AN EXPOSITION WITH Practical Observations CONTINUED UPON The Thirty-fifth,
Thirty-sixth, and Thirty-seventh Chapters of the Book OF JOB: Being the
Substance of Thirty-five LECTURES.

By JOSEPH CARYL, Minister of the Gospel.

ROMANS 11.33. O the depth of the Riches both of the Wisdom and Knowledge of God!
How unsearchable are his Judgments, and his Ways past finding out!

LONDON, Printed by M. Simmons, and are to be sold at her house in
Aldersgate Street, the next door to the Golden Lion. 1664.

TO THE Christian Reader TO Those Especially of this CITY who have been THE
PROMOTERS Of this WORK.
SIRS,
HAving, in the Prefatory Epistle to the former part set forth the state of
these three Chapters here presented and expounded, together with the general
scope of Elihu (the speaker) in them; be pleased to look back thither for some
help toward your satisfaction in those points. All that I shall entertain you
with in this Address, is only to tell you, that, as I have now, through the
good hand of God with me, finished my promised Commentary upon the whole
Discourse of Elihu with Job, divided into a Preface and four distinct Speeches,
contained and continued in six entire Chapters; so, I purpose, through the same
assistance, to proceed (with convenient speed) in drawing up and sending out
(in one Volume more) my slender apprehensions and meditations upon the
remaining five Chapters of this Book: In which it will appear, how (when Elihu
(doubtless with good success) had acted the part of a wise and learned
Moderator, in that grand Controversy of Providence between Job and his three
Friends, Eliphaz, Bildad and Zophar, and had done both with him and them, it
will appear, I say, how) God himself was pleased to come forth and undertake
the matter in differen^e, giving, as the Supreme Moderator of that Noble
Disputation, an unerring and an irrefraga^le Determination of it, to the full
conviction, and in the issue, to the full consolation of Job, as also to the
high content of of all that heard it, even of his three Friends; who, though
they were severely reproved and censured by God, as having over-severely
reproved and censured Job, yet he graciously directed them a way to make their
atonement, and was not only reconciled unto them himself, but reconciled them
to his servant Job; winding all up in Peace and Love, in mutual rejoyceings and
embracings. Now the God of Peace, Truth and Love, lead us all into the love of
Truth and Peace, and teach us to profit always by what has at any time been
written (according to Truth) upon those things, which himself afore-time caused
to be written for our learning, that we through patience and comfort of the
Scriptures might have hope. That, what is here written may be useful to all,
especially to those who are (as Job was) in a state of suffering, till they
come to be (as Job is) past all sufferings, is the hearts desire and prayer of,

SIRS, September 7th 1664. Your affectionate Friend to serve you, JOSEPH CARYL.

ERRATA.
PAge 48. l. 8. dele hurt. p. 92. l. 38. for eve r. eye. p. 95. for 3. r. 2. p.
96. l. 7. for 112. r. 102. p. 147. l. 30. for 50. r. 51. p. 153. l. 28. for
Fourthly, r. Further. p. 165. l. 18. for 4. r. 3. p. 205. l. 34. for 29. r. 24.
p. 300. l. 3. r. comfortable. p. 322. l. 7. for 26. r. 36. p. 458. l. 35. dele
it. p. 551. l. 33. for 2. r. 1.

AN EXPOSITION WITH Practical Observations UPON The Thirty-fifth, Thirty-sixth,
and Thirty-seaventh Chapters of the Book of JOB.
JOB, Chap. 35. Verse. 1, 2, 3. 1. Elihu spoke moreover, and said,

2. Think thou this to be right, that thou said, My righteousness is more
than Gods?

3. For thou said, What advantage will it be unto thee, and, What profit
shall I have, if I be cleansed from my sin?


THis Chapter contains the third Oration, Speech, or Address, which Elihu
made to Job; in which he gives answer to, confutes, and reproves, three
assertions, or complaints, we may call them complaining assertions, with which
he charge Job.

The First is laid down in the second and third verses; Think thou this to
be right, that thou said, my righteousness is more than Gods? For thou
said, What advantage will it be? etc. The answer of Elihu to this both
complaining and (as proposed) proud assertion, is found in the 4th, 5th, 6th,
7th, and 8th verses of this Chapter.

The Second uncomely complaint is charged on Job at the 9th verse; By reason of
the multitude of oppressions, they make the oppressed to cry: they cry out by
reason of the arm of the mighty. To this Elihu gives answer in the 10th, 11th,
12th, and 13th verses.

The Third is expressed in the former part of the 14th verse; Although thou
say, thou shall not see him. To this Elihu begins to make answer in the
latter part of the same verse, and continues ^i^ answer to the end of the
Chapter; Yet judgment is before him, therefore trust thou in him, etc. These
are the general Parts of the whole Chapter. I shall now proceed to the
explication of particulars.

Verse. 1. Elihu spoke moreover, and said. Who this Elihu was, I have showed
heretofore, as also the spirit and temper of the man; and it may well be said
here, Moreover, he said; for we have already heard many of his sayings in the
32d, 33d, and 34th Chapters of this Book.

This first verse is a connecting Preface to that which follows; for when
Elihu had given Job liberty of speech, or of answering for himself, at the
latter end of the former Chapter, and had, as we may suppose, paused a while,
expecting what answer Job would make, he perceiving that Job either had nothing
to offer, or would offer no more, began again; as if the Author of this Book
had said, when Elihu saw that Job would not reply, or had nothing more to say
for his own vindication, he let him understand, that he had more to say for his
conviction.

Elihu spoke moreover, and said. And he said many things, and those very sharp
things, his words were indeed as goads, and as nails, yea as swords, and
spears, in the heart of Job; he objected against him such things, as were in
the matter very bad, and such for the manner, as a godly, yea an ingenious man,
ought not only to be ashamed of, but to abhor: And thus he undertakes him,

Verse. 2. Think thou this to be right, that thou said, my righteousness is
more than Gods? In this verse Elihu enters his renewed suit against Job, or
here he proposes what he had to charge Job with; Think thou this to be
right? And in the next or third verse, he endeavors to make good this charge,
or to prove that Job had said so; for thou have said, etc. As if he had said, I
will prove it to thy face, that thou have said, My righteousness is more than
Gods; for thou have said, What advantage will it be unto thee, and what profit
shall I have, if I be cleansed from my sin? So then in the second verse you
have the charge, and in the third the proof of the charge.

Think thou this to be right? The word which we render to think, (...) An
hoc cogitasti in jus. Heb:
notes more than a bare thinking, even the devising, or curious contriving of a
matter in the brain; have thou formed this in thy Imagination, and concluded it
in thy Understanding for right, for sound, and wholesome Doctrine, for a very
truth? There may be a threefold exposition of these words:

First, As an appeal to Jobs own breast; Think thou this to be right? let me
ask thee the question, Have thou said well in this? do thou believe thou
have? let thy Conscience judge, and make answer. I doubt not but thou will be
self-condemned: And indeed no guilty person can be absolved, himself (if
himself) being judge.

Secondly, We may look upon the words, not only as an appeal, but as a reproof,
or objurgation; Think thou this to be right? What man in his right mind
would think so! thou toldest thy wife in the second Chapter, Thou speak like
one of the foolish women; and may it not now be told thee, Thou speak like
one of the foolish men? Would any man in his wits utter a word of this import,
a word of so gross a savor, of so dangerous a reflection upon the Justice of
God, or so much as intimate himself by any the remotest consequences, more
just, more righteous than God? why has such a word dropped from thy mouth? Thus
he chides, checks, and reproves him.

Thirdly, These words may have the sense of a denying question; Think thou
this to be right? Surely Job thou do not think this to be right, I cannot
believe that thou think this to be right, thou are not surely so far left of
Reason, and of Grace, as to think this to be right. This sense gives some allay
to, or abatement of the former; surely thou do not think so, though thou have
spoken so; though thy words may have this meaning, yet I hope this is not thy
meaning; I am unwilling to take up thy opinion from thy expression; Think
thou this to be right? From the first Exposition,

Note; It is a strong way of conviction, to put or refer a matter to his
Judgment and Conscience, against whom we make opposition.

Think thou this to be right? I refer it to thy own Conscience, whether this
be right yea or no; and thus the Scripture speaks often. When God would stop
the mouth from all contradiction, and not leave opposers a word to say, he
leaves it upon them to say all. Moses intending to prove that none could
prevail against Israel, unless (God provoked by sin) delivered Israel up into
their hands, gives this demonstration of it ( Deuteronomy. 32.31.) Their Rock is not
as our Rock even our enemies themselves being Judges; I refer this to our
enemies opinion, whether the Dunghill gods, the Idols whom they serve and trust
to, be like Jehovah, the living God, whom we have (and ought) to serve and
trust to. You that are our enemies, do you think your Rock is like our Rock? I
know you do not. The Apostles, Peter, and John, referred it back to the
judgment of their Judges, whether it were fit for them, to obey their commands,
yea or no, when they called them, and charged them to preach no more in that
name, the name of the Lord Jesus Christ, ( Acts 4.19.) Whether it be right in
the sight of God to hearken unto you more than unto God, judge ye. We have
received a command from God to preach* Go teach all Nations (Math. 28.19.) and
we have received a command from you not to preach; now we leave it with you,
whether it be fit for us to obey God or you. So the Apostle having admonished
the Corinthians to flee from Idolatry, presently adds (1 Cor. 10.14, 15.) I
speak as to wise men, judge ye what I say; I have given you the rule, and I
leave it to your consideration, what is best and safest for you to do. I speak
as to wise men, that is a holy insinuation; As if he had said, I know you are
wise men, men of understanding, and therefore I do not so much command you to
obey what I say, as to judge what I say; I am much persuaded you cannot judge
otherwise in this thing than I do; There is so much truth and reason in what I
say, that you cannot but say so too. The same Apostle speaks again in a like
form about women's praying uncovered; Judge in your selves, is it comely that a
woman pray unto God uncovered (1 Cor. 11.13.) As if he had said, I do not stand
wholly to my own judgment in this case of conscience, I dare refer it to you,
and stand to yours. Thus in many things we may appeal unto the Consciences of
those we deal with; and no doubt the Conscience is often satisfied while the
Will stands out: Men of much understanding will dispute, when Conscience has
nothing to say; Yea some will for their own ends argue that to be right, which
(in their Consciences) they do not think to be so. Think thou this to be
right? Thou have said it, but do thou think it? I trow not.

Observe, Secondly.

There is a Light within us that will show us what is am^ss, or (...) not right.
Elihu does not direct Job immediately to the Word, (though that is the
authoritative and authentic Rule) but to his heart; thou have a Light in thy
self, whereby thou may see that this is not right. Thus the Apostle, (1 Cor.
11.14, 15.) Does not even Nature it self teach you, that if a man have long
hair, it is a shame unto him? but if a woman have long hair, it is a glory to
her, for her hair is given her for a covering. The Light which every man has
in him will show this. Again, the Apostle ( Romans 2.14, 15.) proves that the
old Gentiles had a light of Nature in them, which showed them many things
amiss. Thus he argues; For when the Gentiles that have not the Law, do by
nature the things contained in the Law, (they do them by Nature, that is, by
the Light of Nature, which shows them to do these things, that is, it shows
them that they ought to be done, and they do them, as to the outward action, by
that Light:) these having not the Law (that is, the written Word, published to
them in that formality, which the people of God have, these having not the Law)
are a Law unto themselves; which show the work of the Law written in their
hearts, their Conscience also bearing witness, and their thoughts the mean
while accusing, or else excusing one another. This Light showed those Gentiles
so far what to do according to the Law, as left them without excuse, for not
doing what it showed. Gospel Mysteries and matters of Faith are purely of
Divine Revelation, but what the moral Law commands or forbids, the light of
Nature leads us to do and to forbear.

There is a generation of people grown up and spreading amongst us, who cry up
the light within them, with neglect of, if not in oppos^tion to the Word
written and preached to them. These make a very ill use of this notion; For
whosoever bids us look to the light within us, to draw us off from the Word or
light without us, err greatly, and may quickly draw us into the greatest
errors both in Faith and Practice. It Is dangerous to go or act against the
light within us, yet if we go or act always by that light alone, we shall be
in da^kness before we are aware. Natural light without Scripture Light, proves
a false light, and may quickly lead us out of the way, and besides our duty.
Therefore the Prophet, when any should say, Seek unto them that have familiar
Spirits, etc. does not say, look to the light within you for resolution,
whether ye should hearken to such or no, but to the Law, and to the Tes^^^ony:
if they speak not according to this w^rd, it is because there is no light in
them, (Isa. 8.20.) If that which is called light within us, speak not according
to the light of the Law and Testimony without us, there is no true light (or as
the Margin has it) no morning in us; the Day Star has not risen in such
hearts, nor do they speak like children of the light. Take heed of striking and
so splitting against that Rock; yet certainly there is a light within us that
must not be resisted. The Apostle reports that as the sin of the old Gentiles (
Romans 1.28.) They did not like to retain God in their knowledge; they had a
light of God by nature, God was in their knowledge, but they liked not to think
of God, but rather thought of the world, and of any vanity, than of God, rather
of the creature, than of the Creator; for this cause God gave them up to a
reprobate mind, (...).
to do those things which are not convenient. They who obey not, who answer not
the light of Nature in doing good, shall be left to the doing of those evils
which are against the light of Nature. Such were those things which the Apostle
calls (by a modest word) not convenient, or not fitting that duty and decorum,
which man as man should carefully and religiously observe. By which negative
expression, Not convenient, he positively intends the vilest evils and
debaucheries of Nature, not to be named. And if God were so wroth with the
Gentiles for not answering the common Light of Nature, no marvel if he spoke so
dreadfully against those that refuse and oppose the Light of the most glorious
Gospel ( John 3.19.) This is the condemnation, that light is come into the
world, and men loved darkness rather than light, because their deeds were
evil. Not to answer the Light of Conscience within us rightly informed, much
more not to obey the Light of the Gospel without us, leaves us under
condemnation. The Light within man will show him very much what he ought to do,
and judge him for not doing it. Think thou this to be right? Does the
Principle planted in thee comply with this Position?

But what was it that Elihu puts the Question about? You have it in the close
of the verse; That thou said, My righteousness is more than Gods;

Or according to the strictness of the Hebrew, My righteousness is before
Gods. The Preposition here used is often taken comparatively, and has the same
signification with that ( Math. 11.19.) where Christ says (as we translate)
Wisdom is justified of her Children; that is, Christ, or the Doctrine of the
Gospel, the Divine Light that shines there, is justified, that is approved and
declared just, by all who are her Children indeed, born not of blood, nor of
the will of the flesh, nor of the will of man, but of God. This is a good and
profitable sense. Though strangers do not, will not justify Wisdom, yet her
Children do and will. Nevertheless that comparative translation, and reading,
which some contend for, carries in it a clear truth also, and serves to
illustrate this Text in Job, now underhand. Wisdom is justified more than her
children, or rather than her children, or before her children. That is, more,
rather, and before the Scribes and Pharisees, who pretended highly, that they
were the children, yea the chief, if not the only children of Wisdom; and
while they made this boast, they really resisted and opposed Jesus Christ, who
is wisdom, and in whom are hid all the treasures of wisdom: And therefore how
much soever the Scribes and Pharisees flattered themselves in their own
opinion, or were applauded, and preferred by others, as children of wisdom, or
as very wise men; yet Jesus Christ the true Wisdom, was justified by God, and
all good men, more than they, or before, yea infinitely before them; he was
justified fully, but they not at all. Such a negative sense Christ intends, in
that comparative determination, between the Publican and the Pharisee (Luke
18.14.) I tell you, this man went down to his house justified rather than the
other: That is, the Publican went home justified rather, or righteous rather,
or more righteous than the Pharisee; the proud Pharisee, not being at all
justified, nor righteous, but in his own eyes. Some Comparatives imply a
perfect Negative to the opposite party, others only a partial. Such a
comparative sense Elihu intimates in Jobs asse^tion of his righteousness. Thou
said, my righteousness is more than Gods; Or I am to be justified rather
than God.

But some may say, where spoke Job this? where is the Ch^pter and Verse? did
Job, or could J^b overshoot himself to such a height of blasphemy?

I answer,

First, Some indeed charge Elihu deeply, as if he had feigned all these things
against Job, or formed them up in his own Imagination, rather than grounded
them upon any of his assertions; but we need not thus wound Elihu, to get a
salve for Jobs sore.

Therefore Secondly, I answer, that although Job had not spoken this in so many
words, or syllabically, yet he had spoken that from which Elihu might gather
such a sense, or of which he might make such an interpretation. And therefore
he seems to say at the thi^d verse, If thou think this a falsehood, or too
hard a charge, and should deny that thou have said, My righteousness is more
than Gods; I Will tell thee what thou have said, which has given me ground (I
think just and sufficient ground) for this accusation: Thou have said, What
advantage will it be unto me? and what profit shall I have, if I be cleansed
from my sin? And is not this to make thy righteousness more than Gods?

But what righteousness is here meant?

I answer, There is a twofold righteousness.

First, There is the righteousness of our persons, which is either imputed in
justification, or imparted in sanctification, (as has been showed upon some
other passages of Elihu's discourse with Job) This is the righteousness of our
persons; as justified we are righteous, as sanctified we are also righteous.
Now when Elihu charge Job to say that his righteousness was more than Gods,
we are not to understand it as if he had said, his personal righteousness, in
either notion, was more than Gods; for that righteousness which is imputed to
our persons, is indeed the righteousness of God, ( Romans 10.3.) but it is not a
righteousness more than Gods. And as for that righteousness planted in our
persons, how imperfect and mixed with corruption is that, at best, in this life?
And therefore had Job spoken any such words, or had harbored such a thought,
it had been blasphemy at the highest rate; and (as one expresses it well) If
Job had spoken these horrible blasphemies, Si haec horrenda blasphemia fuisset
ab eo extorta, Satan certe, non autem Jobus, in hoc certamine victoriam
obtinuisset. Bez.
though extorted from him by utmost extremity, and in the greatest anguish of
his spirit, surely Satan had got the day, and triumphed as Victor in this great
conflict, not Job. Should the most righteous man on Earth, or Angel in Heaven,
say in strict sense, My righte^usnesse is more than Gods, this saying were a
charging of God with unrighteousness, yea (which Satan promised himself, and
told God Job would do, if tried to the utmost) a cursing of God to his face.
But as Job abhorred to speak irreverently (though he sometimes spoke
passionately) of God, so, that he utterly disclaimed such thoughts of his own
righteousness, has appeared fully by his frequent protestations against all
dependence upon, and trust in any self-righteousnesse or perfection, in diverse
passages of this Book.

Secondly, There is a righteousness of our Cause, or of the special matter in
controversy: In which sense (I conceive) Judah said of Tamar, (Genesis 38.26.)
She has been more righteous than I. That is, She has carried this business
better, and more according to right. And thus we may understand Elihu charging
Job for saying, My righteousness is more than Gods; that is, my Cause is more
righteous than his; and to say that (which is the most moderate sense) was too
great a boldness for any creature, yea a blasphemy against the Creator. Shall
man presume to say that God does not carry things righteously with him, or that
there is no reason why God should deal so or so with him! But did Job ever
affirm his Cause more righteous than Gods? I answer, not categorically, or
directly; But Elihu hearing Job make so many complaints, might suppose he
thought there was no reason why God should deal with him as he had done, and
then he had been more righteous in his Cause than God.

The Septuagint read it without any comparison at all, which makes the meaning
much more easy; they say not, My righteousness is more than Gods, but, I shall
be found righteous before God, or in the sight of God. This Job had said, and
therefore made so many appeals to God. Justus sum ante conspectum Domini. Sept.
I am just before God, that is, My cause will be found right and just in the
sight of God. And as Job had said this often equivalently, so once in terms,
(Chap. 23.10.) When he has tried m^, I shall come forth as gold, or appear
innocent before God; which he spoke especially with an eye to those heavy
accusations which his Friends brought against him, and laid upon him: And even
for this Job might well be condemned of rashness by Elihu, who aimed at the
throwing down of all self-righteousness, at the stopping of every mouth, at the
eclipsing of all humane glory, in the presence, and before the brightness of
the Most Glorious, High and Holy God.

So then, even, this other more favorable reading, which speaks not
comparatively, but positively, I am just before God, that is, Praepositio illa
Mom verti potesta vel ab, ni hunc sensum justus suma Deo, vel justificabo
causam mcam apud Deum. Cajet.
I shall be justified by God, or I doubt not but I shall be acquitted, and
found right before God, this cannot every way be justified: It was Jobs fault
and failing, that he was so confident God would not (he was far from saying
God could not) find fault with him. We may see (if we have spiritual eyes, or
eyes enlightened by the Spirit, so many faults in our best services, as may make
us ashamed to own them, rather than to boast of them before men, much more to
bear up our selves before God upon them: For (as Eliphaz told Job in the 4th
Chapter) God charge his Angels with folly, and the best of his Saints are
unclean before him; therefore that was too much fo: Job to say of himself,
though that is the easiest and most charitable Interpretation of what he said,
when he said (as the Septuagint render) I shall be found righteous before God,
or in the sight of God.

Our Translation is very hard, hardest of all, Thou have said, my
righteousness is more than Gods; yet this Elihu might gather up
consequentially from what he spoke in the 19th Chapter, verse. 6, 7. Behold I
cry out of wrong, but I am not heard, I cry aloud, but there is no judgment.
As also from the passage, Chap. 23d verse. 2d. Even to day is my complaint
bitter, my stroke is heavier than my groaning: In both places Job speaks as if
God had not dealt rightly with him, as if God had been over-severe in
afflicting him, or as if his complainings were short of his sufferings. In both
or either of which, Job exceeds the bounds both of truth and duty; such
extravagant expressions, have no apology but his pain, nor can any thing be an
Advocate for him, but this, That Satan who was his Tempter, was also his
Tormenter, and held him so long upon the Rack, that he uttered (as himself
confessed, Chap. 42.3.) that which he understood not, yea words by which Elihu
understood that he said in effect, My righteousness is more than Gods.

Note hence, first, There is no thought of man further from right, than to
think there is any unrighteousness in the dealings of God with man.

Man can hardly do any thing that is just, and it is impossible God should do
any thing that is unjust. Let God do what he will, it is right, and he is
righteous in doing it: Yea, whatsoever evil God does to a Job, to any of his
good people, he is good to them in doing it ( Psalm. 73.1.) Truly God is good to
Israel, even to such as are of a clean heart, or clean of heart. Not only is
God Righteous and Just, but Good and Gracious in what he does: though his
dispensations are often very sad, yet they are never unequal; and as the worst
of men shall at last acknowledge that he is just; so the best of men, a Job, a
David, shall find and see at last with joy and thanksgivings, that God has
been good, yea best to them (considering their state) in his sorest and
severest dealings: For all the paths of the Lord (as well hard as sofr, as well
those that are set with Briars and Thorns, as those that are set with Roses)
are mercy and truth, (mercy as much as truth) unto such as keep his Covenant,
and his Testimonies, Psalm. 25.10. He that shows mercy cannot but show
righteousness to his in all his ways. As he that does righteousness, is
righteous, (1 John 3.7.) so he that is righteousness, cannot but do righteous
things. God is not only righteous, but righteousness; he is essentially
righteous, his righteousness is himself: A man's being, and his righteousness
are two things. The man may subsist without righteousness (all men by nature,
and while nothing but nature, though much sublimated and refined, if not
converted, are unrighteous) but it is as impossible for God not to be
righteous, as not to be. How can he who is righteous, yea righteousness it
self, but do righteous things in all he does, in every cause, in every
proceeding, whether with Persons, Families, or Nations? Is it not then a most
unrighteous thing to think or say God has, or can do any unrighteous thing?

Secondly Note, He that complains that God deals over-severely with him, or
otherwise than is fit, or otherwise than he has deserved, makes himself, as to
his Cause, more righteous than God.

If we say a man deals otherwise with us then we have deserved at his hands, we
judge him, as to that action, uneven and unjust in his dealings. Surely then,
if we think or speak hardly of the hardest ways of God, we speak and think
hardly of God himself. We cannot think well of God, unless we say all that he
does is well done. A thought, that there is but one twig in our rod more than
is meet, or fit, or more than is good for us, or to think it abides one minute
longer upon our backs, than is meet, or fit, or good for us, is to say, Our
righteousness is more than Gods; yea, it is to say, Our wisdom is more than
Gods, and our mercies are more than the mercies of God. Therefore take heed of
such thoughts. Though we cannot see the righteousness of God in his works, yet
we must say his works are righteous. It can never be right, not only to say,
Our righteousness is more than Gods, but so much as to say, Our righteousness
is any thing to Gods.

Thirdly Note, What we speak rashly, may at any time be pressed upon us hardly,
and is sometimes very uncharitably.

It is very usual with those who accuse, or oppose others, to take things
doubtful for certainties, their own conjectures for the assertions of their
adversary, and every thing which has a likeness to an error, to be error.
Elihu might have spoken more favorably to Job, In disputando cavendum, ne ex
dictis adversarii per falsam consequentiam absurda deducamus, quibus illum
gravamus, qua in re hic peccavit Elihu. Pisc.
he might have construed his sayings more heartily than he did: Had he taken
Jobs words with a grain of Salt (as we speak) he needed not to have put so much
Gall and Wormwood into his own: Had he not interpreted Jobs complaints
strictly, according to the sound, or letter, but considered them with his
scope, his aim, and purpose in speaking so, together with the extreme pain of
his body, and anguish of his soul, when he spoke so, he had never given him
such cutting answers.

But God justly, and in much wisdom, sharpened the spirit of Elihu, to speak
cutting words to Job, that Job feeling the smart, might be made sensible of his
error, and at last be brought low, and broken under his hand. Mild words may
skin a sore before it is searched to the bottom, and so not only retard the Cure,
but endanger the Patient. The holy Apostle foreseeing the murmurings, quarrels
and disputes which flesh and blood would make about Election or Predestination,
does not go about so much to answer them by Reason, as to repress them by a
strong Reproof, and vehement Objurgation, ( Romans 9.20.) Nay, but O man, who art
thou that replyest against God! shall the thing formed, say to him that formed
it, why have thou made me thus? has not the Potter power over the Clay? etc.
Now as about that unsearchable depth of eternal Election, so about present
dreadful dispensations, and providence, our undue reasonings and tumultuating
thoughts of heart, concerning God, breaking our bounds, and forgetting with
whom we have to do, or who has to do with us, call for and deserve sharpest
reproofs; Who are you that reply against God! Who are you that think this to be
right ^^^^h you do, or any thing wrong which God does? Who are you, that you
should presume to say (so much as by inference) that your righteousness is more
than Gods, or, that it is any thing compared with the righteousness of God!

Thou have said, my righteousness is more than Gods. What Job had said, which
might give color for this accusation, has been touched before, in the mention
of those Speeches, or Passages, forced from him by the greatness of his
suffering. But Elihu gives it us yet more expressly in the next verse.

Verse. 3. For thou said, What advantage will it be unto thee, and what profit
shall I have, if I be cleansed from my sin? As if he had said, O Job, If thou
should ask me, when or where thou have said, My righteousness is more than
Gods? or how can I prove that thou have said so? I may soon answer thee, and
easily prove it thus, thou have said, What advantage will it be unto thee? etc.
Thou have spoken as if no good were to be gotten by turning from evil; or that
thou suffer evil, being thy self free, at least turned from doing evil; and
that therefore it avails thee no more that thou art righteous, than if thou
were the greatest sinner in the world. So thou have said, and in saying so,
thou have said what I have charged thee with.

But here the Question may arise again, as much about the Proof, as about the
Charge. When did Job say, What advantage will it be unto me? and what profit
shall I have, if I be cleansed from my sin?

I answer, as he said not the former words contained in the Charge directly,
they were only a collection raised consequentially by Elihu, so he said not
these words which are the proof of the Charge expressly, but by consequences.

For the clearing of this, we must distinguish of what is meant by profit and
advantage, when Elihu says, Thou said, What advantage shall it be unto thee,
and what profit shall I have, if I be cleansed from my sin? This advantage and
profit may be considered,

First, As to his eternal well-being and salvation; Secondly, as to his present
ease and consolation. We are not to understand it as if Elihu accused Job for
saying, That to be cleansed from his sin, would be n^ ^^vantage, no profit as
to his eternal estate; that had been impious, and an Atheistical Speech,
crossing the whole current of Scripture, and overthrowing the very foundation
of godliness. Take away eternal reward and punishment, and where is Religion?
where is either the love or fear of God? His meaning then is, that Job had said,
it would be no profit, no boot to him for the present, or as to his then
condition, if he were cleansed from his sin. This Elihu might gather from those
two places (Chap. 9.22, 23.) This is one thing, therefore I said it, He
destroys the perfect and the wicked. If the scourge slay suddenly, he will
laugh at the trial of the innocent. As if Elihu had said, Thou can not avoid
this proof of my first Charge; for he that says, God destroys the perfect
and the wicked, that is, the perfect as well as the wicked, says also in
effect, What profit is it, that I am cleansed from my sin? But thou have said
the former, therefore the latter also. Again thou have said (Chap. 10.15.) If I
be wicked, woe unto me, and if I be righteous, yet will I not lift up my head. I
am full of confusion, therefore see thou mine affiiction; weigh thy words, Thou
have said, Woe to me, if I be wicked, and if I be righteous, (it will not be
much better with me) I will not, I dare not lift up my head, my confusion is so
great. How great soever my innocence is, I have little comfort, or it is
much-what alike with me, whether I be righteous, or wicked. In these places,
and by these speeches Job seems to put little or no difference between the
dealings of God with the wicked and the righteous. Once more. Those words (
Chap. 9.28, 29, 30.) are of a like import, I am afraid of all my sorrows, I
know that thou will not hold me innocent. If I be wicked, why then labor I in
vain? if I wash my self with snow water, and make my hands never so clean; yet
shall thou plunge me in the ditch, and mine own clothes shall abhor me.
Saying this, thou have said, how innocent soever I am, I shall not be dealt
with as an innocent; if I make my self never so clean, God will throw me into
the ditch, that is, into affliction. From these speeches Elihu might charge Job
with saying, What profit is it (as to my temporal good) that I am cleansed from
spiritual evil, my sin? As for his eternal estate, that is not the matter
controverted in this book. The sum of all amounts to this, If I am cleansed
from my sin, I may be as great a sufferer and as hardly dealt with in this
world, as if I were altogether unclean. And hence it might be inferred, Surely
Job was more righteous than God, because while he labored to please God as
becomes his people and good servants to do, God was pleased (instead of
rewarding him, as he had done many, and promised all who do so) to afflict him,
as he uses to do and has threatened to do to the worst of evil men, the
wicked. Thus thou ha^t said, What advantage, etc.

The word here rendered advantage, signifies gain any way, (...) profuit
contulit, utili^ commodin fui^.
or any thing that is commodious and gainful to us; thou have said, What
advantage will it be unto thee? Thus he brings in Job putting the question to
himself, what advantage should he get to himself in this life by living a
religious or a holy life? As if he had said, Doubtless it is concluded in thy
breast, thou shall get none; And to strengthen this thy unbelief, at least to
show that thy unbelief in this point is very strong, thou have said the same
thing in another dress of words a second time; For I have heard thee saying
thus also.

What profit shall I have, if I be cleansed from my sin? Job was taxed for a
saying of the same scandalous sense ( Chap. 34.9.) He has said, it profits a
man nothing, that he should delight himself with God. There Elihu accuses him
for affirming in a third person, it profits a man nothing; and here for
questioning in his own person; What profit shall I have?

(...) A radice (...) p^ofuit, utilitatem attulit; hinc Belial mutilis.
Some derive the word Belial from this root, signifying an unprofitable one, or
an unthrift, a man that does no good, either to himself, or others; What profit
shall I have? what shall I get? All the good I shall get I may put in my eye,
and see never the worse: In a word, I shall not mend my condition, if I mend my
conversation; so it follows; If I be cleansed from my sin.

The words, If I be cleansed, are not expressed in the Hebrew Text, but are
clea^ly employed and unde^stood; For Job cannot be supposed to ask this
question; What profit shall I get by, or from my sin? that question were
nothing to the present purpose or disputation. And therefore though all
Interpreters do not make this supplement, yet all agree, that a supplement is
to be made: Most concur in this, What profit shall I have, if I depart from, or
forsake my sin? We say, If I be cleansed from my sin? As if these were Jobs
thoughts, this his saying, Let me keep my sin, or not keep my sin, I see I am
like to suffer. I shall still be kept under the rod. That Is the plain sense of
the words; Elihu charge Job with complaining of God, that it would be no
advantage to him, (...) to the ease of himself from any outward affliction and
calamity, how much soever he forsook or were cleansed from his sin. There are
two other readings of this verse, Nam dixisti, quid profutura ( se: justitia
tua) sit tibi (item) quid profi^iam: ex ea) magis quam ex peccato meo Pisc.
Rab: Sclom:
which I shall only name, and then give two or three Notes from our own.

First, Thus; Thou have said, What profit shall I have more by it (that is, by
my righteousness) than by my sins: As if his meaning were (which is a very
gross one) What good shall I get by well-doing more than by ill-doing? One of
the Rabbis takes in strongly with this comparative exposition, between those
remotest moral extremes good and evil, as to his case: But I dare not join
either with the one or other in this interpretation.

Si roges, quid profuturum sit ^ibi, dicens, quid proficerem a supplicia mea.
Jun:
A second gives it thus; If thou demandest what may it profit thee, saying, What
good shall I get by further punishment or suffering?

It has been said before, that those words, If I be cleansed, are not found
expressly in the Hebrew Text; And the word in our Translation rendered sin,
signifies also punishment or suffering, which is the fruit or effect of sin.
So that according to this reading, Elihu in these words prevents an objection,
which Job might take occasion to make from what he had said, or wished rather,
at the 36th verse of the former Chapter. My desire is that Job may be tried
unto the end; That is, further afflicted, or afflicted to the utmost. Against
this desire of Elihu, Job is by him supposed making his exception, or
objection, in this verse; As if he had said, Why do thou, or what reason
have thou to desire that I should be yet again tried by affliction? What, I
pray, would that profit me, if I were afflicted yet more and more? Can the
suffering of evil do me good, or make me better? To this objection, Elihu gives
answer in the next verse, and those which follow to the ninth; and he does it
(as the Asserter of this Interpretation judges) by this Dilemma. Thy
afflictions would profit either God or thy self (seeing God does nothing in
vain); but neither thy sufferings, how grievous soever, nor thy doings, how
righteous soever, can profit God, no more than thy sins or evil doings can
damage God; therefore it remains, that if God afflict thee further, it will be
(if thou have a heart to improve it) for thy profit.

This reading, and the sense arising from it, is much insisted on; but as the
former is very harsh, so I conceive, this latter is very dark and intricate,
and grounded upon the supposition of an objection very remote, or not easily to
be suggested in this discourse. And therefore to avoid both my own and the
readers unnecessary trouble, I shall take the Text, as it stands in our
Translation, and offer somewhat for instruction from it.

How great sinfulness there is in saying, There is no profit in the ways of
God, I have showed at the 21st Chap. verse. 11th, and Chap. 34th verse. 9. So
that referring the Reader thither, I shall here give only this Note.

It is very sinful to say, we shall get no advantage by leaving sin. We may
well put the Apostles question ( Romans 6.21.) to our selves, What fru^t have we
in those things whereof we are now ashamed? What benefit have we got by
polluting our selves with sin? But how vain a question is it to say, What
profit shall I have, if I be cleansed from my sin? Elihu charge Job with
this; yet still remember, he referrs not to his eternal, but temporal
condition. And this was Asaphs or David's temptation also, as to his temporal
condition; even he, the one or the other, David or Asaph spoke as much in
express terms, as Job is here charged with, ( Psalm. 73.13.) where complaining
of the great trials and troubles he had been under, and of the prosperity of
the wicked; Behold (says he) these are the ungodly, who prosper in the world,
they increase in riches. But how is it with me? Verily I have cleansed my heart
in vain, and washed my hands in innocence; for all the day long have I been
plagued, and chastned every moment. As if he had said, What have I got by my
holiness, and forsaking of sin? what have I gained by my strictest walkings,
and abstainings from the very appearance of evil? Have I not reason to
conclude, in good earnest, that I have cleansed my heart and hands in vain,
seeing my sufferings are not lessned, though my sins are, seeing my punishments
are renewed every morning, though I am every morning upon the renewal of my
repentance? Thus spoke the Psalmist in the day of his temptation; and
doubtless, this day of his Temption had been a day of temptation and
provocation to the Lord, (like that of Isreal's in the Wilderness, Psalm. 95.7.)
had not the Lord come in by his grace, and helped him to bite in his words at
the very next verse; If I say, I will speak thus, (if I use such, not only
uncomely, but wicked language as this, I have cleansed my heart and hands in
vain) Behold, I should offend against the generation of thy children. And when
I thought to know this, it was too wonderful for me; that is, it was beyond my
skill to reconcile these works, these providence of God toward me, with his
word and promises; nor was I any whit less at a loss, how to reconcile the
prosperity and flourishing condition of wicked men, with those terrible
threatenings which the Lord in his Word every where thunders out against them.
These cross and intricate dispensations puzzel'd me greatly, put my soul into a
maze; nor could I spel their meaning, nor make out the sense of them, Until I
went into the Sanctuary of God, then understood I their end; the woeful
Catastrophe, the miserable end of wicked-men, their slippery standing, and
their sudden falling, as both are described ( v. 18, 19, 20.) Then also I
understood the blessedness of a godly man's estate, both now and for ever, in
having God his guide and his portion ( v. 24, 25, 26.) then I understood what
profit and advantage comes by cleansing our selves from sin, though to the eye
it appear not, yea though all appearances speak the contrary. To be cleansed
from, or to remove sin is profitable and advantageous:

First, As to the removal of Judgment. When we begin cleansing work, the Lord
usually makes an end of afflicting work. For as one great end of sending
affliction, is to cleanse us from sin, ( Isa. 27.9.) By this shall the iniquity
of Jacob be purged, and this is all the fruit, to take away his sin; so our
being clean^ed from sin is usually the end of our afflictions. When we are
cleansed from sin, we are troubled no more, we smart no more: speak then, Is it
no profit to be cleansed from sin, when so many, not only persons, but Nations
have been ruined, because not cleansed from sin? God gave his own people
cleanness of teeth, ( Amos 4.6.) that is, famine or want of bread, because of
the uncleanness of their hearts, and lives; and is it no profit to be cleansed
from sin, when for our sinful uncleanness God will cleanse us of all our
comforts, even to a morsel of bread? It Is therefore a speech both false in it
self, and highly di^honourable unto God, to say, I shall have no profit, for
still I shall suffer, though I be cleansed from my sin; whereas first, there is
more profit in being cleansed from sin, than in being delivered from
sufferings; and, secondly, when once we are cleansed from sin, we are in the
fairest way to be cleared from, and see an end of all our sufferings.

Secondly, The more we are cleansed from sin, the more communion we have with
God, and the more peace from God. Is not this a great profit? a profit besides
the eternal reward? a profit far better than any temporal reward? Will not
communion with God satisfy us for the loss of friends, of estate, or health?
Will not peace with God answer all the tribulations we can meet with in this
world? If therefore being cleansed from sin, we have closer communion and
sweeter peace with God, let no man say, What profit shall I have, if I be
cleansed from my sin? And, although there should be no present profit, or
advantage, though no visible, no nor spiritual income, as to present comfort,
should redound to us in this world, by being cleansed from sin, yet remember,
it is our profit, and our best profit to be cleansed from sin, to be emptied of
sin, to mortify sin, to destroy sin; if we should have no profit in hand by
leaving sin, yet there is a profit promised, that infinitely exceeds all the
profits and pleasures which we can have or hope for by retaining our sin; such
profit and pleasure, as will abundantly recompense us for all the worldly
losses we are at, and penitential sorrows which we pass through in keeping or
cleansing our selves from sin. The Apostle rejoiced at the sorrow of the
Corinthians (2 Cor. 7.9.) But is it good to rejoice at the sorrow of others?
should we not mourn with those that mourn? It Is true, we should; yet it is good
to rejoice in that sorrow which does others good; such was the sorrow of those
Corinthians. The Text is exp^ess; Now (says St Paul) I rejoice not that ye
were made sorry, but that ye sorrowed to repentance, for ye were made sorry
after a godly manner (or according to God) that ye might receive damage by us
in nothing. There is then no damage, no hurt by such sorrow; But comes there
any good, any profit by it? yes, much every way; for (as it follows, v. 10.)
godly sorrow works repentance to salvation, not to be repented of; that is,
greatly to be rejoiced in. What is matter of joy, if salvation be not? True
repentance for sin, is repentance to salvation: And is there not profit, is
there not all profit in that? As there is a Fountain opened (the blood of
Christ) for sin and for uncleanness (Zech: 13.1.) that is, for washing away the
uncleanness of sin; so there are abundance of blessings flowing from that
Fountain, to all such as by the actings of Faith and Repentance wash and are
clean.

Thus far of Elihu's first charge, and the proof of it, taken from Jobs own
sayings. How he answers and refutes those sayings of Job, will appear in
opening the next words.

JOB, Chap. 35. Verse. 4, 5, 6, 7, 8. 4. I will answer thee, and thy Companions
with thee.

5. Look unto the Heavens, and see, and behold the Clouds which are higher than
thou.

6. If thou sinnest, what do thou against him? or if thy transgressions be
multiplied, what do thou unto him?

7. If thou be righteous, what give thou him? or what receives he of thine
hand?

8. Thy wickedness may hurt a man as thou art, and thy righteousness may profit
the son of man.


THe former Context contained the Charge which Elihu brought against Job, that
he should say, His righteousness was more than Gods, and that it would be no
profit to him; if he were cleansed from his sin.

In the Context of these five Verses, Elihu gives answer to those (had Job
positively and purposely said, or asserted them) blasphemous sayings, or
assertions. And we have here.

First, The promise or overture of an answer, at the 4th verse, I I will answer
thee, and thy Companions with thee.

Secondly, We have the answer it self laid down in the 5th, 6th, 7th, and 8th
verses; which answer consists in three particulars.

First, That God cannot be hurt or endammag'd by our sin; at the 6th verse.

Secondly, That God can have no benefit or advantage by our righteousness; at
the 7th verse.

Thirdly, That both Job himself, and other men like himself may, yea shall
certainly have hurt and damage by their sin, as also benefit or advantage by
their righteousness, verse. 8th.

Thus Elihu's answer obviates Job's passionate question at the 3d verse, What
profit shall I have, if I be cleansed from my sin? As if Elihu had said, I know
that neither thy sins can do any hurt to God, nor can thy righteousness do him
any good; but thy sins may hurt thee, and thy righteousness advantage thy
self; therefore lay down such wicked and desperate thoughts as these, say not,
What profit will redound to me if I be cleansed from my sin? etc. That Is his
answer, according to our Translation. Other readings present us with other
forms of answer; but I shall not stay upon them.

Verse. 4. I will answer thee, and thy Companions with thee. Elihu makes
overture of answering before he answers, and tells him he will, before he does
it; I will answer thee, or I will return thee words. Answering is the returning
of wo^ds to words; yet not of empty words, but of words filled with Reason and
Authority to resolve him that is doubting, or to convince him that is
gainsaying. I will answer thee, And thy Companions with thee.

I will speak that which shall not only take off thy Objections, but theirs
also who are of thy mind, or join in Opinion with thee; I will answer thee, and
thy Companions with thee: I will do both at once; when I have answered thee,
they also will be answered; one answer will serve thee and them. Vna fidelia
duos parietes dealbabo. Drus. (...) Socius amicus, familiaris qui simul
pascitur, convictor.
One Line will mark and measure both Walls.

The word which we render Companions, signifies any Friends or Familiars, with
whom we usually converse, with whom we eat, or who eat bread with us, (2 Samuel
13.3.) ( Prove. 17.17.) We may take it either more strictly for a special
intimate bosom friend, who is to a man as his own soul, as Moses speaks (
Deuteronomy. 13.6.) or for a friend at large, such as is called a Neighbor, (Exodus
20.16.) Levit. 19.18.

Yet the question may be, Whom does Elihu mean by Jobs Companions, when he
says, I will answer thee, and thy Companions with thee?

Some by his Companions understand those who came to visit him in his
affliction, and maintained that long Discourse with him, those three friends of
whom we read (Chap. 2.11.) Eliphaz the Temanite, Bildad the Shuite, and Zophar
the Naamathite. The Septuagint conclude Elihu meant them only, (...). Sept.
for thus they render, I will answer thee, and thy three friends.

But why should Elihu join them with Job, seeing they held Opinions contrary to
Job? True, they did, yet they were not able to make good their Arguments, or
convince Job; they had condemned Job, but not answered him, they did their
business imperfectly, and to halves, or impertinently, and to no purpose; so
that all their answerings were called no answer, Chap. 32.3. And therefore
Elihu might see reason to undertake the satisfaction, not only of Job, but of
his three friends, who had not given Job a satisfactory answer unto that hour.

Others take the word Companions in a more large sense, for all that were of
his Opinion. As if Elihu had said, I challenge all the world, whosoever
accompanies thee, or takes thy part in justifying such sayings or assertions,
as I have heard from thee, I will answer them all, how many soever they be; I
will undertake thee, and all thy Party, Thee, and thy Companions with thee.

Hence Note, He who has truth on his sid^, needs not fear the opposition of
many, no nor the opposition of all men.

To oppose two is a very great disadvantage; but if a man have the truth on his
side, he may oppose all, though he be alone: He may be an Antipas (Revel.
2.13.) a man against all men, as that name of Christ's faithful Martyr, there
mentioned, does import. If there be a thousand of them, he may undertake them
all, for in answering one, he answers all. Elijah said of himself (1 Kings
18.22.) I, even I only, remain a Prophet of the Lord; yet he stood up against
all the Idolatrous Prophets of Baal, who were no fewer than four hundred and
fifty men: That we have many with us, is little advantage, and less honor
many a time. A long train of Followers will do us no good, if our Cause be bad.
Truth is strong and will prevail; it is vain to fight against it, though our
partakers are many. The ancient Fathers observed, how some were wont to cry up
those that had the multitude on their side, and to boast that most were of
their Opinion. It was the saying of a Worthy in those times, By my being alone,
Non mea solitudine minuitur, verbum veritatis. Dictum Liberti ad Constantium
Arrianum. Theod. lib. 2. Histor. Eccl. c. 16.
the word of truth, and the truth of the word, is not at all diminished. One
man and the truth are strong enough to oppose a multitude in error, and a
multitude of errors. The more any men, and the more men appear in opposing
truth, the more is God engaged in faithfulness to appear for it. When one
boasted to St Hierome that he had a multitude of Followers in his Opinion; he
answered, That the number of his Companions did not prove him a Catholic,
Multitudo s^cio^um te nequaquam Catholicum, sed Haereticum monstrabit. Hieron.
l. 3. advers. Pelag.
but a Heretic.

But how did Elihu answer Job and his Companions? The next verse tells us how.

Verse. 5. Look unto the Heavens, and see, behold the Clouds which are higher
than thou. (...) Aspexit aliq tando ab o^ulis ad intellectum transfertur.
As if he had said, Look to the Heavens, and they will answer thee; behold the
Clouds, and they will confute thee: Thy very senses may convince thee, that
thou have spoken these things against Reason. And the Heave^s will tell thee,
that thy mistake in this matter is Heave^ly wide. If thou turn thy eyes upward,
and considerest that distance which is between God, Toto coelo erras.
who has Heaven for the Habitation of his Hol^nesse, and of his Glory, and
thee, who dwell in thy house of Clay here on Earth, thou may see that thy
sins cannot hurt him, nor thy goodness extend to him. The distance between
Heaven and man is very great; but the distance between God and man is far
greater; the one is immensurable, but the other is unimaginable,
unconceiveable. Therefore if the Heavens be so high, that thou can not annoy
them with thine Arrows, much less art thou able to annoy God, who is higher,
and infinitely more out of Bow-shot and Gunshot than the Heavens: That Is the
scope of his A^gumentation here, to prove that Job could not, or that no man
can hurt God by his sin.

Look to the Heavens, and see. Both words are applied to the sense or sight of
the eye, yet they have a reference also to an intellectual sight, to the eye of
the mind: Look, and see; that is, Take special notice of, and contemplate the
Heavens. We may look, and not see; that is, look and not consider, look and not
observe: To look and see, is to give earnest attention to the thing looked
upon; look curiously, c^itically, how high the Heavens are, Look and see.

(...) Significat curiose inspicere, intueri visa, contemplare mente. Aquin.
We may apply the first word Look (as some do) to the truth of the thing, look
how high the Heavens are; it may be seen by the eye, that they are very high,
though we cannot see how high they are. The latter word See, may refer to the
admirable contrivance and contexture of the thing seen, as the forme^ to the
truth and reallity of it: Look and see how wonderful, how full of wonders the
Heavens are; see with admiration what a vastness, what an ex^ctnesse there is
in the Heavens above thee. Thus the word is used by the Prophet, ( Isa. 42.18.)
Look ye blind, that ye may see. It is a Prophecy of Gospel times: that is,
Consider the Messages and Mysteries of the Gospel exactly, view them well, that
ye who are blind may behold the glorious light that shines forth in them. There
were many blind ones in Ch^ists time, that looked upon the things of the
Gospel, and did not see; the Pharisees looked upon them, and they were among the
blind ones; they indeed had better thoughts of themselves, and therefore put
that question to Christ in scorn, ( John 9.40.) Are we blind also? They did not
look so as to see; they were blind when they looked, and blind after they
looked: The holy Prophet exhorts poor blind souls to whom the Gospel should
come, to look better, to look again and again, till they saw, Look ye blind,
that ye may see; That is, be diligent and humble, that ye may see the light
shining in the Gospel. The proud Pharisees who would not see the light which
Christ offered to them, were the worst of blind ones.

This is the Look which the word in the Text calls for. Look unto the Heavens,
and see; it cannot be understood of the outward sight only, for he that looks
upon the Heavens cannot but see them; but a man may look a great while upon the
Heavens, and not see them considerately, nor understand what he sees. The
words import attention and consideration: (...) Intentis oculis intuitin est.
And so they are used and placed (2 Kings 3.14.) Were it not that I regard the
presence of Jehoshaphat the King of Judah, I would not look unto thee, nor see
thee; said Elisha to Jehoram King of Israel; that is, I would give thee no
respect, nor take notice of thee. Nomen hoc (...) non potest significare Nubes,
quae sunt substantiae densae, nempe Aer condensatus: At Shehhakim dicti sunt a
substantiae tenuitate. qualis est substantia coeli; ergo ver^o tenues coelos.
Pisc.
In this sense the Prophet represents the Church bespeaking the incompassionate
Spectators of her calamity, ( Lam. 1.12.) Is it nothing to you, all ye that
pass by? Behold and see (that is, weigh it well, and consider) if there be any
sorrow like unto my sorrow. Look unto the Heavens and see.

And Behold (with like attention) the Clouds. There is some difference among
Interpreters, about this word which we render Clouds. The Hebrew properly
signifies Thinnes; but a Cloud, is thick, and consists of many Aireal vapors,
condensed into a body; and therefore this word cannot well be translated a
Cloud, (says this Author) but the thin Heavens, that is, the higher Heavens,
those above the Airy Heaven.

(...) ut plurimum Aethera and nubes signifi^at. Bold.
Again, The Clouds are lower than the Heavens, they are nearest to us, they are
engendered in the middle Region, nor do they at any time rise higher than that
Region. Forasmuch then as Elihu is endeavoring by the consideration of the
highness of Gods royal seat, or of the vast distance (as the Prophet speaks) of
the habitation of his Holiness and of his Glory from us, to prove, that neither
any good we do can profit him, nor any evil we do, teach to his disadvantage;
therefore it may seem not to make much for the purpose of Elihu, to call Job to
behold the Clouds, which are near us, comparatively, though their distance from
us be really very great: but I conceive, notwithstanding that Criticisme of the
word, and this reason, we may well enough abide by the Translation, which
says, Behold the Clouds; for though the Clouds are thicker than the Ai^, yet
they are but thin, and are soon dispersed by wind and ratified by heat.

Again, Supposing (as indeed they do) that the Clouds move in the lower part of
the Heavens, it increases and hightens the sense of the words to the purpose,
for which Elihu makes use of them. As if he had said, Behold and see the
Heavens, the upper Heavens, the Starry Heavens, they are higher than thou, yea,
behold the Clouds which are nearest to us, and much, very much below the
Stars, those especially which Astronomers call the fixed Stars; yet do but
behold the Clouds, which at the top of some hills one may touch with his hand,
(some describe great men hiding their heads among the Clouds) Behold, I say,
the Clouds which are lowest, yet they are higher than thou, they are beyond thy
reach; much more the Heavens, most of all God, who is higher than the highest
Heavens. Thou can neither add to, nor diminish or blemish the beauty of the
Heavens, thou can not make a cloud better or worse; What then can thou do
to or against the God of Heaven? To convince Joh of this, is the purpose of
Elihu in calling him to the view of the Heavens. Now forasmuch as Elihu invites
Job to the view and Contemplation of the Heavens;

Note; First, It is our duty to study and meditate the natural works of God, or
his works in Nature; Especially the Heavens, which are so eminent a part of his
works.

The Scripture calls some, Starr-gazers, such are they, who study the Heavens
to a very evil purpose, drawing men off from their sole dependence upon God, by
foretelling the events of things, and destinies of persons, from the positions
and motions of the heavenly Bodies or Luminaries. This kind of Studying and
Contemplating the Heavens, is one of the greatest vanities under Heaven, a
vanity often reproved in the Scriptures of the holy Prophets; thus to be
Starr-gazers, or Heaven-beholders is our sin: but there is a Contemplation of
the Stars which is our duty and commendation, ( Psalm. 8.3, 4.) When I consider
(in that great volume of the works of God) the Heavens, the work of thy
fingers, the Moon and the Stars which thou have ordained; What is man that
thou art mindful of him, etc. David did both look and see, he beheld the
Heavens for a good purpose, a godly purpose, his own abasement, and the
advancement of the glory and goodness, or of the glorious goodness of God, in
spreading such a Canopy, sparkling with perpetual fires for him to walk under,
and do his work by. And doubtless, did we with enlightened eyes behold and see
the natural Heavens, we should become more spiritual and heavenly.

Secondly, In that we have here three words, look, see, and behold. Note, The
works of God, Especially the Heavens, are diligently to be Considered.

We may look to the Heavens and not see, we may see the Heavens and not behold
them. Let me here again mind the Reader of the Emphasis of that word; it notes
a looking unto, or upon the Object, as a Hunter looks for a Hare, or a Fowler
for a Bird; how does he pry and look into every tuft and bush? So the word is
used ( Jer. 5.26.) Among my people are found wicked men: they lay wait (or
they eye and behold) as one that sets snares, they set a trap, they catch
men. All the visible works of God, much more the Heavens should be diligently
considered, looked into, seen, and beheld. It was a good Conclusion of one of
the Ancients, who said, That man has not looked unto Heaven, In coelum ron
suspicit, qui coelum tantum aspicit. Origin.
that has only looked upon Heaven. A bare look is not sufficient, he must look
with admiration, or till he cannot forbear to admire, as the first Latin word
in that sentence signifies properly. A man may look upon a Picture, and yet not
behold it discerningly; he may say, that is the picture of a man, yet not
consider the Art of the workman in drawing it; he may see it is the picture of
a man, not of a beast, at a look, but he must see it exactly, if he would find
out the worth and workmanship o^ it. A man in passage (as some speak) may see a
house, yet not apprehend the Symmetry of the Platform, the skill of the
Architect, no^ the commodiousnesse of its Situation; to discern these calls
for serious consideration, and settled reviews. As in the Natural works of God,
the Heavens made for man, so much more in his Spiritual works, the making of a
Heaven in man, or man Heavenly, require our deepest thoughts, and most studious
re-searches. O how many are there who look transiently upon those works of God,
who never see nor behold them, never enter into the secrets of them! many know
some Truths, yet never looked into any, nor labored to comprehend with all
Saints (or as all Saints ought to do) what is the breadth, and length, and
depth, and he^ght of them; and therefore attain not to that riches of the full
assurance of understanding, to the acknowledgement of the mystery of God, and
of the Father, and of Christ, as the Apostle speaks ( Col. 2.2.) but are like
children tossed to and fro, and carried about with every wind of Doctrine, as
the same Apostle describes them, Ephesians. 4.14. Remember, we are to look and see,
and behold the Natural works of God, how much more the Spiritual Mysteries of
the Gospel, and the works of grace? these indeed are to be looked upon, and
seen, and beheld, those other are not to be left unlooked upon.

Note, Thirdly, The Heavens are a Divine Glass, wherein we may see much of
God; they are a Natural Alphabet, the Letters whereof being well placed, and
rightly put together, we may spell the name of God, his Wisdom, Power, and
Goodness.

Thus the Apostle argues ( Romans 1.19, 20.) That which may be known of God is
manifest in them, or to them; that is, to the very Heathens. His proof for
this, is taken from the point now proposed: For the invisible things of him
from the Creation of the world are clearly seen, being understood by the things
that are made, even his eternal Power and Godhead. The Apostle lays it down
in general, Whatsoever is made, whatsoever is part of the Creation, holds out
somewhat of God: The very Clods of the Earth declare his Power; how much more
the Clouds and Stars of Heaven? Therefore Look to the Heavens, Behold the
Clouds, consider them, ( Psalm. 19.2.) They declare the Glory of God, and the
Firmament shows his handiwork. If you ask more particularly, what do they
declare? I answer, First, That God is; every Creature does so; if there be a
Creature, there must needs be a Creator; If there be Effects, there must be an
Efficient; the made Heavens declare their Maker. Secondly, The Heavens declare,
not only that God is, but that he is above. Christ has taught us to pray, Our
Father, which art in Heaven; God is every where, yet there especially; Heaven
is the Habitation of his Holiness, and of his Glory. Thirdly, In the purity of
the Heavens, we may see the holiness and purity of God; and they being so
incorruptible and unchangeable, declare Fourthly, The incorruptibility and
unchangeablenesse of God: He that made them such, is much more such himself.
The very unchangeablenesse of the Heavens, is changeable, compared with the
unchangeablenesse of God. The Heavens (says David, Psalm. 102.25, 26.) are the
work of thy hands; they shall perish, but thou shall endure (or stand), yea all
of them shall wax old like a Garment: as a Vesture shall thou change them, and
they shall be changed; but thou art the same, and thy years shall have no end.
Fifthly, The Heavens which God has built as a House for himself, being so high
above the touch of the Creature, show us that God is infinitely exalted above
the reach and molestation of sinful man; that is the thing which Elihu aims at,
as appears by what follows in the next words. Look to the Heavens, and see,
behold the Clouds which are higher than thou.

Verse. 6. If thou sinnest, what do thou against him? or if thy transgressions
be multiplied, what do thou unto him? As if he had said, When thou look to
the Heavens, thou plainly see thou can do nothing against them; it would be
a vain thing for thee to attempt the Heavens, to clamber up to the Clouds;
surely then, thy sinnings, thy frettings, thy discontents, and complaints
cannot hurt God; therefore be quiet.

If thou sinnest. The word here used, notes sin in the least degree, (...)
Erravi^.
any error or deviation from the Rule; but it comprehends sins of the highest
degree, even such as the Prophet calls ( Amos 5.12.) Mighty sins. If thou
sinnest at the greatest rate, at the height of blasphemy, What do thou
against him?

(...) Non tam nocere, quam op^rare et laborare significat. q. d. Laborando et
adnitendo quid tandem efficies quo illum laedas. Pined.
The Hebrew is, What workest thou against him? Properly the word signifies only
to work; we render it by working against, that is, to the hurt and disadvan^age
of another, to his mischief and undoing. As if he had said, If thou should
set thy shoulder to the work, if thou should do evil with both hands
greedily, yet thou can make no work of it in this matter, what do thou
against him? what hurt has he by it? And to assure Job that he has none, nor
can have any, Elihu serves him up the same Mess in another Dish of words, in
the close of the verse.

Or if thy transgressions be multiplied. Here Elihu speaks as high, as he meant
before. Transgressing is more th^n ordinary sinning, though (as was touched upon
the word) under sinning he comprehended any, the most extraordinary
transgressings. If thy sins be transgressions, rebellions, or prevarications,
and they be multiplied, if thou sinnest out of malice and wrathful purpose
against God himself; and do not only commit some one of these, but many, and
heapest them up together, yet etc.

(...) Et ad molem et numerum communis est.
If thy transgressions be multiplied. The word signifies both magnitude and
multitude; hence some render, If thy transgressions be great; we say, If they
be many. Sin as much as thou will, and sin as often as thou will; sin as much
as thou can, what hurt has God by it? Some by sin in the former part of the
verse, understand that evil which is committed immediately against God; and by
transgressions in this latter clause, such evils as are done against our
neighbor: But I see no need at all to be so distinct, we may take it
respecting God, or man, or both; for those sins which we commit against man,
are also against God; he is the person offended, his Law is broken, against
whomsoever the sin is committed. If thou multiply thy transgressions, What do
thou unto him?

(...)
That word, What do thou? signifies not only, or not so much, strong labor
and endeavor, as the former did, but cunning in labor, and skill in labor.
As if he had said, Though a man set all his wits awork to do evil, what can he
do to him? Neither pains nor skill, neither industry nor policy, neither open
force nor secret stratagems, can do him any, the least annoyance. Some
Creatures are weak and inconsiderable, as to any thing they can do by outward
power, yet they can do much by their subtilty, and cunning; but neither the
one, nor the other can do any thing unto God. Scrue up thy wits to the highest
pin, or peg, yet thou can do nothing really prejudicial unto him. The words
are plain; from them

Observe, First, God receives no damage by the sin of man, how great, or how
many soever his sins are.

A man may quickly vex and undo himself by sin. Wisdom says ( Prove. 8.36.) He
that sins against me, wrongeth his own soul: All they that hate me, love
death. But the sinner cannot hurt God, he is far above us; man can no more hurt
God by sin, than he can hurt the Clouds, or the highest Heavens. Had we an
enemy above the Clouds, were it not a madness to shoot arrows, or bend our
forces against him? What is man to God! The School-man concludes, Nothing can
be added to, Per actum hominis Deo nihil potest accrescere vel deperire; Sed
tamen homo in quantum in se est, aliquid subtrahit Deo, vel ei exhibet, cum
s^rvat vel non servat ordinem quem Deus Instituit. Aquin. 1. 2 dae. q. 21. Art.
4. Ad primum.
nothing can be diminished, nothing taken from God by any act of man: Yet man,
as much as in him lies, takes away from, and gives or brings to God, when he
either keeps, or does not keep that order which God has appointed. Sinners
shall be judged and dealt with, as they that have greatly annoyed and
disadvantaged God, as they that have robbed and spoiled him, as they that have
smitten and wounded him, as they that have abased him, and laid him low: And
there is reason they should be judged as having done so, forasmuch as they do
their utmost to do so. Thus they are described ( Psalm. 2.1, 2.). The Heathen
rage, and the People imagine a vain thing. The Kings of the Earth set
themselves, and the Rulers, etc. And why all this? what was it for? It was
against the Lord, and against hu Anointed. This was done by the Princes and
Great Ones of the world; yet they were so far from being able to prejudice the
Lord, either in his Person, or in his Interest, that he did but laugh at them
for it. And it is considerable that God is described there, (according to the
notion used by Elihu in the Text) sitting in the Heavens, (verse. 4.) He that
sits in the Heavens shall laugh, the Lord shall have them in derision. And
why does the Lord laugh? surely because he sees they can no more hurt or hinder
him in his purposes, by any of, or all their sinful advisings, and attemptings,
than if they should hope to batter down the Heavens by discharging a Pot-gun
against them. And therefore he concludes with a triumphant Yet, (ver. 6.) Yet
have I set my King (after you have done your worst) upon my holy Hill of Sion.
The sins of men do tu^n to the glory of God, but to their own shame. The sins
of Gods own children turn to the glory of his mercy; those huge heaps, and
numberless numbers of sins committed by his Children before Conversion, what do
they in the issue, but lift up the glory of his Grace in the pardon of them?
And the rebellions committed by impenitent sinners, going on in obstinacy to
the end, without Conversion, what do they but lift up the glory of God in his
Justice, and wonderful judgments, which he will bring upon them? The sins of
the old world (which was a world of sin, all flesh having corrupted their way
before God, and there being but one righteous Family found in it) all those
sins (I say) did not damage God at all, but indeed they glorified both his
Patience and his Justice; his Patience, in sparing them so long, even an
hundred and twenty years after warning given; his Justice, in sending the Flood
at last, which brought swift destruction upon them, and swept them all away.
The unnatural crying sins of Sodom, did not hurt the God of Heaven, but God
took advantage thereby, to glo^ifie his Justice, in raining Fire and Brimstone
upon them from Heaven, ( Genesis 19.24.) Pharaoh by all his opposition against the
Israel of God, did not disadvantage God, but gave him an advantage to make his
Power known, by swallowing up him and his Egyptian Host in the waters of the
Red Sea. That which is done against the Will of God, fulfills the Will of God.
The sins of men are so far from hurting the God of Heaven, that they glorify
him among men on E^rth; while they behold him either turning the evil which is
door into good, or punishing them ^or their evil doings. That which men speak
or do against God, like an Arrow shot up into the Air, falls down upon their
own heads. David (Ps. 111.2.) breaks out wonderfully into the praise of God
upon this consideration. The works of the Lord are great, sought out of all
them that have pleasure in them. These works of God wherein we should take
pleasure, are not only woe ks of mercy to the Godly, ( verse. 3, 4, 5.) but of
vengeance upon the wicked, ( verse. 6.) He has showed his people the power of
his w^rks, that he may give them the heritage of the Heathen. The works of his
hands are Verity and Judgment, (verse. 7.) That is, judgment for Saints in
saving them, and upon sinners in consuming them. De eo quod agitur contra, Dei
voluntatem, voluntas ipsius vel mala in bonum convertentis vel mala punientis
impletur. August. Enchirid. c. 100.
We should much contemplate the works of God, in bringing glory to himself out
of the sins of men. The Angels sinned and sell; man sinned as soon almost as he
was set up: These Creatures did that which God would not have done, yet God
brought about that which he would. And thus it is to this day among all the
child^en of men; while they break holy Commandments, God fulfills his holy
Counsels; no thanks to them, yea woe to them. So then, the Lord has no hurt by
sin; which way soever sinners turn themselves, they cannot turn away his
Counsels, nor turn from his Counsels: When they are disobeying his revealed
will, Miro et inaffabili modo, non fit praeter ejus voluntatem, quod etiam
contra ejus voluntatem fit; quia non fieret, si non sineret: nec utique nolens
sinit sed volens. Nec sineret bonus fieri male, nisi omnipotens etiam de malo
facere posset been. August. in Psalm. 111.
he is doing his secret will, in which God is most righteous, and in his season
will lift up his Righteousness and Holiness, his righteous and holy Will, in
the face of all the sinners in the world, and they shall know and confess that
he has served his own wise and holy purposes, even in those Providence
wherein they have had no purpose, but to serve their foolish and unholy lusts
and pleasures. We have an illustrious proof of this, in that extremely evil and
unnatural practice of men good in the main, the holy Patriarchs, against their
own Brother ( Genesis 50.20) who told them plainly, when he meant them no evil,
but good, But as for you, ye thought evil against me, but God meant it for
good; to bring to pass, as it is this day, to save much people alive.

Further, To clear the Point in general, we may distinguish of sin, as having a
threefold opposition; First, Against our selves. Secondly, Against our
Neighbor. Thirdly, Against God. This division or distinction of sins, must be
so understood that the two former, namely, sin against our selves, and against
our Neighbor, brings a real detriment, and disadvantage to our selves, and to
our Neighbor. But as sin has respect to God, it does not bring any real
detriment to him: Only it may be said, First, The will of many sinners is
raised up to that height of wickedness, as purposely to set themselves to
dishonor God, to blaspheme his name, and do despite to the Spirit of Grace,
(Heb. 10.29.) which is the utmost length that sin or lust can go. Secondly, The
nature of every sin, or every sin considered in its nature, is a wrong or a
hurt to God; for it is an unconformity to his Will, and a breach of his Law:
Yet as to himself God receives no hurt, nor possibly can receive hurt by any,
the foulest, most sinful sin.

But some may say, Does not sin damage God at all; could Ellhu say in Truth,
What do thou against him, or into him, if thou sinnest? Is sin nothing to
God? The Church complained, and cried out to those that passed by her, ( Lam.
1.12.) Is it nothing to you, all ye that pass by? Are all my afflictions
nothing to you? May not God say much more, Are all your transgressions nothing
unto me? Are our sins nothing to him? Is he unconcerned in them? How can this
be? There are several Scripture-Expressions which show clearly that we do much
against God when we sin, and much for him when we sin not, or abstain from sin.

First, When a People, especially when a professing People, sin, The name of
God is profaned; and is that nothing to God? Is it not against God, to have
his name p^ophaned? We find the Lord charging this upon his People ( Ezekiel.
36.20, 21.) They profaned my name among the Heathen, etc. To profane the name
of God, is to make it as an unholy, as a common, yea, as a corrupt thing; and
is this nothing to God?

Secondly, To sin is to dishonor God, it is called, A despising of God, (1 Samuel
2.30.) Them that honor me, I will honor; and they that despise me, shall be
lightly esteemed. Is it nothing to be despised, to be dishonored? If a man be
despised, he thinks himself wronged; loss of honor is a great loss.

Thirdly, We find in Scripture, that some kind of sinning is blaspheming. The
Apostle tells the Jews (Romans 2.24.) The name of God is blasphemed among the
Gentiles, through you: That is, his name is evil spoken of, a bad report is
brought upon his name, he hears ill among evil men, among the Gentile^, through
you, that is, through the unanswerablenesse of your doings, to your sayings, or
through the unlikenesse of your practices, to your profession. To blaspheme the
name of God is to strike through, to wound the name of God; it is somewhat to a
man to have his name struck through with the poisoned Arrows and Darts of
reproach. An ill tongue falls heavy, and cuts deep. A blasphemed name is a
tongue-beaten name: And is this nothing to God?

Fourthly, Some sins are not only in themselves a contempt of God, but they are
committed in contempt of God. When men sin presumptuously, and with a high
hand; when they sin with a command shining in their eye, with a threat sounding
in their ear, they even send a defiance to Heaven, and bid God do his worst:
And is this nothing against God? nothing unto God? One of the Ancients writing
at large of two Cities, Augustinus, l. 14. De Civitate Dei. cap. 28.
calls one of them, The earthly and unholy City, made by the love of our
selves, even to the loathing and contempt of God. (Love to our selves, rising
up to the contempt of God, does all the mischief in the world) The other City
he calls holy and heavenly, and that (says he) is built by the love of God,
or when we love God even to a loathing and contempt of our selves, and of all
our own concernments, interests and advantages. When a man comes to love God
with a loathing of himself, then he is indeed a builder of the holy City: And
when sinners act with an inordinate love to themselves, they at once cast
contempt upon God, and build that bad City; and is this nothing to God?

Fifthly, The Scripture says, God is angry with sin. A wise man will not be
angry with that which is nothing to him, or which does nothing against him; a
wise man will not be angry for nothing, much less will the only wise God.

Sixthly, The Scripture says, God is grieved for the sins of men. Surely God
will not be grieved for that which is nothing unto him. Himself says, sinners
fret him, (Ezekiel. 16.43.) Thou have fretted me in all these things. A well
tempered man will not fret for that which does not some way or other afflict
him. We read ( Isa. 63.10.) That Israel vexed his holy Spirit so much, that he
was turned to be their enemy, and fought against them. And had they done
nothing against him? Yea, it is said ( Genesis 6.6) God was so much afflicted with
the sins of the old world, that he repented that he had made man upon the
Earth, and it grieved him at his heart. Doubtless that is somewhat to God,
which grieves him thus, and goes to his very heart. And let us take heed of
thinking sin is nothing to God; though Elihu says here to Job, What do thou
unto him, if thou sinnest? Sin has done all the mischief to man that ever was
done him, nor can any thing do him a mischief, but his sin. And though God, as
Elihu argues truly, be above the reach of any mischief that sin or sinners can
do him, yet upon trial they will be found guilty of, and cast for doing much,
and that very mischievously against God. And therefore

For answer to the Objection, know, The glory of God may be considered two
ways; First, In it self. Secondly, In its manifestations: Or, we may consider
God, First, In his Essential glory and blessedness; Secondly, In his
manifestative glory and blessedness. The Glory and Majesty of God in it self,
or his Essential Glory is always the same, and receives neither increase nor
diminution; for it is infinite and perfect, or infinitely perfect; and that is
the definition of Perfection, or defined perfection, to which nothing can be
added, and from which nothing can be taken. So then, Consider God in himself,
and it is true, our sins are nothing to him, they hurt him no more than the
Stars are hurt by throwing stones into the Air at them, or the Sun is hurt
by casting Darts up at it, or the Moon is hurt by the barking of Dogs at it; we
can no more hurt or hinder that good or glory of God by our sins, than Sun,
Moon and Stars in Heaven, are hurt or hindered in their Course, by such angry
assaults from Earth.

But

Secondly, Consider the manifestations of the glory of God, and this is
hindered, or damaged by sin. That Is the meaning of all those Scriptures, where
it is said, his name is profaned, dishonored, blasphemed; the present
manifestations of his glory, which should break out every where, are clouded
and eclipsed by sin. And this, their sins do especially who profess his name.
Professors are obliged wherever they come, to hold out the savor and
excellency of his name: And therefore God will deal with knowing sinners, as
with those that hurt and wound him, as with those that have grieved and broken
him, as wi h those who have burdened and troubled him, yea, as with those who
would destroy him. Peccatum 1 ocatur Deicidium appetens sc: Deum destruere.
Sin is an enemy to God, and would dethrone and thrust him out of the world;
therefore s^nners shall be dealt with as such as have highly hurt and wronged
God. Sinners have sometimes risen up to such expressions of wickedness, that
they would even pull God out of Heaven; it is in the nature of every sin, and
in the spirit of many sinners to do so, they carry a daily enmity in their
hearts.

Therefore woe to those who say of God, God is not hurt by our sins? why then
should we trouble our selves about them? yes, the Lord will at last let all
sinners know he has been concerned in their sins; though they have not at all
touched his Essential Glory, yet they have darkened and slurr'd the
manifestations of his Glory. And therefore I answer,

Secondly, All those Scriptures before alleged, importing that sin grieves
God, vexes him, and is very burdensome to him; all those are spoken either of
God-man, Jesus Christ, who was made like unto us in all things, except sin, and
is spoken of in the Historyes and Prophesies of the Old Testament, Haec de Deo
dicuntur (...) et intelligenda sunt (...).
before he took flesh, as having those (in him) sinlesse passions of anger, and
sorrow, and grief, which were found in him after he appeared in the flesh: Or
if expounded of God, strictly considered, then what is in those Scriptures
spoken of God, must be understo^d after the manner of men, yet as becomes God,
who is without all passions and repentings: Or they are to be understood, not
as importing Affections in God, but Effects upon men. When men sin, God does
such things as angry men use to do, such things as men do that are g^ieved with
what others have done, and repent of what themselves have done. If grief,
anger, repentance, were properly wrought in God, when we sin, our sins must
needs be some, yea much annoyance to him. But while man sees and feels such
Effects as these passions produce, the Lord is infinitely exalted above the
least feeling of these passions, he remains ever the same: That Is it which
Elihu signifies, and holds out to Job; we may trouble one another, and trouble
our selves by sin, but we cannot at all trouble God. If thou sinnest, what do
thou against him, what unto him? I shall conclude, and gather up the sense of
this Context in these four brief Deductions. Take two of them Negatively, and
two Affirmatively.

First, God does not punish sinners in anger, only, though he be angry only
with sin.

Secondly, God does not punish sinners, at all, for fear. He fears none, whom
none can hurt.

The two Affirmatives take thus:

Fi st, When God punishes sin, he does it out of pure love to Justice, or
purely out of love to Justice.

Secondly, God afflicts the godly in mercy; it is not because they have done him
hurt, but for their good.

Elihu proceeds further to prove, that as Job could not hurt God by his sins,
so his righteousness and innocence were no advantage to him; and therefore it
must needs follow, that his sins could only hurt, and his righteousness only
profit himself, and such as were like himself.

Verse. 7. If thou be righteous, what give thou him? and what receives he at
thy hands?

Verse. 8. Thy wickedness may hurt a man, as thou art; and t^y righteousness may
profit the son of man.

Elihu having showed in the former verse, that the sin of m^n cannot detract
any thing from, nor in the least hinder the happiness of God; proceeds in the
7th verse to show, that the sinlesness, yea that the righteousness of man
cannot advantage, nor advance the happiness of God: And therefore lest he
should seem to make both the sin and the righteousness of man to be of no use,
he states the matter in the 8th verse, and tells us both to whom the wickedness
of man is hurtful, and to whom the righteousness of man is profitable; Thy
wickedness may hurt a man as thou art, and thy righteousness may profit the son
of man; but neither can thy wickedness hurt, nor thy righteousness help or
advantage God. That Is the sum of these two verses.

Verse. 7. If thou be righteous, what give thou him? As if he had said; There
is no reason (O Job) that thou should at any time (as thou oftentimes have)
proclaim thy own righteousness, as if that added any thing to God. Job was not
ignorant of that; But the speech of Elihu had this scope in it, to reprove him
for complaining that his goodness profited himself nothing, because though he
was far from wickedness, yet he was afflicted, whereas many wicked men
prospered and lived in full content; to which point his other friends had not
answered. And further, Elihu urges Job with this, because he had so
industriously defended his own righteousness, as if he would intimate that God
was a gainer by it; whereas if God at any time rewards our good deeds, that
proceeds from his own goodness and Free Grace, not from any obligation which
we have put upon him, by what we have done, how well soever we have done it. If
thou be righteous, what give thou him? This supposition, if thou be
righteous, has in it a grant, if not an affirmation, that a man may be
righteous; For though all men naturally, or in nature, are unrighteous, yet
thorough grace all men, that is, all men who receive grace are righteous: And
they who receive grace are righteous under a threefold notion. First, they are
righteous by an imputed righteousness, or by the righteousness of another
accounted to them; and thus every godly man is righteous, because freely
justified. Secondly, they that have grace are righteous by an Inherent
Righteousness, by a stock or a principle of Righteousness planted in them at
their Conversion. In conversion, not only the acts, but the state and nature of
a man is changed. He who before was nothing but a bundle of unrighteousness,
becomes a righteous man; that is, he has a ^ighteous principle planted in him
and abiding with him. Thus a godly man is righteous, because he is sanctified.
Thirdly, every man that has grace, is a Righteous man by a righteousness
flowing out from him, or by a practical righteousness; he is righteous by the
doing of Righteousness; The former is Righteousness by Conversion, this is
Righteousness by Conversation; and this slows from the former, as the Apostle
John speaks in his first Epistle ( Chap. 3.5.) He that does righteousness, is
righteous; that is, he is in a righteous state through Justification, and has
righteousness planted in him through Sanctification; And he that is thus
righteous in his state, is also a practiser of Righteousness in his way. As it
is said of that worthy pair Zachary and Elizabeth, (Luke 1.6.) They were both
Righteous, walking in all the Ordinances and Commandments of God blameless.
Here was practical Righteousness, they were righteous workers, their course was
a course of Righteousness, as themselves were in a state of Righteousness. And
thus, I conceive, Elihu is chiefly to be understood here; because righteousness
in this place is opposed to unrighteous actions. If thou were Righteous; that
is, if thy ways or thy courses were as righteous, as thou have often reported
and asserted them to be (for Job in the 27th Chap. said, He would not let go
his Righteousness, he would hold it till he dyed; he would never give up his
Integrity, how much soever his friends accused him; he would no more give it
up, than give it off, Now says Elihu, If thou art righteous, as thou say,
and stand so much upon it, let it be granted, seeing thou will needs have it
so, that thou art righteous, The Septuagint render so, Seeing thou art
Righteous, or for as much as thou art Righteous, that is, according to thy own
affirmation, yea though God has said so of thee, and born that witness of
thee) yet what is that to God?

What give thou unto him? Justitia tua nihil deum juv^ris, ne igitur tuam
vendites justitiam. Chrysostom:
If thy conversation were such as no blame could be laid upon it; though no spot
could be seen upon thy garments, after all thy walkings thorough the affairs
of this world, yet what give thou unto him? Surely nothing at all. Some
conceive this was a famous proverbial Speech amongst the godly in those times,
full of Reverence and high Estimation, or rather Admiration of God; If we are
Righteous, what is it to God? or what give we to God? (What give thou him?)
The meaning is, thou give him nothing. A gift is the bestowing of some good
thing where there is no obligation; Donum est rei licitae nullo jure cogente
mera liberalitate facta collatio. Hostien.
that is a gift which a man is not bound to bestow by any Law of Righteousness;
A gift is bestowed out of mere liberality, or from a free and bountiful spirit.
Now, says he, What give thou unto God? What service is there in all thy
righteous ways and works, which thou art not obliged to tender unto God, or
which thou art not bound to do? Thy Righteousness does not at all oblige God,
for whatsoever good thou do, thou art under a command to do it; there is a
Law commanding, yea, compelling thee, if thou should refuse; do thou
perform any duty to God or man, which thou art not bound or engaged to
perform? Surely thou do not, yea thou can not. Therefore, what give
thou unto God?

Or what receives he at thy hand? The words are plain, giving and receiving
are Correlatives; where there is giving, there is usually receiving; and where
there is receiving, there must be giving. Sometimes there is giving, where
there is no receiving. When Belteshazar promised Daniel great things, if he
could Interpret the handwriting on the wall, ( Chap. 5.17.) He answered, Let
thy gifts be to thy self, and thy rewards unto another. Daniel would not
receive his offer: There was giving inpro mise on Belteshazars side, but no
receiving on Daniels side. Most are so much for receiving, that they love the
word give, as the Prophet taxed and reproved the Rulers of Israel, (Hos. 4.18.)
Her Rulers with shame (that is, shamelessly, or of which they should be
ashamed, or for which all cry shame on them) do love, Give ye; that word
sounded well, even like sweet music in their ears: And if others did not offer
bribes to corrupt Justice, they invited them, give ye, we are ready to receive.
The Apostle puts both these together in a good way, ( Phil. 4.15.) No Church
communicated with me as concerning giving and receiving, but ye only: And he
would have the Church at Ephesus to remember those words of the Lord Jesus, how
he said, It is more blessed to give, than to receive, (Acts. 20.35.)
Artaxerxes, Artaxerxes longimanus dextram manum habebat longiorem; Rege dignius
est dare quam accipere.
one of the Persian Monarchs, was Surnamed, Long-hand; his right hand, or
giving hand, being longer than the left; showing, as some conjecture, that the
Honor of Great Kings is seen more in giving than in receiving. But as we have
nothing of our own to give unto God, so he has no need to receive any thing of
us. Thus Elihu here, What give thou him? or what receives he at thine hand?

Of thine hand. He expresses it not barely, What receives he of thee, but of
thine hand; because as the hand is the great Instrument of working, so also of
giving; we give and bestow with the hand, (what has he received of thy hand),
there is a speciallitie in that. Consider thy hand, what can the hand of God
take out of thy hand? Thy hand is, First, a weak hand; Secondly, a narrow
scanty hand; Thirdly, thy hand is an ineffectual hand to thy self, it cannot
bring any work about to the issue, to the full end and accomplishment;
therefore what is thy hand, thy weak, thy narrow, thy ineffectual hand, that
God should receive any thing out of thy hand? And then consider what the hand
of God is; His is, First, a strong hand; Secondly, a large, a wide hand;
Thirdly, a hand full already; and, Fourthly, as his hand is full already, so it
is a hand filling all things; He opens his hand, and fills all things with
good. Now God having such a hand, how can thou fill his hahd with thy hand?
What receives he at thine hand? I need not labor further in the explication
of the words; Take one general Observation from them, which I shall draw down
into some particulars.

The Righteousness or Righteous Actions of men, contribute nothing to God; They
are no advantage to God: The best things that we can do, cannot at all better
God, or God is never the better for them: That is the meaning of David, (Psalm.
16.3.) speaking as a type of Christ; My goodness extends not to thee, but to
the Saints which are on the earth, and to the excellent, in whom is all my
delight. Jerome was of opinion, that these words of the Psalm were taken out
of this place of Job. (My goodness) that is, my good deeds extend not to thee;
the good deeds of Christ did not add any thing to God, they did not give any
thing to God; for it is impossible that any good, or any goodness should so be
made an addition to him, who is all, and has all: but (says he) to the
Saints, to them my goodness extends, I can and will do good to them. Thus St.
Paul spoke to the Athenians, (Acts 17.25.) God is not worshipped with men's
hands, as though he needed any thing: God calls for worship, but he is not
worshipped, because he needs our worship, or because he would receive some
benefit at the hand of worshippers. The same Apostle puts the question, ( Romans
11.35.) Who has given unto him, and it shall be recompensed unto him again? As
much as to say, no man has given any thing to God, he is above and beyond all
the gifts and givings of the creature.

There is a threefold ground of it, why nothing can be given to God, either to
oblige him, or to add any thing to him.

First, All is due to him, whatever we do is a debt to him; we cannot make the
payment of a debt a gift. Be as holy and as righteous as you will, as exact in
your walkings as you can, it is all of debt, and therefore not a gift. ( Luke
17.10.) When you have done all, (when you have run your whole Course of
obedience, both as to first and second Table duties,) say you are unprofitable
servants, we have done no more than was our duty to do. There is no gift, where
all is due.

Secondly, Whatever we do in a way of Righteousness, is not a gift, nor an
advan^age to God; for it was all first given us by God, Nihil aceressit ei
nostra justitia, quae tota gratuitum est illius donum.
we and all that we have came first from him; whatsoever we have, we have had
it of God. It is said in that place before noted ( Acts 17.25.) He is not
worshipped of men's hands, as if he needed any thing, (why?) for he gives to
all men life and breath, and all things; he gives all things, and therefore he
needs nothing, nor can any thing properly be said to be given to him, Scitum
est illud sapientis Hebraei: da illi de su^, quia tu and omnia tua illius sunt.
Tua ex tuis offerrimus tibi domine. Drus: Et lamsi q^od debemu^ reddere deo
cupiamus, tamen de suo reddimus. Salvi: de Eccl^ Cathol.
who gives all things. We have that remarkable Scripture (1 Chronicles. 29.10.)
where David praises the Lord for the offering and gift which he himself and
his people had brought toward the building of the Temple; And he desired that
his offerings might be accepted of the Lord, not so much as they were given by
his hand, as because they and the heart to give them, were received from the
hand of God. Wherefore David blessed the Lord before all the Congregation, and
said, Blessed be thou Lord God of Israel our Father, for ever and ever, for all
that is in Heaven and in Earth is thine; thine is the Kingdom, O Lord, and
thou art exalted as head above all. And, now therefore, O God, we thank thee,
and praise thy glorious Name; But who am I, and what is my people, that we
should be able to offer so willingly after this sort; for all things come of
thee, and of thy own have we given thee. And again at the 16th verse; All this
store comes of thee, and all is thine own. We cannot be said properly to give
another that which is his own already; whatever God receives of us, came from
himself: And as whatsoever we give comes from God, so every action or duty
which we perform to God, comes from God; he bestows the power to do upon us,
before we can do any thing, and therefore it cannot be any addition unto him.
There are two graces, which we exercise, very pleasing to God; first, Faith;
secondly, Charity; yet neither of these contribute any thing to God. Faith is
so far from giving God any thing, that its whole work lies in receiving; And
though charity be a giving grace, yet it gives to man only, not to God. So
then, what does God receive of man? surely nothing but his own. David enquires
( Psalm. 116.12.) What shall I return to the Lord for all his benefits? Ma^k
that word, return; the Hebrew Text may be thus rendered; What shall I make to
return to the Lord of all his rendrings, or contributions unto me; As if he had
said, Lord I have received abundance from thee, thou have paid or recompensed
me fully for all my pains, and I am looking over it all, and considering what
of it I shall return to thee; it is all thine own, and now Lord what shall I
return of it back again to thee? What he received was returned, if not in kind,
yet in effect, and the retu n of that was but his duty, it could not be his
desert. Christ indeed me^ited and satisfied, because he g^ve of his own, and as
God-man wrought all righteousness for us in his own strength.

Thirdly, The Lord receives nothing at our hands, for he is full already. We
can put no more into a full vessel; if there be any empty space, you may put
somewhat more into a Vessel, but when it is as full as it can hold, what can
you put into it? Who can make the Ocean fuller, which has in it the fullness
of all waters? All that we can give to God is not so much an increase to him,
as a drop of the Bucket is to the whole Ocean. Who can make the Sun b ighter?
all we do to, or for God, is not so much as a Candle to the Sun. What can he
receive, who has all things in himself? God is infinitely full, therefore
there is no giving to him, nor receiving by him at our hands. That word which
is one of the Titles of God holds forth as much, he is Elshaddi, that is, A God
every way full, every way sufficient, he is all-sufficient for us, and he is
Self-sufficient. Est quidem pictas illis grata, non autem utilis. Plato in
Euthyphra. Manifestam est quod nulla re Deus, nec amicis egebit. Arist. lib. 7.
Eth. c. 12.
Some of the Heathens had such notions and glimme^ing apprehensions of Go^.
Plato says, The exercise of Godliness, or of Worship, is acceptable to God,
but is not at all profitable to God. It is manifest, says Aristotle, that God
needs no friends, nor any thing to help him. The Sacrifices of the Jews were
great and royal Offerings, they brought their Sheep, and Oxen, and Bullocks,
and Goats in abundance, yet the Lord would have them know he had no need of
them, ( Psalm. 50.8.) I will not reprove thee for thy Sacrifices, and burnt
offerings to have been continually before me; I will take no Bullock out of thy
house, nor he-Goat out of thy Folds, for every Beast of the Forest is mine,
and the Cattle upon a thousand Hills: I know all the Fowls of the Mountains,
and the wild Beasts of the Field are mine. If I were an hungry, I would not
tell thee, for the world is mine, and the fullness thereof. Some conceive that
Elihu aims especially at those gif^s. If thou bring or give many
sacrifices, what receives he at thy hand? The Lo^d does not call for
sacrifices because he is hungry; that is, has need of them. The Lord ( Zeph.
2.11.) threatens the gods of the Heathen, that he would starve or famish them;
that is, he would destroy the means of their Worship: But who can famish the
Lord, whose the world is, and the fullness of it?

Now if God receives nothing at our hands by way of supply, or addition, then

First, No Creature is necessary unto God. We all depend on him, he is
altogether necessary to us, but we are not necessary to him; we are and ought
to be his Servants, but he does not need our service; we need such a Master,
such a Lord, we need to have such a one over us, but he needs not such as we
are under him. Earthly Masters and Servants have need of one another; Masters
keep and maintain their Servants, and Servants are very helpful and profitable
to their Masters. As a Servant needs a Master to give him meat and drink,
aparrel, and the conveniences of this life; so the Master needs the Servant, he
needs his work, his labor, his hand, he cannot tell how to do his business
without him; Masters cannot live comfortably without their Servants, much less
honorably, they cannot keep their State and Degree amongst men without
Servants; and Servants need their Masters, they cannot subsist, they cannot
live, but by wages, or the reward of their labor. God has made such a tie,
knit such a knot among the Creatures, that one, though a Superior, should not
despise the other, though much his Inferior, for both concur as parts, to
the constitution of the whole, or general constitution of the world. But God is
not a part, but the Principle, or Constituter of the Universe, not at all
depending upon any part of it. If a Servant should have need of his Master, and
not the Master of the Servant, the Master would despise his Servant; but God
has so ordered it, that as the Servant needs the Master, so the Master needs
the Servant, while himself has no need of either. God has no need of our
service, but we need his service, or him as our Lord and Master. It is an
honor to God that he has so many to serve him, but it is his greatest honor
that he needs none to serve him. Before there were either men or Angels, God
had the same honor and happiness that now he has, he is self-sufficien^; It
were a shame and a dishonor to us, should we own him for God, who needed our
good; he cannot be our God, who needs our good. All Creatures need the help and
good of one another, and the help or good of all Creatures comes from God; but
God himself is strong enough to help himself, and good enough to make himself
everlastingly happy. There is nothing without him, but he can be happy without
it; there is no Creature, whether thing or person, in Heaven or Earth, necessary
to God, either as to his Being, or well-Being: And therefore we may say, not
only to the best man on Earth, but to the most glorious Angel in Heaven, (as
Elihu to Job) What receives he of thine hand?

Secondly, If what we do, adds nothing to God, if he receive nothing by our
most righteous services: then surely God shows wonderful goodness toward us,
in that he is pleased to make so great an account of, and set such store by our
services and righteousness, even of any, the least good we do in uprightness.
Is it not a singular comfort that the Lord puts so much worth upon what we do,
though what we do be of no worth to him? and that God should bind himself to
us, when he is not at all beholding to us? The Lord does not say, What do you
give me? or, What do I receive at your hands? thereby to put a slight upon our
performances and services; it is far from the Lord, that because he has no need
of us, therefore to contemn us; no, he declares a great acceptance of any, the
least faithful service to himself, or to our brethren, which we do at his
command. Though, should we stretch our endeavors, and strain our wits to the
utmost, to do him good we cannot, yet he does not undervalue what we do, but
takes what is well done, well at our hands, and puts all our good deeds into
his Book of Remembrance, and we shall one way or other hear of them again to
our comfort. Hence,

Thirdly, We may infer, How good is God, who highly rewards us for the good
we do, though it do him no good! Man will scarce thank a man for any good that
he does, unless it redound somewhat to himself, much less will he pay or
reward another for that service which stands him in little, or no stead. If man
make a bargain with a man, he comes hardly off with him, if he gets no benefit
by it: seeing then the Lord rewards us for those services by which he gets no
good at all, how wonderfully does this declare his goodness!

Fourthly, How does the goodness of God appear; seeing though we can add
nothing to his glory, yet if we do good and righteous things, he tells us that
we glorify him, which is the highest commendation imaginable of what we do.
It Is the Command of Christ ( Mat. 5.16.) Let your light so shine before men,
that they seeing your good works, may glorify your Father which is in Heaven.
The Apostles Caution is, Whatsoever ye do, do all to the glory of God, 1 Co^.
10.31. Now though (according to this and the other charge) we, in all we do,
sincerely aim at the holding forth and manifesting of that glory and g^odness
that is in God, yet he receives no increase of glory; is it not therefore
wonderful goodness, that he is pleased to say, we glorify him? (which is the
highest attainment of the Creature, and the noblest improvement of our pains
and labors. These and many other inferences, may be made for our instruction,
from this humbling question, If thou be righteous, what give thou to him, or
what receives he at thy hands?

Elihu having told Job that neither his sin did hurt God, nor his
righteousness advantage him, lest any should thence infer, surely then it is
no great matter whether we be righteous or wicked, whether we do good or evil;
to prevent this mischief, he shows that though your sin cannot hurt God, yet it
will do hurt enough, and though our righteousness add no good to God, yet it
may do much good. This he does in the next verse.

Verse. 8. Thy wickedness may hurt a man as thou art, and thy righteousness
may profit the son of man. As if he had said, I will tell thee what will become
of the good and evil thou d est, as to advantage or disadvantage; forasmuch as
thou can not advantage God by thy righteousness, Si bona agerimus, nostro
bono; si mala, nostro malo.
nor hurt him by thy wickedness, it must needs follow, that the one may be
helpful, and the other hurtful to thy self, and to such as thou thy self art:
If it were otherwise, or not so, there would be no difference between the doing
of good or evil, as to the Event, how greatly soever they differ in their
Nature.

Thy wickedness may hurt a man as thou art, only it cannot hurt God. God is as
great and as happy as ever he was, and he will ever be as great and as happy as
now he is, let men do their worst, and be as wicked as they can.

Thy wickedness, etc. The word wickedness notes sin in the highest degree, at
least of a high degree; every wickedness is sin, but every sin is not
wickedness; yet we are not to unde^stand Elihu's meaning, as if great sins
only did mischief and hurt. The truth is, every sin does hurt and mischief; as
a little poison, and the least poison may do hurt, unless it be corrected. We
use to say of some things, A little does not hurt; Modicum non no^et.
but we cannon say a little poison does no hurt, unless you do not take it, or
unless it be corrected; a little poison uncorrected will do hurt. So then,
when Elihu says here, Thy wickedness may hurt, we are not to understand it
only of great sins, as whoredom, murder, perjury, drunkenness, and witchcraft,
etc. but even of idle thoughts, of vain words, or undue passions; these hurt as
well as greater sins, commonly called wickedness. Thy wickedness May hurt a
man as thou art.

These words (may hurt) are not expressed in the Original Text, but they are
plainly intended and employed: Yet if we should leave them out of the reading,
the sense would be the same (Thy wickedness is to hurt a man as thou art) That
is, thy wickedness is to the hurt or damage of a man as thou art; it may hurt
thee or thy brother, it may hurt thy self, or any like thy self.

Hence Note, First, That sin is a hurtful thing.

Wheresoever sin is, it does mischief. Sin is so bad in the nature of it, that
we have reason enough to avoid it and fly from it, and sin is so dangerous in
the Effects of it, that we have further, though not more reason to avoid it,
and fly from it; indeed we should rather (and that is our spiritualnesse in
avoiding of sin) avoid it because of the evil that is in the Nature of it,
because it rises up against the Will, and breaks the holy Commands of God; we
have greatest reason to depart from sin, because it is a departure from God,
because of the blackness and filthiness of it; yet not only the blackness
of this Coal, but the fire, the eternal fire that is in it, gives us cause
enough to depart from it. It Is true, a truly gracious heart would not sin,
though he might escape all the sad effects of sin, but when he hears it is as
hot as fire, and as deadly as poison, and as killing as the plague; when he
hears that it is the ruin of Persons, and of Families, of Churches and
Nations, when he hears that it is sin which has done all the hurt and mischief
that ever was in the world, he sees he has further reason to dread it, and
depart from it.

Again (Thy wickedness may hurt a man.)

Note; Sin does mischief to man, and to man especially.

Sin does mischief all the world over; the whole Creation groans under the
mischief and vanity, which sin has brought upon it, ( Romans 8.22.) Sin has
done damage to the whole Creation; but the great damage which sin does, is to
man, to him that acts it to others before whom it is acted, or toward whom it
is acted. Sin is distributed into two sorts, as to its hurtfulnesse. Sin either
respects our selves in the hurt it does, or others, and those others are either
God or our Neighbor; sin hurts our selves most, yet sin as it is a wrong to
God, may be said to hurt his honor, and diminish the manifestation of his
glory in the world, (as has been showed before). And sin is really a wrong to
our Neighbor. There are a number of sins committed against our selves, yea,
every sin, though committed against our Neighbor, hits and hurts our selves;
no man can hurt his Neighbor, but he hurts himself most. So that, although
there are many sins which respect others, yet all are against our selves. Some
sins (unbelief especially, and the neglect of holy duties) hurt our selves
only; there are sins which more properly hurt others, as oppression and
uncharitableness; there are several sins which at once hurt others and our
selves. Adultery hurts self and others too; evil words hurt our selves and
others too, as the Apostle tells us out of a Poet, (1 Cor. 15.33.) Evil
communication corrupts good manners; that is, you corrupt the good manners of
others, you debauch others by unsavory speeches; our ill example hurts our
selves and others. Our Neighbor is hurt by our sin. First, By any thing that
is a wrong to him, as to his Estate, or as to his Person, or as to his Credit:
Secondly, By the scandal of it, when we do that which is evil, it hardens the
wicked, and makes them go on more securely in their sin, and keeps them off
from the ways of God; it endangers good men also, and discourageth them in the
duties they owe both to God and man in the profession of the Gospel. Thus sin
may hurt our selves and our Neighbors.

Thy wickedness may hurt a man as thou art. But why says he a man as thou art?
What, a man just of thy Complexion, or just of thy height, stature, and pitch?
what, a man of thy State and Degree, a man just of thy eminency in the world?
certainly no; but when he says, A man as thou art, his meaning is, any man,
because all men are in many things alike, they are all mortal, and sinful, and
weak, and apt to receive hurt by the sins of others. Thus every man is a man as
thou art.

Hence no^e All men are alike.

Though the faces of men are very differen^, and we know one man from another,
because they are unlike in face, yet as to their constitution and natural
condition, they are alike; he that is greatest, is such a man as the least; and
the strongest is such a man as the weakest, the richest as the poorest, the
learnedest as the most ignorant, and the godliest man is as the wickedest man,
as to his natural composition. All men are alike in these four things: First,
all men need that which is good. Secondly, all men are sensible of that which
is hurtful and afflictive to them. Thirdly, all men are apt to take hurt, and
to run into danger by the sin and ill Examples of others, or to receive good by
their good deeds, and profitable examples, all men being associated in the same
common nature, and familiar each to other. Fourthly, all men are alike in this,
that they are not self-sufficient, but stand in need of the help of one
another; He that is helpful to a man like himself, helps himself, and does
acknowledge that (considering humane frailty) he may have occasion to call for
and desire the help of another; and therefore (say some) man has two hands,
two arms, that he may understand himself born as much to need and receive
help, as to give it. Thus every man is a man as thou art; and upon these and
many other Considerations thou may hurt a man as thou art. There is an
excellent paradox, handled by some of the Ancients; Nemo potest ab alio laedi
nisi a seipso, nisi enim quis laedatur animo, non laeditur.
No man is hurt, but by himself; for unless a man's soul be hurt, he is not
hurt; which is much confirmed by, and appears clearly in the example of Job.
For the devil planted all those engines, and made all those assaults upon and
against him, not because he had a design to make him poor, childless, and
diseased, (all which, he knew, could not hurt him) but to make him impatient,
and to extort one evil and blasphemous word against God from him. But though it
be true, that no man is hurt but by himself, yet it is true also, that the sin
of one man may hurt another. Oppression hurts other men, (as to civils) whether
they will or no; but no sin can hurt another (as to morals) unless he will; no
man is infected by vice, if himself refuse, and be against it; yea the
oppressions and afflictions which other men thrust violently upon us, cannot
hurt us, unless we by our impatience under them bring hurt to our selves. The
cruel usage of Tyrants, did not hurt the Martyrs; when they burnt them, and
imprisoned them, and hanged them, they did not hurt them, because they were
patient under those oppressions, and took their sufferings for Christ's sake
with joyfulness. What hurt did the poverty and ulcers of Lazarus do him? What
hurt had Abel by that inhumane cruelty of his brother Cain? What hurt had Paul
by all his sufferings? What any of the Saints, by imprisonment, or banishment,
by being sawne asunder, or slain with the sword? properly no hurt at all. It is
out of the power and reach of wicked persecutors to hurt the Witnesses of
Christ, though they have power to slay them. Steven was not hurt when he was
stoned, because he freely gave up himself. In a word, take it thus; First, no
man is hurt by the sin of another, but as himself is pleased with, or
practices the same sin; Secondly, no man is hurt by the temptations of the
devil, but as he consents and yields to them; Thirdly, no man is hurt by the
oppositions and persecutions of others, but as he is impatient under them. Thy
wickedness may hurt a man as thou art, And thy Righteousness may profit the son
of man.

That is, thy righteous actions or deeds, may profit the son of man; that is,
thy self, or any man, good or bad. Those words, may profit, are not expressed,
but are clearly employed in the sense of the Text. Righteousness tends to every
man's benefit, it may help and profit thy self, it may be helpful or profitable
to those who are about thee, or with whom thou have to do.

Hence note.

First, Righteousness, or ^ighteous actions, have profit in them. Wickedness
turns to man's hurt of it self, but Righteousness does profit. Although there be
a vast and wide difference between man's righteousness and unrighteousness; this
latter of it self deserving all manner of evil; and the former, because
imperfect at the best, deserving no good at all; yet through the bounty and
benignity of God it comes to pass, that the sm^llest (if sincere) endeavor
after righteousness shall profit a man as much as his greatest unrighteousness
can hurt or damage him. For God who does not reward us according to our
iniquities, ( Psalm. 103.10.) will most amply reward us according to our
righteousness. The Apostle gave command, Exercise thy self unto godliness,
(follow that trade well; why?) for godliness is profitable unto all things, (1 Timothy 4.8.) it profits by virtue of the p^omise, and it has the promise of this
life as well as of that which is to come. (Titus 3.8.) This is a faithful
saying, and this I will that thou constantly affirm, that they which have
believed in God, might be careful to maintain good works, (why? for) these
things are good and profitable unto men. Some expound these words, good and
profitable unto men, chiefly of doctrine; To teach men to follow works, that
indeed is good and profitable doctrine; now if it be a good and profitable
doctrine to press men to good works, to works of Righteousness, then
Righteousness it self, and good works, must needs be profitable. There is such
an excellency in the nature of Righteousness, it is such an honorable,
amiable, and beautiful thing in its own nature, that it is enough to draw us
to the doing of it (as some have said of Virtue in general, If virtue could be
seen, it would draw all to the admiration of it; so I say of Righteousness in
special, If it could be seen, it would draw all eyes and hearts after it) But
besides that, here is an excellent Loadstone, here is profit, thy Righteousness
may profit another; profit draws much, it draws on all men in the world; where
there is any profit and benefit to be had, how do men strive to trade there, as
if Heaven were to be had there? now Righteousness is profitable; the exercise
of Righteousness is no poor trade, there is a great deal of advantage in it;
and I might show you how every work, good for the matter, done in a right
manner, and for right ends, is profitable to others, and to our selves. To
speak a good word, may be a means to minister grace un^^ the hearers; and to ^o
a good work, of any sort, ministers a gracious example to the beholders: by
doing good, you may draw others to do good; to see one walking in ways of
righteousness, invites and allures others into ways of righteousness; as bad
examples corrupt, so good examples instruct; as bad examples build up for hell,
so good examples build up for heaven; To be built or helped on heavenward, is
the best profit in the world, greater profit than the gain of the whole world.
And as every good work ministers a good example to the beholders, so works of
Charity minister comfort and relief to the receivers, as also an occasion of
blessing God for their benefactors; yea works of Charity to others are
profitable also to our selves, for there is a promise of reward to those who
minister the least charities to such as deserve the greatest charity, though
usually they find the least, ( Math. 10.42.) Whosoever shall give to drink unto
one of these little ones, a cup of cold water only (and how cold is their
charity who will not give that!) in the name of a disciple, shall in no wise
lose his reward; that is, he shall surely have it. Thus we see how profit and
advantage, even great profit and advantage comes by Righteousness; yet take
heed of thinking that your Righteousness deserves any the least profit at the
hand of God. Though we press you to Righteousness as profitable, yet it becomes
you to say, we are unprofitable servants, and therefore cannot challenge any
profit as our due, how righteous soever we are. It does not at all follow,
because we affirm Righteousness will profit us, that therefore Righteousness
can justify us, or that, because it is profitable to us, therefore it can save
us. All our righteousnesses are but as a filthy garment, says the Prophet, and
therefore unprofitable for this thing. The Apostle counted all things loss (not
gain) dung (not profit) that he might win Christ, and be found in him, not
having his own Righteousness, (Phil. 3.8, 9.) Righteousness is profitable, if
you keep it in its proper place, and apply it to its proper use; it is
profitable to what God has appointed it; he helps us to work Righteousness,
and then rewards us for our righteous working: God is not unrighteous to forget
our work and labor of love, (Heb. 6.10.) Let us be found in our duty, and then
in due time and place we shall find our profit. Our experience will teach us at
last, that while we have been doing good to others, we have done good to our
selves; Righteousness is profitable unto all things, and to all men, as well to
those who do it, as to those for whom it is done.

JOB, Chap. 35. Verse. 9, 10, 11, 12, 13. 9. By reason of the multitude of
oppressions they make the oppressed to cry: they cry out by reason of the arm
of the mighty.

10. But none says, Where is God my maker, who gives Songs in the night?

11. Who teaches us more than the beasts of the earth, and makes us wiser
than the fowls of heaven.

12. There they cry (but none gives answer) because of the pride of evil men.

13. Surely God will not hear vanity, neither will the Almighty regard it.


I Have dispatched the first of those great Objections which Elihu made afresh
against Job in this Chapter, his speaking unduly of God. This context contains
a second, with the answer to it.

The Connection is given by some thus; Whereas Elihu told Job at the 8th verse,
That his wickedness might hurt a man like himself; He here proves, that the
wickedness of man is very hurtful to men, so hurtful, that by reason of the
multitude of oppressions they make the oppressed to cry: They cry out by reason
of the arm of the mighty. Yet I shall not prosecute the words in that
dependence, but as they are matter of a second complaint or charge brought by
Elihu against Job. The charge is laid down in the 9th verse, and his answer is
prosecuted in the 10th, 11th, 12th, and 13th verses.

Verse. 9. By reason of the multitude of oppressions they make the oppressed to
cry. This offended Job; the poor cried, and they had no helper, no deliverer.
We may conceive, that Elihu gathered up this complaint from the words of Job,
(Chap. 24.12.) Men groan from out of the City, and the soul of the wounded
cries out, yet God lays not folly to them: As if he had said, The Lord
lightly passes by, and takes little notice of the greatest afflictions, the
oppressions of the poor, though righteous men.

Elihu grants these general truths; First, that many are oppressed; Secondly,
that many cry out in their oppressions; Thirdly, that many remain undeliveeed
from, and unreliered in their oppressions. God sometimes seems not to regard
the groans and cries of the afflicted, nor does he always presently take
vengeance of oppressors according to their folly. Elihu grants all this, he
grants that many poor men are so mightily oppressed by the mighty, that they
are forced to cry mightily; yet he strongly acquits God from any such
imputation, as those words of Job seem to admit or insinuate. And in the
prosecution of his answer (as will appear in opening the 10th and 11th verses)
he shows, that the reason why the oppressed are not delivered, or answered
when they cry, is in themselves, and not in God, (and he would have Job
consider, whether he were not of that number) they cry (says Elihu) but they
do not cry with such a frame of heart, with such a disposition of spirit, as
they ought; they cry as men pressed rather with the weight of their own
sufferings, than touched with any sense of their sins, or reverence of the
sovereignty of God, giving them up to the power of oppressors; or as having any
faith in him for their deliverance, or quiet submission to him, who is ready to
help all those who religiously fly to him for refuge, and is able to bring them
out of their da^kest and most deplorable condition. These may be said either
not to pray at all, or they pray not with such holy aims and designs, with such
integrity and uprightness of heart, as becomes the people of God: They pray
under the power of impatience, or moved with envy at the power of their
adversaries, or with a desire of utmost revenge, which nothing stops them from,
but their own want of power, or because they cannot; and therefore God takes no
notice of their prayers, ( v. 12, 13.) There they cry, but none gives answer;
Surely God will not hear vanity, neither will the Almighty regard it. That Is
the sum and scope of the Context. I shall now open the words in order.

Verse. 9. By reason of the multitude of oppressions, they make the oppressed to
cry. Here are oppressions, and a multitude of oppressions. (...)
The word signifies magnitude as well as multitude, the muchness as well as
the manyness (if I may so speak) of the oppressions which were upon them. Any
one great oppression will make men cry, how much more many great ones? We
render it as a word of number. By reason of the multitude Of oppressions.

(...) Oppressit, vim fecit, quavis injuria affecit.
The Original notes oppression of all sorts: First, oppression upon the credit
and good name of another, by slander and false accusation; So the Septu^gint
render it, By reason of calumnies, or unrighteous charges, or Sycophantismes,
(that is the word in the Greek Translation) they cry. False accusers undermine
others, and bring them into danger by burdening them with lies. Secondly, it
notes usually oppression upon a man's estate, (1 Samuel 12.4. Isa. 33.15. Ezekiel.
18.7. Mal. 3.5.) Thirdly, upon his person, ( Isa. 52.4.) Now when a man is
oppressed all over, when his credit or good name is oppressed by calumniation,
his estate by wrongful seizure, and his person by violent restraint, here is a
troop, a multitude of oppressions. By reason of the multitude of oppressions
They make the oppressed to cry.

That is, the oppressed do not only complain a little, but are forced to open
lamentations; the load upon them is so heavy, that they cannot contain, they
cry; yea as the next clause has it, they cry out, as a woman in travel, when
her pains come upon her.

They make the oppressed to cry. They make them cry upon a double
Consideration; First, because of the misery which they feel, and are burdened
with; Secondly, for the mercy which they desire, expect, and think long
a-coming; men cry for ease, for help, for assistance, for deliverance: we may
suppose the oppressed ones in the Text crying in all these respects; the burden
was so heavy upon them, that it made them cry out for the very weight of it,
and they cried and called for some charitable, or tender heart, to come and
ease them of it, and deliver them from it. Elihu does not rest in speaking this
once, but repeats it again; By reason of the multitude of oppressions they make
the oppressed to cry.

They cry out by reason of the arm of the mighty. These words point us
expressly to the cause of their cry, or outcry; it was the arm of the mighty;
which may be taken either properly, or figuratively. Properly, the Arm is a
well known and most useful member of the body: And because there is a great
deal of strength and power in the arm, therefore by a figure, the arm
signifies strength, might, or power; and to say, they cry out by reason of the
arm of the mighty, is as much as to say, they cry out by reason of the power
of the mighty. Severissimum dei supplicium immissione aut descensione Brachii
significatur.
The arm is frequently in Scripture put for power; the powerful wrath of ^od
is called the arm of God. The Prophet ( Isa. 30.30.) speaks of the lighting
down of his arm. When the Lord lets his arm fall, o^ light down upon a man, a
family, or a Nation, in wrath, it crusheth either or all of them to pieces. And
as the powerful wrath, so the powerful grace of God is called his arm, (Isa.
53.1.) Who has believed our report? to whom is the arm of the Lord revealed?
That is, his mighty power, working by and manifesting it self in Christ, and in
the ministry of the Gospel, for the conviction, conversion, and salvation of
sinners. Thus also the arm of man, is the power of man, ( Dan. 11.6.) She
shall not retain the power of the arm; neither shall he stand, nor his arm:
That is, his power shall fall, or both he and she ( Bernire and Antiochus
Theus) shall fall and be powerless. ( Psalm. 37.16.) The arm of the wicked
(that is, their power) shall be broken, but the Lord upholdeth the righteous.
They cry out by reason of the arm Of the mighty.

The same word which in the first part of the verse is translated multitude, is
here translated, The mighty. (...)
But what was the mightiness of these men? There is a fourfold mightiness.
First, there is mightiness of body, that is natural might, and it is properly
the might of the arm. Secondly, there is a mightiness in valor and in Arms:
Thus soldiers and warriers are mighty men; they who having courage in their
hearts, have also weapons in their hands, and swords by their sides, are the
mighty. Such a one was Gideon, to whom the Angel said, ( Judge. 6.12.) The Lord
is with thee, thou mighty man of valor. Thirdly, there is a mightiness of
Authority: And thus the Magistrate is a mighty man; suppose he be weak in body,
yet he is mighty in power, and can do great things. Fourthly, there is a
mightiness of wealth and riches: Thus Boaz is called a mighty man of wealth,
(Ruth 2.1.) Riches have so much might in them, that in the Hebrew one word
serves to signify both might and riches. We may understand the mighty man here
in any or all these four senses. The oppressed cry out by reason of the arm of
the mighty. They who have much bodily strength, often oppress the weaker, and
so do the mighty in Arms, and so do the mighty in Authority, and so the mighty
in riches have often done, making the poor and the oppressed cry; They cry out
by reason of the arm of the mighty.

From the former part of the verse; Observe.

Oppression is a common sin. Not only was Babylon stained with it, but
Jerusalem. That Is an amazing passage ( Jer. 6.6.) Thus has the Lord of hosts
said; hew ye down trees, and cast a Mount against Jerusalem. This is the City
to be visited, she is wholly oppression in the midst of her. Not only was
Jerusalem a City, but, The City, a City above all Cities, to be visited by an
oppressing enemy; and wh^? even because she not only had oppressors in her, but
was oppression, O how oppressive was that City, which was oppression, and that
not only in some parts of her, but wholly, and that not in her skirts and
suburbs, but in the midst of her! The Lord, to show that the Jews were
superlatively rebellious, or most rebellious against him, calls them (in the
abstract) rebellion, as the Margin has it, ( Ezekiel. 2.7.) and to show how
superlatively oppressive they were one against another, He calls Jerusalem
oppression. Here in the Text we have a multitude of oppressions, surely then,
there were a multitude of oppressors. To hear of a multitude of sins of all
sorts, is very sad, but when there is multitude of one sort, and that one of
the worst sort, and such a sin as cannot go alone, but draws after it a heap of
almost all sorts of sin: what a multitude of sins are there! It cannot be
denied, but that oppression is a very common epidemical sin, if we take and
consider it in the full latitude of it. For there is a twofold oppression.
First, there is a secret oppression. To deceive, defraud, or go beyond another,
in the Apostles sense, is to oppress him. And thus it is said, ( Hos. 12.7.) He
is a Merchant, the balances of deceit are in his hand, he loves to oppress. He
does not oppress by violence, with a sword in his hand, but by craft with
balances in his hand; he oppresses while he over-reacheth in dealing and
trading. This sort of oppression runs up and down every where; and though this
kind of oppression make not a great cry, yet it is a great sin, a crying sin.
There is also a secret oppression under color of Law; many turn the very Rules
of Justice into rods of oppression: And this is by so much the worse, by how
much it has the better cover. Secondly, there is an open oppression, the
Nimrods of the world, the mighty Hunters ta^e and vex and trouble all they can,
and would make all tremble before them, or run from them, as the Hare and Heart
from their merry, but merciless pursuers. Now if both secret and open
oppressions are so commonly practiced, oppression may justly bear the title of
a common sin.

Secondly, Note.

Oppression is a very crying sin. That cannot but be a crying sin, which makes
so many cry. Oppression then is a crying sin. First, as to the nature of it:
Secondly, as to the effect of it. Oppression cries, and it makes those cry who
are oppressed. Solomon says, ( Eccles. 7.7.) Oppression makes a wise man mad.
That which puts a man even out of his wits, or besides the right use of his
reason, will put him much to the use of his tongue, causing him to complain,
cry out, and clamor. But who are they that are most given to, and deepest
drencht in this sin of oppression? The Text answers, They cry out by reason of
the arm of the mighty.

Hence note, Thirdly.

Power is commonly abused to oppression. We read indeed of a poor man
oppressing the poor, ( Pro. 28.3.) And Solomon tells us, that such a man's
oppression is the soarest oppression; for he compares it (in the same verse) to
a sweeping rain, which leaves no food. They who have nothing, will take all
when they can come by it, and get it. If all men in power should be as hard to
their inferiors, as some are who have little or no power, there were no living
in the world. Necessity may drive the poor to be more oppressive, than Ability
draws the rich. It Is a sad encounter when the poor contend with the poor; The
necessity of the one knows no mercy, and the imbecility of the other, can give
him no help. Nothing hardens the heart so much as want or hunger, ( Lam. 4.10.)
They have little or no sense of another misery, who are under the extreme
smart, and feel the biting of their own. But though poor men oppress sorest,
yet they oppress seldomest and fewest. They can oppress none, but such as are
poorer or weaker than themselves, and cannot do that often. There must be an
over-matching power in all who oppress; and usually, they who oppress, are
great and mighty in power. ( Psalm. 52.1.) Why boastest thou thy self in
mischief, O mighty man? The man was mighty, and what did this might serve him
for? what use did he put it to? even to do mischief. Many have a mind and will
enough to do mischief, who want both power and opportunity to do it: But they
who have power and opportunity to do mischief, seldom want a mind or will to
do it. Power is of great use to do good, and it is a great temptation to do bad
things. As Laban bragged to Jacob, and crowed over him as his underling ( Genesis
31.29.) It is in the power of my hand to do you hurt; And what hindered him
then, or what has hindered many in all Ages of the world, from doing that hurt
to others, which they had power to do? Not a dislike or abhorrence of the fact
(which through grace stops every good man from hurting others, how great soever
his power is) but a secret restraint upon their heart, like that, which Laban
had in a dream, or vision to his ear; Take heed thou speak not to Jacob good
or bad; that is, meddle not with him in any case to stop his journey. The
Prophet ( Ezekiel. 22.6.) describing the sinfulness of those times, says; Behold
the Princes of Israel, every one were in thee, to their power, to shed blood.
They did it, to their power; we put in the Margin, To their arm; That is, they
used and improved their arm or power to the utmost length and stretch for the
oppression of others. The Prophet Jeremie charge that people with sinning in
general at that rate, ( Chap. 3.5.) Behold thou have spoken and done evil
things, as thou could. Some men sin (as all men should love and serve God)
with all their might, with all their strength; they do evil with both hands
greedily; that they sin no more, is not for want of will, but ability. As the
people were thus set upon all manner of sin, so the Princes upon that special
sin oppression. They were to their power, for shedding blood; yea many desire
to get power into their hand, that they may avenge themselves by their own
hand, and be ready to hurt whom and where they do not love. It Is not so much
ambition which provokes some men to affect power and greatness, Parati^res ad
nocendum.
as malice and a desire of having their ends upon whomsoever stands in their
way. These like the great Fishes of the Sea, delight to swallow up and feed
upon the lesser; or like the great and strong Beasts of the Forest, they tare
and devour the Lambs or Sheep of the pasture. They use (that is, indeed abuse)
their power, not so much for their own good, as in wronging their neighbors,
whose hurt they should never seek, and whose good they ought to seek and
promote next their own. Power should be used and put forth, for help, not hurt,
for protection, not ruin; and therefore Magistrates, who are the chief mighty
men of the earth, who are called Powers, (Tit. 3.1.) are also called the
Sheilds of the earth; implying, they are to use their power for the defense (a
Shield is for defense) of the oppressed, not to oppress. The Scripture calls
Magistrates Sheilds, but it never calls the Magistrate a Sword. It says indeed
the Magistrate has a sword, and that he bears not the sword in vain, (Romans
13.4.) that is, he does not bear it so as to bear with evil doers, and never
draw it, nor use it. But the Scripture does not say, the Magistrate is a Sword,
as it says, he is a Shield; hereby intimating, that the Power of the
Magistrate should rather be exercised in protecting than in punishing, rather
in saving than destroying. What the Apostle says concerning the design or
purpose of his ministerial office, We have this power to edification, and not
to destruction, (2 Cor. 13.10.) is true of all power; the primary design of it
is for protection, rather than for destruction, and not at all for oppression
or vexation. Magistrates have Swords, but they are Shields, not Swords; they
have a Sword to cut off evil doers, and by that the good are preserved and
defended. Such mighty ones, who delight to be Swords, but care not to be
Shields, who are all for cutting and destroying, not at all for saving,
relieving, and protecting, (such mighty ones, I say) caused the oppressed to
cry, yea to cry out in Jobs time; and in what times soever they are, they make
the oppressed cry out. And the matter, that Elihu supposed Job was offended at,
was, that God did not hear the cry of these oppressed ones, nor appear for
their deliverance; which yet he has declared himself ready to, as David
afterward describes him, ( Psa. 12.5.) For the oppression of the poor, for the
sighing of the needy, now will I arise (says the Lord) I will set him in
safety from him that puffs at him. But Job hearing this cry of the oppressed,
or crying out of his own oppression, and God seeming not to regard it, was
stumbled at the matter. To remove this, Elihu answers in the next verse.

Verse. 10. But none says, Where is God my maker, who gives songs in the
night? There is a twofold Exposition of these words, arising from a doubt
about the Antecedent to none, or who is meant by those that say not, Where is
God my maker? Who are those?

The first Interpretation gives it to the oppressors, to the mighty men before
spoken of; They make the oppressed to cry by reason of the multitude of
oppressions; but none of these mighty oppressors say, Where is God my maker,
that gives songs in the night? Thus the verse is translated quite through,
with respect to wicked oppressors, who cast God out of their thoughts, never
saying, Where is God my maker, who has set me up, who has given me this
power, and given me songs, (that is, occasions of joy) in the night? The wicked
have abundance, they can feast it and sing it day and night, yet mind not God
the fountain and bestower of all. This is a truth in it self; and because the
interpretation is insisted upon by some as the truth intended in the present
Text,

Take this Note from it.

Oppressors put away the thoughts of God, or mind not God, when they do, or are
about to do, mischief. They make the oppressed cry, but they say not, Where is
God? They neither speak nor think of God, who has clothed them with power,
and made their arm mighty. We find this frame frequently ascribed in
Scripture to oppressors; Elihu charge Job with it, ( Chap. 22d) where having
told him to his face, of many acts of oppression; Thou have stripped the naked
of their clothing, (v. 6.) Thou have withholden bread from the hungry, (v. 7.)
And the arms of the fatherless have been broken, (v. 9.) Having (I say)
reckoned up these his supposed oppressions, he concludes, ( v. 13.) And thou
say, How does God know? can he judge through the dark Cloud? David in
prayer, speaks the same of his oppressors, ( Psalm. 86.14.) O God, the proud are
risen against me, and the assemblies of violent men have sought after my soul,
and have not set thee before them. (Psalm. 94.5, 6.) They break in pieces O Lord
thy people, and afflict thine heritage; They slay the widow, and the stranger,
and murder the fatherless: Yet they say, the Lord does not see it, neither
shall the God of Jacob regard it. All these Scriptures may be resolved into the
Text; They say not, Where is God my maker? They who do all they can to unmake
and undo their fellow creatures, care not to remember him, who is the maker and
creator of us all. But

Secondly, I conceive, those words, None says, Where is God my maker? are
rather to be referred to the oppressed, than to the oppressors: The oppressed
cry indeed, but not unto God their maker. As Job said; ( Job 24.12.) Men groan
from out of the City, and the soul of the wounded cries out, yet God lays it
not to heart; so here Elihu says, men groan and cry, yet themselves lay not
God to heart; None says, Where is God my maker? Thus our translation seems to
carry it, and thus it is most generally understood; None of the oppressed say,
etc.

Taking this sense, Elihu here begins to assign the reason why the oppressed
are not delivered. As if he had said, It Is true, there are a multitude of
pressures and oppressions, and they transport all manner of men with passion;
the oppressed cry, they make much ado, when they suffer, against them, under
whom they suffer: But few or none are so wise, in such a case, as to recollect
themselves, and make serious application to God, putting him in mind of his own
gracious nature toward the work of his hands, to have mercy upon it, and in
faith to seek to him for remedy and comfort, as being only able to relieve and
glad the heart in great extremities; they look not to the hand of God, when
they cry out by reason of the arm of the mighty: they only toil and tear
themselves with complaints, they cry out of this and that man, of this and that
instrument; but, alas, they find neither redress nor deliverance, because they
say not, Where is God my maker? That is, they are more forward to complain of
wrong done them by men, than to remember what good, or what favors God has
done them; They do not particularly and specially apply themselves to God in
their trouble, they do not seek nor enquire early after God, Non habet
cogitationem deliberationem, propositum quaerendi deum, neque agnitionem
aestimationemque beneficiorum ejus; sunt (...). Coc:
nor humble themselves before him, or under his mighty hand, neither do they
consider what God is to them, nor whether he be with them, and in them; and if
they find not God near them, not in them, they consider not how they may be
united to him, or get him near them. We find God, when we hear his voice
speaking to us by his Word and Spirit, and hearken to his voice; we find God
when we are at peace with him, trust upon him confidently, and rejoice in him
comfortably. The oppressed considered not these things.

None says. Here is an universal Negative, none; that is, not so much as one;
yet we may understand it with an allay, none, that is, few or none (as we
commonly speak) say, Where is God my maker? Possibly many say it with their
mouths, but few or none say it; either first, heartily; or secondly,
spiritually; or thirdly, humbly; or fourthly, repentingly; or fifthly,
believingly; or sixthly, submittingly; and therefore no wonder, if they are not
heard and helped when they cry. It is a common thing for men in distress, or
under oppression, to cry out, O God, O Lord, The name of God is taken by many
in vain, when any thing afflicts or hurts them; but few call upon his name. It
is no easy matter to cry out, in deed, O God my maker, or to say with a
serious holy and gracious frame of spirit, Where is God my maker?

There is a twofold understanding of these words.

Sunt verba optontis.
First, Some look upon them, as an earnest wish or prayer for help; None says,
Where is God my maker? That is, none says, O that God my maker would appear in
the present manifestations of his power to succor and deliver me. In which
sense Elisha is conceived to speak when he smote the waters with Eliahs Mantle,
(2 Kings 2.14.) And said, Where is the Lord God of Elijah? As if he had said, O
thou God of Elijah come, show thy glorious power, and divide these waters.

Sunt verba gratulantis.
Secondly, Others expound them as an expression of praise, or as the words of a
man looking up to God in thankfulness for former benefits, in present
straights. Where is God my maker? Where Is he that made me, and has preserved
me hitherto? As if Elihu had said, none of these oppressed ones have recourse
to God in the day of their calamity, confessing and acknowledging his great
goodness to them in their creation and further preservation, which might much
comfort and encourage their hearts under present grievances and pressures; None
says, Where is God my maker?

The word maker, may be taken in a threefold notion; First, for him that has
given us our being. As God is the maker of heaven and of earth, so he is our
maker, ( Genesis 1.26, 27.) Secondly, for him that has continued us in and
preserved our being; for providence is a renewed creation. Thirdly, for him who
ha^h raised us up, or preferred us, and done us good all our days. In which
sense the word is used (1 Samuel 12.6.) And Samuel said unto the people, it is
the Lord that advanced Moses and Aaron. We put in the Margin, made Moses, etc.
it is this word, Eloah nomen singular (...) participium plurale. Factores mei;
sic usu obtinuit: de deo loquuntur promi^cue modo singulariter modo pluralitur.
Sensus autem ubique singularis est. Ideo nomen (...) Elohim quando de vero deo
dicitur interpretes reddunt semper deus, ubi ratio habetur sensu^, non
terminationis. Drus: vid: Merc: Vbi est deus qui fecerunt me. Heb: (...)
he made them great, and put them in those high places of Government and Trust.
The Lord is he that makes men in this sense. We say commonly of a man that is
advanced to some great place, He is a made man; and on the contrary, of a man
that is thrown down, He is an undone man. God gives us a being, and a bodily
fabric, he protects us in our being, he advances us to a wel-being, in all we
may call him, and call upon him as our Maker. And when men would unmake us,
that is, oppress and undo us, then we should say in faith, Where is God our
maker? who once gave us life, and has since lifted us up from the gates of
death, and put us into a good condition. Many are crying out upon, and
possibly, some railing and raging at men, but who says (in the sense opened)
Where is God my maker?

There is one thing further considerable in the Grammar of the Text. The Hebrew
is plural, or a plural with a singular; as ( Genesis 1.1.) In the beginning God
created: The word Elohim, rendered God, is plural; The word Bara, created,
singular. Thus here, Where is God my makers? Mr Broughton translates, Where is
the puissant my makers. I might spend much time in showing the consent of
several Scriptures in that point. Joshua said to the people, (who promised and
engaged to serve the Lord) ye cannot serve the Lord. Why could they not? the
reason follows; For he is an Holy God, (Josh. 24.19.) The Hebrew strictly is,
God holyes he. Thus the Prophet expresses it, ( Isa. 54.5.) Thy makers is thy
husband. Solomon's admonition runs in the same plural style, ( Eccl. 12.1.)
Remember now thy Creators in the days of thy youth. Deus sanctus est. Ad
verbum. Dii sancti ipse. Mont:
But though the Scripture speaks of God sometimes in the singular, sometimes in
the plural number, yet the sense is always singular. The true God being but
One, and the onemost one, and therefore the plural word (Elohim) is always
rendered in the singular number God, where men^ion is made of the true God; they
having regard to the true meaning or Divinity of the Text, not to the Grammar,
or termination of the word. There are usually two reasons given by learned
translaters and interpreters, why the true God who is but one in essence and
being, is so often expressed in the Hebre^ text plurally. First, to insinuate
or intimate unto us that Great and glorious mystery of the Blessed Trinity of
persons in the Godhead; I say, to intimate it, we cannot make a full or
convincing proof from it against any Antitrinitarian Adversary; because though
the word Elohim notes a plurality, yet we cannot by any force of the word,
determine that plurality precisely to a Trinity, that must be done by other
Scriptures, of which we have an abundant store to stop the mouth of all
gainsayers. Secondly, they tell us, This plural word is used to set forth the
honor of God, according to the usage of Kings and Sovereign Princes (called
Gods) who speak of themselves (though single persons) in a plural style, We and
Us. But I conceive, neither is this cogent, though both this and the former may
be piously improved. So much for the opening of these words, No man says,
Where is God my maker?

Hence observe.

First, Many cry and complain in affliction, but look not to God in affliction.
( Deuteronomy. 32.18.) Of the Rock that begat thee thou art unmindfull, and have
forgotten God that formed thee. Which as it is often verified in times of
peace, plenty, and prosperity, so not seldom in times of trouble, pressure,
and affliction. Yea, there are some who cry and complain in affliction, yet
turn away from God in affliction, ( Hos. 7.14.) They have not cried unto me
with their heart, when they howled upon their beds; they assemble themselves
for corn and wine, and they rebel against me. These are so far from seeking
God indeed, or saying, Where is our maker, with their heart, that they rebel
against him, while they would be relieved and fed by him. How frequently, even
at this day, do some men storm, and fret, and rage, little minding God in
their afflictions, though formally or vocally calling on him. It Is easy to
complain, but hard to pray in a day of trouble. The Jews are reproved for
their regardlesness of God, while they made great preparations in a time of
danger and war, or of a feared siege, ( Isa. 22.8, etc.) Thou did look in
that day to the armor of the house of the forest; ye have seen also the
breaches of the City of David, that they are many, etc. And the houses have ye
broken down to fortify the wall: Ye made also a ditch between the two walls
for the water of the old pool, etc. Here were politic warlike preparations,
yea God was little thought upon in all this; as it follows, ( v. 11.) But ye
have not looked unto the maker thereof, neither had respect unto him that
fashioned it long ago. It Is thus with the most of men; when outward misery
comes upon them, what crying? what working is there? yet little returning to
God, little turning into their own hearts.

Secondly, Note.

When men oppress and vex us, it is best to have our recourse to God, and apply
to him. That counsel, Look to me and be saved, (Isa. 45.22.) is true of
temporal as well as of eternal salvation. God is our best friend at all times,
even in the best times, and it is best to look to him in the worst times. David
could say, ( Psalm. 73.28.) when flesh, and strength, and heart, when all failed
him; It is good for me to draw near to God. Let our condition be what it will,
but especially if we are in a bad condition, it is good, yea best to go to him
who has our times, that is, all the changes of our condition in his hand, to
him, in whose hand the arm of the mighty is, and in whose hand alone there is
might to help and deliver us from the arm of the mighty. Is it not best to
look to him in affliction, who can either support us in, or bring us out of our
affliction as pleases him? He that made us can protect and save us; therefore
in every pinching strait, in every pressing danger, let us go to God in faith
and hope, and he will either give us enlargements, or do us good by and in our
worst and greatest straits.

Thirdly, Note.

As it is good, when at any time we are in trouble to look to God, so we should
then look to God, specially under this relation, as he is our Maker. It is good
then to say, God is my maker, and I am the work of his hands, therefore he will
take care of me, and deliver me out of the hand of my oppressors. There are
five duties which arise from this Consideration, that God is our Maker. First,
We should highly esteem and be thankful for this benefit, our making.
Secondly, We should be confident that he who has made us will preserve us.
Thirdly, We should patiently submit to him, when he afflicts us himself, or
suffers others to afflict us. Fourthly, We should give him glory, by believing
that he will take care of us in, or deliver us out of all our sufferings and
afflictions. Fifthly, We should not think nor speak hardly of God, because he
has made us subject to trials, and the exercise of patience; neither should we
take it ill, that he has made others so high or great, that they have power to
oppress us. In all these respects, we should look to God our maker, and neither
murmr at, nor be afraid in a day of ^ffliction. The Lord himself points us to
that, ( Isa. 51.12, 13.) Who art thou that thou should be afraid of a man
that shall dye, and of the son of man which shall be made as grass, and
forgettest the Lord thy maker? It is good in time of affliction to remember God
in all our relations, and in this, as our maker, in a threefold making of us.
First, As our maker in a natural capacity, that is, as he has made these
bodies of ours; we may plead with and urge the Lord to take care of and
preserve our bodies, because he ha h made them; preservation is an act of
providence, and providence follows creation. Secondly, As our maker in a
civil capacity, that is, as he has made us rich or poor, high or low in the
world, or in any worldly enjoyments. Pharaoh that great Dragon, lying in the
midst of the rivers, said, ( Ezekiel. 29.3.) My river is mine own, and I have made
it for my self. But grace teaches us to say otherwise; if we are rich or
strong, God has made us so; if our river be broad and deep, full and
overflowing, God has made it so; and if we are poor, and weak, if our river
be na^row and shallow, empty and dry, God has made it so; and who shall say to
him, Why have thou made it so? That God is the maker of our cross, should make
us quiet under it. Thirdly, A godly man should look to God in affliction, as
his maker in a spiritual capacity; I do not mean as he has made our spirits,
but as he has made us spiritual, or as we are his workmanship, (that is the
Apostles word) created in Christ Jesus unto good works, (Ephesians. 2.10.) That we
are thus wrought, works much upon the heart of God in the day of our
affliction. That God has made us men, that we are his creatures, is a good
argument, a fair plea, and moves much; but that he has made us new men, or
new creatures, his Sons by grace, and Temples of his Spirit, that he has made
us holy, believing, righteous, is a far stronger argument, a suller plea, and
moves much more. A soul that can go to God thus, and tell him he is his maker;
a soul that can say, (as it is said of the Church, Isa. 54.5.) My maker is my
husband; He that made me, has married me to himself; a soul that can say this,
may indeed triumph in and over all his tribulations. How sweet is it to have an
interest in Christ, and by him a relation to God as our maker in this respect.
When the Lord rejects a people to the utmost, he says he will not be stayed, no
not by this relation as their maker, from doing it, ( Isa. 27.11.) This is a
people of no understanding; therefore he that made them will not have mercy on
them, and he that formed them will show them no favor. As if the Prophet had
said, If any argument could move the Lord to show mercy, this would do it, to
tell him, he has made such a people, or, he is their maker. But there are none
whom the Lord has made in the third sense, as to a new creation, but he will
have mercy on them, and show them favor; his making of them such, is a g^eater
mercy and an higher favor, th^n any they can ask of him; nor are there any of
that making, who are of no understanding. So then, he that is made of God
spiritually, needs not care for all the unmaking or undoing he can receive from
men, nor fear that he shall ever be unmade or unmercy'd by God. All he can lose
in this world, does not, cannot make him miserable, who is made fit for the
world to come: He knows he has an estate settled upon him by his Maker, which
cannot be taken away. A man thus made, may say to his spoylers, Ye have taken
nothing from me but the scraps and sweepings, the parings and chippings of my
estate: The Archers indeed have sorely grieved me, and shot at me, but my bow
abides in strength, and the arms of my hands are made strong by the hands of
the mighty God of Jacob. He that is spiritually made, or made a new creature,
is made for ever, and in every strait he may look to God his Maker, as a helper
and restorer. He that made us when we were nothing, can help us when we are
reduced to a very nothing. It is an encouragement to go to God for healing,
because he has wounded us; Come, and let us return unto the Lord, (says the
Church) for he has torn, and he will heal us, he has smitten, and he will
bind us up, (Hos. 6.1.) Much more is it an encouragement to go unto God to be
our healer, because he has been our Maker. He that has made us, can mend us;
He that built us, can repair us, if we say, as we ought, and have been taught,
Where is God our maker?

Who gives songs in the night. Those words contain a second Consideration, why
the oppressed should seek to God; he gives songs, that is, matter of songs, or
cause of singing, joy and comfort, even in the night. There are several
opinions about the meaning of these words. Some (as I showed before) interpret
this verse of the oppressors; None (of them) say, Where is God my maker, who
gives songs in the night? So the words are a description, as of the great
worldly security, so of the great worldly felicity of those oppressors. Poor
men labor all day hard, and being wearied out with their labors, when night
comes they go to bed; But profane great and rich men, idle away the day, and
sport and play and sing away the night. As good men have holy songs in the
night, ( Isa. 30.29.) Ye shall have a song as in the night, when a holy
Solemnity is kept, etc. So the wicked have their wanton, vain, revelling songs
in the night, when their sensual Solemnities are kept. Belshazer was drinking
in the night, and doubtless, he had his music and songs that night: And as he
had his songs, mirth, and music in the night, so he said not Where is God my
maker, who gives me songs in the night: he instead of minding God his maker in
his mirth, minded only the gods which himself had made (as the text speaks,
Dan. 5.4.) They drank wine, and praised the gods of gold and of silver, etc.
And thus it is in proportion with all the wicked to whom God gives songs in the
night, they say not, Where is God my maker? This interpretation which carries
the songs to the oppressors before spoken of, contains a truth, yet I shall not
stay upon it, but take the words as referring to the oppressed.

Here it may be queried, how does God give them songs in the night? I shall not
insist upon those conjectures, which some have made about this giving songs in
the night. As First, implying God so gracious, that he gives us not only in
the day, but in the night, occasion of joy in sorrow, namely, the view and
contemplation of the Heavens and Stars, which are very pleasant and
refreshing, ( Psalm. 19.1.)

Others, Secondly, conjecture, that God may be said to give the sorrowful and
oppressed ones songs in the night, by the singing of birds in the night, of
that bird especially which has its name from singing in the night, the
Nightingal. Some insist much upon these interpretations. It is, I grant, a
great mercy of God that when the Sun is down, we have Moonlight and
Starlight, and that in the night we have the innocent harmless birds to sing
and make us pleasant melody. But leaving these, we may take the words in a
double notion; First, Properly; Secondly, Metaphorically.

Properly, and so to give songs in the night, as the night is taken for night
time, imports the goodness of God to man, not only in the day time, but in the
night.

Hence Note.

God in the night season, as well as in the day, gives his people matter of
joy. Night-mercies deserve and call for day-praises; especially two sorts of
night-mercies; First, Night preservations, ( Psalm. 3.6.) I laid me down and
slept, for thou Lord make me to dwell in safety. The night is subject to many
dangers; Qui distribuit nocturnas custodias. Sept:
The Septuagint render fully to this sense; Who gives watch or preservation in
the night; that is matter of praise and thanksgiving to God. Secondly, he gives
us cause of praise and singing, not only for preserving our lives while we
sleep in the night, but for refreshing us with sleep in the night, ( Psalm.
127.2.) So he gives his beloved sleep. The Lord gives us not only safety, but
sleep. Sweet sleep is a great mercy, ( Eccl. 5.12.) The sleep of a laboring
man is sweet, whether he eat little or much; and they who sleep sweetly get
refreshing and renewings of strength after all their fo^mer labors, for new
labors. So tha^, if we take night properly for the night time, there is much
occasion of rejoicing given by God to mankind in general, and more peculiarly
to his faithful servants, in reference to those common mercies of bodily
safety, and the return of natural strength and spirits.

Secondly, Take night properly; and then this assertion, He gives songs in the
night, may have this meaning; The Lord gives his people a praising frame of
heart in the night season! Et^am cum nulla ad eum laudandum documenta
circumfulgent, intus Spiritu excitat ad lauds. Jun:
When they are wrapped up and compassed about with outward darkness, when they
are solitary and alone, when no worldly object holds out any occasion of
comfort to them, yet then the Lord lets in a light, or shines into their s^uls
by his good Spirit. The Lord may well be said to give songs even in the night,
when by the immediate work of his Spirit, he fills our spirits with joys
unspeakable and glorious. These a^e the most ravishing songs of the night.

Hence Note.

God by his good Spirit does often suggest sweet meditations and comfortable
thoughts to his people in the night. In the night the Lord minds his servants
either of such mercies as they have already received, or of such, as according
to his promise, he is ready to, or will surely bestow, that so they may be
busied in that heavenly work of praising him, and rejoicing in him, when they
awake or cannot sleep. This was David's experience, ( Psalm. 17.3.) Thou have
visited me in the night. Men use to visit us in the day when we are up or
awake. But (says David) God gives me visits in the night, when I am in bed he
gives me many a song, or makes me to rejoice. When we are in our retirements,
or freest from the hurry of worldly businesses and enjoyments, then we are in
the fittest posture for the entertainment and enjoyment of God. The Lord visits
his servants in the night, not only (as David there) to try them, or as
elsewhere to instruct them, but to com^o^t them, as David was assured, ( Psalm.
42.8.) The Lord will command his loving kindness in the day time, and in the
night his song shall be with me. That is, a song concerning him. I will sing
and rejoice, even in the night time, because of the goodness and kindn^ss of
God to me in the day. The experience of Asaph, or of David, communicated in
that Psalm to Asaph, gives further proof of this, ( Psalm. 77.6.) where having
said, ( v. 1.) I cried unto God with my voice, and he gave ear unto me: he
adds, ( v. 6.) I call to remembrance my song in the night; that is, those
occasions of joy and singing which God has heretofore given me: These songs
were sweeter to me than sleep. As it shows an excellent frame of spirit to
remember the Commandments of God in the night, which David also professed as
his practice, ( Psalm. 119.55.) I have remembered thy Name, O Lord, in the night,
and have kept thy Law. The name of God is any manifestation of God, either in
his word or works. And again, ( Psalm. 119.62.) At midnight I will rise to give
thanks to thee, because of thy righteous judgments. Some watch in the night to
give thanks, ( Psalm. 134.1.) others give thanks when they wake at any time in
the night; both are acts of purest love to God, and proceed from purest
consolation in God. (Cant. 3.1.) By night on my bed I sought him. The Spouse
does not say only, by night I sought him, but by night on my bed, I spend not
the night in sleeping, but in seeking him whom my soul loves. ( Psalm. 16.7.)
My reins instruct me in the night season; That is, I have as it were
discourses and soliloquies, secret debates about, and strong desires after the
things of God, even in the night. That soul is indeed awake to God, which is
acquainted with and used to these divine songs in the night, the time of sleep.

Further, Take the word night in a metaphorical notion, as night signifies a
troublesome state; God may be said to give songs in the night, when he comforts
us in or at any time of affliction. I need not stay to prove that in Scripture
the night is put for affliction, nor need I prove, that, to give inward joy in
a day of outward sorrow, is to give songs in the night. The observation rising
from this metaphorical understanding of night, is this, which the Scripture and
experience are full of.

God sends comfort to his people, or causes them to rejoice in the midst of
their afflictions. It is the Apostles description of God, (2 Cor. 1.3, 4.) The
God of all comfort, who comfort us in all our tribulation. What sweet songs
have suffering Saints sound in the darkest midnight of their affliction! What
inward peace in outward troubles! What soul freedom in bodily restraint!
Carmen in nocte est laetitia in tribulatione. Greg:
One of the Ancients has put the question, and answered it. What Is a song in
the night? It Is joy in time of trouble. Whenever God gives a soul joy in time
of trouble, he gives a song in the night. Paul and Sylas sang in the night, in
both notions of night. If we take night in a proper sense, they sang in the
night, and in an improper sense, they were in prison, that was a night of
affliction to them, yea it was midnight with them, the power of darkness, or
the darkest outward affliction to them, yet, says the Text, At midnight Paul
and Sylas sang: They had songs in their mouths, and in their hearts too; they
sang so loud that all heard them. And hence we may collect the strength of the
argument or reason upon which Elihu here says, God does not regard the cry of
many under oppression, they make a noise, but none says, Where is God my
maker, who gives songs in the night, who is able to comfort us in all our
afflictions, who is able to make darkness light to us, and turn our sorrows
into songs of joy; they had not these high thoughts of God, not these holy
confidences in God, while they lay under the oppressions of men, and therefore
God did not regard their cry, nor save them from the arm of the mighty. This
is the first part of the answer which Elihu made to Jobs complaint, that the
oppressed were not delivered, though being pressed so sorely they could not
forbear to cry, yea to cry out in their misery. The next words give us a
fuller and more express answer to that complaint.

Verse. 11. Who teaches us more than the beasts of the earth, and makes us
wiser than the fowls of heaven.

Verse. 12. There they cry (but none gives answer) because of the pride of evil
men.

Verse. 13. Surely God will not hear vanity, neither will the Almighty regard it.

Elihu proceeds in assigning a second reason to highten their sin, who being in
distress, say not, Where is God my maker? or he gives a further account, why
the Lord does not presently attend to the prayers and cries of some men under
great oppression. He had showed in the former verse one reason of the Lords
forbearance to help them in such distresses, they did not say heartily, Where
is God our maker? nor did they remember him according to the special benefits
which they sometimes had received from God, even songs in the night.

In this 11th verse, Elihu aggravates the sin of such oppressed persons by the
consideration of that light, and understanding wherewith God has endued, and
enriched man above the irrational creatures, and which he has therefore
furnished man with, that he might know what to do in a time of distress, in the
day of affliction; they say not, Where is God my maker?

Who, not only gives us songs in the night, (matter of praise, but) teaches us
more than the beasts of the earth.

Some of the Jewish Interpreters read these words positively, not (as we)
comparatively, or ^hey render them, to show that God has appointed the very
beasts to be our Tutors, not (as we) that himself tutors us beyond the beasts:
Thus; Who teaches us by the beasts of the earth, and makes us wise by the
fowls of heaven. This answers what Job spoke in the 12th Chapter of this book,
( v. 7.) Ask now the beasts, and they shall teach thee: and the fowls of the
air, and they shall tell thee. It Is a truth that God does teach us by the
beasts of the earth, and makes us wise by the very fowls of the air. We may
learn much in the School of those creatures who have not only no learning, but
no understanding, and may be stirred up to the exercise of excellent virtues,
by those which have not the exercise of reason. The Scripture sends man, the
highest of visible creatures, to the lowest of visible creatures, to creatures
so little, that they are scarce visible, for instruction; Go to the Ant thou
sluggard, consider her ways, and be wise, (Pro. 6.6.) There are several
observable qualities, and, as I may call them, virtues, not only in the beasts
of the earth, and fowls of the air, but in the meanest creeping things, which
are very imitable by man; and thus God does teach us by the beasts of the
earth, and by the fowls of the air, vertually, though not formally, by their
practice and example, though not by their precepts or rules; for such teachings
neither the beasts of the earth nor the fowls of the air have any competency at
all. Man alone cannot teach man ^^fectually to conversion and salvation; all
that are so taught, are and must be taught of God, (1 Cor. 3.5, 6, 7.) yet the
beasts of the earth, and the fowls of the air, may and do teach us
instrumentally to conviction, and if we learn not by them, their teachings (as
rude as they are) will be to our shame, confusion, and condemnation.

But I rather take the words, as we translate them, comparatively; Who teaches
us more than the beast of the earth: As if he had said, God teaches the beast
somewhat, but he teaches man much more.

Quidem Hebraeorum specialiter eo reserunt, ne bestiarum aut avium more invicem
rapiamur. Merc:
They who expound this context of the wicked man, who oppresses the poor, give
the sense thus; God teaches us more than the beasts of the earth, and makes
us wiser than the fowls of heaven; that is, he teaches us that we should not
like beasts, vex, tear and rend one the other, that we should not like the Bear
of of the Wood, and the Lion of the Forest, nor like the Vultures and ravenous
Birds of the air, ^^ey one upon another; They who are fierce against, and
unmerciful to their brethren, degenerate into beasts, whom God has taught no
better, but left them to live by rapine and spoil: Whereas he has laid more
noble principles into the heart of man, and taught him to be kind and
charitable, loving, and compassionate, not to devour and vex those of his
kind, how much soever inferior and below him in degree. And therefore what a
shame is it for men to be more oppressive and cruel to men like themselves,
than beasts are to beasts, or fowls to fowls? This is a truth: yet I conceive
the context is rather to be understood of the oppressed, (as has been touched
before) than of the oppressor, and therefore our reading runs most clearly; Who
teaches us more than the beasts of the earth.

(...) in ^il discere in piel docere significat. Deus nos majori familiaritate
and consuetudine dignatur, quam ^ostias.
That is, though the very beasts of the earth, are taught somewhat by God, and
have a kind of knowledge, yet men are taught of God in a more eminent,
transcendent, and noble way, than they, whether wild, or tame, one or other.
God does not set up such a School for beasts, as he does for man, nor provide
such instructions for them, as he does for man; He gives men more means of
instruction, he gives them more time for instruction, he takes (as I may say)
more pains to instruct them, rising early, and sending his Ministers now, as
the Prophets of old, to teach his people. He every way teaches us more than he
teaches the beasts of the earth; And makes us wiser than the fowls of heaven.

But what? Are the fowls of the air endued with wisdom? I answer, First,
wisdom is put sometime for that inbred subtlety, which is no more than an
inclination to avoid that which is hurtful to nature, and to follow that which
is suitable to it. That which is wisdom indeed is the proper and peculiar gift
of God to men and Angels only. God has given somewhat like wisdom to the
fowls of heaven, they have a natural forecast; But what is the wisdom, with
which the fowls of heaven are endued, to that wisdom with which man is endued,
those men especially, who (through grace) are heirs of heaven? What is the
wisdom which beasts have by a common instinct, to the wisdom which man has
by divine instruction, yea sometimes by divine inspiration. Beasts and birds
are wise, they are taught by God what is convenient for their state, yet the
best of their knowledge is ignorance, and the top of their understanding folly,
compared with man. And hence it is that when men act foolishly or uncomely,
they are said in Scripture to be like beasts, to corrupt themselves like brute
beasts, to be brutish in their knowledge. (...) De formicis, cuniculis,
locustis, araneis dicitur; non quod sciant quid and cur agant, sed quod ipsum
opus habeat ordinem utilitatem and rationem. Coc:
We may easily conclude the wisdom of birds and beasts extremely below man's,
seeing whenever man acts below himself, or does any thing unwisely, he is
said to be and do like a beast. The Hebrew word which we translate wiser, being
applied in Scripture to Emmets or Ants, to Conies, to Locusts, to Spiders, (
Pro. 30.24.) does not imply, that they truly know either what or why they do
such or such a work, it only shows that the work which they do, has an
order, usefulness, and reason in it, according to knowledge. Solomon says
indeed, those four little creatures are exceeding wise, not that they exceed
the wisdom of man, but among brutes they exceed, or are among them of the
first form for wisdom. He makes us wiser than the fowls of the air.

Hence observe, First, The beasts of the earth, and fowls of the air, have a
kind of knowledge, and wisdom;

They have somewhat which is Analogous to or like knowledge and wisdom, yet
neither knowledge nor wisdom strictly taken. Some of the Ancients have
reported to us, Augustinus lib. 6. c^ntra Faustum Manichaeum. Epiph: lib. 1.
Haer: 42.
the opinion of the Manichees, and Marcionites, who maintained, that the beasts
of the earth, and fowls of the air, were endued with reason, properly so
called; which opinion was by them justly numbered among heresies, and indeed a
little reason may serve for the refutation of that opinion, which asserts
beasts and fowls endued with reason; Though some other learned men in their
time, and Great Philosophers have asserted as much as the Manichees or
Marcionites in this point. Quintilian said, that beasts did rather want an
ability of speaking, than of understanding: And Plutarch endeavors to prove
the same in his Dialogue about that Question, Whether brute Beasts have or are
endued with Reason? But we affirm the wisdom of Brutes is only brutish, and at
most, but similitudinary to the rational actings of man and a similitude of, or
somewhat like wisdom and reason cannot with reason be denied them. It Is said of
the Serpent ( Genesis 3.1.) that he was more subtle than any Beast of the field,
which the Lord God had made. And when Christ says, ( Math. 10.16.) Be ye as
wise as Serpents, he implies, according to that in Genesis, that Serpents have
some shadow of wisdom, somewhat like wisdom. And when the Prophet Jeremiah
(Chap. 8.7.) says, The Stork, the Turtle, the Crane, and the Swallow, know the
time of their coming, he affirms that those Fowls have a kind of knowledge.
Another Prophet upbraids men with the Knowledge of Beasts, ( Isa. 1.3.) The Ox
knows his Owner, and the Ass his Masters Crib, but, etc. Here in the Text, to
learn or be taught is ascribed to Beasts, because they are tamed, broken,
brought to hand, and made useful for the service of man. And wisdom is
ascribed to the Fowls of the Air, because they keep their seasons duly, make
their Nests safely and fitly, and bring up their young ones tenderly, with
pains and diligence. There are very strange instances, scarce credible, given
by Pliny and others, concerning the sagacity and docibility of some Beasts of
the earth, and Fowls of the Air; we are told how they have acted more like
rational creatures, than brutes: And daily experience gives proof enough, that
they have a kind of knowledge, reason and wisdom, only we cannot allow them
reason, wisdom, or knowledge in kind: They do works of Reason and
Understanding, only (which is man's excellency) they understand not the reason
of their works.

Secondly, Note; The knowledge or w^sdome (such as it is) that the Beasts of
the Earth, and Fowls of the Air have, is of God.

If he teaches men more than the Beasts of the earth, and makes them wiser
than the Fowls of the Air, then in some way and measure he teaches them, and
makes them wise. That wisdom and knowledge, whatsoever it is, which Beasts
and Fowls have, is planted in them by God; they have that which serves their
turn, and answers their state, by a common instinct of nature, which man has
answerable to his state, either by immediate Revelation, or by means of
instruction from God. So then, Beasts and Birds receive their peculiar
qualities and abilities from God, as well as their Being: And God has bestowed
those qualities, which are shadows of wisdom and understanding, upon Beasts
and Birds, not only for their own preservation, but for the benefit of man,
that they may be more useful to him, and fitter for his service. As God has
made both Man and Beast for himself, so he has made the Beasts of the Earth,
and Fowls of the Air for Man, either to serve man's necessity, or to procure his
honest delight: And that they might reach both these ends, he has furnished
them accordingly. A creature which has not somewhat in it like Reason, could be
little made use of by the Reason of Man.

Thirdly, Note; Man is far better taught, than either the Beasts of the Earth,
or Fowls of the Air.

Man, as Man, has that in him, which wonderfully exceeds the Beasts of the
Earth and Fowls of the Air; he has Reason in him, which they have not; he is a
reasonable creature, which they are not, and so can do that which they cannot.
Man, by the power of Reason is able, first, to propose to himself an end in
what he does; secondly, to choose fit means for the attaining of that end;
neither of which Beasts can do. And if any man be without wisdom to propose to
himself a right end, and to choose due means lo^ding thereunto, there is little
difference between that man and a beast, surely all his wisdom is but brutish.
Further, God has not only given Man a sense of those things which are hurtful
to him, as he has to the Beasts of the Earth and Fowls of the Air; but God
has given Man an Understanding, by which, he knowing God, may worship him, by
which also he may see into and foresee the causes of things, and likewise
rightly apply known means, either to prevent or remedy evils, and to bring
about that which is good. Again, as God has bestowed that wonderful blessing
of Reason upon Man, above Beasts and Fowls, which makes him capable of higher
instructions and fruitions, than either of them; so God has provided higher
and better means for the instruction of Man, than he has for the instruction
of Beasts. He teaches us more. For,

First, He has given his Word to Man, not to Beasts; he has not made a Bible
for the Beast of the Earth, and the Fowls of the Air; but for Man he has, that
he might both know his will and do it, know his favor or good will to him, and
enjoy it. Secondly, He has given some men his Spirit; he has not bestowed his
Spirit upon any Beasts, nor upon any Fowls of the Air: and because his Spirit
teaches us, we are said to be taught of God, eminently taught of God. Thirdly,
he has given us his Ordinances, and appointed Officers, or set persons in
Office, to manage and hold out those Ordinances, wherein himself is both
honored and enjoyed. He (says the Apostle, Ephesians. 4.11, 12.) gave some
Apostles, and some Prophets, and some Evangelists, and some Pastors and
Teachers; for the perfecting of the Saints, for the work of the Ministry, for
the edifying of the Body of Christ, for the bringing in, and building up of
souls. He shows his Word unto Jacob, his Statutes and Judgments unto Israel,
(Psalm. 147.19.) and as it follows in the next verse of the same Psalm, He has
not dealt so with any Nation, as with his Israel, his Church, to be sure he
has not dealt so with the Beasts of the Earth, nor with the Fowls of the Air,
as was showed also in opening the Text.

Further as to the matter in question about the Providence and dealings of God
with man; God has taught Man much more than Beasts: As First, That all things
which befall us, come from, and are ordered by himself. Secondly, That we ought
to receive the Rule and take instruction from God, how to behave our selves
under his various dealings. Thirdly, He has taught us at all times, and in all
turns of Providence, to stay our selves in waiting upon him, ( Psalm. 37.7.)
Fourthly, He has taught us in times of trouble and affliction, to cry to him,
and call upon him as his children in faith, not barely to complain, much less
to be impatiently outrageous like Beast^.

Now if God has taught us more than the Beasts, then, we should not live by
sense, nor pursue sensible things, as Beasts do, but aspire to and seek after
union and communion with God, whom the beasts of the earth know not. How
greatly will this aggravate the sin of man, if having been taught more than
beasts, any man should be found to have learned less than beasts; as will
appear yet more in the next observation but one.

Fourthly, Elihu at least intimates this Note; Men sometimes act but as, or
indeed below, the very beasts of the earth, and the fowls of the air:

For (says he) they say not, Where is God our maker, who gives us songs in the
night? who teaches us better, or more, than the beasts of the earth. As if he
had said, In extremam stultitiae meam incidimus, si sapientiores nos eo
putemu^, qui sapientes nos facit.
The beasts of the earth answer the instinct of nature, (which is all the cost
God bestows in teaching them) better than men do those costly teachings and
instructions which God bestows upon them by his Word, by his Spirit, by his
Ministers, by his Ordinances, and by his Providence; for all these ways does
the Lord teach and instruct men from day to day; yet men often act, not only
beside and below, but quite contrary to all these teachings. The beasts of the
earth keep up to the instruction which they have received, the instinct of
nature, they move according to that; but man who has an understanding, does
not always move suitably to his understanding; man has reason, yet he does
not always regulate his motions by reason, but is hurried by passion, or led
by sense, as a beast. ( Psalm 49.20.) Man that is in honor, and understands
not, is like the beasts that perish; that is, though his state and sphere be
higher than a beast, yet he moves by as low a principle as a beast, even by
sense, or sensual appetite, either irrascible, or concupiscible, as a beast
does. By the man in honor, that understands not, the Psalmist intends not a
fool that has no understanding, nor an Idiot that has no use of reason, but
he is said not to understand, because he does not use his understanding; as he
in the Parable that did not use his Talent, is said to have none, ( Mat.
25.29.) Understanding is a Talent, and a great one, a choice one too. A man
that has the greatest natural understanding and reason, yea possibly the
greatest learning, and experience, may be said, not to understand, when he does
not behave himself understandingly, or according to the Laws and Rules of
reason. Men of the best understanding and greatest honor are like the beasts
that perish, as to their frailty, that is, they dye; which may be the meaning
of the Psalmist at the 12th verse, where he says, Man being in honor abides
not, he is like the beasts that perish. But all men that are in honor and
understand not their du^y, or do not what they understand, are like the beasts
that perish, as to their inability, that is, they live as if they had nothing,
but (what beasts have) sense and appetite to govern their lives by. He that
does not practice according to knowledge what he knows, is like, and worse than
a beast that has no knowledge. For when a beast does any thing absurdly, he
does like a beast; but when man does any thing absurdly, he degenerates or
falls from his own form, he does not like a man, and therefore is worse than
a beast. And that is it, I conceive, which the Apostle Jude aims at in the 10th
verse of his Epistle, where rebuking a very vile generation of men, Revilers,
who speak evil of those things which they know not; he presently adds, But what
they know naturally as brute-beasts, in th^se things they corrupt themselves.
When he says, What they know naturally as brute-beasts, his meaning is, what
they know in common with beasts, that is, by sense and appetite, which are
common to man and beast, (as reason and understanding are common to Man and
Angel^:) Now (says the Apostle) what they know naturally as brute beasts, in
those things they corrupt themselves, which brute beasts do not. For these
words, as brute beasts, are to be taken in construction and interpretation,
with the former part of the sentence, What they know naturally, not with the
latter, they corrupt themselves. Their knowledge indeed is no better than the
knowledge of brute beasts, natural, but in corrupting themselves they are
unlike to, and do worse than brute beasts, who run not to such excesses; yet
there is nothing more common in Scripture, than to say that men act the beast,
when they sin, and put off those manners which become and are worthy of an
ingenuous and rational man. For as man is partaker both of a spiritual and
sensitive nature, so he takes his denomination from that part to which in his
disposition and conversation he most inclines: Hence he is sometimes called
God, or an Angel of God, and sometimes he is compared to the most hurtful of
beasts, a Lion, sometimes to the worst of beasts, to a Fox, to a Wolf, to a
Dog, to a Swine, to a generation of Vipers, to what not, which may put a mark
of dishonor and reproach upon him.

Fifthly, Note; It Is a great shame, reproof, and reproach to man, when he acts
unanswerably to the teachings of God.

It is better to be a beast in or by nature, than to be a beast (and continue
so) in qualities and conditions. O what a reproach is it, that they who have a
far better nature than beasts, should lead no better lives than a beast, yea
possibly much worse! The Psalmist cries shame upon such ( Psalm. 32.9.) Be ye not
as the Horse, or as the Mule, which have no understanding, whose mouth must be
held in with bit and bridle, lest they come near unto thee. The Horse and Mule
are unruly creatures, if left to their own rule, they have no understanding how
to manage and order themselves; they must be managed and ordered by bit and
bridle in the hand of a skilful rider, else they do more hurt than good service
to those that come near them: Now, says the Lord to man, Be not you like the
untaught or unmannag'd Horse and Mule; as ye are better taught, so ye should
have better manners. We say of some men, they are better fed than taught; and
we may say of many men, they are better taught than manner'd; they mend not
their manners, though daily taught, yea urged to mend them. For this neglect
the Lord reproves the sluggard, ( Pro. 6.6.) Go to the Ant thou sluggard,
consider her ways, and be wise; thou do not answer natural, much less
Scriptural light, thou do not learn by any teachings; one of the least of my
creatures may teach thee more than thou have yet learned of all the teachers
which I have sent thee. The little Ant that dwells upon a Mole-hil, that creeps
upon the ground, may teach thee better manners, and make thee wiser. Art thou
not ashamed to need such a teacher, having had so many teachers? That Is also
the sense of those rebukes which the Prophet powers out (with a strong
contestation) upon the people of Israel, calling Heaven and Earth to witness
against them, ( Isa. 1.2.) Hear O Heavens, and give ear O Earth, I have
nourished, and brought up children, and they have rebelled against me. But how
does the Lord convict them of rebellion, and by whom? even by the teachableness
and trac^ableness of the dullest brutes, The Ox knows his owner, and the Ass
his Masters crib: but Israel does not know, my people does not consider. As if
he had said; The Ox, and the Ass outdo you, the Ox knows his owner that
feeds him, and the very Ass knows the crib where he is fed. These beasts take
notice of, regard and submit to their Master and Benefactor: but Israel does
neither observe nor submit to me, who have tenderly nursed and plentifully
nourished them; who have (as the Lord spoke by his Prophet, Hos. 11.4.) been to
them, as one that takes the yoke off their jaws, and lays them meat, the
fat and the sweet, the finest of the wheat, and honey out of the Rock to feed
upon; and, which is more than this, who have not only fed them better, but
taught them better than the Ox or Ass; O ye Heavens, be astonished at this!
Further, as in this Scripture the Lo^d contested with, and reproved his people
by the beasts of the earth, so he does it in another by the fowls of the air, (
Jer. 8.6, 7.) I (says the Lord) hearkened and heard, but they spoke not aright,
etc. every one turned to his course, (his sinful course, or his course in sin)
as the Horse rusheth into the battle; that is, fiercely, fearlesly,
presumptuously, at once slighting, at least forgetting, both their own danger,
and my command. As the Lord thus rebukes the headstrong obstinacy and
wilfulness of that people, by their likeness to the Horse; so in the next verse
he reproves their blindness and blockishness, by their unlikeness to the Sto k,
etc. Yea the Stork in the Heaven knows her appointed time, and the Turtle,
and the Crane, and the Swallow observe the time of their coming, but my people
know not the Judgments of the Lord. Then follows, ( v. 8.) How do ye say, we
are wise, and the Law of the Lord is with us; Lo certainly in vain made he it,
the pen of the Scribe is in vain: As if he had said; You have been taught, you
have had the Law of the Lord, and you a^e ready to boast of it, as the Apostle
observed ( Romans 2.23.) but with what face can ye take it upon your selves to be
wise men, or arrogate wisdom to your selves, or so much as own the Law, when
you are so unready to pay that obedience which you owe to it. The Crane, the
Turtle, and Swallow, the very fowls of Heaven, follow the light of nature
better than you have done the light of Scripture and daily instruction. These
reasonless creatures, reason with themselves more rationally than you have
done; They say thus in themselves, It is best for us to change our quarters,
and take our flight to some more benign or milder region, for here the season
grows sharp, and the weather tempestuous, if we abide here we starve, we perish
with cold and hunger: But you my people are so sottish, that you change neither
your minds nor manners, you mend neither your ways nor your works; what
changes soever I bring upon you, or how much soever I vary my ways and
workings toward you, you apply not your selves to my course and dealings with
you, but still take your own course, say I or do I what I will; you neither
embrace seasons of grace and offers of mercy, nor do ye labor either to
prevent or to avoid those storms of wrath and divine vengeance, with which you
have been often threatened, and which hang in the clouds ready to drop down and
overwhelme you. And will ye say after all this, we are wise, when the fowls of
the air appear wiser than you? And will you say, the Law of the Lord is with
us, when they guide themselves better by the Law of nature? And forasmuch as it
is thus with you, have I not reason to conclude, that, Lo, certainly in vain
made he it, the pen of the Scribe is in vain; that is, it was to little or no
purpose that God at first enacted and published his Law, ( Exodus 20.) or
appointed Scribes to write it out, that Copies of it might be transferred to
and read by his people, ( Deuteronomy. 17.18. Chap. 31.9.) Is not both the making and
writing of the Law vain, (as to you) seeing you are thus vain and foolish,
even much more vain and foolish than the Stork in the Heaven, than the Turtle,
Crane, and Swallow, notwithstanding the making and writing out of the Law for
you?

This will fill the faces of the wicked, that is, both of the profane and
formal professors of the Lords name, with shame and confusion for ever, when
they shall be made to see and confess, that the beasts of the earth have
followed their light, better than they, though God has taught them more than
the beasts of the earth; and that the fowls of the air have carried themselves
more wisely than they, though God has made them wiser than the fowls of the
air.

Verse. 12. There they cry (but none gives answer) because of the pride of evil
men. When Elihu had thus closely hinted the sin of those persons that acted
below beasts and birds in their afflictions, he proceeds to tell us, what they
do in their affliction; There they cry (but none gives answer.) We translate
these words, But none gives answer, in a parenthesis; we may read the verse
without it, and transfer those words to the end of the verse, There they cry,
because of the pride of evil men, but none gives answer. That is, (as some
give the meaning) they being oppressed by the pride of evil men, cry out of
their insolences, and their own miseries, and yet can get no answer; for the
reasons given in the two former verses, that is, because they do not heartily
and believingly apply themselves to God their Maker. (...) A faciebus superbiae
malorum. Mont: Propter superbiam malorum. Pagn: Ibi vel tunc, A^verbia loci pra
adverbiis temporis passim s^^untur. Merc:
Mr Broughton understands it thus of the pride of oppressors; There (says he)
they cry, but he answers not concerning the wrong-doers pride. Others take it
for the pride of the oppressed; There they cry. The word rendered there, is an
Adverb of place, but here it notes the time or estate rather in which these
persons lived; they were in an oppressed estate or condition, when they cried,
yet says the Text, None gives answer; that is, they have no help when they
cry; they cry to men, yea they cry to God for help, but have none, help is far
from them. God does not answer them immediately by himself, neither does he
send them answer by the hand of any other. Now, what is the reason of this? The
Text gives it partly (yet somewhat obscurely) in this verse, more fully and
clearly in the verse following. The reason given here is their pride, Because
of the pride of evil men; that is, because themselves are so proud, they are at
once poor and proud, humbled but not humble; they are oppressed and subdued
under the power of men, yet their pride remains unsubdued and in full power;
they are laid low in estate, but they are not lowly in spirit: proud men
oppress them, and they, though oppressed, are still proud; their hearts are not
brought down, though they are come down wonderfully, as the Prophet spoke of
the captivated Jews, Lam. 1.9. They are fallen before men in misery, but they
are not fallen before God in humility; they cry of wrong, but themselves are
not right, and that is the reason why they are not righted; There they cry (but
none gives answer) because of the pride of evil men. This also is a good
sense, and may yield us profitable instruction; I leave the Reader to his
choice, both being safe and useful. There they cry, etc.

Note hence.

First, They that are oppressed, and brought low, will be crying and
complaining, Both God and Men shall hear of them: There they cry. An afflicted
condition, is a complaining condition; Nature being pinch't will speak. I (said
Job, Chap. 7.11.) will not refrain my mouth, I will speak in the anguish of my
heart, I will complain in the bitterness of my soul. I mourn in my complaint,
said David, (Psalm. 55.2.) The title of the 102d Psalm runs thus; A prayer of
the afflicted when he is overwhelmed, and powers out his complaint before God.

Note; Secondly, Some in their afflictions do nothing but cry, nothing but
complain.

Elihu does not say, There they repent, and there they humble themselves, and
there they turn to God, but there they cry; that they are troubled is the all,
the only thing that troubles them. It Is said before, God teaches man more than
the beasts of the Earth; but many in a day of affliction, do no more than the
Beasts of the Earth. A Beast, when hurt, will cry, he will rage and roar; and
that is as much as many men do when they are hurt, though God has taught them
more, many lessons more, which they should be practicing under sorrowful
dispensations. The Ox loweth, and is taught no more, when he wants fodder, the
Ass brayeth, and is taught no more, when he wants grass; but man is taught to
act repentance, and faith, and patience, and submission to the will of God in
want. How sad is it when we hear nothing but flesh cry in man, or when nothing
is cried for by man but flesh, that is, the supplies of Nature, in the day of
his distress. As it is said of those ( Hosea 7.14.) They have not cried unto me
with their heart, when they howled upon their beds; they assemble themselves
for corn, and for wine, and they rebel against me. How miserable are they in
their miseries, whose tongues cry to God, but not their hearts, or their hearts
being silent; who cry for corn and wine, not for grace and repentance, or not
for grace to repent; who cry much because they suffer evil, but not at all
because they have done evil, yea who are doing evil at the very time when they
are crying out because of the evils which they suffer: Such was the wretched
frame of those in the Prophet; They assembled themselves for corn and for
wine, and rebelled against God. It Is bad enough, when there is crying, and
nothing but crying, this is to cry but as beasts cry; but to cry and rebel
against God, is to be worse than beasts, for beasts do not rebel against God
when they are pinched with want, and cry. It is sad to be in afflictions; to be
put to cry in afflictions is more sad; only to cry for the affliction is yet
more sad, when nothing comes from a man but a cry, there is nothing in the
crier, but what is merely of man; but to be found sinning against God, while we
a e crying out in our affliction is most sad, that is the saddest and worst
condition of man in affliction. The Lord teaches his people better, let us
show our selves better taught, than only to cry in our afflictions; and let it
be the abhorrence of our souls for ever to sin at all, much more to sin up to
rebellion against God in our affliction, that it should be said of any of us as
of that wicked King Ahaz, (2 Chronicles. 28.22.) that in the time of any distress,
we have trespassed more against the Lord.

Thirdly, Whereas those oppressed ones cried, yet (according to the second
interpretation) continued proud and naught.

Observe, The greatest oppression and worldly trouble, cannot break the power
of sin, nor bring down the proud heart of man.

Neither oppression from man, nor affliction from God, can break the pride of
man's spirit. These were oppressed, yet proud still. Our estates may be broken,
our relations broken, our comforts broken, yet our hearts remain unbroken. The
oppressed are many times, as proud as their oppressors, and they who are
unjustly dealt with, are ^s bad as they that deal unjustly with them.
Oppressors (though not all who oppress) are always bad, and the oppressed are
many times so too, even as bad as their oppressors. There is no proof of any
man's grace or goodness by this, that he is oppressed, or wronged; for he may be
wronged, and ground to powder with oppression, yet his heart as hard as a
nether Millstone, and his spirit as high, and as much lifted up as Lucifers.
There is nothing in affliction, trouble, or oppression, that can humble the
heart of man; the Spirit of God, God himself must do it. Outward changes work
no inward change; we may be emptied from vessel to vessel, from one condition
to another, yet have our sin-sent remaining in us. It was, indeed, said of
Moab, (Jer. 48.11.) He has not been emptied from vessel to vessel, neither
has he gone into captivity, (that is, he has not been troubled much in his
own Land, nor carried into strange Lands, as Israel has been) therefore his
taste remained in him, and his sent is not changed; that is, as he still retains
his civil state and strength, so his spiritual vanity, impiety, and impurity,
even as Wines that have not been drawn off the Lees, and put into other Cask,
(to that the Scripture there alludes) retain their first taste and sent or smell,
and are not meliorated or made more fit for the palate and stomach of those that
drink them. Now (I say) as many for want of changes or afflictions, are not
mended, so some mend not though they have many changes and afflictions; nor can
any thing or affliction mend us, or work a change of heart and life in us,
unless grace work with it.

Fourthly, Whereas it is said, they cry, but none gives answer, God does not
hear and answer them;

Note; The cries of proud, or bad men, how much soever they are oppressed, do
not move God, nor will he answer them.

There is no reason he should answer their cry, (though they have reason enough
to cry) who will not answer his call, his command; let such cry and cry, tear
the air, and rend their throats with crying, they shall not be answered. Job
says of the hypocrite, ( Chap. 27.9.) Will God hear his cry when trouble
comes upon him? No, he will not. Solomon leaves the contemners of wisdoms
counsel under the same doom, ( Pro. 1.28.) Then shall they call, but I will not
answer; they shall seek me early, but they shall not find me. But when was this
Then in which they called, and the Lord would not answer? The 27th verse tells
us, The when or time of this rejection, it was when they had most need of
hearing and acceptance, even when their fear (that is, the thing feared, or
at least which made them afraid) came upon them, as desolation, and their
destruction as a whirlwind; when those sad Messengers came they sought God
early, that is, earnestly and diligently, but could not find him: But what was
the reason of this refusal? They hated knowledge, and did not choose the fear of
the Lord, (v. 29.) They had been wicked, and naught, before trouble came, and
when trouble was come they were no better, therefore the Lord regarded not
either their persons or their cries. The Lord (says the Apostle preaching to
the Athenians, Acts 17.27.) is not far from every one of us; yet it is said (
Pro. 15.29.) The Lord is far from the wicked, but he hears the prayer of the
righteous: He is far, that is, far from hearing and answering, far from helping
and relieving the wicked when they pray. The Lord is not far from any of us as
men, for in him we live, move, and have our being, (v. 28.) and he gives to
all life, and breath, and all things, for the support of life and natural
being; but he is far from all proud men, as to any complacency in their
persons, and as to the hearing of their prayers. He is far from hearing them,
and he knows them a far off, ( Psalm. 138.6.) that is, he deals with them as
with men at a distance. Thus the Lord told the impenitents among his own people
by the Prophet, ( Isa. 1.15.) Though you make many prayers, I will not hear,
for your hands are full of blood. Ye are full of bloody sins, and ye have not
humbled your selves, nor cleansed your hearts and hands by the blood of the
Covenant to this day; and being in that case, you may cry and pray till your
hearts ache, and your tongues ache too, yet no prevailing with God, no grant, no
hearing. Another Prophet tells them as sad news from the Lord, ( Jer. 11.11.)
Behold, I will bring evil upon them, which they shall not be able to escape,
(or, go forth of) and though they shall cry unto me, I will not hearken to
them. Though the Lord threatened, I will bring such evil upon them, that they
shall not escape; they might say, well, but when the evil has taken hold of
us, we hope God will hear us, and deliver us. No, says God, when the evil has
overtaken and arrested you, yet your prayers shall not overtake me; Though you
cry, yet I will not hearken unto you. That Is a dreadful Scripture of the same
import, ( Psalm. 18.41.) They cried, but there was none to save them: even unto
the Lord, but he answered them not. They cried being in great distress, and
they cried to the Lord; he brings in that, lest any should say, they cried
indeed, but possibly 'twas to false gods, to idols, possibly they knocked at a
wrong door, and so were not heard: No, they cried to the Lord, to the Lord by
name; they were right as to the object of prayer, but their hearts were not
right; they were not right subjects of prayer. That once blind man saw this
truth, when answering the Pharisees about the person by whose power he received
his sight, he told them plainly, ( Joh. 9.31.) We know that God hears not
sinners; that is, Such as love and live in sin, such as go on impenitently in
their sins. By this answer he closely, but strongly confuted that blasphemous
opinion and censure of the Pharisees, who reputed and reported the Lord Jesus
Christ, who came into the world to save sinners, as one of the vilest sinners
in the world, and upon that account got him crucified at last. As if the man
had said, Were he that cured me of my blindness such a sinner as you reckon him
to be, he could never have obtained power from God to cure me of my blindness,
for we know God hears not sinners. When men sin and pray as it were by turns,
their prayers are turned into sin, and therefore will not be returned in mercy.
God sometimes hears sinners in wrath and judgment, and he sometimes will rot
hear Saints, as to the grant of the thing in hand prayed for, in love and
mercy; but he never denies praying Saints in wrath, nor does he ever hear a
sinner (such a one as is here intended) in mercy when he prays.

Now, as when the Disciples heard Christ's answer to the Pharisees question
about Divorce, they presently said, ( Math. 19.10.) If the case of the man be
so with his wife, it is not good to marry; so some hearing this doctrine, that
God hears not proud sinners when they cry or pray, may possibly say, if the
case of the proud be thus with God, it is not good for them to pray at all. To
such I answer, this doctrine is not urged to make proud or impenitent sinners
to leave praying, but to leave their pride, it is urged to make them humble
under their oppressions and afflictions, not to make them profane. They who
(as they are) cannot get by prayer, certainly they cannot get by casting off
prayer. What answer can they have who cry not at all to God, when some may cry
and get no answer! as Elihu here speaks, There they cry, but none gives
answer, because of the pride of wicked men. This sense or interpretation most
insisted upon in this 12th verse, will appear more full and fair in opening
the 13th, Ad dicti superioris confirmationem Epiphonemaris vice subjicit.
in which Elihu brings down what he said here into a strong and peremptory
conclusion; or the next verse renders another reason why God would not relieve
those oppressed ones, It was not only for the pride of their spirits, ( v. 12.)
but also for the emptiness and heartlesness of their prayers; or because the
prayers of proud and evil men are heartless or empty.

Verse. 13. Surely God will not hear vanity, neither will the Almighty regard
it. They cry, but God will not hear: why will he not hear? what hinders? He
tells us both why and what.

Surely God will not hear vanity. What is vanity? What says vanity? has
vanity a tongue? can vanity speak? the Text says, God will not hear vanity.
It Is frequent in Scripture, to ascribe a tongue, and a voice to sin of any
kind; though some sins are more vocal, and speak louder than others, yet all
speak. But when he says, Surely, (or, without all Question) the Lord will not
hear vanity, by vanity we are to understand vain men praying; or vanity is put
for the prayers and cries of those persons who are as vain as vanity it self.
The word rendered vanity, (...) temeritas, falsitas, mendacium; dicitur de re
salsa vana, levi and mutili.
signifies a lie, as also rashness, temerity; God will neither hear
rash-headed, nor false-hearted prayers, he will not hear vain prayers, or the
prayers of vain men. The Abstract is often put for the Concrete in Scripture,
( Psalm. 107.42.) All iniquity shall stop her mouth. When the Lord brings about
that mighty work, the bringing down of the mighty, and sets the poor on high,
(those that are at once poor and humble the Lord will set on high), then
Iniquity, that is, wicked men, men of iniquity, shall stop their mouths, or
have their mouths stopped, they shall not have a word to say, as gaine-saying
that righteous and glorious work of God. So here, God will not hear vanity,
that is, vain men, or men that pray vainly; all that, which men speak, or act,
is vain or vanity, if it be not good, if it be not answerable to the will and
ends of God; yea whatsoever prayer does not proceed from faith, and flow from a
pure heart, is vanity, it is but straw, and stubble, dross, and dung. God will
not hear vanity, Neither will the Almighty regard it.

He that will not hear, will much less regard vanity. The sense is gradual,
regarding is more than hearing, we may put both together, he will not hear with
regard, nor regard what he hears from such. The strong God, who has all power
in his hand, the power of Authority, or the power of a Judge, will not hear
vanity. The All-mighty, The All-sufficient, who has all power of efficiency in
his hand, the nourisher, and preserver, the punisher and correcter of all men;
(...) intendit oculos and visum, intentis and fiaeis oculis intuitus est,
solicit observavit.
this Shaddai will not regard vanity, he will not give it a look with respect,
no not one good look. The word signifies to fix, or set the eye with strong
intention upon any thing or person. The Prophet Elisha spoke to this sense,
though he used another word, when he said to the King of Israel, (2 King.
3.14.) Were it not that I regard the presence of the King of Judah, I would not
look to thee, nor see thee. The Lord will not regard, he will not look to
vanity, to the prayers of vain men, he will as it were shut his eyes, he will
not see though he does see; The Almighty will not regard it.

Hence Note; First, The prayers of vain and evil persons, are vain things.

The Text does not say, their oaths are vain, and their lies are vain, and
their idle words are vain, but their cry, their cries in prayer to God are
vain, yea vanity. There may be vanity in the prayer of a good man, but his
prayer is not vanity. That Is a just reproof upon the good works of many, which
Christ gave the Angel of the Church of Sardis, (Rev. 3.3.) I have not found thy
works perfect, or, I have not found thy works full. Though that Angel had done
good works, and possible was full of good works, yet his works were not full. A
man may be full of prayer, pray often, yet his prayer not full, his prayers may
be empty, vain prayers; that is a vain thing which is an empty thing. How
vain are they whose best things are vanity! If the prayers of a man are
vanity, then certainly all is vanity; and we may say of him in the whole bulk
of all, he is vanity of vanities, all is vanity. When once God calls a man's
prayer, and hearing, vanity; when he calls those works, which are good for the
matter of them, vanity, then the man is indeed altogether vanity. You will say,
when is prayer vanity, or a vain thing? I shall answer it in a few particulars.

First, That prayer is vain, or vanity, which is not put up in faith. A
faithless prayer is a fruitless prayer. All the prayers of an unbeliever, or of
him who is in a state of unbelief are vain; and the prayers of a believer,
that is, who is in his state a believer, are vain, if he has not faith about
that thing for which he prays. Now if the prayer of a believer is vain, when
he has not actual faith, then the prayer of an unbeliever must needs be vain,
who has no habitual faith.

Secondly, All the prayers that are for our lusts, or when we resolve to
continue in the practice of any lust, are vain prayers. When we do not pray
with a purpose to glorify God, with what we shall obtain by prayer, but only
to serve our own turns, and so bestow it upon our lusts, that is a vain prayer,
( James 4.3.) Such praying is rather a mocking than a worshipping of God, a
serving of our selves rather than a serving of God. How do they abuse God in
prayer, who cry to him for help, whom they have no mind to honor? who would
feign be heard of God, yet have no heart to hear God?

Thirdly, That Is a vain prayer, when we pray merely to get ease, or
deliverance from an affliction, not at all minding our profiting by, or the
improvement of an affliction. It Is not faith in God, but sense of our own
smart, which moves to pray, when we rather look how to get off our burdens,
Tales clamores non fides, sed malorum sensus extorquer.
than out of our sins, or to get out of the fire, than to get out our dross;
when we pray more to have the plague taken away, than our hard and proud
hearts, that is a vain prayer; it is like the prayer of Pharaoh, who begged
that he might be delivered; but it was the plague of God for his sin, for his
hard heart, that troubled him; his hard heart, his sinning against God never
troubled him. Pharaoh-like prayers, are vain prayers.

Fourthly, Those prayers are vain which we make in our own strength. What can
those prayers be, which go forth in our strength, seeing we are told that we
know not what to pray, much less then how to pray, but as the Spirit of God
helps our infirmities, ( Romans 8.26.) Unless the Spirit make intercession for
us, that is, make our intercessions for us in our hearts, as Christ makes
intercession for us in heaven, we pray in vain.

Fifthly, Those are vain prayers, which we make in our own name, not in the
name of Christ. And remember, though it be an easy matter to name Christ in
prayer, yet it is no easy matter to pray in the name of Christ. It Is as common
as that which is commonest, for all sorts of people, yea for children, to name
Christ in prayer; but to pray in the name of Christ, is the peculiar work of
the Spirit in the heart of a true believer. If the Reader desire to know more
distinctly what it is to pray in the name of Christ, I refer him for some help
toward it to the 17th verse of the 16th Chapter, where also the requisites of
pure and powerful prayer, are more fully held out.

Sixthly, Angry passionate prayers are vain prayers. The Lord loves zeal and
much warmth of affection in prayer, but he cannot abide wrath, or any the least
sparks of passion in prayer. The Apostles Rule is, (1 Timothy 3.8.) I will that
men pray every where, lifting up pure hands, without wrath, and without
doubting. A peaceable heart is as necessary in prayer, as a pure hand. When a
soul coming to God in prayer, has I know not what wrathful and angry disputes
within himself against his Brethren, how can he look for a gracious acceptance
with God? Will the Lord be pleased with us, while we nourish secret displeasure
against our Neighbor? Now be sure when you go to God for mercy and favor,
that ye carry no wrath in your spirits toward man, one or other; therefore
Christ has taught us in that most perfect model of prayer, which he has left
us, (when we ask the forgiveness of our own trespasses) to forgive those that
trespass against us. We must lay down our unquiet thoughts of revenge, if we
would have favor with, and compassion from God.

Seventhly, Those are vain prayers, which are not both formed and mattered
according to the Will of God, (1 John 5.14.) which are not grounded upon a just
cause, and which are not directed to a right end. Besides all these I may add
all cold Prayers, sleepy Prayers, slight-spirited or heartless Prayers, mere
fo^mal Prayers, tongue-wording Prayers, which are not soul-working and
self-affecting Prayers, are, to them who pray so, but vain Prayers, or as the
Text speaks, vanity.

These Rules must be observed in all our prayer-addresses to God, else prayer
is vain, or vanity; and when the prayer it self is vain, the person praying
has no hearing: God will not hear vanity, neither will the Almighty regard it.
Consider that, Elihu does not only say, God will not hear, but he adds, neither
will the Almighty regard it. The doubling of the matter in higher Language
intima^es something to us; and we may note this from it; As the Prayers of evil
men are vain, so they have not any, the lest regard from God:

He will neither hear, nor regard. David says ( Psalm. 66.18.) If I regard
iniquity in my heart, God will not hear my Prayer. God will not hear a David, a
good man, as to that particular prayer, if he regard iniquity in his heart,
that is, if he hold any, the least compliance or secret correspondence with any
sin, yea, if he has not repented of, and labored to mortify every known sin:
Doubtless then he will not regard the prayers of evil men, when they pray also
with an evil mind. And when this, and other Scriptures say, he does neither
hear nor regard them; there is more intended than expressed, even that he does
reject and abhor them, that they are a burden and an abomination to him. The
Scripture is much in showing how much God makes of holy prayers. For first, God
has not only promised to hear, but regard such prayers, ( Psalm. 112.17.) He
will regard the prayer of the destitute, and not despise their prayers; that
is, he highly prizeth and esteems them. Secondly, The Scripture tells us,
God delights to hear such prayers, they are sweet to him, they are the best
music in his ears; Let me hear thy voice, for sweet is thy voice (her
prayer-voyce he means chiefly) says Christ to his Spouse, ( Cant. 2.14.)
Thirdly, The Scripture assures us, that God looks upon or reckons prayer as
an honor done to him, it is an eminent part of worship, it is the giving of him
glory; certainly therefore (take prayer purely) God does regard it very much;
he will have regard to that which he has promised regard to, he will have
regard to that which is sweet and delightful to him, which is an honor and
brings glory to him; therefore there must needs be a great matter in it, when
he says, He will not regard a prayer; such a prayer must needs be very vile,
impure, and stark naught in it self, which he thus thrusts from him, or
cannot away with.

It must be confessed, that God sometimes defers to hear (that is, to answer)
the prayers of those that call upon him in faith, and even their prayers who
call upon him humbly and sincerely. Holy prayers are not always presently
answered, but holy prayers are never unregarded, never rejected. It Is never
said in Scripture, God does not regard the prayers of a godly man. God may let
him stay long for the answer of his prayer, to try his faith, and patience; but
he will not slight his prayer. As it is the duty of all men to pray, and the
desire or delight of a godly man, (when his heart is in a right frame) to pray,
so it is the privilege of every godly man, that his prayer is heard and
regarded. And as it is the sin of most wicked men that they pray not at all, (
Psalm. 14.4. Jer. 10.25.) so it is the misery of all wicked men, that their
prayers, though they make many and long prayers, are not heard, are not
regarded. They are far from the grace and fear of God, who regard not to pray
unto him; and they are as far from the mercy and favor of God, whose prayers
are not regarded. And if a man be upon such bad terms with God, that he is not
regarded, when he is at his best work, his praying-wo^k, O how little is such a
one regarded when he is at his worst work, his sinning-work! If some men are
not regarded, when they are praying to God, what are they when they are
swearing, and blaspheming God, when they are causlesly vexing or oppressing
their brethren? If some men are not regarded when they are praying, what are
they when they are revelling and reviling! The Lords indignation breaks out
to the utmost against wicked men, when he tells them, the best of their duties,
their prayer, is vanity, and though they cry much to him, he will not hear nor
regard them. The Lord has not said to the seed of Jacob, seek ye me in vain,
(Isa. 45.19.) that is, ye shall not seek me in vain, no, as your prayers are
honorable and acceptable unto me, so they shall be profitable and beneficial
unto you; you that go forth weeping, bearing, and scattering this precious
seed, shall doubtless come again and bring your sheaves with you, your prayers
shall be returned with blessings upon your souls, upon your bodies, upon your
estates, upon your families, in which you live, as also upon the Nations and
upon the Churches among whom you live. Thus the seed of Jacob have found and
shall further find by the blessed experiences of all these blessings, that God
has not said to them, Seek ye me in vain. He has only said of them who are
vain, your seekings of me are vain in themselves, and will be vain,
fruitless, answerless unto you; for I the Lord will not hear vanity, neither
will I the Almighty regard it.

JOB, Chap. 35. Verse. 14. Although thou say thou shall not see him, yet
Judgment is before him, therefore trust thou in him.


THere is a twofold rendering or translation of this 14th verse; First, Some
connecting it with the former, and taking it in a dependence upon what Elihu
had last affirmed concerning God, He hears not vanity, Multo minus si di^ is,
non contemplaris istud (exauditurus e^t judica coram eo and expecta eum. Jun:
neither does the Almighty regard it, translate thus, Much less will he hear
thee, if thou say thou do not lo^k to, or regard this; judge thy self
therefore before him, and wait for him. As if Elihu should bring an argument
from the less to the greater; God will not hear vanity, nor will the Almighty
regard it, how much less will he hear thee, who say, (upon the matter) that
thou regardest not him, or what he says and does. That word, which in the
close of the 13th verse, we render regard, is the same with that in this 14th
verse, rendered, see; as if the whole were a rebuke, or a conviction of Job for
his stoutness, in not viewing and contemplating the power and prerogative of
God as he ought, in laying his hand upon him; and therefore says Elihu, if God
will not hear those that pray vainly, how much less will he regard thee, who
seem not to regard him? that is, not to humble thy self before him as
becomes thee to thy Sovereign Lord: And thereupon Elihu gives him counsel in
the close of the verse; Judge thy self before him, and then wait for him, or
trust him, as we render it. Mr Broughton seems to speak in his translation much
to this sense, giving it thus; So, when thou say thou will not mark it,
judge before him, and wait for him. As God will not regard vain prayer, so
when thou say to him, thou will not mark it, that is, attend to providence
as thou ought, he will not regard thee. There is a truth in this, and the
Original word may fairly bear this translation; yet I shall not stay upon it;
but rather take this Context as the beginning of a new argument, than as the
inforcement of the former; understanding it so, the words have yet a reading
different from ours.

Another modern translater disliking the former reading only in the first part
of the verse, gives his own, thus; In this also (thou have sinned) Those words
are supplied to make up the sense, Etiam (in hoc pexasti; quod dixisti te non
contemplaturum eum; Judica (te) coram eo, and expecta eum. Pisc:
as being the bringing in of a further charge against Job) In this also (thou
have sinned) that thou have said, thou shall not see him; judge therefore thy
self before him, and look for him. This is the matter of his new charge, Thou
have said, thou shall not see him, this is thy sin. And having given him this
charge, Elihu gives him counsel according to this translation in the close of
the verse, Judge therefore thy self before him, and look for him. We say in our
translation, Judgment is before him, that is, before God; this translation
says, Judge thy self before him; and the reason of it is because some take the
word here as a Noune, Aliqui (...) nomine exponunt, Judicium alii pro (...)
verbo imperativi. modi; Judica. Merc:
others as a Verb of the Imparative mood; Judge thy self before him, and then
look to him, or trust in him; that is, thou have failed greatly, and sinned in
taking up such a Conclusion as this, that thou shall not see God, (the sense of
which I shall open when I come to our own translation) therefore I advise thee
to judge thy self thoroughly, and humbly to acknowledge thy fault. This
translation is much insisted upon, and because it has a profitable sense, I
shall note two or three points from the latter part of the verse, where it
differs from ours, and then proceed to our own Translation. Job being charged
with sin for saying, that he should not see God, is here advised to judge
himself, Judge thy self, and look to, or trust in him.

Hence Note; It is our duty to judge our selves.

And it is a great Gospel duty: The Apostle gives it in plain words, (1 Cor.
11.31.) If we would judge our selves, we should not be judged of the Lord. We
are very apt to judge one another, but very backward to judge our selves. It is
a great work to erect a Tribunal (as I may say) in our own Souls and
Consciences, to sit in Judgment upon our selves; which that we may do, we must
do these three things. First, we must send Summons to our selves, we must cite
our selves to our own Tribunal; for always before Judgment, Summons must go
out and be sent to the party offending: Here we are to send Summons to our
selves, that is, to call together all the powers of our souls to appear in this
Judgment, and answer what is or may be alleged against us. And when we have
Summoned our selves, then secondly, we are to examine, search, and try our
selve^, ( Lam. 3.41.) Let us search and try our ways, and turn again unto the
Lord. Thirdly, having tried and examined our selves, before we can come to
Judgment (that Judgment which is here intended) we must humble our selves
under a Conviction of our own vileness and sinfulness, whether of our nature or
of our actions, whether of our state or of our way; for whereas there are two
parts of Judgment, Absolution and Condemnation, we can never come to that part
of Judgment, the judging of our selves, as persons worthy to be condemned by
the Lord for our sins, unless we are first convinced of our sins. Now when we
have summoned, examined, and convicted our selves, then we are ready to judge
our selves, to judge our selves even with the judgment of condemnation,
respecting what we have done, yet we should do it (with hopes of absolution)
acting our faith upon the free grace and mercy of God through the satisfaction
which Jesus Christ has made for us.

Again, The scope of this counsel, or the reason why Elihu advises Job to
judge himself, was to show, that he had rashly judged of the ways of God,
because he had not duly judged himself.

Hence Note; Self-judging, or judging our own doings, will preserve us from
rash judging the doings and dealings of God with us.

We shall never think God deals harshly, or rigorously with us, if we do but
enter into and pass a right judgment upon our own souls. As they that judge
themselves shall not be judged of the Lord, (1 Cor. 11.31.) so, they that judge
themselves will never judge the Lord; no, they will acquit and justify the
Lord under all his proceedings, even in his sorest and severest ones. Thus did
Ezra in reference to those great and unparalleled sufferings of the Jews in the
Babylonian war and captivity, ( Chap. 9.13.) Thou our God have punished us
less than our iniquities deserve. And so did Daniel (Chap. 9.7.) O Lord,
righteousness belongs unto thee, but unto us confusion of faces, as at this
day.

Further, Elihu concluded Job very much affected with, or highly conceited of
himself, because he pleaded his own innocence or integrity so much, and was so
desirous to come to a hearing, and have his matter tried before God; and
therefore says he, Judge thy self.

Hence Note; Self-judging will keep us from proud or high thoughts of our
selves, of our own ways or works, how good soever they are.

Suppose our ways and our works pure and good, as Jobs indeed were for the
maine, (he was a man of the highest elevation in holiness and of greatest
integrity) yet if we would thoroughly examine and judge our selves, consider
our short comings in duty, our sinnings against duty, and the sins that cleave
to our best duties, we should find our very innocence to be guilty, and our
righteousness to be unrighteous; and surely such a discovery would lay us very
low in our own thoughts, and go very far toward the subduing of that pride of
our hearts, which often arises from the contemplation of our own well-doing.

Lastly, Consider this counsel was given Job (according to this translation)
with respect to that which follows; Judge thy self, and trust in or wait for
him.

Hence Note; We are never fit to trust, nor to wait upon God in any of his
providence, till we judge our selves; or, Judging of our selves will dispose
and prepare our hearts for trusting and resting upon the power, goodness and
mercy of God.

The more we judge and humble our selves, the readier ha^h God declared himself
to help us in our extremities, (1 Pet. 5 6.) we also are then the readier to
trust and wait on him, both because we then see more clearly what need we have
to trust on him for help, and may have the more assurance of his help, while we
trust him.

I shall now proceed to our own translation, which fairly accommodates the
scope of Elihu's dealing with Job in this place.

Although thou say thou shall not see him. Elihu had reprehended two of Jobs
sayings before in this Chapter; here he reprehends a third; Although thou
say this, thou shall not see him; although thou say it, either secretly
in thy heart, (the fool says in his heart there is no God) or although thou
say it with thy mouth, and have openly declared thy despair of seeing him.
Some passages in the discourse of Job do more than intimate and imply, that he
had said, he should not see God. And we may conceive that Elihu aims at that
passage specially ( Chap. 23.8, 9.) where Job seems to say this thing; Behold,
I go forward, but he is not there, and backward, but I cannot perceive him; on
the left hard where he does work, but I cannot behold him; he hides himself on
the right hand, that I cannot see him. Now, Elihu gives answer in this 14th
verse, showing, that al^hough God would not give him a present hea^ing upon his
importunate call for it, yet he might rest assured, that God would do him
justice, and therefore advises him quietly to rest upon him. Although thou
say thou shall not see him, or can not see him, yet Judgment is before
him, therefore trust thou in him. In that 23d Chapter, Job made a sad
complaint, that though he much solicited and desired to see God (in what sense
I shall open presently) yet he could not be admitted, he could not find him,
nor come near him; I (says he) cannot perceive him, I cannot behold him, I
cannot see him; we have all these words negatively expressed there; as here,
Although thou say thou shall not see, (or contemplate) him.

There is a twofold sight of God; First, immediate, or in himself; and thus
God is seen only by himself, and of himself, to all others he is invisible, No
eye has seen him, nor can see him, (1 Timothy 6.16.) The Lord told Moses, No man
can see my face and live; that is, no man can see me immediately, no man can
have any ocular sight of me, as we see those things that are before us; God is
a Spirit, and therefore invisible. Job does not complain, (in this sense) that
he could not see God, for he knew God was not to be seen, nor did he wait for
any such corporal view or sight or presence of God. Secondly, There is a
mediate sight of God, and that by a threefold means; First, in or by his Word;
for that is one glass wherein we behold him. Secondly, there is a sight of God
in his Works, they are another glass wherein we see and behold him; and those
works are two fold; First, the works of Creation, in them we may see or
contemplate God all the world over, in his power, wisdom, and goodness, ( Romans
1.19, 20.) Secondly, his works of providence, ordering and disposing all the
motions of the creatures, as himself pleases, how much soever any of their
motions are displeasing unto him. Thus we may see God in his works, that is, it
is seen by his works, not only that he is, but what he is, or that he is
Eternal and Infinite, that he is Most Wise and Omnipotent, that he can do all
things, or that nothing is too hard for him, he having brought all things out
of nothing. There is a Third Medium or Means by which we may see God, and that
is, His Son, our Lord Jesus Christ, (2 Cor. 4.6.) The light of the knowledge of
the Glory of God shines to us in the face of Jesus Christ; that is, in the
person of Christ, God-Man, we may behold the glorious Grace of God unto poor
sinful lost man. All the beams of Divine Love are collected in, and issue forth
from the face of Jesus Christ. He that would see how good, how gracious, how
merciful the Lord is to sinners, let him by an eye of Faith, or spiritual
Contemplation look Christ in the face, and there he shall find the express
Characters of all that Glory. By these Means, or mediately in all these ways,
God may be seen, and is seen by his People. This threefold sight of God, is the
sight of Faith; it is by Faith that we see him in his Word; it is by Faith that
we see him in his Works; it is by Faith that we see him in his Son. Thus we are
to understand that of the Apostle concerning Moses, (Heb. 11.27.) He endured,
as seeing him that is invisible.

We may also distinguish of this sight of God two ways; there is a sight of God
first in grace, which is, though a true and real, yet an imperfect sight, of
which the Apostle speaks (1 Cor. 13.12.) Now we see as in a glass, darkly.
Secondly, There is a seeing of God in glory, which is there called A seeing of
him face to face: Of that sight Christ speaks ( Math. 5.8.) Blessed are the
pure in heart, for they shall see God. As they now see him in the dispensations
of his Grace here, so they shall see him in the givings forth, or
manifestations of his Glory to them hereafter. Now when Job complains, or
Elihu brings him in complaining, That he should not see God, we are not to
understand it, as if he despaired of ever seeing God in Glory, or had concluded
in his own breast, that he should never see him in his ways of Grace, or
professed that at present he had no sight at all of God by faith; for, though I
conceive Jobs sight of God by faith, or in the actings of his Grace, at that
time was very low and dim, yet some sight he had of him by faith, enough I am
sure to preserve and keep him from making any such negative Conclusion against
himself, that he should not see God in Glory. But that which he chiefly
intends, is, (...) Intendit oculos. Verbum viden i forense est, pro astare
little aliquo cum magna causa fiducia, ^a ut non demiss^ in terram vultu, sed
elato capite ad interroganturi respt^teniemque judicem oculos intrepide
dirig^re q is audeat. Bold.
that he feared he should not come to see him in such a day and way of trial,
as he before desired in the 23d Chapter, ( verse. 8, 9.) or that God would never
manifest himself so clearly in his Providence and dealings about his case in
this world, as might acquit him, and b^ing the matter in question to a full
state, that all might take notice of his wronged integrity. Job was under a
great Cloud at that time, and feared that God had cove^ed himself with a Cloud
also, (as the Church bemoaned her self, Lam. 3.44.) and therefore said, I shall
not see him; I shall not ^ee him as a Judge acquitting me, and giving sentence
for me. Some conceive, that the Hebrew word rendered Seeing, refers to a person
brought before a Judge, for the trial of his Cause, and standing before him,
not as a guilty Malefactor, with a heavy heart, and a down-look, but as a man
conscious of his own innocence, with much honest boldness, and well tempered
confidence. The words following intimate such a sense of that word, Although
thou say, thou shall not see him, (that is, be b^ought to trial,) yet
Judgment is before him, he will certainly try thee. This I take to be the most
proper Explication of these words, Although thou say, thou shall not see him.

Job spoke this as the worst of his case, as that which was a greater grief and
misery to him, than all his other miseries and griefs, that God would not set
him in a clear light before others, or that himself should not have a clear
light from God concerning his condition.

Hence Note; The sight of God, or Gods discovery of himself in any dark case,
is very sweet to an upright and gracious soul.

Job had begged for this once and again, though possibly, as Elihu would here
convince him, he was something too forward in it, and did not enough reflect
upon himself; yet as he had often desired it, so doubtless it was exceeding
much upon his heart, that he might have a clear discovery from God. The
Apostle, in somewhat a like case, in being aspersed in his Ministry, says, We
are made manifest unto God, (2 Cor. 5.11.) It pleased him that he was manifest
unto God: But when God is pleased to manifest himself unto a Soul, how pleasing
is that? When we can say, now we see God, we see him clearing up our way,
clearing up our integrity, clearing up our state, how satisfying is it! And as
it is most sweet and satisfying to see God clearing up our state to our own
consciences, so it is exceeding sweet to see him clearing up our actions to the
eye of the world; as the Apostle spoke in the same place, We are manifest unto
God, and I trust als^ are made manifest in your consciences. As if he had said,
we hope, God has discovered us to you, and your consciences do also attest
with us and for us what we are. Light is sweet (the light of the air, says
Solomon) and it is pleasant to behold the Sun, the Sun in the firmament; how
much more sweet is the light of divine favor, as also of our own faithfulness,
shining into our hearts, and upon our ways, so that we are able to say, now we
see the Lord graciously rolling away our reproach, owning us, and taking our
part before and against all the opposing contradicting wo^ld!

Secondly, Note; A godly man may lose the sight and present apprehension of
God, as owning of him, and taking care of him.

It is so often as to our spiri^ual estate, and it may be so, as to our outward
state; hence those many complainings which we find in the Psalms, and those
many deprecations, as to the hiding of Gods face; David would feign have kept
sight of God, O how he desired to see him, to behold him! yet many times he did
not, neither as to the assurance of his spiritual interest, Saepe deus ostendit
faciem suam, sed non ita ut cupitait homines, ideoque non vident se videre, ut
ita dic^m. Coc:
nor as to the comforts of his outward condition, ( Psalm. 13.1.) ( Psalm. 27.9.)
( Psalm. 30.7.) As God sometimes shows himself in a kind of cloud or darkness,
in fire and tempest, which is very terrible to the soul; so he at other times
discovers himself only a little, or gives but a glimpse of himself clearly, to
stir up further desi es of seeing him, and to make us weary of all we see in
this world: in these cases we may be said not to see God when we see him. Many
godly men are in such a dark condition, that they think God hides his face
from them in displeasu^e, when indeed he does not, but only tries them, to see
what is in them, and whether they will obey him in hope and pa^ience, and keep
close to him in holy walkings, even when he seems to depart from them, and
withdraw his presence.

Thirdly, Observe; Good men are apt sometimes to make over-sad conclusions
against themselves,

As evil men are apt to make over-good conclusions for themselves, they doubt
not but they shall see and enjoy God. O what presumptuous thoughts have men,
and what peremptory, though groundless, conclusions do they make for themselves
upon false and rotten premises! they will say, they know God, and are known of
God, they see God, and enjoy God, when they know not the meaning, much less
have tasted the comfort of knowing God, or of being known by him, of seeing
God, or of enjoying him. These mysterious experiences are not every man's meat,
nor every man's matters, who makes title to the knowledge of God. The Apostle
says expressly, (1 John 2.4.) He that says I know him, and keeps not his
Commandments, is a liar, and the truth is not in him. And again, ( Chap. 3.6.)
Whosoever sins (that is, loves and lives in sin) has not seen him, neither
known him. Yet how many are there, far from keeping the Commandments of God,
far from a holy life, yea far from a holy state, so far from such a holy life,
as of which it may be said in a Gospel sense, that they sin not, that indeed
they do nothing else but sin! yet these are apt to conclude, they see God, they
see him by faith, they know him, they doubt not but he is their God. Now as
many carnal men are apt to make false conclusions to themselves of an interest
in God, when there is no such matter, kindling a fire, and compassing
themselves about with their own sparks, as the Prophet speaks, ( Isa. 50.11.)
that is, with vain conceits of their own blowing up, that all is well with
them; when all that they, who do so, shall have at Gods hand, is, they shall
lie down in sorrow. So on the other side, godly men often times make sad
conclusions against themselves, they say (as Job in the Text) they shall not
see him; who though (as was showed in opening the Text) he did not conclude
against his sight of God by grace, or that he had no sight of him by faith, yet
he had not a comfortable sight as to his present enjoyment, and he doubted
whether ever he should in this world. Jonah made such a conclusion ( Chap.
2.4.) Then I said, I am cast out of thy sight. As Hezekiah said in his
sickness, ( Isa. 38.11.) I shall not see the Lord, even the Lord in the Land of
the living; that is, I shall die, and shall no more go into the house of the
Lord, to behold the beauty of the Lord, and to enquire in his Temple, which was
the one thing, even the only thing (in this life) which David desired and
resolved to seek after, ( Psalm. 27.4.) So many, while they live, are apt to
make such conclusions, they shall see God no more, they shall not see him as
long as they live, they are afraid they shall never have comfort more, nor
peace more, while they are in this world, while they are on this side heaven;
yet whether ever they shall come to see him in heaven, is their greatest, their
saddest, their most heart-disquieting and heartbreaking doubt and fear. And
indeed as we cannot see God, until he gives us eyes, so we cannot believe we
shall see him, until he gives us hearts. Many times his dealings, both as to
outward terrible providence, and inward terrors, are so dark, that we can see
nothing but darkness, nor say any thing but as Job is here charged to say, that
we shall not see him. Yea, God does often hide himself from his people on
purpose to try whether they will trust him and wait upon him under such
withdrawings, for salvation, whether temporal or eternal, ( Isal. 45.15.) Thou
art a God that hidest thy self, O God of Israel, the Savior: Let us therefore
take heed of saying, he will be for ever hidden, or that we shall never see,
nor behold him as a Savior; say not it is so dark with us, that as now we see
no light, so our night shall never have a morning.

Fourthly, From these words, Although thou say thou shall not see him, Note,
A good man is apt to give his heart and tongue too much liberty.

We should watch our hearts, to keep out or cast out vain thoughts, we should
strangle distrustful and unbelieving thoughts in the very birth, that so our
tongues may never bring them forth, nor publish them to the offense of others.
Thou have said, thou shall not see him. But when our unbridled tongues have run
at random, and spoken what is not right, yet God will do what is right, as the
next words assure us.

Yet Judgment is before him. These words plainly intimate, that Jobs scope,
when he said he should not see God, was, that he should not see him as a Judge
clearing up his cause, or appearing to vindicate the wrong done him, and to do
him right. As if Elihu had said, Whatever thy opinion is concerning God, that
he will never appear in thy cause to do thee right, yet know this (O Job)
Judgment is before him, and therefore I advise thee, be thou better persuaded
both of his presence with thee, and of his providence over thee. The word
rendered Judgment, is that from which one of the Patriarks had his name, and it
is a great elegancy, ( Genesis 49.16.) Dan shall Judge his people. The proper name
Dan, is the same with the Verb which follows, shall Judge.

When Judgment is said to be before the Lord, it may be taken three ways, (so
we find it in the Sc ipture) First, we read there of Judgment as it is opposed
to mercy. These terrible and dreadful Judgments of God are every where spoken
of. Secondly, Judgment is opposed to imprudence and want of understanding or
discretion; Judgment is a wise and clear sight or apprehension of things; as
we say such a one is a Judicious man, or a man of a great Judgment. Thirdly,
Judgment is opposed to injustice or to un^ighteousness; thus we do judgment
and justice. Many have a great stock of judgment or understanding, who yet
will do little judgment, that is, little justice, they have a right
understanding of things, yet will do little or nothing right. Here, when it is
said, Judgment is before him, we are to understand it in the two latter senses;
for though it be a great truth that judgment as opposed to mercy, is before the
Lord, And he shall have judgment without mercy, that has showed no mercy,
though (as the Apostle adds in the same place James 2.13.) Mercy rejoices (or
glories) against Judgment; The Lord has judgments, all manner of judgments
about him, yet that notion of judgment does not belong to this place, but the
two latter. Judgment is before him; that is, he is a God of infinite
understanding and wisdom, he sees every thing to the utmost, he goes to the
bottom of every man's case, yea, to the very bottom of every man's heart; he
sees every action quite through, and every person: And as he knows the truth of
every man's cause and case, so he will do every man right, according to the
merit of his cause and case. Justice and Judgment are the habitation of his
throne, while clouds and darkness are round about him, (Psalm. 97.2.) that is,
though present dispensations are obscure (as in Jobs case) yet both the
procedure and dealings of God, as also the issue or determination which he
gives in every matter, is just and righteous to all men, as well as gracious
and comfortable to good and upright-hearted men. Thus, Judgment, or this
judgment is always before him, that is, he has a clear sight of it, and he
is ready to do it.

Hence Note, First, God has a right and clear apprehension of all persons and
actions;

His understanding is infinite. The Lord is (as Hannah spoke in her
Thanksgiving-Song, 1 Samuel 2.3.) a God of knowledge, and by him actions are
weighed; That is, he knows them exactly, to a grain, as we do the weight of
those things which we have laid in an even Balance. It is required of Judges
(in that advice which Jethro gave to Moses, Exodus 18.21.) That they should be
able men, that is, (not so much men of able purses, as) of able parts, men of
able judgment, and of more than common understanding, even such as were able
to look through every man's Cause that came before them. Such is the ability of
the Lords understanding to the full, he is Omniscient, He is light, and in him
is no darkness at all. And as in him there is no darkness, so nothing is dark
to him; the most intricate and knotty Case, the most ravel'd and vexed Cause
that ever was, is plain and evident before his eyes, with whom we have to do,
and who has to do with us. Judgment is before him; neither is there any
Judgment before any other in comparison of him; God has so much light, that
Men and Angels are to him but darkness; God sees so much, that all others may
be said not to see, or to be stark blind; even those Judges may be called
blind, who are not blinded, we may say they have no eyes, whose eyes are not
put out with gifts, compared with God. How blind then are those Judges, who are
blinded? and whose eyes are put out, either by prejudice or passion, by hopes
or fears! it cannot be, but Judgment must be before God, because as he clearly
sees, and fully understands whatsoever comes before him, so nothing can divert
or biass him from doing every man right, according to his sight and
understanding. Judgment is before him.

Hence Note, Secondly, God will do right to every man, as sure as he knows the
right of every man.

There are many who know what is right, who know whose Cause is right, yet will
not do right. But as sure as God knows every man's righ^, so certainly he will
do him right. Abraham pleaded thus with God, Shall not the Judge of all the
Earth do right? (Genesis 18.25.) Certainly, he will do right, he cannot but do
right; Judgment is before him. The Scripture is express, He will reward every
man (and award to every man) according to his works. Every man shall have as he
is; for (as the Apostle speaks, 1 Cor. 4.6.) He shall bring to light the hidden
things of darkness, and make manifest the counsels of the heart; and then
shall every man have praise of God; that is, every man shall have it, who is
fit for it; every man shall have praise, who is (as we say) praiseworthy, how
much soever he has been dispraised, slurr'd in his credit, unworthily dealt
with, and accused in this world. God will not hold, or detain the truth of men
in unrighteousness, though men hold both the truth of God, and the truth of
men (the truth of their Causes) in unrighteousness. Judgment is before the
Lord.

Fu^ther, That Particle which we render yet, gives us this Note.

God is never a whit the less Righteous, because it does not appear to us that
he is so. Although thou say, thou shall not see him, yet Judgment is before
him. The ways of God are often secret, but none of them are unjust; Judgment
is before him, even then, when we think i^ is farthest off from him. Therefore,
if we will give God the glory of govern^ng the world, and of ordering all our
personal conditions, we must not measure him by the things we see, or which
appear; for we cannot see the measure of his Judgment by what appears, that
which appears to us is not his Judgment, something else is his judgment, and
he in the close will make his judgment clear to all men, he will make it
appear that judgment is his, though what his judgment is does not appear. The
mis-apprehensions, or mis-constructions of men do not at all retard or stop the
righteousness of God, as the Apostle speaks in another case ( Romans 3.3.) Shall
the unbelief of man make the Faith of God (that is, the Faithfulness of God)
of none effect? God forbid; God will be Faithful and True, though all the world
be Unbelievers and Liars. Now, as the unbelief of man cannot make the
Faithfulness of God of none effect; so our not believing that Judgment
proceeds, or our saying it is delayed, does not at all take off God from
righteousness in doing Judgment; he is doing Judgment righteously, whatever
apprehensions men have of his doings. Judgment is before him; Therefore trust
thou in him.

Elihu according to the first reading of the former words, exhorts Job to
Repentance, Judge thy self; and here he exhorts him to Faith, Trust thou in
him. Judgment is before him, therefore trust thou in him, or wait and hope in
him; for seeing God is a Just and Righteous Judge, he will not neglect or
slight the Cause of any of his People; therefore they have all the reason in
the world to trust in him, and wait upon him. It is unbelief which makes haste,
Faith is content to wait and tarry.

The Original word has several significations. First, (...) a (...) Notat 1.
Dolere. 2. Parturire. 3. Manner, Perseverare. 4. Sperare. Forte per metaphoram,
quia animus sperans futur^m gaudium cum dolor parturit. Coc.
More general, to grieve, or be in pain and trouble. Secondly, In special, to
bring forth, or the pain of a woman in travel to bring forth; there is much
pain in that travel. Thus some translate here, Wait for him, as a woman in
travel waits for deliverance. Thirdly, As it signifies to have pain, and to
have that pain in bringing forth children, so to attend, to wait, to stay
quietly, and expect. Rest in the Lord (says David, Psalm. 37.7.) and wait
patiently for him. We may give the reason of this signification from that
allusion. The woman though she be in pain, yet she patiently bears it, because
she has hope a man shall be born into the world, ( John 16.21.) A woman in
that pain, has not only patience but comfort under it, because she hopes a
child shall shortly be born, who will recompense all her sorrows, in bearing
and bringing him forth into the world. That Is the force of this word, Trust in
him. Thou art in pain, in trouble, in travel for the present, yet thou shall
have a blessed deliverance, thou shall certainly find, that it is not in vain
to trust upon God. Thus Elihu a^viseth Job to such a patience as a woman in
travel with child has, who bears her pains comfortably, being refreshed and
supported with an assurance, and fore-sense of that joy which she shall have,
being once delivered. Trust thou in him. I have in some other places of this
Book, met with this Point of trusting in God, Job said in the 13th Chapter of
this Book, ( verse. 15.) Though he slay me, yet will I trust in him; And
therefore I shall not stay to open that general duty, or the exercise of that
Grace, which here Elihu exhorts Job to, Trusting in, or waiting upon God. Only
from the Connection,

Note; First, It is our duty to wait and trust upon God;

And it is such a duty as will keep us close to all other duties; a mind staid
on God, is a mind fit to move about any good work whatsoever, which God calls
us unto.

Secondly, Put all together, Thou say, thou shall not see him, (thou art
doubtful whether ever things will mend,) yet Judgment is before him, therefore
trust.

Hence Note; When things are not clear to us, when we have no light about what
God is doing, or what he will do, yet it is our duty to trust and wait upon God.

We must wait upon God, and trust in him, though we do not see him, yea, though
we cannot see him, for Judgment is before him. That of the Prophet ( Isa.
50.10.) is a clear proof of this duty, (and some expound this Scripture
specially respecting outward dark providence, as others of inward darkness, or
darkness of spirit) Who is among you that fears the Lord, and obeys the
voice of his servants, that walks in darkness, and has no light (as Job
says here, I shall not see him) What shall a poor benighted soul do in that
case? The answer or advice follows) Let him trust in the name of the Lord,
and stay upon his God. How dark soever our condition is, yet it is our duty to
trust upon God; and if once we are enabled to give God the glory due to his
name, in confessing, that Judgment is before him, we shall readily trust upon
him, to order all things for us, though all things seem out of order, even to
amazement though we see heaven and earth, as it were, confounded, yet we shall
readily trust upon him, because we believe, that even then Judgment is before
him. How soon can he turn our darkness into light, who in the first Creation,
when all lay together in a confused heap, and darkness over all, b^ought forth
light and set all in order? The Lord can command light out of darkness, good
out of evil, order out of confusion, and he can do all this easily, and at an
instant; therefore whatever the appearances of things are, let not us judge
according to appearance, but hope and wait, and stick to what God has
promised. Though providence appear cross to promises and prophesies, yet they
never frustrate either. Let us also be sure to stick to the commandments of
God, for we may rest assured, God will stick to his promises. To keep
Commandments is our work, to keep promises is Gods work; though we fail much
in our work, God will not fail at all in his work: To believe this, is the
highest and truest work of faith. But if we are faithful in our work, the
keeping of Commandments, we have a further evidence, that God will be faithful
in his work, the keeping or fulfilling of promises, (a great part, the most
spiritual part of Gods fulfilling promises, being his enabling of us to keep
Commandments) and then we shall be able to say, not only in faith, but from
experience, that Judgment is before him. And until we come to this conclusion
of faith in dark times, when we cannot see him, the soul never sits down in
rest. Nothing fixes the soul but trust in God; we are unquiet, yea we boil
with unquietness, and toss as the angry Sea with the winds, till we trust
fully upon God, upon his wisdom and power, upon his goodness and faithfulness,
and can say, let him do as seems good in his eyes; we know he is and will be
good to Israel, even to such as are of a clean heart. When we can once stay our
minds on God, we are quiet; but when we must bring God to our mind, and must
have God go our pace, or come at our time, and work in our way, (none of which
he will do, what a do soever we make to have it so) O how restless and troubled
are we, even like the troubled Sea when it cannot rest! And O how much of this
restless trouble discovers it self in the minds of many (that I say not the
most of) men, and all because they cannot trust God when they do not see him,
or because when they do not see him (which was Jobs failing) they say, they
shall not see him. If matters come not to pass according to their platform,
and model, or hit not the dates and days, the times and seasons which they
have fixed in their unscriptural Calendar, or by a mistake of the Scripture
Calendar, they are ready to say, they shall not see him, their hopes are as the
giving up of the ghost, that is, they give all for lost, and past recovery.
Many trust God (as they do some men) no farther than they see him; they are the
worst and coursest sort of men, whom we trust no otherwise. How dishonorable
then, how infinitely below God is such a trust? Elihu would have Job (and so
should we) trust God, though he could not see him, and said he should not. Thou
have said, thou shall not see him, yet trust in him.

Lastly, From the illative particle, therefore (that is, because Judgment is
before him) trust thou in him,

Note hence; The consideration of the Righteousness and Justice of God, is a
mighty argument to provoke us to trust him, and wait upon him.

Trust is not every bodies due; some (as we speak proverbially) are to be
trusted no farther than a man can throw a Millstone, that is, they are not to be
trusted at all: Trust (I say) is not every bodies due: but to trust God is
every bodies duty, yea and interest too, for he is clothed as much with
righteousness and justice, as he is with strength and power. Will you not trust
an honest man, will you not trust a wise man? We can come to a height of
confidence in man sometimes, if we think him a man of judgment and wisdom, of
honesty and faithfulness, we can trust all we have in such a man's hand; how
much more should we say to God, seeing Judgment is before him, therefore will
we trust in him! We have an eminent Scripture, urging this duty upon this
ground, ( Isa. 30.18.) The Lord is a God of Judgment (Judgment is there taken
in the same notion as here in the Text, he is a wise and a just God, the Lord
is a God of judgment, what follows) Blessed are they that wait for him.
There can be nothing said, more urging, more encouraging to wait and trust on
God, to do us right, then this, He is a God of Judgment, a righteous God,
Judgment is before him.

Thus far of the good counsel which Elihu gave Job in this his dark and
deserted state; and counsel it was worthy to be embraced with both arms, and
with an open breast; and that Job had need of it, he shows in the next words,
while he tells Job and us, it was not so with him yet, as appeared by the sad
hand of God upon him, and his own distemper under it.

JOB, Chap. 35. Verse. 15, 16. 15. But now because it is not so, he has visited
in his anger, yet he knows it not in great extremity.

16. Therefore does Job open his mouth in vain: he multiplieth words without
knowledge.


IN the close of the former verse, Elihu called upon and exhorted Job to a
patient reliance, and trust on God, Judgment is before him, therefore trust
thou in him; here in the 15th verse he shows, that, the reason why God visited
him so sorely, and yet continued his visitation upon him, was because he did
not, as he ought, patiently trust in, and rely upon him.

There are several readings of this verse, but I shall only mention one,
besides our own, and having stayed a little about that, go on to the
explication of the Text, as it lies in order before us. Some render thus;

But know now, his anger has visited thee but a little, (Hebr: Nunc autem cito
quod paululum te visitavit ira ipsius, neque inquisivit multum admodum. Merc:

Scito perexiguum esse, quo te deus iratus plectit, nisi leviter in te inqui
ere m^luisset. Bez:


nothing) neither has he made any great inquisition. The sense of the verse,
according to this rendering, rises thus; As if Elihu had said, God has dealt
with thee O Job, far better than thou have dealt with him, or then thou have
cause to expect; he has not laid his hand so heavy upon thee, as thy iniquity
has deserved, and yet thou complainest much of his severity; whereas indeed he
has not strictly inquired into the multitude of thy sins, which if he had
done, he would certainly have brought upon thee, a greater multitude of
afflictions, he would have afflicted thee much more: Thou art too well used to
complain thus; That Is the sum of this rendering, which the learned Authors of
it make fairly out from the Original, to whom I refer the Reader, and shall
only offer two notes from it, for instruction.

First, The sorest afflictions that fall upon sinners in this life are little
or nothing to what God might lay upon them. There is no condition here actually
so bad, but possibly it might be worse; though the darkness of night be upon
us, yet it may be darker with us; God can make a night so dark, that the former
darkness may be called light; God can add so much bitterness to that which is
very bitter, so much weight to that burden of affliction, which is already very
heavy, that the former bitter may be called sweet, and that former weight of
affliction, light. Are any poo^, sick, or pained, God can make them poorer,
sicker, and so increase their pain, that former poverty, sickness, pain, may
go for riches, health, and ease. And as present sufferings of one kind or
other, are but little to what they may be, so they are but little to what we
have deserved they should be: The least mercy is more than we deserve, and the
greatest affliction is less than we deserve. Et nunc quia nihil est quod
visitavit ira ejus. Drus:
He has visited thee little or nothing, (so the word is) says Elihu,
according to this reading of the Text. The Lord has not only not visited thee
too much, O Job, but he may be said, not to have visited thee at all, or the
All of thy visita^ion is nothing to that which the Lord could have brought upon
thee. David gives a general assertion near this concerning the dealings of the
Lord, in his angry dispensations, ( Psalm. 103.10.) He has not dealt with us
after our sins, nor rewarded us according to our iniquities; that is, our sins
and our iniquities might have born out the Justice of God in laying heavier
evils and troubles upon us, than yet he has done. Sinners never have their
full punishment till they come to hell. As the sweetest joys and strongest
consolations which the godly find and feel on earth, are only tastes and
first fruits of that they shall have in heaven; so all the sorrows and
sufferings of the wicked in this world, are but tastes, light touches and
beginnings of sorrow, compared with the pains and sorrows of the next world,
where sinners shall be paid their wages in full.

Vtrumque visitandi and recensendi vel cognoscendi verbum in hoc loco judicis
vel magistratis in peccatores animedversionem inquisitionem punitioni
conjunctum importat. Bold:
Secondly, From the latter part of the verse thus translated, Neither has he
made any great inquisition; that is, he has not taken strict knowledge of thy
sins, though a multitude, though even past number; though there be abundance of
them, and they abounding in sinfulness, yet he has not made any great
inquisition after them;

Hence Note; The Lord does not severely mark the sins of his people, no not the
multitude nor magnitude of their sins, to punish them.

( Psalm. 130.3.) If thou Lord should mark iniquity, implying that the Lord
does not mark (in the sense here intended) if thou should mark iniquity) O
Lord, who shall stand? The word in that Psalm rendered to mark, notes, first, to
watch, or to observe with exactest diligence, (...)
and is therefore in the Noun rendered a watch Tower, upon which a man is placed
to take observation of all things that are done, and of all persons that pass
by, or approach and come near. A Watchman placed upon a high-Tower, is bound
industriously and critically to observe all Passengers, and passages, all that
his eye can reach: So says the Text, If thou should mark as a Watchman,
and eye with rigor every thing that passes from us, Who could stand? That is,
make good his Cause in the day of his judgment and trial before thee?
Secondly, The word signifies to keep in mind, to lay up, to have, as it were,
a store and stock, a memorial or record, of such and such things by us. In that
notion it is said ( Genesis 37.11.) Joseph's Brethren envied him, but his Father
observed the saying; he marked what Joseph spoke about his Dreams, he laid it
up, and did not let it pass away as a D^eam, or as a vision of the night: Thus
in the Psalm, If the Lord should mark iniquity, if he should treasure up our
sins in his memory, and keep them by him, who were able to stand when accounted
with? The Lord in a way of grace, sees as if he saw not, and winks at us
oftentimes when we do amiss, as he is said to have done at those times, the
times of ignorance, when not only many things, but even every thing was done
amiss, and out of order, in the dark Gentile world, before the approach of
Gospel light, ( Acts 17.30.) And the times of this ignorance God winked at, but
new commands all men every where to repent. That is, the Lord took little
notice of those untaught times, in comparison of that strict notice which he
will take of these times; concerning which, he gave command to his Apostles, Go
and teach all Nations; and yet the strictest notice which he takes of our sins
in these times, is but little to what he might.

So much from that Translation of the Text; our own runs thus.

Verse. 15. But now because it is not so, he has visited in his anger; yet he
knows it not in great extremity. We must expound this Verse in Connection with
the latter part of the former.

But now because it is not so. What is not so? what is missing? what is
wanting? What had Job done amiss? or what had he mist to do? Elihu seems to
answer, he has mist the doing of that duty to which he was moved in the close
of the foregoing Verse, expressed in those words, Trust thou in him, or wait
upon him: But now because it is not so; that is, Because thou do not put
forth such acts of holy confidence, and patient waiting upon God as thou
ought, and as I admonished thee to do, therefore God is engaged, and even
compelled to treat thee thus roughly and severely, He has visited in his
anger. As if he had said, Though thou have professed a trust in God, yet thou
do not trust in him fully, as becomes thee, yea, thou seem sometimes (as a
man forlorn) to cast up thy hopes; therefore, because thou do not trust in
him, because it is not so as I have exhorted and directed thee, the Lord has
visited in anger. Mr. Braughton renders, But now for missing, his anger does
visit. For missing; that is, for missing of duty, or for not acting up to duty,
for not trusting fully in the Lord, the Lord has visited thee in his anger.
This sense is obvious and commodious according to our reading. But now because
it is not so, Homo tentatur et in examen vocatur ut probetur ejus spes et
patientia; quandoquidem igitur illa non extat, invasit ira ejus, qua odit, et
amolitur peccat m, etiam in iis ques diligit, et salv^s vult maxim. Coc.
He has visited in his anger, or strictly, his anger has visited;

That is, God has heavily afflicted thee. God is far from all passion and
perturbation of mind, only he is said to be angry, or to visit in his anger,
when he does that which anger produces among men; when he casts down and
punishes, when he lays his hand sorely upon the Creature, then he is said to
be angry, then His anger has visited. The word notes quick breathing in the
Nostrils; anger appears, or vents it self there; as it is said of Paul, when
Saul (Acts 9.1.) And Saul yet breathing out threatenings, and slaughter against
the Disciples of the Lord, went unto the High Priest. You might see anger, as
it were foam, yea flame out of his mouth, (...) Ira ejus visitavit.
and evaporate at his nostrils. Thus says Elihu, Because it is not so, his
anger Has visited.

To visit, is properly to go to, and see any person whom we respect and love;
thus we visit friends in civility and courtesy. Secondly, To visit is an act
of pity and mercy; and thus we visit the sick, the widow, and the fatherless
( James 1.27.) Pure Religion, and undefiled before God, and the Father, is to
visit the fatherless and widows in their affliction; that is, to go to them in
pity, either for the supply of their wants by our purse, or for the comforting
of their hearts by our counsel. Thirdly, We visit in care, as well as in
kindness, that is, when we go to our Families or Flocks, or places of charge,
wheresoever they are, and see that, or whether, all things are well and right
with them, or well, and rightly done toward them, according to the rules that
such persons under our charge ought to act, and live by: Thus in Colleges and
Hospitals, there is a visitation of care, to make enquiry of persons in trust,
about persons and things under their trust.

To the Point in hand; there is a twofold visitation of God.

First, He visits in love and mercy, ( Ruth. 1.6.) Then she (that is Naomi)
arose with her Daughter in Law, that she might return from the Country of
Moab, for she had heard in the Country of Moab, how that the Lord had visited
his people in giving them bread. That is, God had showed them kindness and
mercy in relieving them from that devouring famine. Again, ( Genesis 21.6.) And
the Lord visited Sarah, as he had said; that is, he gave her the promised mercy
of a Son. Once more, ( Luke 1.68.) Blessed be the Lord God of Israel, for he
has visited, and redeemed his People; and that is a blessed visitation indeed,
which brings redemption. Thus the Scripture often speaks of Gods visitation in
mercy.

Secondly, There is a visitation of God in anger, wrath and judgment. The Law
says ( Exodus 20.4, 5.) Thou shall not make to thy self any graven Image, etc.
Thou shall not bow down thy self to them, nor serve them; for I the Lord thy
God am a jealous God, visiting the iniquity of the Fathers upon the Children,
unto the third and fourth Generation of them that hate me: That is punishing
the iniquity of the Fathers upon the Children, these Children continuing in
their Fathers ways, to do sinfully; such Children as take up the evil examples,
or tread in the bad steps of their Forefathers, shall suffer for it. The
Prophet at once upbraided the impudent Jews, and threatened them in this
Language, ( Jer. 6.15.) Were they ashamed when they had committed abominations?
nay, they were not ashamed, neither could they blush; therefore they shall fall
among them that fall at the time that I visit them, they shall be cast down,
says the Lord. Again, ( Isa. 26.14.) Therefore have thou visi^ed and destroyed
them. There is a visitation for destruction, that is a sad visitation. In this
sense we read of a time of visitation ( Jer. 8.12. Jer. 10.15.) We read of days
of visitation, ( Hosea 9.7.) The days of visitation are come, the days of
recompense are come. We read also of a year of visitation, ( Jer. 23.12.) For I
will bring evil upon them, even the year of their visitation, says the Lord.
As also ( Chap. 11.23.) I will bring evil upon the men of Anathoth, even the
year of their visitation. This is the visitation here spoken of; it is a time,
a day, a year of sore visitation with thee, O Job. Because it is not so, he
has visited in his anger.

Hence Note, First, God expects the work of Faith and Patience, when his
afflicting hand is upon us.

Faith has much work to do at all times, but most in times of affliction.
There is also a use of two sorts of patience in our best days; the patience of
laboring in Gods work, and the patience of waiting for the reward of our work,
after all our labors: But in sad days the Lord expects we should exercise
both patience in suffering, and in waiting for deliverance out of all our
sufferings; then it is that both Faith and Patience, trusting and waiting must
have their perfect work.

Secondly Note; When the Lord does not find or see, as he expects, the work of
Faith and Patience in a time of affliction, he will afflict more and more until
he finds or works it.

This is it which Elihu says in the Text, Because it is not so, he has
visited in his anger. Job was sorely afflicted before, but now he is visited in
anger, because he did not manifest such trust in God as he expected in that
condition. As when the wicked repent not of their sins under the punishing hand
of God, he will punish them more and more, even seven times more for their
sins, ( Levit. 26.41.) So when good men act not their Graces, believe not,
trust not under the afflicting hand of God, he usually afflicts them more and
more, gives them soarer stripes, and lays yet heavier burdens on them. When
God misseth what he locked for, we may quickly feel what we looked not for. Mr.
Braughtons Translation speaks the Point fully, But now for missing, his anger
does visit. Man seldom misseth t^ouble from God, when God misseth duty from
man; and it is a me cy that he does not: it is man's mercy when God minds him of
his deficiencies in duty, though by a smart visiting rod. Thus the Lord spoke
of David's Seed, (and it is to be understood of all the Seed of Christ, whom
David typed, Psalm. 89.) If his children forsake my Law, (v. 30, 31.) Then
(verse. 32.) will I visit their transgressions with the Rod, etc. How true this
charge of Elihu was, as to Jobs omission of duty, I shall not stay to enquire;
only this we know, Job had professed trust in God, yet because it was mingled
with so much complaint, with so many unbelieving expostulations, Elihu might
say the Lord missed the patience, trust and confidence, which he expected from
Job. Doubtless, more of all these should have appeared in him, and they should
have appeared more in that time of affliction. There are two things which God
looks for, and aims at in the time of our affliction; first, the mortifying
of corruptions, that they wo^k no more, at least no more so strongly as they
have done; secondly, The stirring up, and acting of our Graces, that they may
be more wo^king, and work more strongly than ever they have done. Where the
Lord sees not these effects of affliction, that our sins grow less, and our
graces more, that we complain less, and trust or believe more, we are like to
be afflicted more, and he will discover his anger more. Because it is not so,
he has visited in his anger. And thence

Note, Thirdly; Distrust or impatience under the affl^cting hand of God, or our
not trusting God in our worst condition patiently, is a very provoking sin.

We provoke the Lord to visit us in his anger, when we do not trust in his
mercy. Our not trusting God must needs provoke him to anger; for when we do not
trust him, we question him; distrust or unbelief questions all that God is, and
all that God has promised, it questions his Truth, and his Faithfulness, his
Power, his Mercy, and his Goodness; all these, which are the glory of God, and
in all which the sons of men ought to glorify him, these are all questioned
and darkened, when we put not forth acts of trust and reliance upon God, in
times of greatest affliction and extremity. Is it not then a provoking sin, I
say not to withdraw trust from God, and give it to an arm of flesh, but not to
put out fresh and full acts of trust upon God, let our affliction or extremity
be what it will! The Children of Israel were in great extremity at the Red Sea,
a mighty Army pursuing them at the heels to destroy them, and mighty waters
being before them, ready to swallow them up; in these straits (whilst they
should have done their utmost to get, and assure God to be their Friend) the
Psalmist tells us, They provoked him, (Psalm. 106, 7.) But wherein lay their
provocation? that Scripture says, They remembered not the multitude of his
mercies: The former mercies of the Lord did not strengthen their trust in
present troubles; that was one provocation. And as former mercies did not
strengthen their trust, so the present trouble drew out their distrust, as
another Scripture assures, reporting their behavior in it ( Exodus 14.11.) And
they said to Moses, Because there were no Graves in Egypt, have thou taken us
away to dye in the Wilderness? Wherefore have thou dealt thus with us, to
carry us forth out of Egypt? What were these fearful fore-casts, these amazing
bodements of an unavoidable (as they apprehended) ruin, but the overflowings
of unbelief, or distrust in God; and this was another provocation. Former
mercies are forgotten, yea eaten up by unbelief, as the seven lean Kine in
Pharaohs dream, eat up the fat ones, and present difficulties are aggravated by
unbelief, as if all the power of God could not remove and overcome them. And
will not the Lord (think you) visit in anger for such a sin as this?

Again, As Elihu does not say barely, he has visited, but he has visited in
his anger, or his anger has visited, so consider, who was it that was thus
visited in anger? It was Job, a Godly man, a man perfect and upright.

Hence note, Fourthly; God visits or afflicts, even his own people, his elect,
and choicest servants, with fatherly anger, when they displease and provoke him.

We find the Scripture speaking expressly of the anger of God toward the best
of his servants, even toward a Moses, (as himself made confession, Deuter.
1.37.) when they displease him; Also the Lord was angry with me for your sakes,
saying, thou also shall not go in thither. Moses was a most meek man, the
meekest man upon the face of the earth, nor was he an inferior in any other
grace, yet the Lord was angry wi h him, and angry with him upon that special
occasion, his unbelief, ( Numb. 20.12.) And the Lord spoke unto Moses and
Aaron, because ye believe me not, to sanctify me in the eyes of the children
of Israel, therefore etc. We read of the Lords anger breaking out against Aaron
for another sin, ( Numb. 12.9.) The anger of the Lord was kindled against them,
that is, against Aaron and Miriam, because they had spoken against Moses,
(verse. 1.8.) Aaron was the High Priest, and as he was high in office, so
eminent in grace; and doubtless Miriam was a very gracious woman, yet the Lord
was not only angry with them, but exceeding angry; his anger waxed hot against
them and kindled, when they forgot their duty to Moses, and remembered not their
distance with reverence. Solomon in his prayer at the Dedication of the Temple,
speaks of the people of God collectively; If they sin against thee, and thou be
angry with them. The Lord is not only angry with the world, but angry with his
Church, not only angry with Babylon, but with Jerusalem. And as Solomon spoke
that of the whole Nation of the Jews, supposing they might fall under the
Lords anger all together as a body; so he did experience it sadly in his own
person, (1 Kings 9.11.) And the Lord was angry with Solomon, because his heart
was turned from the Lord God of Israel, which had appeared unto him tw^ce. Wise
Solomon departed from God through an evil heart of unbelief and vanity, after
the Lord had come and appeared to him more than once in grace and savor; and
the bitter effects or fruits of that departure, appeared to him shortly after,
the Lord (says that Scripture) was angry with Solomon; and the sequel of his
History tells us, there went out very hot displeasure against him. As these
Scriptures are a proof of the Lords anger kindling against his people when they
sin; so we find the Church represented praising the Lord for quenching the fire
of his ange^, ( Isa. 12.1.) And in that day thou shall say, O Lord, I will
praise thee: though thou wast angry with me, thine anger is turned away, and
thou comfortest me. When we turn from God, his anger is turned against us, and
when we turn to God, his anger is turned away from us. When the Lord is angry,
what can comfort us, but the turning away of his anger? And by the very act of
turning away his anger, he comforts us, though all the world be angry with us.

But some may say, How does the Lord, who is said to love his people with an
everlasting love, visit them in anger? To clear that, we may distinguish of
anger.

First, There is correcting anger: Secondly, there is consuming or destroying
anger. Destroying anger is inconsistent with eve^lasting love, but not
correcting anger: correcting anger may be very grievous, therefore the Prophet
deprecates it, ( Jer. 10.24.) Correct me, O Lord, in Judgment, not in thy
anger. The Lord does often exercise (that is as often as there is cause, and we
give him cause too often to exercise) a smart and severe anger toward his own
people; but his consuming and destroying anger is the lot and portion of the
wicked; If his anger be kindled but a little (namely against his enemies)
blessed are they that trust in him; blessed are they that believe, when that
anger of the Lord breaks forth against unbelievers. Or we may state it thus;

First, God is angry with sinful persons; thus he is angry with the world, or
with wicked men.

Secondly, God is angry with persons for sinning, (there is a great difference
between these two; anger with sinful persons, and anger with persons for their
sin, or for sinning) and thus he is angry with his own people, even with the
godly when they sin, though not for every sin.

Further, We may distinguish of anger thus; There is anger mixed with a desire
of taking revenge upon those that we are ang^y with, a revengeful anger: thus
the Lord is angry only with the wicked. Of this anger Moses speaks, having
described a presumptuous sinner, who believes not only without a word, but
against the word, who when he hears the word of the curse, blesses himself
in his heart, saying, I shall have peace, though I walk in the imagination of
mine heart, to add drunkenness unto thirst; then the anger of the Lord and his
jealousy shall smoke against that man, etc. ( Deuteronomy. 29.19, 20.) Read more of
this revengeful anger of the Lord, ( Deuteronomy. 32.22, 41, 42.) Secondly, there is
anger with a desire to reform, and reclaim those that we are angry with: Thus
a loving and indulgent father is angry with his child, when he has committed a
fault; he is angry, not with an anger of desire to revenge, but with an anger
of desire to reform. And thus the Lord is angry with his own people, with his
choicest servants, and dearest children, when they forget their duty and play
the wantons.

Lastly, We may distinguish of anger thus; There is First, a temporary anger:
As there is a temporary faith in hypocrites, so (we may say) there is a
temporary anger in God against the faithful when offending; that is, he is
angry with them for a while, for a season: Sing unto the Lord, O ye Saints of
his, and give thanks at the remembrance of his Holiness, (says David, Psalm.
30.4.) But why does he call them to singing? we have the reason of it given at
the 5th verse, For his anger endures but a moment; he speaks there of the
Lords anger against his Saints and peculiar people: while they indeed have
cause to mourn for provoking the Lord to anger, they may also sing, both
because his anger endures but for a moment, that is, because (if that be all)
it endures not at all, (a moment is of no endurance) as also because in his
favor is life; weeping may endure for a night, but joy comes in the morning.
Once more, hear the Prophets report of the Lords anger, ( Micah 7.18.) Who is a
God like unto thee, that pardons iniquity, and passes by the transgression
of the remnant of his heritage; he retains not his anger for ever, because he
delights in mercy. God does not retain his anger for ever; that is, not long;
yea, that not for ever, is but a little while, a moment, and that but a small
moment, as the Prophet Isaiah spoke, ( Chap. 54.7.) As if he had said, The
Lords anger is not retained so long, as if it should be always retained; his
anger toward you is soon blown over, and gone, upon the matter (like a moment)
as soon as come. Such is the anger which God discovers toward his own people.

Secondly, There is an anger for ever, an abiding wrath, a fire of anger which
never goes out, nor can be put out, which is kindled in the breast of God
against ungodly men, and against them only as living and dying without
repentance, in their ungodliness. Job a godly man, was visited in the former,
not in this latter anger.

Yet for the fuller answer to this query, as it concerns Jobs case, I conceive
Elihu speaks with the highest and hardest toward him. For though it be a
truth, that the Lord discovers, as was showed before, a fatherly anger toward
his children when he chasteneth them for their sin, yet he chasteneth them
more, or rather, in love than in anger; As whom he loves, he rebukes and
chastens, (Rev. 3.19.) so he chastens and rebukes them in love. And as for Job,
whom God dearly loved, it is clear from the first and second Chapters of this
Book, that God afflicted him not for any special sin, or way of sinning, but
for his trial, and to set him up as a great pattern of patience to all
succeeding generations. Or we may say that God afflicted Job, not because of
any provocation which he had given him, but at Satan's instance and provocation,
( Chap. 2.3.) All that can be said for Elihu's help in saying that God visited
him in anger, is only this, That though Job had not provoked the Lord to visit
him in anger when he began to visit him, yet some impatient and over-bold
speeches of his, or that liberty of speech which he took in expostulating and
almost contesting with God about his afflictions, might cause him to visit him
in such anger as has been set forth in answer to the query. And now because it
is not so, because the Lord misseth those acts of grace, trust and patience,
which thy case calls thee to the exercise of, He has visited in his anger;
and what follows?

Yet he knows it not in great extremity. Et non advertit ad auctum valde. i.
e, Nihil discrevit ( sc: deus) qued non visitaret, etiamsi ea re visitatus
magis dolerer. Nam necesse erat visitatum ita tangi ut sentiret: quod fieri non
poterat, si non and pleraque and charissima quoque bona adimerentur. Coc:
Elihu seems to have spoken this turning himself to the company, and
complaining to them of Jobs insensibleness, Yet he knows not, etc.

Some refer this clause of the verse to God also, He has visited in his anger,
and takes no notice of the great increase, or of that which is greatly
increased; that is, God has spared nothing from his visitation, although the
party visited were never so much grieved or damnified in the loss and spoil of
his all. There was a necessity (says this Author) that he who was visited
should be so touched as to be sensible of the stroke; which could not be,
unless the greatest of his increase, and those things which were most dear to
him were taken away from him, or he were stripped naked and bereaved of them.

Our translation refers these words to the person visited, as if he, though
reduced to the greatest extremities, yet was not sensible of it, or took no
notice of what he suffered, or was done to him; Yet he knows it not in great
extremity. Who knows not? the Antecedent to he is Job, according to this
translation; because he knows not. But what did not Job know? First, He knew
not the dealings of God with him, to submit to them as he should. Secondly, He
knew not that there was such a miss or deficiency in the acting of his graces,
he perceived not how weak a soul he had in that weak body; his trust, his
faith, did not act, and yet he knew it not, or took no notice of his failing in
those duties. Thirdly, He has visited in his anger, yet he knows it not,
that is, he knows not the anger of God, who visits him. To know may be
taken three ways.

First, For the bare notion or apprehension of a thing; thus certainly Job did
know that he was visited, for he spoke often and enough of it.

Secondly, To know, is to consider, to lay a thing to heart, ( Isa. 1.3.) My
people does not know, Israel does not consider, the latter part is exegetical,
and expounds the former, My people does not know, that is, does not consider.
So ( Hos. 2.8.) She did not know that I gave her corn, etc. ( Psalm. 90.11.) Who
knows the power of thy anger? that is, who considers it? who weighes what the
anger of the Lord is? we have sweet thoughts, about the mercy, and love, and
goodness of God, yet it is little, very little of any of these that we know. The
love of God, which we delight to know, passes knowledge, ( Ephesians. 3.19.) But for
the anger of God, which is so dreadful, we seldom set our selves to the study
of it; none can know it comprehensively, and few seek or labor to know it
industriously, considerately.

Thirdly, To know, is to be under a due sense of what we know: We may know a
thing, and consider it, yet not have a feeling of it. I conceive we are to
understand the word know here, in these two latter senses; He knows it not;
that is, he does not consider, nor has he a due sense, either of the defect of
his own graces, that his faith acts not as it ought, that his trust performs
not its part as it should; nor does he know the anger of God in this
visitation; that is, he knows not, nor considers, the scope and meaning of
God in this angry dispensation. Yet he knows it not In great extremity.

(...) est (...) Multitudo, multum passim o^currit in Targ: Interdum in
Hebraismo. Merc.
The word signifies any kind of increase ( Mal. 4.2.) They shall go forth, and
grow up as the Calves of the Stall. So it is used ( Jer. 50.11.) Because ye are
grown fat, we put in the Margin, big or corpulent. (Lev. 13.5.) If the Plague
(of Leprosy he means) increase, grow great, and spread it self, then etc. Jobs
affliction was a great one at first, and it grew greater afterward: He was in
great extremity, or in extremities; of what? in great extremity, First, of loss
and poverty in his Estate; Secondly, of pain and torment in his Body; Thirdly,
of grief and anguish in his Soul: In all these he suffered, and suffered
extremely, or in great extremity. Mr. Broughton renders, Because Job knows
not this great plenty, namely, of sorrows, which compass him about.

This was the censure of Elihu upon Job, and Job had given Elihu too much
ground for this censure. Though Jobs Faith and trust were strongly at work
sometimes, yet they did not always continue their work in the same degree or
strength: and while he often complained in his extremity, that God dealt with
him as with an enemy, he did not well consider what that anger of God was, in
which he visited him, during the time of that great extremity: Y^^ he knows
it not in great extremity.

As this not knowing is referred to his weakness in acting his Graces; now, it
is not so, yet he knows it not;

Note; A godly man is not always sensible of his defects and failings in grace.

As some have little or no Grace, who yet conceit they have much ( Rev. 3.17.)
Thou say, I am rich, and increased in goods, and have need of nothing, and
know not that thou art wretched and miserable, and poor, and naked. So
others who have grace, yea, much grace in the habit (as Job had) may be very
insensible how little it acts, yea they may suppose it acts much, when the
actings of it are intermitted or extremely suppressed by passion and
corruption: They may think their Faith strong, or that they trust fully in God,
they may think themselves patient and humble under the hand of God, and yet be
greatly defective in the working of all these Graces; I mean not such a
deficiency only, as is common to all believers (the best come short in the
exercise of grace) but some great deficiency may be, and yet the soul not
sensible of it. As some are over-sensible of their failings, complaining that
they have no Faith, no Patience, when they not only have Faith and Patience, as
to their Being, but as to their working also, and possibly, working well. (It
is a different work of the Spirit, to act and stir up Grace in us, and to
discover to us the actings and stirrings of Grace) Now as some godly men act
Grace, and know it not, so in others that are godly Grace acts not, and they
know it not; Faith is down, and they know it not; they can bear little or
nothing patiently, yet they take no notice of it. Thus the words of Elihu
concerning Job, he knows it not, referr to the former part of the verse, It
is not so; that is, his Graces act not, yet he takes no notice of it, but
thinks Faith and Patience, with other Graces, work well enough.

Secondly, As not knowing refers to the visitation of God, He has visited him
in his anger, and he knows it not (yea, though) in great extremity, though he
have a very hard time of it.

Hence Note, First, A good man may not only be visited, but extremely visited
by the hand of God;

He may be under many extremities at once; extremely visited in Body, extremely
in Mind, extremely in his Relations, extremely in his Name, ext^^amly in all
his worldly concernments. As there is no outward evil, for the matter, so none
for the degree, but a good man may be in it. Let us be moderate in judging
those, who are in the extremest extreamities of suffering.

Secondly, Note; Some good men, or good men sometimes under very great
afflictions, are not sensible of the hand of the Lord upon them.

As a good man may receive many mercies, and yet not observe (at present) how,
or from whom he receives them, so he may be under angry visitations or
dispensations in great extremity, and not mind the dealing of God with him in
it, nor what he intends by it; yea, he may complain of the burden, and cry
out under the pressure, yet not know it at that time for his own good, for his
humbling or purging. The Prophet says concerning Ephraim, (Hos. 7.9.)
Strangers have devoured his strength, and he knows it not: That is, Enemies
have swallowed up, or taken away that wealth, those riches, they have subdued
those Armies, those Forces, which he looked upon, and boasted of, as his
streng^h; they have broken him quite with Wars and Invasions, yet Ephraim knew
it not: and not only so, but as it follows, Yea, Gray hairs are here and
there upon him; that is, he has many Symptoms or Signs or ruin and
destruction, yet he knows it not. Grief of heart for great changes in our
Estate, change the hair; many grow gray with sorrow. So that, when it is said
gray hairs are upon him, it is an allusion taken from the Body Natural to the
Body Politic; for as when the natural Body of a man has gray hairs appearing,
or (as Solomon allegorizeth, Eccl. 12.5.) when the Almond Tree flourishes, it
is an argument that old Age and infirmities are coming upon him (Gray hairs
tell us that Death and the Grave are not far off, they signify some decay of
nature.) Now as the natural Body has its gray hairs, so a Politic Body, the
body of a State has its gray hairs too; that is, something may come upon a
State, which shows that it is declining and waxing old, that it is ready to
break, and go to the Grave. I shall not stay to enquire what are the gray hairs
of a Nation; I only bring that Scripture, to prove that many are insensible of
the hand of God; he visits in his anger, yet man, possibly a good man,
knows it not, as Ephraim knew not of his gray hairs.

But did not Ephraim know his affliction? or did not Job know his? what is it
to know, or who may be said to know an affliction?

I answer, they only know their afflictions, or that God is visiting in his
anger,

First, who labor to find out the cause of Gods visitation. If we feel the
afflicting hand of God upon us, and enquire not, whence is this? why is it so?
what has moved or provoked the Lord to this manner of proceeding with us? If,
I say, we make not such enquiries, we are visited in anger, and know it not.
And therefore in that case, the Prophet Jeremy exhorts the afflicted,
captivated Church of the Jews in Babylon, to search and try their ways, (Lam.
3.41.) that is, to consider why it was so with them, what was the cause of
their captivity. Till we sit down and make diligent search, why we are visited,
why any affliction or calamity is upon our Persons and Families, or upon the
Kingdoms and Nations respectively where we live, we know neither the day of
our visitation, nor what our visitation is. Then only we know Gods visitation,
when we are studying the causes of it; Scire est per causas scire.
To know a thing is to know it in the causes of it.

Secondly, They may be said to know the visitation of the Lord, that are
studying, as the cause which they have given, so the ends and purposes which
God has in visiting them; for how much soever we find and see the causes of an
affliction, yet till our hearts are drawn out to answer the ends of it, we do
not truly know it.

But you will say, what are the usual ends which the Lord has in afflicting
his people?

I answer, First, to turn them from sin; Secondly, to unglew and wean them from
the world; Thirdly, that they may live nearer to, or more with him; Fourthly,
that they may live more unto him, or (which takes in both the latter ends) that
they may enjoy him more while they live, and honor him more with their lives.
Now (I say) till we are upon this kind of study, both of the causes of our
visitation, and the ends of it, and beg that we may both remove those causes,
and comply with or answer those ends, we may be said not to know the visitation
of the Lord, though it be, and we are, in great extremity. And if this be to
know the visitation of God, surely many are perishing and sinking under the
hand of his visitation, w^^ yet know it not. How many are there, who neither
endeavor to search out the causes, nor to fulfill the ends for which the Lord
visits them in his anger! I conceive this assertion, or supposition at least
of Elihu's concerning Job, both as to his not trusting God in his affliction,
and not knowing his visitation, was, though in part true, and occasioned on
Jobs part, yet over-harsh and severe: nor was the inference which he made from
it in the next verse, less severe and harsh.

Verse. 16. Therefore does Job open his mouth in vain, he multiplyeth words
without knowledge. Here Is the conclusion of Elihu's third Discourse with Job:
Therefore does Job open his mouth in vain.

Some connect this verse with the former, according to the first reading of it,
before mentioned, that giving a reason of this; But now his anger (or he in
anger) has visited thee but a little, or nothing, etc. Therefore thou, O Job,
openest thy mouth in vain. As if he had said, Because the anger of God has not
punished Job sharply enough, nor in proportion to the multitude and greatness
of his sins, therefore he speaks thus boldly and rashly.

Therefore does Job open his mouth in vain. To open the mouth is a Pariphrasis
of speaking; As if he had said, therefore Job speaks in vain. To speak in vain,
or to use vain words, is to speak to little or no purpose, as I have had
occasion to show upon other places of this Book ( Chap. 15.2. Chap. 16.3.) and
therefore shall not stay upon it here. Job was no vain speaker, he used to
speak words of weight, words of soberness and truth, yet was overborn by
passion, though not to speak vain words in the matter, yet to speak or open his
mouth in vain.

Therefore does Job open his mouth in vain. Consider the Inference, therefore,
that is, First, Because he does not humble himself in a patient dependence upon
God; Secondly, because he does not, as he ought, duly take notice of the
purpose of God in visiting him; Thirdly, because he seems more solicitous and
zealous in defending his own right and credit, than the honor and
righte^usness of God: for all these Reasons he opens his mouth in vain, that
is, he loses his labor, in all this discourse, and might (as we speak
proverbially) have saved his breath to cool his broth: Therefore does Job open
his mouth in vain. Taking the Charge which Elihu brought against Job in the
former verse, to be well grounded and true, we may Note, All our complaints to,
and debates with God, as also all our Apologies for our selves in affliction,
are fruitless and succesless, till we give Glory to God, and answer his
purposes, in laying his hand upon us.

Gratio vana sensus atque sapientiae inops, tantum sonitu verborum and
querimoniarum clamosa.
Unless our hearts bow to God, he will not bow his ear to us. We only fill the
air with words, we are but sounding brass and tinkling Cimbals in all we say to
God, unless we do what God says. Elihu supposing J^bs spirit yet unsubdued or
not wrought and brought into a right frame under his affliction, might well
say, he opens his mouth in vain; and as it follows to the same effect in
the close of this verse and Chapter, He multiplieth words without knowledge.

Here is another hard censure, upon this good, this holy, and wise man Job.
Some Expositers fall heavy upon Elihu, as charging Job too far; he spoke (say
they) many things that were right, but not rightly; he spoke many things that
were true, but he did not speak truly in fixing them upon Job; he spoke all
uprightly, but somewhat too rigorously: And indeed, if he had charged him so
far, as to say, he had no knowledge at all, and had not opened his mouth at all
to purpose, he had charged him beyond both truth and modesty. But Elihu, who
was set up by God for this very end to humble Job, had ground to tell him, that
as to some things, he had both opened his mouth in vain, and multiplied words
without knowledge; that is, he had spoken many words which seemed not to
proceed from any sound or well-grounded knowledge; and I may give a fourfold
ground of it.

First, Because he had not sufficiently attended and magnified the Sovereignty
of God, in laying those afflictions upon him.

Secondly, Because he had not, as he ought, sat down quietly under the hand of
God; but often called to know the cause, and that God would plainly tell him
the reason, or give him an account why he suffered: Whereas he should have
remembered, that as many of the judgments of God are unsearchable, and his
ways past finding out by man, so he has reserved some of them as secrets in
his own breast, and will no more give any man an account of them, than any man
ought to desire an account of them.

Thirdly, Because he had not more considered his sin, or had not been so much
in considering the greatness of his sin, as he had been in setting forth the
greatness of his integrity. For though it were true which Job spoke, that his
way was upright, and though God had given testimony to his uprightness and
integrity in all his ways, yet he should not have insisted so much upon that
point, which had so much affinity with self-boasting, though he intended it
only for self clearing, or for the righting of himself. It had been more
becoming him to have been aggravating his sin, than setting forth his
righteousness; this was the point that Elihu struck at, that he had justified
himself too much, and judged himself too little. Yea Job was convinced of this
at last, Once have I spoken, but I will speak no more, that is, of my own
integrity, or righteousness.

Fourthly, He may be said to have multiplied words without knowledge, because
he had spoken so much in the aggravation of his afflictions: It Is true, his
afflictions were very great; yet Elihu censures him deservedly, because he took
too much notice of them, complaining often and often, how heavy the hand of God
was upon him, yea that God was an enemy to him; whereas he should rather have
looked upon the visitation of God, as light and easy, Inscritam objicit quod
pugnantia, saliem non satis inter se cohaerentia conjunaeit. Merl:
or (at least) as but little comparatively, to what the Lord was able to lay
upon him, or what his sin might justify God in laying upon him. Elihu having
observed Job often and long striking upon that string, hightning his sufferings
and troubles, had reason enough not only to call him off from it, but to check
him for it. And therefore let us remember and be admonished, that in all our
afflictions we should not so much set forth the greatness of our suffering, as
the greatness of the mercy of God; we should look upon little mercies as great,
(it shows an excellent spirit, when we heighten and greaten the mercy and
goodness of God, even in little things) but we should speak of, and look upon
our greatest chastenings and afflictions as light, and little. Job failed
somewhat in all these things, and in some of them his faylings were great; and
upon some of, if not upon all these grounds, I judge Elihu gave this judgment
upon Job; He opens his mouth in vain, and multiplieth words without
knowledge.

Job also yielded himself thus faulty at last ( Chap. 42.3.) Who is he (there
he speaks of himself in a third person, Who is he) that hides counsel without
knowledge; therefore have I uttered that I understood not, things too
wonderful for me, which I knew not.

I shall close my thoughts upon this Chapter, with minding the Reader: First,
of Elihu his candedness ^owards Job, beyond what he found from his other
friends; for Elihu charge Job here, only with vanity and inadvertency, not
with any premeditated wickedness or blasphemy, as Eliphaz had done, ( Chap.
22.13, 14.) Secondly, let me mind the Reader, of that liberty and plainness of
speech which Elihu used toward Job, in telling him of, and censuring him for
his faylings; as also of that patience, meekness, and equanimity, with which
Job heard, received, and bare his sharpest censures, not replying one word in
passion, nor so much as pleading the least excuse for his former
passionateness, but taking all in good part, and, doubtless, improving all for
his spiritual profit.

JOB, Chap. 36. Verse. 1, 2, 3, 4. 1. Elihu also proceeded, and said,

2. Suffer me a little, and I will show thee, that I have yet to speak on Gods
behalf.

3. I will fetch my knowledge from afar, and will ascribe righteousness to my
Maker.

4. For truly my words shall not be false: he that is perfect in knowledge is
with thee.


ELihu has already made three addresses or speeches to Job, and here he begins
a fourth; this and the next Chapter are wholly spent in it, and are the issue
of his whole discourse with this sorrowful man. In which we may consider three
parts.

First, The Preface, or rather the Prefaces of his speech. Secondly, The Body
or Substance of his Speech. Thirdly, The Conclusion of it.
The Preface or Prefaces, the Introductions of this Discourse of Elihu with
Job, are contained in the four verses of this Text under hand.

The Body of his Discourse, is begun at the fifth verse inclusively, and
continued to the 23d verse of the next Chapter exclusively.

The Conclusion of all, is laid down in the two last verses of the 37 Chapter.

In this copious Discourse or long Oration, Elihu brings not any new assertion,
or saying of Job, to be proved against him, nor does he reprove Job for any new
fault, but insists upon the proof of what himself had asserted before, to show
that God is righteous, or to maintain the righteousness of God; which he does
variously by looking through the various works of God, those especialy which
are wrought on high, the Meteors of the aerie region, the rain, the snow, the
lightening, and the thunder, in and by all which, report is made, as of the
Wisdom and Power, so of the Justice and Righteousness of God, who often
declares his mind to Mankind by those Teachers, and proclaims by their mouths
(as it were by sound of Trumpet) how terrible he is, and will be to wilful and
impenitent sinners. That Is the sum of his Argumentation, or the Scope of this
his last undertaking with Job.

Verse. 1. Elihu also proceeded, and said. This is the Pen-mans Preface, he
makes the Connection thus between the former and this discourse; Elihu also
proceeded, and said: The Hebrew is, Elihu added, that is, to his former
speeches he added this. We render the word he continued, (Chap. 23.1.) Elihu
also proceeded, or continued his speech, and said; and what said he? that
begins at the next verse.

Verse. 2. Suffer me a little, and I will show thee, that I have yet to speak on
Gods behalf. Here begins Elihu's own Preface, (...) Hoc significatu chaldaicum
est. Drus.
the aim or tendency of which is to gain Jobs attention and subscription to
what he had to say, and he suggesteth four Arguments or Motives in these three
Verses, to draw out the attention of Job, and likewise to gain his submission
to what he should lay before him.

First, He gives him an Argument from his intended brevity, I Will be short, I
mean not to be tedious, I will not tire thee, nor wear out thy patience with a
long Discourse: Suffer me a little.

His second Argument is taken from the greatness of the Person, in whose name
and behalf he was about to speak: As if he had said, Hear me, for it is not my
own Cause, nor the Cause of any man that I have in hand, I speak for God,
Suffer me a little, and I will show thee, what I have yet to say for God.

His third Argument is taken from the Authority in which he would speak. Hear
me diligently, for what I have to say, Nihil vulgar: nihil non magnum dic^m.
Sanct.
is not only for God, but from God; I will fetch my knowledge from afar, and
ascribe righteousness to my Maker, verse. 3.

Fourthly, Which is a necessa y Consequent of the former two, he would be
heard, because he resolved (and hoped he should make good that resolu ion) to
speak the truth, and nothing but the truth; he offers this at the 4th Verse,
For truly my words shall not be false, he that is perfect in knowledge is with
thee. These are the four Arguments contained in this Preface, by which Elihu
like a wise persuasive Orator, would draw on the attention of Job in hearing,
and gain his approbation in receiving what he had to say. We may gather up the
spirit and substance of all his Arguments into this one.

He is to be patiently heard, and readily assented to, who intends to speak but
a little, and that little for God, and that little from God, and that in truth,
and nothing but the truth.

But what I am now about to speak shall be but little, and that for God, and
from God, and that in truth and nothing but the truth;

Therefore I am to be heard patiently, etc.

Suffer me a little.

Sta circa me paululum. Mont.
Some render, stand, or stay about me; that is, have patience a while, be not
hasty. Impatient persons will be gone, they will not abide by it, to hear
another out. Our Translation reaches this sense fully (according to the Idiom
of our Language) Suffer me a little. (...) Parum modicum est temporis et
quantitatis discretae.
The word which we render little, may refer either to the littleness or
brevity of his Speech, or to the littleness of the space or time which he would
spend in speaking; we join both here; as if he had said, I will not speak much,
and therefore I shall not take up much of your time. The word is used by the
Prophet with an addition, ( Isa. 10.25.) Yet a very little while, and the
indignation shall cease, and mine anger in their destruction; that is, in the
destruction of the enemies of my People. As if he had said, My wrath shall not
abide, it shall not last long, nor continue upon my People; and when I have
done with them, it shall be turned upon their enemies and oppressors, the
Assyrians, and toward them it shall not cease, till they are utterly
overturned. Take one instance more in the same Prophet, nearer the business of
the Text in Job. (Isa. 28.10, 11.) Line upon Line, Precept upon Precept, here a
Little, and there a Little, or now a little, and then a little. They shall not
be overburdened, they shall have it by drops, by inches, by little and little,
as they are able to bear; just as children and young Novices are taught, who
cannot receive much at once, but now a letter and then a letter, now a rule,
and then a rule. Possibly Elihu perceived Job was not in a case to hear much,
and therefore condescending to his weak condition by reason of his long
sufferings, he says to him, Suffer me a little.

Yet further, I conceive, when Elihu says to Job, Suffer me a little, it may
signify one of these two things, or both of them. First, That Job had given
him some interruption as he was speaking before. It is usual with us, if when a
man is speaking, any interpose, to say, Pray suffer me a while, you shall have
your liberty to object or reply what you please when I have done. Secondly,
That he had showed some dissatisfaction with what Elihu had spoken fully out,
or when he had done speaking, and therefore he desired that he might further
clear the matter, and speak out his mind, yet, at least, a little more, if it
might be to his full satisfaction, and the removal of all his doubts. Suffer me
a little.

Lay all these things together, and they will teach us a point of prudence, so
to compose and compact what we have to say, that it may not be grievous or
burdensome to those that hear us, especially not to those who (as Job was) are
already grieved in mind, or body, or both. As the Spirit of God, lest the Faith
and Patience of his People should fail in sufferings, tells, yea assures
them, it is but a little while that they shall suffer; relief, or deliverance,
and which is more, the Reliever, the Deliverer, is making have toward them, (
Heb. 10.27.) Yet a little while, and he that shall come, will come, and will
not tarry; as the Spirit of God (I say) does thus nurse up the Faith of his
People in suffering times: so we had need to nurse up the attentions of our
Hearers at all times, but then chiefly when they are under any kind of
suffering, and say, yet a little, suffer us a little, we will not burden you
much. There are two things of admirable use in speaking. First, Brevity.
Secondly, Perspicuity. It Is true, that they that strive to be short, prove very
obscure; yet doubtless, it is no very hard thing, in most matters, to join
perspicuity with brevity, and to give a clear sense in a few words. And though
it be a truth, That when we have said much of God, and of the things of God, we
have said but little, yea, that when we have spoken our all, there remains
infinitely more to be spoken, yet we should as much as may be, aim at brevity,
especially where the Person spoken to is weak, and unfitted by bodily
indispositions to hear much. Suffer me a little, And I will show thee, etc.

(...) Amplam et susiorem rei elucidationem et declarationem importat. Bold.
That is, I will make all plain to thee, I will give thee a full declaration of
my mind, and I hope of the truth, I will set all before thee, that so upon a
^eview thou may the easier apprehend my sense, and give thy sentence about
it. Day unto day utters speech, (says David, Psalm. 19.2.) and night unto
night shows knowledge. It Is this word, and it notes a very plain and evident
manifestation of that which is offered to be known; the very night carries a
light in it concerning the glory of God; I will show thee That I have yet to
speak on Gods behalf.

Dativus verba addities indicat honorem et cultum, loqui Deo, est non solum pro
Deo defendendo, sed etiam honorificando sermonem assumere. Bold.
Some read for God, or to God; that is for the glory of God, or to the honor of
God, in the clearing up of his righteousness, against those blemishes which thy
speech, if not intentionally, yet consequentially, has cast upon it; I will
speak that which may both convince thee, and justify God. The Original Text
strictly is thus, I will show thee that there are yet words for God; that is, I
will make it appear that many things more may be said and proved in pursuance
of this Point, for thy further humiliation under the mighty hand of God, and
for the Lords vindication in all his dealings with thee. I speak for God: Nor
was this a mere pretense, Quia saepe arrogantes sibi sentium silentii
reverentiam non deberi, Domini non nunquam potentiam, de quo quasi loquuntur
insinuant, etc. Greg. in Loc.
or a vain boast, as I find some Expositers (I conceive very causelessly)
charging Elihu, as if here he published a zeal to speak for God, that he might
gain applause, or draw a reverence upon himself, in what he had to speak. Some
('it is granted) have c^yed up the Name of God, when they closely aimed at their
own: But doubtless, Elihu was honest and plain hearted, when he said, that what
he had to say was for God; as he pretended, so he was really for God; I have
yet to speak on Gods behalf.

Hence Observe, First; It is a man's honor, as well as his duty, to be an
Advocate for God.

As it is man's comfort, his choicest comfort, that God has p^ovided an
Advocate for him, that he has found out one to speak to himself in our behalf,
namely, Jesus Christ; so it is both the duty and honor of man, to be an
Advocate for God.

For if, First, it be a great honor to know God, and to have God made known to
us; He has not dealt so with any Nation (as he dealt with the Jews, in giving
them the knowledge of his mind) and as for his Judgments they have not known
them, (Psalm. 147.20.)

Secondly, If it be a greater honor to believe, and obey according to what we
know, then

Thirdly, When we know, when we believe and obey, our greatest honor of all is
to plead for, and stand up in Gods behalf, to undertake (being called) the
defense of his truth and of his ways, to contend earnestly for the Faith, once
(by God) delivered to the Saints, which is indeed the only good contention.
Paul says ( Phil. 1.17.) I am set for the defense of the Gospel. Paul was a
Champion ready to cope and buckle with all comers for Christ or the Gospel; and
therefore at the 20th verse of the same Chapter, he says, the great thing he
looked after was, That Jesus Christ might be magnified in his body, whether by
life, or by death. There are three ways whereby we appear as Advocates on Gods
behalf; First, By saying, or arguing; Secondly, By doing or practicing;
Thirdly, By enduring and suffering; and by all Christ is magnified in our body;
the two former ways, by life, the latter by death, or by that which bears the
Image of it. There Is nothing needs a fuller measure of defense for God, than
the Truth of God; and we never stand up so fully on Gods behalf, as when we
stand for his Truth, though ^ur selves fall. To speak and do on Gods behalf, is
most for our own behoof, though we get but small fees or wages, yea though we
lose our all in this world for such speaking and doing. I could wish there were
not too much cause of complaint, that God has not many to speak on his behalf,
and that Christ Jesus, our great, our only Advocate with God, has few
Advocates among men. When God as it were calls to us, Who is on my side? who?
Truly there are but few that will appear for him, that is, for Truth, for
Holiness, for holy Worship; few appear for these things when differences arise
about them. The corrupt part of the world in any Age will not, and the better
part are not so free as they ought, to speak and appear (in such Cases) on Gods
behalf. The world (says St. John in the Revelation) wondered after the Beast;
and he cannot want Advocates, who has so many Admirers. But as the Admirers,
so the Advocates of the Lamb are not many, they are only a sealed, a selected
Company. We can be very warm in speaking in our own Cause, and on our own
behalf; but how cold and dead-hearted are we when we come to speak in the
behalf of God! what a sad withdrawing is there from that duty! God stands up
often on the behalf of his People, and owns them in their need, yet few own
God, or the Truth of God, when there is most need. Remember, as it is our
honor, so our duty to speak on Gods behalf; and they will come to a bad
reckoning at last both for their doings and speakings, for the work both of
hand and tongue, who have done and spoken much in their own behalf, and little
or nothing on Gods.

Again, As Elihu makes this an Argument to provoke Job to hear him patiently,

Note, They that speak for God, ought to have audience.

It is an Argument commanding attention, to say, I speak from God, or for God.
As when the Lord himself speaks, all ought to hear; even those things that have
no ears, are called upon to hear him speaking, or what is spoken from him, Hear
O Heavens, and hearken O Earth, says the Lord ( Isa. 1.2.) Now, as when the
Lord speaks all should hear, so all should hear when any thing is spoken on the
Lords behalf; they that speak for the Lord in truth, speak also fr^^ the Lord.
As truth bears the stamp and Image of God, so it tends to the glory of God. To
resist the truth of God, spoken by a true Messenger, is to refuse the God of
truth, ( Luke 10.16.) He that hears you, hears me, and he that despises
you, despises me. Not to hear those that speak for the Lord, and from the
Lord, is indeed not to hear the Lord, and so they will be judged in the great
day.

Thirdly, In that Elihu gathers up his Spirits, girds up the Loins of his mind
upon this consideration, that he was to speak on Gods behalf,

Note, They who speak for God, may speak with courage, and be bold.

If any thing can encourage us to, and in a work, it is this, that we engage for
God. That which puts spirit and life into us, is our end and design in doing or
speaking; now this is the highest end or design, to argue for God; and
therefore it may put the highest life, and liveliest spirits into man, it may
make him that is weak, strong as a Giant, and him that is fearful, bold as a
Lion, when he can speak in truth, that he is speaking truth on Gods behalf.

I will show thee that I have yet to speak. That word (yet) has a great
Emphasis in it; he had been speaking in Gods behalf before, and says he, I
have yet to speak

Observe, They that truly begin to speak for God, will persevere in speaking
for God.

As when we have spoken our all of God, and for God, there is yet more to be
spoken of him, and for him (God is an everlasting Argument, a Subject that can
never be finished) so they who have begun (with an honest heart and right aims)
to speak for God, will hold on and never give over to speak for him, while they
have a call to it. A soul touched with true zeal, finds it hard to make an end,
when once he has begun so good, and so honorable a service, as to speak for
God. So much of the second Argument used by Elihu to gain attention: Suffer me
a little, and I will show thee what I have yet to speak on Gods behalf. He
spoke for God. The third follows.

Verse. 3. I will fetch my knowledge from afar, and will ascribe Righteousness
to my Maker. This (I say) is Elihu's third Argument brought to the same purpose
as before.

I will fetch my knowledge from afar, Or a great way off. From how far? (...) e
longinquo' ex abund^m^i ex linguae idiomate adjicitur. Merc. Vtar scientia
quada^^ long^pe^ita. V^^.
There are four notions under which knowledge may be said to be fetched from
afar.

First, That Is knowledge from afar, which is of things out of sight, or
invisible, of things which not only are not, but cannot be seen. As if Elihu
had said, I will not discourse about such things as fall under common sensitive
observation, I will not speak of eye-objects, but of that and such things, as
no eye has seen, nor can see, of God, and of Divine things, the things of God.

Secondly, From afar, may imply this, I will not treat about matters of a late
Date or Edition, but of things done long since. Thus David prefac'd his Speech,
( Psalm. 68.2, 3.) I will open my mouth in a Parable, I will utter dark sayings
of old, which we have heard, and known, and our Fathers have told us. Such
things are far off from us, which were transacted and done a great while ago,
or in former Ages, or in the first Age. As if Elihu had said, I Will fetch my
knowledge, not from yesterday, but from ancient times, from the very beginning
of the Creation, or from the Foundation of the world; such things are truly
afar off; or, I will fetch my knowledge from those things which were before the
beginning; that is more truly afar off. Thus a Learned Translater glosseth upon
the Text, Prout res fuit non tantum in de a seculis, sed etiam ante omnia
secula. Jun.
I will speak even of those things which were before any thing visible was,
even from Eternity. The things of Eternity are most proper to set forth and
illustrate the honor of God, and most lively express his Power and Divine
Perfections.

Thirdly, When he says, I will fetch my knowledge from afar; the meaning may
be this, It shall be of admirable and sublime things, Ex operibus Dei
admirandis et sublimibus. Merc.
the reason of which could not easily be given, nor presently found out. Those
things are far from us, which we cannot dive into, nor reach, nor fathom the
bottom of, by the Line of our understanding: Such are the secret Counsels of
God before the world was, and some ways of his Providence in dealing with men
ever since the world was, which are therefore said to be unsearchable, and past
finding out; and of these Elihu speaks at large in this Chapter, to the 26th
verse.

Fourthly, I will fetch my knowledge from afar, may be thus understood, I will
speak to thee of things which I have much studied for; I will not speak what
comes next, nor what lies uppermost, Ex ramotis sed necessariis principiu^
agam, non noviter excogitata seda principio cognita, et accurate paremeditata
proseram. Scult.
but will beat my brains for what I say, in most serious meditation; I will not
offer thee any raw or undigested sentiments, but shall well and maturely
consider before I speak; nor will I speak what my weak reason only tells me is
true, but what by light from above, and I hope by me special teachings of God,
I know to be true: I will fetch my knowledge, or that which I make know, from
the depths of my heart, not from sudden flashes and conceits of my head. In all
these senses possibly Elihu was resolved to fetch his knowledge from afar, he
would not take up, nor trouble Job with things that were obvious, common, or
easy to be had, but bring what he had to say out of the closest Cabinets, and
utter conceptions, which were most remote from the common road.

There is yet another apprehension concerning Elihu's purpose, when he says, I
will fetch my knowledge from afar, with which I rather close than any of the
former; that his meaning was to speak to Job of those things, which as they are
not easily comprehended, because the sublimest works of God in nature, so
because they might seem far from the present matter; As i^ he had said, We have
been arguing all this while about Gods dispensations here below, but now I Will
speak of things that are wrought above, of those both useful and dreadful or
terrible Meteors, the snow and rain, the winds, the lightening and the
thunder; these things may be thought very foreign and heterogeneal, very far
off from the business in hand, but I will speak to thee of these things, even
of the works of God in the Heavens, in the Air, in the Chambers of the Clouds,
and I will convince thee by what God does there above, of his righteousness, in
what he does here below. The wisdom and power of God, in ordering those
natural works in the Clouds, and in the Air, prove that man has no cause to
complain about his providential works on earth: For as those wonderful visible
works of God are real demonstrations of those invisible things of God, his
eternal power and Godhead, so they declare both his righteousness and
goodness, his wrath and mercy toward the children of men in the various
dispensations of them. And so although those things might be thought far from
the point which Elihu supposed Job questioned, at least by consequences, the
righteousness of God in his severe dealings with him, yet indeed they contained
principles or general grounds, by which that which Elihu had engaged to
maintain might be fully confirmed and unanswerably concluded. This, I conceive,
is the special afar off, that Elihu intended to fetch his knowledge from, as
may appear in the close of this Chapter, and in the next, quite through. I will
fetch my knowledge from afar.

Hence note; First, The natural works of God, or the works of God in nature,
are to be studied and searched out.

As the works of grace are afar off from all men, in a state of nature; so the
works of God in nature, are very far off from the most of men, they know little
of Gods works in the Heavens, or in the Earth, in the Sea, or in the Air, yet
all these are to be searched out with diligence by the sons of men.

Secondly, Note; The works of Creation and Providence, show that God is, and
what he is.

We may see who God is, in what he has done; we say things are in their
working, as they are in their being. God has done like himself in all that he
has done; his own works (as well as his own Word) speak him best, ( Psalm.
19.1.) The heavens declare the glory of God, and the firmament shows his
handiwork, etc. The rain and snow declare the power of God, Thunder and
Lightening show what he can do.

Thirdly, Note; Knowledge is worth our longest travel, it will quit cost to go
far for it.

We say, Some things are far fetched, and dear bought; true knowledge,
especially the knowledge of Jesus Christ deserves to be far fetched, and it
cannot be too dear bought; we must drive a strange kind of trade with the
truths of God; we must be always buying, and never selling, yet that is a
commodity will never lie upon our hands, never brayde. If we were to fetch our
knowledge from afar, as to the distance of place, we should not think much of
it. The Queen of the South fetched her knowledge from afar, she came a very
great way, undertook a long jou^ney, to hear the wisdom of Solomon; in that
sense we should be willing to fetch our knowledge from afar; yet some will
scarce step over the threshold to fetch in knowledge. It is prophesied ( Dan.
12.4.) Many shall run to and fro, and knowledge shall be increased. Knowledge
ought to be traveled for as much as any thing in the world. We fetch our gold
and silver, and rich Commodi^ies, afar off, we go to the ends of the Earth for
them, through a thousand deaths and dangers; we sail within three inches of
death for many months together, to fetch wo^ldly riches f om afar off; and
shall we not fetch knowledge afar off, how far soever it is from us in distance
of place, and what labor or cost soever we bestow to fetch it in? I will fetch
my knowledge from afar, I will ascribe righteousness to my Maker.

These words contain the ground, purpose, or design of Elihu in this whole
discourse, which was to maintain the righteousness of God; I (says he) will
ascribe (the Hebrew strictly is give) righteousness to my Maker; here is a very
great undertaking, (...)
to give righteousness to God; God gives and imputes righteousness to us; It Is
the sum of the Gospel, that God imputes or ascribes righteousness to sinners:
Now as God in a Gospel sense, gives righteousness to us, both the righteousness
of justification, which is lodged in the person of Christ, and the
righteousness of sanctification, which is lodged in our own persons, though the
spring and principle of that also be in Christ still; so we must give
righteousness to God; that is, both believe and declare or publish to all the
world, that God is just, and give him the praise of his justice, which is the
best and noblest work we can do on Gods behalf in this world. There are two
most excellent works, which indeed contain all our work in this world.

First, To do righteously, or act righteousness our selves. Secondly, To
ascribe righteousness unto God.

But you will say, what is it to give or ascribe righteousness to God?

I answer, It is to acknowledge, that God is righteous in all his ways, and
holy in all his works. It Is man's duty to justify God, to ascribe that
righteousness to him, which is properly his own. It Is Gods grace, his
free grace to justify man, to ascribe that righteousness to him which is
properly another. David made profession of the former as his duty, ( Psalm.
50.3, 4.) I acknowledge my transgressions, and my sin is ever before me; that
thou might be justified in thy sayings, and clear when thou judge: That
is, I Will confess my sin, Is qui peccat et confit^tur deo peccatum justifi at
deum, cedens ei vincenti et ab eo gratiam sperans. Ambros: l. 6. in Luc:
that all the world may see the righteousness of thy dealings with me, though
thou should deal never so severely with me, though thou should speak the
bitterest things against me, and pronounce a sentence of heaviest judgment
upon me. The Apostle referring to this place in the Psalms, quotes the words
in a passive form and sense, not of God judging man, but of God judged by man,
( Romans 3.4.) Let God be true, but every man a liar; as it is written, that thou
might be justified in thy sayings, and might overcome when thou art
judged. As if David had said, according to the Apostles reading out of the
Septuagint, (which yet as learned Beza in his Annotations affi^meth, Istud
(...), active meo quidem judicio necessario explicandum est, ut Graeco Hebraeu
respondeant. Bez: in Rom: 3.4.
ought to be expounded actively, as if, I say, David had thus expressed
himself) Lord, I know some men will take the boldness to question thee, yea and
to condemn thee of rigor, when they see thy afflicting hand heavy upon me;
therefore, either to prevent such rash judgments of man, or that thou may
gain the day, and have the better in the opinion of all good and wise men,
over thy Judges, Behold, I here freely confess my great sin, with all the
aggravating circumstances of it, and surely they who know, or shall hear, how
greatly I have sinned against thee, cannot but justify thee, how great soever
my sufferings may be. To speak thus is to ascribe righteousness unto God, in
all that he does, whether with respect to his public judgments upon Nations,
or particular, upon persons, in any way of affliction he is pleased, and sees
need, to exercise them with.

And the reason why Job was here charged by Elihu as a person not giving
righteousness to God, was, because he did not sit down quietly and patiently
under his hand in sufferings, but muttered and complained as a man unsatisfied
with, though he did not openly murmur against the dealings of God with him. To
give righteousness to God, is not only, not to accuse him as unrighteous and
unjust, but to thank him for, and honor him in all that he does, or to speak
good of his Name, under all our sufferings of evil. Further, to ascribe
righteousness to God, is to justify him, though he give never so much
prosperity to unjust and wicked men ( Jer. 12.1.) Righteous art thou, O Lord,
when I plead with thee; yet let me talk with thee of thy judgments. Wherefore
does the way of the wicked prosper? wherefore are all they happy that deal very
treacherously? Some begin to think, surely God is not righteous, when they see
the unrighteous prosper, and at rest, while righteous ones are afflicted with
continual hurries and troubles; but whatsoever God does with us or ours,
whatsoever peace he gives to wicked men, whatsoever trouble to good men, he is
still righteous; and to acknowledge this sincerely, is actually to do what
Elihu undertakes to do, even to ascribe righteousness to our Maker. And surely
that knowledge will quit the cost, though we have fetched it very far, by which
we are taught, and have learned to ascribe righteousness (for that is the
ascribing of glory) to our Maker. I (says Elihu) will ascribe righteousness To
my Maker.

There Is something in that expression very considerable; Elihu does not say, I
will ascribe righteousness to God, but speaks of God under that relation, His
Maker. (...) importat facere aliquid cum intention diligentia energia quae
valde enitet in formatione hominis. Bold:
The word signifies not only in General to make or create, of which work Moses
treats in the first of Genesis, but it notes the doing of a thing, first, with
diligence, secondly, with skill and great intention of mind, it is to draw all
our spirits together in a work, as Artists do; This divine art or skill did
chiefly appear and shine forth in the creation or formation of man. Not that
God strains himself in any work, but he speaks thus, to show that the highest
perfections and exactness imaginable, yea beyond all imagination, were centred
and laid into the works of God, or the things that he has made. will ascribe
righteousness to My Maker.

He does not say, to the Maker of man, or to the Maker of Heaven and Earth, but
to my Maker; he appropriates that common work of God to himself. God is the
maker of every Creature, the least worm, the least fly is of his making, yet
Elihu speaks of it as his peculiar privilege, my Maker.

There Is a great Emphasis of affection in those Pronounes, Mine, Delicata sunt
haec pronomina Meum, Tuum, Suum, et plena affectionis; pronomen hoc substantive
ponitur pro amico. Dulcesque meorum reliquias. Virgil: Aeniad: 4. Ego meorum
solus sum meus. Terent:
Thine, His. Elihu in this my intimates a friendly sweetness and closeness of
relation between God and him. To call another Mine, is more than to call him a
friend of mine; And to say, God is my Maker, is more than to say, He is the
maker of me, or the maker of my soul and body. It Is the Dialect of lovers: Whom
we love we call Ours. It is so in the writings of Heathen Poets and Orators.
One of them said, I must do this with the gifts of mine, that is, of my
friends; and another, I only am my to mine. Much love reigns in this Language
of faith up and down the Scriptures, chiefly in those raptures of divine
delight between Christ and the Spouse in the Book of Canticles. Elihu is here
greatly affected, as with the righteousness of God in all his works, so in the
workmanship bestowed on him: I (says he) will ascribe righteousness to my
Maker.

Hence Note; First, God is the Maker of man.

I shall not stay upon that.

Secondly, In that he holds himself engaged to stand up for God as his Maker,

Note, The Common benefits of God to man, should be acknowledged, and he
honored for them.

God has made man and beast, and he preserves man and beast. A godly man sees
peculiar mercy to him in both, though they be common mercies. General mercies
should have, they highly deserve, special remembrances. All the works of God
are to be looked to as personal engagements. God has made others as well as
thee, yet so remember him to be thy Maker, as if he had made none but thee; and
indeed every one that is made, is as much beholding to God, as if he alone had
been made. As some things which are made in common for all men (the Sun, the
Air, etc.) are so made, that no man could have more of them than he has, if
they had been made for him only: So though it be common to all men, that God is
their Maker, yet no man could have more in his making, if none had been made
but he. One of the Ancients represents all the Creatures offering themselves to
man, in general, and speaking these three words: Accipe, Read, Cave.
First, Receive us cheerfully, for we were made for thee; Secondly, Render
thanks for us daily, for we are all made useful unto thee; Thirdly, Take heed
you do not abuse us, for you must give an account to our Maker and yours, how
you have used us. And surely, as we should strive to honor God for all things
which he has made, so mostly for our own making. The Lord is often (in the Old
Testament especially) spoken of under this Relation ( Psalm. 121.2.) Our help
stands in the Name of the Lord, who made Heaven and Earth. (So Psalm. 124.8.
Psalm. 95.6. Psalm. 146.6.) Still God is remembered as the Maker of all things;
and he is thus remembered, not only in opposition to Idols, or false gods, who
are gods made by man, not the makers of man, but God is thus remembered and
recorded in Scripture, to preserve a grateful memory of God in man, as he is
the Maker of man. He that forgets God as his Maker, will never remember, much
less answer and accomplish the ends for which he was made.

Thirdly, I will ascribe righteousness to My Maker.

Note, A godly man takes God as his own, and appropriates him by Faith in all
his Relations.



Faith takes not only a share in God, but all of God; My God, my Father, my
Maker, my Redeemer, are strains of Faith. A Believer does as it were ingross
God to himself, yet desires and endeavors, that all, as well as himself, may
have their part and portion in God, yea God for their Portion. Job said ( Chap.
19.25.) I know that my Redeemer lives: He spoke as if he had got a Redeemer,
not only to, but by himself. Thus also holy Paul of Christ, ( Gal. 2.22.) Who
loved me, and gave himself for me; as if he had been given for him alone, and
loved none but him. This is the highest work of Faith, and it is the
signification of our hottest love to God, it shows endearedness of affection to
him, as well as neerness and clearness of interest in him, when we thus take
him as our own Savior, Father, Maker. I will ascribe righteousness to my Maker.

Observe, Fourthly; He who is the Maker of all men, can be unrighteous to n^
man, nor is liable to the censure of any man, whatever he does.

It Is impossible that he who made us should wrong or injure us, and that upon a
twofold Principle; First, Of the respect he has for Justice toward all those
whom he has made. God is so tender, that he does not willingly (or with his
heart) affl^ct, nor grieve the children of men, to crush under his feet all the
Prisoners of the earth (Lam. 3.33, 34.) much less will he (as it follows,
verse. 35, ^6.) turn away the right of a man before the face of the most High,
that is, before his own face, who is the Most High: As if it had been said, The
Lord will not pervert Judgment in any man's Case, that comes before him. Or, if
we take those words before the face of the Most High, as denoting the highest
Judicatory on Earth, as our Margin intimates, putting there, for Most High, A
Superior; then the meaning is, The Lord does not approve, that any earthly
Judge, though Supreme, or most Superior, should turn aside the right of a man,
how inferior soever; for, as the 36th verse has it, To subvert a man in his
Cause, the Lord approves not; or, as the Hebrew is rendered, sees not, that
is, he sees it not with approbation, but indeed with detestation, and will
severely punish such subverters of Justice. Secondly, It is impossible that he
who has made us should wrong or injure us, upon the principle of his
Sovereignty over all those whom he has made. He that gives all men their
being, he that gives all to all men that are in being, can be unrighteous to no
man, whatsoever he takes from him, or does with him. We have Job in the
beginning of this Book ( Chap. 1.21.) ascribing righteousness to God his Maker
upon this reason, or principle, The Lord has given, and the Lord has taken
away; blessed be the Name of the Lord. It is he that made me a man, it is he who
once made me a rich man, a great man, the greatest man of all the men of the
East, (Chap. 1.3.) What if now he has lessened me, and left me little or
nothing? what if he has now made me a mean man, a poor man (in account) a no
man? what if God has now stripped me naked, and taken all from me? He has taken
nothing but what he gave; why then should I take it ill at his hands, or have
so much as an ill thought of him? the Lord gives, and the Lord takes; there is
no unrighteousness in all this. If God should utterly undo us, he does us no
wrong; if he should as it were, unmake us, let us consider he is our Maker, and
then we must say, there is no unrighteousness in him, yea we shall be ready
(with Elihu in the Text) to ascribe righteousness unto him. And therefore, as a
Corollary from the whole,

Note, Fifthly; Whatsoever God does with us, or others, we ought to maintain
the honor of God, and retain good thoughts of him, both as righteous and good.

Though Heaven and Earth be moved, though the World be full of confusion and
un^ighteousness, yet we must ascribe righteou^nesse to God. Whatsoever or
whosoever falls to the dust, the Honor and Justice of God must not. Thus far
of Elihu's third Argument for attention; the Fourth is at hand in the next
verse.

Verse. 4. For truly my words shall not be false; he that is perfect in
knowledge is with thee. As if he had said, I am purposed to speak the truth,
and nothing but the truth; therefore hear me. Truly my words shall not be
false. He gives assurance for, or warrants the truth of his words, while he
says, they shall not be false. Negatives in Scripture often carry a strong
affirmation. The Father of a Fool has no joy, Non est ^^num, pro passimum est;
sic non remitt^tur ei, i. e. famietur. Drus.
says Solomon (Prove. 17.21.) that is, he shall have a great deal of sorrow.
When the Scripture denies forgiveness to any sort of impenitent sinners, or
says, their sin shall not be forgiven, the sense is, they shall be punished.
When we say proverbially, Goods ill gotten shall not prosper, the meaning is,
they shall perish, and do him mischief that has gotten them; not only shall he
not thrive with them, but they shall ruin and undo him; his goods ill gotten,
shall do him no good when the evil day is come, much less shall they be able,
or he by them, to prevent the coming of an evil day. Once more: When we say,
Such a thing is not ill done, our intendment is, it is very well done,
excellently done. So here, when Elihu says, Truly my words shall not be false,
his meaning is, I will speak truth, and truth to the highest, I will speak
nothing but what shall endure the Touchstone and the Test; I will not offer
thee a Syllable of falsehood; what I allege and urge either for God, or against
thee, shall not be fetched o^ hammered out of my own brain, and so subject to
error and mistake, but such as God, who cannot err (by whose Spirit, and in
whose stead, I speak unto thee) has inspired me with, or taught me for thy
conviction and instruction.

Fourthly, When he says, Truly, my words shall not be false, we may take it
two ways: First, As to the matter spoken; Secondly, As to the mind of the
Speaker: when truth is thus spoken, it is truly spoken; thus much Elihu engaged
for: As if he had said, The matter that I speak, shall be true, and I will
speak it in truth, or with a true mind and heart; I will not speak any thing to
flatter thee, nor for my own ends, to trouble thee; my words shall be candid
and sincere, as well as found and orthodox: I will speak the truth, and speak
it in truth. Some speak that which is false (as I may say) in the sincerity of
their heart, thinking it to be true; and others speak truth in the falseness of
their heart, that is, they have some by ends in speaking it; from both those
Elihu here clears himself, and with both these Job had taxed his Friends, Chap.
13.7. Chap. 17.5.

Hence observe; It is the highest Commendation of a Speaker, to speak truth,
and the higher the Truth, the higher the Commendation of the Speaker.

Words can have no greater beauty, nor richer ornament, than Truth, and Truth
is never more adorned, than by plainness of Speech, nor more beautiful, than
when (like our first Parents in innocence) it is naked. To speak truly, is much
more honorable, than to speak eloquently; one plain word of plain truth, is
better than a long painted Oration, tinctured with the least error: What then
are long Orations, and large Volumes, which have, upon the matter, as many
errors as words, as many lies and flatteries, as Periods and Sentences! at
best, some in putting off their words, do as others in putting off their wares,
mingle good and bad together. It Is dangerous to make such medlies. As we must
not put bad for good, darkness for light, bitter for sweet, falsehood for Truth,
so we must not blend or put bad among the good, nor mix darkness with light,
nor falsehood with Truth. And as it is dangerous to mix any falsehood of Doctrine
with Truth, so to mix falsehood of Heart, with Truth of Doctrine, or to speak
Truth, but not in truth. The Apostle is zealous in protesting against falsehood,
and professing for the Truth, in both these respects; First, as to the truth of
the Doctrine, or of the matter spoken, (2 Cor. 2.17.) We are not as many, which
corrupt (or deal deceitfully with) the Word of God; we do not adulterate or mix
it with our own imaginations or inventions; which he further confirms ( Chap.
4.2.) We have renounced the hidden things of dishonesty, etc. Secondly, As he
spoke truth of Doctrine, so he spoke it in the truth of his heart, as he
assured the Corinthians, in both the places last mentioned; we are, not only no
corrupters of the Word of God, but as of sincerity (there is truth of heart) as
of God, in the sight of God, speak we in Christ. And again, We walk not in
craftiness, nor handle the Word of God deceitfully, but by manifestation of the
truth, commend our selves to every man's Conscience, in the sight of God. He
makes a protest yet once more in the same tenor, and somewhat higher, (2 Cor.
13.8.) We can do nothing against the Truth; O blessed Impotency! but for the
Truth; O blessed Ability! Who would not be weak against the Truth? who would
not be strong for the Truth, which is strongest of all, and will prevail? And
as we should speak nothing against the Truth, so nothing but the Truth, nothing
beside the Truth, nothing that may be any blemish, or turn to the least
disservice of the Truth; yea, though it should be (as we hope) for the service
of that excellent and amiable thing called Peace; a thing so excellent, that we
cannot over-bid, nor pay too much for it, unless we part with, and pay away
truth for it: and if ever we do so, we over-bid for it, and over-buy it indeed,
and shall have cause at last to repent of our bargain, and cry out, we have
burnt our Fingers, and it would be well if that were all. Therefore let us
remember the Lords admonition by his Prophet ( Zech. 8.19.) Love the Truth and
Peace: First, Truth, then Peace. Nor was there ever any true Lover of Truth,
that was not also a Lover of Peace; nor any true Lover of Peace, but was such a
Lover of Truth, that he could lay down, or let go, his Peace for it. One of the
Ancients tells us, Tantus sit in te veritatis amor, ut quicquid dixeris,
juratum putes. Hieron.
There ought to be so great a love of Truth in us, that, whatsoever we say to
be true, should be as much as if we had sworn it to be true, or had delivered
it upon Oath. There is no more goodness in what we say, than there is Truth in
what we say. A Lie in report or Discourse, and a Lie in Doctrine or Dispute,
are both abominable to God, and should be so to man; therefore Elihu heartily
disclaims it, Truly my words shall not be false.

He that is perfect in knowledge is with thee. This Assertion suits well with
the foregoing Protestation: (...) Integer scientiarum, vel integer scientis.
Heb.
He that is perfect in knowledge, will not, cannot utter words of falsehood. But
who is that? and where to be found? Some understand it of God; He that is
perfect in knowledge is with thee, that is, God is with thee in this business;
and without all controversy, it may be said of God, in the highest and
strictest sense of Pe^fection, He is perfect in knowledge. The Lord is a God of
knowledge (1 Samuel 2.3.) as well as (...) God of mercy; he is as knowing, as he
is merciful, perfect in both. Taking the Text so; it is as if Elihu had said,
Thou had need, O Job, look to thy self, and diligently attend to what is
spoken, for thou have not to do with man, with one like thy self only, but thou
have to do with God. Some insist much, yea, altogether upon this Interpretation
of the word; God is with thee, therefore receive truth; God cannot be deceived,
nor does he deceive, therefore hearken and obey. Yet Elihu might speak thus
with respect to the message brought by himself; for when man speaking in the
Name of God speaks the mind of God to us, it may be said, God is with us, and
speaks to us by him. The Apostle says (2 Cor. 13.5.) If any require a Sign or
Token of Christ speaking in me. Christ speaks, while his Messengers and
Ministers speak truth. The same Apostle testified of the Thessalonians, that
they took his speaking as Gods speaking, (1 Thessalonians. 2.13.) When ye received the
Word of God which ye heard of us, ye received it not as the word of man, but
(as it is in truth) the Word of God. And therefore I conceive we are to
understand the words of Elihu concerning Elihu himself, yet not as in himself,
but as fitted for, and assisted in the work by God, He that is perfect in
knowledge is with thee; As if he had said, Though I am but a young man, yet
thou have not to deal with an ignorant man, with one who is but a novice or
smatterer in the things of God, with one that is yet in the Elements of Divine
knowledge and learning; He that is perfect in knowledge is with thee. And it is
conceived that Elihu speaks thus in the third person for Modesties sake, as the
Apostle Paul also did (2 Cor. 12.2, 3.) I knew a man in Christ, etc. He does
not say, I Paul was caught up to the third Heaven, and heard unspeakable words,
etc. but I knew such a man. Thus Elihu here; and doub^less, he had been liable
to censure, as arrogating too much to himself, had he spoken in the first
person, I that am perfect in knowledge am with thee: Therefore he covers and
conceals himself by expressing it in the third person, He that is perfect in
knowledge is with thee; that is, He that is with thee to convince thee of thy
former error, and to give thee better counsel, is perfect in knowledge.

But is that true? was Elihu, or is any man perfect in knowledge, or (as the
Hebrew ha^h it plurally) in knowledges, that is, in all kinds of knowledge, or
in all the degrees of knowledge of any kind? Surely, No man is perfect in the
knowledge of any one thing, much less of all things, (1 Cor. 13.9, 12.) We know
in part, and prophecy in part, we see but darkly, etc. How then can it be said
of Elihu, He is perfect in knowledge? I answer; There is a twofold perfection.
First, Absolute. Secondly, Comparative. There Is no man living here below has
absolute perfection of knowledge; yet one man being compared with another, may
be said to be perfect in knowledge, another not: There are various degrees of
knowledge in man; the highest degree of knowledge compared with the lowest, may
be called perfect knowledge. Thus we are to understand Elihu speaking at the
rate of a creature, not of God, or as becomes and is commensurable with the
state of man in this life, whose best perfection in knowledge, is to know his
own imperfections.

Secondly, Elihu speaks not of any perfection of knowledge, but of being
perfect, that is, sincere, in knowledge. As if he had said, What I know, I know
with an honest, upright heart and intention: I do not know to abuse thee or
others, I make not use of my knowledge to deceive the simple, but to inform
them. Some are crafty and cunning in knowledge, not perfect in it; they are
knowing as the Devil is knowing, who takes his name Demon from his knowledge,
yet he is not perfect, but corrupt in his knowledge, he is subtle, and full of
devices to do mischief with his knowledge. That Is perfect knowledge, which is
sincerely employed for the Glory of God, and the good of those with whom we
have to do. So then, the meaning of Elihu may be summed up thus in short; He
that is with thee (that is my self) will deal with thee to the best of my
understanding, and in the Integrity of my heart. This also suits well with the
former part of the verse, Truly my words shall not be false.

Hence Note; First, Though no man knows all things, yet some know much more
than others.

One is a Babe, and needs milk; another is a grown Christian, and can, not only
receive, but give the strong meat of instruction, ( Heb. 5.13, 14.) Some cannot
understand wisdom, when spoken by the perfect, they know not how to learn,
yea, some (as the Apostle speaks, 2 Timothy 3.7.) are ever learning, but never
able to come to the knowledge of the truth. Others can speak wisdom among them
that are perfect (2 Cor. 2.6.) that is, they are got to the highest Form of
Gospel knowledge, and are fit to be Teachers.

Secondly, Note; Whether we know little or much, this is the perfection of our
knowledge, honestly to employ and improve it, for the information of the
ignorant, and the conviction of those who are in error.

If we have but one Talent of knowledge, yet if we use it well, we are perfect
in knowledge. They who have dug (as they think) to the heart, and dived to
the bottom of all Sciences, yea into the heart of the Scriptures too, yet if
they keep their knowledge to themselves, or know only for themselves, if they
have base ends and by respects, in vending their knowledge, if they trade with
their knowledge for self only, or to do mischief to others, their knowledge is
not only utterly imperfect, but, as to any good account, nothing, or none at
all. As he that slothfully hides his Talent, so he, who either vain-gloriously
shows it, or deceitfully uses it, shall be numbered among those who have none,
( Math. 25.29. Luke 8.18.)

Lastly, Elihu speaking of himself in a third person, Note, Modesty is a great
virtue, and the grace of all our Graces.

He that says, I am perfect in knowledge, knows not what is nearest him,
himself. We should use our knowledge as much as we can, but show it as little
as we can, unless in the using of it. It Is best for us to take little notice of
our own goodness, and not to know our own knowledge. Usually they have but
little, who are much in showing (unless much called to it) what they have.
Empty Vessels sound most, and shallow Brooks make the loudest noise in passage.
Moses put a Vail upon his face, as unwilling to have that Divine beauty seen.
While we are provoked, and even necessitated to discover our knowledge, we
should cover our selves. It is our duty to impart our knowledge, but our folly
to p^oclaim it.

Thus far Elihu has been preparing his Patient Job, to receive his Medicinal
instructions; he is now ready to administer them, for the cure and quieting of
his distempered mind.

JOB, Chap. 36. Verse. 5, 6. 5. Behold, God is mighty, and despises not any: he
is mighty in strength and wisdom.

6. He preserves not the life of the wicked: but gives right to the poor.


ELihu having done prefacing, proceeds to the matter of his discourse, wherein
he gives a large description, of the power, wisdom, and Justice of God, in
his disposure and government of the world; First, In things Civil, which he
prosecutes to the 26th verse of this Chapter. Secondly, In things Natural,
which he handles to the 23d verse of the following Chapter. He begins in these
two verses, with an excellent Elogium, or with the high praise of God in his
divine perfections, into which he leads us with a command of attention, or
serious consideration, yea of wonder and admiration.

Verse. 5. Behold, God is mighty. I have several times opened the sense and
intendment of this word Behold, and therefore will not stay upon it here; (...)
Magnus, grandis, potens, id est potentissimus.
But what are we to behold? what is the sight which Elihu represents to our
faith? it is God in his might; Behold, God is mighty. God is strong, potent,
omnipotent, God is mighty, yea Almighty: The words are a plain assertion of
that royal Attribute, the Mightiness or Almightiness, the Potency or
Omnipotency of God. Elihu promised to ascribe righteousness unto God his Maker,
yet here he begins with his Mightiness; and this we find often both ascribed to
God, and asserted by him. When God made a Covenant with Abraham, he thus offers
himself to his faith, though by another word in the Original, ( Genesis 17.1.) I
am the Almighty God, walk before me, and be thou perfect, or upright, or
sincere, (as our Margin reads it) The same title is again repeated by Isaac,
when he dispatched his son Jacob with a blessing to Padan-Aram, to avoid the
fury of his brother Esau, (Genesis 28.3.) Thus also spoke the blessed Virgin, (
Luke 1.49.) He that is mighty has done to me great things, and holy is his
Name. The holy Scriptures every where exalt the name of God by this glorious
Attribute; The mighty God, even the Lord has spoken, (Psalm. 50.1.) And he
seems even to delight in this title, The mighty God of Jacob. Jacob was mighty
with God in prayer, as a Prince he had power with God and prevailed; and God
loved and loves to put forth his might for Jacob, his Church and people, in
answer of their prayers. But I shall not stay in general upon this title, only
opening it a little, shall make some inferences from it. God is mighty in a
twofold notion.

First, In authority, or in command; he commands in chief; God is Sovereign
and Supreme; the Legislative power is in his hand, he gives Laws, and he
gives the Law to all the world, ( Psalm. 62.11.) Once has he spoken, and I
heard it twice, that power (Soveraignity, Law-giving power) belongs to God; He
is so mighty in this governing power, that he does not only give Laws to rule
Nations, but he disposes of all the Rulers in Nations, ( Daniel Chap. 2.21.
Chap. 4.17.) And again, ( Psalm. 22.28.) The Kingdom is the Lords, and he is
the Governor among the Nations.

Secondly, Besides this power of Authority, which the Lord exercises paramount
over all the world, he has also another power or might; he has the might of
Strength, as well as the might of Authority. Some have a great, a mighty
Authority, but they have little or no might to make good that Authority; they
cannot effect or carry on what they comm^nd, how much right soever they have to
command, yea how just and right soever that is which they command: they have
Authoritive might, yet want Executive might, they cannot bring about, nor issue
what they determine. But when Elihu asserts, Behold, God is mighty, we are to
take it under both notions, he is mighty, as he has the whole Legislative
power in his hand, and he is mighty, as having also the whole Executive power
in his hand. The sons of men are jealous about these two Powers, and labor to
keep them in distinct hands, that they who have the Legislative power, may not
have the Executive power also, as fearing what they would do were they vested
with both: But God (beyond all dispute) has both powers in himself, and it is
impossible they should be taken from him, or devolved upon any others,
otherwise than himself pleases, or permits; behold and wonder, God is
mighty, (and O how mighty is God!) in the union of these two powers; and to set
forth yet further the wonder of his might, I shall give you seven brief
propositions, or assertions, concerning the might of God, as it is twisted and
made up of these two mights or powers.

First, He is so mighty both in strength and power, that all the might which is
in the creature, all the Legislative might, and all the Executive might, all
the Authority, and all the ability which is in any man, is from him, and by
him; that is it, which is said, ( Pro. 8.15.) By me Kings reign, and Princes
decree Justice; they have both their Authority, and their power to execute that
Authority from me; every kind and degree of might (whatsoever it is) is but a
derivation, a rivolet, from the Might and Power of God, that is the fountain,
the spring of all.

Secondly, Behold the mightiness of God, as in giving, so in taking away power,
whether the power of authority or of strength, from the sons of men; He takes
away might from the mighty. Sometimes such power, such authority, such command
is put into the hands of others, that they who put it there, know not how to
get it out again, but are mastered and over power'd with the very power, which
they trust others with; but such is the might of God, that whatever might of
authority or strength he has trusted or clothed any of the Princes or Powers
of this world with, he can presently take it out of their hands again, ( Psalm.
75.7.) God is the Judge, he puts down one, and sets up another; and it is
as easy with him to put down, as it is to set up; as he can make the weak
strong, so he can presently make the strong weak; this is the glory of the
might of God, he can take away power, as well as give it.

Thirdly, Behold, God is mighty, for, he can do whatsoever pleases him;
Certainly, he is Almighty that can do so; He whose power runs parallel with his
will, he who can act as far as he desires, how mighty is he! none of the mighty
ones of this world can do this. Oh, what work would some men make in the world,
if they could do as much as they desire, if their power should always extend,
as far as, or be commensurate with their Will; yet thus it is with God. The
Scriptures of truth are clear in it, ( Psalm. 115.3.) where, when some profane
wretches had scoffed and jeered the people of God, wi^h where is your God? they
presently answer, Our God is in heaven, and he has done whatsoever pleases
him. It is not what this man pleases, or what that man pleases, or what this
sort or gange of men please, but what the Lord pleases, that is done, (and
that he does well, how ill soever men do it) both in heaven and in earth. The
Lord will not do all that he can, for he could by his power reduce this world
to its first principles, a Chaos, or into a nothing, as it was before that, but
he can do whatsoever he will; all things are possible to God, yea all things
are easy, nothing hard or difficult to God: And we may very well put a behold
of admiration upon his might (and such is the might of God,) who can do
whatsoever he wills.

Fourthly, The Lord is so mighty, that he can do all, without the help of any.
Some men are very mighty, but it is with other men's hands, with other men's
strength; let them alone, let them stand by themselves, do but desert and leave
them, and what can they do? just nothing. But such is the mightiness of God,
the Almightiness of God, that if all second causes, if all persons, powers and
Nations should leave him, in that which he intends should be done, he can do it
himself without them. The Prophet setting forth the victory of Christ over his
enemies, represents him speaking thus, ( Isa. 63.3.) I have trodden the
wine press alone, and of the people there was none with me. Which though many
interpret of his passive conquest by suffering as a Priest, yet most, of his
active conquest as a King, which he usually atchieveth by himself alone,
without any appearance of help from man. And though Deborah in her Song ( Judge.
5.) pronounces a curse upon those that came not out to help the Lord against
the Mighty, yet it was not because the mighty God needed their help or service,
but because they did owe it him, and in duty should have given it him. For,
that the Lord wants no help, is further clear from the Prophet, ( Isa. 59.16.)
He saw that there was no man, and wondered that there was no Intercessor, (none
so much as to speak a word) therefore his arm wrought salvation, and his
righteousness it sustained him. Not only, no arm was put forth to help, but no
tongue so much as move or intercede for help to do it, yet his own arm did it.
Thus the Prophet, ( Isa. 44.24.) He stretches forth the Heavens alone, and
laid the Foundations of the Earth by himself. Now as it was with the Lord in
the work of Creation, he had no helper, no assistant, he did it alone by
himself; so it is as true, as to all works of providence. Let all men forsake
him (as the Apostle Paul complained they did him, 2 Timothy 4.16.) and no man
stand by him, yet the Lord (what his purpose and counsel is) can bring to pass
alone: O behold this might! he can do all things without the help of any; and
not only so, but

Fifthly, God is so mighty, that he can bring all things to pass, or do what he
pleases, though all creatures should be displeased, though all men and Angels,
though all second causes stand up to hinder and to stop him. The Lord can work
his will against every will, against all contradictions and oppositions. Thus
the Prophet extols the power of God, ( Isa. 14.27.) The Lord of Hosts has
purposed, and who shall d^sanul it? His hand is stretched out, and who shall
turn it back? Where we have, first, the purpose of God, none can disanull that;
Secondly, the execution of that purpose, He stretches out his hand (to do such
or such a thing) who shall turn it back? Let all men and Devils join forces and
counsels, let them strive to do it, they shall not be able to do it. We have a
like confession, ( Dan. 4.35.) He does according to his will in the Armies of
Heaven, and among the Inhabitants of the Earth, and none can stay his hand, or
say to him, what do thou? Such is the mightiness of God, that he can work,
not only when the creature does not help him, or when they apostatize from and
desert him or his interest, but though they set their hearts and heads, their
hands, and their all against him, they cannot stay him, nor hinder his work; I
(says the Lord, Isa. 43.13.) will work, and who shall let it?

Sixthly, Behold, how mighty the Lord is, he is so mighty, that he can do all
these things, and never trouble himself in doing of them; he can do all things,
and not be weary. We see the mightiest among men, the Powers of this world, how
they are toyled, and moyled, how they are worn out, how they sweat and labor,
and are ready to faint and tire, in b^inging some poor business, some petty
project about, or to its issue. But the greatest designs which the Lord has
in his heart to do, he can do them, without any wearisomness or trouble at all,
( Isa. 40.28.) Do not thou know that the Lord is not weary, neither does he
faint: and when the Prophet says, the Lord is not weary, neither does he
faint, the meaning is not this, the Lord is somewhat weary, only he does not
faint, but the meaning is this, he has not the least wearisomness upon him, no
more than a man has in turning his hand; not only are all things possible to
God, or such as he can do, if he put forth the utmost of his power and
strength, if he make (as we say) much ado, if he lay himself out to the full;
not only are things thus possible to God, (which yet argues wonderful might)
but behold, the Lord is so mighty, that there is nothing difficult unto him.
Not only can he possibly do great things, but he can easily do them, he can do
them without the least trouble to himself: There is nothing hard to him, who
can do every thing. Mighty men have done great things, but they will tell you
they could hardly do them, they were forced to turn every stone, to strain
every vein of their hearts to do them; whereas the mighty God can do his work
with as much ease, as desire to have it done.

Seaventhly, Behold, God is mighty, so mighty that he can do any thing, but
that which will argue that he is not almighty. The Scripture speaks of
something which the Lord cannot do, ( Tit. 1.2.) In hope of eternal life,
which God who cannot lie has promised. And again, the Apostle says of God,
not only making promise but oath to Abraham, (Heb. 6.18.) That by two Immutable
things, in which it is impossible for God to lie, the heirs of promise might
have strong consolation. Once more, (2 Timothy 2.13.) If we believe not, yet he
abides faithful, he cannot deny himself. We have these and such like negative
Propositions concerning God, telling us what he cannot do. Now the only reason
why it is said, the Mighty God cannot do these things, is because the doing of
them would argue him not to be Almighty. To lie is to be weak; to deny himself
would affirm his impotency, therefore he cannot do these things; the Lord is
so mighty, so strong, that it is impossible for him to do any thing, which
should declare any weakness or impotency in him. Thus I have given you seven
assertions concerning the might of God, all which may very well call for a
behold of admiration and astonishment at the mightiness of God. Take a few
Inferences from this grand Assertion.

First, For Comfort.

Secondly, For Terror. Behold, the Lord is Mighty, Almighty; this speaks
comfort to the people of God.

First, Surely then he can do whatsoever he has promised to do, and if so,
then look through the promises and see, whether God has not promised, to do
good things for his people in general, and for every believer in particular;
Behold, the Lord is mighty, these are not vain words, he can fill up, and
fulfill all his promises. As he has made promises, so he can create
performances. Abraham was fully persuaded that what he had promised he was able
to perform, ( Romans 4.21.)

Secondly, If the Lord be mighty in all those notions foreshewed, then
certainly he can do whatsoever we desire him to do according to his will. As
God has not out-promised his power, so we cannot out-pray the power, nor
out-ask the arm of God, we may quickly out-pray the power of man, and ask what
he cannot do; he may say, I cannot do this for you, it is not in my power: but
here is our comfort, if what we pray and ask be good for us to have, if it be
just and righteous for him to do, let it be what it will, it is within the
compass of the power of God, who is also ready to perform it for us. The
Apostle assures us of this, ( Ephesians. 4.20.) He is able to do for us abundantly,
above what we ask or think; he cannot only do what we ask, but he can do above
what we ask, yea, abundantly above what we ask. How narrow, and short, and
poor, are our words and prayers, compared with the power of God! He can do
abundantly for us above what we ask, and not only so, but above what we think.
If a man should have somewhat in his mind, that he is not able to express, (as
the mind is far larger than the tongue,) if a man think what he cannot speak or
utter, yet the Lord is of such power, that he can do not only what we think,
but abundantly above what we are able to think. How many requests do we put up
daily to God in prayer for our persons, for our families, for the Church of
God, and about the Kingdoms of men, our own Kingdom especially, is it not
matter of singular comfort, that all these requests are before a Mighty God, a
God who can quickly send down all our prayers in performances, and give us the
fruit of all our askings? It Is an everlasting Spring of comfort and
encouragement unto the people of God, both in prayer and unto prayer; they pray
to him who is mighty, mighty to do what they pray for.

Thirdly, If God be so mighty himself that he can do all things, then he is
able to give us might to do what he requires of us; if he be mighty enough to
do what we ask, then he is mighty enough to enable us to do what he commands.
We ask many things of God, God commands many things at our hands; when we ask,
God is mighty to help us to what we ask; and if what we ask be what he commands
us, he will surely help us to do what we ask, even whatsoever he commands us to
do; he strengthens his people with might by his Spirit in the inner man, ( Ephesians.
3.16.) Paul could say, ( Phil. 4.18.) I can do all things, through Christ
strengthening me; Christ has strength to do all things, and Christ can make me
strong (says the Apostle) to do all things; Christ has strength to do all
things that he has a mind to do, and he is strong to strengthen us in and for
the doing of all things, that are according to his mind.

Fourthly, If God be thus mighty to do all things, if he has all strength,
both commanding and executing strength, then as he can give us strength to do
all things that he calls us to do, so he has strength enough to reward us for
all we do for him; this is comfortable. Sometimes we work and labor for men,
who are not able, they have little power, or if power enough, yet no will at
all to reward us for it. But as the Lord is not unrighteous, to forget our
labor, ( Heb. 6.10.) so he is not unable, that is, he is infinitely able to
reward us. We find the strength of God spoken of to this point, ( Jer. 32.18,
19.) Thou show loving kindness unto thousands, etc. The great, the mighty
God, the Lord of Hosts is his Name; Great in counsel, and mighty in working,
for thine eyes are open upon all the ways of the sons of men, to give every
one according to his ways, and according to the fruit of his doings. When the
Prophet had asserted, God is mighty in working, he brings it down to this, he
is mighty in rewarding us for all our works. Do not think (what labor soever
you have taken for the Lord) that you shall want a reward, for the Lord has
treasure and store, strength and power enough, to give you a sufficient
recompense for all your labors.

Fifthly, This truth is matter of comfort and encouragement in doing good, not
only as it is a service to God, but as it is a kindness to men, especially to
the poor, and more especially to Gods poor. The mightiness of God should move
us to be charitable, yea, liberal and bountiful in our charity. The Apostle
uses this Argument, (2 Cor. 9.8.) for having said, God loves a cheerful
giver, he presently adds, God is able to make all grace abound toward you,
that ye always having all sufficiency in all things, may abound in every good
work. As if he had said, Be not afraid to give, nor sparing in giving, for God
(to whom you lend, when you give to the poor) is a good debtor, a sufficient
paymaster, and he will pay you, not only in your own, but in better coin, than
you lent: he will pay you in spiritualls for your temporalls, in grace for your
gold, and that abundantly, both in the grace of his favor shining upon you, as
also in the Graces of his Spirit working in you; yea, ye shall have, not only
an All Sufficiency in spiritual things, but in all things, which must needs
include temporal things; even your Gold and Silver will multiply as Seed, by
sowing and scattering it abroad (as he alludes in the 9th verse) so that ye
shall (through this ability of God) be enabled to abound in every good work,
that is, every good work of Grace, in general; and if you are called to that
special good work of Charity again and again, you shall be able to abound in
every one of them. Some are doubtful, if they should give freely and liberally,
they should lose by it, and be straightened themselves: No, says the Apostle, I
avouch and engage the Almightiness of God for it, if you be cheerful givers,
God will show his All Sufficiency in giving you an All Sufficiency in all
things. Here are three or four Alls, promised to those, who give but somewhat in
a due manner. Here is, First, all grace; Secondly, All Sufficiency; Thirdly, in
all things; and Fou^thly, always; and all these grounded upon the mightiness
of God: God is able.

Sixthly, God is mighty: Then he can protect us from, support us under, or
deliver us out of all those dangers, which we incur for his Names sake, (
Dan. 3.17.)

Secondly, Hence we may infer matter of terror to the wicked world, the sons
of Belial, the mightiest enemies of God. What is the might of sinful man, to
the mightiness of God! The weakness of God is stronger than man; what then is
his mightiness! We read ( Rev. 6.15.) how, the (Heathen) Kings of the earth,
and the great men, and the rich men, and the chief Captains, and (which may be
the recapitulation of all these) the mighty men, hid themselves in Dens, and
said to the Mountains fall on us, and hide us from the face of him that sits
upon the Throne, and from the wrath of the Lamb. The Apostle checks the madness
of the Corinthians in sinning, by an intimation of the mightiness of God,
against whom they sinned (1 Cor. 10.22.) Do we provoke the Lord to jealousy?
Are we stronger than he? As if he had said, What do ye mean? (he speaks to
those that would venture to go to the Table of Devils, that is, who cared not
how they mingled themselves, and held Communion, in the things of God, with
those who worshipped Devil-gods, or (as all Idolaters do) Devils rather than
God; what mean you (says he to these) consider your selves, Will you provoke
the Lord? are you stronger than he? are you his match? are you able to graple
with him? not so well as a Child with a mighty Giant, or a Lamb with a Lion.
The mightiness of the Lord, his Almightiness, should make sinners tremble, and
fear to provoke him; he can crush them as a Moth, and break them in pieces like
a Potters Vessel. As it is the Joy of all true Believers, that God has laid
help for them (as it is said, Psalm. 89.19.) upon one that is mighty, that is,
Christ, of whom David was but a shadow; and as it is the comfort of the
Fatherless, (how weak soever) that their Redeemer is mighty (Prove. 23.11.) So
it may fill the faces of the wicked and presumptuous with confusion, and their
hearts with despairing sorrow, to hear, that God, who is ready to take
vengeance on them, is mighty, Behold, God is mighty; that is a glorious sight;
and yet behold a sight more glorious, if more glorious may be, And despises
not any.

What a temperament is here? God is so mighty that he fears none, no, not the
mightiest, yet so meek, that he despises not any, no, not the meanest. Elihu
having asserted the mightiness of God, amplifieth it, First, by his gracious
condescension and moderation in the use of his mightiness; he is mighty, yet he
does not exercise his might in a proud vaunting or contemning way, he despises
not any; that is the first thing, in which he amplifies the excellency of God in
his mightiness. Secondly, As God is thus mighty, and moderate in the exercise
of his might, not despising any; so behold another excellency of this might of
God, He is mighty, not only in strength of Arm and Authority, but (as the last
words of the verse set him forth) In strength and wisdom;

Or, he is as wise as he is strong. Some men have a great deal of might, and
they presently swell proudly, this spoils all; others have a great deal of
might, but not a bit of wit, or wisdom, or understanding, how to dispose or
make the best of it: But what a mighty God have we to do with! who is mighty,
and despises no man; who has, not only might of strength, but might of
wisdom too. Thus we see how Elihu, in this latter part of the verse, advances
or extolleth the mightiness of God, in these two things, the infinite
Moderation and Wisdom, that go along with it and act it. I shall a little open
both. First, his wonderful Moderation in the exercise of his mightiness; He is
mighty, And despises not any.

To despise is an act of Pride; Pride is a bad Mo^her of many bad Children,
these three especially. First, boasting of our selves. Secondly, contending
with others. Thirdly, despising of others. The word here used signifies to
despise with abhorrence or loathing, as the Stomach does meat which is
offensive to it; (...)
ill savoured meat is loathsome, and any thing which the mind nauseates, is an
abhorrence to us. The Lord despises not, he does not nauseate any. The word
any is not expressed in the Original Text, that says only, The Lord is Mighty,
and despises not; we put that supplement in our Translation, any; He is
Mighty, and despises not any. Others render more strictly, thus, Behold, God
is Mighty, and despises not his own people. The Chaldee Paraphrase speaks
exegetically, The Lord is mighty, and despises not the righteous man. The
Greek Version has a fourth supplement, to the same purpose, God is mighty, and
despises not the innocent person, (...). Innocentem simplicem integrum. Sept.
Etsi, ^^ga^^r ^usti, tamen non ideo quia justi. Merc.
the man free from evil or wickedness; a man of integrity, a man of
simplicity, the Lord will not despise: such are often afflicted, but never
despised, especially not as such. Lastly, thus, God is mighty, and despises
not the mean, the affl^cted, the poor, or those of low estate, ( Psalm. 22.24.)
He has not despised, nor abhorred, the affliction of the afflicted, neither
has he hid his face from him, but when he cried unto him, he heard. And this
seems most proper to the scope and meaning of Elihu here; God is mighty, and
despises not those who have no might. Thus the words reflect chiefly upon Job,
who at least seemed to charge God, that he did not consider him in his
affliction, or in his low estate when he complained and cried to him. We have
two Texts in this Book of Job, which might very well move Elihu to speak thus
unto him; though God be mighty, yet he despises not the afflicted, or the
poor. Job said (Chap. 10.3.) Is it good to thee that thou should oppress,
that thou should despise the work of thy hands, and shine upon the Counsel
of the wicked? As if he had said to God, Thou seem to despise me, the work
of thy hand, now that I am poor, low, and reduced, as it were, to dust. Again
(Chap. 19.7.) we have near the same ^^nguage, Behold, I cry out of wrong, but I
am not heard, I cry a loud, but there is no Judgment. As much as to say, I am
despised and neglected, I am not regarded when I cry. This Elihu takes off in
the present Text, Behold, God is mighty, and despises not any; he despises
not the afflicted, not the poor, when they cry un^o, and call upon him; and
therefore in this, O Job, thou have misbehaved thy self, or spoken amiss.

But which-soever of these supplements we take, the sense is good, and the
Proposition true, he despises not; what will he not despise? we say, not any;
a second, his own; a third, the Just; a sourth, the Innocent; a fifth, the
afflicted (there is a sixth, which I shall offer before I part with these
words) All these are true, God despises not.

Hence Note; First, Though the Lord be infinitely more mighty than the
mightiest of men, yet he does not despise any man;

He does not despise man in general, who is the work of his hand; yea, Job said
once ( Chap. 14.15.) Thou will have a desire to the work of thy hand. The Lord
does not despise any of his works, as they are his works, or as they come out
of his hand; and therefore when Jonah seemed to set so low a rate upon the
Ninivites, who were the work of his hand, his Creatures, the Lord reproved him
for it, by the Gourd, which when the Lord smote, Jonah was angry; but said the
Lord, Do thou well to be angry for thy Gourd? Have thou mercy upon a Gourd,
and should not I spare this City, wherein are more than six score thousand
persons, that know not their right hand from their left, and also much Cattle?
The Lord did not despise, but pity them. Go through all the sorts of men, the
Lord despises none; the Lord despises not great men, because great (which
will come to a further consideration, upon another Translation of the Text) nor
mean men, because mean; he despises not men in prosperity, because they are
rich and prosperous, nor does he despise men in adversity, because poor and
unprosperous. He despises not any upon any of these accounts; the Lord
despises none but the wicked, and the ungodly, the unbeliever and the
impenitent, and all them he despises, and them he ever will despise, how
great, how high, how mighty, how rich soever they are; the Lord despises them,
and he will always despise them. He does not despise any man because a great
man, if he be not a wicked great man; and let men be never so poor or low, the
Lord looks not disdainfully upon them because they are so; God does not despise
any man because he is in a bad case, he only despises men, because their case
or Cause is bad, and then he will despise them, let them be who or what they
will. Such is the goodness of God, and this goodness is his Glory, That
although the highest and greatest of men, are but as worms to him, or not so
much to him as the dust of the Balance, or the drop of the Bucket, yet he
despises not any, no, not the lowest and least of men.

S^condly, When the Text says, he desp^seth not, there is more in it than is
expressed. We may take it affirmatively, God gives all sorts of men due regard
and favor, he takes care of them, and bestows suitable mercies upon them, even
upon the meanest and poorest of them: if they be his, if they be faithful and
godly, how does the Lord own them! how does the Lord honor them! how does the
Lord embrace and lay them in his bosom, though they lie upon the Dunghill, as
Job did! As when we are warned not to despise the chastnings of the Lord (Heb.
12.5.) we are taught to take them in good part; and as when the Apostle
admonishes us (1 Thessalonians. 5.20.) not to despise Prophecy, his meaning is not
only this, that he would not have us slight it, and throw it at ou^ heels, but
he would have us give it due esteem, and honor it as one of our choycest
mercies, he would have us set a g^e^t price upon it, and bless God heartily for
it. So here, when Elihu says The Lord despises not any, his purp^^e is to
show, that he respects and favors men according to their condition, but most
his own faithful and obedient Servants. This Interpreta^ion may give us another
Instruction: God has a due regard and respect to all sorts and conditions of
men.

Having made all men, he does not throw them up to the wide world, much less
trample upon them himself; but owns them, preserves them, wa^cheth over them
all. And as for his special people, he tends them as a Nurse her infant, or as
a Father tenders his children; he counsels them, he guides them, he directs and
leads them, he supports and comforts them, he carries them through this world,
as it were in his own arms, as the Eagle carries her young ones upon her
wings. (...) simila devorat ^^ consumat; sed sibi si^ulia complactitur. Brent.
The Lord is a consuming fire to burn up the wicked, those that are unlike him,
and like him not; but he is a warm Sun, to cherish, and a safe-guarding Shield,
to protect those that fear him and trust in his Name: He indeed will be as a
refining Fire, to fetch out and consume the dross that he sees in his people,
and as a trying Fire (by affliction) to their Graces (as Jobs case was) But
when he is so, and does so, he is so far from despising them, that he honors
them, and makes them more honorable. And therefore having made Promise of
being with his people when they should be called to walk through the fire (
Isa. 43.2.) he presently subjoyns, ( verse. 4.) Since thou wast precious in my
sight, thou have been honorable. As if he had said, Since thou have given a
proof that thou art good Metal, and that thou have lost and left nothing in the
fire of affliction, but thy dross, I both honor thee my self, and will cause
others to honor thee also.

Again, He desp^seth not any. Elihu in this sets out the honor of God, he puts
this as a Crown of Glory upon the head of his Power. God is mighty, yet he
despises not any.

Hence Note; To be mighty in Power, and meek in Spirit, shows an excellent
God-like Spirit.

As God is great, so good; both are equally essential to him: goodness,
gentleness, and meekness, meet together and are matched with greatness and
mightiness in God, ( Nahum 1.8.) The Lord is great in Power, and sl^^ to anger;
he is not presently in a flame with sinners, but waits to be gracious. Fury
is not in me, (says the Lord, Isa. 27.4, 5.) I do not presently execute my
power, because great in power. Who would set the Briars and Thorns against me
in battle? I would go through them, and burn them t^gether; or let him take hold
of my strength, and make peace with me, and he shall make peace with me. As if
he had said, If sinners, of one sort or other, who are to me, or to my people,
like Briars and Thorns, vexing and troubling both me and them, should take the
boldness to contend with me, I could quickly rid my hands of them, even as soon
as fire can consume Briars and Thorns fully dry; yet I rather advise them to
humble themselves, and humbly make suit for peace, and they shall not find me
inexorable, though I am invincible* they may have Peace for the asking, though
I fear not at all the issue of the War. O that the mighty men of the World,
would strive to imitate this overture of the mighty God: But oh how unlike are
the most of the mighty men of this World to God!

First, Some mighty men of this World rather pride themselves that they can do
hurt, than please themselves, that they may do good with their might. ( Psalm.
52.1.) Why boastest thou O mighty man, that thou can do mischief? that thou
can tread and trample upon others? this thy boast should be thy shame. Mighty
men are apt to despise all men (upon the matter) that are below them, that are
their underlings; but why do thou boast, O thou mighty man, seeing (as it
follows in the Psalm) the goodness of God (who is mightier than thou)
endures continually.

Secondly, How unlike are they to God, who having might and power in their
hand, despise the mean, and the oppressed, who come to them for Justice! Such
are not like God, the Judge^ all men, but like that Judge, whose Character was
( Luke 18.2.) He feared not God, nor regarded man; he despised all; what cared
he for them, or their tears, so he might serve his own turn, and carry on his
own ends? Woe to the mighty, who despise the Cause, much more who despise the
cries of the oppressed.

Thirdly, The mighty men of the earth usually despise those whom God honors
most. God despises not any, but he highly esteems his own; whereas the
mighty men of the World are apt to despise all, especially his, that is, the
Generation of the righteous; they that are nearest to Gods heart, are farthest
from theirs. The affections and estimations of the mighty, seldom fall in
with, but run cross to Gods, ( Psalm. 10.3.) He blesses the Covetous, whom God
abhors; that is, he has a high esteem of those, whom God cannot abide; and he
that does so, will never abide those whom God highly esteems, and those least
whom God esteems most highly; away (says he) with those that are so strict in
their way, away with them (says he) that walk in the narrow way. O let such
mighty ones as despise these, consider how unlike they are to the mighty God,
who despises not any, who greatly honors these. Michal, David's Wife, Saul's
Daughter, had a piece of this spirit in her; though David was a mighty King,
she despised him, only because he was a holy and a zealous King: When she saw
how he danced before the Ark, when she saw how he was taken with the things of
God, she despised him in her heart, and for that was punished with a barren
womb, as long as she lived, (2 Samuel 6.23.) They who act highest in holiness,
are always lowest in the thoughts of the unholy.

Fourthly, They that are mighty in Parts and Gifts of speech and knowledge,
they who are got a Form higher than their Brethren, how apt are they to despise
all that are below them! Not is this the sin of carnal vain men only, but of
many (for the main) good men also, who taking too much notice of their own
great Abilities, will scarce take any notice of them who have but little. This
dead Fly has corrupted many a Box of precious Ointment; this Weed has been
found growing in the richest grounds; and the richer any ground is, the more
apt it is to bring forth this Weed, unless the Lord, with those other Gifts,
give also that which is more excellent than all Gifts, even than the Tongue,
yea H^ad of men and Angels, an humble and self-denying heart. St Paul himself
was in danger to be lifted up (and certainly had, if God had not given him
preventing Physic) with this distemper, through the abundance of Revelations;
now, he that is lifted up in himself, is within a step of despising others. And
O how unlike are these in this also to God, who is mighty, not only in
strength, but in wisdom, yet despises not any! And, that God who is mighty
and despises not any, is mighty, not only in st^ength, but in wisdom, is
Elihu's Assertion also concerning God, in the close of this verse, and comes
next to be opened and handled.

He is mighty in strength and wisdom. The Original may be thus rendered
strictly; He is mighty, the strength of heart: Now, the strength of the heart
consists, first, in courage; secondly, in wisdom; and hence we translate
distinctly, He is mighty in strength and wisdom. Here are two points of Gods
might according to our reading: He is mighty, First, in strength; Secondly, in
wisdom. As before we had that Noble combination of Mightiness and Meekness in
God, He is mighty and despises not any; so here we have another noble
combination, in his mightiness, of strength and wisdom; He is mighty in
strength and in wisdom. Some men are mighty in strength, who are weak in
wisdom; others are mighty in wisdom, but not in strength; both meet and are
joined in God (in whom all things are but one, he being but an infinite
simplicity, though they are acted diversely toward man, both these (I say) meet
in God) and he equally excels in both.

Yet because, if these two be taken distinctly, we can understand nothing in
God by strength, but what was comprehended in mightiness before spoken of,
therefore I conceive, these words, He is mighty in strength and wisdom,
signify no more in this place than this, That God is mighty in the strength of
wisdom, or that he is mighty strong in wisdom. And so I shall proceed with
the Text.

This strength of the wisdom of God, or his strong wisdom, is of two sorts,
or consists in a twofold wisdom. First, there is his knowing and discerning
wisdom. Secondly, there is his governing and disposing wisdom.

First, There is a strength of wisdom in knowing and discerning: God is mighty
strong in this wisdom, in this knowing, this discerning wisdom, (1 Samuel 2.3.)
The Lord is a God of knowledge, by him actions are weighed; He knows our
actions exactly, and he will weigh them to a grain, he knows our actions to
the utmost. And as he knows our actions, so our intentions; he knows our
inside as well as our outside, ( Heb. 4.13.) All things are naked and manifest
before him, with whom we have to do; and they are not only naked to the skin,
but unbowelled, and anatomized to every vein and bone, ( Acts 15.18.) Known to
God are all his works from the beginning of the world; he knows all his own
works, much more ours. Thus God is strong in wisdom, as wisdom consists in
knowledge; and thus strong he is, he knows all things; First, the least
things, as well as the greatest; it is no burden, no distraction to God, to take
notice of the smallest matters, even to the numbering of the hairs of our
head. That Is true greatness of knowledge, to know the least things and motions
of the meanest creature. Secondly, he knows the most secret things; Secret
things belong to God, (Deuteronomy. 29.29.) that is, God has secrets which he
reserves to himself, man cannot know them, man must not attempt to know them,
such an attempt were insufferable intrusion. Now as God has secrets of his
own, which no man must meddle with, so be medles with all our secrets, our
secrets belong to God as well as his own; he knows the secrets of our hearts,
he has a key to that Cabinet, and can unlock it, and look into it; we may lock
men, one and other, out of our hearts, but we cannot lock out God, he sees
what is there, such is the strength of his knowing wisdom. Thirdly, He knows
things future, or what shall be; he knows what as yet is not, as clearly as
what is; He declares the end from the beginning, (Isa. 46.10.) Upon this
ground the Prophet challenges all the Idols of the world, ( Isa. 41.23.) Show
the things that are to come hereafter, that we may know that ye are Gods; tell
us what shall be next, tell us what will be to morrow; that will be a
demonstration of your Divinity; the Lord declares things to come, and he only
declares them. We know little of that which is, he, and he only, knows that
which will be. All futures unrevealed, are secrets, and among them our thoughts
are the greatest secrets, yet them the Lord knows, ( Psalm. 139.2.) Thou
(says David) understandest my thoughts afar off, that is, before I think them;
Is not this strength of knowing wisdom? Fourthly, God knows all things
always, or everlastingly, there is not one of them slips out of his knowledge,
they are at all times alike, that is, perfectly before him; Is not this also
strength of knowing wisdom? Fifthly, The Lord knows all these things as
distinctly as if he had but one thing to know. Sixthly, He knows all things
by one act of single and simple intuition, he does not know (as we) by report
from others, nor by comparing one thing with another, nor by inferring one
thing from another, that is, he does not know by discourse, argument, or
demonstration, but all things are before the eye of his knowledge nakedly and
immediately, as they are. These two last as well as any of, or all the former,
are a clear proof, not only, that God is knowing and wise, but that he is
mighty in strength of knowing wisdom.

Secondly, Consider wisdom, as it is applied in working. Some have much of
that wisdom which we call Theoreticall, knowing, discerning wisdom; but as
for practical, working wisdom, how to put things together, how to order them
as to the businesses and affairs of this life, they are very far to seek. We
say, Great Scholars are not always the wisest men: many are knowing, they know
almost all things, they will dispute (de omni scibili) of all things knowable,
yet are very weak when they come to lay things together for practice or
government; if it be but the government of a family, or of their private
estate, they know not how to manage it, much less can they manage the
government of great Societies or Corporations, least of all of Kingdoms and
Nations. But as for the Lord, he has not only a knowing wisdom, but a
disposing, a governing, a working, practical wisdom, in ordering all affairs,
which we properly call prudence or discretion, ( Psalm. 112.5.) We have seen
knowing learned men do things very foolishly, imprudently, indiscreetly. But
all the works of the Lord are contrived and modeled, as also effected and
perfected with infinite wisdom. Hence that Holy exclamation, ( Psalm. 104.24.)
O Lord, how manifold are thy works, in wisdom have thou made them all? Which
as it is true of all the works of Creation, so likewise of the works of
Providence, the former of which are spoken of in the beginning of the Psalm,
and the latter in the following parts of it. The Lord in wisdom made the
world, He made the heavens by his wisdom, (Psalm. 136.5.) and by wisdom has
he founded the earth, (Pro. 3.19.) If in both those places we understand Christ
by wisdom, it does not hinder, but advance this truth; now as the Lord made
the world both heaven and earth in wisdom, so in and by the same wisdom he
governs heaven and earth, and all his works in both are full of wisdom. Thus
it appears that the Lord is mighty in strength of wisdom, both as to the
knowing and ordering of all things: yea, the Lord is so mighty in both these
kinds of wisdom, that there is indeed none wise but he. And therefore the
Scripture not only calls him, The wise God, but God only wise, (Romans 16.27.
Jude v. 25.) And surely he is mighty strong in wisdom, who has all the
wisdom, or is only wise. Some may say, How are we to understand that? is not
wisdom one of those communicable Attributes of God? so we distinguish the
divine Attributes, some are communicable, others are incommunicable. The
infiniteness, the omniscience, the unchangableness, the simplicity of God are
incommunicable, but the holiness, the justice, the mercy and wisdom of God,
are communicable; that is, God does communicate unto man his holiness, his
justice and wisdom. Why then is it said, That God is only wise, seeing God
has endowed many with a spirit of wisdom, or has made many wise men in the
world?

I answer, First, God is said to be only wise, because there is none so wise as
he; his wisdom is so much beyond the wisdom of all men, that no man may be
called wise but God. Thus also God is called the only Potentate, (1 Timothy 6.15.)
because though there are many Potentates in the world, yet Gods potency is
beyond them all. His life also is such, that, at the 16th verse of the same
Chapter it is said, He only has immortality, yet both the Angels and the souls
of men are immortal; but God has immortality in a way of such eminency, that
the very Angels and souls of men are mortal in comparison of him. David said of
his life, ( Psalm. 39.5.) My age is nothing to thee; I scarce live at all, when
I consider the life of God; so the wisest man in the world may say of his
wisdom, my wisdom is nothing unto thee, I have no wisdom when I consider how
wise God is.

Secondly, God is said to be only wise, because there are none originally wise
but he; his wisdom is of himself, yea his wisdom is himself; the wisdom of
God is not a separable quality from him, as the wisdom of a man is. Many are
men, but not wise men; but it is impossible for God to be God, and not to be
wise; his wisdom is essential to him. The wisdom of man is like gilding upon
an earthen vessel; but the wisdom of God is like a golden vessel. The wisest
men are gilded over with wisdom, they are adorned and beautified with it, but
no man, how wise soever is wisdom, only God is. God is (if I may so speak) an
Immense and immeasurable vessel of gold, he is all gold, you cannot distinguish
the gold from the vessel, it is gold quite through, he is massy gold, massy
wisdom. The wisdom of man is another thing from himself. The wisdom of God
is himself; and thus God alone is wise.

Thirdly, God is only wise, because all wisdom is from him; as he has his
wisdom from himself, so all others have wisdom from him; all the wisdom of
men and Angels, is but a ray from his light, but a stream, yea, but a drop from
his Ocean. Bezaliel's Artificial wisdom was from the Lord, Solomon's political
wisdom was from the Lord; Solomon asked wisdom from the Lord to govern. And
not only is the wisdom of Princes, Statesmen and Politicians, but the very
Plowmans wisdom is from the Lord, ( Isa. 28.26.) where the Prophet having
showed how the Plowman tills the ground, how he harrows and casts in the seed,
how he thresheth and gets out the grain, he adds ( v. 29.) This comes from
the Lord, who is wonderful in counsel, and excellent in working. The Plowman
knows not how to till his ground, to sow his seed, to harrow his land, to
thresh his corn, if the Lord did not give him wisdom for it. Thus common
wisdom as well as political and spiritual wisdom is of God, as Daniel
confessed when the secret was revealed to him, ( Dan 2.21.) He gives wisdom
unto the wise, and knowledge to them that know understanding. Seeing then all
wisdom is from God, we must confess, He is only wise.

Fourthly, The Lord may be said to be only wise, because he is victoriously
wise, his wisdom is a conquering wisdom, he conquers by his wisdom as well
as by his power; his wisdom overthrows the wise men of the world, ( Prove.
21.30.) There is no wisdom, nor understanding, nor counsel against the Lord.
Many men will be taking and giving counsel against the Lord, but it shall not
stand ( Isa. 8.9.) He is only wise, who destroys the wisdom of the wise, (1
Cor. 1.19. 1 Cor. 3.19, 20.) Thus the Lord is mighty in strength of wisdom, in
knowing and disposing wisdom, discerning all things most clearly, and ordering
all things most wisely, according to the pleasure of his holy and righteous
will: and he is so wise in all these things, that he ought to be acknowledged
and reverenced, as the only wise God, or as God only wise. Hence take these
Inferences.

First, If the Lord be mighty in strength of wisdom as well as in strength of
power, then fear to do any thing amiss before him; he will spy out every fault;
and the more you cover the faults, cracks and flawes in what you do, the more
the Lord sets himself to find them out; you cannot hide what you do from him,
therefore take heed what you do.

Secondly, Is God mighty in strength of wisdom? then do not find fault with
any thing he does, for he can do nothing amiss* The works of providence,
whether they regard persons or Nations, are done with as much exactness as the
works of Creation were. In what beauty and order was the fabric of this world
set up at first in six days! It is called Cosmos in Greek, from the beautiful
order visible quite through it; and certainly, the works of providence are as
orderly and perfect as the work of Creation, and so will appear at last, though
now we see so many appearing confusions, disturbances, and tossings up and
down: The Lord keeps order, how disorderly so ever men are. The Lord does all
things in number, weight and measure. There is not one, the least, slip, error
or mistake in what himself does, not in what he suffers men to do as to his own
ends, how many errors and mistakes soever there are in the ways of men, or in
the means which they use. Then take heed of picking holes in Gods work, much
more of picking quarrels with his work. We are apt to find fault (where there
is none) with what God does, but how slow are we to find faults (where there
are many) in our own doings!

Thirdly, Is the Lord mighty in strength of wisdom? then never be troubled,
though you have mighty wise men against you; be not afraid, only labor to
assure the mighty wise God for you. If you can but assure God, who is mighty in
wisdom for you, you need not be troubled, though mighty wise men are against
you, though Achitophels, though Matchevels, though the Conclave of Babylon be
against you: if the wisdom of God be with us and for us, we are well enough,
and shall do well enough, notwithstanding the wisdom of the world against us.

Fourthly, If God be mighty in strength of wisdom, then, when we want wisdom,
and know not what to do, or how to suffer, let us go to God; if we want wisdom
to manage a prosperous estate, or to bear an afflicted estate, let us go to
God. The Apostle gives this direction ( James 1.5.) If any man lack wisdom,
(he speaks of a man in a troublous condition, in a time of temptation) let him
ask of God, who gives to all men liberally, and upbraideth not. God has
wisdom enough for us, and can make us wise enough; apply to him, and you may
be supplied for all occasions.

Fifthly, If God be mighty in strength of wisdom, then confidently cast your
care on him, put your all into his hand, (Psalm. 37.5.) Commit thy way to the
Lord, trust also in him, and he shall bring it to pass. (Prove. 16.3.) Commit
thy works unto the Lord, and thy thoughts shall be established; that is, thy
thoughts about thy works, and usually our thoughts are more unsettled than our
works. When we have left a matter in the hand of a wise man, how confident are
we, and how composed are our thoughts, as to the well-issuing of it! how much
more may we be confident, and composed, when we have believingly left our
matters in the hand of the only Wise God!

Sixthly, If the Lord be so mighty in Wisdom, that he only is Wise, then
beware of trusting to your own wisdom, or of being wise in your own eyes.
That Is the counsel of Solomon the wise, ( Prove. 3.5.) Lean not to thy own
understanding. We are apt to lean too much to the understanding of others; if
we have such a wise man to counsel us, we think all is safe, we are Cock-sure
(as we say) the work cannot miscarry. It Is dangerous to lean to the
understanding of others, but much more to lean to our own. Remember God is only
Wise, and we never show our selves more fools, than when we lean to our own
wisdom, or think to carry it by our own wit, and so depart from the wisdom of
God. Therefore be fools, be nothing in your own wisdom, and you shall be wise
with the wisdom of God.

Thus I have prosecuted the Text according to our Translation.

There is yet another reading as to both the parts of this 5th verse, which I
shall touch a little, because they are much insisted upon by Learned
Interpreters.

The former part of this verse, which we render. Ecce Deus p^tens, et non
fastidit potentes, robore cordis. Scult. Deus potentes non abjecit, cum et ipse
sit potens. Vulg. Vt haec explicatio verbu Hebraeis conveniat, vau, quod saepe
sit, redundante verti popest. Ecce Deus potentem non fastidit, vel, Ecce Deus
potens non fastidit. sc. potentem. Cum enim verbo illo accusativus addendiu
sit, satius est ex praecedenti. (...) Potentem repetere, quam objectum ex mente
fingere. Scult.
Behold God is mighty, and despises not any, is thus rendered, Behold God is
mighty, and despises not the mighty. The vulgar Latin, thus, God does not
cast away the mighty, seeing he himself also is mighty. The scope of this
Translation, is thus conceived. Job in the 29th Chapter of this Book, having
set forth his own mightiness or greatness, complained in the 30th, that
notwithstanding all his former power and might, yet God had cast him down, and
laid him in the dust. Here Elihu tells him, though God be mighty, yet he does
not despise the mighty; he does not reject any man how high soever, because he
is high, nor the great, how great soever, because great. God himself is great
and mighty, and they that are like, (usually) rejoice in those that are like
them. Therefore God being mighty himself, does not despise or reject those that
are mighty, because they are so; there must be some other reason (it is not
their mightiness) why God despises and casts down the mighty. God is mighty,
and despises not the mighty.

Hence Note.

The great God is no enemy to greatness. God does not despise the mighty, the
Kings and Princes of the Earth, as they are such; he has no antipathy in him
against greatness, nor does he reject any man because he is great; if he does
at any time reject a great man, it is because of the abuse of his greatness:
God dislikes no man's just power, but the unjust exercise of that power. The
Authority and Power of man over man is of God, therefore God does not despise
men because they are in power. He ordains Powers, There is no Power but of
God, the Powers that be, Non potentia justa sed actio prava damnatur. Greg. l.
26. c. 24.
are ordained (or as our Margin has it, ordered of God.) He puts power into
the hands of men, and disposes of their power. God cannot despise his own
Ordination. It Is the abuse of Power, and not the Power it self, which the Lord
sets himself against, and that indeed he does set himself against; he despises
the most mighty and powerful Princes of the World, when they instead of
governing, are only vexing others with their Power: This causes him to pour
contempt upon Princes (Psalm. 107.40.) and renders him terrible to the Kings of
the Earth (Psalm. 76.12.) Yet the Lord is never so angry with, nor does he so
aggravate the faults of those that are in Power, as to make Power it self
faulty. Indeed, when great and mighty men turn their Power into oppression,
then the Lord speaks as if he had conceived a displeasure against all great and
mighty men, yet he is not displeased with their greatness, but with the
mis-improvement of their greatness, and mal-administration of their Power. The
Prophet puts the Question ( Hab. ^.8.) Was the Lord displeased against the
Rivers? was thine anger against the Rivers? was thy wrath against the Sea? What
was the reason why God turned the River of Nilus in Egypt, into blood? What was
the reason why God divided the Red Sea? Was he wrath with the River, or with
the Sea? No, he was wrath with the great Ones of Egypt, his wrath was against
Pharaoh and the Egyptians. Such an expression we have ( Nahum 1.4.) He rebukes
the Sea, and makes it dry, and dries up all the Rivers: Bashan languisheth,
and Carmel, and the Flower of Lebanon languisheth. What was the meaning of all
this? it only signified that the Lord was highly displeased with the great and
mighty Ones of the world, who were to others, as the Sea is to a River, and as
Carmel and Lebanon were to the Plains and low Valleys of the Earth, exceeding
them in height and greatness; I say, he was highly displeased with them,
because these carried it amiss in the exercise of their high Power; it was not
because they were high and great, but because they had not exalted God in their
highness, nor acted toward man as became those who were advanced above, and
over other men. Thus all along the Lord speaks against, and rebukes the high
and mighty, upon no other account but the unrighteous administration of their
might and highness. God quarrels with no man merely for his might.

The Historyes of all Ages have reported the great and mighty men of the World,
opposing the mighty, purely because they were so. Some say they did it out of
Reason of Statel, but the true Reason of it, usually was their own pride, or
envy, Superbia parem non fert.
because they could not bear those that were equal with them, as Pompey, much
less a Superior, as Caesar could not. Or it was out of fear that the great
would undermine their greatness, or bring them down. Thus mighty men oppose
the mighty, as mighty; but the Lord is infinitely above these thoughts, He is
mighty, and he despises not the mighty, nor does he set himself against them,
Magnificus magnificentias cogitabit. Heb.
because they are mighty. The liberal (Isa. 32.8.) devises liberal things, and
by liberal things shall he stand. David a great P ince, prayed ( Psalm. 51.12.)
that God would establish him by his free (or Princely) Spirit; that being a
mighty King, he might never any more entertain low and unworthy thoughts of any
man, Maximus virtute cordis. Coc. (...) Potens est robore cordis, i. e. valet
animi praestantia, est magni animi ergo opera manuum suarum non contemnit. Merc.
nor do any thing unworthy of God, or of himself.

Again, Our Translation distributes the latter part of the verse into two
Branches of the mightiness of God. He is mighty, first, in strength; and
secondly, In wisdom. This, by others, is rendered a single Proposition. He is
mighty in strength of heart. Strength of heart may be taken three ways: First,
For courage in dangers. Secondly, For patience in troubles. Thirdly, For
nobleness and greatness of mind, in all we do. In this third or last sense,
we are to understand it here; as if Elihu had said, The Reason why the Lord
being mighty, does not despise the mighty, is this, Because he excels all
others, not only in mightiness and power, but in the nobleness of his Spirit.
The Lord has such an heroical Spirit, that he can do nothing below or
unbecoming himself. This is an excellent reading of the words. Take two Notes
from it. First, By way of Assertion. Secondly, By way of Illation. By way of
Assertion, thus, The Lord has a wonderful noble heart, and magnificent Spirit.

He has not only an outward power (as many have) but an inward power; he is
not only Master of others, but, as I may say, he is Master of himself. Many are
Masters of others, who are not at all Masters of themselves; they are mighty in
the strength of hand, yet weak as to strength of heart. The inward excellency
and mightiness of the heart of God, may be seen eminently in a threefold
respect.

First, The Lord is mighty of heart, as to patience and long-sufferance, in
bearing with those that are evil. The Lord is infinitely above that patience
which consists in the bearing of evil, (though that as was touched before, shows
much strength of heart) but he is continually in the exercise of that patience,
which consists in bearing with those that are evil. And O how great is the
strength and might of Gods heart in this! Some of the Rabbis translate the
Original Text, (...).
long-suffering. The Prophet Nahum speaks of God, as slow to anger, and great
in power, (Chap. 1.3.) It argues strength of heart indeed, when we can stop
and bridle our boisterous and angry passions, toward those that have offended
us. The Lord says unto, or concerning Pharaoh (Exodus 9.16.) And in very deed,
for this cause have I raised thee up, for to show in thee my power, etc. What
power? The Lord showed forth a twofold power in the raising up of Pharaoh:
First, the power of his Arm, that he was able to cast down such a mighty
Prince. Secondly, The power of his Patience, that he spared him from ruin till
he had sent ten messages to him, and poured ten Plagues upon him. The Lord was
so provoked by Pharaoh, that he might have crushed him upon the first denial,
but he forbear him long; the Lord might well say, I have set thee up that I
might show forth my power, my power in forbearing thee long, as well as in
destroying thee at last. The Apostle speaks of this power (Romans 9.22.) What if
God willing to show his wrath, and make his power known (the Lord will not only
show his wrath hereafter in breaking those vessels of destruction, but he shows
his power now in suffering them long, and therefore he to make his power known)
endured with much long-suffering the Vessels of wrath fitted to destruction.
Here Is the strength of the Lords heart, he bears long with wicked men.

Secondly, There is a mighty power or strength of heart in God, as in
long-suffering toward impenitent sinners, so in pardoning sinners who repent.
Who, Magni animi est ignoscere.
but the Lord has such a strength of Spirit, to pardon and pass by offenses!
After the People of Israel had mutined, and murmured, Sola sublimis et excelsa
virtus est, nec quicquam magnum, nisi quod simul placidum. Sen.
and so provoked the Lord to the height, Moses begs and bespeaks the power of
the Lords pardoning-mercy, ( Numb. 14.17.) And now I beseech thee let the power
of my Lord be great, according as thou have spoken, saying, The Lord is
long-suffering, and of great mercy, forgiving iniquity, etc. As if Moses had
said, Lord, thou must put forth as much power in pardoning the sins of this
People, as ever thou did in delivering them from their bondage-sufferings in
Egypt. Or thus, O Lord, thou might magnify the power of thine anger in
punishing this rebellious People, but rather magnify the power of thy patience
and long-sufferance in sparing and pardoning them. O what strength of heart is
in God, who passes by the great transgressions of his People!

Thirdly, The Lord has a mightiness of heart in executing his wrath upon his
incorrigible enemies, ( Psalm. 90.11.) Who knows the power of thine anger? The
anger of God is such a thing as no man can go to the bottom of it in his
thoughts. The Lords wrath is powerful, beyond all imagination and apprehension;
his anger, as well as his love, passes knowledge. In all these respects the
Lord has strength of heart, or he is mighty in strength of heart, as well as
in hand or arm. The greatest discoveries of Gods power, are in the ways of his
mercy. His Judgments are called his strange work, but his mercy is his
strength, as the Prophet calls it, ( Isa. 27.5.) where warning the Briars and
Thorns to take heed of warring with God, he gives a sinner this counsel, Let
him take hold of my strength, that he may make peace with me, and he shall make
peace with me. But what is meant by the strength of God? Some render,
Apprehendet arcem meam, i. e. Christum. Coc.
Let him take hold of my Tower. A Tower is a place of strength, but here put
for that which God glories in most, as his chiefest strength, even his
goodness, me^cy, patience, and long-sufferance, yea Christ himself; as if he
had said, Let not the sinner struggle with my strength, let him not think by
str^ng hand to overcome my strength, but let him take hold of my Christ,
through whom all those glorious perfections of mine, my Goodness, Mercy,
Patience, etc. are given out to the children of men, and he shall make peace
with me. This is the true strength of God; nor does any thing more set forth
the strength of man, than this, that he is ready to pardon, to forgive, and
pass by; only impotent spirits are much for revenge. It Is our weakness not to
pass by wrongs and injuries done to us. To bear wrongs is to be like the high
and mighty God, to bear them in mind, is to be like the lowest and weakest
spirited men. He is strong indeed, who is strong in patience against Offenders,
and as strong in mercy to pardon humble ones, as in power to punish stubborn
and rebellious ones.

Secondly, By way of Illation,

Note.

It Is the greatness of Gods Spirit, or the strength of his heart and mind,
which moderates him toward sinful man. That which keeps men in a moderate
frame toward men, is true greatness of spirit: They that are of such a
spirit, will neither despise those that are below them, nor envy those that are
above them, not willingly oppose those that are equal to them. The envy and
opposition of others greatness, arises from the meannesse and weakness of
our own spirits. The reason why one man is afraid that another should be high,
is because himself has not a real highness of spirit; or the reason why most
oppose the greatness of others, is the littleness of their own spirits.
Whence spring contentions and strifes, envyings at, and underminings of one
another? come they not from the narrowness of our hearts, that we cannot
rejoice in the good of others, or from the impotent jealousies of our hearts,
that we fear others will do us hurt? If such a one get up, he will pull me
down; if such a one be high, it is dangerous to me, therefore I must pull him
down, if I can; whence comes this, but from lowness and poorness of spirit,
from that pitiful thing in man, called Pusillanimity. The Lord has so great a
Spirit, that as he envieth no man's greatness, so he fears no man's greatness,
and therefore does that which is just and equal to all sorts of men, bad and
good, as is further showed in the next verse.

Verse. 6. He preserves not the life of the wicked, but gives right to the
poor. As if Elihu had said, Though the Lord does not despise any that are
great, yet he does not respect any that aro bad; he preserves not the life of
the wicked. And as the Lord will not do any wrong to the rich, so, to be sure,
he will give right to the poor. What Elihu had affi^med of God, he now proves
by instances or particulars, and that both in respect of the wicked and the
godly. That the Lord is most just and righteous he proves thus, He preserves
not the life of the wicked.

That Is the first instance, and he expresses it negatively, (...) Non
vi^ificat.
He preserves not the life of the wicked, he makes not, or suffers not the
wicked to live. The Hebrew strictly is, He does not enliven the wicked: So the
word is used concerning the Midwives that feared God, ( Exodus 1.17.) They did
not obey the word of the King, but saved the Male Children alive, or, they
enlivened the Male children. They who preserve, do, upon the matter, give a new
life. The like Expression we have ( Exodus 18.22.) Thou shall not suffer a Witch
to live: The Hebrew is, thou shall not vivifie or enliven a Witch. They who
have commerce with the Devil, the Prince of the Air, they who Trade with Hell,
to satisfy the lusts and curiosities of evil men on earth, are not worthy to
breath in the Air, or live upon the face of the Earth. He preserves not the
life of the wicked. There are two things in this negative speech of Elihu.

First, God does not show any favor to, nor indulge wicked men in their evil
ways. He that will not so much as p^eserve their lives, does not give them
favor while they live. Life and savor are two distinct things, ( Job 10.12.)
Thou have granted me life and favor. Favor with life is the p^iviledge of the
living; favor is better than life. The Lord does but seldom reprieve, much
less does he at any time favor or pardon impenitently wicked men.

Secondly, When Elihu says, he preserves not the life of the wicked, Non
vivificat (...), pro inters^ it, et omni vita spoliat. Coc.
we are to understand it by an ordinary Figure, wherein less is expressed, than
is to be understood; He preserves not, that is, first, he is not solicitous
about their preservation, he cares not much what becomes of them; and not only
so, but Secondly, he destroys the life of the wicked; the Lord will certainly
ruin and utterly undo them, one time or other, one way or other; he will do
it either immediately, by his own Arm, by some notable stroke of vengeance
from himself: or he will do it by means, he will find out, and empower
instruments, that shall destroy the very life of the wicked. And I conceive
Elihu brings in this Proposition concerning God, in answer to what Job had
observed and complainingly alleged about the Prosperity of the wicked, (
Chap. 21.7.) Wherefore does the wicked live, become old, yea are mighty in
power? As if Job had intimated, that the Lord surely did show, not only some,
but much respect unto wicked men; they did not only live, but they lived a long
time, and not only a long time a bare life, but were mighty in power, and
overpowered, yea, oppressed many with their might. Elihu replyeth here,
notwithstanding this Allegation (which seemed to reflect upon the Justice of
God) that the Lord preserves not the Life of the wicked. Mark, first, he does
not say, he preserves not the Life of a man that sins, for then whose life
should be preserved? but, he preserves not the life of the wicked; (...)
that is, of a man who sins presumptuously, and goes on impenitently, who
is incorrigible. Secondly, he does not say, God suffers not a wicked man to
live, for then (most men being wicked in all Ages of the world) the world would
be very thin, and almost naked, of Inhabitants: But he preserves not (says
he) the life of the wicked; that is, he sets no sto^e by them, as we do of
those things, which we carefully preserve. We may compare this verse with that
of Job (Chap. 34.26, 27, 28.) where it is said of mighty oppresso^s, the Lord
strikes them at wicked men (that is, as he uses to strike wicked men) in the
open sight of others; because they turned back from him, and would not consider
any of his ways: So that they cause the cry of the poor to come up to him, and
he hears the cry of the afflicted. Now, as there Elihu speaks affirmatively,
he strikes wicked men, so here he speaks negatively (which is the same in
effect) God does not preserve the life of the wicked; and as there he said, God
hears the cry of the afflicted, or poor, so here, he gives right to the
poor. These Texts are of the same sense, and expound each other. From the
former part of this sixth verse already opened, he preserves not the life of
the wicked,

Observe, First; Wicked men are out of Gods Protection, they can expect no
favor from him;

They are outlawed. Some persons are outlawed by men, and then if any man
injure them, or kill them, they can have no remedy by the Law; they have their
amends (as we say) in their own hands, the Law gives them none. Wicked men are
out of Gods love, and therefore out of his care; he turns them up (as we say)
to the wide World to shift for themselves: whether they sink or swim, it is all
one to him. He is neither Sun nor Shield to the wicked, he is both to the
godly, ( Psalm. 84.11.) The Lord is a Sun and a Shield, the Lord will give Grace
and Glory; no good thing will he withold from them that walk uprightly. As a
Sun he gives out the warm Beams of his savor, to refresh and revive them,
when the World leaves them cold and comfortless: And as a Shield he defends and
saves them, when the World strikes at them and vexes them; he will keep them
safe from evil, as with a Shield. The wicked have no share in this, not in any
suchlike promise; the Lord is rather Fire and Sword, than Sun or Shield to
them; he neither comforts them while they live, nor preserves their lives from
death.

But some may say, Does not God preserve the lives of the wicked? Is it not
said ( Job 7.20.) He is the preserver of men? Which indefinite seems to carry
it for all men: And ( Psalm. 36.6.) Thou preservest man and beast. Yea, wicked
men not only live, but prosper and flourish in the World, as Job complained, (
Chap. 21.7.) Wherefore do the wicked live, bec^me old, yea, are mighty in
power? Surely then they are preserved, and if God do not preserve them, who
does? Man has no more power to preserve his own life, than to give himself
life; how is it then that the Text says, God does not preserve them? or that
they are out of Gods Protection?

I answer, First, It cannot be denied, but that the wicked hold their lives,
and all the good things they have (possibly they have many good things) of God.
But the wicked, and their live^, or the lives of the wicked, are preserved only
by that common Providence of God, which extends even to the Beasts of the
field; they are not preserved by any special Providence or Promise of
preservation made to them: their Souls are not bound in the bundle of life with
the Lord their God, as Abigail assured David his should be (1 Samuel 25.29.) nor
are they, as one very well expresses it in the Language of the Prophet Isaiah
(Chap. 4.3.) written (or reckoned) among the living in Jerusalem. Neither their
life, nor their death, is precious in the Lords sight, as both of the meanest
Saints are ( Psalm. 116.15.) The special Promises of preservation are made to
the godly; the common Providence of preservation extend to the wicked. God
preserves many wicked men, but not one of them can plead a Promise for his
preservation, or say, Lord, thou have undertaken to preserve me, I have thy
Word or Warrant for my preservation. So then, the Lord does not preserve the
life of any wicked man upon a word of Promise.

Secondly, I answer, When the lives of the wicked are preserved, they are not
preserved for any love which God bears to their persons as such, but either,
First, to bring them into a better state, that is, to turn them from their
wickedness, that being converted, they may be saved at last, according to his
purpose: Or, Secondly, they are preserved, to serve some ends and purposes of
his in this World. For though God has no pleasure in them, yet he makes some
use of them, and does his pleasure by them; Or, I may say, they are preserved
to be Executioners of his displeasure, in chastening and correcting his own
people. The King of Assyria was preserved in great Power; and to what end? I
will send him against an hypocritical Nation, (Isa. 10.6.) He must go on my
Errand, though he means not so, nor does his heart think so, (as the Lord
spoke, verse. 7.) He has other matters and designs in his head, but I have this
use of him, and of his power, even to punish the people of my wrath. The Lord
made use also of Nebuchadnezar, and his Army, to serve him in the destroying of
Tyrus, and of him and his Army he says, They wrought for me, (Ezekiel. 29.20.)
Thus the Lord does some of his work, his strange work especially, his work of
Judgment, by the hands of wicked men; and therefore he preserves their lives.
Yea, he preserves them many a time to be a help and a defense to his people. A
Thorn Hedge keeps the Pasture, that strange Cattle break not in, and eat it up.
Wicked men are as Briars and Thorns, and they are suffered to live, because the
Lord can make use of them as a Fence to his people. When the Serpent cast out
of his mouth water as a Flood after the woman (the Church) that he might cause
her to be carried away of the Flood, then the Earth (that is, earthly, carnal
men) helped the Woman (Rev. 12.15, 16,) The Lord used bad men to do that good
work, the preservation of his distressed and persecuted Church.

Thirdly, As the Lord suffers many wicked men to live, that they may be brought
out of their sins, so he suffers others to live that they may fill up the
measure of their sins. Why did the Lord preserve the Amorites? was it because
he loved or liked them? no, but because they were not then ripe for Judgment, (
Genesis 15.16.) The Iniquity of the Amorites is not yet full. Some wicked men are
to fill up their days, that they may fill up the measure of their Fathers
sins, by their own, as Christ threatened the Scribes and Pharisees, (Math.
23.32.) Such a grant of life, though for a thousand years, is worse than a
thousand Deaths.

Fourthly, we may answer, The wicked are not so much preserved from, as
reserved unto further wrath, (2 Pet. 2.9.) The Lord knows how to deliver the
godly out of temptations, and to reserve the unjust unto the day of Judgment,
to be punished. God does not presently punish all the wicked, nor take away
their lives; there is a day of Judgment coming, and till that day come, their
lives are preserved, as persons reserved unto Judgment.

Fifthly, When wicked men are said to be out of the Lords Protection,
consider, There is a twofold Protection; First, ordinary; Secondly,
extraordinary. The Lord does preserve and protect wicked men in an ordinary,
not in an extraordinary way; he does not work wonders, much less miracles, to
preserve them, as he often does for the preservation of his own people. God
will not be at such cost in preserving of wicked men, as he is at in the
preserving the lives and liberties of his eminent Servants; rather than they
shall perish, or not be preserved, he will sometimes work a miracle, and put
Nature out of its course, to save their lives. When those three Worthies were
cast into the midst of the burning fiery Furnace, God stopped the rage of that
furious Element, that the Fire had no power upon their bodies, nor was an hair
of their head singed, neither were their Coats changed, nor the smell of fire
had passed on them, (Dan. 3.27.) Did we ever hear that the Lord restrained the
power of the fire, to preserve wicked men? When Daniel, a man precious in the
sight of God, was cast into the Lions Den, the Lord preserved his life also, by
stopping the Mouths of the Lions, ( Dan. 6.22.) Did we ever hear that God
preserved the lives of wicked men in such a way? No sooner were Daniels
accusers cast into the Lions Den, but the Lions had the Mastery of them, and
brake all their bones in pieces, e're ever they came to the bottom of the Den,
( v. 24.) The Lord does not preserve the lives of the wicked, by miraculous
manifestations of his Power and Glory.

Sixthly, I answer, Though some wicked men are commonly preserved, as other
men, yet many by their wickedness, hasten their ruin, and shorten the number
of their days. We may distinguish of wicked men; First, wicked men may be
taken in a General notion, for all that are unconverted, and unregenerate. Many
persons pass for honest and good men in the world, who yet are wicked, being
carnal, and abiding in a state of nature: wicked men of this sort, are
ordinarily preserved. Secondly, Take wicked men (and such I conceive the Text
especially intends) for notorious wicked men, such as are murderers,
blasphemers, etc. the Lord does not preserve the lives of such, but lets man's
Justice seize upon them, or divine vengeance overtake them ( Psalm. 55.23.) The
blood-thirsty and deceitful man shall not live out half his days; that is, he
shall not live half so long as he might, according to the course of Nature,
because of his nefarious sinful courses. Histories are full of dreadful
Tragedies, sealing to this Truth, with the blood and untimely death of gross
offenders. How often have we seen or heard of the Vengeance of God following
and falling upon those that were (signanter) notoriously wicked; and of ^^ese
we are especially to understand the Point and Text, He preserves not the life
of the wicked. Take this Inference from all that has been said about this
awakening Observation,

How sad is the life of a wicked man! indeed of any man on this side the Line
of grace, but especially of any very wicked man! He can scarce be said to live,
whose life is not preferved by God; a wicked man is always in death, seeing
God does not preserve his life. The Apostle Paul said he was in Deaths often,
but God had as often preserved his life; but they are in Deaths always, whose
life God never preserves. What preservation of life can he have, who has not
God for his preserver? God in Creation or Propagation gives us our life as to
being; but Preservation gives us our life as to well-being. Can it be well with
them that are not under the preservation of God? To be redeemed by Christ would
be but a small comfort, unless we were also preserved by him. ( Jude 1.) To
them that are sanctified by God the Father, and preserved in Jesus Christ, and
called. If we were only redeemed from death, and not preserved in life, what
were our spiritual life to us? So I may say in respect of the life of the body;
to be merely created or propagated, what is it, if we are not preserved? It Is a
high Privilege, when a man can, not only say, he has received life from God,
but his life is preserved by God. That Is the first point. He preserves not the
Life of the wicked.

Again, From that other Interpretation of the words, as not to preserve is as
much as to destroy and ruin,

Note, As God utterly disowneth, so he will at last utterly ruin all wicked
men.

He not only does not favor them, but pours out fury upon them, (Jer. 10.25.)
Pour out thy fury upon the Heathen that know thee not, and upon the Families
that call not on thy Name. The Prophecy of Isaiah speaks no better concerning
them than that prayer of Jeremy. (Isa. 3.11.) Woe unto the wicked, it shall be
ill with him, for the reward of his hand shall be given him. And what can the
hand of a wicked man earn? the wages of sin is death; he can get nothing but
wrath, and death, nothing but tribulation and anguish here, and eternal misery
hereafter, by the work of his hands. VVoe to the wicked, for the reward of his
hands shall be given him, that is, eternal destruction and sorrow shall be
given him, according to the iniquity of his hand. A godly man is rewarded
according to the cleanness of his hands ( Psalm. 18.20, 24.) He labors to keep
his hands, (much more his heart clean, whatever the World judge of him) But
woe to the wicked when God gives them the reward of their hands, of their
unclean, soul and filthy hands; for what can such hands get or procure by all
their labor but their own mischief and sorrow? There is no peace, says my
God, to the wicked, (Isa. 57.21.) No peace is to them, because no good is done
by them: their portion lies in promises, who keep Commandments, so theirs must
needs lie in threatenings, who do nothing but break them, or break them in all
they do. My meditation of him shall be sweet, I will be glad in the Lord, (said
David, P^al. 104.34.) As if he had said, I know that I and every Godly man,
shall receive so much good from the Lord, that it does me good at the heart to
think of it: But as for the wicked, I can foresee (as we say) with half an
eye, how ill it will be with them, and so let it be; I must subscribe to, and
vote with the righteous judgment of the Lord against them ( ver. 35.) Let the
sinners be consumed out of the Earth, and let the wicked be no more.

Lastly, Consider these words, He preserves not the life of the wicked, with
respect to the wicked, specially intended and treated of in this Context, The
Lord is mighty, and despises not the mighty (because they are mighty) he
preserves not the wicked.

Hence Note; Wicked men, how mighty soever, cannot preserve themselves, nor
does the Lord undertake for their preservation.

The strongest of wicked men, cannot stand by their own strength, they cannot
protect nor preserve themselves, and the Lord will not put forth his strength
to preserve them from falling. As no mightiness, no power can bear man up, or
maintain him against the Lord, so not without the Lord; if he preserves not
the life of the wicked, they cannot escape death and destruction, though high
as Cedars, and strong as Oaks. They cannot but perish, whom God preserves
not. He preserves not the life of the wicked, But gives right to the poor,

(...) Pauperes afflicti.
Or to the afflicted. Poverty it self is a great affliction, and usually the
poor are afflicted by others. Here is a second instance of Gods goodness in
the exercise of his power and might. As He preserves not the life of the
wicked, So he gives right to the poor; as he destroys wrong-doers, so he
will do right to those that suffer wrong. Every word is considerable, First, He
gives; that is an act of bounty. Secondly, He gives right; that is an act of
equity. And that Thirdly, To the poor; that is an act of pity and charity.

Further, When it is said, He gives, that implies, First, a present or speedy
act; Secondly, a constant and settled course of acting. As the word gives
imports, that the Lord does it now, and does not put it off to hereafter only;
so it likewise imports that the Lord will do it hereafter, as well as now. He
gives Right to the poor.

The poor suffer wrong, but the Lord comes, (...)
and gives them right, or rights them, and that in a twofold notion. First, He
gives them that right which is due to them, according to his own righteous
Laws, or the righteous Laws of men. That Is right done, which is done according
to a righteous Law. Secondly, He gives them that right which is due to them
according to the integrity of their own hearts and ways. We may say, Thirdly,
The Lord gives them right, not according to the strictness of the Law, but
according to the integrity of their hearts. Thus David prayed ( Psalm. 7.3.)
Judge me, O Lord, according to my righteousness, and according to mine
integrity that is in me; that is, according to my honest meaning, and the
simplicity of my Soul. As if he had said, O Lord, do me right; men have done me
wrong, they have false and wrong apprehensions of me, they raise false reports
concerning me, but thou, O Lord, who know my integrity wilt judge me
accordingly, and it is my humble and earnest Prayer that thou would. He
gives right To the poor.

The poor in Scripture are taken two ways; First, as they stand in opposition
to the rich; Secondly, as they are opposed to the proud; thus here, he gives
right to the poor, as well as to the rich; and he will especially give right to
the humble poor, to the righteous poor, to the poor in spirit. Such the Prophet
speaks of ( Isa. 66.2.) To this man will I look, even to him that is poor. He
means not the poor in purse (as such) he means not those (as such) who wear
poor clothes, the Lord does not always look to, or respect such poor, for many
such are both proud and wicked; but he looks to him that is poor in spirit, or
of a contrite spirit; let such be in Rags, and lie upon the Dunghill, the Lord
will look to them; and he has a threefold look for them. First, A look of
honor, as respecting their Persons. Secondly, A look of care, to supply their
wants. Thirdly, A look of justice, to deliver them from wrong. And if they that
are poor in spirit, be rich also in the world, they shall not fail to receive
right from the hand of the Lord. The Lord gives right to all sorts of men
against their wicked oppressors; but his poor, the Godly poor, believing poor,
those that are poor not only in purse, but in spirit, are more peculiarly under
this privilege, of being righted by the Lord. And usually in Scripture, the
word poor is taken in a good sense, Nomen pauperis in bonum sumitur, pauperes
sunt populus Dei.
for good men, as the word rich, in an ill sense, for evil men ( Jam. 5.1.) Go
to now ye rich men, weep and howl for the miseries that shall come upon you.
The Apostle speaks as if that were the case of all rich, or as if he called all
rich men to weeping and howling, etc. Yet some poor men are wicked, and some
rich men are righteous; and therefore I conceive the word poor may be taken
here for any wronged or oppressed poor, yet especially for the Godly poor. For
though God gives right to all men, even the worst of men, yet here the scope
of Elihu is to show that God takes most care of those whom the wicked do most,
not only neglect, but injure and oppress, He gives right to the poor.

Hence Note; The poor, especially the Godly poor, are often wronged, and go by
the worst in the world. Or thus:

The poor, as poor, usually suffer from, and by the world.



As the world is apt to oppress any poor, so mostly the Godly poor, ( Psalm.
12.5.) For the oppression of the poor I will arise. It Is possible a rich man
may be oppressed, a mighty man may be oppressed by one mightier than he; but
usually the poor are oppressed, and they trampled on, who are already
underfoot. And therefore the Lord says, For the oppression of the poor, for
the sighing of the needy, now will I arise, and set him at safety from him that
puffs at him. This is not exclusive, the Lord will arise for the help of the
rich and great, when any such are wronged; but he is said to arise for the help
of the poor, as intimating that the poor seldom come by their right, or find
help in the world, unless God arise to help them, or help them to it; and
because he has said he will help them to their right, we may be sure he will.
David's Faith was strong upon this promise, ( Psalm. 18.27.) Thou will save the
afflicted people, (Psalm. 72.4.) He shall judge the poor of the People. (P^al.
140.12.) I know that the Lord will maintain the cause of the afflicted. And his
Experience was as clear, as his Faith was strong ( Psalm. 37.25.) I have been
young, and now am old, yet have I not seen the righteous forsaken; that is, I
have often, yea always seen him helped one way or other; and sometimes set on
high from affliction, (Psalm. 107.41.) The Lord cares so for the poor, as if he
cared for none else; and the best of the poor are little cared for by any, but
the Lord. ( Zeph. 3.12.) I will also leave in the midst of thee an afflicted
and poor people, and they shall trust in the Name of the Lord. The rich of this
world trust to creature helps, but as the Lords poor know they ought not to
trust in creature help, so they have it not to trust to, and therefore they
trust in the Name of the Lord, not only out of choice (which is their grace and
duty) but out of necessity. And what will the Lord do for them that trust in
him, not only out of necessity but choice? he will surely take care of them,
and do them right.

Secondly, Note; God rights the poor freely.

He gives them right, he does not sell it. What freer than gift? They need not
bribe for it. As he freely gives them the Righteousness of his Son to
justify them, so they have common right of free gift to relieve them.

Note Thirdly; The Lord relieves, or rights the poor speedily.

He gives, implies a present act, and that doubles the mercy.

Note Fourthly; God will always right the wronged poor.

He gives, imports even a continued act; as he did it in former times, in the
days of old, so he does it at this day, and will do it always. As the Lord
gives right speedily, so constantly, with him is no variableness or shadow of
turning. Most men do right only by fits, but the Lord is ever giving right.

Lastly, He gives right to the poor, not to this, or that poor man, but to the
poor.

Hence Note; The Lord distributes right to all that are wronged.

As his Mercy, so his Justice is not confined to a few, but flows out to all.

But it may be objected, Why then are so many poor without their right? If the
Lord gives right, and gives it continually, and impartially, why do the poor
cry, and sigh, and groan, and mourn? why see we so many tears of the poor? If
they have right, why do they complain?

I answer,

First, The Lord gives right to the poor, sometimes, when the poor perceive it
not. ( Psalm. 97.2.) Clouds and darkness are round about him, Righteousness
and Judgment are the habitation of his Throne. When a man cannot see the Lord
doing right, yet the Lord does right. The Sun shines when eclipsed or covered
with a Cloud. The Lord never cease to right the poor, though neither poor nor
rich perceive how, or which way he does it.

Secondly, I answer, He gives right to the poor, even when they want right, or
when they are under the sorest oppressions, by supporting their hearts in this
persuasion, that he will give them right. The poor have right when their minds
are satisfied that they shall have right. There is no true Godly poor man in
the world, how much soever afflicted, but his heart is, or may be satisfied,
that he shall have right. That Is a sure word ( Psalm. 9.18.) The needy shall not
always be forgotten, the expectation of the poor shall not perish for ever. And
therefore we may pray with confidence, Forget not, O Lord, the Congregation of
thy poor for ever, (Psalm. 74.19.) The poor may rest in this assurance, while
their troubles rest upon them, that God will bring forth their Righteousness
as the Light, and their Judgment as the Noon day, (Psalm. 37.6.) He has right,
who believes he shall have it; as he that believes, has everlasting life in
hope, long before he attains the possession of it, ( John 3.36.)

Thirdly, Though we say, The Lord gives right to the poor, both speedily and
constantly, yet he reserveth to himself a liberty as to time, and means, and
manner; as in all his outward Administrations, so in ministering or giving out
this right; the Lord waits to be gracious, till we are ready for his grace, and
he waits (in the same sense) to be righteous, till the poor are ready for their
right; they shall not stay for it, when once they are ready for it; and it
would be a wrong to them to have their right, before they are ready for it.

Lastly, There is a day spoken of, wherein the Lord will do all his poor right
in the view of all the world, ( Acts 17.31.) He has appointed a day in the
which he will judge the World in Righteousness, by that man whom he has
ordained. The day approaches, wherein the Lord will judge the world in
righteousness. Right is prepared and designed for them. The time till right
shall be done to all, as is desired, or to the utmost of their desires, makes
have: He that shall come, will come, and will not tarry; Behold (says he) I
come quickly, and my reward is with me, to give every man according as his
works shall be, (Rev. 22.12.) And if the Lord come with a reward in his hand
for those who have done well, he will undoubtedly come with right in his hand
to give all those who have suffered wrongfully.

JOB, Chap. 36. Verse. 7. He withdraws not his eyes from the righteous: but
with Kings are they on the throne, yea, he does establish them for ever, and
they are exalted.


THis verse contains a further confirmation of Gods righteous and gracious
dealing with the righteous and gracious poor, yea, with all that are righteous
and gracious. The words may be taken, either in a stricter or in a larger sense.

First, Strictly, as an Exposition of the latter part of the former verse, He
gives right to the poor, that is, He withdraws not his eyes from the
righteous: We may put both together, He is so set to give right to the
righteous poor, he takes such care of them, that he cannot take his eye off
from them.

Secondly, In a larger and more general sense, as a Conclusion upon the whole
matter, that, God will not desert any righteous person, whether poor or rich,
high or low, God will take notice of piety and godliness, wheresoever he finds
it, He withdraws not his eyes from the righteous.

(...) minuit, diminuit, ademit, substraxit.
The word which we translate withdraws, and is here used negatively, He
withdraws not, signifies, strictly in the Noune, any kind of abatement or
diminution, and in the Verb, to diminish, or abate, or take short in any kind
that which was before. When Pharaoh (Exodus 5.8.) gave out a fresh Charge for
burdening, or indeed oppressing the Children of Israel in their bondage, the
Order ran in this style; The tale of bricks which they did make heretofore you
shall lay upon them, you shall not diminish or withdraw any, you shall not
abate them a brick. And Moses showing how sacred a thing the Word of God is, (
Deuteronomy. 9.2.) gives a double check or prohibition to all medlers with it: First,
to medlers by way of addition, Ye shall not add unto the Word: Secondly, by way
of abate^ent, or abstraction, Ye shall not diminish, or withdraw from it: it is
this word; As if the Lord had said, Every tittle of my word shall stand by it
self, and every Iota be established; be sure that ye put nothing to it, that you
withdraw nothing from it. Further, this word which we translate withdraw, is
rendered also to clip, as the hayr of the head or beard is clipped, (Jer. 48.37.)
It is indeed high treason against the King of Heaven, to clip his coin, his
word, which bears the royal stamp and superscription of his truth and holiness.
Thus here, he withdraws not, that is, the Lord does not abate, lessen,
diminish, or take off his eyes from the righteous, his eyes are fixed on them
for good always, and they are always fixed in the same strength and virtue;
He withdraws not His eyes.

God is a Spirit without parts and passions, yet often in Scripture parts and
passions are ascribed to him in allusion to man, here eyes, He withdraws not
his eyes, that is, his sight, Oculos domini esso super aliquem, nisi aliquid
additur semper in bonum sumitur and peculiarem ejus favorem et curam importat.
Bold:
or his providence. And we may take notice, that in Scripture, where this
expression is used without any further addition, it is always taken in a good
sense. When we read either of Gods keeping his eyes upon his people, or of his
not withdrawing his eyes from his people, it always respects their privilege,
benefit and comfort; He withdraws not his eyes From the righteous.

He does not say, from this or that righteous man, but from the righteous,
implying the whole kind or generation of the righteous. The indefinite is
universal; we may render it thus; he withdraws not his eyes from any that are
righteous. The righteous here may be taken in a twofold notion, First, for the
righteous, as to their state, or who are in a state of righteousness. Man
wanting a righteousness of his own, has the righteousness of another assigned
and imputed to him. Justified persons through faith in our Lord Jesus Christ,
are righteous persons, as has been showed heretofore. Secondly, We may take
righteous here, with respect to the righteousness of their ways and actions:
They who do righteousness are righteous, says the Apostle John. To a righteous
state, there belongs a righteous way, a righteous walk, righteous acting; not
that the righteous do not sin, but they would not, nor do they sin at all as
the unrighteous. It is a high blemish or stain to the Gospel, when any that
pretend to a righteous state, or to righteousness by Jesus Christ, are not
righteous as to their ways and course, as to their walkings and workings,
whether toward God or man. It Is true, in a strict legal sense, none are
righteous, no not one; but in a Gospel sense all justified and fanctified
persons are righteous; and they are called so, not only positively as to what
themselves are, but comparatively, as to what the men of the world are, who
live in a state or walk in a course of sin and unrighteousness. The Lord
withdraws not his eyes from the righteous.

But some may here object or question, Is this true only of the righteous? Does
the Lord at any time withdraw his eyes from the unrighteous? truly that would
be very good news to many unrighteous persons, they would be glad that they
and their way might be hid from God, or that God would not look upon them.

I answer, This Scripture is not to be so understood, as if God did behold the
righteous and not the wicked, for ( Prove. 15.3.) The eyes of the Lord are every
where, beholding the evil and the good, whether things done or persons doing
them. The Lord does not withdraw his eyes from the most unrighteous persons,
nor from any of their acts or ways of unrighteousness. And when it is said
here, The Lord withdraws not his eyes from the righteous, it is meant of a
peculiar eye, which the Lord has upon the righteous; he beholds both the
righteous and the unrighteous, yet he does not behold the unrighteous, as he
beholds the righteous; which I shall clear further by giving in a five-fold
discovery, what that eye of the Lord is which is upon the righteous, four of
which are distinct and totally differing from that eye with which he beholds
unrighteous men, and from every one of them I shall give you an observation for
our further profiting by this general assertion, that the Lord withdraws not
his eyes from the righteous. There is a five-fold eye of God spoken of in
Scripture.

First, There is a discerning eye, that eye by which be unerringly knows what
every man is, and what every man does.

Hence note; The Lord takes exact and full notice of, he clearly discerns the
righteous in every condition.

This is true also of the unrighteous; therefore David puts it universally, (
Psalm. 11.4.) His eyes behold, his eyelids try the children of men, that is,
his sight discovers and discerns what they are, of what sort soever they are.
We may see many men, yet not discover what they are, they may have a fair
outside to our view, whilst within they are foul and full of rottenness; they
may appear in Sheeps clothing, yet inwardly be ravening Wolves. But the Lords
eye is a trying eye, he does not only know who men are, but he knows what they
are. Such is the importance of that Scripture, ( Heb. 4.13.) All things are
naked and manifest to his eyes, with whom we have to do; that is, the Lord does
so behold things and persons, that he has a clear understanding of them. And
though the Lords eye be thus upon all men, yet this is specially affirmed of
righteous men, ( Psalm. 33.18.) Behold, the eye of the Lord is upon them that
fear him, and hope in his mercy. Again, ( Psalm. 34.15.) His eye is over the
righteous. Both texts teach us, that God considers not only what they do, but
as I may say, how they do, whether it be peace with them, or whether it be
trouble with them, whether it be joy with them, or whether it be sorrow with
them, the Lords eye is over them, to discern, not only whether, and how they
go, but how things go with them.

Secondly, The Lord has a directing or a counselling eye.

Hence Note; The Lord with his eye favorably guides, directs, and counsels
righteous men.

This eye of the Lord, as it denotes favor, is peculiar to the righteous. We
have that expressly, ( Psalm. 32.8.) I will instruct thee, and teach thee, (how?)
I will guide thee with mine eye. We put in the Margen, I will counsel thee,
that is, thee a Godly man, a David, spoken of ( v. 6, 7.) mine eye shall give
thee counsel. Men can give direction by the eye, and they that are acquainted
with them, understand what they mean when they look this way or that way, thus
or so. Solomon says, A naughty person winketh with his eyes, he speaks with
his feet, he teaches with his fingers, (Pro. 6.12, 13.) that is, all the
postures and gestures of his body, show what he is, stark naught, and silently
teach others to be naught. The holy God also teaches by his feet and fingers,
his goings and doings, his works and ways teach us the work which we should
do, and the way wherein we should go; he has a providential eye; the looks of
providence give counsel to those who know how to look upon them, and interpret
them. The Lord has a providential eye upon the righteous, not only to foresee
their dangers, but to direct their course; he shows them their way, and their
work by this eye; he tells them what pleases him, and what displeases him, by
this eye; this eye the Lord does not withdraw from the righteous; He will guide
the feet of his Saints, (1 Samuel 2.9.) It Is possible for a righteous man
sometime to be without counsel, he may neither know what counsel to give
himself, nor what to take from others; as Jehoshaphat said in his straight (2 Chronicles. 20.12.) He knows not what to do; yet (as Jehoshaphat said then) his
eyes are toward the Lord, and the Lords eyes are toward him. When he is thus
counselless, there is a counselling, a directing eye of God upon him; though he
at that present know not his way, yea, be out of his way, yet he is not out of
Gods eye, and that will in due time show him his way, or bring him into his way
again: though God suffer him to go out of the way, yet the eye of God is upon
him, even when he is out of his way, and that eye will reduce and bring him
back to his right way. There is a directing, a counselling eye of God.

Thirdly, The Scripture speaks of a pitying and a compassionating eye of God.
It is ordinary with us to hear those that are in distress cry out to those who
pass by, cast an eye upon us, look upon us, and that is as much as to say, pity
us, have compassion upon us; this eye of pity the Lord does not withdraw from
the righteous.

Hence note; The righteous are under the compassionating, the pitying eye of
God.

When the people of Israel were in Egypt, the Lord said to Moses, (Exodus 3.7.)
I have surely seen the affliction of my people; and what kind of sight was
that? what eye of God was it which was upon them? the words following, and the
whole series of Gods dealings also clear it, that it was an eye of compassion;
I have surely seen, or seeing I have seen the affliction of my people that are
in Egypt, etc. and I am come down to deliver them. We read in that notable
place, ( Genesis 16.14.) when Hagar was in a very sad and distressed condition,
being cast out of Abraham's family, God had compassion on her, and showed her a
Well, where she might have water for her self and child, and the text says,
She called the name of the Well Beer-la-hai-roi, that is, the Well of him that
lives and sees me: As if she had said, God has seen me in my afflicted
condition, and he has also had compassion on me. That Is another great
privilege, the righteous are under this pitying and compassionating eye of
God; and from thence follows,

The fourth eye of God, his providing eye, his caring eye.

Hence note; The Lord does so eye the righteous in their straits and
afflictions with compassion, that he also provides to deliver them out of their
affliction, out of their straits.

There is a providing eye of God continually beholding his people; Of this
providing eye Abraham spoke, ( Genesis 22.14.) when he was put upon that hard
task, the sacrificing of his own son, his Isaac, the Lord had compassion on
him, and provided another sacrifice, and therefore he called the name of that
place, Jehovah Jireh, the Lord will see or provide; that is, as the Lord has
seen and provided for me, so he will see and provide for all his in their
greatest exigents and extremities. What Abraham said, all the seed of Abraham
may say in the day of their distress, Jehovah Jireh, the Lord will see and
provide. And as the Lord has a seeing and a providing eye for his in times of
distress, so at all times. Moses said of the Land of Israel, (Deuteronomy. 11.12.) It
is a Land of hills and of valleys, a Land which the Lord thy God cares for:
The eyes of the Lord thy God are always upon it, from the beginning of the
year, even unto the end of the year. The eyes of the Lord are upon the land,
that is, upon the people of the land, or upon the land for the peoples sake who
dwell in it: What to do? the text answers, to care for it, that is, to provide
all things for their good, to give rain in season, and the fruits of the
earth, not only for the support, but comfort of his people. We read of the same
eye promised to the people of Israel in the Land of their captivity, ( Jer.
29.6.) I will set mine eyes upon them for good, and I will bring them again
into this Land; I will not only give them a look, or a glance, but fix or set
mine eyes upon them for good, that is, to do them good. It is a proverbial
saying amongst us, The Masters eye fattens the Horse: The Masters eye is a
caring, a providing eye, he will take care that the Horse shall be well fed.
Certainly, Gods eye is a sattening eye; they shall be fat and flourish, from
whom God will not withdraw his providing eye, at least they shall have
necessaries, or food convenient, both for soul and body.

Fifthly, The Scripture speaks of a delighting eye, or of an eye of
complacency; and thus also the Lords eye is upon the righteous, he beholds
them with high content, he is, as I may say, taken with them, ( Isa. 66.1.) To
him will I look that is poor. Among all objects, none so pleasant or pleasing
to God as the poor. What poor does he mean? surely the righteous poor, or the
poor in spirit, (as was showed upon the former verse) let such a one be whom he
will, to him will I look, mine eye is greatly pleased to behold such a one. The
word used by Elihu in this Text, does further clear it, while he says, He
withdraws not his eyes from the righteous. How pleasant is any object to our
eyes from which we cannot withdraw or take them off, but must be continually
feeding them upon it! Some cannot take off their eyes from unlawful wanton
objects, because they are so delighted in them, they have as the Apostle Peter
speaks, eyes full of adultery, and such can never glut their eyes with
adulterous objects. Now certainly the Lord is exceedingly taken with the
beauty, the spiritual beauty of a righteous person, with the comeliness, the
spiritu^ll comeliness of those that are godly, when the Text says, He
withdraws not his eyes from them, but carries them (as it were) always in
his eye. Among the Latins, to carry one in our eye is an expression of
singular high content, delight and pleasure taken in such a person. We may say
of all the righteous, the Lord carries them in his eye, and therefore he is
highly pleased and delighted with them.

In oculu oliquem gestare, est eum vehementer amplecti and diligere.
Thus you have this five-fold eye, which the Lord does not withdraw from the
righteous; and, in that the text says, he does not withdraw or abate or
diminish his eye from them, but looks fully upon them, it gives us this fixth
note; The inspection of God upon, his compassion toward, his care of, his
delight in the righteous is perpetual.

Though God does afflict, yet he never cease to love or care for his people.
Elihu was much upon that, industriously to remove the scandal of the cross,
which it is like then did and still does offend many, and causes them to
stumble, when they see the righteous afflicted; therefore he would assure us,
that God never withdraws his eye from them: but his care of, and pity to, Non
solum Satagentem attentamque curam denotat haec phrasis, sed perseverantem,
continuam minimeque deflectentem. Bold:
yea pleasure in them is everlasting. That eye of his which carries all this in
it, is never shut toward them. The Lord says of the Church, ( Isa. 49.16.)
Thy walls are continually before me. As the walls of Sion, so the walls of
every righteous person in Zion, or of every true Sionist, are continually
before the Lord, he withdraws not his eyes from the righteous; He that
keeps Israel shall neither slumber nor sleep, (Psalm. 121.4.) he that neither
slumbers nor sleeps, needs not withdraw his eyes from us, and he that has a
tender regard to us, will not. The Prophet ( Isa. 27.3.) speaking of the Church
under the Allegory of a Vineyard, brings in the Lord giving this assurance, I
will water it every moment, I will keep it night and day. He that waters a
Vineyard every moment, never withdraws his eyes from it; now by watering is
meant the supply of whatsoever good the Vineyard or Church of God stood in need
of; to be so supplied is to be well watered. The providence of God, as to our
spiritual and temporal estate, watches over us continually to water us.

But some may question here, Does not the Lord withdraw his eyes from the
righteous? are his eyes continually upon them? what then is ^^ meaning of that
Scripture, ( Psalm. 44.23.) and of several others of like importance; Awake
Lord, why sleep thou? That was at once the voice of the Church, and her
complaint; surely the Lords eyes were withdrawn from the Church when he was
asleep. I answer, The Lord sleeps, with respect to his Church, as the Church
sleeps with respect to the Lord, ( Cant. 5.2.) I sleep (says the Spouse) but
my heart waketh. Indeed the Lord does act sometimes so toward the righteous,
or lets things go so with the righteous, as if he were asleep, as if he took no
notice of them, yet still his heart waketh toward them: So that his sleeping
does not imply an intermission of his care, but only a suspension of the
effects of his care. For while the Lord lets things go so as if he were asleep,
he then wakes and watches as much over the righteous, over his Church and
people, as at any other time, when they have the highest actings of his
providence for their outward peace and preservation.

And if that other sort of Scriptures should be objected against his perpetual
watching over the righteous, or that he never withdraws his eyes, which say, he
hides his face, and turns himself away from them. I answer, Those Scriptures
are all of them to be understood according to the former interpretation, the
Lord hides himself, as to sense and present appearance, but he never hides
himself, as to the real continuance of his love and care toward his Church or
People. This Objection some made to one of the Ancients; the Lord (said they)
may seem to withdraw his eyes from the righteous, because he suffers them to
fall under the oppression of the unrighteous. Famulos suos nunc m gis,
respicit, nam jam praevidet, quid eis miserecorditer recompenset. Greg: in loc:
No, says he, The Lord beholds the righteous, though they perish by the hand
of the unrighteous; yea, when it is worst with them, the Lords Eye is upon them
for good, both to see how they carry it, or behave themselves in their
Sufferings, and likewise to provide a full reward and recompense for them after
all their sufferings.

Before I pass from this part of the verse, let me make these two Inferences.

First, If the Lord never withdraws his Eyes from the righteous, then let the
righteous know their own Privilege and Mercy. How happy are they upon whom the
Eyes of the Lord abide always for good! The Lord cannot endure to have good
men out of his Eye, as Parents say of their darlings, and Princes of their
Favorites. If we were assured, that the Eye of a great (...), who loves us,
were always upon us, if he should promise to have an eye to us, (That Is an
ordinary Promise among men, I will have an Eye to you, that is, I will take
care of you; if we have (I say) but such a word from a man in Power) we think
we have got a great revenue; such a great Lord will have an eye to us, we have
his word, he will not take off his care from us. How much then should we boast
and rejoice in spirit, that the Lord has said, I will always have a care of
you, I will never withdraw mine eyes from you, I will never leave you, nor
forsake you (Heb. 13.5.) As it will be the eternal happiness of Believers in
Glory, always to behold, or see God, Blessed are the pure in heart, for they
shall see God; they have some sight of him here in a Glass, but they shall see
him face to face; that is, they shall see him clearly, as clearly as the
creature is capable of seeing or enjoying him; now (I say) as it is the
happiness of the Saints in Heaven always to behold God, so it is the happiness
of Saints here on earth, that the Lord does always behold them, that his eye
is never withdrawn from them.

Consider therefore, you that are in a righteous state, whose acts and words,
and walkings, are also righteous, consider your Privilege, consider what it is
to have the Lord Jesus always setting his eye upon you, to have the Lords
directing and counselling eye always upon you, to have the Lords pitying and
compassionating eye always upon you, to have the Lords providing and caring
eye always upon you, to have the Lords delighting and well-pleased eye always
upon you; to have the eyes of the Lord thus upon you, and to have them always
upon you, what can ye desire more! Thus it is promised, (2 Chronicles. 16.9.) The
eyes of the Lord run to and fro throughout the whole earth, to show himself
strong in the behalf of them, whose heart is perfect with him. And whose hearts
are perfect with him, but the hearts of the righteous? this is their
privilege. Jesus Christ ( Zech. 3.9.) is called, The stone, and says the
Text, upon one stone shall be seven eyes. There are two interpretations given
of that Prophecy, First, thus, upon one stone shall be seven eyes, that is,
the eyes of all men shall be upon that stone, upon Christ. Seven is a perfect
definite Number, put for all numbers; the eyes of all shall be upon the stone,
upon Christ; although he be to the wicked, or to them that believe not, a
stumbling stone, and a rock of offense, (1 Pet. 2.8.) yet to them that believe
he is a most precious stone; and as they are always beholding the beauty of
that precious stone, so Jesus Christ does indeed invite all eyes to behold him
( Isa. 65.1.) Behold me, behold me; he would have us take off our eyes from all
others, and look steddily on him. Let all eyes be upon the stone; that is a good
interpretation. There is a second, which suits the present point I am upon
fully; Seven eyes shall be upon one stone; that is, the eyes of God shall be
upon Jesus Christ. This is a promise made unto him as Mediator, when he came in
the flesh, or in our nature, to do that great work for us; Then, says the
Prophet, upon one stone shall be seven eyes; which seven eyes note the perfect
knowledge of God, and so the perfect care that God would have of Christ, to
bear him up through that wo^k of our Redemp^ion: Upon one stone shall be seven
eyes; I will take ca^e of him, I will p ovide for him, and I will delight in
him. As Jesus Christ is all eye, and Jesus Christ does enlighten all eyes, that
is, all that see, are enlightened by Jesus Christ; so the eyes of God, the eyes
of the Father were always upon him, in favor, in love, in care, when he was
here in this world about that great work of our salvation, and he had abundunt
experience of the eyes of his Father upon him. Now, mark it, this was the great
promise made to Christ, the Stone, that upon him should be seven eyes, the eyes
of the Lord should be always and fully upon him. And this is the privilege of
every one that has part and interest in this stone Jesus Christ, every
righteous person has seven eyes upon him, the Lord God beholds him exactly,
perfectly, and always; He withdraws not his eyes from the righteous.

A second inference is this; If the Lord never withdraws his eyes from the
righteous, Then let the righteous know their duty: What Is that? Never to
withdraw their eyes from the Lord. There is a threefold eye which a righteous
man should never withdraw from God. First, An eye of faith: Secondly, An eye of
hope: Thirdly, An eye of dependence: and that, First, for direction in all his
ways; Secondly, for protection in all his dangers. I will lift up mine eyes
(says David, Psalm. 121.1.) unto the hills, from whence comes my help. And
again, ( Psalm. 123.1, 2.) Unto thee lift I up mine eyes, O thou that dwell
in the heavens. Behold, as the eyes of servants look unto the hand of their
Masters, and as the eyes of a maiden unto the hand of her Mistress, so our eyes
wait upon the Lord our God, until he have mercy on us; that is, we never
withdraw our eyes from him, while we have need of his mercy, and that is
always. Walk before me, that is, with an eye of faith, hope, and dependence,
was the Lords charge to the father of the faithful, ( Genesis 17.1.) I have set
the Lord always before me, that is, I keep a constant eye upon the Lord, was
the profession of David, as the type of Christ, ( Psalm. 16.8.) And as to keep
an eye on God is best and safest for us, so it is extremely pleasing and
contentfull to Christ, as he tells the Church, ( Cant. 9.9.) Thou have ravished
my heart, my Sister, my Spouse, thou hash ravished my heart with one of thine
eyes, that is, with a believing, a hoping, a depending look on me for all that
good which thou want and would have, or with a delighting look on me as
thy chiefest good. Let not the righteous withdraw their eyes from God, for he
withdraws not his eyes from the righteous.

But (which is yet more) with Kings are they on the Throne.

These words fully clear up the sense, which I have given of that negative
promise, he withdraws not his eyes from the righteous, namely, that the eyes
of the Lord are upon the righteous for good. His is not a bare beholding of
them, favors flow from his eyes. When the eyes of God are upon the righteous,
they find the sweet and benefit of it. In the former verse Elihu said, God will
give the poor right, here he says more, he will give the poor, the righteous
poor, a reward, and that no small one, With Kings are they on the Throne.

The Latin translation reads this part of the verse, Et reges in solio
collocat in perpetuum. Vulg:
not of the righteous poor, but of righteous Kings; He withdraws not his eyes
from the righteous, and he places Kings upon the Throne for ever. That Is a
truth, the Lord places Kings upon their Thrones, and establishes them there;
but that is not the meaning or truth of this place; nor will the Hebrew (with
any tolerable convenience) bear such a translation.

Secondly, There are others, who, Quasi (...) scriberetur pro (...) Merc:
a little mistaking the word which we translate Kings, render it Angels; They
are with Angels on the Throne. There is but very little difference in the
Hebrew between those two words that signify Kings and Angels, (the former is
Melachim, the latter Maleachim) which has given occasion for this reading, He
places them with Angels on the Throne; and so the words are interpreted of the
glorious exaltation of the righteous in Heaven, (when indeed they shall be like
Angels, Angels Fellows, ( Mat. 22.30.) and walk hand in hand with Angels.) Mr
Broughton though he translate (with Kings) yet seems to carry it in that sense,
giving his gloss in the Margen, thus; They shall be made fit for light with
the living, with the Angels of God, his servants, in their degree, and be
placed for ever in honor, and be high in honor and dignity; so ye shall sit
upon twelve Thrones, judging the twelve Tribes of Israel. But this Text will
not serve that purpose neither; and therefore I shall take it plainly as we
render it, They shall be with Kings upon the Throne. Cum regibu^ tantum valet,
ansicut reges. Bold: Vt (...) sit (...) cum; ut m^meru^ mutetur, ut p^lsim fit
in hoc libro. Merc:
There is a twofold interpretation of the words according to this translation.

First, The Lord will exalt the righteous to great dignity, they shall be like
Kings and Princes in this world, or they shall be in great favor with Kings,
even Kings Favorites.

S^condly, They shall be with Kings upon the Throne, that is, they themselves
shall be Kings. The Hebrew strictly read, is, and Kings on the Throne; they
shall not only be like Kings, but they themselves shall be Kings, (...)
articulus accusativi casus quam verba transitiva sive activa regunt; accipitur
tamen non raro pro a ex, de, and cum praepositionibus* Drus: Obser: sacra: l.
9. c. 7.
and sit upon Throne^: either of these interpretations reach the scope of Elihu
fully. As if he had said, The righteous shall be greatly advanced or exalted by
Kings, whose privilege it is to sit on Thrones, or they shall be Kings upon
the Throne. Some experiences and examples have confirmed this. The Lord has
not only given righteous persons great advancement, and great favor with
Kings, who sit on Thrones, but has even advanced them to Kingly dignity, and
given them Thrones to sit upon.

A Throne is a Seat Royal, the Seat of Majesty; A Throne is a seat exalted
above other seats, as the person sitting upon it is exalted above other
persons. Solomon made him a great Throne of Ivory, and the Throne had six
steps, (1 Kings 10 18.) God is represented sitting upon a Throne, and there
receiving honor from all that were before him, ( Rev. 4.2, 9.) The whole
Heaven is called the Throne of God, and the earth his footstool, (Isa. 66.1.)
because as Heaven is high above all, so there are the fullest manifestations of
the greatness and glory of God. And because Thrones note power and dignity,
therefore the Angels (who among all mere creatures excel in power and
dignity,) a^e called Thrones, (Col. 1.16.) So then, to be with Kings on the
Throne, that is, to be near them, and much accepted by them, is a very great
honor; and that is the least here intended. But to be Kings on the Throne, is
the greatest worldly honor; and possibly so much is here intended the
righteous, while Elihu says, But with Kings are they upon the Throne.

In that the righteous are said here to be with Kings upon the Throne, we
learn, Righteous persons are in high esteem with God:

He would not thus, in love, set them high, if he did not highly esteem them;
he would not thus prefer them, if he did not know their worth. The world
usually judges righteous persons, as if they were fit only for the dunghill, as
if they were the filth of the world, and the offscouring of all things, (1
Cor. 4.13.) but God has another opinion of them, he thinks them fit to serve
Princes, and to be near the Throne. Take heed of judging them unworthy to be at
the foo^stool, whom God thinks worthy to be with Kings on the Throne.

Secondly, Note; God has exalted, and will exalt righteous persons.

Whom he highly esteems, he sometimes advances highly in this world, they
shall be with Kings on the Throne, ( Psalm. 107.40, 41.) He powers contempt
upon Printes, that is, upon unrighteous Princes; yet (as it follows) He
sets the poor on high from affliction, so we translate and put in the
Margen, He sets the poor on high after affliction. He afflicts the righteous
to purge them, and so to prepare and fit them for greatest enjoyments. We have
a like affi^mation, ( Psalm. 113.7, 8.) He raises up the poor out of the dust,
and lifts up the needy out of the dunghill, that he may set them with
Princes, even the Princes of his people. Thus spoke Hannah in her Song, (1 Samuel
2.8.) and thus, in effect, spoke the blessed Virgin in hers, ( Luke 1.52.) He
has brought down the mighty from their seats, and has exalted the lowly and
meek. We have some Scripture-instances of such exaltations. Joseph, a righteous
person, was cast into bonds, yet God sets him, not only at liberty, but on
high, he was with the King on the Throne, Only in the Throne, (said Pharaoh,
Genesis 42.40.) will I be greater than thou; and all were commanded to bow the
knee to him. David, a righteous person, followed the Ewes great with young, and
the Lord set him upon the Throne, upon the Throne of Israel. Valentinian was
committed to prison by the command of Julian the Apostate, because he struck an
Idolatrous Priest, that would have sprinkled him (aqua lustrali) with their
unholy holy water, as he stood in the gate of the Temple, where Julian was
sacrificing to his Idol-gods; yet he escaped that danger, and afterward
ascended the Throne of that Great Empire. The Lord knows both how to deliver
the righteous out of trouble, and to bring them to honor.

Lastly, We may hence infer, If the righteous are with Kings on the Throne,
then righteousness has a reward. Them that honor me (says the Lord, 1 Samuel
2.30.) I will honor. It is no vain thing to serve the Lord; to be righteous,
and to do righteously, cannot but issue well. The Lord has all promotions at
his dispose, ( Psalm. 75.6, 7.) And therefore he says, Say ye to the righteous,
that it shall be well with him; for they shall eat the fruit of their doings,
(Isa. 3.10.) With Kings are they on the Throne.

Yet, let me add, by way of Caution, that neither this Text, nor the notes
given from it, are so to be understood, as if all righteous persons might hence
expect great advancements in this world, or to be the special Favorites of
Kings and Princes: The word of God does not feed such humors, but mortifies
them; nor does it cherish any such aspiring expectations in righteous men, but
teaches them quiet submission in their own private stations and callings, to
those who are upon the Throne. So that while Elihu says of the righteous, With
Kings are they on the Throne, his meaning must be taken soberly, and may be
taken distinctly, thus;

First, That God has great respect to, and high favors for righteous men.

Secondly, That he brings some of them (as it is said of Daniel with the Prince
of the Eunuchs, Chap. 1.9.) into favor and tender love with Kings and Princes.

Thirdly, That the Lord has often advanced righteous persons to Thrones and
Kingly Dignities. And whenever the Lord advances any of the righteous,
Etiamsi id externe non fiat semper, tamen omnium fides and pietas quorundam
piorum exaltatione honoratur. Coc.
he makes good this promise, because in the exaltation of one, the faith and
piety of all righteous persons, or the whole kind of them, is honored and
exalted.

Fourthly, To be sure, all the righteous shall be with Kings on the Throne
hereafter. Christ has purchased, and is gone to prepare a Kingdom for the
righteous, and will give them a better Crown, than any this world affords, an
incorruptible one. As now the righteous are spiritual Kings, or Kings in a
spiritual sense, ( Rev. 1.6.) that is, they rule over and keep in subjection,
their own lusts and corruptions, pride, ambition, love of the world, wrath,
envy, and whatever else in them does rebel and exalt it self against the
knowledge of God; yea, they as Kings (in this world) conquer the world by
faith, (1 John 5.4.) and the Prince of this world, the devil, through the power
of Jesus Christ (as I say all the righteous are now spiritual Kings (in the
sense given) through grace here on earth, so they shall be glorious Kings and
reign with Christ for ever in Heaven; and then shall this word of God by
Elihu, be fulfilled to the utmost, With Kings are they upon the Throne, Yea, he
does establish them for ever, and they are exalted.

Elihu proceeds to show the happiness of the righteous yet further; The Lord
does not only advance them, but establish them; nor does he only establish them
for a while, but even perpetuateth their establishment, He establishes them
for ever. (...) a radice (...) sedere, and in hac conjugatione, sedere fecit.
The word is, He makes them sit. We render fully to the sense, He establishes
them. The Lord sets them up on high, and then settles them on high. Some get on
high, but they cannot keep on high, they find no establishment there; but God
can establish For ever.

The for ever of this world is a long time. The Lord says of Sion, (Psalm.
132.14.) Here will I dwell for ever, that is, long. Thus in the text, He will
establish them for ever, that is, they shall have long establishment. And if we
take it as to their exaltation in the other world, there God will establish
them to the utmost latitude of for ever, that is, to eternity. The Septuagint
translate, (...) in victoriam. Sept: Sic 2 Samuel 2.26. (...).
He will establish them to victory. The same word in the Hebrew, signifies
eternity, and also victory, because eternity overcomes and triumphs over all:
The Lord shall settle them to victory; and that may have a good interpretation,
with respect to the power of God in settling them; He shall settle them to
victory, that is, they shall (in his power) overcome all difficulties that
stand in the way of their establishment.

Hence Note; As preferment, so establishment is from God.

First, He establishes all things, whether they be, First, natural things, the
heavens and the earth, times and seasons, ( Genesis 8.22.) or Secondly, Civil
things, States and Nations; or Thirdly, Spiritual things; First, the Gospel,
and the Church of the Gospel, that he establishes as a Rock, against which the
gates of hell shall not prevail, ( Mat. 16.18. so Isa. 44.28. Psalm. 87.5.)
Secondly, Grace in the hearts of his people, (1 Pet. 5.10.) and them in the
ways of grace, (2 These. 2.17. Chap. 3.3.) Thus God establishes all things.

Secondly, He establishes, counsels and actions, ( Isa. 44.26.) He confirms
the word of his servants, and performs the counsel of his Messengers; that
is, he makes good, and brings to effect that word which they have given in
counsel. And as for actions, Moses prays ( Psalm. 90.17.) Establish thou the
work of our hands upon us, yea the work of our hands establish thou it.
Whatever is in our hands quickly molders away, and (as the enemies said when
the Jews built the walls of Jerusalem, Neh. 4.3.) If a Fox go up upon it, it
will fall, unless the Lord establish it; but neither the Foxes with their
subtilty, nor the Lions with their power and cruelty, shall be able to
overthrow that wall, or those actions, which the Lord is pleased to establish;
for he does establish them For ever.

Hence Note; The Lord can establish, not only for a time, but for always; he
can give a perpetuity of establishment, not only a lasting, but an everlasting
establishment; he can give an eternity of establishment.

Here is complete happiness. What can we desire more, than First, to be in a
great and good estate; Secondly, to be established there; Thirdly, to be
established for ever? They that are set high are set in slippery places, unless
the Lord be with them; how much more if the Lord be against them? ( Psalm.
73.18.) But the Lord can set us as high as the highest Rock, and yet make us as
firm as the firmest Rock. He does establish them for ever, And they are
exalted.

Some read thus, He establishes them for ever, when they are exalted, which
makes a very clear sense; when they are got high, the Lord does establish them
fully and finally. We render it as a distinct act of God, They are established
for ever, and they are exalted; probably intending thus much; that the Lord
when he will do a thing, can do it, notwithstanding all opposition, that either
is or can be made against it; he sets them with Kings on the Throne, and does
establish them for ever, yea, they rise in power and dignity more and more,
They are exalted.

Hence Note; What God will do, shall be done;

If he says to a person, be exalted, he shall be exalted; if he says to
Jerusalem, thou shall be built, and to the Temple, thy foundation shall be
laid, (Isa. 44.28.) it is done; if he says, pull down Babylon, down it must
come, even to the very foundation. Ephraim said, ( Jer. 30.18.) Thou have
chastised me, and I was chastised; I found the effects of thy chastisement, it
came home to me. What Go^ ^ill work, no man can let or put a stop to.

Further, From the other reading, Note; Whom God sets up, no man can pull down,
till himself pleases;

He does establish them for ever, when they are exalted. God is able to
maintain his own acts, whether in casting any down, or exalting them. When God
laid the mountains and heritage of Esau wast for the Dragons of the Wilderness,
(Mal. 1.3.) Edom said at the next verse, (well, I see) we are impoverished, but
we will return, and build the desolate places. As if Edom had said, Though the
Lord has brought us thus low, yet we doubt not to recover our former glory.
But what says the Lord? hear what in the next line; Thus says the Lord of
Hosts, They shall build, (or let them build) but I will throw down. Now (I say)
as when the Lord pulls down, none can build without his leave, so whom the Lord
exalts, none can pull down; He establishes them for ever, when they are
exalted. Thus Elihu sets forth the exceeding kindness of God to, and his care
over the righteous, not only his provident care as to their present condition,
but as to the abiding of their exaltation and the establishment of it for ever.

JOB, Chap. 36. Verse. 8, 9, 10. 8. And if they be bound in fetters, and be
holden in cords of affliction:

9. Then he shows them their work, and their transgressions, that they have
exceeded:

10. He opens also their ear to discipline, and commands that they return
from iniquity.


THese three verses hold forth three things in particular, all which concern
the righteous, of whom Elihu said in the former verse, not only, that God does
not withdraw his eyes from them, but establishes them on high, or advances
them highly in this world.

First, That possibly they may be cast into sore affl^ctions, even after their
exaltation, and the newly promised lastingnes of it, ( v. 8.)

Secondly, That the procuring cause of these afflictions, is their own sin; for
we find mention of their transgression in the 9th verse, and of their iniquity
in the tenth.

Thirdly, That the purpose and design of God toward them, when they have
brought themselves into streights, and are cast into an afflicted condition, is
very gracious, and tends to their everlasting good. And this design is
threefold.

First, To discover their sin to them; that is laid down at the 9th verse, Then
he shows them their work, and their transgressions.

Secondly, To prepare them for a better receiving of faithful counsel and
instruction, at the 10th verse, He opens also their ear to discipline.

Thirdly, To bring them quite off from their sin; that is expressed in the close
of the 10th verse, and commands that they return from iniquity. These are the
parts, this the purpose of the Context under hand; Verse. 8. And if they be
bound in fetters.

There is some question who are to be understood as the Antecedent to this,
they, if they, who are they? Some, because the words following speak of
transgression and iniquity, conceive, that surely it must be meant of wicked
men, or of the ungodly; but El hu comes not upon that subject til the 13th
verse; there he turns his speech to such, but the hypocrites in heart heap up
wrath, etc. Therefore here he does not speak of, or to, wicked, but righteous
men, falling into trouble and affliction; they, that is, the righteous, etc.

Again, Taking righteous men to be the Antecedent (as the text plainly carries
it) yet there is a difference in opinion, whether we are to understand Elihu
speaking of righteous men in that special dignity described at the 7th verse,
such as are with Kings on the Throne, or of righteous men in general: I
conceive we may understand the text of either. And therefore,

First, When Elihu says, If they be bound in fetters, he may intend those
righteous men who were so highly exalted in the former verse, such a change may
come upon them; even they who were with Kings on the Throne, may come to be
bound in fetters, and holden in the cords of affliction.

Secondly, He may intend it of righteous men in any other condition; for Elihu
having showed how graciously God deals in exalting some righteous men,
shows that God is gracious also unto those that are not exalted, even unto
those that are greatly afflicted, and brought very low. Briefly, as in the
former verse he spoke of righteous men lifted up, so here of righteous men cast
down: As if he had said, If any of the righteous are at any time so far from
being exalted with Kings on the Throne, that they are cast upon the dunghill,
and are brought into great streights, yet it is not because God takes no care
of them, or because he has cast them out of his favor; but it is thus with
righteous men for many blessed ends and purposes, which God has upon them, or
toward them, to show them their sin, to fit them for instruction, and to bring
them off from their iniquity. Thus the words prevent an objection; for Elihu
having said, he withdraws not his eyes from the righteous, but with Kings are
they on the Throne, some might say, You can show us very few such sights, you
can show us few righteous men with Kings on the Throne, or exalted highly in
this world; and we can show you many righteous men in great trouble, in fetters
and cords of affliction. Well, says Elihu, suppose it be so, suppose you find
many righteous men in such a low condition, yet God withdraws not his eyes
from them, no not then; yea, he is doing them good by all the evils that they
suffer. So then, if this relative they refer to righteous men in either
capacity, either to such as were before exalted, and are now affl cted, or to
such righteous men as were never so exalted, yea as are depressed and cast into
an afflicted condition, yet God withd^awe h not his eyes from them, but still
continues his care of them, and tenderness toward them.

If they be bound in fetters, and holden by the cords of affliction. Here are
two hard words, bound and holden, bound as captives, bound as prisoners, bound
in fetters, yea, and holden in cords, holden or caught as a poor bird in a net
or snare, or as a wild beast in a toil. Bound in fetters, and holden in cords.
These fetters and cords may be understood two ways.

First, Literally and properly, it is possible for a righteous man to be bound
in fetters, and holden in cords, plainly so called. Joseph was cast into
prison, and the Iron entered into his soul, and his feet were hurt in the
Stocks, in material Stocks.

Secondly, We may expound these fetters and cords figuratively, or
metaphorically, and so any trouble or straight is as a fetter, and as a cord:
Thus to be bound in fetters, and holden in cords, is but an expression
signifying any afflicted condition. Fetters and cords are Emblems of slavery
and captivity. The P ophet foreshewing the willing contribution of diverse
strange Nations toward the help of the Jews in their return from the
Babylonish captivity, as also, beyond that, their subjection to Christ and the
power of the Gospel, gives it under this shadow, ( Isa. 45.14.) Thus says the
Lord, the labor of Egypt, and merchand se of Ethiopia, and of the Sabeans, men
of stature shall come over unto thee, and they shall be thine, (that is, they
shall yield themselves to thee as thy subjects, and more) they shall come after
thee in chains, they shall come over; that is, they shall follow thee as
captives do a conquering enemy, in chains. In what chains? the meaning is
not, that they fhall come with chain^^ of Iron upon their bodies; but even the
stoutest, greatest, and richest of them shall humbly submit, they shall come
even as prisoners, with their chains about them, supplicating and entreating
thy favor. We read in the holy History of the Kings, that the servants of
Benhadad came with ropes about their necks to Ahab, Vin^ula sunt servitutis
Symbola.
they came with material ropes about their necks in taken of their abasement
and readiness to submit unto what sentence soever the King of Israel should lay
upon them. To come with ^opes and chains, is, in Scripture Language, to come in
deepest humiliation; and to be bound in chains and fetters, is to be in
greatest affliction. That Is the sense of the Prophet ( Isa. 28.22.) Now
therefore be ye not mockers (there were some that derided him, threatening
judgment in the name of the Lord, take heed of that) lest your bands be made
strong; that is, lest God bring you into such great afflictions, that you shall
find and feel your selves (as it were) in bands, or (as Elihu expresses it in
the Text) bound in fetters, and holden in the cords of affliction. So then,
this notes in general any state of trouble or sorrow, of misery or calamity
that befalls us here below, ( Psalm. 107.10.) They that sit in darkness, and in
the shadow of death, being bound in affliction and iron; that is, as fast bound
in affliction, as if they were bound in iron. Thus here Holden in cords of
affliction.

Some translate, cords of poverty; (...) Eunibus p^upertatu. Vulg: (...)
Dicitur qui quid premit and constringit; quare appellalatione Funis
comprehenditur pignus, quo obligatur homo, ^^ dolor praefertim parturie^ l^m.
the same word signifying both affliction and poverty, because poverty is so
great an affliction. Here Is the case, this is the condition into which Elihu
supposes righteous men may fall; They may be bound in fetters, and holden in
cords of affliction. Taking the words as they refer to righteous men in
general, observe, The best of men may fall into the worst outward condition;

They may be in a condition of captivity, they may be in real fetters and
cords, or they may be in a state of affliction, as bad to them as fetters and
cords. I have heretofore, more than once, spoken of the afflictions of the
righteous in the opening of this Book, therefore I shall not stay upon it here.
Only take notice that the righteous may come into fetters, etc. not only for
trial of their graces, but for the punishment of their iniquities; they
possibly have not kept close to the bands of duty, and therefore God brings
them into the bands of calamity. As wicked men say in the pride and stoutness
of their hearts, ( Psalm. 2.3.) Come, let us break their bands, and cast their
cords from us; that is, those bands of duty and cords of obedience which the
Gospel lays upon them; So, in a degree, good men, righteous men, may throw
off the cords of obedience, and the bands of duty, through the violence of
corruption and temptation, walking loosely and vainly for a season, they may
break the bands of the Gospel Covenant, and the cords of the Commandment, and
when they do so, God will not spare them, but will throw them even into the
bands of trouble and into the cords of affliction; they shall know the fetters
and bands of affliction, threatened in the Law, when they have not carefully
kept to the rule of the Law.

Secondly, Taking the righteous in that special capacity, for such as were once
exalted, and in high place, or as it is said in the former verse, With Kings on
the Throne, and finding them here in fetters and bands, Note, The worldly state
of good, of righteous men, as well as others, is subject to change.

For though that text says, He establishes them, yet it is not to be
understood that God does so establish righteous men in their places, that they
can never be put out of them, or so exalt them, that they shall never be pulled
down; that text shows what God can do, he can exalt them so, that they shall
not be removed for ever, and he often exalts them so, but he does not so
always; for the outward estates of good men may have as great changes, as the
outward estate of wicked men have: they may come from thrones to prisons, and
from chains of gold to fetters of Iron. There have been many such changes as
to the things of the world, even to those that are not of the world; And as
Heathen Princes and Kings have often found such changes, so also did several of
the Kings of Judah, they were brought from the throne to the prison. Zedekiah
and Jeckoniah and Manasseh, had such sad changes; when they highly provoked
God, they came from their Thrones to the prison, from a Crown to the cords of
affliction; yea this has been the lot of many other righteous men exalted,
they have been brought to the prison, and laid very low in this world. Solomon
says of one, ( Eccles. 4.14.) Out of prison he comes to reign, and of
another he says in the same verse, He also that is borne in his Kingdom
becomes poor; such vicissitudes and revolutions come over the heads of the
children of men, yea good men are not exempted from such changes and
revolutions. Therefore be not offended if at any time you see good men in
chains and fetters, in a condition of great affliction.

Thirdly, From the manner of expression, When they are bound in fetters, and
holden in cords. Affliction is set forth and described by cords and fetters.

Hence note; Afflictions are grievous to the flesh.

Are not fetters so? are not cords so? The word here translated cords, is
several times in Scripture applied to signify the pains of a woman in travel;
those are most dolorous pains; such are some afflictions. The Apostle speaking
of affliction in general, ( Heb. 12.11.) says, No chastning for the present
seems to be joyous, but grievous. It Is no easy thing to be in fetters and
cords, to be bound in chains. Afflictions streighten, and press, pinch and
gall like fetters, they burden the flesh, they are no light matters. Though
the Apostle, comparatively to the weight of glory, calls the heaviest outward
afflictions light, (2 Cor. 4.17.) yet first, in themselves; and secondly, to
our flesh, they are very heavy. Therefore we should pity those that are in
affliction, as those that are in fetters and cords, and we should pray for
those that are in affliction, as for those that are bound. Every affliction is
a kind of captivity: If they be bound in fetters, and holden in cords of
affliction; thus it may be with the righteous. But is not this an argument that
God hates them? surely no; we read the mind of God toward them notwithstanding
this in the next verse.

Verse. 9. Then he shows them their work; That is, when they are in cords and
fetters. But did he never show them their work before? yes, doubtless he did;
but then especially and effectually, then he shows, he declares, he makes
manifest to them, or he causes them to see and know their work. The word in
that conjugation signifies, not barely to show, but to make them see,
understand and consider their work; he brings them to a review of what they
have done, and to see that they have done amiss. Then he shows; it is a
showing with power, an efficacious showing, he shows them their work. What
work? this their work may be considered two ways.

First, As to the matter of it, what they had done. Till we see what we have
done, we repent not of what we have done, how much soever it ought to be
repented of; as the Lord complained of Israel by the Prophet ( Jer. 8.6.) No
man repented of his wicked^esse, saying, What have I done?

Secondly, As to the vitiousnesse or falsenesse of it, He shows them their
work, that is, either what they had done which was evil in the matter of it, or
what they had done in an evil manner, though in it self good; ^he shows them
the evil of their work, the irregularity, the crookedness, and sinfulness of
their work. That this is the meaning, appears plainly in the words that
follow, Then he shows them their work, and their transgression; that is, that
there is some transg^ession or fault, possibly many faults and transgressions,
in their work. Then he shows them their work.

Hence Note, First, Sin is properly the work of man;

That is, of the flesh in man ( Gal. 5.19.) The works of the flesh are
manifest, which are these, Adultery, etc. Good is Gods work in us, evil is our
work against the mind of God. Sin is often called the work of our hands, (
Psalm. 28.4.) Give them after the work of their hands, render to them their
desert; that is, what they have deserved by their sins. Moses declared his fear
and holy jealousy concerning the children of Israel in this Language, ( Deuteronomy.
31.29.) I know that after my departure, ye will utterly corrupt your selves,
because ye will do evil in the sight of the Lord, to provoke him to anger by
the work of your hands. Idolatry is specially called the work of man's hands,
because Idolaters either worship that as a god, or God by that, which their
hands have wrought ( Rev. 9.20.) They repented not of the works of their hands,
that they should not worship Devils, and Idols of Gold, and Silver, and Brass,
etc. Yet Idolatry is much more the work of the heart, than of the hand. And as
Idolatry, so any other sin, whether of heart or tongue, may be called the work
of our hand, it being that which is most properly our work, though originally
the Devils work. As to pardon sin, is properly the work of God, so to commit
sin, is properly the work of man. There is no work so much ours, as that; no
work properly ours, but bad work; all the good we do, is the work of God in us,
or by us.

Secondly, Note; Man does not see the falseness and faultiness of his own work,
till God shows it him.

There may be many cracks and flaws in our good works, which we perceive not,
we are ready to think and say, All Is well, we have done very well, until God
lets us see our work in his light, in the light of his Word and Spirit; and
then we shall see cause to be humbled for those works which we were proud of,
and sometimes boasted in. The Prophet ( Haggai 1.5.) called the Jews to
consider their ways; they saw their ways, but they considered not their ways,
and therefore they saw not the evil and error of their ways. As we see many of
the works of God, yet see not the excellency or admirable contrivance of them,
till himself shows it; so we see many of our own works, yet we see not the
sinfulness, vanity, and folly that is in them, till God show it unto us; he
makes us see our work as it is.

Thirdly, From the circumstance of time, when it is that the Lord shows unto
man his wo^k, the falseness of his wo^k; the Text says, Then he shows them
their work, that is, when they are bound in fetters, and holden in cords of
affliction.

Hence Note; The badness or sinfulness of our works, is most usually, and most
clearly discovered to us in times of affliction; then shows he them their
work.

Joseph's Brethren did a very ill work in selling him into Egypt, and in putting
off their Father with a lie; yet they took little notice of this work for many
years; but when they were bound in fetters, and holden in the cords of
affliction, when they came down into Egypt for Corn, and were in great
streights, through the policy of their Brother to discover them, not out of any
design to hurt them, Then they said one to another, we are verily guilty
concerning our Brother (Genesis 42.21.) And ( verse. 22.) Reuben answered them,
saying, Spoke I not unto you, saying, Do not sin against the child, and ye
would not hear? therefore behold also his blood is required: Then their sin
appeared to them in bloody colors, then that sinfulness of their work appeared
to them, which they saw not before. Affliction is a dark condition, yet it
brings much light into the soul: Affliction brings light to discover our works
of da knesse, that is, the sinfulness of our works; troubles make Comments
upon our works, ^fflictions expound our actions, and show wh^re the error of
them is. We are usually very blind to see or discern a fault in our selves, or
in what we have done, until God opens our eyes, by laying a cross upon our
backs; Then he shows them their work, And their transgressions that they have
exceeded.

Here we see (as was touched before) what kind of works they are which God
shows them in affliction; Sce^era eorum. Vulg.
works of transgression, or the transg^ession of their works. The Vulgar La^ine
renders the Text by a harder word, Their wickednesses, or villainies. Others by
a word of no less, if not of a more hard and harsh signification, He shows
them their prevaricati^n; as if they had dealt cunningly and treacherously wi^h
God, not plainly, clearly, and above board, as if they had used tricks and
policies very much unbecoming righteous persons. Most give it a more easy
title (as we) translating by a word that will comply with any sin, Nomen hoc
usurpatur etiam de levioribus vi^iis. Drus.
transgr^ssion; every sin, the least sin is a transgression, Sin is a
transgression of the Law in the very nature of it; and taking the word in this
lowest, and most favorable notion,

Observe; God will not spare, he will not spare the righteous for their
transgressions, or lesser faults, if they do not judge and humble themselves;

If their sins be but slips, the Lord will make them know what they have done.

But there seems to be a great aggravation in the Text, upon these
transgressions, which more than intimates that they are no small ones; for it is
added, And their transgressions, That they have exceeded.

Some read the words in the Present Tense, or time, He shows them their
transgressions, when they exceed or prevail: As if the meaning were, God does
not suffer the sins of righteous perfons to grow too potent and prevalent upon
them, but takes them in time, and ^ips their sins in the bud, when he sees they
begin to grow strong upon them, least if let alone, they might be foiled by
them, and so fall into open scandal, or be hardly withdrawn from them. It is
no easy thing to master and mortify a lust, when once it has got head, and
therefore it is a very gracious work of God, to show a man his sin
convincingly, and humble him for it, when he perceives it rising in strength.
This is a pious sense and profitable. We read it in the past time, When they
have exceeded.

That is, when these righteous persons have exceeded much in their
transgressions. As much as to say, when they have sinned exceedingly, or when
their sins are many and great, when (according to the Hebrew) they are waxen
mighty, then the Lord sees it high time to deal with them.

The word which we render exceeded, (...)
comes from a root that signifies a strong, or mighty man, and in the Verb, to
act strongly and mightily; as if Elihu had said, He shows them that they have
sinned like Giants and mighty men, they have sinned greatly, grievously. And
it is possible for those that are righteous in their state to sin greatly; not
only to transgress, but to exceed in their transgressions, that they have
exceeded.

Hence Note, First, There is an excessiveness, or an exceedingness in some sins.

All men sin, but the sins of all men, at least all the sins of all good men,
do not exceed; they are not all of a high stature, they are not all strong and
mighty sins, as the Lord by his Prophet called those of Israel (Amos 5.12.) We
usually distinguish of sins; some are sins in the excess, and some in the
defect; Prodigality is a sin in the excess, and Parcimony is a sin in the
defect; Superstition is a s^n in the excess, when men will worship God more
than he requires, or in what he requires not; Profaneness, or ne^lect of
Worship, as also negligence in Worship, are sins in defect. Thus some sins are
in the excess, others in the defect, yet every transgression has a kind of
excess in it, and some a^e exceedingly excessive. And because when any
exceedingly exceed in sinning their sins may be said to reign; therefore (I
suppose) M^. Braughton translates this Text so, And that their trespasses
reigned. For, though as to a course of sin, it is inconsistent with the state
of a righteous man, that sin should reign in him, yet as to this or that act
it may reign; sin may reign over, and bring under a godly man by the violence
of a present temptation, though it cannot reign over him (as it does over the
wicked) by a willing submission. As the best sin always, so sometimes they
have sinned greatly, they have exceeded. David's sin exceeded, his sin, as to
that act, mastered and reigned over him. Solomon's sin exceeded, when in his old
age his wives turned away his heart to other gods, (1 Kings 11.4.) And Peter's
sin exceeded, when he denied his Master. The righteous are not exempt from a
particular reign of sin, though through grace, they are delivered from the
reign of any the least particular sin. As there is no kind, so no degree of
sin, but a godly man may fall into it, except that against the holy Ghost, and
total Apostasy from his profession.

Secondly, God shows them that they have exceeded, that is it which God
shows them in their affliction.

Hence observe; Many see their sin, that do not see the exceedingness of their
sin, or that they have exceeded in sin.

Not only natural and carnal men, who see that they have sinned, do not at all
see the exceedingness of their sin, but some good men see that they have
sinned, but see not presently the exceeding, no nor half, the evil of their
sin; therefore, says Elihu, He shows them their transgression, that they
have exceeded. Paul before his conversion, knew that he had sinned, but he knew
not the sinfulness of his sin, which yet afterward was to him exceeding
sinful, ( Romans 7.13.) As it is the height of our corruption to commit sins
exceeding sinful, so it is a very high point of grace, to see the exceeding
sinfulness of our sin.

You will say, how is it that sin does exceed, or wherein consists the
exceedingness of it? I answer,

First, There is an exceedingness of sin, in the streng^h that it has over us,
when it does easily command and prevail, then we sin exceedingly, o^ then sin
is exceeding sinful, it has got a mighty hand over us. O how sadly do the
sins of many exceed thus! they are held down by their corruptions as slaves and
captives, they cannot get themselves out from under the power of a base lust.
As the devil leads some, so lusts and corruptions lead others captive at their
will, they are at the beck and command of sin. Thus sin exceeds in the wicked,
who either know not God, or who walk daily contrary to their knowledge.

Secondly, That man does exceed in his transgression, or his transgression does
exceed, who sins with, or has a very ill frame of heart in sinning. Many a
good man falls into sin, and yet he has not, as I may say, a base or wicked
frame of heart in sinning, but his very sinning is, upon the matter, against
his own heart, and the bent of his spirit, his heart goes not with it. The
more of the heart or will is mingled with any sin, the more exceeding sinful
it is. I may say of some men (I would not be mistaken) That they do evil with
a better frame of heart, than others do good; there are some that do good with
very bad, yea with base hearts; The sacrifice of the wicked is an abomination;
how much more when he brings it with a wicked mind, or (as we put in the
Margin) with wickedness, (Pro. 21.27.) that is, either for applause, to be seen
of men, or for profit, to gain by men, or in malice, the better to compass
revenge upon any man, or sort of men; under all which covers, wicked men have
brought their sacrifices, that is, have appeared in the outward worship of God,
or have taken up the form of godliness. And whosoever does thus, has a far
worse frame of heart in doing good, than a good man has in doing evil: who
though he does evil, yet he delights not in it, and closes not with it. By how
much any man's heart is more taken with sin, by so much the more sinful it is.

Thirdly, The exceedingness of a sin may be measured by the circumstances of
sinning; then a man may be said to transgress, and exceed in transgression,
when he sins, First, against light, against the checks of his own conscience
within; as also, Secondly, when he sins against reproofs, warnings, and
admonitions from without; that man exceeds in sin, who has been told of it,
and yet goes on. Thirdly, that man exceeds in sin, who sins in the midst of
much mercy, and daily received or renewed favors; as also he, Fourthly, who
sins in the midst of many afflictions and judgments, whether upon his person
and family, or upon the Nation where he lives: such as these not only sin or
transgress, but exceed in transgression. Now the Lord in times of affliction
shows men these and the like exceedings of their transgression, and causes
them to confess, not only that they are sinners, and have transgressed, but
they are brought upon their knees to confess, that they have exceeded in
transgression. And when this is done, the Lord goes on yet further to perfect
the work of humiliation and repentance, while they are bound in fetters, and
holden in the cords of affliction; for then, as it follows, Verse. 10. He
opens also their ear to discipline, and commands that they return from
iniquity.

Still it is Gods work, he shows before, and here, he opens: as in the
former verse he opens their eyes to see, so in this he opens their ear to
hear.

He opens their ear. (...) Revelavit occulta and abscondita: revelatio auris
notat intimam insinuationem.
This latter is more than the former, this opening the ear to discipline, is
more than a showing of sin, and the exceeding sinfulness of it: Opening the
ear, imports a close and home-discovery of a man's condition to him, ( Psalm.
51.6.) David, after his great sin, perceived the Lord showing him, or making
him to understand wisdom secretly.

He opens also their ear. The word which we translate, to open, properly
signifies to reveal; and, in Scripture phrase, the ear is said to be
revealed, or uncovered, when a secret is brought to us, (1 Samuel 20.2.) Jonathan
said to David, God forbid, thou shall not die; behold my father will do
nothing, either great or small, but that he will show it me, (or uncover my
ear) and why should my father hide this thing from me? Saul also used the same
Hebraisme, or form of speech, when he upbrayded his servants with their
unfaithfulness to him; What, says he, has the son of Jesse such preferments
for you? and are you all so corrupted in your loyalty to me, that all of you
have conspired against me, and there is none that shows me, (or uncovereth my
ear) that my son has made a League with the son of Jesse, Loquit^r de auro
cord^ and mentis. Scitum illud; Men's audit, men's vidit, caetera surda et caeca
sunt. Drus:
( Sam. 22.8.) Will none of you uncover my ear? that is, discover the plot that
is contrived for my ruin? Then the ear is said to be opened or uncovered, when
any secret is made known to the mind; as was further showed at the 16th verse
of the 33d Chapter, where Elihu used this expression; and therefore I shall not
return to that matter, but refer the Reader thither. Only consider to what,
or for what, the Lord is said to open the ear. In the 33d Chapter Elihu told
us, that when the eyes of men are shut (deep sleep being fallen upon them) he
opens the ears of men, and seals their instruction. Here Elihu says, God
having men under the rod, he opens also their ear To discipline.

The Hebrew word is of the same extraction in both places; (...) Ad
castigationem, i. e. Ne castigatio sit eis absque fructu, vel ut ista
disciplino seu correctione emendentur. Pisc:
Instruction is for discipline, and discipline tends unto instruction. It is
often rendered, chastisement, and generally signifies any severer course of
instruction or education, whereby we are drawn off from evil and unto good.
When Elihu says, He opens their ear to discipline, we may understand it two
ways.

First, To fit them for instruction, and counsel; they heard (possibly) before,
but not with an open, that is, a ready and obedient ear. The ear is shut,
though we hear much, unless we submit and conform to what we hear. The ear
seldom opens fully till the Lord smites, as well as speaks, and gives us both
a word and a blow.

Secondly, He opens their ear to discipline, that is, to hearken what Gods
chastening or correction speaks, or what he speaks by his chastning. The Lord
would not have his chastnings unprofitable, nor his rods without fruit to us,
and therefore he opens the ear to discipline, and shows us the meaning of
such a cross or sickness, of such a loss or affliction; He opens their ear to
d^scipline.

Hence note; First, It is a special power of God which helps us to understand
his mind, either in his Word or in his Works.

We neither understand the dealings nor sayings of God, if left to our selves:
the heart of man is shut, his ear is deaf, the ear of his heart (that is the ear
here intended) till God say (as in the Gospel to the bodily ear) Ephatha, Be
thou opened, (Pro. 20.12.) The hearing ear, and the seeing eye, the Lord is the
maker of them both: That Is a great truth; First, of the sensitive ear and eye;
it is the Lord who has made the one to hear, and the other to see, as he told
Moses (Exodus 4.11.) and as it is said, ( Psalm. 94.19.) Secondly, it is as true if
understood of the intellectual eye and ear; the hearing ear and seeing eye,
that is, the ear that hears obediently and practically, that ear is of Gods
forming and making; such an ear did God create ( Acts 16.14.) where it is said,
A certain woman named Lydia, a seller of purple of the City of Thyatira, which
worshipped God, heard us, whose heart the Lord opened, that she attended to the
things that were spoken by Paul.

Further, what was the season of opening the ear? It was a day of affliction,
when they were bound in fetters, and holden in cords of affliction.

Hence learn; God uses afflictions as medicines or means to restore spiritual
hearing.

Man is often cured of his spiritual deafness, both as to the voice of the word
and works of God, by sickness. A good man in health, Fles prospera donum est
dei consolantis, res odversa est donum dei admonentis; quod igiturpateris, un
de plangis; medicina est, non paena; castigatio non damnatio. August: in Psalm:
102. Qui juhentis verba non audiunt, ferientis verberibus admonentur; ut ad
bona aeterna paenae trahant, quos praemia non invitant. Greg: l. 26. Moral. c.
26. (...) et dicit.
peace, and prosperity, may have his ears so stopped that the Lord sees it
needful to send some sharp correction to get out the ear-wax and unlock them.
Prosperity (says one of the Ancients) is the gift of God comforting us;
adversity is the gift of God admonishing us; why then do thou complain that
thou suffer, thy suffering is a medicament, not a punishment; it is for thy
bettering, not for thy undoing. It Is a favor to feel God striking, when we
have not heard him speaking, and he therefore strikes that we may attend what
he speaks; When words do not prevail to open the ear, fetters and cords shall.
That Is the second design of God when he brings the righteous into streights,
Then he opens their ear to discipline: The third is given in the close of
this verse; And commands that they return from iniquity.

Here Is the issue of the former two: The showing them their transgressions, the
opening their ear, are that they may return from iniquity; and here is a
command that they must; And commands that they return, etc. The Hebrew text
may be rendered, He speaks, or says, that they return from iniquity; and this
speaking may be expounded two ways, First, by persuading; He speaks
perswadingly. The Lords afflictions are persuasions, his strokes are
entreaties; he beseeches us by ou^ sorrows, and sicknesses, and weaknesses,
and pains, that we would return from our iniquity. Secondly, we take speaking
or saying in the highest strain, He speaks by commanding, he speaks
autho^itatively; Thus we render, He commands. The command of God is twofold;
First, formal or express, when God gives the rule in so many words. Secondly,
vertual. The command of God (I conceive) is here to be understood in this
latter sense. When the Lord afflicts the righteous, he vertually commands, or
sends out his Edict, that they return from their iniquity. The word return,
implies them formerly following some iniquity, and gone far from the Lord: This
returning is repenting all the Scripture over. I need say no more of that. As
by sin we turn from God, so by repentance, we return from iniquity; and as the
Lord at all times commands the righteous by his word, so they even force him
sometimes to command them by his rod, which is called discipline in the former
part of the verse, because sinners feel pain, and find matter to learn, all at
once. He commands that they return from iniquity.

The word rendered iniquity, signifies a vain, empty thing, (...) habet
significationem nihili. -- Ab operibus suis malis, quae similia sunt vanitate
and nihilo. Chald:
a thing of naught: so the Chaldee paraphraseth it here, He commands that they
return from their evil works, which are like to vanity, and a thing of naught.
What is sin, but a kind of nothing? we look for great matters from sin, but it
is a vanity, it is (like an Idol) nothing in the world, that is, it is not such
a thing as it does import, or as it promises, or as the opinion of men make it
to be; Iniquity is no such thing as it pretends, or as is pretended. The Lord
commands that they return from iniquity; that is, from doing that which will
profit them nothing at all, or no more than a vain thing, a thing of nothing
can. And yet though iniquity be nothing good or profitable, yet it is all things
evil and hurtful, nor had any thing ever hurt us or been evil to us, had it
not been for iniquity. He commands that they return from iniquity.

Hence Note; First, Affliction has a voice; God speaks loudly to us by
affliction;

He speaks to us as loud in his works, as he does in his word; he trumpets to
us, he thunders to us in his works: God speaks aloud, but sweetly, to us in his
works of mercy, he speaks aloud, but terribly, to us in his works of judgment.

Secondly, Seeing, as was touched in opening the words, this command is not to
be taken for a standing Law, for so God always commands men to return from
iniquity, but the command here is a renewed act or a special dispensation,
there is, as it were, a fresh command issued, when a man is under the
afflicting hand of God.

Hence Note; God reinforceth or renews his command to return from sin, as
often as he renews our afflictions.

That we return from iniquity, is a standing, an everlasting Law, but when we
are in affliction, then there is, as it were, a fresh Edition of the command,
it is, as I may say, new printed and proclaimed, the fetters print this command
upon our heels, and the cords upon our hands, that we return from iniquity.

Thirdly, Note; Iniquity is a vain thing, it is a nothing.

Shall we not then return from it? one would think a little persuasion might
serve the turn to hasten our return from a nothing, and shall not a command do
it? when I say a nothing, remember, (as was showed) sin is no such thing as you
look upon it to be: where are the profits that you have reaped by sin? where
are the contents and pleasures that you have taken by sin? the profit, the
pleasure, and content of sin are nothing, there is no advantage to be had by
sin. Sin is something in the ill effects of it; if you would have pain, and
dishonor, and reproach, you may have enough of it in sin, and you will find
sin a something in that sense; but sin is a nothing, that is, no such thing as
you expect and look for, and therefore be persuaded to return from it.

Lastly, From the whole text take notice of the purpose of God, what he has in
his heart, when he afflicts his people, the righteous, for their iniquities
and faylings, for their faults and uneven walkings. The scope of God in all
this, is not their hurt, but good; it is not to destroy them for their sin, but
to destroy their sin; it is not to withdraw himself from them, but to draw them
nearer to himself; all the hurt that the Lord intends us by any affliction, is
but to get out our dross, and to fetch out our filth, to bring us off from
those things that will undo and ruin us for ever. And how great an argument of
the goodness of God is it, that he designeth the evils which we suffer in these
dying bodies, to heal the evils, and help on the good of our immortal souls!
that is all the hurt that the Lord means us. And the Lords heart is so much in
this design (the return of those he afflicts from their iniquity) that he seems
confident of it, that when any are in affliction, surely they will return, (
Hosea 5.15.) In their affliction they will seek me early, surely they will. And
therefore the Prophet speaks of the Lord as defeated and disappointed of his
purpose, when he sees such as he has afflicted continuing in their sin, (
Isa. 9.13.) The people turns not unto him that smites them, neither do they
seek the Lord of Hosts: As if he had said, It Is a wonder, that being smitten
they have not returned; what a strange, what a cross-grained people are these!
What? does the Lord smite you that you should run farther from him, and follow
your iniquity closer, or hold it faster? you may be ashamed that you turn not
unto him that speaks to you; but when you are smitten will you not return from
iniquity? remember, the Lord therefore suffers you to be bound in fetters, that
you may be loosed from your sins; he therefore suffers you to be holden in the
cords of affliction, that you might let go your transgressions. Take heed you
be not found disappointing him of his purpose. How well it will be with those
who do not disappoint him, and how ill it is like to be with such as do, will
appear further and fully in the two next verses.

JOB, Chap. 36. Verse. 11, 12. 11. If they obey and serve him, they shall spend
their days in prosperity, and their years in pleasures.

12. But if they obey not, they shall perish by the sword, and they shall die
without knowledge.


IN the former Context we heard, what the blessed designs of God are upon the
righteous, when they are bound in fetters, and holden in the cords of
affliction, namely, to convince them of their sin, to fit them for the
receiving of Instruction, and to bring them clear off from iniquity.

In these two verses Elihu proceeds to show what the issue of those
afflictions will be, in a double respect or case.

First, In case the afflicted come up to and answer the forementioned designs
of God; that is, if they take knowledge of their sin, if their ears be opened
to Instruction, if they return from iniquity; what then? he tells us ( v. 11.)
If they obey and serve him, they shall spend their days in prosperity, and
their years in pleasures; that shall be the issue, the blessed issue of all the
afflictions with which they were exercised.

Secondly, He shows us how those afflictions will issue in case the afflicted
come not up to those designs of God, in case they are not brought to a
knowledge of sin, nor receive instruction, nor return from iniquity; what then?
he tells us that ( v. 12.) if they obey not (this will be the consequent of
their obstinacy) they shall perish by the sword, and they shall die without
knowledge. We have a parallel Scripture to this almost in terms, ( Isa. 19.20.)
If ye hear and obey, ye shall eat the good of the Land, but if ye refuse and
rebel, ye shall be devoured with the sword. This text not only carries the
sense, but almost the words, by which Elihu expresses both the Lords pleasure
and displeasure in this place to Job.

Verse. 11. If they obey, or hear, That is, take out the lesson taught them; if
they do that which the affliction teaches them, or which God teaches by their
affliction, by their cords and fetters, then, etc. The same word is frequently
in Scripture used for obeying and hearing, (Psalm. 81.8, 11, 13. Psalm. 95.7.) To
what purpose is our hearing the will of God without obedience to it? When young
Samuel said at the Lord's call, Speak, for thy servant hears, (1 Samuel 3.10.)
his meaning was, Lord, I am ready to do what thou speak. We hear no more
than we obey, and therefore obeying and hearing may well be expressed by the same
word. The text is plain, I shall only give this Note, and pass on; It is our
duty to hear and obey whenever God calls or speaks, either in his word or in
his works.

That which this text holds out specially is the voice of God in his works,
what God speaks by Fetters, what he speaks by Cords. If ever we hear and obey
the voice of the Lord, it should be when he teaches us (as Gideon taught the
men of Succoth, Judge. 8.16.) with thorns and briars of the wilderness. O let
us take care of hearing and obeying this voice. For First, God is the Lord, and
therefore to be obeyed. Secondly, God is a Sovereign Lord, and therefore much
more to be obeyed. Thirdly, As all the Commands, so all the Chastisements of
God are just and righteous, therefore they are most of all to be obeyed.
Fourthly, To obey the Commands of God, whether taught us in his Word or by his
Rod, is good, yea best for us, therefore we should obey for our own good. If
they obey And serve him, or worship him.

The word which here we render to serve, (...) Religio at numinis cultus est.
servitus quaedam.
is very often in Scripture rendered to worship, and sometimes worshipping is
expounded by serving, ( Mat. 4.10.) Thou shall worship the Lord thy God, and
him only shall thou serve; that also is the mind of the Text, If they obey and
serve him.

Hence note; The Lord expects our service, and then especially, when we suffer.

Religion and the Worship of God, in the whole compass of it, is nothing else
but service, a blessed service, a free service, a service infinitely more free
than any thing the world calls freedom. ( Exodus 4.23.) Let my Son go that he
may serve me, that is, worship me. All the Sons of God are his Servants, and
they have most of the Son in them who have most of the Servant in them. If any
deny him service they deny their sonship, or rather (as the Apostle speaks of
Non-sufferers in one kind or other, Heb. 12.8.) They are bastards, not sons;
yea, God expects whole and all service from us, or that we should serve him
with our all, ( Deuteronomy. 10.12.) Thou shall serve the Lord thy God with all thy
heart. We must serve the Lord, not only with the best we have, but with all the
best, with the heart, and all the heart. We serve God no further than we obey
him, and we worship him no further than we serve him, and that heartily.

To serve God, (as to love God) is a very comprehensive word, it is the sum of
all the duty of Man. To serve God is to submit both to what he commands us, and
to what he lays upon us. To serve God is to submit to what he would have us
do, and to whatsoever he is pleased to do with us; and so we serve him
particularly under sufferings: We should always serve him actively, and we are
called sometimes to serve him passively. All Believers are free, and yet they
must serve; and they are made free on purpose to serve: We are purchased by the
blood of Christ, that we might serve him. Because we are bought with a price,
we must not be the servants of men, says the Apostle, (1 Cor. 7.23.) Whose
servants then? Surely the servants of God. Servus tanquam in bello servatus.
We are conquered that we might serve. The Latins say, that a Servant is one
that is saved in War, taken and saved. So it is with all the people of God,
they are taken in the holy war, they are taken prisoners, and so made servants
to Jesus Christ. Yet Believers are servants, not only by conquest, but compact
and covenant; every godly man has, as it were, sealed Indentures with God, he
has (upon the matter) put his ear to the Lords post to be boared through, (as
you read, Exodus 21.6.) that he may be his servant for ever. The Lord expects
service.

But what is it to serve him?

First, To serve him is to do his Will.

Secondly, To serve him is to do his whole Will. It is not the doing of this or
that piece of the Will of God, or this or that patch of the Will of God, which
renders us his servants; but the doing his whole Will.

Thirdly, To serve him is to do his Will only; so says the Scripture, Him only
shall thou serve. If it may be supposed, that we could do the whole Will of
God, and yet do the will of any other, or do our own will too, in any thing
contrary to his, we were not his servants; if we serve him not alone, or if we
serve him not only, that is, if in serving man we aim not chiefly at the
serving of him, or if all our services to men are not subservient, or not in
subordination to the service of God, we serve him not at all.

Fourthly, I may add this also, To serve God is to do every thing under this
contemplation, that, what we do is the Will of God. It Is very possible for a
man to do that which is the Will of God, and yet not to serve him in doing it;
which we never do till we do it because it is the Will of God. His Will must be
not only the Rule of what we do, but the very Reason why we do it, else our
doings are not his servings. They that do not attend this, serve God but as a
beast may serve him, a beast may do that which is the Will of God; the
inanimate creatures serve him so; We hear of stormy winds and tempests
fulfilling his Will, (Psalm. 148.) All living, yea, liveless creatures do that
which is his Will, but they do not attend this, that it is his Will which they
do. So that, I say, to do his Will, not considering that it is his Will, is to
serve him no otherwise than beasts, or than the winds or storms serve him: And
to do his Will, aiming at our own wills or ends, is to serve him but as a
hypocrite serves him. A hypocrite does not serve God in what he does, though he
does many things which are materially the Will of God, because in all he minds
his own will more than the Will of God.

Lastly, We must serve God as Sons, ( Mal. 3.17.) A Son serves no less than a
Servant, yea much more, though not as a servant; for he knows more of his
Fathers mind than a mere servant does ( Joh. 15.15.) and he knows, that he
shall have also, though not Wages at the end of every day, yet the inheritance
in the end. Obadiah was the proper name of one good man, and it is a name
common to all good men; they are (as that word imports) Servants of the Lord.
It is a common Theme to urge men to serve God, but it is a rare thing to be
indeed a servant of God. To serve God is the Sum and Marrow of all knowledge
in divinity, and the great end why we came into this World and for which we are
here detained. Nor is it an easy matter to come up to, or attain the holy
skill of serving such a Lord and Master as he: There must be a doing of his
Will, and of his whole Will, and of his Will only, and that under this precise
contemplation, that it is his Will, to denominate us his servants, or to make a
proof that we serve him.

Now whether God teaches us by his Word, or by his Rod (which is the teaching
of this context) O how readily should we obey and serve him! To serve him is
not only the design of our being made free, that is, we were not only made
free to serve him, but to serve him is our freedom (as was touched before) yea,
to serve him is not only to be free, but to serve him is to reign and rule.
They that serve God to purpose reign over the lusts of the evil World without,
and over their own lusts within; nor can any reign over the lusts of the world
without, or their own within, but only they who serve him, and only so far as
they serve him. Every gracious act of service to God is the subjugation or
bringing under of some lust or other in man.

Now if any should say, surely this is a very sad Life, to be always serving,
or to lead only the life of a servant.

I answer, To serve God, or the service of God is sweet, pleasant and easy in
a twofold respect. First, comparatively, to the service of sin and the world,
of lust and the devil; that is a weariness indeed as well as a baseness.
Secondly, It is easy also if we consider the help we have in it. The people of
God serve him in a Covenant of Grace, which, as it calls them to work, so it
gives them help to work. The New Covenant does not call us (as Pharaoh did the
children of Israel) to make brick and deny us straw; yea, under that Covenant,
we have not only straw afforded us to make our brick, but we have strength
afforded us to make our brick; thar is, the very power by which we serve our
Master is given in by our Master. The Masters of this world set us a work, but
they give us no strength, but what work soever God sets his Covenant-servants
about, he gives them strength to do it. Then, O how sweet is it to serve him,
and how readily should our hearts come off in his service! Let me add one thing
more (which brings us to the next words) serve him, for his is not a lean
service, not an unprofitable service, there is a reward promised to those who
serve him; yea, his very service is a reward, his work is wages. Therefore what
calls soever we have from him let us answer and serve him. There are two things
which should be the daily meditation of Saints, or they should be continually
acquainting themselves with them. First, The Cross of Christ, that they may
know how, and be willing to suffer for him. Secondly, The Yoke of Christ, that
they may know how, and be willing to serve him. If they obey and serve him,
What then? even that which was the last consideration prove king us to his
service, there is a reward in i^, If they obey and serve him, They shall spend
their days in prosperity and their years in pleasures.

Here Is good wages; who would not serve that Master who will pay him for his
work in that desirable coin, Pleasure and Prosperity! They shall spend their
days in prosperity, that is, they shall run out their days in prosperity,
their days and their prosperity shall be like two parallel lines, one as long
as the other. (...) Significat tum consumere, tum consummare, significat etiam
consumi desiderio, quod dicitur aliquem deperire amore.
The word which we translate to spend, signifies to finish, and that in a
double respect; First, in a way of Consumption; Secondly, in a way of
Perfection or Consummation. That which is consumed is finished, or ended. So
the word is used ( Psalm. 90.7.) ( Numb. 16.45.) The Lord says to Moses, Go you
up from this Congregation, that I may consume them in a moment; I will dispatch
them and make an end of them presently. The Lord can soon rid his hand of
sinners. And as it notes a consuming by sudden judgments, by diseases or age,
so by longing or desire, (2 Samuel 23.15.) And David longed ('it is this word, he
was even spent and consumed with a longing desire) and said, Oh that one would
give me drink of the water of the well of Bethlehem, which is by the gate. Now
as that which is consumed or spent, so that which is perfected is finished.
Thus, Moses having set down the particulars of the whole work of Creation
sums all up in this word, ( Genesis 2.1, 2.) Thus the heavens and the Earth were
finished, and all the host of them; that is, God completed or brought that
great work of Creation to its utmost perfection, he put (as we may speak) his
last hand to it, there was nothing more to be added. Here in the text we a^e to
take this word spend, not only as it often signifies, to spend in a way of
Consumption, but also to spend in a way of Perfection, they shall perfect, not
barely wear out their days. A godly man has not so much consumed as perfected
the days of his life, when he is come to and has ended the last day of his
life. They shall spend their days (...) In bono, i. e. in omni jacundit^t^.
In prosperity, or in good (says the Original)

Prosperity is a good thing, a good blessing of God. They shall spend their
days in good, we translate it in the 21 Chapter v. 15. in wealth. Wealth also
is a good blessing of God to those that are good, and prosperity takes that in;
prosperity is a large word comprehending all good, health and wealth, honor
and peace: whatever we can imagine to render our lives comfortable comes under
the name of Prosperity, They shall spend their days in prosperity, or in good;
this reward they shall have from the Lord who serve him. Is not this good
wages? The carnal rich man pleased himself and said, ( Luke 12.19.) Soul, take
thine ease, thou have goods laid up for many years. The godly do not please
themselves, that they have goods laid up for many years in their own Stock, in
their Lands, in their Houses, in their Purses, in their Shops, but they please
themselves that they have good laid up for many years, yea, for eternity, in
the Promises of God. They who serve him, they shall spend their days in good,
they shall have good for every day, and so finish their days with good; yet
this is not all, They shall spend their days in prosperity, And their years in
Pleasures.

In the former words he promised days of Good, here years of Pleasure; as if
he had said, they shall enjoy their prosperity long, they shall not only have
Days but Years filled up with it. One year contains many days, how many
days of pleasure are there in years of pleasure! Our life is measured by days
to show the shortness of it; the longest measure of it is by years; They shall
spend their years (...) ^t jucundis. (...) Affort jucunditatem, delectatic^ in,
pulchr^udinem, rei nobis gratissimae. In Canticis Parg. in Epith^lmiis Munst.
(...), S^ pt. in deloct^tionibus. Pagn.
In Pleasures, or (as we may read it) in sweetnesses, in pleasuntnesses, in
deliciousnesses, in beauties.

The word is used (2 Samuel 1.23.) to show the loveliness of Jonathan and Saul,
they were a pleasant pair, a couple of goodly persons. They shall spend their
days in pleasantness, or in pleasures.

Further, Take notice, the word is plural; he does not say, they shall spend
their days in pleasure, but in pleasures, implying all sorts and varieties of
pleasure; in Songs, says one; in Marriage Songs, says a second; in graceful
Beauties, says a third; and, which may be all or any of these, in delights,
says a fourth.

But here are two Questions that I must give answer to, for the clearing of
this Scripture.

First, The Question may be, Is this a mercy much to be reckoned upon, to spend
our years in pleasure? says not the Apostle (1 Timothy 5.6.) The widow that lives
in pleasure is dead while she lives? If it be a dead life to live in pleasure,
how then is it here promised as a favor, as a mercy, to them that obey and
serve God, that they shall spend their years in pleasures?

I answer by distinguishing of pleasure; pleasures are of two sorts. First,
lawful and honest delights; of such we read ( Genesis 49.20.) where dying Jacob
blessing of Asher says, Dabit deli^ias regis. Hebr: Mont:
He shall yield royal dainties, or pleasures for a King; meaning, he shall
give, not only honest, but honorable pleasures and contentments, such as befit
Kings. Secondly, There are unlawful and dishonest pleasures, which the Apostle
calls ( Heb. 11.25.) the pleasures of sin for a season. A woe will be their
portion who live in such pleasures. Go to now ye rich men, weep and howl (says
the Apostle James, Chap. 5.1.) why so? among other Reasons this is given for
one ( verse. 5.) Ye have lived in pleasure, wantonizing, and gluttonizing, and
Epicurizing: in such base pleasures you have lived, therefore woe to you. To
live in sinful or unlawful pleasures is death and misery, or a life worse than
death; but to live a life of lawful and honest pleasure is a mercy, the mercy
here promised, and the very life of our lives.

Secondly, We may distinguish of pleasures thus; they are either, first,
Corporal pleasures, pleasures of the body, of which we read ( Job 21.25.) One
dies in his full strength, and another dies in the bitterness of his Soul,
and never eats in pleasure; that is, he has had no contentment in the body,
or no bodily contentment, but was always sickly, crazy, pining, languishing,
and ill at ease, his life was tedious, even a burden to him, for he could never
eat in pleasure, scarce last what he did eat. Secondly, There are Spiritual
pleasures ( Psalm. 36.8.) They shall drink of the Rivers of thy pleasures. David
speaks there of Saints, what enjoyments and Joys they have in the Church or
House of God, attending upon him in holy Ordinances. Thirdly, There are eternal
pleasures ( Psalm. 16.11.) In thy presence is fullness of j^y, and at thy right
hand are pleasures for evermore. Such are all the joys of Heaven, or of a
glorified state. Now when Elihu says, they shall spend their years in
pleasures, we are not to take it merely for honest corporal pleasures, for such
a life, at best, is but the life of a Beast; but we are to take these corporal
pleasures, either as heightened by better, that is, as spiritualized by the
sense of the love of God, and mixed with spiritual pleasures; or, for those
purely spiritual plea^ures which the soul finds in communion with God alone
(having nothing to do, or no intercourse with creatures) drinking at the River
of his pleasures in Prayer, in Hearing, in Meditation, in breaking Bread, in
Singing. Now to spend our days, either in these purely spiritual pleasures,
taking in also those corporal pleasures so qualified as before, and duly
circumstantiated, is a high, a very high blessing and mercy indeed. So then,
here is nothing to feed the fancy of Epicures, here is no promise of sensual,
though of sensitive pleasures, these only are pleasures sit for the Servants of
God, these pleasures only become Saints; as for those other pleasures, Christ
says of them in the Parable of the Sower ( Luke 8.14.) They choke the Word of
God; and God will not feed his people with such pleasures, as a reward of
serving him, as shall choke the Word, and unfit them for his service. No, we
are to watch against, and deny our selves such pleasures, as our Lord Jesus
cautioned his Disciples ( Luke 21.34.) Take heed, least at any time your hearts
be overcharged with surfeiting, drunkenness, and the cares of this life, and
so that day come upon you unawares. As if he had said, Take heed of carnal
pleasures, as much as of worldly cares, for as they are alike destructive to
the present purity of the Soul, so they alike endanger our future peace, and
lay us open to the surprise of Judgment. And as such pleasures ruin the state
of the soul, so of the body too, with which they have nearest cogna^ion. Hence
that of Solomon (Prove. 21.17) He that loves pleasure shall be a poor man.
There, pleasure is opposed to work or labor: He that is all for taking his
pleasure, and will not follow his Calling, this man comes quickly to poverty,
and will dye a Beggar. Suppose the pleasure be lawful, yet if he loves
pleasure, and is at his pleasure when he should be at his labor, he will soon
be reduced to a morsel of bread, and become a poor man: But he that loves
unlawful pleasures, shall not only be a poor man, but will prove a wicked man.
Thou that art given to pleasures (Isa. 47.8.) is the Character of Babylon. God
gives good men pleasure, but it is the mark of an evil man to be given to
pleasure. They that love pleasure, are lovers of pleasure more than lovers of
God (2 Timothy 3.4.) and such must needs be the worst of men.

And therefore we are not to understand this Text of any sinful pleasure, nor
of a life merely lead in lawful pleasure, that a man should be all upon his
pleasure, and lay aside his Calling; Elihu does not oppose pleasure to work,
labor or business, but to trouble, sorrow, and affliction. They that obey and
serve the Lord shall spend their years in pleasures, in honest pleasures, that
is, they shall live, not only contentedly, but joyfully. The Lord allows us
to take any honest pleasure while we live, but not to live in pleasure; he
allows us to take our delights, but our delights must not take us.

There is yet another Query, for it may be said, Is this a truth, that they who
obey and serve the Lord shall spend their days in prosperity, and their years
in pleasures? I answer to that,

First, If we take it absolutely and universally, we cannot affirm that every
one who serves and obeys God, shall always have pleasure, that is, outward
comforts and contentments in this world; many of the Lords faithful servants
have lived in pain and sorrow; so that if (as David spoke in this case, Psalm.
73.5.) we should speak thus, we should offend against the generation of his
servants. Some flourish in grace, who wither in worldly comforts. There is no
certain connection between these two, Grace and outward peace or pleasure; the
providence of God vary in this point as himself pleases. Neither is it true,
that the true servants of God do uninterruptedly or always enjoy inward
pleasures, comforts and contentments; for he that fears the Lord, and obeys
the voice of his servants, may walk in darkness, and trouble of spirit, and see
no light, (Isa. 50.10.) We are therefore to understand this Scripture as others
of like nature, of that which is commonly done, or of that which we may upon
good ground expect from God, and in faith wait for, that if we serve and obey
him, he will make our lives comfortable to us. I answer,

Secondly, This promise, or promises of a like nature were fitted to the time
wherein Elihu spoke; he spoke of the times long before Christ's appearing in the
flesh, when the Lord did, as it were, lead on his people very much by promises,
of temporal and outward prosperity, of which the Scripture is more sparing in
the new Testament, where we are come to the fullness of Christ, and the riches
of the grace of God to us in him; of which there is but little (comparatively)
spoken in the old Testament: And therefore under that darker dispensation of
spirituals, the Lord saw it good to encourage that people to obedience by a
multitude of very particular outward promises, as we may read ( Deuteronomy. 28.) He
would bless their basket and their store, the fruit of the field, etc. These
promises were suited to the state of that under-age people, who were led on and
enticed by visible and sensible blessings, as we do children with toys and
Gaudees; and indeed all visible enjoyments are but such in comparison of
spirituals. Believers under the Gospel being come to a higher state, to fuller
seize, the promises made to them run not much in that channel; yet it
cannot be denied, that the Gospel also holds out promises for temporals, as
well as the Law; and this latter dispensation of the Covenant as well as the
former, has provided sufficiently for our outward comforts.

Thirdly, For answer, let us consider the drift of the Spirit of God in this
promise of pleasure. Job had often complained of his own sorrowful condition,
and concluded himself a man of sorrow for all the remainder of his days:
though his faith was strong for the resurrection of his body after death, yet
he had little, if any faith at all, that he should be raised out of that
miserable estate wherein he was in this life. He also had spoken somewhat
rashly and amiss concerning the dealings of God with his servants in general,
as if nothing but trouble and sorrow, did attend them, and that the wicked went
away with all the sweet and good of this world. Now Elihu to take him off from
these sad, and almost despairing thought^, as to the return of his own
comforts, and to rectify his judgment in the general point, as to the
dealings of God with others; he assures Job, that if righteous men being bound
in fetters, etc. hear and obey, God will break those bonds, and cut the cords
of their affliction, and they shall spend (the remainder of) their days in
prosperity, and (the rest of) their years in pleasures. So that Elihu in
holding out this promise to Job, would rather clear his judgment from an error
concerning the lastingness or continuance of his pains and sorrows, than heat
his affections in the expectation of joys and pleasures in this world.

Fourthly, I answer, Though the people of God have nor always days of such
outward prosperity, nor years of such sensitive pleasures, yet they have that
which is better, and if they have no pleasures, they do not want them. The
Apostle could say ( Phil. 4.11.) I have learned in what state scever I am,
therewith to be content. What is pleasure if content be not? We may have
outward pleasures, yet no content, but he that has content within, cannot miss
of pleasure. A man may have riches, but no contentment, but he that has
contentment is very rich, (1 Timothy 6.6.) Godliness with contentment is great
gain, and great gain is prosperity: this great gain, this heart-pleasure, or
soul-rest, contentment, is the assured portion of those who obey and serve the
Lord whatever their outward portion be in this world. And he may be said to
spend his days in good, and his years in pleasure, who has these pure gains
of gracious contentment, resting the soul in God in all conditions. The life of
man (that is, the comfort of his life) does not consist in the abundance of
that which he possesses, ( Luke 12.15.) or in sense-pleasures; but in that
sweet composure and sedateness of his soul, resting by faith in the promises of
God, or rather in the God of the promises, and so sucking sweetness from them.

Lastly, As though a servant of God should be exercised with sorrows all the
days of his life, yet he cannot be said to spend his days in sorrow, because
he meets with many refreshing intervalls and shines of favor from the face of
God in the midst of those clouds; so he may be said to spend his days in
pleasure, because at least, when his days here are spent, he consummates his
days (which is one signification of the word) by an entrance into everlasting
pleasures.

So much for the answer of these questions, concerning this promise, They shall
spend their days in prosperity, and their years in pleasure. From the promise
it self, Note; First, Obedience to God is profitable to man.

God has no profit by our Obedience, but we have. God does not call us to
serve him in his work, as we call servants to do our work, to get his living by
us, or better himself; no, the Lord calls us to serve him and obey him, for our
own good. They consult their own good best, who do most good. I may say these
three things of those who do good (and what is serving God, but doing of good?
or what is doing good but serving God?) First, they shall receive true good;
Secondly, they shall for ever hold the best good, the chief good, they shall
not only spend their days and years in good, but when their days and years
are spent, they shall have good, and a greater good than any they had, in
spending the days and years of this life; they shall have good in death, they
shall come to a fuller enjoyment of God, the chief Good, when they have left
and let fall the possession of all earthly goods. Thirdly, they that do good
shall find all things working together for their good; if they have a loss,
they shall receive good by it; if they bear a Cross, that shall bear good.
Outward troubles cannot disturb, much less pollute our spiritual good; for, All
things work together for good to them that love God, who are the called
according to his purpose (Romans 8.28.) Surely then the service of God is a
gainful service, a profitable service; though the work may be hard, and the way
painful, yet the wages will be sweet, and the end pleasant. The contemplation
of this put David upon putting that question ( Psalm. 34.12, 13.) What man is he
that desires life, and loves many days, that he may see good (that is, that
he may enjoy good) keep thy tongue from evil, and thy mouth, that it speak no
guile; depart from evil, and do good. The Psalmist makes Proclamation, What man
is he that would have good? let him do good, let him obey and serve God, and he
shall have good.

Again, Consider the Promise in relation to the Persons described, verse. 8, 9,
10. They were bound in Fetters, and holden in Cords of affliction: Now says
Elihu here, they shall spend their days in prosperity, and their years in
pleasures.

Hence Note; There is no condition so low and forlorn, but the Lord is able to
bring us out of it, and into the enjoyments of fullest comforts;

He can change our Iron Fetters, and Cords, into Rings of Gold, and Bracelets;
he can translate our days of trouble, and our years of pain, into days of
prospe^ity, and years of pleasure; it was so with Job in the issue, and he was
the man that Elihu here intended. Job was long bound in fetters, and holden in
the cords of affliction, yet as Elihu told him he should, so he did afterwa ds,
spend his days in prosperity, and his years in pleasure; the Lord doubled his
Cattle to him, his friends filled his Coffers, and his Cabinets, Every man gave
him a peace of money, and every one an Ear-ring of Gold; his children also were
the same for number, his daughters the fairest in the Land; himself also lived
in the fullness of this outward Prosperity, till he was full of days, and he
fed upon the delicious fruits of this Promise all his after-dayes. Manasseh
having run a course of unparalled wickedness, was at last taken by the
Captains of the host of the King of Assyria, among the Thorns, and they bound
him with fetters, and carried him to Babylon (2 Chronicles. 33.11.) yet when in his
affliction he besought the Lord his God, and humbled himself greatly before the
God of his Fathers, he was entreated of him, and brought again to Jerusalem,
where he spent his days in prosperity, and his years in pleasure. If we turn
to the Lord in affliction, the Lord is ready to turn away our affliction, or
(as the Church prayed in the half turn of her affliction, Psalm. 126.4.) to turn
our captivity, as the streams in the South; that is, to make both a most
admirable and a most comfortable turn of our condition. Streams in the hot
Southern Countries are rare; the Rain of those Lands usually is dust. Streams
in the South are also very welcome: How glad are they of a cooling Shower from
a Cloud, who daily feel, and are fainted with the scorching Beams of the Sun!
Such a turn shall they have (says Elihu) who being holden in the cords of
affliction, turn from iniquity, obey and serve the Lord.

Thirdly, From the matter of the Promise,

Note; A comfortable passage through this life, is a very great mercy, as well
as the hope of happiness for ever in the other life.

It Is prosperity and pleasure in this world, though nor mere worldly prosperity
and pleasure, which is here p^o^ised; and we are not to slight any thing that
comes by promise, yea, we should highly esteem those things, which, considered
in themselves, are little worth, as they come to us through the Promise. We may
quickly over-rate and over-reckon outward things in themselves, and we ever do
so, if we rate or reckon them any better than vanity; but as they are promised
and bestowed in a way of savor from God, and as they are a part of the
purchase of Christ, and handed to us by him (so are even outward things to
believers) thus they are very valuable. Upon these terms to live and spend our
days in good, and our years in honest lawful pleasures, is a great mercy.

From the whole take two Corolaries.

First, How blasphemous then is their Opinion, who say it is a vain thing to
serve the Lord, or that there is no profit in calling upon him! which blasphemy
was resuted Chap. 21.14.

Secondly, Would we have a good end of, or out-gate from our afflictions, then
let us hear and obey. Thus much of the first case, what the issue of their
afflictions shall be, who obey: The Second issue upon the contrary case,
follows in the 12th verse.

Verse. 12. But if they obey not, they shall perish by the Sword, and dye
without knowledge. Here contraries are set one over against another, for their
fuller illustration. If they obey not; that is, if those righteous men spoken
of before ( verse. 7.) obey not. What it is not to obey, is clear by what I said
was to obey, in opening the former verse. I shall only take notice, that in
this latter part it is not said, If they obey not, and serve him not, but only,
if they obey not; and I conceive, Elihu says no more, or proceeds no further,
because they who deny obedience, will certainly deny service; therefore he
stops at that.

If they obey not. They who are good in their state, may often fail in doing
that which is good; for of those this Text yet speaks, and is generally
interpreted. The Hypocrite in heart is spoken of in the next verse, but here
Elihu is speaking of the righteous, and because he is so, therefore by this
disobedience cannot be meant an obstinate rebellion, but a sloth or carelessness
in attending to the Call of God, for the amendment of some evil in their lives.
If they obey not:

Hence Note; The calls and commands of God are not always obeyed, no not by
good men, not by the righteous.

The call and command of God is not at all obeyed by the wicked, and it is not
always obeyed by the righteous. The righteous sometimes hear the word, but do
not answer it, and sometimes they feel the rod, and do not attend it; they cry
out of the smart of the rod, and of the sores which the lashes of the rod have
made upon them, they weep over, or because of their sores, yet they do not
presently give glory to God by obeying him, and leaving their sins, I mean as
to that special point of duty in which God would have them obey him, and as to
those special sins which God by that affliction calls upon them to leave. Many
good men do not presently understand the purpose of God in this or that
affliction; and while it is so with them, they must needs fail in
answerableness to it. I know every godly man has a general bent to obey God
and serve him. It is not with the godly in their afflictions as with the wicked
under theirs, of whom the Prophet speaks, ( Isa. 9.13.) They did not turn to
him that smote them; yet even such Scriptures are in a degree applicable to
many of the people of God, they do not always turn to him that smites them;
when they are exercised with variety of calamities, they mind not the Lord as
they ought. And hence it is (I say) that though the righteous have a general
bent to obedience, yet they sometimes come short of that obedience which a
special affliction or correction calls them to; yea, they may be so short in
answering it, that the Lord may proceed to lay heavier and greater afflictions
upon them, even to the taking of them out of the world, as it follows in this
verse, If they obey not They shall perish by the sword.

Before they were bound in fetters and held in cords, De carcere educentur ad
occisionem gladij Aquin. Per gladium iransire dicitur q^i gladio occiditur,
Drus.
but now the sword shall overtake them, and they shall perish or be taken away
by the sword: The Hebrew is, they shall pass away by the sword, that is, they
shall die. Man is said to pass away by the swo^d, when the sword does not pass
by him, but smites and kills him, which is a temporal perishing. It is said (
Isa. 57.1.) The righteous perish, etc. As the righteous perish by a natural
death, so they may perish by a violent death, and possibly that may fall upon
them when they attend not the providential dispensations of God.

(...) ^^^prie ^^e mi^sile, aut ja^^lum.
They shall perish by the sword, or by the drawn weapon. The word notes any
weapon that is drawn or cast forth, hence some translate it a Dart or Javeling,
which is shot out of the hand; but it may also be applied to the Sword, which
being drawn forth out of the sheath is often sent upon deadly messages, and may
be numbered among missive weapons: Now when Elihu says, they shall perish by
the sword, we may take the word sword properly or tropically. Properly two
ways; First, for the sword of the Warrier; Secondly, for the sword of the
Magistrate, either justly punishing or grievously afflicting. Some good men
have acknowledged in great trials and sufferings, under the hand of man, that
God has met with them for their neglect or non-attendance to more immediate
afflictions under his own hand. Again, take the sword tropically or improperly,
and so any sore affliction that greatly annoyeth, especially if to death, is
called a sword in Scripture; They shall perish by the sword (under one notion
or other) if they do not obey.

Hence learn; God will not spare, no not his own People, if they do not obey
him.

God is full of sparing-mercy, but the righteous may provoke him so, that he
will not spare, no not them. Judgment begins often at the house of God (1 Pet.
4.17.) And if Judgment begin at the house of God, what shall the end be of
those that obey not the Gospel? This is a terrible word. The righteous may
perish by the sword; how dreadfully then shall the unrighteous, the wicked, the
scorners of godliness, perish! If God will make his own people smart in his
anger, when they provoke him, how will he speak to his enemies in his wrath,
and vex them in his fore displeasure (Psalm. 2.5.)

Secondly, From the gradation of their troubles; First, they were bound in
fetters and holden in cords, but now here is a sword, a devouring sword, a
killing deadly weapon.

Hence learn; They who give not glory to God in lesser or in lighter
afflictions draw greater upon themselves;

They may come from a cord to a sword, from being bound to be slain. God has
several sorts of Instruments to chasten his people with, and as the best of
outward good things may be the portion of evil wicked men, so the worst of
outward evils may be the portion of good men; they may at any time, and
sometimes shall perish by the sword, and as it follows, They shall die without
knowledge.

The sword is death, a deadly sword; (...)
they shall die Without knowledge, or, as the text may be read, because they
were without knowledge.

But is any righteous man without knowledge? That the soul be without knowledge
is not good, (says Solomon, Prove. 19.2.) How then can he be good whose soul is
without knowledge? And seeing we interpret this text of the righteous, how can
it be said, they die without knowledge?

I answer, Knowledge may be taken in a more general sense, and so no righteous
man either lives or dies without knowledge? he neither lives nor dies without
the knowledge of God in Jesus Christ, whom to know is eternal life, (John
17.3.) and without the knowledge of whom, all (who are actually capable of such
knowledge) must die eternally; he neither lives nor dies without the knowledge
of himself as a sinner, and of Christ who saves him from his sins. Such
ignorances are inconsistent with the state of a godly man; he may do foolishly,
but he is not a fool; he may be wanting in some kind of knowledge, but he does
not want knowledge; he cannot be without saving knowledge, though he may perish
(temporally) without knowledge. The first thing that God makes in the new
creation is light, the light of knowledge, there he begins his work; therefore
we cannot take knowledge generally, simply and absolutely, in this text; Dei
monita per castigationes ^cire and intelligere noluerunt; Drus.
but as knowledge may be taken restrictively, for knowledge in or about this or
that particular, so a good man may want knowledge, there may be somewhat which
the Lord would acquaint the righteous with, and teach them by their fetters and
afflictions, which they do not learn; and therefore they die without k^owledge,
or, because they are without knowledge; yet that want of knowledge, together
with all their other wants and ignorances, are pardoned to them.

Further we may expound the words thus; They shall die without knowledge, that
is, without the knowledge or consideration of of that special affliction or
judgment which is coming upon them, Non est oration affirmativa stultitiae vel
negativa scientiae, sed simpliciter negat advertentiam. Bold.
they shall die unawares, not thinking, nor so much as dreaming of such a
judgment, or that such a hand of God was so near them. According to this
interpretation, Elihu intends either their inadvertency of that approaching
scourge or calamity with which they are overtaken, or their not understanding
the reason of it. Christ says in the Gospel ( Luke 12.46.) The master of that
servant (the evil servant) shall come in a day which he knows not of, and in a
time when he looked not for him. Now, as the last Judgment, the great
Judgment shall come upon the wicked in a time when they look not for it, so
the Lord may bring a special particular judgment upon some one or more of his
own people, when they do not think of it, or never suspected that they should
fall under it. Good men are sometimes surprised; and so, they shall die without
knowledge, is no more than this, they shall be taken unawares by a sudden
unexpected judgment. Though every godly man has a preparation for the general
judgment, yet as to a particular one, he may be much unprepared.

Lastly, Some expound the words of more than inadvertency, or bare nescience,
even of folly, and some degree of affected ignorance, which possibly may
prevail upon a righteous man in some cases and for a time; but I rather adhere
to the former interpretation, because (as was showed before) the whole context
seems to intend a more ordinary case of a righteous man. So then, this
Scripture holds out the sad issues which the neglect of giving God the glory of
his corrections and chastenings may bring upon the righteous.

Hence note; Disobedience, or neglect of duty, is dangerous, wheresoever it is
found.

The Church of Corinth felt this; many of them died (in the sense given)
without knowledge, or not having a due spiritual knowledge of Christ in the
holy supper, which the Apostle calls, their not discerning the Lords body, (1
Cor. 11.29.) and presently tells them ( ver. 30.) for this cause many are weak
and sickly among you, and many sleep; that is, are taken away by death. Any
kind or degree of sin is dangerous; not to obey a hint of providence, not to
obey an intimation of the mind of God in an affliction, may be very dangerous;
afflictions may end in destructions, and fetters in death, if the purpose of
God in them be not attended and answered by us.

Secondly note; Not to obey when God calls and commands, is folly and ignorance.

Such do as if they had no knowledge at all what or how to do.

Lastly in that he says, they shall dye without knowledge, we may learn this
from it; The ignorance and heedlesness of men undo them, and bring destruction
upon them.

Many die because they have no knowledge, others not heeding or minding what
they know. Holy David confessed that in on^ point he was ignorant and foolish,
even as a beast, (Psalm. 73.22.) and when good men act like beasts, without a
due improvement of reason and understanding, they may perish (as to this
temporal life) like beasts, ( Isa. 5.13.) Therefore my people are gone into
captivity, because they have no knowledge. The Prophet (I conceive) is to be
understood (as this text) not that they had no knowledge at all, or were
utterly ignorant, but they had no knowledge as to that special dispensation of
God, how to make use of it or improve it, at least they took no heed, no care
to use or improve it; and (says he) they therefore are gone into captivity,
they are brought under bondage to their enemies, they are scattered, ruined,
and (as to this world) quite lost and undone. Wicked men are undone by acting
against their knowledge; good men may be undone by acting below their
knowledge, or by not acting according to what they know or should have known;
and so (through their ignorance or heedlesness) they dye without knowledge.

JOB, Chap. 36. Verse. 13, 14. 13. But the hypocrites in heart heap up wrath,
they cry not when he binds them.

14. They die in youth, and their life is among the unclean.


ELihu having put the case of the righteous in these two conditional
propositions last opened, as somewhat doubtful, what at least some of them may
do, as to a right-improvement of outward afflictions; he proceeds in these two
verses to show the case of the wicked wholly desperate, in their affliction.
There is an if put upon the righteous, but he is conclusive upon the hypocrite;
to be sure he will neither hear nor obey, neither submit nor conform to the
voice of the rod.

So that in these words he sets forth the common yea constant issue of the hand
of God upon hypocrites in heart. Possibly good men, righteous men may not
always answer the expectation of God, when affliction is upon them; but as for
hypocrites, they (always) heap up wrath. And in this we may conceive Elihu
has a respect to Job; For though he did not conclude him to be an hypocrite in
heart, yet he put it home upon him to consider the matter, whether he himself
had not, at least, acted and carried it like an hypocrite in heart, under the
afflicting hand of God, forasmuch as he was no more humbled and subdued under
it. And indeed Elihu turns every stone, and tries every way, to bring down the
spirit of Job. And therefore as he had showed, what the usual effects of the
hand of God upon the righteous are, so he tells him how it is with the wicked
in that case, thereby to put him upon the trial, whether he had not reason to
suspect himself to be an hypocrite, because his carriage, was so like theirs.

(...)
Verse. 13. But the hypocrites in heart, etc. That adversative particle shows
that he is dealing upon another subject: hypocrites in heart are far from
righteousness. I have discoursed somewhat largely concerning the hypocrite in
chap. 34 v. 30. upon these words, That the hypocrite reign not, lest the people
(...) snared; Therefore I intend not here to revive that subject, but shall
only a little open the additional term or amplification which is here put upon
the hypocrite. Elihu does not say barely, hypocrites heap up wrath, but, The
hypocrites in heart heap up wrath; as implying some special character and brand
of hypocrisy upon the persons here aimed at. An hypocrite in heart is no more
but this, nor is it any thing less than an hearty hypocrite; he is one that is
not to the halves, but wholly hypocritical; he that is but half with God (such
is the hypocrite) is wholly profane, wholly wicked. The same word which
signifies an hypocrite signifies a profane person, and so we put it in the
margin of this text, The hypocrite, or the profane in heart. This expression
is very parallel with that of the Apostle Paul (Col. 1.21.) Ye that were
sometimes alienated and enemies in your mind, by wicked works, yet now has he
reconciled. He does not only call natural men enemies to God, as indeed they
all are, (the wisdom of the flesh is enmity against God) But he calls them
enemies in their minds, that is, such as have a mind to be enemies, or such as
have a good will to do evil. So here, an hypocrite in heart is a man heartily
hypocritical; whosoever is an hypocrite is an hypocrite in heart; Hypocrisy is
that which lies at the bottom, it is an heart-sin: though hypocirsie act and
vent it self at the tongue, and by the hand, yet all hypocrisy lies at the
heart; nevertheless, every hypocrite is not (strictly taken) an hypocrite in
heart. The hypocrite in heart is opposed to the upright in heart, ( Psalm.
92.11.) The hypocrite in heart has a heart as full of hypocrisy, as the
upright in heart would have hearts full of uprightness. Yet further to
characterize the hypocrite in heart,

Take these three considerations to clear it; Data opera inpius est.


First, an hypocrite in heart is one who does evil, not out of mistake, but our
of design; not because he cannot do otherwise, but because he will not, and is
resolved on it; such a sinful piece or such a piece of sinfulness is the
hypocrite in heart; he sins as he should love and serve and obey God, with all
his heart.

Secondly, as this hypocrite does evil upon design, so also he does good with a
wicked mind. It is possible for a man to do good unsincerely, or not to be
sincere in the doing of it, and yet not to do it with a wicked mind and
purpose, or with a base design. There are many who do good, who come to duty,
whether in family or congregation, who mind not what they do, nor have any love
to it, or zeal for it; here is hypocritical attendance, in that they set not
themselves to meet with God or find God in the duty; yet possibly such come not
with a wicked purpose, nor with a plot in their heads in doing these duties,
that is proper to the hypocrite in heart. Thus we may understand that of
Solomon, lately opened upon another occasion, ( Prove. 21.27.) The sacrifice of
the wicked is an abomination to the Lord; how much more when he brings it
with a wicked mind! A man may be wicked as to his state, yet not do a thing
with a wicked mind, not bring a sacrifice (which includes all holy services)
with an unholy purpose: but the hypocrite in heart whenever he does any good,
has a plot in it; as he always serves God with a reserve, he has somewhat
that he does withold, he comes by halves, so he always serves God with a
design. He may make a fair show, and a great noise in profession, but ever he
has some end of his own in it. Jehu said, Come see my zeal for God. He was
about a good work, the destroying of Ahabs House, and Baals Priests, this he
called zeal for the Lord; but he did all this with a wicked mind; for the great
thing upon his heart was to get into the Throne, ^o be a King, he made use of
all those specious acts of zeal only as a stirrup to raise himself into the
saddle, the matter he aimed at was to establish the kingdom of Israel to
himself and his posterity. That Is a second thing; as the hypocrite does evil
purposely, so when he does good he has a purpose, a plot in it, more than is
good; he does it not, either for the honor of God, or for the enjoyment of
God, which are the best ends of every good action, and without a pure eye,
without which no action, how good soever in it self, is good to, or turns to
the good of the actor.

Thirdly, The hypocrite in heart, I conceive, is such a one as knows himself to
be an hypocrite. There are many hypocrites, who little think that they are
hypocrites, yea, they may think themselves very upright and honest in what they
do; ignorant deluded souls, understand not their own case. Laodicea was
wretched and miserable, these are false and hypocritical, but know it not. As
some judge, or rather mis-judge themselves hypocrites, who are upright in the
maine with God, and honest at heart, (How frequent are such complaints, and
self-wronging accusations?) So many are hypocrites, or rotten at heart, who
know it not. The heart is deceitful above all things, (says the Prophet Jer.
17.9.) and desperately wicked, who can know it? And among all men, common
hypocrites know least o^ their own hearts. But the hypocrites in heart know
their hearts are rotten and fal^e, to what they profess. Induunt pallium
pretatis et colorem sanctitatis; haec enim est proprietas radicis (...), sc:
infi^ere rem alieno color, ^el obmibere et velare alieno pallio.
The politic hypocrite knows that all he does is but in show, and that he
does but act a pa^^ in Religion, as a Player upon the Stage, when he is most
religious; he does but take a color, or die, or paynt himself with Religion,
(which is the signification of the word here used in the Hebrew) but i^ not
religious, he does but put a fair gloss, or disguise upon himself, that he
may appear what he is not, or what he knows himself not to be; He knows in
himself that he is naught, while he would be known by and to others as good.
The Apostle speaking of the grievous sufferings of some primitive Christians,
says ( Heb. 10.34.) They took joyfully the spoiling of their goods, knowing in
themselves that they have a better and a more enduring substance; that is, they
knew they were in a present gracious state, and that there remained for them an
eternal happy state. Thus also an hypocrite in heart, is one that knows in
himself, or in his heart, that he does but pretend to be good, and that
whatsoever good he does, it is only in pretense, and is therefore (as the
Apostle speaks of the Heretic, Tit. 3.11.) condemned of himself, while he
acquits or commends himself never so well to others. Thus it appears how bad,
how base the hypocrite in heart is in his best appearances, and how much he
excels and bears away the Bell fobaseness and badness, I may say, for madness
too, from all common hypocrites. Now as they exceed in sin, so they shall in
misery, the next words assure us of that; But the hypocrites in heart heap up
wrath.

Elihu having described the persons that he deals with, or about, he also
sets forth both their woeful and sin^ull condition: And he does it three ways:

First, By what they do; They heap up wrath. For a man to be laboring
continually only to make heaps of wrath for himself, in what a woeful condition
is that man!

Secondly, He shows their bad, both sinful and woeful condition, by what they
will not do; that we have at the latter end of the 13th verse, They cry not
when he binds them. They heap up wrath, that they do: They cry not when he
bi^deth them; That they do not.

Thirdly, He sets forth their woeful condition by that which is an inevitable
consequent and fruit of such doing, and not doing, the evil which they suffer;
that we have ( v. 14) They die in youth, and their life is among the unclean.
These are the parts of the woeful condition of hypocrites in heart. I shall
give a touch upon each of them.

First, Consider what they are doing: If you would know their trade, (...)
Ponunt iram.
it is this; They are heaping up wrath; they add wrath to wrath, till they make
a mighty mass or heap of it. There is a difference among some interpreters
what wrath is here intended. They heap up wrath.

Aliqui, ponunt iram, intelligunt, ex^ondescunt in deum. Merc:
First, Some conceive that Elihu means their own wrath. Hypocrites in heart
heap up wrath, that is, when God does at any time bind them in fetters, and
holds them in the cords of affliction, as he spoke in the former context,
these hypocrites in heart, what do they? Do they obey? Do they turn from
iniquity? Do they amend their hearts or lives? No; They heap up wrath, they
grow angry, they vex and rage instead of repenting; that is all these hypocrites
do; when the Lord has bound them in fetters, and holds them in the cords of
affliction, they are all in a slame, they are mad with rage and fury. Some both
of the Ancients and Moderns, insist upon this opinion, and it is a very great
truth, that when the hypocrite ih heart is under the hand of God, when God has
him fast in his fetters, his wrath does boil, his fury comes up in his face, as
it is said ( Ezekiel. 38.18.) concerning the wrath of God toward his enemies:
this fully answers that assertion of Eliphaz, (Job 5.2.) Wrath kills the
foolish man. What wrath? his own wrath; he kills himself with vexing and
fretting. The hypocrite in heart is a wrathful man, when things go not right
with him. Some have so expounded that ( Ephesians. 2.3.) Ye were by nature children
of wrath, even at others. Children of wrath, that is, wrathful children; we
are full of wrath, full of anger by nature. Though I do not take that to be the
sense of the Apostle; but that by children of wrath, he means all men as borne
under the wrath of God, nor do I conceive this the proper meaning here, though
not unusefull. They heap up wrath, that is, they grow angry, vexed, and
troubled; But

Secondly, Rather the wrath heaped up, is the wrath of God, which is the most
dreadful thing in the world; and so these words may be expounded by those of
the Apostle to an impenitent sinner ( Romans 2.4, 5.) Despisest thou the riches
of his goodness, and forbearance, and long-suffering, not knowing that the
goodness of God leads thee to repentance: But after thy hardness and
impenitent heart treasurest up unto thy self wrath against the day of wrath,
and revelation of the righteous judgment of God. To heap up wrath, and, to
treasure up wrath, are the same. The abusers of the patience and long-suffering
of God, are treasuring up wrath against themselves from day to day; and so do
the hypocrites in heart, They heap up wrath.

Hence Note, First, The wicked or hypocrites in heart, grow more wicked while
the hand of God, his afflicting hand, is upon them.

The more they are under the rod, the more they rebel. I ground it upon this;
If they did not heap up sin, they should not heap up wrath; were they not more
vile and wicked under their affliction, there would not be more anger against
them. It was said of those that would have brought in the captives (which was a
very oppressing purpose, (2 Chro. 28.13.) ye shall not; for Whereas we have
effended against the Lord already, ye intend to add more to our sins and to our
trespass. Then presently follows, For our trespass is great, and there is
fierce wrath against Israel. As if it had been said, If ye do this thing ye
will increase the wrath of God (which is very fierce already) and blow it up
into a consuming flame. While men grow more and more wicked and vile, God
grows (as to the manifestations of wrath) more wrathful. When we hear of the
increase of wrath, we may be sure there has been a proportionable increase of
sin. It is said of Ahaz, who was a hypocrite in heart, a very profane person,
(2 Chronicles. 28.22.) that in the time of his distress he trespassed yet more
against the Lord, and trespassing more against the Lord, he heaped up more of
the Lords wrath against himself: For it is added, ( v. 23.) He sacrificed to the
gods of Damascus which smote him; he got nothing but blows, for his pains, or
impious piety in serving them: And he said, because the gods of the Kings of
Syria help them, therefore will I sacrifice to them, that they may help me. But
what got he by this increase of his sin? Surely nothing, but an increase of
wrath; for, it follows in the same verse, They were the ruin of him and of
all Israel. God makes new rods, when men make new sins; and he multiplyeth
swords, while men multiply transgressions. The more men draw iniquity with
cords of vanity, the more they draw misery upon themselves, and are held the
faster in the cords of affliction.

Secondly, When it is said, The hypocrites in heart heap up wrath. We know
hypocrites are cunning gamesters, they hope to sin so closely and artificially,
that no hurt shall ever come to them by it, yet The hypocrites in heart heap up
wrath.

Hence Note; The wiles and policies of hypocrites will avail them nothing;

They shall not avoid wrath, do what they can; the Lord will find them out. The
Apostle says ( Gal. 6.7.) God is not mocked; for whatsoever a man sows, that
shall he also reap; for he that sows to his flesh, shall of the flesh reap
corruption; but he that sows to the Spirit, shall of the Spirit reap life
everlasting. Let hypocrites in heart sow as cunningly as they can, though they
seem to sow only good seed, yet they shall reap bad fruit, because they sowed
with a bad heart. Hypocrites may deceive men, and heap up their favors to
themselves, but they cannot deceive God, who knows their hearts, and will
therefore consume them in his wrath, which they have heaped up to themselves.

Thirdly, Elihu puts it upon hypocrites in heart to be at this work of heaping
up wrath. All impenitent sinners do it, but he puts it upon them especially.
All sinners, open professed sinners, that sin and hide it not, that throw up
even the very name and profession of Religion, these all heap up wrath; yet
they heap up most, and are here spoken of, as the only helpers up of wrath, who
are hypocrites in heart.

Hence Note; God is extremely angry with hypocrites, or the wrath of God does
burn extremely hot against hypocrites;

He heats the Furnace of his wrath seven times hotter for hypocrites in heart,
than for ordinary sinners. The Lord ( Isa. 10.5.) speaking of the Assyrian
says, The staff in their hand is mine indignation: I will send him against an
hypocritical Nation, and against the people of my wrath will I give him a
charge, to take the spoil, and to take the prey, and to tread them down, like
the mire in the streets. The Lord put a staff in the hand of that great King of
Assyria, and he called it his indignation; it was the Lords indignation which
was a staff in the Assyrians hand. But against whom will he send it? That text
answers against an hypocritical Nation; Who are they? the people of his wrath.
God has wrath for all sinners, but the generation of hypocrites are the people
of his wrath beyond all other people. None abuse God like hypocrites: For,
first, hypocrites carry it toward God, as if he were like the Idols of the
Heathen, that have eyes, and see not ears, and hear not, hands, and handle not;
feet, and cannot walk: That is, they carry it toward God as if he were but an
Idol, satisfied with mere outward shows and services. An Idol sinds no fault,
nor troubles any for their hypocrisy and false-heartedness: All that is
required in the Idols service, is but outside and bodily exercise. Thus the
hypocrites deal with God, as if he also would be satisfied and taken up with a
little outside service; or as if sacrifice would please him, when his word is
disobeyed, (1 Samuel 15.23.) Has the Lord as great delight in burnt offerings
and Sacrifices, as in obeying the voice of the Lord ^ Saul had been very
careful to bring home sacrifices; He had not obeyed the command of God, yet
hoped to put him off with a sacrifice. But what were herds and flocks of
cattle to be sacrificed, when Saul rebelled against God? Nothing provokes God
more than outward services of worship, when they are not accompanied with
inward, and universal submission to his will; for that is no better a sacrifice,
no purer worship, than a Heathen pays to his Idol-god. Hypocrites offer God
only the blind, and the lame, (Mal. 1.14.) that is, maimed and imperfect
services: there is imperfection in the services of the best, but theirs are
imperfect services, so imperfect, blind and lame, that they are fit only for
the blind, and the lame; so Idol-gods are called, (2 Samuel 5.8.) And do not they
heap the wrath of the true God, who serve him no better than false gods are
served, by their Idolatrous Devo^ionists!

Secondly, There must needs be a continual heaping up of wrath by Hypocrites;
for, if not to set the heart right provokes God to wrath, ( Psalm. 78.8.) The
Lord was exceedingly displeased with the Israelites, because they set not their
heart aright. Now if the Lord be so angry when the heart is not set aright)
much more must it provoke the Lord, when then do purposely set their hearts
wrong, when they do evil knowingly, advisedly, when, as it were, they study to
do evil. To do good only in show, does more displease the Lord, than the doing
of that which in show is evil, or which is evil above-board, known to be so by
all beholders. As Hypocrites often deceive men, so they attempt to deceive God
himself. This cannot but heap up wrath, being it self so great a heap of sin.
They who think God will be pleased with outward Services alone, or have no care
to give him inward, are alike displeasing to him. Therefore, among all sorts of
sinners, the Lord declares his wrath, and thunders woe upon woe, in the Gospel,
against Hypocrites: They have heaped up wrath, and it shall be heaped upon
them, They shall have their Portion in the Lake that burns with fire and
brimstone. That Is the first thing, what they do, They heap up wrath. When the
hand of God is upon them, they are so far from coming forth humbly and
penitentially to turn away his wrath, or to seek his face, that they provoke
him more and more, and dreadfully inflame the reckoning against themselves;
They heap up wrath.

Secondly, Elihu tells us what the Hypocrites in heart do not; They cry not
when h^ binds them. (...) Vincire pro castigare, species pro genere. Licet
hanc doctrinam in communi Elihu prop^nat, verisimile tamen est Jobum dicendo
pungere.
But is it a fault, or so great a fault, not to cry when God binds us? Are we
commanded or bound to cry, when we are bound in fetters, and holden in cords of
affliction? wherein lies this sin? That will appear while I show what crying
is here intended.

To cry, is, First, to complain and make a noise; this is the cry of
impatience. Secondly, to mourn and be sorrowful; this is the cry of Repentance.
Thirdly, to pray, to supplicate, yea, to pray mightily, to pray strongly; and
this is the cry of Faith. ( Luke 18.7.) Shall not God avenge his own Elect,
which cry day and night unto him? That is, which pray mightily to him night and
day. The hypocrite in heart often makes the first cry when God binds him, the
cry of impatience, but never the two latter; he makes not, either the cry of
Repentance, or the cry of Faith in Prayer, when God binds him. This lets us
see the second Part of the wickedness of these hypocrites, it is the omission of
a most necessary duty, yea of two: They act very sinfully, for they heap up
wrath; they act not holily, for they do not cry when God binds them; that is,
they neither repent nor pray, or they repent not heartily, they pray not
earnestly, in the day of their affliction.

Hence note, First; Hypocrites humble not themselves, when God humbles them;

When he binds them as it were hand and foot, they are tongue-tyed and
heart-tyed. The Lord said of such ( Hos. 7.14.) They cried not unto me with
their heart, when they howled upon their beds; they assemble themselves for
Corn and Wine, and rebel against me. They howled and made a noise, but (says
the Lo^d) all the while they cried not to me. There was no Repentance, no
Prayer in their cry, they cried not with their heart. Hypocrites will, first,
complain much when God binds them; secondly, they murmr much when God binds
them; thirdly, they will vex themselves like a Bull in a Nett, when God binds
them; Fourthly, they will rail and curse when God binds them; but repent, or
pray they do not. ( Isa. 8.21.) They shall pass through it hardly bested and
hungry; and it shall come to pass, that when they shall be hungry, they shall
fret themselves, and curse their King and their God, and look upward. Here was
blaspheming, but no crying, no repenting, no praying, no deprecating the hand
of God, or the Judgment felt, in an humble and spiritual way. Hypocrites cry
not to the Lord, though he makes them cry; they are readier to find fault with
God, than with themselves, in the day of adversity: they neither cry the cry of
godly sorrow for their sin, nor the cry of godly Prayers, for help out of their
affliction. They who are false with God in times of Peace, seldom, if at all,
repent, or duty apply themselves to God for help in times of trouble; the
reason is, The Conscience of the hypocrite in heart, tells him, Anteactae
turpis ^itae ^em^ria anintum enervat.
he has dealt basely with God; and therefore, when he is in streights or
bound, what face, what faith, what liberty of spirit, can he have to cry to
God? Such hypocrites often cry out despai^ingly, but oh how rately are they
brought to cry, either believingly or repentingly, when God binds them.

Secondly, Consider this cry a little further, as a Prayer-cry. Hypocrites in
heart may be much for prayer in time of prosperity, they were not hypocrites
else; if they did not pray, they were openly profane, not hypocrites. Christ
speaking of hypocrites, ( Math. 6.) tells us, they pray much, and ( Math. 7.)
they cry Lord, Lord. Hypocrites are much in praying, especially in times of
prosperity, yet here he says, They cry not when he binds them, that is, in
the day of adversity.

Hence Observe; That which is not done uprightly, will not be done constantly.

Hypocrites cry to God only in show at best, and when it is best with them; but
when they fall into a troubled condition, they cry not, they even lay down
their show; they throw up their duties, when they miss their desires. They who
have prayed often in a time of prosperity, not throwing away their sins, coming
into affliction they throw away their prayers. Prayer will forsake them, who
forsake God while they pray. Such as want Faith, will not have a heart to pray
in their wants. If holy Duties cause us not to leave our sins, sinning will at
last cause us to throw off our holy Duties, Will, or does, the hypocrite pray
always? was Jobs denying question, at the 27th Chapter of this Book. They who
do not love prayer, cannot hold out in prayer: They who do not find a sweetness
in drawing near to God in good Times, will soon withdraw from him in evil Times.

Thirdly, They cry not when he binds them.

Note; Hypocrites, when they have most need of prayer, are least in the use of
it.

When more need of Prayer, than in time of affliction? yet the hypocrite bound
in affliction is bound in spirit from supplication.

Fourthly, They are said not to cry, though (in some sense, as has been
showed) they do cry when God binds them.

Hence Note; That holy Duty, which is not rightly and holily done, is reckoned
by God as not done at all.

What almost is more common among hypocrites, yea, among some profane ones,
than to p^ay, and desire others to pray for them in time of affliction? Pharaoh
will needs have Moses pray for him; and when Ahab was threatened with a binding
he humbled himself; yet this goes for nothing, and gets nothing, at most, but
what Ahab got a reprieve from some present or temporal punishment.

Fifthly, Those words are brought in as an aggravation of the sinfulness of the
hypocrite; he does not cry when God binds him, he prays not when God afflicts
him.

Hence Note; It is an heightning of our sin, to neglect prayer in time of
affliction.

It is a sin to neglect prayer at any time, but their sin is exceeding sinful,
who neglect it then, who cry not to God, when God binds them. Is it not
extremely evil, that they should not pray at all, or but little, when they
should be all and always in prayer? Affliction does, as it were, naturally
draw us, yea, forcibly drive us to God. In their affliction they will seek me
early (Hos. 5.14.) As if the Lord had said, If ever they will seek me, surely
they will seek me then, and then they will seek me early, that is, earnestly,
and with all their hearts. Therefore how unnaturally sinful are they, who in
their affliction will not seek God! The Prophet says ( Isa. 26.16.) Lord, in
trouble have they visited thee, they powered out a prayer when thy chastening
was upon them: Yet the hypocrite will not pray when chastened. How sinful it
is, not to pray when God binds us, appears upon many accounts.

First, To neglect prayer in time of affliction, is very sinful, because then
we have most occasion for it.

Secondly, In time of affliction God especially calls us to prayer; he commands
us at all times, but chiefly then. Is any among you afflicted? (is that any
man's case?) let him pray (Jam. 5.14.) What should an afflicted man do else?
What is he so much engaged to do by his own necessity, what so much by the will
of God, as to p^ay? Affliction, which takes us off from many other works, sets
us upon and about this.

Thirdly, Prayer in time of affliction is under most promises to be heard: Now
not to pray, not to cry to God, when we have so many promises to assure us of
hearing, increases our sin in the neglect of prayer. Though I do not say, the
hypocrites prayer is under these promises of hearing, yet it shall be reckoned
as a sin that he ha^h not prayed in affliction, because there are so many
promises of hearing prayer in affliction. The Lord is very gracious to those
tha^ cry in affliction, and the hypocrite has often heard that he will be so;
how wretchedly sin^ul is he then against God, as well as regardless of his own
good, it God hear not of him, or from him, in his affliction! ( Psalm. 102.17.)
He will regard the prayer of the destitute, and not despise their prayer, that
is, graciously accept and answer it. Again ( Psalm. 69.33.) The Lord hears the
poor, and despises not his Prisoners; that is, any who are bound in
affliction: For I suppose that Text is not to be restrained to those only, who
are shut up in prisons, but takes in all those that are bound in any trouble.
In which sense the word is used ( Lam. 3.34.) The Lord does not afflict
willingly, nor grieve the children of men, to crush under his feet all the
Prisoners of the earth: The Hebrew is, All the bound of the earth; by whom, he
means, as chiefly the Jews gone into Captivity, who were more properly bound,
so any detained under any calamity whatsoever; to all, or any of them, that
Scripture is applyable, The Lord does not willingly affl^ct. Seeing then there
are so many promises made to those that cry in affliction, this will be urged
upon the hypocrite as an heightning of his naglect, that he has not cried when
God bound him. Thus we see the second part of these hypocrites misery, by what
they do not, They cry not when he binds them.

The third thing by which the woeful misery of hypocrites in heart is set forth,
is by what they suffer.

Verse. 14. They dye in youth, and their life is among the unclean.

They dye in Youth.

The Hebrew is, their Soul dies. The Soul, strictly taken, is immortal, and
dies not; yet it is often said in Sc^ipture, the Soul dies; the Soul being
taken, either, First, for the Life; or, Secondly, for the Person. To say, their
Soul dies in youth, is no more than to say (as we translate) they dye in
youth. The word rendered Youth, (...)
s^gnifies in the Root of it, to shake and trouble, or to make some great
concussion; hence some render the Text, In tempestate: Vulg In excussione: Rab.
Sal. q. d. Excussione et vt afflictionum in quibus sunt peribunt.
They dye in a Tempest, or in a Storm. One of the Jewish Doctors gives it thus,
They shall dye with a stroaker shaking; that is, they shall perish by the force
and violence of that affliction, which has arrested and taken hold of them.

But I conceive our reading is clear, They dye in Youth, because Youth is the
most stirring time of our life, or that time of life, wherein we use the most
violent motions without, and are subject to the most violent passions within;
therefore the Hebrew expresses both by one word. Now when we say, They dye in
Youth, the meaning is, they dye in the prime, in the best, in the most
flourishing time of their life, in the spring of their days.

But is it true, that all hypocrites in heart dye in youth? Do not many, who
discover themselves to be but hypocrites, dye in old age?

I answer, Suchlike Scriptures do not intend an universality, as to every
individual; but only show that it is so for the most part, or often so.
Hypocrites in heart, men of profane spirits, usually dye in their youth, and
are cut off in the Flower of their Age. They who multiply their sins, substract
from their days; and they have least g^ound of hope to live long, who live
ill. As bloody, so deceitful men (such are hypocrites in heart) shall not live
out half their days. They who live not out half their days, dye in youth.
That also is the meaning of Eliphaz (Chap. 15.32.) where he says, The wicked
man shall have his recompense before his time; as also when he says ( Chap.
22.16.) They were cut down out of time; that is, before the ordinary time of
cutting man down by Death was come. And therefore, I answer,

Secondly, they die in youth, needs not be taken in that strictness, as
importing that they die before they come to men's estate, but only that they die
before the common time of dying. To die in youth signifies any immature death;
or when death comes suddenly upon any, they may be said to die in youth. Thus
here; they die in youth, that is, some immature or sudden death overtakes
them, they come to an hasty or untimely end, they prolong not their days on
earth.

Thirdly, this dying in youth may refer to the hypocrites unpreparedness or
unfitness to die. Unprepared persons may be said to die in youth, because
youths or younger men a^e usually unprepared to die. Hence that serious memento
or warning given them ( Eccles. 12.1.) Remember now thy Creator in the days of
thy youth. Young men are commonly so unprepared to die, that whosoever die
unprepared, may be said to die in youth; yea, though they die in old age, they
die infants. I may say at least in alusion to that of the Prophet (possibly it
may be a proof of what I say) Isa. 65.20.) An old man that has not filled his
days (by being good and doing good) dies a child. As a child may be said to
die an hundred years old, when he dies full of grace, so a man of an hundred
years old, may be said to die a child, an infant, when he has no grace; for
though he has been long in the world, yet he can hardly be said to have lived
at all. So then, how long soever the hypocrite in heart has had a being on the
earth, and a breathing in the air, he always dies in youth, or before his
time, Moritur cum Juventa. Jun. Ponitur pro (...) ut cap. 9.26. Psalm. 143.7.
Pisc. Aeque morientur and pari judicio Dei conterentur atque juveniles illi
animi qui proterve obnituntur Deo, and palam ad omne flagitium projecti sunt.
Jun. Vt hic vita mori dicitur, sic Authors Latini dicunt vita vivere and vitam
vivere; vita moritur, cum homo vitam cum morte commutat. Drus. Vita eorum
(suppleo) ausertur. Pisc. Cum meritoriis. Pisc. Latini vacant cinaedos and
pathicos qui in concubitu libidinoso vice mulieris funguntur. Id.
because he has not yet learned the way to eternal life.

There is yet another reading of the wo^ds; we say, they die in youth, that
says, they die with youth, or young men; that is, as dissolute, deboyst,
vicious and riotous young men die, so hypocrites die. The hypocrite is opposed
to the outwardly profane in his life, but he shall be like him in his death: As
if Elihu had said, look as vain voluptuous youths, carnal youths, or young men,
who give themselves up to their pleasures, look as or how they die, look what
wrath is upon them when they die, even so shall the hypocrites in heart die,
they die with the youth. I shall touch this further upon the last clause, where
Elihu gives us this sense in other words, and in words that more fully reach
this sense; for having said, they die in (or with) youth, he thus concludes,
And their life is among the unclean.

Here it may be queried; forasmuch as he said before, they die in youth, how
does he here say, Their life is among the unclean? what life have they when
dead? I answer, By their li^e, we may understand that life which hypocrites in
heart shall have after death; which may be taken two ways. First, for the life
of the soul, while the body remains a consuming or consumed ca^kass in the
grave, that life (after death) the life of their souls is among the unclean.
Secondly, for the life which they shall have after the resurrection of their
bodies, that will be among the unclean too. Some translate the words thus,
Their life is taken away among the unclean; we say, their life is among the
unclean. The word (is) is not in the original text, and we may make the supply
by a word signifying to take away; Their life, is taken away among the unclean,
that is, they shall die like the worst of sinners, they shall make no better an
end, than the unclean and profane, no better than the most foul and filthy
Sodomites, as the original imports. For

The word which we render unclean, has a double, yea, a contrary
signification, holy and unholy, clean and unclean. They who are holy only in
name, are most unholy in heart and life. (...) Duo contraria signifi^at
sanctura and profanum pollutum, scortatorem. Recte simulatores effaeminatis
comparat, quia ex pravitate animi contingit, quod homines sint simulatores; est
enim proprium magnanimi esse manifestum. Aquin.
The Scripture often by the same word expresses things of utmost opposition;
so here he calls those who are most unholy, by a word which signifies
holiness; the Hebrew says, their life is among the Sodomites. Mr. Broughton
translates, and their life with fornicators. Sodomites, who are the most
unclean and filthy sinners, worse than fornicators, are expressed by a word, by
this word which also signifies holy, or holy ones (Deuteronomy. 23.17.) There shall
not be a Sodomites, or, an holy one among you; and therefore as we read of
Sodomites in the land, who are sinners against the the law of nature, (1 Kings
14.24.) so according to that law of Moses, we read, 1 Kings 15.12. and Chapter
22.46. as also 2 Kings 23.7. of the destroying of the houses of the Sodomites,
and of the removing of Sodomites out of the land. Sodomites being the most
abominable of all unclean ones, how unclean are they whose life is among them,
or whose life is taken away wi^h them! The Spirit of God does rightly compare
hypocrites to Sodomites and filthy persons, because it proceeds from the heat
of some base lust or other that any are hypocrites. It Is proper to those who
are magnanimous, or of noble spirits, to be open, clear-hearted and ingenious.

Their life is with the unclean. Hypocrites have a great affectation to be
numbered among the clean and holy, and possibly they have been, or may be, high
in the opinion of men, for holiness, for very Sain^s; But their life shall be
among the Sodomites, or the unclean. It being a shame to express the
abomination of that sort of sinners by a word proper to them, the Scripture (by
an Euphemisme) calls them holy; we translate the Scripture sense, and call them
unholy or unclean; Their life is among the unclean, among Sod^mites. Thus as
the death of the hypocrite here is fully expressed in the former words, He
shall die with the youth, that is, like those sinful Sodomitish youths, like
those youths who live in the heat of abominable lusts, though he seemed to have
an heat of holiness; so their life he^eafter is fully expressed in these latter
words, Their life is with the unclean. This clearly sets forth hypocrites, they
are spiritual adulterers, they pretend love to Christ as their husband, but
their hearts go a whoting after the world. And therefore as their life was
really in this world, though they pretended otherwise, so it shall be visible
in the world to come, among the unclean.

Hence Note; First, They who are like the unclean in this life, shall be
wrapped up with them in the next life after death, or in the second death.

They who live like the wicked shall die like the wicked, and live with them, if
theirs may be called a life, for evermore. The hypocrite, with all his varnish
and fair colors, shall not die like a godly man, nor live with him after
death; though he has lived the life of a godly man, as to appearance, yet he
shall not die so, nor live so when the dead rise: he shall die and live like and
among his own company, the unclean. He was secretly unclean in his life, and he
shall openly live among the unclean, when he dies. Balaam a Sorcerer, a Witch,
a false Prophet, how did he beg, that he might die the death of the righteous,
and that his last end might be like his! (Number. 23.14.) The hypocrite would sain
die like those whom he has imitated and made a show of all the days of his
life; But did Balaam die like the righteous? no, he dyed, as he lived, like one
that had loved the wages of unrighteousness. Though hypocrites have lived in
reputation with godly and good men, yea, have been reputed godly and good men,
yet when they die they shall go down among the unclean, even among the debauched
and filthy Sodomites, they shall go to their own place and to their own company.
It is said of Judas when he hanged himself ( Acts. 1.25) He went to his own
place, (...).
his proper place. All things naturally tend to that which is congeniall or
like to them; heavy things downward, light things upward. What place is
congenial to, what place is the center of wicked men? Surely Hell, the
bottomless pit is their own place, and that is the meaning of the text there.
Judas was a great while among the Apostles in an high place, in a very
excellent place, he went like an Apostle, or for an Apostle; but that was not
his own place; he was an hypocrite, and when he dyed then he went to his own
place, to that place which was proper to him. In this life good and bad are
mingled together in the same place; the hypocrites and the sincere may be in
one House, in one Cong egation, in one Church, in the purest Church on earth
there may be hypocrites in heart as well as sincere; but when hypocrites die
they shall be divided from all those with whom they were never truly, or in
heart, united. If it were possible, all the godly or sincere should be in one
place as to spirituals here (that is most comely and desirable, though not
attainable) yet we cannot make the separation perfect in this life; but at
death it will be done perfectly; death will not leave one hypocrite among the
sincere, not a weed among the herbs, nor a chaff in the floor; death will make
perfect separation; after death all the holy shall be gathered together into
one society, and all the unholy into another society by themselves. It is said
of Abraham he was gathered to his people (Genesis 25.8.) Not only to his kindred,
in the flesh, but to all those that were of his faith. Death will gather all to
their proper place and company. Godly Josiah was gathered to his fathers (2 Chronicles. 34.28.) and the wicked are said ( Psalm. 49.19.) to go to the generation
of their fathers, where they shall never see light. Death will send every one
to his own. The hypocrite shall no more shuffle himself among the righteous,
nor Satan himself, nor any of his Sons, among the Sons of God; every man shall
be for ever among his like.

Further note; The smoothest-faced and closest hypocrite in the world shall
fare as bad or no better then the foulest and deboystest sinner;

They shall die with the vile, and be taken away among the unclean. The fairest
hypocrite, shall have no more esteem with God, then the foulest Sodomite that
ever was in the world. Christ says, if any refuse to receive the Gospel, it
shall be worse with them then with Sodom, the cry of whose sins went up to
heaven; nor shall it be any whit better, but rather worse, with them who
^eceive the Gospel of Christ only in show, their hearts not being right with
him. How woeful is their present condition, who daily heap up wrath, who (in the
sense opened) die in or with youth, and whose life (after death) is among the
unclean!

JOB, Chap. 36. Verse. 15, 16, 17. 15. He delivers the poor in his affliction,
and opens their ear in oppression.

16. Even so would he have removed thee out of the strait into a broad place,
where there is no straitness, and that which should be set on thy table, should
be full of fatness.

17. But thou have fulfilled the judgment of the wicked: judgment and justice
take hold on thee.


ELihu having showed how terrible God will be, how dreadfully he will deal with
subtle hypocrites; The hypocrites in heart heap up wrath; proceeds in this
context to do two things further.

First, that he might raise some hope in Job, if he did it last humble himself,
he repeats the gracious dealings of God with humble and upright-hearted ones at
the 15th verse; I say he repeats it, because he had spoken of it before ( verse.
6, 7.) and this is a very useful and profitable repetition, by which Job is
doubly admonished to raise himself from his despair of a better condition;
forasmuch as God does not afflict with a purpose to destroy, but that he may
heal and help the afflicted. The greatest design of God in chastening us should
be always remembered, that he intends only our good, especially to make us
thereby better or more partakers of his holiness.

Secondly, he makes application of the whole doctrine to Job; and that two
ways; First, by way of consolation, assuring him he had been delivered in case
he had humbled himself duly and deeply before the Lord ( v. 16.) Even so would
he have removed thee out of the strait into a large place, etc. Secondly, he
applies it by way of conviction, that as yet surely he was unhumbled, because
still under the afflicting hand of God, verse. 17. But thou have fulfilled the
judgment of the wicked, judgment and justice take hold on thee. So much
concerning the state of these three verses in general; I shall now go on to
open them in order.

Verse 15. He delivers the poor in his affliction, (...) Traxit, exiraoeit,
detr^xit, in piet extraxit ex aerumu^, miseria, ericulo.
or he pulls the poor out of affliction; That is the sense of the word, and the
work of God. We find the word used to signify the pulling or drawing off of
the shoo, ( Deuteronomy. 25.19.) As the shoo is tied or buckled to the foot, and must
be loosed before it can with any ease be drawn off; Chalatz and lachatz two
contraries, save and undo, are sweetly used ^y Elihu in this verse. Brough.
so affl^ctions are tied to us, till the Lord unlooseth and draws them off
from us, or us, from them. To draw out of trouble, or to draw us out of
trouble, is deliverance. David expresses himself by that word ( Psalm. 6.4.)
Return, O Lord, deliver (or draw) my soul (that is me) out of the enemies hand,
or out of the trouble which compasses me about, and is ready, like deep
waters, to swallow me up. He delivers The poor in his affliction. (...) Est
vox conjugata, pauperum a paupertate. miserum a miseria. Pined.


Who are meant by the poor, has been showed before, I shall not stay upon it
here, only consider, there are poor as to their outward state, and poor as to
their inward state, that is, first, poor in spirit, which is a blessed poverty;
and secondly, poor in spirituals, which is a miserable poverty. The two former
sorts of poor especially, when joined in one, are here intended; He delivers
the poor in his affliction, or, in his poverty.

There is a great elegancy in the Hebrew text; it is a word of the same root
which signifies the poor who are delivered, and the affliction in which or out
of which he or they are delivered. We may translate the text thus; he
delivers the poor in his poverty; that is, when he is in his poverty or
affliction, the Lord delivere^h him out of his poverty, or affliction; if
poverty be his affliction, o^ whatsoever affliction comes under the name of
poverty, Hic redditur per (...) de, ex.
the Lord delivers him out of it. I have upon other passages of this book
spoken of this deliverance, yet shall touch it here again, because we ought
always to remember it; we are often in affliction, often in trouble, and
therefore we have need often to be put in mind, and continually to bear in
mind, that God is a deliverer, the deliverer of his people from, or out of
afflictions; He delivers the poor in his affliction.

Hence Note, Deliverance is the work of God.

As ^he poor cannot deliver themselves in affliction, so neither can the rich
deliver the poor by his riches, nor the strong by his power, nor the wise man
by his wisdom, craft or policy. The Lord often uses the help of man, creature
help, in delivering the poor out of affl^ctions; yet the whole effect is here,
and every where in Scripture attributed to God, He delivers the poor.
Deliverance of any so^t is of God, yet more especially some sort of
deliverances are; as Nebuchadnezzar confessed ( Dan. 3.29.) who, when those
three Worthies were delivered out of the fiery furnace, ma^e a decree, that
every People, Nation and Language which spoke any thing amiss, against the God
of Shadrach, Meshach and Abednego, should be cut in pieces, etc. and he did it
upon this ground, because (says he) there is no other God that can deliver
after this sort. He had an opinion that his god could deliver, but he
appropriated the glory of that deliverance to their God; there is no god can
deliver after this sort; no god but the God of Shadrach, Meshach and Abednego
can check and stop the rage of fire, and b ing out those unburnt, who are cast
into the burning. That Is the first thing, Deliverance is of the Lord.

Secondly, He delivers the poor.

Note; The lowest and meanest are the objects of deliverance.

When it is worst with us, then usually God comes in. He will be seen in the
Mount, and provide at a pinch; he loves to do for us when we can do nothing for
our selve. Take the poor in any notion, but especially for such as being
destitute of all help and means of deliverance, are also poor in spi it, not
trusting to any help or humane arm, these, these are the persons whom the Lord
delights to deliver; and herefore God is so often spoken of in Scriptu e, as
espousing the cause and quarrel of the Widow and the Fatherless.

Thirdly, From the manner of expression, He delivers the poor in affliction,

Note; They who are not delivered from affliction, may yet be delivered in
affliction.

God does not always deliver his People from affliction (either not suffering
affliction to fall upon them, or presently bringing them out of affliction) but
he is engaged (by promise) to deliver them in affliction; and this he does
sometimes by checking the affliction, that it shall not hurt them; sometimes by
enabling them to bear, yea, to conquer the affliction, how much soever it hurts
them. He delivered those in the third of Daniel, in the fiery fu^nace, by
checking the fire that it should not hurt them; and Daniel in the Lions den, by
checking the hungry Lions that they did not devour him. He delivered Job, and
David, and Jeremie, and the Apostles, and all the Martyrs, who loved not their
lives to the death for the testimony of Jesus, by causing them to glory in, and
triumph over all their tribulations. He delivers the poor in his affliction,
and opens their ears in oppression.

What Is meant by opening the ear, was showed at the 10th verse of this Chapter,
and at the 16th verse of the thirty third; Yet consider somewhat in the words
anew.

And opens their ear. The Hebrew copulative particle, which we render, and,
is often in that language used to denote a season, or special time, and then it
is rendered by when; thus here he delivers the poor in affliction, when he
has opened their ears, by or in oppression. Thus also ( Psalm. 139.16.) Thine
eyes did see my substance, yet being imperfect, and in thy book all my members
were written, which in continuance were fashioned, when as yet there was none
of them. The Hebrew is, and not one in them; as if he had said, God had a full
Idea or platform of David's b die before it was framed; so here, he delivers
the poor in affliction, and opens, or when he has opened their ears in
oppression; that is, taught them effectually to make a good use of their
afflictions. We may also render it, after; so the copulative (Vau) is expounded
( Lev. 17.15. Jer. 10.13.) Thus here; Faciet eum intelligere quod pro peccatis
punitur. Aquin
He delivers the poor in afflion after he has opened their ears; that is,
after he has made them understand that sin has caused their sufferings, and
has also made them obedient and ready to receive counsel from him, as that
phrase of opening the ear has been opened. He opens, or when or after he
has opened their ears (...) a radic^ (...) coarcta^it, pressit, co^pressit,
vim intulit praeposito, in saepo valet, per.
in oppression, or by oppression,

The word notes, extreme oppression; we read it ( Number. 22.25.) in the story of
Balaam, where it is said, his Ass crushed (or pressed, or oppressed) his foot
against the wall, while he was going to curse the people of Israel, that so
Balak might oppress them. This word is used also Judge. 4.3. 1 Samuel 10.18. and
by it Elisha showed how he would have Jehorams messenger handled (2 Kings
6.32.) Oppression takes fast hold. The Lord takes fast hold of sinners by
oppression, and will not let them go till he has opened their ears; but as
soon as he has opened their ears in or by their oppressions, then (out of
hand) he delivers them in, if not out of their afflictions. From the
connection of this with the former part of the verse,

Observe; The evil of oppression or trouble is preparatory to, or a usual
means to fit us for our receiving of good.

He delivers them in affliction, when he has opened their ears in or by
oppression. When once the soul by hearing the cry of the oppressor is made
obedient to the call of God, then God comes and works deliverance. Good men,
while free from evil, are oftentimes like the wild ass described in the 39th
chapter of this book, such as will not hear nor regard the crying of the
driver, though he be not an exactor, (as the word there signifies and we put in
the Margin) but a fair and gentle driver. Few hear when spoken to, till they
feel as well as hear; and therefore the Lo^d first sends them into trouble,
that they may hear, and having by that means opened their ears to hea^, he
b^ings them out of trouble. When we are truly humbled by affliction, we are
near deliverance from affliction. The plaster must be kept on till the wound
be healed. The Lord will not leave off scourging or correcting his people till
he has brought them to such a post^re, that they are fit for mercy. The Lord
helps and heals those who submit; and if they whom he has bound with the cords
of affliction, call humbly for release and relief, he will not forsake them,
but restore them in due time to their former felicity; He delivers the poor
in affliction, when he has opened their ears in or by oppression.

Elihu having laid down this general Doctrine, makes Application of it in the
two verses following; Verse. 16. Even so would he have removed thee out of the
strait into a broad place.

Thus Elihu proceeds from the general Thesis or assertion of Gods deliverance,
to the Hypothesis, accommodating the Doctrine to Jobs Case and Person, Even so
he would have removed thee, etc.

This 16th verse contains the first part of the Application made to Job, where
Elihu informs him what the issue would undoubtedly have been, if he had
submitted (which he did not) as he ought, to the afflicting hand of God, and
had not (which he did and ought not) filled his mouth and the ear of God with
bitter complaints, nor stood so stifflly upon his own defense and vindication.
This Elihu does by a double allusion.

First, to the bringing of a man out of close prison into a state of freedom,
or into an open air. This he gives us in the former part of the verse, even so
would he have removed thee out of the strait into a broad place.

Secondly, he does it by alluding to the furnishing of a man's table with store,
not only of wholesome but of delicious meats, who before fared very hardly.
This he does in the close of the verse, and that which should be set on thy
table, should be full of fatness. As if he had said, if thou had harkened to
the voice of God, thou should have had both liberty, and plenty, had thou
been bettered by thy troubles, it had been better for thee, and much better
with thee; thou had been enlarged fully, thou had been supplied abundantly
with all manner of good things desirable, even to the utmost of thy desires:
that is the general scope of this verse; more particularly.

Even so would he have removed thee out of a strait into a broad place. Some
read the verse with a retro-respect, or as looking back to the time past; as if
Elihu had bid Job remember his former experiences, whether God heretofore dealt
not bountifully with him. To this sense (besides others) Mr. Broughton
translates, which has turned thee from distresses mouth, Sic etiam averterat
to ab ore angustiae in latitudinem, cui non fuberat pressura and ferculum
mensae tuae plenum erat pinguedine. Jun.
to largeness, where is no straitness, and that which was laid upon thy table
was full of fatness: and he gives the gloss upon his own translation thus; God
once made thee wealthy, and would again; thou have had experience how good a
master, and how liberal the Lord is to those that serve him, thou thy self
did enjoy prosperity a long time far from all trouble, or touch of
affliction. Thus, (I say) some refer the words to the time past; but I rather
keep to our own translation, which expresses the original text, as an
assurance of what Job should have had, and might have expected in time, had he
complied as he ought, with the purpose of God in his afflictions.

Even so would he have removed thee out of a strait into a broad place. As if
he had said, God who uses and loves to deliver the poor out of affliction,
(...) est proprie incitare, fere ad malum, a radice (...)
would also have delivered thee out of thy affl^ction had thou been humbled
under thy affliction, had thou fallen down before him, had thou submitted
the matter to him, and not disputed it with him as thou have done, had thou
confessed his justice, and not accused it or complained about it, even so would
he have removed thee, etc. The word which we translate to remove, signifies
also

To move or to persuade; because he that persuades another, Ex eadem radi^e
variae loctiones and interpretationes pullularant. Pined.
moves or removes him from his opinion or intendment, or from what his
practice was before, and brings him to be or do somewhat that he did not, or was
not, before. To be persuaded is to be inwardly moved, to be moved in mind: And
therefore they who persuade or entice others to evil, are said to turn them
from the Lord, and to thrust them out of the way which the Lord commands them
to walk in ( Deuteronomy. 13.5.) To persuade in any degree, is to move ( Josh. 15.18.)
and some persuade so strongly, that they make in others great removes.

Further, It signifies to deceive, as will appear if you compare Text and
Margin; 2 Kings 18.32. and those Texts, 2 Chronicles. 32.11, 15. all concerning one
matter. He that is deceived, is usually deceived by persuasion, and is drawn
away by some enticements.

Now, because he that persuades or deceives another, endeavors to turn or
remove him from what he holds or intends, to the contrary, therefore (as we
render) this word signifies also to remove, to bring from one place to another,
or from one state to another. He would have removed, or translated thee Out of
a straight into a broad place.

Here are two sorts of places, a straight, and a broad place: What a straight
place, properly taken, is, all know. The Heb ew is, He would have removed thee
out of the mouth of the straight. (...) Angustia et adversarius. Hinc
Septuaginta reddunt, (...).
The Septuagint render, He would have removed thee out of the mouth of the
enemy. An enemy puts us to streights; and therefore the same word signifies a
straight and an enemy: he would have removed thee out of a straight place; the
hand of an enemy is so. But mo^e generally, by the straight place, we are to
understand any kind of tribulation or trouble whatsoever. Troubles of any sort
are justly called streights, for they enclose and imprison us, they abridge us
of our liberty, they ty us short up, where we can scarce stir or breath. A man
in trouble, is a man in streights. Some expound these words allegorically,
taking the mouth of the straight for Hells mouth; they that descend thither,
are indeed in everlasting streigh^s; for, though Tophet be deep and large, as
the Prophet speaks ( Isa. 30.33.) yet all that are there, are in streights.
Hell is la ge to take in, but straight to let out, Gehenna est ampla ad
recipiendum, et angusta ad emitten^um.
so straight, that it will not let one out for ever. Others expound it
tropologically, or with respect to manners; he would have delivered thee out of
the mouth of the straight, that is, from the power of thy sins and corruptions,
for they indeed are streights; and though we easily fall into them, yet we
hardly get ou^, De put^o peccati et pr^vae consuctudinis, cu^^ ingressus
facilis exi^us pr^^^ angu^tu^. Gregor.
or free of them again. But we need not take up, either Allegories, or
Tropologies; the words are plain. That which Elihu here inten^s by streights,
is great trouble, deep misery, into which a man being cast, knows neither how
to subsist, nor how to escape: Ye^ out of that straight place he promises
deliverance; He would have removed thee out of a straight O^ ^ng sli^^ e^t
ingeas ^^la^itas, abyssu^ m^^^rum, in quam de^ersus homo, n^que subsistere,
n^que emergere potest.
Into a broad place;

That is, to liberty and prosperity, which are in Scripture compared to a broad
place, where a man has room enough. Thou have known my Soul in adversity (sai
h David, Psalm. 31.7, 8.) and have not shut me up in the hand of the enemy; thou
have set my feet in a large Room, that is, in a prospe^ous condition. Thus
Elihu here promises on Gods behalf, He would have removed thee out of a
straight, into a large place, Where no streightness is;

Sp^tium latum est, ^mo la^issimum, ubi n^lla angustia est.
That Is a broad place indeed. No streightness implies greatest enlargement, or
enlargment to the uttermost, not only of need, but desire. A broad place, where
there is no streightness, is full lib^rty, or fill of liberty. A man may be in
a very good, in a very free condition, and yet have some streights. To be in so
good a condition, as to have no streights at all, is the top and perfection of
freedom. And surely, The full attainment of such an enlargedness, is the reward
of the next life, not the enjoyment of this life. The way of the wicked, V^t
impi^rum est lata angustissim^e; via justo am est angusta latissime, et definit
in latitudinem jucund ssimam.
in this life, is most straightly broad; the way of the righteous, in this
life, is broadly straight, and ends in a broadness of everlasting
blessedness. God at last will remove all his out of a straight, into a broad
place, where there is no streightness. Hence,

First, See, the Author of our deliverance is again here rememb^ed, He would
have removed etc. As before, he delivers the poor in affl^ctions, so here
again, He would have removed thee out of a straight, into a broad place. As all
our mercies are of the Lord, so let us acknowledge him in all.

Secondly, From the Allusion, Note; Troubles are streights.

He is in a straight, that knows not what to do; thus it is often with us in our
troubles. It was so with good Jehoshaphat (2 Chro. 20 12.) when a mighty Enemy
came up against him, Lord (said he) we know not what to do, but our eyes are
toward thee; he was in a straight, what to do here on earth, but he had a b
oad place to look to, even to heaven, to the Lord of heaven and earth, our eyes
are toward thee. As if he had said, Lord we are in a straight, but thou art
never in streights; Lord counsel us what to do, Lord help us to do it. The
afflicted, many a time, know not what to do, and many times, they cannot do
what they know; they know this thing would do them good, but they cannot do it,
they know, that might be helpful to them, but they cannot reach it.

He is in a straight that doubts what good to choose, much more is he in a
straight who sees that whatever he chooses, he must choose some evil. Paul was
in the former straight, and David in the latter: Paul was in a straight, it was
a trouble to him, being doubtful, which good to choose, ( Phil. 1.23.) I am in
a straight betwixt two; betwixt what two? betwixt two very good things, namely,
living here in doing good, and going to heaven to receive his reward; he was in
a straight whether to live here to do more work, or to go to heaven to receive
the reward of his work. It Is some trouble, but a blessed trouble, when we are
in a doubt which good to choose. But they are in very great trouble, who are in
such a straight, that whatsoever they choose, they must choose evil: That was
David's straight, (2 Samuel 24.14.) the Lord gave him a choice, and a very sad
one, of three evils, either of famine, or of pestilence, or of flying and
falling before his Enemies; hereupon David said, I am in a great straight;
somewhat he must choose, and whatever he chose, it was evil, that is, penal
evil; but seeing it was so, and could not be otherwise, (e malis minimum) he
would choose the least, he chose to fall into the hand of God, rather than into
the hands of men. Into such kind of streights are the people of God sometimes
cast, they have somewhat before them to choose, but whatever they choose, it is
very hard, and troublesome; troublesome to stay, and troublesome to go,
troublesome to abide by it, and troublesome to fly from it, every way it is a
trouble; and how many of the precious people of God have been brought into
these troubles! Only this is their comfort as well as their duty, that though
they may be in such streights as necessitate them to choose a less good, or a
penal evil, yet as God will not, so man cannot bring them into any such
streights as necessitate them to choose a moral or sinful evil. Troubles are
streights. He would have removed thee out of a straight into a broad place.

Hence Note, Thirdly; Whatever streights we are in, God is able to enlarge us.

The hand of the Lord is not shortened that it cannot save, (Isa. 59.1.) There
is no straight so strict, but the Lord can open it, and remove us out of it, or
it from us. When the Children of Israel were in that great straight, having the
Sea before them, and Pharaoh with his Host behind them, the Lo^d removed them
out of that straight, and brought them into a large place. There are a thousand
instances and experiences of this. David says, ( Psalm. 130.1.) Out of the
depths have I cried unto thee O Lord: The depth there, and straight here, are
the same under several Allusions. David cried out of the depth of misery: when
he was at the bottom of the pi^, he cried unto God, and was delivered. We can
be in no depth, but the power and mercy of God can reach a hand to us, and draw
us out; we can be in no straight, but the power of God can, and his love will
make room for us, that we may escape. Dum deus velit misereriquia bonus e^t,
and possit quia o^nipotens est: ^pse contra s^ di^inae pietat^s januam claudit,
qui deum sibi aut non velle aut non posse misereri credit. August: S^r: 88. de
Temp:
Seeing then (as one of the Ancients speaks fully to this point) God will help
because he is so merciful, and can because he is s^ powerful, that man shuts
the door of hope against himself, who thinks, or through unbelief fears, that
either God will not or cannot help him. And therefore when at any time we are
in a straight, let the greatness of our streights, be the exercise of our
faith, not a discouragement to it. Some make their streights a stop to their
faith, they cannot believe they shall be delivered out of great streights; but
the greatness of our streights, should quicken, not deaden our faith, it should
increase our faith, not weaken it; and so it will, if we consider who it is
that undertakes to remove his people out of their streights; it is the great
God; and the more their streights are, the greater their difficulties are, the
greater is his glory in removing any of them into a large place. It Is said in
the Psalm, The Lord makes a way for his anger; he does do so sometimes, he
makes a broad way for his anger; yet remember he makes a way for his love and
mercy too, that his great power may be seen in opening our greatest streights.

Fourthly, Whereas, it is not only said, He would remove thee into a large
place, but, into a large place, where there is no streightness.

Observe; God can bring his afflicted people perfectly out of streights, and
set them out of the reach of danger.

O^r comforts in this world are usually mixed with sorrows, our enlargements
with streights; yet ^he Lord is able to give us sorrowless comforts, and such
enla^gements as shall not have the least shadow of a st eight in them. As Jesus
Christ saves us to the uttermost of soul streights, o^ we are saved through
Christ to the uttermost of our sins, that is, of our guilt and danger of
condemnation by sin; so he can save us also to the uttermost of outward
troubles, he can give a perfect temporal salvation, such a salvation as shall
have nothing of fear or danger in this life: Elihu speaks of such a salvation.
The Lord can save us to the uttermost of present perils, and set us beyond the
reach of peril, even in such a place, where there shall be no fear, no
suspicion of annoyance. It Is said ( Pro. 10.22.) The blessing of the Lord
makes rich, and he gives no sorrow with it. The Lord makes some men rich, or
gives them a great estate, yet they find sorrow enough with it; but the Lord,
through his blessing, can give riches, and add no sorrow with it, put no
gravel in our bread, nor gall in our cup, but all shall be sweet to us; that is
bringing us into a large place, where there is no present streightness, no, nor
appearing cause to fear any. Thus the Nations are brought in rejoicing at the
fall of Babylon, (Isa. 14.7, 8.) The whole earth is at rest, and is quiet, they
break forth into singing, yea the fir-trees rejoice at thee, and the Cedars of
Lebanon, saying, since thou art laid down, no feller is come up against us.
Positio vel requies. Heb: a radice (...) quod est requiescere Metonymia
adjuncti. Pisc. Est abstract^m pro concreto, ^ositio and requies, pro i^s quae
s per mensam deponuntur a serculariis; Quemadmodum jumenta vocantur, servitus
hominum, quia hominibus serviunt. Bold: Vicinae sunt radices (...) quievit ^^
(...) posuit; quod enim ponitur in aliquo loco, ponitur ut requiescat. Merc:
The Lord will work full deliverance for his people by Babylons fall; when that
falls, Sion shall not fear the coming of any more fellers, Christ will then
give his faithful people such enlargement as shall know no streights.

This is the first allusion; He would have removed thee out of the straight
into o broad place, where there is no streightness; it follows, And that
which should be set on thy Table, should be full of fatness.

Here Is the second mercy. As if he had said, The Lord would not have given thee
a bare deliverance out of evil, but thou should bave received abundance of
good; thou should not only have room enough, but comfort enough; That which
should be set on thy Table, should be full of fatness.

Some render, That which rests, or abides on thy Table; that is, thy meat,
and thy drink, thy wine, and thy oil, that which thou feedest upon, should be
of the best and most nourishing, not bare commons, not ordinary fare, but Full
of fatness.

Fatness is put in Scripture to express the best of things; if often signifies
the best of spiritual things, ( Psalm. 36.8.) They shall be abundantly satisfied
with the fatness of thy house. The house of God is the Church of God, and, God
keeps a good house, there are fat things, and they who worship and wait upon
him, they shall have abundance of them, their full satisfaction: the fatness of
Gods house, is the riches of Grace, the best of Gospel Ordinances and promises,
the best of Gospel-comforts and mercies, these are the fatness of the house of
God; these are the things which the Apostle intended while he told the
Gentiles, ( Romans 11.17.) That they were partakers of the rest and fatness of
the Olive tree. Thus also spoke the Prophet, ( Isa. 25.6.) In this mountain
shall the Lord of Hosts make a feast of fat things: what, of such fat things as
the Epicures of the world surfeit upon, Sheep, and Oxen, etc? no; the feast of
fat things which the Lord will make to his people is of spiritual things, they
shall have much of Christ, much of grace here, and an assurance of glory for
hereafter; This is the feast of fat things. And though the Lord give to any of
his servants the bread of adversity, and the water of affliction; though the
fig tree should not blossom to them, though they should have neither Sheep in
the fold, nor Calves in the shall, yet they may daily sit at this feast of fat
things, and be filled with joy in the Lord, ( Hab. 3.17, etc.)

And as fatness is used in Scripture to express the best of spiritual things,
so fatness expresses the best of natural and outward good things, ( Psalm.
65.11.) Thou crownest the year with thy goodness, and thy paths drop fatness;
that is, plenty, and plenty of the best things, which grow out of the earth by
the blessing and benign influences of Heaven. I conceive spiritual good
things, the best of them, are also shadowed under those expressions of Temporal.

Further, Elihu does not only say, That which shall be set upon thy Table shall
be fat, Lautissime suavissimeque vives.
but, full of fatness; which implies thus much. Thou shall have whatsoever may
make thy life comfortable, and happy; for as by bread, our daily bread, we are
to understand all the necessaries of this life (though bread be the meanest
^a^t of our sustenance, yet it it is called the staff of life, because the m^st
necessary part of it) so by fatness, we are to understand all things delicate
and delicious; and those things which are most delicate and delicious, are said
to be full of fatness.

Hence Note; First, God, who delivers his people from trouble, or out of
streights, can also fill and furnish them with comforts.

The mercy of God does not only take away evil, and so leave us, it does not
only bring us out of our streights, and there set us down; but mercy proceeds
to the bestowing of good upon us. As we in obedience should not put off the
Lord with abstaining from evil, but ought to do good, even abundance of good,
and not only bring forth good, but much good fruit; that is our duty; so the
Lords mercy stays not in delivering us from evil, but bestows good things,
the best things upon us, and them in abundance.

Secondly, In that those good things are expressed by fatness, o^ by being full
of fatness,

Note; The Lord thinks nothing too good for his good people.

When once a people, or a person are accepted of God, he ^ no cost, nor thinks
any thing too costly for them, the most ^ous things in the world are not too
good for them, ( Psalm. ^ He would have fed them also with the finest of the
wheat, a honey out of the rocks should I have satisfied thee. I would no^ ^fed
them with wheat only, that is good, but with the finest when ^ that is the best;
we put in the Margin, with the fat of wheat; they should not have had the bran,
but the flower and the finest of the flower! they should have had not only
honey, but honey out of the Rock, which, as Naturalists observe, is the best
and purest honey. Surely God cannot think any thing of this world too good for
his people, who ha^h not thought the next world too good for them; Certainly
God cannot think any of these outward enjoyments too good for his people, who
has not thought his Son too good for his people: that is the Apostles argument,
( Rom 8.32.) He that spared not his own Son, but delivered him up for us all,
how shall he not with him also freely give us all things? even the best of
outward good things, when he sees it good for us.

In this see the difference of the spirit of the world, and of God, to his
people. The world thinks nothing bad enough for those that are the choycest
servants of God, they are sorry to see that they have any thing that is good;
that they have a morsel of bread, or a penny in their purses, is thought too
much for them by the world: And if any trouble befall them, it^ good enough for
them, will the World say. The World thinks any thing too good for the choycest
servants of God, how much more the choycest things! But God has other thoughts
toward them, he thinks nothing too good for them, they shall be filled with
fatness.

Thirdly, In that Elihu makes promise of these outward things, to the choice
servants of God, whose ears are open to attend unto him;

Note; Even outward mercies, and a full Portion of outward mercies, fall
sometimes to the share of the faithful servants of God in this World.

Though such are not of this World, much less are servants to the World, yet
God can make the wo^ld serve them with its best, and give them a full portion
of the World, though the World be not their portion. The servants of God would
not take all the World, if it were offered them, for their portion, no not a
thousand Worlds, considering what a perishing thing this World is, and that at
best it is but a finite thing; I say, a servant of God would not take all the
World, at the hand of God, for his portion, though he is thankful for any
thing, for a little of it, and unworthy of any, the least, part of it. Howbeit,
many times God gives a large portion of this World to his people, and that
which he sets upon their Table, that is, outward good, is full of fatness.
Indeed some of the choice servants of God have been afraid when they have seen
much of the World come in, least God should put them off with such wo^ldly
things; when their Table has been full of fatness and dainties, when they have
had Houses and Lands, Gold and Silver plenty, they have been troubled, least
God should say to them, There is your All. It is said of Luther, when he had a
considerable present sent him from a great Prince (the Duke of Saxony, as I
remember) this came upon his heart, I hope God will not put me off with these
things, with gifts from Princes; I shall be hungry as long as I live, if I have
nothing to feed upon but what is of the World, and poor as long as I live, if I
have no other treasure, but what is earthly; and thereupon protested he would
not be satisfied with the best things of this World, though content with any
thing. Thus, I say, God deals bountifully, with a liberal hand, to some of his
people especially. This was made good in the former, or Old Testament times,
when the promises went more upon externals (as has been showed) whereas now
they go more upon spiritual and heavenly things; yet there wants not examples
of Gods dealing bountifully in outwa^ds with his faithful servants under the
Gospel, he has caused that which was set upon their Table, to be full of
fatness.

This is the first part of the Application, wherein Elihu acquaints Job what
God would have done for him, if he had carried it humbly (as he should) under
his afflicting hand, he had been out of his fetters and bonds before that time,
and set in a large place, he had not fed so long upon ashes, his Table had been
full of fatness.

As in this verse Elihu applied the matter to Job, by showing him how it should
have fared with him, or how graciously and bountifully God would have dealt
with him, if he had humbled himself, as he ought, and been duly affected with
the afflicting hand then upon him, so in the following verse, he applies the
Doctrine to him, by telling him, that the reason why he was at the present in
such an afflicted condition, was, because he had not so humbled himself in his
affliction.

Verse. 17. But thou have fulfilled the Judgment of the wicked, therefore
Judgment and Justice take hold on thee. This is a home Application indeed, he
speaks to his face, Thou have done it, thou have fulfilled the Judgment of the
wicked; which is, as a home, so a very hard and heavy charge. Take a twofold
Interpretation of it.

First, Some expound it (I think not rightly) of Jobs ill carriage in the time
of his prosperity; as if Elihu had reflected upon that: Thou have heretofore
fulfilled the Judgment of the wicked, and that, First, by a general ill course
of life. As Christ says to the Pharisees (Math. 23.32.) Fill ye up the measure
of your fathers; some conceive Elihu speaking to Job in that sense, Thou have
filled up the measure of the wicked, following them in their evil ways.
^^^^ium impii imple visti, q.d. Optimi et inc^rrupti judicis Offi^io desuisti,
impii munus et parts obiisti. Cajet. Sed receptissima vocis Originalis
sententia est Judicium, est non Officium. Pined.
Secondly, That in his Magistratical capacity, or that being a Magistrate, he
had fulfilled the Judgment of the wicked; that is, what wicked men, and their
bad Causes wanted of weight and t uth, of righteousness and goodness, that he
filled up by favor, by accepting their persons, and giving countenance to
their wickedness. Some charge him thus directly, Thou have done the part or
Office of an unjust Judge; when thou had power in thy hand, thou wast
defective, short, or wanting, in discharging the Duty of an upright Judge, but
did the work of a corrupt Judge (corrupting Judgment) to the full; therefore
now Justice and Judgment take hold of thee. But (as I said before) this is not
a right Exposition of the Text; for Elihu never charged Job with a sinful
course of life in former times, or before his affliction (as his friends had
done) though he changed him with much sin in his carriage under his
afflictions; and it may be conceived, that Job heard Elihu more patiently and
equally than he heard his friends, because Elihu dealt more equally and
heartily with him, than his F^iends did; he did not lay it upon him, as if in
the foregoing part of his life he had traded in wickedness; but only reproved
him for his boldness, in dealing with, and appealing so often unto God, in his
soars and sickness; or, because his spirit was not broken enough,
notwithstanding those sore breakings and sicknesses, with which he was
afflicted. So then, Elihu in saying this, intended not that Job had fulfilled
the Judgment of the wicked, either by a wicked conversation, or by perverting
Justice in favor of the wicked: Such a charge had been utterly inconsistent
with the Testimony which God gave of him in the first Chapter of this Book.

Therefore Secondly, Thou have fulfilled the judgment of the wicked, may be
understood, first, that Job had gone near, in his behavior under his
affliction, to do even almost as Satan boasted, and presumed to God he would
do, in the second Chapter, that if God did but lay his hand home or closer upon
him, and touch his bone and his flesh, then (said Satan) he will curse thee to
thy face. Now, though Job did never, in the height, fulfill this wicked opinion
or judgment of the Devil concerning him, yet by his often complainings of, and
murmurings about the severe dealings of God with him, and his not pitying him
in his distress, he verged upon it, he came somewhat toward, and much too near
the fulfilling of that judgment of the wicked one; and Elihu might say, Thou
have fulfilled the judgment of the wicked, thou have done (in a degree or
show) as the Devil said thou would, if the hand of God were heavy upon thy
body.

Secondly, These words, Thou have fulfilled the judgment of the wicked, may
have this meaning, Thou have rendered thy self guilty of, or obnoxious to, that
judgment which God uses to pronounce and execute upon wicked men.

Thirdly, Thou have fulfilled the judgment of the wicked; that is, thou under
the hand of God have carried thy self as wicked men usually do, thou have
imitated them in a great measure. More impiorum causam tuam agisti impaticuter
contra deum murmurando. Sanct.
What do wicked men when the hand of God is upon them? they rage and murmur,
they toil themselves and are full of the fury of the Lord, as a wild Bull in a
net; thou seem to have fulfilled this judgment of the wicked, for thou have
been so far from humbling thy self, as thou ought, that thou have stood it
out and stouted it with God, and desired a day of hearing; Have thou not in all
this fulfilled the judgment of the wicked? In the 34th chapter of this book at
the 8th verse, Elihu told Job, that he had gone in company with the wicked,
that is, that he had taken the same course with the wicked, and as they use to
do in the day of their calamity. And that is the meaning of Elihu's charge here,
Thou have fulfilled the judgment of the wicked, that is, thou have carried thy
self too too like wicked men in the day of thy trouble. Thus Job is here
censured, not strictly, as if he had done like wicked men, but because he did
not suffer so patiently as became a good man; this was in him a fulfilling of
the judgment of the wicked.

Hence note; Not to submit heartily, and humble our selves freely, when the
affl^cting hand of God is upon us, is to do very sinfully, even like the wicked.

I shall not stay upon this, having spoken of the extreme sinfulness of
murmuring and impatience under the hand of God heretofore.

Secondly, Note; If we give way to any corruption, or passion, it will quickly
carry us a very great way in sin, and from our duty.

They that are good in their state, may sometimes in their acts, (as Job here)
fulfill the judgment of the wicked. As hypocrites fulfill, in appearance, the
judgment of the upright, that is, do like upright men; so the up^ight may, in
appearance, do like hypocrites, and then they also fulfill the judgment of the
wicked. Job said to his wife, in the second chapter, Thou speak like a
foolish woman; and now Elihu tells him, thou have spoken and done as a wicked
man.

Note, Thirdly; They who do like the wicked, must not think much if they be
numbered with the wicked, and involved in the same outward evils and judgments
which usually fall upon wicked men.

Though we may not judge such a man's eternal estate like that of the wicked,
yet as to this or that act, we may (without breach of charity) number him among
the wicked, and he may quickly feel the same smart which the wicked feel. They
that are godly should act like godly men, and not do any thing that represents
the lusts or practices, the judgment or conversation of the ungodly; left it
be said (in one sense or other) of them, as here Elihu of Job, you also have
fulfilled the judgment of the wicked.

Therefore judgment and justice take hold of thee. As if he had said, I told
thee before, if thou had humbled thy self, thou should have had a large
place, and full table, store of mercies and favors; but now judgment and
justice take hold of thee. (...)
Here are two words which sometimes are used distinctly, but here they signify
the same thing, or the one is but an explanation of the other. Justice and
Judgment; some take justice for the habit, and judgment for the act, exercise
or decree; as if he had said, Justice has sent forth Judgment upon thee, and
now both take hold of thee; God has no^ed thy sin in thy sad condition. Yet
the original does not determine it upon Jobs person expressly, it does not say,
Justice and Judgment take hold of thee, but Justice and Judgment take hold; we
supply they take hold of thee, for that is it which Elihu intends; Justice and
Judgment take hold of thee, O J^b, nor will they let thee go. We find the word
so used in several places, ( Prove. 3.18.) Wisdom is a tree of life to them that
lay hold upon her. And as the believers closing with and hold-fast upon Christ
is expressed by this word, so also is the hold which sin takes of an unbeliever
( Prove. 5.22.) His own iniquities shall take the wicked himself, and he shall
be holden with the cords of his sin. Judgment and Justice take hold of thee.

Hence Note; First, God will not indulge sin in any, no not in his own servants.

If a Job do like wicked men, he shall smart like the wicked. Though God will
not cast any of his servants to hell for ever, yet they may be cast into a
temporary hell. The Lord told David as much, in case his Children should
disobey him, and break covenant with him, though he would not cast them off,
yet they should pay dearly for it; He would visit their transgressions with a
r^d, and their iniquities with stripes, (Psalm. 89.32.) The History of David's
children makes good that Prophecy, and so has the dealings of God with
believers in all ages, who are the seed, the children of David mystical, that
is, of Christ, whom and whose spiritual children the Spirit of God chiefly
pointed at in that Psalm. They that do like evil men, shall suffer like evil
men. Justice and Judgment properly and strictly take hold of the wicked and
disobedient only, as the Apostle says (1 Timothy 1.9.) The Law is not made for a
righteous man, but for the lawless and disobedient, etc. Yet when they that are
righteous are found doing like the lawless and disobedient, the Law, that is
Justice and Judgment will take hold of them. Tygurina legit int^ansitive; Causa
and judicium retinebunt, i. e. sustent bunt vigorem suum quamdiu impius fueris.


Again, Some read the words intransitively, Justice and Judgment shall hold, or
hold on still, that is, they will hold on their course or way in punishing, as
long as thou hold'st on thy course or way in sinning.

Hence note; So long as any man lives in any sinful way, he shall find Justice
and Judgment taking hold of him. Justice will not leave sinners till they have
left their sins.

Again, Justice and Judgment take hold of thee, that is, they hold thee fast.

Hence note; There Is no getting out of the hand of divine Justice.

Men oftentimes get out of the hand of man's justice, they can break prison,
they can file off their fetters and cast their cords from them; but none can
break Gods prison, none can get out of the hands of divine Justice. As Justice
and Judgment shall take hold of, attach and arrest sinners, so they will hold
them fast, they cannot make an escape, nor can any rescue them till God signs
a warrant for their release. We cannot hinder God in the exercise or execution
of Justice, nor turn him aside from his purpose, either by our power or
policies. God can easily hinder men of their purposes, and can undo whatever
they have done, but none can make the Justice and Judgment of God let go their
hold. Therefore let us take heed, while we hold sin and iniquity, nothing can
deliver us from the hand, or hold off the sin-chastning and avenging hand of
God. However men fail, the Justice and Judgment of God are everlasting; they
hold on their course still though men do not. Though we could pluck the Sun out
of the firmament, yet not Justice out of the hand of God. We can neither put
God besides his rule, nor force him from his purpose. These are the two great
Prerogatives of God, he has first a righteousness which cannot be perverted;
secondly, a Justice which cannot be interrupted.

JOB, Chap. 36. Verse. 18, 19 20. 18. Because there is wrath, beware lest he
take thee away with his stroke: then a great ransom cannot deliver thee.

19. Will he esteem thy riches? no, not gold, nor all the forces of strength.

20. Desire not the night, when people are cut off in their place.


IN these three verses Elihu presses the Application of the former Doctrine
upon Job, by way of admonition and counsel; forasmuch as he had done amiss
before, and carried himself unduly under the hand of God, even so far as to
fulfill the counsel of the wicked, that therefore he would now, and for the time
to come, take heed, and be more wary.

And lest Job should slight this admonition or counsel, Elihu adds a powerful
motive to urge that duty upon him, even the wrath of God; Beware, Why?

Because there is wrath; Beware, and beware lest (this wrath breaking forth) he
take thee away with a stroke. And how dreadful the wrath of God is, Elihu shows
in these three verses by a threefold Consideration.

First, because if we fall into the Lords hand, when he is in wrath, there is
no means under heaven that can deliver or bring us off. This he asserteth at
the latter end of the 18th verse, Then a great ransom cannot deliver thee. It
is dangerous coming un-der that wrath, from which a ransom, especially a great
ransom, cannot deliver. What that ransom is which cannot deliver us is
expressed in the 19th verse, Will he esteem thy riches? no, not gold.

A Second motive to beware o^ this dreadful wrath is this, because if once the
wrath of God be up, as there is no ransom, so no power in the creature that can
deliver. That we have in the latter part of the 19th verse, nor all the forces
of strength; though thou have armies, millions of men in arms, yea though thou
have legions of Angels in pay, yet they cannot prevail, all the forces of
strength cannot deliver thee.

There is also a third consideration, to show the unavoidableness of the wrath
of God, namely, because there is no sleeing no making an escape from it. Some
indeed are so angry that you cannot satisfy them with a ransom, and so powerful
that no strength can deliver you from their power, yet possibly you may make an
escape and hide from them, you may get out of the way and lie out of sight; but
says Elihu, that will not do neither in this case, (v. 20.) desire not the
night when people are cut off in their place; the night or darkness will be no
cover to thee from the wrath of an angry God. Thus you have the sum and
substance of this admonition to Job, Beware, because there is wrath, and that
wrath of God so terrible that nothing can deliver from it, no ransom, no power,
nor can we deliver our selves by flight, or by darkness.

I shall now open the words more distinctly.

(...) calor, ira, a (...) caluit, incaluit, quod iracundi incalescunt.
Verse 18. Because there is wrath, beware, etc. The word which we translate
wrath, comes from a root that signifies heat, or to be hot; and we know they
that are angry and in wrath are very hot, their mind and spirit are enflamed,
we use to say to an angry man, why are you so hot: the wrath of man is hot: the
wrath of God, is certainly much hotter.

Because there is wrath; but where is it? I answer, First, there is wrath, in
the breast or heart of God, there his anger is kindled against sinners.
Secondly, There is wrath in the decree of God, against sinners ( Zeph. 2.2.)
Thirdly, there is wrath in the threatenings of God, there it first appears and
breaks forth ( Deuteronomy. 29.20.) So the Apostle ( Romans 1.18.) The wrath of God is
revealed from heaven. How is it revealed? As his love is revealed in promises,
so his wrath in threatenings. Fourthly, there is wrath in the works of God, in
his Judgments acted upon the children of men. As there is wrath hidden in his
breast and decreed, so wrath is heard from his mouth in terrible threatenings,
and seen in his hand by terrible Judgments executed upon his enemies. We may
see wrath in the dealings of God; his works tell us he is angry. Therefore fear
to persist, lest in his anger he take thee quite away. We should beware of
sinful works, lest we provoke and stir up the Lords anger to make bloody work.
There is wrath, (particularly as to the dealings of God with thee, O Job, says
Elihu) therefore, Beware.

The word beware, is not expressly in the Hebrew tex^, but it is plainly
intended, and supplied by Interpreter^, in gene^al, to make up and clear the
sense of this verse. We have a like reading in the 36th of Isaiah, v. 18.
Beware lest Hezekiah persuade you, etc. The word beware, is a supplement added
there in a different character, to show that it is not expressed in the Hebrew.
As if Raoshakeh had said, If Hezekiah persuade you to stand out against my
Master Sennacherib, you will provoke his wrath to your utter ruin and
destruction, therefore beware. There, as here, beware, bespeaks our caution;
because there is wrath, take heed what you do or say.

Hence note, First; There is a wrath of God against sin, or, God will appear in
wrath against sinners.

The Apostle John in his first Epistle ( Chap. 4.8.) tells us in a direct
predication, God is love; and it is as true, God is wrath. The wrath of God is a
divine perfection, it is the perfection of God, as his love is. God is one and
the same, he is not divided into several passions, perturbations or affections;
but thus the Scripture speaks of him, to denote what we may expect from him,
and what he is and will be in his actings toward them who obey him not.

Secondly note; The wrath of God appears and is put forth in his works of
judgment.

As the goodness of God is his love acted, or as the good things which God does
for us are love-actions, so the evils that are upon us are wrath-actions. I do
not say that every evil which we endure in this world is the acting of wrath
upon us, but I say, there is wrath in the actings of evil upon us. Moses said
to Aaron, (Numb. 16.46.) Go quickly, take a Censer (have, have) and make an
atonement, there is wrath gone out. How did he know wrath was gone out? He
tells us in the next words, the plague is begun: He saw wrath in that
dispensation of God; the plague begun argued that God was angry. Because there
is wrath, beware.

Hence note, Thirdly; We should by all means take heed and beware of the wrath
of God.

The wrath of man is a small matter to the wrath of God, yet we are very
careful to beware of the wrath of man, especially of great men. The wrath of
the Kings and Princes of the world, is like the ^oaring of the Lion, says
Solomon, and we are ready to tremble at that; but O how should we tremble at,
and beware of the wrath of God! Who knows the power of thine anger? (Psalm.
90.11.) We may take some scantling, some measure of the wrath of man, and know
how far it can go, and what it can do; but we can take no measure of the wrath
of God, for it is immesurable, and therefore we should avoid every thing that
procures his wrath. That Is the meaning of this caveat; do nothing that blows
up or incenses the wrath of God. But what is it that blows up wrath? It is
sin, every sin has that in it which may blow up wrath. The Apostle says, The
wrath of God is revealed from heaven, against all ungodliness and
unrighteousness of men, not only against this or that ungodliness, no^ only
against this or that degree of ungodliness, ('it is neither against ungodliness
of some special kind, nor of some special degree) but against all ungodliness,
therefore all ungodliness and all unrighteousness is to be avoided.

And as we should do nothing to provoke wrath, so we should do every thing
which may prevent wrath ( Psalm. 2.12.) Kiss the Son, why? lest he be angry, and
his wrath kindle. Who is the Son, and what is this kissing of the Son which
p^events wrath? The Son is Christ, he is the Son of God; this kissing is a kiss
of homage, an humble submission to Jesus Christ by faith and obedience; it is a
Gospel receiving of Christ: to kiss the son is to receive Christ as ou^ King,
as our P^iest, as our P^ophe^, to receive Christ in the whole manifestation of
his Mediatorship. Do this to prevent wrath, kiss the Son. And consider how
terrible he repo^ts that wrath to be; If his wrath be kindled but a little,
blessed are they that put their trust in him. On then take heed that you do not
provoke the wrath of God, and do your utmost to prevent it; which nothing can
do but kissing the Son, that will and that only can do it; submit to Jesus
Christ, receive Jesus Christ, without him it is impossible to prevent wrath. H^
that believes not, the wrath of God abides on him, (Johs 3.36.) Jesus Christ
alone is he which delivers us from the wra h to come, (1 These. 1.10.) And if
we further consider this wrath from the expression, both of the Psalm and of
the Text, it should make us (who are so fearful of, and who so shift from the
wrath of men) exceedingly afraid of the wrath of God. The word, as was showed
before, comes from a root which signifies the heat of fire, implying that the
wrath of God is fire, and ( Heb. 10.27.) it is called fiery indignation; yea,
God himself ( Heb. 12.29.) is called a consuming fire. Why does the Scripture
express him and his wrath, by fire? Surely because fire is well known to us,
and we are well able to conceive how dreadful a thing fire is, when it is in
its rage and fury, when it has got the mastery; Fire is a comfortable servant,
but a dreadful master. Now as fire is the most dreadful element, so wrath is
the most dreadful attribute of God; yet I may say, that elementary fire which
(as to our sense) is so dreadful, is but a sunshine compared to the wrath of
God; as will appear if we consider it in two things.

First, it burns internally. The visible fire burns but visible things, outward
things, but this fire burns within, scorches the conscience, burns the soul,
burns that which all the fires in the world cannot reach, cannot touch. God is
a Spirit, and the wrath of God is a fire that burns the spirits, and will for
ever afflict and torment the consciences of wicked men. The hottest fires which
the most enraged malicious Persecuters kindle, cannot touch the spirit; the
conscience is quiet, the soul triumphs while the flesh fries in the fire. It Is
the fire of divine wrath alone which has power upon the soul; and a burning
there is ten thousand times more painful than the burning of our flesh.

Secondly, the wrath of God burns eternally. Your fires here though they are
dreadful, yet they go out, they consume themselves by consuming the matter or
fuel cast into them; they cannot continue always, because they eat up and
devour that which maintains them: But the wrath of God burns continually. God
is called a consuming fire, not because the fire of his wra^h consumes, but
because he consumes sinners in the fire of wrath; and when we say, he
consumes sinners in his wrath, or his wrath consumes sinners, we are not to
understand it of a consumption as to being, but only as to a well or comfortabe
being; for not only the soul^, but the very bodies of sinners shall remain in
this fire of the wrath of God for ever unconsumed. The bodies of the damned
shall be raised again at the great day, and being reunited to their souls,
both shall abide unconsumed in the fire of this consuming wrath eternally. The
great dread of ordinary fire is, that it consumes what it burns, but the
greatest dread of this fire is, that it consumes not that which it burns. O
therefore take heed of the wrath of God, the wrath of God is terrible as to
corporal and temporal judgments, much more as to spiritual and eternal
judgments; that is, as the fire of his wrath burns both internally and
eternally. Because there is wrath, beware, Lest he take thee away with his
stroke.

Here the danger is expressed. If the Lord be angry, he can soon take thee away
with a stroke, he can remove, yea hurry thee away out of all thy present joys
and enjoyments, to everlasting sorrows. The word imports a violent remove. The
stroke here spoken of is like that ( Chap. 24.26.) He strikes them as wicked
men, (...) Cum com^losione.
in the open sight of others; that is, he shames them as well as punishes
them; as he strikes them with his hand to their confusion, so he strikes or
claps his own hands together in dirision, as it is said ( Chap. 27.23.) Men
shall clap their hands at him, and shall hiss him out of his place; we may take
it in both these significations; Lest he take thee away with a stroke; that is,
lest he strike thee so as to make an utter end of thee, or lest he take thee
away with derision, clapping his hands at thee, and pouring contempt upon thee.
Have we not reason to beware of that wrath, which in either sense can take us
away with his stroke? Yet I conceive a third sense may be given of these words,
Lest he take thee away with his stroke, that is, lest he take thee away
suddenly, even as suddenly as a st^oke can be given.

Hence Note; First, God can presently strike to destruction,

He can take the strongest away with a stroke, he can do it wi h one stroke.
The Lord needs not stand cutting and slashing, hacking and hewing (as we say)
all day long; one stroke of his will do it. He took away Herod at one stroke (
Acts 12.23.) He took away Ananias and Saphira at one stroke ( Acts 5.5.) Nadab
and Abihu were taken away with one stroke ( Lev. 10.1.) All these perished, and
so have thousands more, as with a stroke, so suddenly, at one stroke. The Lord
can strike home; as Abishai said to David in the case of Saul, when he found
him in the Trench, Let me strike him at once, and I will not strike him a
second time. The Lord threatened ( Nah. 1.9.) to b^ing destruction upon those at
once, when he told them Affliction should not rise a second time; as if he had
said, I will not strike another blow at them, I Will hit them home, and do my
wo^k with one blow. We need not fear how many, or how mighty his enemies are,
he can rid himself of them with one stroke. The Lord strikes some to take away
their sin; thus he strikes his own people: others he strikes to take away their
persons; thus he strikes the wicked, especially those who enemy-like,
designedly strike at Him, his Name, his Truth, his Glory. Elihu does not say,
Beware least he strike thee, but least he take thee away with a stroke. The
Lord often strikes his own faithful servants, they receive many a stroke, many
a lash, many a blow, many a chastisement at his hands, but he does not take
them away with a stroke, as he does the wicked. The Lord strikes his servants
to take away their sins, and he strikes wicked men to take away their lives, to
destroy them utterly.

Secondly, As the word signifies taking away with clapping ^f the hands or
with derision,

Note; God will even laugh at the ruin of wicked men,

He will clap his hands at their fall. We read ( Prove. 1.26, 27.) how Wisdom
called and cried, and none would answer, all set her calls and counsels at
naught; what followed? I (said Wisdom, that is, Christ) will laugh at their
calamity, and mock when their fear comes; as much as is said in the Text, I
will take them away with a stroke, or with clapping my hands, with a kind of
deriding plaudite at their going off, or rather at their being thrust off the
Stage of this world. They are in the most sad condition, whom God not only
destroys, but derides; they have most cause to mourn in their affliction, at
whose affliction God laughs. It is said ( Job 9.23.) God will laugh at the
trial of the innocent, and why, was showed in opening that place; I only touch
it now upon this occasion: The Lord knows the innocent will come off with
honor, will stand it out in their trial bravely, he sees what Courage and
Faith and Patience they will manifest in and under their sufferings. Now as the
Lord even claps his hands, and laughs, when his chosen noble ones go forth to
the trial, knowing they will honor him in their trial; so the Lord laughs at
the destruction of the wicked, knowing that his Justice and Righteousness shall
have a full stroke at them, and lay both their shame and sin open to all the
world.

That the Lord in his wrath takes away with a stroke, should make us all
beware, fear and tremble; but that which follows, may make us wary, fear and
tremble much more; for, says Elihu in the close of the verse, Then a great
Ransom cannot deliver thee.

(...) Redemptionis Pretium, quod (...) Graeci appellant.
The word rendered a Ransom signifies that which is paid as a price for the
deliverance of a Captive out of bondage: Thus Christ gave himself a Ransom for
sinners. But here is a Case wherein no Ransom will be taken, no, though it be,
not a small, petty Ransom, but a great Ransom, of that (says Elihu) it
cannot deliver thee. As if he had said, When once God is so far provoked, that
the Decree is gone forth to destroy thee, then it will be in vain to think of
getting off by Ransom.

Here it may be queried, What is this great Ransom that will not deliver? There
is a twofold Ransom, by one of which the people of God are sometimes delivered,
and always by the other.

First, The people of God are sometimes ransomed or delivered by the destruction
and ruin of the wicked; that is their Ransom, and that, not seldom, proves a
great Ransom. It is said expressly (Prove. 21.18.) The wicked shall be a Ransom
for the righteous; how, a Ransom for the righteous! will a wicked man p^y a
Ransom for the righteous? or will the wicked man offer himself a Ransom for
him, and say, I Will dye instead of the righteous man? surely there is no such
thing to be expected from him. Peradventure for a good man (says the Apostle,
Romans 5.7, 8.) one would even dare to dye; that is, one good man may possibly be
willing to lay down his life for another good man. Scarcely for a righteous man
would one dye; that is, for a man, who only gives every man his due, o^ does
every man right: but for a good man, that is, for a man that has been very
kind and bountiful to others, some would even dare to dye; yet he that does so,
must be supposed to be a righteous and a good man himself. For it cannot be
thought that a wicked man would give himself a Ransom for the righteous, that
he would dye for him whom he does not love, yea, whom he usually hates to the
death. How then is it affirmed by Solomon, that the wicked shall be a Ransom
for the righteous? The meaning is, God will destroy the wicked, to save the
righteous, or he will save the righteous, even through the blood and
destruction of the wicked: In that sense the wicked are many times a Ransom
for the righteous, rather than the righteous shall perish, the Lord will
destroy the wicked. Thus the Lord spoke by his Prophet of old ( Isa. 43.3.) I
gave Egypt for thy Ransom, Ethispia and Sheba for thee. How was Egypt a
Ransom for Israel? had they any mind to deliver the people of God? no; but
rather than God would not have Israel saved, he destroyed Pharaoh and the
Egyptians in the Red Sea. Thus the Lord makes the wicked a Ransom for the
righteous. Though Egypt were a very goodly Country, yet God destroyed it by ten
Plagues, that he might deliver Israel. Though Pharaoh was a great Prince, he
drowned him in the Sea, rather than his people should go back into Captivity.
Solomon gives us this sense of the Prophets words fully in his own ( Prove.
11.8.) The righteous is delivered out of trouble, and the wicked comes in his
stead.

Secondly, There is another, a more excellent Ransom for the people of God,
and that is the Blood of Jesus Christ: We are bought with a price, dearly
bought, and that is the Price with which we are bought (1 Cor. 6.20.) that is a
Ransom which sets sinners f^ee, and makes them free indeed ( Joh. 8.36.) free
from sin, an^ free unto righteousness ( Math. 20.28.) He gave himself a Ransom
for many; for a great many, for all who believe and take hold of his Name. When
Elihu says, A great Ransom cannot deliver, '^is not to be understood of the
Ransom which Christ has paid; that is a Ransom so great, so precious, that it
has, and does, and will for ever deliver the greatest, the worst of sinners,
who run to it from the wrath of God.

What then is the Ransom that is invalid and useless, which will not be
accepted, which cannot deliver?

I answer, First, in general; it is any thing on this side Christ, be it what
it will. The greatest Ran^ome that men can devise or heap up together, or that
men can make, whatsoever it is, besides the Ransom of Gods own appointment,
will not deliver a sinner when once wrath has siezed upon him.

I answer, Secondly, as to particulars: It is not, First, Riches, no not Gold.
Secondly, It is not our own prayers, no not tears. Thirdly, It is not our own
good works, no not our own righteousness. Fourthly, It is not any of the good
works or righteousness of any other, the holiest men on earth, no not the
righteousness of the Saints and holy Angels in Heaven, that can deliver us from
the wrath of God. The first of these particulars Elihu gives for instance in
the 19th verse (of which I shall there speak further) and we may understand
this verse of all the rest. Then a great Ransom cannot deliver thee.

Hence note; There is nothing but the Blood of Christ can ransom sinners from
the wrath of God, nor will that deliver some sinners.

(I suppose Elihu might have respect to that, in urging Job to humble himself
and repent) There are Cases, wherein even the Blood of Christ will not deliver;
though that has an intrinsecal virtue, power, and value, to deliver any
sinner, yet, I say, there are Cases, wherein even that great Ransom, the Blood
of Christ, will not deliver sinners; or thus, there are many sinners in such a
Case, that Christ will not ransom them by his Blood. But who are they?

First, All that are impenitent, and persist obstinately in their sins. If any
man resolve to go on in sin, the Blood of Christ is no Ransom for him. Jesus
Christ came to save us from our sins, not to save us in our sins.

Secondly, All that are unbelievers; though they have a great measure of sorrow
(such as it is) for sin, yea, suppose they have left off the outward practice
of those sins, for which they have sorrowed, yet if they do not lay hold on
Christ by faith, his Blood is no Ransom for them. As Christ will not save
presumptuous sinners, who believe without repenting, so neither will he save
incredulous sinners, who repent without believing. Thirdly, That great price of
the Blood of Christ is not a Ransom for apostatizing sinners, who having
pretended to Repentance, and made proof sion of faith, yet go back from Christ
and his ways, at once bu^lding what they seemed to have destroyed by
repentance, and d^stroying what they seemed to be built up in by faith. The
Apostle declares the doom of all such ( Heb. 10.26.) For if we si^ wilfully
after we have received the knowledge of the truth, there remains no more
Sacrifice for sin. Wilful sinners against received Light cast off the Sacrifice
of Christ (which is our Ransom, and) with which they seemed to close; and
having cast tha^ off, God will never be at the cost to provide them another
Sacrifice: There remains (says the Text) no more Sacrifice for sin. They would
have no more to do with that Sacrifice for sin (that is the case of those who
sin against the Holy Ghost) and there is no other Sacrifice for them. Such
Apostates crucify to themselves the Son of God afresh, and (by their being
ashamed of him, and turning from him, as much as in them lies) put him to open
shame, as the Apostle speaks ( Heb. 6.6.) but God will never crucify his Son
afresh, nor put him again to open shame, for the ransoming of wilful Apostates.
It is the ground of our hope, that God once gave up his Son to be crucified for
us, but they are of all men most hopeless, who crucify to themselves the Son
of God afresh. The Son of God, Jesus Christ, will not save those that tread him
under foot, not shall the Blood of the Covenant be a Ransom for those who count
it an unholy thing; as it is said at the 29th verse. They who refuse the Gospel,
that is, Gospel Grace, shall never have any benefit by the Gospel; these
Apostates do not only refuse to choose the Grace of the Gospel, but refuse it
after a seeming choice of it, and are therefore said in the close of that
verse, to have done despite to the Spirit of Grace; and shall they who despise,
and, which is more, do despite to the Spirit of Grace, be ransomed through
Grace? Thus we see, that as nothing but the Blood of Christ can be a Ransom,
so some shall have no share in, nor benefit by that great Ransom. They who
repent not, they who believe not, they who sin wilfully after a profession
made, both of Fai h and Repen^ance, can have no deliverance by that great
Ransom, the Blood of Jesus Christ.

El^hu having ^old Job in General, that if he provoked God to wrath, then a
great ransom could not deliver him, proceeds to give him one particular
instance of what cannot; and he gives it in that which is the most usual
ransom, and which has ransomed thousands from the wrath of man, that is,
riches, gold.

Verse. 19. Will he esteem thy riches? no, not gold, nor all the forces of
strength. As if he had said, Possibly, O Job, thou having been a great man, a
rich man, the richest the greatest man in all the East, may think thou
could buy off thy offense with gold, and get out from under his wrath by thy
wealth and riches; but suppose thou were as great and rich as ever, or greater
and richer than any are, or ever were, Will he esteem thy riches?

(...) ordinavit; and quiares aestimandae ordinantur aliae juxta alias, ideo
pro aestimare sumitur. Merc:
The word rendered esteem, signifies to put in order, because things which are of
esteem and value, are laid up handsomely and orderly. As no man esteems trash,
so he will not lay it up among his treasures. Will he esteem, or lay up thy
riches, as some precious thing, as his treasure; surely no. The question (as
frequently in Scripture) is a strong denial; will he? he will not value thy
riches, no more than a rush; what do tell him of thy riches, he makes no
account of all that thou have to give, yea, though thou had all the world to
give: Men will esteem thy riches, money answers all things among men, but
alas, it will answer nothing with God, will he esteem Thy riches?

Some translate the word which we render riches, by nobleness or greatness; so
Mr Broughton, Will he esteem thy nobleness? The word signifies both, and Job
was both, he was a great man, and a Nobleman, the chief Magistrate, a Prince
among the people where he dwelt, as appears fully in the 29th Chapter. Will he
esteem either thy riches, or thy nobleness? shall thou be accepted because thou
art a great Lord, a mighty man, do thou think the Lord will-esteem thee for
this? Certainly no. We may take in both senses of the word, Will he esteem thy
riches, or Nobleness?

Hence note, First; Greatness without goodness, is of little or no esteem with
God.

Note, Secondly; God will not be taken off by any outward respect whatsoever,
from bringing vengeance upon evil men.

God will not be stopped in his course of Justice wi^h riches or great titles,
with honor, or nobleness: The riches of one man cannot ransom another, (
Psalm. 49.7, 8, 9.) They that trust in their wealth, and boast themselves in the
multitude of their riches, none of them can by any means redeem his brother,
nor give to God a ransom for him. Nor can any man's riches ransom himself, (
Pro. 10.2.) Treasures of wickedness (that is, treasures gotten wickedly) profit
nothing. Nor will the treasures of the wicked (though well gotten) profit them,
( Pro. 11.4.) Riches avail not in the day of wrath, (Zeph. 1.7.) Their gold
and silver shall not profit them in the day of my wrath. If you present your
selves before God with titles of honor, and bags of gold, neither the one nor
the other will do it, he will not regard thy riches, nor nobleness. When
Ishmael came treacherously upon those Jews, ten of them said, Slay us not,
(Jer. 4.8.) for we have great treasures in the field, of Wheat, and of Barley,
and Oil, and of Wine; so he forbear, and slew them not among their brethren.
But this will not do in the day of the Lords anger.

Will he esteem thy riches? (...) clamavit. Septuaginta id in mente habuiss^
videntur, nam vertunt (...) opulentus dives (Isa: 32.5.) (...) ^or scurec
significat opes, cap. 30.24. cap. 34.20. Non estimabit clamorem tuum, nihil
ducit quantum vis clames, non ea movebitur, sed pro di^itiis malo. Merc:
Some translate thus, Will he regard thy crying or clamor? As if Elihu had
said, Cry as much as thou will, the Lord will not regard it. This goes higher.
Many possibly will not be taken off from the process of Justice, by greatness
or riches, who yet by our humble supplication and cry may be taken off; But
will the Lord regard thy cry? or as the Septuagint read it, Will he have regard
to thy prayer? Wicked men that have rejected the Lords commands, will yet hope,
or rather presume, the Lord will hear their cry, and therefore they will be at
their prayers in times of trouble, when the wrath of God breaks out; this is
their last resort and refuge. They who never made the Lord their choice in good
times, will yet make him their refuge in evil times, or in days of trouble;
they think surely to be sheltered, and saved, and spared, when they pray: but
this will not do neither; Will he esteem thy prayers? The Hebrew Text, at
least, allows, if not clearly holds out this reading, and it can be no hurt to
take in as much profitable sense, as the words, without undue straining, may
hold out to us. So then, when the Lords wrath appears, neither riches, nor
honor, nor prayers, nor tears can give sinners any relief. The cries and
prayers of the wicked are no more regarded by God, than their riches or
greatness. Then they shall call upon me, (says Wisdom, Pro. 1.28.) that is,
When their fear comes as desolation, and their destruction comes as a
Whirlewind, when distress and anguish comes upon them, (v. 27.) when it is thus
with them, then they shall call upon me, but I will not answer; that is, I will
not esteem their cry. That Is a very remarkable Scripture, ( Psalm. 18.41.) where
David speaking of his enemies, how the Lord had given him their necks, and a
power to destroy them that hated him, presently adds, They cried, but there was
none to save them, (but it may be they cried where they should not for help;
no, says the Text, they cried) even to the Lord, but he answered them not:
then did I beat them as small as the dust before the wind, etc. The Lord having
declared how resolved he was to proceed in a way of wrath against the Jewish
Nation, adds ( Jer. 14.12.) When they fast I will not hear their cry. That
people had been very obstinate and rebellious, they had withstood the call of
God by the Prophet; yet when they saw wrath appearing and approaching, then
they betook themselves to fasting and prayer; but says the Lord, it shall not
advantage them, though they fast and in their fasting cry, yet I will not
regard them, nor be entreated: I know they will be praying to me, but I will
take no notice of them. See how dreadful a thing it is to refuse the offers
and tenders of grace, to go on in a way of sin; for then, no ransom will do
it, riches and honors, yea prayers and cries and tears, shall not be
regarded. Will he esteem thy riches?

No not gold. This is to be joined (according to our translation) with the
former words, and it suits fully with our translation of these words; Gold
being the best of worldly riches, and having the greatest power with and
command over men; yet says Elihu, Will he esteem thy riches, no not Gold. He
mentions that, because (I say) it is the choicest part of riches, the worst
sort of gold is of higher esteem and worth, than any other metal; Gold bea^es
the greatest price among metals, and has the greatest prevalency among men,
but none with God. The word rendered Gold, signifies defending, but gold is no
defense against God. Will he esteem thy riches? no not Gold. The note is the
same in substance with the former.

The Lord regards not men for their riches, no not for the best of riches. Not
only will he not esteem your Copper, and Brass, and Iron and Tynn, but not
your Gold, (1 Pet. 1.18.) Gold does much with men, but nothing with God. I
shall not stay upon this clause, it being only an hightning of the same thing
before asserted. But

There are two other readings of the latter part of this verse, upon which I
shall stay a little: First, thus; Will he esteem thy riches? no not in
affliction.

The word which we render as one, signifying the best gold, Ne quide^^ in
angustia (...) ego nomen (...) verto in augustia; alii reddum in s^gnificatione
auri, in qua r^paritur, cap. 22.24. sed ibi scribitur. (...). in accentu
distinguente pro (...) Pisc:
refined gold, other interpreters render as two words, which signify to be
perplexed or in streights; Will he esteem thy riches? no though thou art in the
greatest streights, and know not what to do.

Hence Note; The Lord will not regard rich wicked men, when they are in
streights.

The Lord who esteems not the wicked rich at any time, will lest esteem them in
an evil time. The Lord who has an esteem of, and a regard to the godly at all
times, has it especially in a time of streights and trouble. But as the Lord
never regards wicked men, so then lest when they have most need of it. Will he
esteem them? no not in affliction.

There is a third reading of these words: (...) in piel, contra rapinas
munivit, hinc (...) aurum lectissimum, quasi ab igne munitum aut quod fit
hominis munimentum.
Will he esteem thy riches? no not any defense. As our translation, no not
gold, falls in plainly with the first words of the Text; so this with the
latter. Will he esteem thy riches, no not gold, say we, answering the word
riches in the first part of the verse. Will he esteem thy riches? no not
defense, say others, which answers those words, nor all the forces of strength,
in the latter part of the verse. So then, as our reading complyes with the
former part of the verse, so this has as fair a compliance with the latter;
No not any defense. The word signifies to fortify, to fence, to make strong,
and hence, gold, because gold is man's strength and defense. Riches are a great
strength; to be rich in gold is a man's strong tower. Will he esteem thy riches?
no, not gold, or defense, Nor all the forces of strength.

These words, in the close of the verse, being the same with the middle part,
as last rendered, may very well be drawn up into one, and conceived of, as if
Elihu had said, Suppose thou art a mighty man and have strong forces, he will
not esteem thee for all that; The very weakness of God is stronger than man (1
Cor. 1.25.) that is, than the strongest man, or than any strength which man can
procure, either to oppose God, or to protect himself against him. The Prophet
to show the great power of the Chaldeans, says ( Hab. 1.10.) They shall scoff
at kings, and deride every strong hold. Surely the Lord is so far from
esteeming the defenses and forces of strength, which men make to, and for
themselves, that he scoffs at and derides them. The Lord will deride all the
strong holds of man, even the forces of strength. Some get internal carnal
strong holds, to fortify themselves in, of which the Apostle speaks (2 Cor.
10.4.) The weapons of our warfare are not carnal, but mighty, through God, to
the casting down of strong holds. Most sinners are men of wit, they provide
themselves strong holds to save their sins in, they have their excuses and
reasonings to defend their sins or themselves in their sins by. Others are men
of might, they get external strong holds, they have Armies and Cities of
defense, to secure themselves by; but will the Lord regard either? Not the
strong holds, set up and maintained by force of wit, no, nor all the forces of
strength. Though thou have Army upon Army, and City upon City, though thou do
add Castle to Castle, and Fort to Fort, they are no more than paper walls
before the Lord. As neither riches nor nobleness, so no power of man can secure
man from the hand of God. Mr. Broughton varieth a little from our reading, yet
concurrs fully in sense; No gold, nor any other thing should be able to give
sound strength; which himself expounds by this short gloss. If now thou
despisest repentance, thou shall be utterly cast off. As if he had said to Job,
it is not thy, or any man's standing out against God, that will help you, your
only help is in repentance and self-humbling before God. Will he esteem thy
riches? no, not gold, nor all the forces of strength.

Hence note; There is no strength against the Lord.

As there is no counsel, so no force of strength against the Lord. Hannah sang
this truth (1 Samuel 2.9.) By strength shall no man prevail, that is, against
man, if God be with him; much more is it true that by strength shall no man
prevail against God ( Isa. 1.31.) The strong shall be tow, and the maker
thereof as a spark; that is, as some expound, their Idols, whom they made their
strength, shall be as tow, that is, as the most combustible matter, easily
consumed, and the maker of it, that is, the Idol-maker, shall be as a spark. Do
but blow a spark among tow, and what will become of it? Such are the strongest
Idols, in which men trust, and such are the mightyest and strongest men before
the Lord, who trust in them. Tow or flax or hemp (after the dressing) is as
tinder, that the least spark will give fire to The strong (Idol) shall be as
tow, and the maker of it as a spark; or, which is in effect the same, The
strong (man) shall be tow, and that which he has made, or (as we put in the
Margin) his work, that is, his Idol, shall be as a spark, and they shall both
burn, or perish together. This is the sentence of the Lord against the strong,
a spark shall set them on fire and burn them; how then shall the strong be able
to stand before the Lord who is not a spark, but a fire, and that a consuming
fire! and therefore, I may urge Elihu's counsel to Job, upon all sorts of men,
upon those especially who persist in any sin, take heed, because there is
wrath, beware, etc. or I may urge them with the Prophets dehortation ( Jer.
9.23.) Let not the wise man glory in his wisdom, nor the mighty man in his
strength, nor the rich man in his riches, for, none of these can help or
deliver from wrath, only Jesus Christ can, and it has been showed who they are
to whom he will not be a delivering ransom. It may be very useful to consider
what negatives Elihu puts upon sinners as to deliverance from kindled wrath;
not riches, not honor, not crying, not praying, not strength, not defense can
deliver without turning from sin to God, and all in Christ.

Elihu having urged two arguments to make Job beware of wrath, first, because
nothing could ransom him, God regards not riches, no not gold; secondly,
because nothing could rescue him, all the forces of strength could not defend
him against, nor fetch him out from under the hand of God; Elihu (I say) having
dispatched these two arguments, he in the 20th verse gives a further, and that
a third argument to move Job to take heed of wrath, because, as he could
neither be ransomed nor rescued, so neither could he be hid or sheltred from
the wrath of God. That is the general sense of the next verse.

Verse. 20. Desire not the night, when people are cut off in their place. The
root of that word which we render desire, signifies a very earnest breathing
and longing after a thing, as conceiving and believing the enjoyment thereof
would be an exceeding comfort and refreshment to us. (...) significat
respirare, anholare, ad aliquid vel rei alicujus summo desiderio teneri. Merc.
So it is used in the seventh Chapter of this book at the second verse; as the
servant earnestly desires the shadow, etc. When a labourer is hot and
sweltered almost (as we say) at his work in the Sun, how earnestly does he
desire the shadow! We say (in the Margin of that place) he gapeth after the
shadow. A man, when he is hot, gapes to suck in fresh air. Such an intendment
and force there is in this word, desire not, long not for, gape not after the
night,

The night seems not to be a thing, or a season so desirable, that we should
gape for it or long after it. Solomon says ( Eccl. 11.7.) Surely light is
pleasant, and it is a comfortable thing for the eyes to behold the Sun; but who
has a desire after the night? what is the beauty or comeliness of the night
that any should so much desire it? why then does Elihu here forbid Job (as
supposing he did) to desire it? desire not the night.

I answer, the night may be taken two ways, or under a twofold notion. First
properly, as that which casts a vail or mantle of darkness over both persons
and things, and covers them from our sight; in allusion to which, the sense is
this; Do not hope to hide or conceal thy self from the eye or knowledge of God.
As thou can not be ransomed, as thou can not be rescued from his power
(which was showed before) so desire not the night, for thou can not be
obscured from his knowledge under the covert of it, there is no hiding from
God. Though I judge that interpretation too gross, which supposes Elihu
counselling Job not to desire the night, as robbers and adultere^s, to cover
him while doing wickedly, yet possibly he might think Job was not so free to
confess the evils which he had done, and therefore rather desired the
concealment of them.

Secondly, the night in Scripture, as also in humane Authors, is put improperly
for death. All the dead are wrapped up in a night of darkness. Hence that counsel
( John 9.4.) Work while you have the day, the night comes when no man can
work. We may work, yea, much work is done in the natural night. It is said of
the virtuous woman ( Prove. 31.18.) Her candle goes not out by night; she and
her maids are at work in the night; therefore it cannot be strictly meant, that
no man can work in the night. The night there is the night of death, Ne aspires
ad illam noctem (sc. mortis) qua abeunt populi ad locum suum. Jun. Qua e medio
tolluntur populi in lo^o ipsorum. Pisc.
or of an extreme troublous life; in these nights, especially in the former, no
man can work, for there is no wisdom, nor device, nor labor in the grave
whether we are going, (Eccl. 9.10.) According to this Scripture interpretation,
desire not the night, is desire not death. Job had put forth such desires more
than once ( Chap. 7.15.) My soul chooses strangling and death rather than
life. Mr. Broughton translates, Breath not unto that night: for peoples passage
to their place: That is, (says he) desire not death, the common passage of all
men, as thou have done. Therefore Elihu seems here to call Job off from those
desires; do not thou peevi^hly or impatiently (because of the trouble of thy
life) call for death, lest it come too soon, and it do by thee as it has done
by many others, whom it has cut off in judgment. So it follows here, Desire
not the night, When people are cut off in their place.

Death is a cutting off. As many die in the night, so whenever any die they
are cut off from this world, and all the employments of it. they are cut off
from their dearest friends and relations. Death cuts off the thread of life,
and us from the comforts of this life.

The Hebrew is, when people ascend. The Original Scripture expresses dying by
ascending, though the death of the wicked is rather a descending. Verbum (...)
ascendere pro excidi and tolli ^umitur.
It is said by a late Writer concerning the heathen profane and wicked Emperors
of Rome, Such a one descended (that is, died) in such a year of his
abomination. Now though the wicked descend when they die, yet there is a sense
also wherein all men may be said to ascend when they die; and there is no doubt
but the godly, as to their more noble part, ascend to God when they die. Thus
the word is used in the fifth Chapter of this Book, at the 16th verse, where
Eliphaz speaking of the death of a godly man, says to Job, Thou shall come to
thy grave in a full age, like as a shock of corn comes (or ascends) in his
season. David deprecated an immature death under this Metaphor ( Psalm. 102.14.)
Take me not away in the midst of mine age. The word is, let me not ascend in
the midst of mine age, that is, before I have measured the usual course of
life. Translatio a condelis, quarum lumen ascendit, atque ita paulatim
consumuntur ipsa.
Thus to ascend, is the same with to be cut off; death cuts off the best from
this world, and then they ascend to a better. This sense of the words suits
well with the latter exposition of the night, as taken for the night of death.
The word ascend, is conceived to have in it a double allusion; first, to corn
which is taken up by the hand of the reaper, and then laid down on the stubble.
Secondly, unto the light of a candle, which as the candle spends, or as that
which is the food of the fire is spending, ascends, and at last goes out and
vanishes.

There is yet a further sense of the whole verse thus; Desire not the night,
etc. That is, do not curiously enquire the cause of that divine judgment by
which God sometimes sweeps away whole nations, good and bad together, in the
night, or suddenly. Or thus, disquiet not thy mind in the night, but rather
rest in the will of God, when thou see or hear of those great destructions
which come upon persons or nations. (...) Sub, subter saepe significat, in loco.
Desire not the night, when people are cut off in their place, that is, when
they die in, or are removed from the place where they formerly lived and had
their abode; in which sense it is said of the dead, their place shall know them
no more (Psalm. 103.16.) How well soever any are settled, death cuts them off in
their place.

First, Forasmuch as Elihu speaking to Job in this distressed estate, wishes
him not to desire the night,

Observe; In times of distress and trouble we are apt to make many strange
wishes, or to express uncouth requests and desires.

The Prophet Jeremiah quits himself from this in one point ( chap. 17.16.) I
have not desired the woeful day (Lord) thou know. He was so far from desiring
it, that he prayed for the peace and prosperity of that people; but though
Jeremy did not desire the evil day to come on others, yet when the evil day was
come upon himself we find him venting strange and strong desires of that kind (
Chap. 9.2.) O that my head were a fountain, and mine eyes rivers of tears, that
I might weep night and day for the slain of the daughter of my People. He had
visions of slaughter, and he did even beg a head melted into water for abundant
mourning over that day. But what were his other, what were his further wishes,
with respect to himself at that time? we have them in the next verse. O that I
had in the wilderness a lodging place of a wayfaring man, that I might leave my
people, and go from them, for they be all adulterers, a company of treacherous
men. What uncomfortable desires had Jeremiah as to that day of distress! O how
did he covet to have a retiring place, any hole in the wilderness, like a
wayfaring man, that he might leave his people and see them no more, because
they were so wicked, and their wickedness he foresaw would bring down such
dreadful evils upon them. And as he wished this sad retirement upon the
foresight of evils to come, so we find him in another place ( Chap. 20.14, 15,
16, etc.) wishing that he had never been born to see such presnet evils. We
have the like plain wish of David, in the day of his trouble ( Psalm. 55.2.)
Attend unto me (O God) and hear me, I mourn in my complaint, and make a noise;
because of the voice of the enemy, because of the ^ppression of the wicked: for
they cast iniquity upon me, and in wrath they hate me (they charged him with
evils that he had not done) my heart is sore pained within me, the terrors of
death are fallen upon me, fearfulness and trouble are come upon me, and horror
has overwhelmed, or covered me. David was at that time in a very sad day, you
see; and what was his wish that day? we have it at the 6th verse, And I said, O
that I had wings like a dove, for then would I flee away and be at rest; lo
then would I wander far off and remain in the wilderness. Holy David could not
keep his heart (in those distresses) from extravagant wishes. David had the
integrity of a dove (as he often pleaded before the Lord) and being distressed,
he wished also for the wings of a dove, that he might flee away, and get out of
the reach of all those impendent calamities. How usual is it for good men in
bad days to breath out such wishes? one wishes that he had never been born,
rather than to see such a day; another wishes he may die presently, rather than
live in such a day. When the Apostle John had given the prophecy of dreadful
judgments to come upon the wicked world, or the world of wicked men, he
presently tells us what their wishes or desires will be ( Rev. 9.6.) And in
those days shall men seek death, and shall not find it, and shall desire to
die, and death shall flee from them. Most men flee death, that is a misery; but
death sleeth from some men, and that is a greater misery. They are in the worst
of conditions who would have death when death will not be had. Their lives are
worse than death who only wish to die. What nonsense wishes and desires had
they also in the day of the Lords anger, mentioned in the same book ( Chap.
6.16.) Who said to the mountains and to the rocks, fall on us, and hide us
from the face of him that sits on the throne, and from the wrath of the
Lamb. It is possible for good men sometimes to have strange wishes; but O how
lamentable are the wishes of wicked men and unbelievers, who have no part nor
interest in Jesus Christ, in those times when Conscience is wounded and
awakened, or when a day of the Lords wrath, or judgment from the Lord
appears! When Christ the Lamb shall sit upon the throne, and call them to
give an account, O then they will wish for rocks and mountains to fall upon
them, that they might not appear; how glad will they then be to be hidden with
an everlasting night! They cannot but desire the night, who have sinned against
light. Holy Job could not forbear to desire the night of death in the day of
his distress; what desires then must the wicked have, who have no hope beyond
this life!

Again, as to the vanity of that design of some in desiring the night for
shelter,

Note; There is nothing can cover us from the eye, or secure us from the hand
of God.

What is darkness to God, who is light, and in whom there is no darkness at all
(1 John 1.5.) Desire not the night. As gold and silver cannot ransom sinners,
as great forces, (all the Armies on earth) forces of strength cannot help
sinners, so the night cannot hide them; they that are in the grossest darkness,
are never the more out of Gods sight; The darkness is not darkness to him, the
darkness and the light to him are both alike (Psalm. 139.11, 12.) and therefore
he said before ( verse. 7.) Whither shall I go from thy spirit? or whither shall
I flee from thy presence? If I ascend up to heaven thou art there, etc.
Wheresoever we are, God is, who is every where; nothing can keep us off from,
or keep us out of the eye of God.

Lastly, as the night, is taken for death; Desire not the night,

Hence note; It is a vain wish to desire death for our rescue, or escape from
the evils of this life.

Death is it self an evil, the worst of natural evils. How can that help us out
of our evils of trouble, which is it self the most troublesome evil? The Lord
promises some of his people that they should die before the evil day; Josiah
and Hezekiah had such promi^es: It Is a favor to die (as they did) in the
assurance of eternal life, before we feel the evils of this life. But death,
considered in it self, is no relief against evil; and as it is the worst of
natural evils in it self, so it carries those who are unprepared and
unprovided for it, to worser evils than any they can meet with in this life.
Some desire death to escape the evils of this life, when, as soon as they die,
they go to the evils of another life, which are the second death, such a death
as has no second, and descend not only to the grave, but to hell. And what
has any one got by leaving the troubles of this life, to fall into the dolors
of that second secondless death! They only dream of security by death, who are
unprepared go die. Death is good for none but those who are fitted for, and
have by faith laid hold upon eternal life.

JOB, Chap. 36. Verse. 21. Verse. 21. Take heed, regard not iniquity, for this
thou have chosen rather than affliction.


IN this verse Elihu gives Job another serious admonition, or re-enforceth the
former, warning him to take heed of speaking or uttering any thing rashly,
(...) Custodivit, servavit.
unduely, or unbecomingly of God, in respect of his troubles and sufferings;
and this he urges upon him by two sorts of arguments, as will appear when I
come to handle the two following verses.

Take heed, regard not inniquity. As if he had said, beware, be well advised
what thou do, and what thou say. The word which we here render take heed,
signifies to keep and preserve, but most properly, to prevent and keep off any
evil, that it fall not upon us. The noun, from this root, signifies a watch
tower, upon which a person stands to observe and give warning of any danger, or
to descry any approaching enemy. It Is translated, take heed, as here, so (1
Kings. 2.4.) where David upon his deathbed, gives counsel to Solomon his son
and successor what to do, and how to walk in the way of the Lord, that (says
he) the Lord may continue his word which he spoke concerning me, saying, if thy
children take heed to their ways, that is, if they are very watchful over
their ways, both as to their personal and princely walkings, if they walk in
my statutes, then I will do thus and thus for them. Thus says Elihu, take
heed, look about you, have your eyes in your head, be careful. These take heeds
are frequent in Scripture. From whence (before I come to the matter about which
Elihu would have Job take heed.)

Observe; It is our duty to be heedful.

We cannot be dutiful unless we are heedful; a headless person cannot be a
faultless person. This duty runs quite through all we have to do; take heed,
first, to the inward motions of the soul, take heed how and what you think (
Pro. 4.23.) keep thy heart with all diligence (with all keepings, with all
heedings, it is this word in the text) heed thy heart, that is, thy first
stirrings and motions unto any work. Secondly, take heed, as to the first
motions of the soul, so to the affections of the soul, which are soul-motions
formed up and stated; take heed of your affections, how and what you desire,
how and what you love, how and what you hate. Thirdly, take heed to the tongue,
how you speak, and what you speak, where you speak, and why or for what ends
you speak; there is a great deal of take heed belonging to the tongue.
Fourthly, take heed to the ear, when ye hear others speak, take heed how you
hear, and when ye hear, and what you hear; infection may soon come in at those
ports. Fifthly, take heed to the eyes, what you behold; the eyes are windows
which often let in vanity, yea, I may say, venom and poison into the soul. In
a word, take heed of all your actions, or of your whole conversa^ion; take heed
what you do, (...) A verbo (...) quod saepe animi intentionem, vel
contemplationem valet ad aliquem finem, utpote ad miserandum, vel
interrogandum, vel adjudicandum. Bold.
and how you do it; see that ye walk circumspectly, take heed in and about all
these things, that ye sin not, especially, that ye neither have, nor carry on
any design or work that is sinful; take heed that ye be not found falling into
that error, to avoid which, Elihu calls or awakeneth Job to this
watchfulness, take heed.

Regard not iniquity. Here is the special matter in the text, about which Elihu
advises Job to be heedful, regard not iniquity. The word rendered regard,
signifies the turning of the face to look upon any object; that which we much
regard, we turn about to look upon it, (...) Iniq^itas, vanitas.
as that which we slight, we turn away from it and will not look upon it; we
turn our face to a person or thing, signifying our approbation, and we turn
away our face to show our dislike; and therefore we do well express this word,
(...). Absurda, indecentia. Sept.
which signifies to turn the face, by regarding; turn not thy face to iniquity,
look not to it, give it not any respect or countenance, regard not Iniquity.

The word signifies vanity properly. All iniquity is vanity, sin is vanity, and
sin has brought vanity into the whole creation, yea sin makes all things a
vexation to us. The Chaldee says, regard not a lie, the Septuagint, regard not
things absurd or uncomly.

But what Iniquity does Elihu here chiefly intend? I answer, It is a truth of
Iniquity in general, regard not any iniquity; yet here Elihu speaks not in that
compass; as if he should say, regard not robbery, regard not murder, regard not
adultery and wantonness, regard not any of these foul and gross sins; but there
was a special sin which Elihu had an aim at, and which he thought Job gave too
much regard unto; regard not iniquity, that is, undue speeches and heart-g
udgings, or impatient complainings against the proceedings of God with thee;
that is, do not stand so much complaining about what thou suffer, and
justifying thy self in what thou have done, expostulate the matter no more with
God, wish not for the night of death, etc. This is to regard or turn thy face
to iniquity; take heed of these things, do not regard these evils, this kind of
iniquity.

Further, when Elihu says regard not iniquity, we are to expound him by these
affirmatives; slight it, turn from it, abhor it, loath it, despise it, reject
it; all these affi matives are contained in that negative, regard not.
Frequently in Scripture, negatives intend their contrary affirmatives. When
that Scripture says, despise not prophesying, (1 These. 5.) the meaning is, ye
shall regard it, love i^, follow it, delight in it; so on the other hand, when
this Scripture says, regard not iniquity, the meaning is, despise and oppose
iniquity to the utmost; Take heed, regard not iniquity. From this part of the
verse thus opened,

Observe, First; It is no easy matter to keep our selves right when things
seem to go wrong with us.

It is a hard thing to forbear iniquity when we are pinched with adversity; not
to speak unduely and uncomly, not to speak amiss of God, not to speak
unbecoming our selves, require ^reat caution in a day of distress. We have need
to take heed of this iniquity, to be watchful in an evil day, that we neither
do nor say that which is evil. When things are amiss with us, we are very apt
to speak and do amiss. As soon as ever the hand of God touches us, how do we
grieve! how do we complain! how do we murmur! how do we repine! O regard not
this, it is an iniquity to be taken heed of, in a dark day, in a day of trouble,
such as was upon Job; as black a day was upon him, as ever upon any in the
world, as to his personal condition. If such a Cedar failed, have not we, poor
Shrubs, reason to look about in such a day? When an affliction is very great,
they that are for reputation great and strong in faith, very choice believers,
experienced soldiers in the wars of Jesus Christ (when an affliction (I say)
grows very great) how apt are they to be dismayed, to be out of heart, to
despond, to look upon themselves as undone, and all undone! O regard not, turn
from this iniquity. It should not satisfy any servant of God that he avoids
gross iniquities in practice, he must make conscience of an impatient word, and
order his speech aright under the rod, as well as his conversation.

Secondly, Forasmuch as Elihu calls this an iniquity,

Observe; Impatient speeches render us guilty, let our afflictions and troubles
be never so great.

Jobs affliction was as heavy as the sand, yet Elihu tells him, your
complainings are your iniquity. I have had occasion several times in this book
to speak of the evil of complaining, under the worst and sorest of afflictions,
and therefore I only name it here.

Thirdly, taking iniquity in the largest notion,

Observe; Sin deserves no respect from us.

Sinners deserve no respect, much less does sin. It Is one part of the character
which David gives of a Citizen of Sion, (Psalm. 15.4.) He is one, in whose eyes
a vile person (that is, a wicked person, a person given up to his lusts) is
contemned. That which makes a person vile and contemptible, is worse than a
vile person, and therefore should have less respect, or more contempt from us.
Remember, sin is the only thing which makes any person vile; should we then
give any respect to sin? should we give respect to that which brings utter
disrespect upon us? have we any reason to honor that which brings us to shame?
to regard that which makes us regardless both with God and all good men?
However some men are regarded with men for their wickedness, I mean with wicked
men (they regard their like the more, when they are most like them) yet (I say)
sin makes every man regardless with God and every good man: Therefore regard it
not, yea, slight it, trample upon it. Take that

For a Fourth note in the affirmative; Iniquity is utterly to be disregarded
and abominated;

We should abhor it and cast it out of our souls, we should throw it out of
our conversation.

Note Fifthly; To regard iniquity is the mark of a wicked man.

As it is his property to disregard all good ( Psa. 26.4.) he seteth not his
heart to that which is good, he abhors not evil; that i^, he has no regard
to the good of duty, and he has a great regard to the evil of iniquity. His
not abhorring evil is to be interpreted in the affirmative, he regards,
respects evil, he prizes and values his very basest lusts before the Law and
Will of God. David disclaimeth this base spirit ( Ps. 66.18.) If I regard
iniquity in my heart, God will not hear my prayers. Now who are they whose
prayers God will not hear? We have the answer made by the blind man ( Joh. 9.)
God hears not sinners: whom will he hear then, seeing all are sinners? His
meaning is, he hears not impenitent sinners, unbelieving sinners, such as trade
on in a way of sin. Thus David concluded, if I regard iniquity in my heart, God
will not hear me; for if I regard iniquity, I am of those sinners whose prayers
God will not hear. Though David had done great iniquities, and had much
iniqui^y in his heart, yet he regarded no iniquity in his heart, If I have
locked to any iniquity in my heart (says he) as the word is; that is, if
iniquity in my heart be smiled upon, if I have pleased my self with it, if I
have given it a good look, I were a wicked man, and God hears not such.

Lastly, from these words, Elihu speaking thus to Job, a godly man, take heed,
regard not iniquity,

Note; A godly man should take heed of doing any thing which may signify the
least respect or regard unto sin, the least respect to the least sin.

Indulge not thy self in complainings and impatience, lest thou be found to
regard iniquity, as Job is here charged in the next words.

For this thou have chosen rather than affliction. Here Elihu applies the
matter yet closer to Job; I have advised thee, to take heed, not to regard
iniquity, and my admonition is not without cause; I do not speak at random, for
I tell thee plainly, thou have chosen this rather than affl^ction; that is,
thou have regarded iniquity. To choose is to regard.

This thou have chosen rather that affliction. This, What? This sin, impatient
complaining and expostulating with God, (...) Elegit, selegit.
this sin thou have chosen. The word which we translate to choose, denotes a
very serious and exact work of the soul. Choice is a deliberate act; we choose
upon discussion and debate; choice is made upon trial and proof. Thus the word
is used ( Exodus 17.9.) Joshua was to take chosen, approved, experienced men, to
go to the war against Amalek. David gathered all the chosen men of Israel (2 Samuel 6.1.) And thus the Lord spoke to the house of Jacob by the Prophet ( Isa.
48.10.) I have chosen thee; Where? I have chosen thee in the fire of
affliction. Affliction is a tryer, and either discovers who are fit to be
chosen, or sits and prepares them to be chosen. This thou have chosen Rather
than affliction.

But may we say that Job sat down, and putting his affliction in one balance
and sin in another, chose iniquity rather than affliction, or sin rather than
suffering? Surely the bent of Jobs spirit, the frame of his heart was far
otherwise; nor is it consistent with a gracious state, or a state of grace, to
sit down and make a perfect election of any sin, upon any terms whatsoever.
Therefore the word choosing may be taken in a milder sense, or in a more
moderate intendment; as if Elihu had said, Thou have spoken and done such
things, thou have behaved thy self so under thine afflictions, as that a man
may say, surely thou have chosen iniquity rather than affliction; thou have
given others great cause to judge thus of thee. Elihu did not purpose to fasten
this upon Job, that he had purposely concluded to choose sin rather than
affliction; Prae afflictione. i. e. magis quam af^l tionem, hoc est tol^anti^^
afflictionis. Me^^n mi^ subjecti. Pisc.
but he had taken liberty (through the violence of his temptations an^ the
extremity of his pains) to use such impatient speeches an^ actings as might
be interpreted, in a sense, a choosing of iniqui^y (that is, impatience) rather
than affliction; that is, a quiet sufferance of affliction. This thou have
chosen rather than affliction, or, (As some render it) For this cause have thou
chosen any thing rather than affliction, thou have cho^en what came next rather
than affliction; or, thou have chosen this because of thine affliction, so
others read it; that is, thou have been so pressed with thine affliction and
trouble, that thou carest not what thou chusest.

Mr. Broughton thus; Beware thou look not to sorrow, to choose that for thy
affliction. The sum of all is, as if Elihu had thus bespoken Job in this part
of the verse; O Job, whereas God requires of thee to give him glory in the
humble submission of thy soul unto him, and sitting patiently under his mighty
hand, thou have behaved thy self quite otherwise, thou have carried it stoutly,
and uttered very bitter complainings of thy condition, thou have not given God
the glory of his sovereignty, of his holiness, justice, purity and goodness, in
thy affl^ction, thou have not set thy self to do this as thou should, but
thou have run out exceedingly, and overshot thy self; So that, I may even say
of thee, thou have chose this iniquity, rather than submitted to thy affliction.

Elihu speaks reprovingly, this thou have chosen; Is this a good choice?

Hence note, First; Sin, or that which is sinful, ought not to be chosen
whatsoever we choose.

As Solomon counseleth, in the book of Proverbs, with all thy gettings get
understanding, he means spiritual understanding; as if he had said, What ever
thou are getting be sure thou get wisdom for thy soul, wisdom to salvation,
wisdom for eternity; in all thy gettings get understanding: So I may lay in
this place, among all your choosings be sure you never choose sin; that is not
to be chosen, leave that out, or pass that by in all your elections. This is a
point of very large compass; it suits not my work here, to insist much upon it,
yet I shall take leave a little; What ever you ch^ose, choose not sin. Why?

First, Sin is evil in it self, and that which is (malum in se) evil in it
self, or evil it self, is not the object of choice; no man is to choose evil,
nor properly can choose it.

Secondly, Choose not sin, for sin is an evil forbidden, the Law is against it,
and the Gospel too.

Thirdly, Choose not sin, for sin is a dishonor to God, and we should rather
choose to die than dishonor ^od.

Fourthly, Choose not sin, for it brings destruction upon man. Sin strictly and
abstractly considered cannot properly be chosen. A rational creature cannot
choose sin properly, because sin is evil; and election being the office of the
Will, whose adaequate obj^ct is good, sin, strictly taken, cannot be chosen.
But sin is often chosen, and it is the choice of most men, they choose iniquity
rather than affliction; iniquity is the choice and the beloved of many a man's
soul. But how? It is under the pretense of something that is good; no man can
choose it as it is evil. For though some love sin and choose sin for sins sake
(such come up highest and nearest to the frame of the devil, as they that do
good for goods sake come nearest to the holy Angels) yet, I say, sin is always
chosen under some consideration or shadow of good; and if any man choose to sin
without respect to profit or gain, yet he has some good in his eye, namely to
please himself, he would have his will, and will not let God have his will; and
this is good to him who is stark naught. But usually sin is chosen upon one of
these three accounts.

First, sin is very often chosen (by a mistake) for that which is good. They
who (as the Apostle speaks, Heb. 5.12.) are u^skilful in the word of
righteousness, they who have not senses exercised to discern between good and
evil, are very apt to choose evil in stead of good, that is, thinking it to be
good. Thus error in opinion is chosen, upon a mistake, for truth; and iniquity
in practice, is chosen, upon a mistake, for duty. Of such the Prophet speaks (
Isa. 5.20.) They call evil good, and good evil, they put darkness for light,
and light for darkness: which, as some do knowingly, out of perverseness of
spirit; so others ignorantly, out of unsoundness of judgment, imagining that
to be good which is evil, and that to be light which is nothing else but
darkness, that to be sound doctrine which is er^our, and that holy worship
which is superstition. So did Paul before he was converted, he chose iniquity,
and thought he had done very well; I thought (says he) I ought to do many
things against the name of Jesus Christ (Acts 26.) I thought it my duty, I
verily thought I ought to persecute and vex those who believed in Jesus,
wherever I found them. And Jesus Christ himself forewarns his Disciples (
John 16.2.) that the time was coming, that whosoever killed them would think
they did God service. Thus many do not understand what is right, and so choose
what is wrong.

Secondly, Others choose that which is evil, hoping that some good will come of
it, that God may have some glory by it, and men themselves and others may have
some advantage by it. This reproach was cast upon the Apostles and their
doctrine, which St. Paul rejected with highest disdain ( Romans 3.8.) Not as we
are slanderously reported, and as some affirm, that we say, let us do evil that
good may come thereof, whose damnation is just. The glory of the free grace of
God will be manifested in the pardoning of our sin, come therefore (say some)
let us sin our fill, that so the immeasurableness of the Lords goodness and
mercy may appear. Woe to those who make such inferences, their damnation is
just. To do evil upon any hopes of good by it (though it be the glory of God)
subjects to the worst evil of suffering, damnation. Others choose sin; Why?
They look some good will come by it, that is, some profit. If we strain our
consciences to do this, we may get or keep favor with men; if we do this evil,
it may gain us acceptance in the world. Many choose evil, because in doing so,
they swim with the stream, and comply with the many, or as the Apostle speaks,
with the course of this world; these choose evil, because they would be in the
fashion of the most, they consider which way the world is like to go, and set
themselves to go that way.

Thirdly, Others do evil hoping to avoid and escape danger by it; they choose
the evil of sin, that they may escape the evil of punishment. As many sin for a
little advantage, so others to avoid loss, and that they may sleep in a whole
skin. Some will deny what they have done, to save themselves: No body can prove
it against us, we will deny it, and so avoid trouble, and keep out of the reach
of danger. Yea, for this cause many deny the truth and renounce the ways of
God, in which they have walked. Demas forsook Paul, he left the Church of God,
that he might keep in with, and close to the world. Upon these pretenses and
hopes many choose evil, not merely and barely in it self, but as it comes thus
clothed: As some choose it through ignorance, so others upon hopes of getting
good, and not a few upon hopes of avoiding evil, and keeping out of hazard and
harmes-way. But whatever worldly good any gain, or danger they escape, by
choosing iniquity, that choice brings them into greater danger, and subjects
them to the loss of a greater good.

This thou have chosen rather than affliction. The particular iniquity (as has
been showed) was impatience.

Hence note; He that gives himself up to unquietness and impatience under the
afflicting hand of God, chooses sin rather than affliction.

The Lord by Moses told his People, when they should be brought into great
tribulation, because of their sin and uneven walkings, because of their
breaking the Lords Statutes and Commandments ( Lev. 26.41.) If they shall
accept of the punishment of their Iniquity, then it shall be well with them. If
at such a time ye stand not complaining and murmuring against me, but shall
well accept or take the punishment kindly, and kiss the Rod, acknowledging how
you have provoked me, and walked unworthy of former mercy; then I will show you
favor, and renew your mercies: But if in affliction you fall a murmuring, and
say, surely the Lord has cast us quite off, there is no hope, you choose
iniquity rather than affliction.

Thirdly, Elihu in this does not only reprove Job for doing that which was very
evil in it self, but he reproves him for doing that which was very evil to
himself; this thou have chosen rather than affliction. As if he had said, Thou
do not know thine own good, in making this choice. We say, He is a wise man
that understands his own good.

Hence note; They make a very bad and miserable choice for themselv^s, who
choose iniquity rather than affliction.

Thus Solomon concludes for Wisdom ( Prove. 8.36.) He that sins against me
wrongeth his own soul. He that sins, wrongs Christ, but Christ passes that
over, and seems to say, I will bare your wrongs, but pray take heed to your
selves, will you not love your selves? will you not abstain from sin out of
love to your selves? he that sins against me wrongs his own soul; all that
hate me (that is, my ways) they love death: And surely there is no great
beauty in death, that we should love it and desire it. They choose very ill for
themselves, that choose sin, the wages whereof is death. I grant, to choose
affliction is but a hard choice (affliction is not good in it self) but
affliction, if chosen, may prove good; it may be very good to us, it may bring
in much good to us: and therefore there is wisdom, not only in choosing any
affliction, rather than sin, but in choosing some one affliction rather than
another. But what good does he choose, that chooses sin? Happy is the man that
endures correction, or affliction, says the Scripture in many places; but does
it say any where, Happy is the man that commits iniquity? If you choose
affliction rather than iniquity, you choose a great deal of good. First, David
could say upon trial ( Psalm. 119.71.) It is good for me that I have been
afflicted, that I might learn thy statutes. Did ever David say, it is good for
me that I have sinned, which is to unlearn or break Statutes? did he ever
please himself in thinking that he had sinned? he did even please himself that
he had been afflicted; that was good, because he learned Commandments by it; he
grew a better Scholar, then he was in that best learning of all, the knowledge
of the Commandments of God.

Again, Secondly, It is good to be afflicted; why? afflictions are the
exercises of our Graces, the exercise of our Faith, the exercise of our
patience, the exercise of our self-denial. It Is a good thing to have our Graces
exercised, for thereby they are increased. If you choose affliction, you shall
probably have that good by it, the increase of your best things, your Graces.

Thirdly, Affliction purges out our corruptions, and that is good. Is it not
good to have a disease, or an ill humor, purged out? this good comes by
affliction. But does the committing of sin purge sin? does the Stock of sin
abate by sinning? does the ill humor spend it self? no, the ill humor rather
increases. When you choose sin, you weaken your Graces, and cherish your
corruptions; but when you refuse sin, your corruptions weaken or spend their
strength. Do you think when you have committed one sin, that the soul is made
more unable to, or more averse from the same or another sin? When you have
satisfied the call of one lust, will it now let you alone, and call no more?
no, not at all; the more you sin, the more you may; the more you sin, the more
does the Stock of sin increase and grow in you.

Fourthly, Affliction is a means to take us off or wean us from the World: O
what a good is that! we being so apt to dote upon it. The sin of the Age is,
falling in love with the World; therefore it may be good for us to be soundly
afflicted, that we may be weaned from the World, and from all things in the
world, and be kept, where our true interest is, in the bosom of Christ, or
close to him. But if you choose iniquity, will that take you off from the World?
no; the more sin, the more love of the World; for sin and the World are akin,
they are of a Blood; therefore the more you have to do with the one, the more
you will have to do with the other.

Fifthly, Affliction b^ings us nearer to God. That which takes us off from the
World, brings us nearer to God: this is an excellent advantage, a great good of
affliction. But choose sin, and will that bring us nearer to God? Sin is a
departure from God: The Lord says to sinners, Ye are departed and gone. Sin is
so far from bringing us nearer to God, that as all in a state of sin, are far
off from God, so every act of sin widens the distance, and puts us farther off
from God.

Sixthly, Affliction is our conformity to Christ. If you choose affliction, you
choose that which makes you look like Christ; for he was a man of sorrows in
this world, he was not in the ruff and jollity, in the power and pomp of this
world, but low, and of no reputation, acquainted with grief all his days. If
then you choose affliction rather than sin, you choose conformity to Christ; but
choosing iniquity rather than affliction, you take up the utmost disformity to
Christ, who knew no sin, n^r was any guile found in his mouth. He took all our
afflictions upon him, but he would not touch our sin, as a doer of it, only as
(in our stead) a sufferer for it.

How great is the good of affliction! But is there any good at all in sin? Upon
all these considerations the Apostle says, When God, the Father of spirits,
afflicts his sons and daughters, he does it for their profit, that they may be
partakers of his holiness (Heb. 12.10, 11.) The Lord afflicts us for our
profit, but he does not say I have let you sin for your profit: For though the
Lord is able to, and often does, bring good out of sin, yet not instrumentally,
but occasionally. Therefore the Scripture at^ributes no profit to sin, but
speaking of sin, it says, What fruit have ye of those things whereof ye are
now ashamed (Romans 6 21.) show your gain; what are your advantages? what the
revenues which your lusts have brought in? what have you got by your malice, by
your wrath, by your conformity and compliance with the world? have these b
ought you in any advantage? are you bettered by them? what fruit have you of
those things, whereof you are now ashamed? Let us therefore often consider
Moses's choice ( Heb. 11.25.) Moses was a wise and a holy man; and what did he?
He chose rather to suffer affliction with the people of God, than to enjoy the
pleasures of sin for a season. Herein try your spirits. Christ set two things
before Moses; Come, Moses, here is affliction, you must be afflicted, and
afflicted with the people of God (which are the greatest afflictions, you shall
be sure to be lashed with the smartest so^rest Rod in their Company) or here is
Egypt, and all the contentments that sin can give; which will you have Moses? O
give me afflictions with the people of God (said Moses) Let the world ruffle
and rant in the pleasures of sin for a season, for my part I will have
affliction, O give me affliction. In this choice Moses approved himself a wise
man, and understood his good. So did the Martyrs. Come, will you have a p^ison,
or deny Christ? a Halter, or forsake the Faith? will you into this fire, or
will you commit that iniquity? O say they, give us Prisons, Halters, Fires,
rather than conform to your wickedness. Remember this Point, this is a needful
Point for us at all times. I would add these three things further about it.
Choose affliction rather than sin; why?

First, Because sin is worse than all affliction. Secondly, Because sin is the
Sting of all affl^ction. If you are in an afflicted condition, and your
consciences tell you you have been base, vile, complying with the World, and
dissembling or false-hearted with God; if your hearts tell you, you have been
rotten at the heart, this will be the sting of your afflictions. What is the
sting of death? The Apostle answers (1 Cor. 15.56.) The sting of death is sin.
Would a man choose a sting? Surely you choose a sting when you choose sin, and
that which will afflict you beyond all your afflictions.

Thirdly, Sin is worse than affliction, for when God would declare his severest
wrath, and bring the greatest affliction upon the children of men, when he
resolves to affli^t a person or a people to the utmost, he does not say, I will
make this man a poor man, or I will send plague, or sickness, or famine among
this people, but he says, I will deliver him or them up into the hands of
their sins, or to the power of their lusts. ( Psalm. 81.11.) Israel would none
of me (says the Lord) they were coy, they had other lovers, they would have
the world, they chose sin, rather than God, and to go a whoring after the
creature, rather than keep close to him. What then? So I gave them up to their
own hearts lusts. As if the Lord had said, Pray take your course, you that love
your own inventions, take your fill of them, you that love and would have the
vanities of the world, take your fill of them. The Lord does not threaten them
with famine and pestilence, no nor with hell, but he threatens them with sin,
and leaves them to the power of iniquity. Thus he gave up the old Gentile
Romans to vile affections, (Romans 1.26, 28.) Let them be victorious, let them be
rich, let them subdue all Nations under their iron hands, let Rome be the Head
and Mistress of the world, and command all people, let all stoop to their
power, but says God, I will give them up to vile affections, they shall be
basely Idolatrous, and basely wanton, and basely gluttonous, and basely
drunken, and basely ambitious, and basely envious: As they were above all
people of the world in outward glory and power, so God left them under the
power of their lusts, and gave them up to glut themselves with wickedness; He
gave them up to a reprobate mind, to do things that are not convenient. It Is
the most terrible of all afflictions, when God makes a sin an affliction, and
gives men up to hardness of heart, to pride, to a spirit of looseness and
wantonness; here is a mischief indeed, the mischief of sin.

Lastly, Observe; Our Avoydance of, or escape from the greatest affliction in
the world, will not bear us out in the choice of any iniquity.

We may understand and prosecute this point two ways.

First, As to guilt. It will no way excuse us before God, to say, I forbore to
do duty when commanded by God, I did evil because commanded by man, not out of
any dislike of my duty, or liking of iniquity, but only to avoid those
afflictions, which I saw inevitably falling upon me, in case I had either done
the one, or not done the other. This plea will not hold before God, for any
man's discharge from guilt upon either account. And though there may be some
sea^ons wherein a duty may be laid by or omitted, yet there is no season
wherein any iniquity may be chosen or committed.

Secondly, We cannot be excused, as to Discretion. We are fools, and act below,
not only gracious but rational men, if we choose iniquity to avoid any
affliction, whether that affliction or suffering, be, first, our own; or
secondly, the suffering of others. First, though nearly related, and very near
to us, wife, children, etc. Secondly, though many, never so many, a whole
Nation, a whole world, the Church. I believe that assertion of St Augustine
will be found sound and Orthodox Divinity; Better let the world perish, than
attempt to save it by telling an officious ly.

The evil of sin is so bad that if any good could come by it (which of it self
cannot) it were not worth the having: Some said in the Apostles times, and they
said it of the Apostles, ( Romans 3.8.) Let us do evil that good may come of it.
God by his infinite power, wisdom, and goodness, brought good out of evil,
even salvation to man out of the fall of the first man; but if any man, or sort
of men, shall project the obtainment of good by the doing of evil, the Apostle
in the same place has given them this doom, Their damnation is just; nothing
is more just or righteous, than their damnation, who hope to get good for
themselves or others by doing evil, which is it self injustice and
unrighteousness.

JOB, Chap. 36. Verse. 22, 23. 22. Behold, God exalts by his power: who
teaches like him?

23. Who has enjoined him his way? or who can say, thou have wrought iniquity?


IN these two verses Elihu prosecuteth the admonition which he had given Job in
the 21 verse, to take heed of uttering any thing rashly concerning Gods
dealings with him, or, of choosing iniquity rather than affliction: And he
presses the admonition by two great arguments.

First, From the power and wisdom of God, in the 22th verse; Behold, God
exalts by his power: who teaches like him?

Secondly, He urges it by an argument taken from the sovereignty of God, as
also from his most exact Justice, ( v. 23.) Who has enjoined him his way? or
who can say, thou have wrought iniquity? As if he had said, Take heed how thou
accusest the Justice of God in any of his dealings with thee: If God be of such
power, of such wisdom, of such sovereignty; of such integrity, then consider
well what thou speak, yea what thou think of God; beware thou speak
not a word, nor conceivest a thought amiss of him. Consider, I say, God
himself, his ways, and works, thoroughly, and thou will conclude with me, That
though many in the world have great power, and have left the marks of it in
many places, and upon many persons; yet none like God, either, first, in doing
his own work, or secondly, in directing or teaching us how to do ours.

So that Elihu by this report and commendation of the power and wisdom of God,
seems to comfort Job in the assurance or hope of better things, Ecce, deus
excelsus in fortitudine sua. Vulg: (...) excelsus est, intransitive sumi
potest; attollit robur suum, i. e. rob^re suo excelsus est.
if he would hearken to and accept his counsel; for as God had mightily
afflicted and broken him, so he was as mighty to heal those breaches, and
deliver him; he only waited to see him in a better frame, that he might be
gracious, ( Isa. 30.18.) That Is the general sum of the words.

Verse. 22. Behold, God exalts by his power. Some read, God is high in his own
power; that carries Elihu's reason strongly in it, God is exalted in his power
above all others; and therefore it is no way suitable or consentaneous unto
reason, that the greater power should be questioned, much less condemned of
injustice by the lesser power: There must be a parity, a coordination, or a
co-equality at least, if not a superiority, where judgment is given. That Is a
great truth, God is exalted in his own power.

David (Psalm. 21.13.) turns it into a prayer, or wish, Be thou exalted, O Lord,
in thine own strength. He makes a like prayer, ( Psalm. 108.5.) The Lord in
other places declares himself p^remptorily in it, ( Psalm. 46.10.) Be still,
and know that I am God; I will be exalted among the Heathen, I will be exalted
in the Earth. It shall be so whether men will or will not; whether men will or
no, God will be exalted, because he is exalted in his own power, not in any
derived power, or power given him from the creature, Men or Angels. The power
which God puts forth in his works exalt him, or show him to be a great, a
mighty God. Behold, God is exalted by his own power.

But we translate the Text (and so I conceive it more fitly suits the scope of
Elihu) as expressing an act of God toward others; Behold, God exalts by his
power. So Mr Broughton; Mark, the Omnipotent sets up by his strength.

Behold: (As has been showed) is a note both of attention and admiration.

God. The strong God, the potent, the omnipotent God, who is able to overcome
all difficulties, Exalts;

(...) Elevare, exaltare, corroborare, stabilem and inconcussum reddere.
The word which we render to exalt, signifies to set in an inaccessible height,
or to exalt very high; and not only so, but to establish in that exaltation,
yea so to confirm and corroborate him that is set up in such a height, that no
power is able to molest, trouble, or afflict him; and therefore a word coming
from this root signifies a fortified Castle or Tower; such places, if any, are
exalted and lifted up on high. Behold, God exalts; As if Elihu had said, God
is not only exalted in himself, he is not only lifted up beyond the reach of
all creature-annoyances, but he is able to lift up others; and he does actually
exalt his when he pleases, beyond the reach of all danger, beyond the hurtful
power of those who hate them, and therefore have a mind to hurt them. God is so
exalted above others, that he can exalt others also. He exalts by His Power;

He has the power in himself. The word which we render power, signifies,

First, That might and strength which is corporal, the might and strength of
the body.

Secondly, Inward might and strength, whether acquired or infused, the might of
the mind, wisdom and policy.

Thirdly, Civil might and power, honor and riches. Whatever makes a man
strong, comes under the notion of this word; and every way, in all the Notions
of power, God is exalted. He exalts by his power.

But seeing it is barely asserted (He exalts by his power) nothing being
expressed, it may be questioned, whom does he exalt? or what does he exalt? I
answer, Forasmuch as the Scripture leaves it at large, and undetermined, we
may apply this assertion to any, either thing or person. God exalts whom he
pleases, and what he pleases. We may take it distinctly these five ways.

First, He exalts Himself by his power; that is, he exalts his own Name and
Glory, which is nearest to him, yea, as himself.

Secondly, He exalts every work which he will undertake and engage upon: He
does not only lay the Foundation of his work, and rear up the VValls a little
way, but he exalts by his power till he has set up the Head-stone of his
work (as the Prophet Zechariah speaks, Chap. 4.7.) all that love and fear him
shouting and crying, Grace, Grace, to it. He exalts his works of Providence,
as once he did his work of Creation, to full perfection.

Thirdly, The Lord exalts those that fear him, for they are most properly his
Favorites; and whom should he exalt but those whom he favors? All the
worldly exaltations of evil men, are but depressions and abasements, compared
with those exaltations and advancements which God intends for all that fear
him; and some he exalts much in this World.

Fourthly, and more specially, He exalts by his power (such Job then was)
those that are cast down by the oppressing power of men, even the poor, and
those that have no help. Thou art he (says David, Psalm. 9.13.) that liftest me
up (or exaltest me) from the gates of death. When I am perishing, when I am
ready to be swallowed up with death, when I am at the greatest loss, even as to
life it self, then thou liftest me up, thou liftest me up from the very gates
of death. Again, ( Psalm. 18.48.) He delivers me from mine enemies, yea thou
liftest me up above those that rise up against me: When they are casting me
down, God is exalting and raising me up. And if God will raise up, who can keep
down?

Fifthly, We may take the words in this general sense; Whosoever is exalted in
this world, God exalts him. The Sparrow cannot fall to the ground, nor the
least thing or person be lifted from the ground, but by the hand of God. As he
exalts some in a way of special favor, so he exalts the worst of men in a
way of common providence: As none can be exalted if he say, no; God is able to
put a bar or a stop to any man's exaltation; so he can exalt whom he will, and
none are able to put a bar or a stop to their exaltation. Behold, God exalts
by his power.

Hence Note; God is able to exalt any person, how low soever brought, how much
soever despised.

Elihu spoke this purposely to Job, who was in a low condition, brought (as it
were) to the very gates of death; and he makes this large description of the
power of God in exalting those that are cast down, purposely to comfort Job, to
erect his spirit, and cheer his heart, with a blessed confidence, that how
much soever he was at present under-foot, or under-hatches, yet he might hope
for better things, even to be lifted up, if he humbled himself under the mighty
hand of God. ( Psalm. 9.9.) The Lord will be a refuge, (the word in the Text
answers this) or an high place, for the oppressed. Places of refuge are usually
high places, and therefore the same Hebrew word signifies both an high place
and a place of refuge, ( Psalm. 107.41.) He sets the poor on high from
affliction, and makes him families like a flock. The Prophet ( Isa. 33.16.)
Having spoken of the man that walks in his integrity, tells us how it shall be
with him, He shall dwell on high; The word is, He shall dwell in the high
places, that is, he shall dwell in God, who is most high, for evermore; God
will exalt him even to as much safety, as himself is in; his place of defense
shall be the munition of Rocks; bread shall be given him, Particeps erit
divinae faelicitatis, atque consors tecti a^ntons^c.
his water shall be sure; He shall be housed with God, yea housed in God, he
shall be fed by God, he shall lodge under his roof, and sit (as it were) at his
Table, he shall have bread enough, and water enough, and both sure enough.

And if the Lord exalts thus by his power, let none be discouraged in their
afflictions and castings down. The Lord alone is sufficient, yea all
sufficient; and he exalts not only by his will, that is, he has not only a
will to exalt, but he exalts by his power, that is, he has power enough to
exalt whom he will. What power soever is in the creature, it is the Lords power;
it is a stream from his Ocean, and when the Lord is pleased to remove all power
from the creature, he has a sufficient reserve of power in himself, or in his
own hand, by which he can command deliverance, yea exaltation. Therefore do not
speak either despondingly or* desparingly, as if all hope were gone, when at
any time all humane power is gone; for God exalts by his (own) power; and as
it follows in the Text, Who teaches like him?

As if Elihu had said, God is not good only at acting, but he is good at
instructing, and he is best at both. He is best or beyond all in power; He is
best or beyond all in wisdom and understanding, and therefore who teaches
like him?

At the 15th verse of this Chapter, we have the substance of what is here
asserted, and so upon the matter, it is but the same thing repeated; there it
is, He delivers the poor: here, He exalts by his power; There it is said, He
opens their ear to instruction; here, Who teaches like him? The words are a
divine challenge, Who teaches like him? B ing forth the man, bring forth the
Angel that can. The word which here we tender, to teach, in its first sense
signifies to cast a Dart, Javelin, or Stone. It signifies also to rain,
Verbum (...) commune ad pluviam, et ad d^ctrinam, vel legem, qua perfunditur et
excolitur animus ad fr^ctus bonorum operum. (...)
and so the rain which falls from heaven, because that is as it were, cast from
the clouds to the earth. Hence by a Metaphor it signifies to teach or
instruct, because holy doctrine or instruction comes down like rain from
heaven upon the minds and hearts of those that are taught. My doctrine shall
distill as the dew, and my speech shall drop as the rain, said Moses (Deuteronomy.
32.1.) And hence the whole Law of God is expressed by a word in the Hebrew
coming from this root, that being powered down from heaven in showers of
doctrine to make men fruitful in every good word and work. In answer to which,
some translate this latter part of the verse, Nullus ei similu in
Legislatoribus. Vulg:
There is no Lawgiver like unto him. Who is a Lawgiver like him? or there is
no Lawgiver like him. To give Law, or to be a Lawgiver, is more than barely
to be a teacher, though he that teaches, does also (in a sense) give Laws.

Here, I conceive, we take the fittest and most suitable signification of the
word, when we render it by teaching, Who teaches like him? As if he had said,
None can teach like God, and therefore surely none can teach him how to govern
the world, or to dispose of any man's person or condition, as thou, O Job, have
rashly or overboldly done; for while thou have complained so much and so often
of his dealings with thee, thou have (upon the matter) attempted to teach him.
But, Who teaches like him? Where shall we find any able to give instruction,
and apply doctrine like God? God is exalted infinitely in power, and yet he
condescends to be a teacher, or an instructor; God does not stand upon his
power only, he says not, I have power to do what I will, I can force all men
to my will, or break them if they will not, but he inst^ucts and persuades, he
labors to allure the soul into a right understanding of his will, and
submission to it. Who teaches like him?

Hence note; First, The great goodness of God: that he who has all power to
command, should yet vouchsafe to instruct; that he who is the Judge, will also
be the Teacher of his People.

This is the great P^omise in the Covenant of grace, They shall be all taught
of God (John 6.45.) Some things may be known by the light of nature, of which
knowledge God is the Author, in the same sense, as he is of all natural Powers
and faculties. But here Eli^^, intends a spiritual knowledge, both of God and
of our selves, or a teaching of divine things by divine chastenings, both with
respect to what we should do and desire, as also with respect to what we should
shun and avoid, which is the work of God alone by his grace and Spirit. Thus
David shows how God is teaching while he is chastening ( Psalm. 99.12.) Blessed
is the man whom thou chastenest, O Lord, and teach out of thy Law. God
teaches, First, by his Word, (that is his ordinary way of teaching) Secondly,
he teaches by his Works; and those both the works of Creation and of
Providence, and by those, whether works of Mercy or of Judgment: By all these
means God teaches. But that which Elihu chiefly aims at in this place
(speaking to afflicted Job) is his teaching by affliction, Who teaches like
him? As if he had said, God does not lay his hand upon thee by affliction, only
to make thee smart, but to make thee wise; he is instructing thee while he is
afflicting thee. Further, as God teaches by his Word and by his Works, so he
teaches most eminently by his Spirit, who alone makes the teaching both of
his Word and of his Works effectual upon the hearts of the hearers and
beholders. Many are taught, but none to purpose, without the Spirit. Who
teaches like him?

Note Secondly; God is no ordinary teacher; The teachings of God are above all
other teachings; There is no teacher to be compared with God.

Elihu does not say, Who teaches besides God? There are many other teachers,
but there is not one who teaches like him. Some may say, wherein does the
excellency of divine teaching lie? how has that the supereminence above all
other teachings? Take the answer briefly in seven words.

First, none teaches so plainly and clearly as God. The teachings of men are
but dark and obscure to the teachings of God. Christ said ( John 16.26.) I
shall no more speak unto you in parables, but I shall show you plainly of the
Father. God speaks by his Word and Spirit to the lowest and meanest
understanding.

Secondly, none teaches like God; that is, so mildly, so moderately, so
condescendingly to the condition and capacity of those with whom he has to do.
Christ said ( John 16.12.) I have many things to say unto you, but ye cannot
bear them now; and therefore I will not say them now, I will not bu^den you
beyond your strength. I know what lessons, what instructions you are fit for,
and I will give you only these and no mo^e, till ye are better prepared to
receive them; I will give you only milk because ye are children, and so not
able to digest-st ong meat.

Thirdly, none teacketh like God, so patien^ly and meekly. There is nothing
does more provoke the passion of a teacher, than the untowardness and dullness
of those that are taught. It was a very good Rule given by one of the Ancients,
he that will teach children, must in a manner be a child; He must consider what
they are, and form himself to their condition, else she will never have the
patience to teach them. O with what patience does the infinite and only wise
God teach his children! ( Isa. 28.9, 10.) He gives line upon line, and precept
upon precept, here a little and there a little. Here is the patience of God; He
does not say, if ye cannot take it now, I will teach you no more; No, says
God, I will give precept upon precept, and line upon line; though former
precepts have not been received, yet I will give you more, here a little and
there a little, ye shall have another little to the former little. God was
forty years tutoring and teaching the Israelites in the wilderness, to fit
them for the possession of Canaan. These three years, says Christ, have I
come looking for fruit, and all that while he was teaching them, to make them
fruitful; nor was he hasty then, but upon the in^ercession of the
vineyard-dresser, waited one year more. O the patience of God in teaching!

Fourthly, none teaches like him, that is, so constantly and continually; He
teaches, and he is always teaching; there is no hour, no moment, but one way
or other God is reaching; By every thing we hear, or have to do with, in the
ways of his providence, he is teaching us. B sides, how constant is God in
teaching us formally, as it is said, in the Prophet ( Jer. 35.14, 15.) I have
sent unto you all my servants the prophets, rising up early, and sending them:
As if the Lord did bestir himself in the mo^ning, to send our teachers betimes.
He sows his seed in the morning, and in the evening he does not with hold his
hand, as he requires us to do in all sorts of duty, whether of charity and
righteousness, toward our n^ighbour, or, of piety and holy worship toward
himself ( Eccl. 11.6.)

Fifthly, none teaches like him, that is, so truly, so unerringly. While men
teach they sometimes mis-teach, while they lead, they often mis-lead; they
teach error for truth, and unsafe doctrine for sound; they build wood, hay and
stubble, in stead of gold, silver, precious stone, upon that sure foundation
Jesus Christ (1 Cor. 3.12.) The best, the wisest, and most knowing men may
err; only God knows the full compass of all mysteries, yea he is Truth;
therefore his teachings are most true.

Sixthly, none teaches like him; that is, so authoritatively. Men teach in the
name and authority of God; but God teaches in his own name and authority. The
Lord gives Authentity to his own word. If the Lord has said it, that is
warrant enough to receive it and believe it. When Christ preached, the people
wondered at his doctrine ( Mat. 7.29.) For he taught them as one having
authority, and not as the Scribes; that is, there went forth a mighty command
with the word of Jesus Christ; He did not, as I may say, beg attention and
submission to his doctrine, but exact it upon them, and draw it from them.
Where God teaches, he commands, his word works mightily; when he speaks,
all must hear at their peril. Wh^^e Princes give the rule and publish their
Laws, subjects must hear and obe^, or suffer for not obeying: How much more
where God gives the Rule, and publishes his Law!

Seventhly, who teaches like him? that is, so effectually, so efficatiously.
As God has authority to charge his teachings upon us at our peril to receive
them, so he has a power to work our hearts to the receiving of them. Who
teaches thus like God? The M^^isters of Christ teach in the authority of God,
and charge all to receive what they say in his Name, but they cannot give an
effect to the charge ( Isa. 48.17.) He teaches to profit. One translation
says, He teaches things profitable. But that is a lean rendering, for so does
every Minister that teaches as he ought; but our rendering carries the
efficacy of the word of God in it, He teaches to profit; that is, he can make
the dullest Scholar learn, he can make the most stubborn heart to submit.
Christ speaking of this great work of God in teaching, says ( John 6.45.) No
man comes unto me, except the Father draw him. What is that drawing? It is
this teaching, as ye may see ( verse. 45.) Every one therefore that has heard
and learned of the Father, comes unto me. That is, every one whom the Father
has vouchsafed to teach and instruct, that man comes to me, that is, he
believes and obeys the Gospel, and submits both in judgment and practice.
Every one that has heard and learned of the Father comes to me: There is not
one whom God has undertaken to teach, that does miscarry. ( Isa. 32.4.) The
heart of the rash shall understand knowledge; or, the heart of the hasty. Now
hasty and rash persons, are heady and inconsiderate persons, and therefore none
of the wisest; they usually have little judgment or discretion, who are much in
passion; but God can make the heart of the rash to understand knowledge; that
is, he can make them understand and know things aright, who seem most incapable
of, and are naturally at the greatest distance from a rightness of knowledge
and understanding.

To close the Point, take these inferences from the who I.

First, If God be such a teacher, then stay not in the bare teachings of men.
What are the teachings of men to the teachings of God? Though you should have
an Angel from heaven to speak to you, yet stay not in his teachings, wait for
the teachings of God. Till ye are taught of God ye never learn to purpose. Set
your selves, not only as in Gods presence, but as under his Spirit, to be
taught; wait for the moving of the Spirit in every ordinance, as they did for
the Angels moving of the waters, who lay at the poole of Bethesda for healing (
Joh. 5.4.)

Secondly, Seeing God teaches thus paramount, seeing none teach like him, then
submit to his teaching. Do not question any of his rules of life or doctrines
of faith, they are all righteous and full of divine truth; you cannot do amiss
if you do, nor believe amiss if you believe, no, nor miss of blessedness in
doing and believing, what he has taught.

Thirdly, Then appear as they who are taught of God.

You will say, How, or when does it appear, that we are or have been taught of
God? I shall answer that query in four things.

First, If you are or have been taught of God, his teaching unteacheh or
emptyeth you, and that in a threefold respect. First, of your own carnal
principles. The great business of divine teaching, is to unteach, to take men
off from their own Will and Reason, from their own Rules, as also from those
Customs which they have received by tradition from their fathers. If you would
appear as taught of God, you must lay down all these. The teachings of grace
empty the soul of what it has taken up by Nature. Secondly, the teachings of
God empty the soul of all self-righteousness. If ye be taught of God ye will be
nothing in your selves. Paul, before the teachings of God came, had confidence
in the flesh, and boasted in his own righteousness; but when he was taught of
God, he threw off all those. Thirdly, If ye are taught of God, that will
certainly unteach and empty you of all unrighteousness. The Apostle speaks
fully to that ( Ephesians. 4.20, 21.) Ye have not so learned Christ, if so be that
ye have been taught as the truth is in Jesus. If ye have been divinely taught,
then this teaching has emptyed you of the old man; as of all
self-righteousness so of all unrighteousness toward others. It is impossible
any should take in the teachings of God, and yet hold any sinful practisings.

Secondly, divine teachings, as they empty and unteach the soul, so they keep
it very humble. Knowledge endangers us naturally to high thoughts of our selves,
and has a tendency in it to p^ide (1 Cor. 8.1.) Knowledge puffs up, but
charity edifieth. Take knowledge barely as received of men, even the knowledge
of divine things (for ye may have a humane knowledge of divine things) this
usually makes the heart swell; but the knowledge we have from the teachings of
God, makes us humble, it will cause us to cry out (as the Prophet did, when the
Lord appeared and let out a more than ordinary manifestation of his glory, (
Isa. 6.5.) we are undone. It was so with Job, when the Lord had schooled him,
and made himself more fully known to him th^n ever before, he presen^ly cried
out ( Chap. 41.5) I have hea^d of thee by the hearing of the ear, but now mine
eye sees thee; wherefore I abhor my self in dust and ashes. Nothing keeps the
soul so humble as the teachings of God. Where we see any proud of what they
have learned, it is an argument that either they were never taught of God, or,
that as yet they have not understood his teachings.

Thirdly, The teachings of God do not only empty and humble the soul, but they
transform the soul, and change it into another thing than it was, as to its
state and qualities: The teachings of God change not only our manners but our
very natures; they not only give a light to the Understanding, but a newness to
the Will, new Affections, new Desires. This is it which the Apostle calls the
new creature (2 Cor. 5.17.) and that this creature is wrought to its highest
perfection by the teachings of God, he shows (2 Cor. 3.18.) We all with open
face, beholding as in a glass, the glory of the Lord, are changed into the same
image from glory to glory, as by the Spirit of the Lord. The glass wherein we
have this sight of the glory of God, is chiefly the Word. The glory into which
we are changed by those sights, is our conformity to that holiness which
shines in the Word. And this change is twofold; First, from sin to grace,
which is a degree of glory. Secondly, from glory to glory, that is, from a high
to a higher, and at last to the highest degree of grace. Look what the Word is,
and calls us to be, that are we when taught according to the truth of the
word, by the power and Spirit of God.

Fourthly, The teachings of God confirm the soul in that which is taught, or we
have learned. If God teach any divine lesson, that will stick. We receive many
lessons from men, and let them slip, as the Apostles word is ( Heb. 2.1.)
Doctrine taught us of God settles upon us, we hold the substance of it, and
hold forth the fruit or power of it in every season of our lives: yea, if
trouble or persecution arise for the truth, they who are taught of God will
hold it fast, though they let go all they have in this world for it. If God
teach us the doctrine of Free Grace, how we are justified by the righteousness
of Jesus Christ, without our own works; If God teach us the doctrine of pure
Worship, how he is to be served, and honored according to his own will,
without the Traditions of men, (as Christ spoke ( Mat. 15.9.) If (I say) God
teach us these, or any other saving truths, we cannot but hold them: whereas
they who have received them from men will part with them on the account of man.
Only that which God has taught us abides with us, and that no man can take
from us. Men may take the life of such a one from him, which God has given
him, but they cannot take the truth from him which God has taught him. What
God teaches, is written, as it were, with a pen of iron and the point of a
diamond, it is graven upon the tables of the heart for ever. Thus we may in
some measure discern who are taught of God; and seeing they who are taught of
him, are so taught, we may very well insist upon Elihu's challenge; Who teaches
like him? And as there is no teacher like God, so neither is there any ruler
like God; this also is taught us by Elihu, as a matter out of question, while
in the next verse he proceeds to make more questions, or two questions more.

Verse. 23. Who has enjoined him his way? (...) Pro jubere.
or who can say, thou have wrought iniquity? This verse holds out two things.
First, the sovereignty; Secondly, the integrity of God. God is supreme in
power, and he is righteous in the use of his power, and therefore, O Job, thou
have much forgotten both thy self and him, in making so many complaints about
thy condition, which is indeed to enjoin God his way, or prescribe to him how
he shall govern the world. And seeing no man has enjoined God his way, who can
question him about it, what way soever he is pleased to take, either with whole
Nations, or with any of the sons of men.

Who has enjoined him his way, or, visited him? No man has, no man can,
enjoin him his way. God has no visitors over him. Mr. Broughton renders, Who
gave him charge over his ways. Like that, Chap. 34.13.

The way of God is any course which himself takes, either in governing the
world in general, or any person in particular; who shall instruct him about
either what or how he shall do, whom he shall spare, whom he shall punish,
whose heart he shall soften, whose he shall harden, whom he shall save, whom he
shall destroy, how he shall teach, which way he shall lead; in a word, how he
shall administer justice and order any of his matters? all must be bound to and
by his Laws, he cannot be bound to or by the laws and prescripts of any,
either in works of Judgment or of Mercy, either in doing good to and for man,
or in dealing out of evil. Further,

Who has enjoined him his way? By the way of God we may understand both the
actions of God themselves, as also the reasons moving him to those actions. As
if Elihu had said, Who has taught God what to do? Who has, or who can direct
him what to do? Who may be so bold with God, who is the sovereign Lord over all
the earth, thus to enjoin him his way?

Hence note; God is the first mover of all that himself does;

No man has showed him or enjoined him his way. He is the fountain of light,
he sees what to do; who has been his counselor? (1 Cor. 2.16.) that is, no
man has, or may instruct him ( Isa. 40.13. Romans 11.34.) Again, he is the
fountain of power; none has authority to direct him, he is above all; as he
needs not the counsel of any, so he receives the rule from none. I have had
occasion more than once in the process of this Book, to say somewhat of the
sovereignty of God over all creatures, and therefore only remind it here, Who
has enjoined him his way?

Or who can say, thou have wrought iniquity? The world is full of iniquity, but
in God there is none at all. As God is not obliged to give any men an account
of his works, so no man can find any, the least, real fault or defect in any of
them; and if his works do not appear so to us now, yet at last they will appear
to all without any shadow of iniquity. Samuel called together the Israelites,
and demanded (1 Samuel 12.3.) Whose ox have I taken? etc. Whom have I defrauded?
etc. Come charge me, witness against me; who can say, I have wrought iniquity?
It was much, and a rare thing for Samuel to carry it so justly, that none could
challenge him; but when all the world shall be summoned before God, he will be
able to put the question, Who of all the sons of men, can say, I have wrought
iniquity? None can say it, but with utmost impudency and highest blasphemy. It
is impossible for God to work iniquity; not only is his Command, but his Will
totally against it. Whatever God works is according to his own Will, and his
Will is the Rule of Righteousness; therefore he can do no iniquity. There is no
iniqui y in acting or working according to the Law. If men act according to
their will, they usually act iniquity, because their will is no^ a Law, and
it is seldom conformed to the Law. The will of no man is so right, or so fixed
in the right, as to be received for a Law. But seeing whatever God does, he
does it according to his o^n Will, and his Will is the righteous Rule of all
things, therefore all must be right which he does: Who-ever took him tripping
in his dealings? Who can say, he bath wrought iniquity?

But why does Elihu speak thus to Job? Had he ever said that God works iniquity?

I answer, He had not. Yet because he thought God might have done better by
good men, or have given out that which was more suitable to their estate, than
such continual sorrows and afflictions as he endured, therefore this saying is
deservedly imputed to him. For, it would have become Job, and does every man,
to say, that is best done which God does, and that he has chosen or pitched
upon the best, and most proper means of doing his own choicest servants good,
even when it is worst with them in the world, or, when he afflicts them with the
greatest evils; For, Who can (then) say, he has wrought iniquity?

Hence observe; First, The infinite purity of God, as also his love to
righteousness and justice;

Who, though he be so absolute in power, that none can call him in question (
none can enjoin him his way, and therefore none can question him for his way)
yet he is so perfect in righteousness, that no fault can be found in him, nor
any error in his way. Though the Lord has power to do what he will, yet he
has no will to do wrong with his power. The Lord neither does nor can do wrong
to those who have, to their power, continually wronged him. And indeed, he that
has all power in his hand, can have nothing but right in his heart. How few
are there in power (though their way be enjoined to them, though they have
power merely by commission, from superior powers, though their power be such as
they are to give an account of, yet, I say, how few are there in power) who do
not much iniquity, who do not, either for want of better information, or, of a
better conscience, oppress, grieve and afflict those that have to do with them,
or are subject to them! God may do what he will, yet will do nothing but what
is right. How infinitely then is God to be exalted in his truth and
righteousness! And thus the word of truth exalts him ( Deuteronomy. 32.4. 2 Chr. 19.7.
Rom 9.14.) There is no unevenness, much less aberration in any of the ways of
God, he never trod awry, nor took a false step; Who can say unto him (without
great iniquity) thou have wrought iniquity.

Hence we may infer;

If God works no iniquity in any of his ways, whether in his general or
special providence, Then,

All ought to sit down quietly under the works of God. Though he bring never
so great judgments upon nations, he does them no wrong; though he break his
people in the place of dragons, and cover them with the shadow of death, he
does them no wrong; Though he sell his own people for naught, yet he does them
no wrong. All which, and several other grievances, the Church sadly bemoans (
Psalm. 44.) yet without raising the least dust, concerning the justice of God,
or giving the least intimation of iniquity in those several sad and severe
ways.

Secondly, We should not only sit down quietly under all the dispensations of
God, as having no iniquity in them, but exalt the righteousness of God in all
his dispensations, as mingled also, and sprinkled with mercy. Though we cannot
see the righteousness of God in some of them, yet we must believe he is not
only so, but merciful in all of them; though the day be dark, and we cannot
discern how this or that su es with the righteousness, much less with the
goodness and mercy of ^od, yet sit down we ought in this faith, that both this
and that is righteous, yea, that God is good to Israel, in the one and in the
other. When the prophet was about to touch upon that string, he first laid down
this principle as unquestionable ( Jer. 12.1.) Righteous art thou, O Lord, yet
give me leave to plead with thee about thy Judgments: Why does the way of the
wicked prosper? Why is it thus in the world? I take the boldness to put these
questions, O Lord, yet I make no question but thou art righteous, O Lord. It
becomes all the sons of men to rest patiently under the darkest providence of
God. And let us all, not only not charg God foolishly, but exalt him highly,
and cry up both his righteousness and kindness toward all his people; For who
can say to God, thou have wrought iniquity? Having in several other passages of
this book, met with this matter also, I here briefly pass it over.

JOB, Chap. 36. Verse. 24, 25. 24. Remember that thou magnify his work, which
men behold.

25. Every man may see it, man may behold it afar off.


THese two verses contain the third advice, counsel or exhortation given by
Elihu to Job, stirring him up to give glory to God in his providential
proceedings with him.

There are three things considerable in these two verses.

First, The general duty commanded, which is, to magnify the work of God.

Secondly, We have here a special reason or ground of that duty; the visibility
and plainness, yea, more than so, the illustriousness of his work. The work of
God is not only such as some men may see, but such as every (...) ^ay see, yea,
behold afar off.

Thirdly, We have here an incentive to provoke to this duty, in the first words
of the Text, Remember.

Verse. 24. Remember that thou magnify his work, which men behold. To Remember,
imports chiefly these two things.

First, to call to mind what is past ( Mat. 26.75.) Then Peter remembered the
words of Christ.

Secondly, To remember, is to keep somewhat in mind against the time to come;
in which sense the Law runs ( Exodus 20.8.) Remember the rest-day; that is, keep
it in mind, that whenever it comes, or upon every return of that day, (...)
may be in a fit posture and preparation for it; Remember the rest, or sabbath
day to keep it holy.

To remember in this place, is set (I conceive) in a double opposition: First,
To forgetfulness of the duty here called for; remember and do not forget it.
Secondly, To the slight performance of the duty here called for; the magnifying
of the work of God.

Remember that thou magnify. As if he had said, Be thou daily and duly
affected with it, do not put it off with a little, or a bare remembrance; the
matter is weighty, consider it fully. As if Elihu had said to Job, Thou have
much forgotten thy self, and gone off from that which is thy proper work. I
have heard thee much complaining of the works of God, but thy work should have
been to magnify the work of God. Though God has cast thee down and laid thee
low, yet thy business should have been to exalt the work of God; Remember, it
would much better become thee to act another part than this; thou should
have acted the part of a magnifier of the work of God, not the part of a
complainer against it. Remember that thou (...) i. e. (...) Augeas, extollas
ejus opus, non accuses ut nunc facis. Merc.
Magnify;

The root signifies, to increase and extol. We may consider a twofold
magnifying of the work of God. There is an inward magnifying of the work of
God; and there is an outward magnifying of the work of Go^.

First, There is (...) ^^d magnifying of the work of God, when we think highly
(...) it; thus did the Virgin in her song ( Luke 1.46.) My soul does magnify
the Lord. Her heart was raised up, and stretched out in high thoughts of God.

Secondly, There is an outward magnifying of the work of God. To speak highly
of his work is to magnify his work; to live holily and fruitfully is to
magnify his work. We cannot make any addition to the work of God, there is no
such magnifying of it; but we must strive to give the works of God their full
dimension, and not lessen them at all. As we must not diminish the number of
his works, so we must not diminish the just weight and worth of them. There is
such a charge of God to the Prophet about his word ( Jer. 26.2.) Go tell the
people all the words that I command thee to speak unto them; diminish not a
word. Deliver thy message in words at length, or in the full length of those
words in which it was delivered unto thee. We then magnify the wo^k of God,
when we diminish not a tittle. As we cannot add any thing to it, so we must
neither abate nor conceal any thing of it. To magnify, is not to make the
works of God great, but to declare and set forth the greatness of them; that is
the magnifying here especially intended. Remember that thou magnify his works.

I shall not stay upon that other reading, Remember that thou art ignorant of
his work. The same word which we translate, Memento quod ignores opus ejus.
Vulg. Hieronimus confundit (...) cum (...) quanquam (...) potius errare quam
ignorare: significat. Drus.
to magnify, with the variation of a point, signifies to err; hence that
translation. There is a profitable sense in it; for indeed the best knowledge
which we have of the work of God may be called ignorance, and we said to be
ignorant of that work which we are most knowing in. Yet because this is
straining of the Text, I pass it by, and keep to our own rendering, Remember
that thou magnify His work.

What work? Here is no work specified, therefore I answer;

First, All the works of God are here included; Magnify his work. Whatever is
a work of God, whatever has the stamp and inscription of God upon it, see
that thou magnify it.

Secondly, and more specially, We may unde^stand this work of God to be the
work of Creation, Hujus mundi opificium intelligo. Bold.
the goodly structure and fabric of this visible world; and indeed that is a
work so great and magnificent, that it ought to be continually remembered and
magnified.

Thirdly, Others restrain it more narrowly, to that part of the work of God
which is eminent in the heavenly meteors, and wonderful changes in the air,
together with the motions and influences of the stars, of which we shall find
Elihu discoursing at large, like a divine Philosopher, in the next Chapter.
There are strange works of God in these lower heavens, where those meteors are
born and brought forth; Remember to magnify those works.

Fourthly, I rather conceive (though such works of God are afterward spoken of)
that Elihu intends the work of Providence in both the appearances of it, as it
is a white or black work, as it is for good or for evil, as it is in judgment
or in mercy. A modern Interpreter pitcheth upon the former, and upon one
particular of the former; as if Elihu had directly led Jobs thoughts back to
the Deluge, that work of God in bringing the Flood upon the old wo^ld; and if
we can but go back and honor God for his past works of Providence, we shall
magnify him for his present. As if Elihu had said; Thou complainest that thou
art overflowed with a deluge of afflictions; but do thou remember how God
destroyed the whole world at once in the universal flood? But though I think,
that may be taken in among other works, yet to restrain it to that is a great
deal too narrow for this Text. Therefore under this work of God, we may
comprehend any great work of God, which is upon record, or which we have heard
of, wherein he has showed his power, wisdom, and justice.

Remember his work; The work of providence. Those works of providence which are
afflictive, have a great place in this Text, because the person spoken to was
one in an afflicted condition. And I conceive Elihu directs Job not so much to
magnify God for the day of prosperity and Sunshine which he once had, as for
the day of adversity and darkness, which then covered him. Remember that thou
magnify his work, Which men behold,

Which the sons of Enosh behold, says Mr Broughton. But the word Sons is not
in the Text, there it is only men, or weak men. The word which we translate to
behold, (...)
has a double signification, and that has caused a double translation: It
signifies, first, to sing; secondly, De quo cecinerunt viri. Quod laudaruni
justi viri. Chald:
to see or behold. It is translated by several in the former sense, Remember
that thou magnify his work, whereof men have sang; The Chaldee Paraphrase
says, For which just men have given praise in Psalms and songs. Beholding
fully a good thing, and praising it, or praising God for it, go together, as Mr
Broughtons gloss expresses it out of Ramban. Gracious and holy men do not
only speak, but sing the wonderful works of God; And, that praises were in song
or verse, both the Scriptures and many ancient Authors testify. God works, and
men sing the praises of God for his works, as Moses, David, and Deborah did.
And we find all the Saints ( Rev. 15.3.) singing praises to the Lord for the
great work which he will do in bringing forth Judgment to perfection upon
Babylon. Thus it is a truth, the work of God is to be sung and set forth in
meeter, or in verse.

We take the other translation, Which men behold; which, with respect to that
which follows ( v: 25.) where both expressions refer to the eye, is, I
conceive, most proper. Magnify the work of God, which men behold; As if Elihu
had said, O Job, I advise thee to leave off searching into the secrets of God,
and set thy self to consider and magnify those works of God which are plain
and lie open to every man's eye.

The word rendered Behold, may note, both a transient, and an intense or fixed
beholding, to look wishly as we say, to look fastening the eye solicitously,
yea, it imports, not only to behold with the eye of the body, but with the eye
of the mind.

Some Interpreters put an Emphasis upon the word men, Quae viderunt non hominos
sed viri praestantes, ut sit nomen (...). Sic alibi, in loco ubi non sunt viri,
virum te praesta. Drus:
as noting excellent men, virtuous men, men of virtue in their qualities, and
of excellency in their abilities; such are men indeed, worthy men, worthy the
name of man; as it has been said of old, Where there are no men, do thou play
the man, act and speak like a man. Some men have nothing but the outside of a
man. This is a good notion. For good men, holy men, men of divine excellency,
are most quick-sighted, and quick-sented; First, espying the appearances of God
in any of his providence, and then making a due improvement of them. Therefore
(says Elihu) magnify his work, which men, that is, holy and good men, behold
and take notice of. David speaking of the works of God in that notable place, (
Psalm 92.6.) says, A brutish man knows not, neither does a fool understand
this; that is, such a one as he, (...) Non tam ex^ellentes, quam mi^^^ et
plei^^^s, v^^ omnes ^^mmo homines significat.
cannot behold the work of God. And therefore it is more than a cri icisme to
restrain the word men, to men of this sort; yet it must be granted that the
word signifies not only excellent men, but any sort of men, whether wise or
foolish, rich or poor, and the weak sort of men more specially than the
stronger and more noble in any kind.

And to take the word in that universality, as compassing and comprehending all
sorts of men, even those who ar^ dim sighted, blear-eyed, that is, of weakest
understanding, may be a good improvement of the Text, implying, that as some of
the works of God are o mysterious, that the wisest cannot see the meaning of
them, so many, very many, of his works are so manifest, that common men may
compass them. Magnify his works, which men behold.

The works of God are of two sorts, visible and invisible.

First, Such as we see or know by s ght: Thus the works of Creation, and the
works of Providence, his present providence, are such as we behold, they are
visible works.

Secondly, There are invisible works of God, which we cannot behold, but must
believe, and can know only by faith; such are his spiritual works, or what he
works upon or in the spirits of the children of men: These are written in too
small a letter for the eye of Nature to behold; none can see them or behold
them but by an eye of faith, or spiritual understanding. The works of
regeneration and sanctification (for which God is wonderfully to be magnified)
may be seen or beheld in the fruits and effects of them, in those they are very
visible, but they cannot be seen in themselves. The past and future providence
of God cannot now be seen by the eye, but by faith they may, and we ought to
believe that such things were wrought, and shall be wrought; we are to receive
the testimony given by faithful History, that such things were done, though we
never saw the doing of them, and we are to receive the sure word of Prophecy
that such things shall be done, though we live not to see the doing of them.
The work of God intended here by Elihu is a visible work, therefore it must
fall among his providence.

Verse. 25. Every man may see it. (...) Omnes homines in quibus est vel mi^a
bonae mentis. Merc:
That is, say some, every wise and understanding man; but rather, any man, (as
was touched at the former verse) if he be but a man of common understanding, if
he have any spark of Reason left in him unquencht, if he have his eyes in his
head, he may see it; the eye of every one who will not shut his eyes against
the light, must needs see it. We say, Who so blind as they that will not see.

Man may behold it afar off. The word here rendered Behold, is not the same
which we translate Behold in the former verse, nor is it the same word which
signifies to see in the former part of this verse. (...)
Some make a difference between seeing in the former part of the verse, (...)
and Beholding in the latter. Holy and good men see the works of God clearly
and distinctly, (...)
they look on them with d^light and contentment; the common sort of men only
b^hold them, first, darkly, as at a distance; secondly, confusedly and in
gross. Man may behold it Afar off.

There is a fourfold conception about that afar off. (...) A Long. Mont:
Eminus, i. e. a formatione mundi huc usque R^b: Solom^th. Non plane perspicit
rationem ejus. Pisc:


First, Some expound it for afar off in time. The work of God does not wear
out; that first and great visible work of Creation which was from the
b^ginning, yet remains. Ages pass away, but the work of God does not pass
away, though done some hundreds, yea thousands o^ years ago.

Secondly, Afar off, that is, imperfectly, not fully; he may have some
discoveries of it, every man the weakest man may discern somewhat of it. Things
that are high and afar off, are confusedly seen, not clearly or fully
discerned. A man that is afar off cannot be distinguishingly known. When a man
is afar off, we may see him to be a man, but what manner of man he is, or who
he is, we cannot discern; though possibly it may be our own father, yet being
afar off we cannot know him distinctly. Thus to see afar off notes only a
confused knowledge. That Is a good sense; things afar off are not distinctly
seen.

Thirdly, Afar off, may be expounded of all the sight we have on this side
Heaven. In this world we see all that we see afar off, we have not a near
intimate knowledge of things, especially not of the best things, spiritual
things, of all them we must say, We know but in part, and see through a glass
darkly, as the Apostle speaks, (1 Cor. 13.12.) Such things as are not immediate
to us, E longinquo, i. e. ex posteriori us et effecti^. Merc:
we are said to see through a glass, or as represented in their effects, and
issues, or in their back parts, as God himself is seen. ( Exodus 33.18, 23.)
Thou shall see my back parts: but my face shall not be seen, said God to Moses
when he moved to see his glory.

Fourthly, This beholding afar off, may note the greatness of the work of God,
the exceeding lightsomness and glo iousness of it. Those things that are great,
may be seen a great way off. A high Tower is seen afar off. We ha^dly believe
the doctrine and reports of Astronomers, how far off the Sun is, which every
eye beholds. Though the Sun be so many thousand miles distant, yet any man may
see it, it is so great, so beau iful, so bright a body. Many of the works of God
have such a beauty, radiancy and luster in them, that any that are not stark
blind may see them afar off. Remember that thou magnify his work, which men
behold. Every man may see it, man may behold it afar off. From the centext of
these two verses, note, First, We are very apt to forget our duty in giving God
the glory of his works.

The memento or remember at the beginning of the verse is no more than needs.
We have bad memories for any thing that is good, especially for the good word
and the good works of God. We are so far from magnifying his work, that we
often forget his work. It Is said of Israel (Psalm. 106.13.) They soon forgot his
works. If we soon forget the works of God, we shall sooner forget to magnify
God for his work. Many remember the work of God, who do not magnify it, nor
him for it; but none can magnify the work of God, nor God for his work, who do
not remember it.

Secondly, In that the Text says, Remember that thou magnify, not only that
thou speak of, or declare his work., but magnify it,

Note; We usually have low apprehensions of the work of God.

While we remember it, we do not magnify it; while we speak of his work, we
seldom praise his work. It is said of the virtuous Woman, ( Prove. 31.31.) Her
own works praise her in the Gates; that is, they like so many Elegant Orators
tell all that pass by, how praiseworthy she is. The works of God will praise
him, whether men do or no. All thy works shall praise thee, (says David, Psalm.
145.10.) What then should they do for whom they are wrought? The latter part of
the verse show, what they will do who know what God has wrought for them; Thy
Saints (says he) shall bless thee. They who have (as most have) low though^s,
can never give high p^aises of the works of God.

Thirdly, In that this counsel and exhortion is given to Job, in that this spur
is, as it were, put to his sides, Remember that thou magnify,

Note; The best men need monitours and remembrancers to quicken them about
their duty of magnifying the works of God.

The Lord, though he needs not, yet will have us to be his remembrancers, to
do our works for us, if we would have our works done; the Lord would have us by
prayer to mind him of our own, and of all his peoples condition ( Isa. 62.6.)
Ye that are the Lords remembrancers (so we put in the Margin, and in the Text)
ye that make mention of the Lord, etc. The Lord will have us to be his
remembrancers. And though he is ever mindful of his Covenant, yet he likes it
well to be put in mind of it. But O what need have we of a remembrancer, to put
us in mind of the work of God, and to magnify his work! We need a daily
remembrancer to put us in mind of what we should do, how much more of what God
has done! We need to be minded of that which it is a wonder how we can forget,
our latter end, or how frail we are; how much more do we need to be minded of
those duties which fit us for our latter end, and lead us to those enjoyments
which never end!

F^urthly, Observe; Such is the sinfulness of man's heart, and his sluggishness,
that he hardly remembers to magnify God for those works which he cannot but
see.

Elihu urges Job, and with him all men, to remember that they magnify even
that work of his which men behold, and which every man may see. How slack are
they in or to that great duty of magnifying God, who when they see, or may see,
if they will, his mighty works, yet mind not the magnifying of him!

Fifthly, Observe; Some works of providence are so plain, that every man, that
does not wilfully shut his eyes, may behold them.

He is altogether stupid and blockish, that sees not what all may see. Hence
the Psalmist, having said, O Lord, how great are thy works, concludes such
among brutes and fools, ( Psalm. 92.6.) The brutish man knows not, neither
does a fool understand this. It was the saying of Plato an Heathen; That man is
worthy his eyes should be pulled out of his head, who does not lift them up on
high, that he may admire the wisdom of the Creator in the wonderful ^abrick
of the world; I may add, and in the works of providence: Are they not such,
that as the Prophet speaks, He that runs may read them?

Sixthly, Consider why does Elihu thus charge it upon Job? surely to humble him
for his sin, in that he did not magnify God for his works.

Hence Note; It is a great aggravation of our neglect of praising God for his
works, or of our not magnifying the works of God, seeing his works are obvious
to every man, even to the weaker and ruder sort of men.

If the very blind may see them, how sinfully blind are they, who see them not!
The works of God should be sought out, ( Psalm. 111.2, 4.) If they lie in
corners, yet they are to be sought out, and they are sought out of them that
have pleasure therein. If God should hide his work under ground, if God should
put his Candle under a bushel (as Christ says men do not, Mat. 5.) yet it is
our duty to seek it out, and set it upon a Candlestick, that all may behold it,
and praise him for it. Now if the most hidden works of God must be sought out,
that they may be magnified, surely then, when the works of God stand forth and
offer themselves to our view and we cannot tell which way to draw our eyes from
them, how great a sin is it, not to behold them, not to give him the glory of
them.

Seventhly, Observe; To magnify the works of God is man's duty, yea it is a
most necessary and indispensible duty.

This is the point chiefly intended by Elihu in his present discourse with Job;
This contains the sum and substance of the whole Text. To magnify the work
of God is so necessary, so indispensible a duty, that A remember is put upon
it, lest at any time it should slip from us. The Lord knowing how great, how
weighty, how comfortable, how profitable a duty it is to keep the Rest day,
prefixeth this word, Remember the Sabbath day to keep it holy, (Exodus 20.8.) I
might give instance from several other Scriptures, importing those duties which
have a memento put upon them to be of great necessity, and that the Lord will
not bear with us if we lay them by, or neglect the constant performance of
them. To forget any duty is very sinful, how much more those which we are
specially warned to remember that we do them! David was not satisfied in doing
the duty of the text alone, but must associate others with him in it. ( Ps.
34.3.) O let us magnify the Lord together; that is a blessed consort, the
consort of the blessed for ever. The whole work and reward too, of Saints in
heaven is, and eternally will be, to magnify God; and they have the beginnings
of that work and reward, who are sincerely magnifying his work here on earth.
God has magnified his word (in all things) above his name (Psalm. 138.2.) and
the reason is, because his works answer or are the fulfilling of his word to
the praise of his glorious name. Now if God has magnified his word by his
works then we must magnify his works, or him in his works, For wherein does
God magnify his word but in his works? He has magnified his work by bringing
his word forth in his works: Surely then if God has magnified his word by
bringing it forth in his works, then it is our duty to magnify the works of
God, which are the product, effect and answer of his word.

But some may say, how is that done? I would give answer to this question in
five things.

First, Then we magnify the work of God, when we magnify God for his work: we
cannot magnify the mercy of God, but by magnifying the God of our mercys; We
cannot magnify his work while we neglect himself. we magnify God in his work,
first, when we ascribe the whole efficiency of what we see done in the world,
to him, and say, This is the singer of God, Or when we say, according to this
or that time, What has God wrought? (Numb. 23.23.) To magnify the work of God
is to give the whole of it to God. It Is the hand of God upon a work that sets
the price upon any wo^k, and makes it worthy to be magnified. As in some
Pictures, this ^ets a price upon them, to say they are such a man's work, the
work of such a famous Artist, the work of Apelles, or of Michael Angelo. So if
we would magnify any p^ovidential work, we must say, it is the wo^k of the
great God, it is he that ha^h done it; the eye of our mind must look directly
at God in ruling and governing of the wo^ld. While we pore much upon, or stay
our thoughts about second causes, we cannot exalt the work of God; though we
call it Gods w^rk, yet if our hearts hang about second causes, the work cannot
be exalted as his. It Is a depression of the work of God to put any thing of man
upon it. To honor the work of God is to give him the whole effect of the work.
As we then magnify God when we look to him alone, with a single eye, as the
end of all our works (There is nothing does magnify God in what we do, but our
looking to God as the end of all we do; Let our work be what it will, never so
glittering, never so gay and glorious in the eye of the world, yet if it be not
consigned over to God, it is a base and pitiful work; if any man dedicates his
work to himself he dishonours his work: Now (I say) as it magnifieth our work
when we make God the end of our work) so that which magnifieth Gods work, is,
when we look upon him, not only as having an hand in it, but as being both the
beginner and ender of it. If we take or give this to the creature, that is, sit
down in this or that Instrument, as the means by which we have attained our
end, or as the end of what we have attained, we spoil the work as to God, or
despoil God of his work. Remember, this, and this only, magnifieth our work,
when we with a single eye look to God as the author and as the end of it. Every
work we see done is magnified, and God in it, when we look to God as the Alpha
and Omega, as the Author and Ender of it. Nor is this true only in those works
of God which he does more immediately, but where men act most, and are very
instrumental. Let us therefore ascribe every work to God, and that first, in
afflicting us; such an eye Joseph had ( Genesis 45.8.) It was not you that sent me
hither, but God; that is, not so much you, as God (says Joseph to his
brethren) I do not say it was you (though you were unkind brethren) it was not
you that sent me hither, but God: I look at him more than at you in that great
affliction, which was brought upon me by your envy and unbrotherly unkindness
toward me. Such an eye David had when he was under a very grievous, black,
dark providence, when his son rose up against him, and when his subject Shimei
cursed him, even then he magnified that work of God, by ascribing it wholly
unto him (2 Samuel 16.10.) The Lord has said unto him, curse David. He magnified
God in that great affliction by looking at the hand of God alone in it, and
passing by Shimei's, both undutifulness and extreme malignity. He said as much,
while he tells us he said nothing, in a like or as bad a case ( Psalm. 39.9.) I
opened not my mouth, because thou di^st it. Hence that reproof in the Prophet (
Isa. 5.12.) They regard not the work of the Lord, nor consider the operation of
his hand. Secondly, Let us ascribe every wo^k to God in exalting us; such an
eye had the Church to God ( Psalm. 44.1, 2, 3.) Our fathers have told us, what
work thou did in their days; Thou did drive out the heathen by thy hand,
and plantedst them, they got not the land in possession by their own sword,
etc. but by thy right hand, and thine arm, etc. Here is no mention at all of
Joshua's achievements and famous victories in subduing the Canaanites, etc. All
is given to God, and he alone exalted for that exalting work. That Is the first
answer: Then we magnify the work of God, when we acknowledge him alone both in
afflicting and exalting us.

Secondly, Then we magnify the work of God, when we beat out, as it were, and
sift all the circumstances of his work (as we say) to the bran, that so we may
find out every perfection, every glory of it: when we do not only behold and
see the wo^k, but when (as direction is given, Ps. 48.) We walk about Zion,
tell her towers, and consider her palaces, that is, when we do not look upon
things only in the bulk, but make an exact scrutiny, or take a full view of
every part. We cannot magnify the work of God by a bare beholding of it, but
by prying into every circumstance of it, or by considering what excellencies
and rarities are in it. As we magnify our sinful works (in one sense we should
magnify our sins, that is, aggravate them, not magnify them to applaud them,
or glory in them, but to make our selves ashamed of them, as (I say) we
magnify our sinful works, or what we have done sinfully, when we consider all
the circumstances of our sins, as committed against light and love, against
mercy and goodness, against the patience and forbearance of God, against our
own professions and promises, against our experiences and privileges, all
which should oblige us to holiness, and engage us to a gracious circumspection
in all our ways, and walkings, lest at any time we should sin against God and
grieve his Spirit: So we magnify the works of God when we eye all the
circumstances of them, and consider them as done for us when we could do
nothing for our selves, as done for us when we must have perished and been
undone, unless God had appeared for us; as done for us when we deserved not the
least good to be done for us; as done for us when none would do any thing for
us, none caring for our souls; as done for us when none could do any thing for
us. These and such like circumstantial considerations, exceedingly magnify the
work of God. A bare behold, a transient look may discover no great matter, but
if we seriously weigh every particular, we shall then see cause enough to
magnify the: work of God. Eliah (1 Kings 18.43.) commanded his servant to go
look toward the sea, and when he went first, he saw nothing, but being
commanded to go seven times, he at the seventh saw a little cloud rising out of
the sea, as big as a man's hand; but at the last, heaven was black with clouds
and wind, and there was a great rain. If we would look again and again, if we
would look seven times upon the work of God, that which at first seemed
nothing, or afterward no bigger than a man's hand, or no bigger than a man's
hand could effect and bring about, will at last be magnified to such a
vastness, that all must confess, the hand of God has done it.

Thirdly, We then magnify the works of God, when we freely submit to God in
them, as just and righteous, when we accept and take them kindly at his hand,
not only when they are outward kindnesses, but crosses. All the great words and
rhetoric we can bestow upon the works of God will not magnify them, unless we
freely submit to them as just and righteous. They that would magnify the works
of God, must say, Judgment and righteousness are the habitation of his throne,
while they can see nothing but Clouds and darkness round about him (Psalm.
97.2.) I (says the Psalmist) am in the dark about all that God is doing at
this day, yet of this I am as confident as confidence it self, Judgment and
Righteousness are the habitation of his throne; I know God does nothing amiss,
no not in the least. Thus John in the Revelation (Chap. 15.3.) saw them that
had gotten the victory over the beast, and over, his image, and over his mark,
and over the number of his name, and they (says he) sing the Song of Moses.
etc. saying, great and marvelous are thy works, just and true are thy ways.
The works of God in Judgment upon Babylon, are full of justice, and we magnify
them by proclai^ing and crying them up as just; yea, the work of God in
judgment upon Zion, is exceedingly magnified, when Zion submits to it, and
embraces it as just and righteous. It was the great sin of the house of
Israel, when they said ( Ezekiel. 18 25.) The ways of God are not equal. As if
they had said, are these the Lords equal dealings, that we his People should be
given up to the hand of the enemy, and suffer such things as these? yea, the
house of Israel must say, all the works of God, not only his exalting works,
but his humbling works, are equal, just and righteous, for we have sinned. This
is to magnify the work of God.

Fourthly, To magnify the work of God, is to look upon his work whatever it
is, not only as having justice in it toward all men, but as good and being
full of goodness to his People. Possibly it may be very hard work, yet we must
bring our hearts to say it is good work, good to and for the Israel of God.
Thus the holy man of old magnified the work of God ( Psalm. 73.1.) Truly God is
good to Israel. This he spoke while he was bemoaning himself under very
afflicting providence. We magnify the afflicting works of God, when we submit
to them as just, much more when we embrace them as good. And it was very much
the design of Elihu to bring Job off from disputing about the evils with which
God had so long exercised him, to a ready yeeldance that they were good for
him, and that in all the Lord intended nothing but his good.

Fifthly, To magnify the work of God, is to answer the end of it. Every work
is magnified when it receives its end; if a work be done; yet if it have not
its effect, if it bring not that about to which it was designed, the worker
receives no honor from it, nor is the work honored. To work in vain, is a
debasing, a lessening of any work, not a magnifying of it. The Apostle was
afraid to bestow his labor in preaching the Gospel in vain. When people still
continue in their blindness and unbelief, etc. this lays the preaChing of the
Gospel low; but when souls are convinced and converted, and come flocking in,
then the Gospel is magnified, and the word of the Lord glorified, as the
Apostle prayed it might (2 These. 3.1.) Now as the word of God is magnified when
it attains its end, so the work of God is magnified when we give him, or come
up to those ends for which he wrought it: But if we let God lose the end of his
work, we do what we can to debase his work, as if he had done it in vain. We
say, he works like a fool that has not proposed an end to every wo^k he dot^;
and he appears not very wise, at least not very powerful, who a^taineth not the
end or ends for which he began his work. The most wise God has his end and aim
in all his works in this world; and this is the honor we do his work, when we
labor, first, to know, and secondly, to give him his end in every work.

But if any ask, What are the ends of God in his work?

I answer, They are very various.

First, The chief end of all that God does, is the advancement of his own Name
and Glory. As he made all things for himself in Creation, so he does all things
for himself in Providence. That which is the sin of man is the holiness of God,
to seek himself. It is most proper for God, who is the chief good, and whose
glory is the ultimate end of all things, to set up himself in all things (
Prove. 16.4.) The Lord has made all things for himself, says Solomon. And the
Apostle faith as much ( Romans 11.36.) Of him and through him, and to him, are
all things: to whom be glory for ever, Amen. All things are of him, therefore
all things should return unto him. If we would magnify any work of God, we
must be sure to give him this end, the glory of it. Let it not satisfy us,
that we are advanced, or get up by the works of God, unless we our selves
advance his glory by them. Many advance themselves, and are lifted up with
pride, when God works for them or by them, not at all minding that which they
should chiefly mind, the glorifying of God in and by what he has w ought,
either for themselves or others.

Secondly, God has this in design, by all his works, to make us better. If it
be a work of Judgment, it is to make us better, and then we exalt his works of
Judgment, when we are bettered by them, when we are more humbled and weaned
from the world by them. And as it is the design of God to make us better by his
works of Judgment, so by all his works of mercy. The Apostle beseeches us by
the mercies of God, to present our bodies (that is, our whole selves) a living
sacrifice, in all holy service to himself ( Romans 12.1.) What will it advantage
us to be bettered in our outward enjoyments, by what God works or does for us,
unless we learn to be better, and do his work better? that is, unless our
hearts be more holy, and we more fruitful in every good word and work. Some
will magnify the work of God by keeping a day of thanksgiving, because they
are richer or greater by what God has wrought for them, who yet are not a whit
more holy or spiritual by it. Woe to those who magnify the work of God because
they think it shall go better with them, when themselves are not better.
Enquire therefore what lust has the work of God moved you to mortify, wha^
grace has the work of God put you upon the exercise of: They only indeed
magnify the work of God who have such workings toward God. It were better not
receive a mercy, than not to be bettered by a mercy. It is not our crying up
the works of God in our words, but in our works, which is the magnifying of
them. It is more safe for us to say nothing of what God has wrought for us,
than to publish it, or make our boast of it, when we our selves do ^^^hing
worthy of it, in a way of condecency and proportion to it. It Is the design of
God in giving promises to make us cleanse our selves from all filthiness of
flesh and spirit, perfecting holiness in the fear of God (2 Cor. 7.1.) Much
more having given us any great performances of his promises, does he expect
that we should be clean and holy. O then what a pitiful course do they take,
who pretending to magnify the works of God, do such things as are a defilement
both to flesh and spirit!

A third design of God in working for us, is to make us trust him more, or, to
be more in believing. It Is showed ( Psalm. 78.4.) what great things God did for
the Jewish nation, and for their fathers; But what did God aim at in all? we
have the answer ( v. 8.) That they might set their hope in him, and not forget
his works. The aim which God had in those great works, was that their hope
might be set upon him; that they might trust in him more then ever they had
done. The Lord, by the great works he does, would gain upon our faith, or cause
us to trust him for the future. How dishonorably do they carry it toward God,
who believe not his word, much more they who believe not his works, that is,
who believe him not, notwithstanding his works, as it is said of Israel (Ps.
78.32.) For all this they sinned still; and believed not his wondrous works.
The Psalmist does not mean, that they did not believe such works had been done;
but the meaning is, they did not trust God who had done those works. These and
many more duties the Lord teaches us by his word, and he teaches them also by
his works, as it is said (v. 22.) who teaches like him? The Lord teaches us
many excellent lessons by his works, if we had hearts to learn them. Lay these
things together in practice, and they will be the best, yea, they are the only
way of magnifying the works of God done for us. And, if the works of God are to
be magnified all these ways, then they fall short of this duty,

First, Who only make a report of the works of God, who tell the story of what
he has done, and so have done. As we ought to adorn the doctrine of God (
Tit. 2.) so likewise the doings of God, or what God has done, by our doings,
Mere narratives about the work of God, is far below magnifying his work.

Secondly, They fail much more who extenuate and diminish the works of God, wh^
^bscure or eclipse his works. As in our confessions of repentance, it is a
sign of a bad heart barely to report our sins before God, without aggravating
them in their sinfulness; but in confession to extenuate our sin shows a very
rotten and naughty heart; so in our confessions of praise, merely ^o report
what God has done for us, without putting an accent or a due emphasis upon his
mercies, shows much ^oldness of spirit in the duty; but to clip and lessen the
works of God, to hide and darken them, to abate and detract from them, shows
a base and a wicked spirit.

Thirdly, How do they fail in magnifying the works of God, who do not only
conceal how good they are, but bring up an ill report upon them, as those
searchers did upon the land of Canaan. Those works and dispensations of God,
which (like that land) slow with milk and honey, may be looked upon and
censured by some, as good for nothing but to eat up and consume those that are
under them.

Fourthly, They who ate impatient under any work of God, who murmur and repine
at it, are far from magnifying the work of God.

Fifthly, They are far from magnifying the work of God, who think themselves so
wise that they could mend the work of God; had they the pensel in their hand
they would make fairer work of it: what hudling is here? think some; what
confusion is here? say others; what sad work is here? says a third. If we had
the ordering of things what an orderly wo^ld would we make, if we had the
ordering of things (as God has) we would quickly cure and remedy all these
disorders. Though such formal speeches be not uttered, yet such things are
spoken in parables, the actions of some tell us such are their thoughts, as if
they could mend the work of God, and govern the world with greater moderation
than it is; though indeed we need not scruple to call the wisest man in the world
a very dotard, if he thinks so, or that any thing can be done more equally than
God has done it. Let all flesh adore, let none presume to question the work of
God; let God alone with his work; as he will have no controler, so he needs no
counselor. Remember, it is man's duty to magnify his work, not to mend it, to
show how good it is, not to attempt the making of it better. And indeed as it
is the highest point of presumption, so of ignorance, to meddle with the
mending of it. The Lord is a Rock (says Moses, Deuteronomy. 32.4.) and his work is
perfect. Who but a fool, or who but by the over-working of his own folly would
venture to mend that which is already, not only perfected, but perfect, were it
only the work of a man, much more when it is the work of God, the only wise God?

And that we may be provoked humbly to magnify, and for ever deterred from that
proud attempt of finding fault with, or mending the work of God, consider these
three things;

First, Take the argument in the text, the plainness of the work of God, it is
such as may be seen afar off, none can pretend ignorance of it, or if they do,
that is a vain covert, or excuse; every man may see it, man may behold it afar
off, as most worthy to be magnified.

Secondly, If we do not magnify the work of God, God will lessen his own works
of mercy and favor toward us.

Thirdly, He will do no more for us if we magnify not what he has done. It is
said ( Math. 13.58.) Christ did not many mighty works there, because of their
unbeleif. God will do no more mighty works for them, who refuse or neglect to
pay him a tribute of praise and glory for what he has done.

JOB, Chap. 36. Verse. 26. 26. Behold, God is great, and we know him not,
neither can the number of his years be searched out.


ELihu having called upon Job to magnify the work of God in general, proceeds
to draw him to the magnifying of the special works of God in naturals: Yet
before he leads him to the consideration of the greatness of those works, he
invites him to consider God himself who is the Author and Disposer of them, and
he invites him to consider God is three things, all which we find laid down in
this 26th verse.

First, In his Greatness; Behold God is great.

Secondly, In his Incomprehensibleness; He is great, and we know him not.

Thirdly, In his Eternity; Neither can the number of his years be searched out.

Surely he is most worthy our consideration who is great, and so great that he
cannot be comprehended, and who is eternally great, whose years are numberless.

Verse. 26. Behold God is great. The word Behold, is here a note both of
Attention and admiration; O mind, O admire the greatness of God. God is great.
The word rendered great, properly signifies an increasing growing greatness; God
is without all increase or growth, being for ever the same, (...) Et multus.
and magnus, multus robore. Drus. Septuaginta legunt multus, i. e. omnibus
numeris perfectus, atque omnibus perfectionibus cumilo^is.
yet he may be said to increase, to be magnified and multiplied (as I may say)
according to the apprehensions which we have of him. This word bears the
signification both of much and many. God is but one and the one-most one, yet
(in this sense) many. So the Septuagint renders it here, he has, or is many,
that is, he has all perfections in him; the lines of all excellency and
virtue, of all glory and perfection, center in God alone. Thus God is much, and
God is many; the one God is many, he has many, he has all eminencies and
excellencies bound up, boundlesly in him.

Again, God is great, in himself or in his being. Whatsoever is in God is God,
and therefore whatsoever is in God is great. The power of God is the powerful
God, and therefore his power must needs be great: the wisdom o^ God is the wi e
God, and therefore his wisdom most needs be very great; the mercy of God is the
merciful God, and therefore his mercy must needs be very great: And thus we may
p^oceed in our meditations quite through all the divine Attributes.

And as God is great in his being, so he is great in his working, he does great
things. The Psalmist ^aith, he is good, and does good; he is also great, and
does great things; he is the t^^st, the chief, and the best being, and his
doings are such as he is, he does like himself. God is great, and he has an
excellent, an excelling greatness. Praise him (says David, Psalm. 150.2.)
according to his excellent greatness, or as the words may well bear, according
to his muchness of greatness; for when the Scripture says, God is great, this
positive is to be taken as a superlative, God is great, that is, he is
greatest, he is greater than all, so great that all persons and all things are
little, yea, nothing before him ( Isa. 40.15.) Behold the nations are (to him
but) as the drop of the bucket, and are counted but at the small dust of the
balance: behold, he takes up the Isles as a very little thing, they are as
nothing, and they are counted to him as less than nothing and vanity. How great
is God in comparison of whom the greatest things are little things, yea, the
greatest things are nothing!

Behold, God is great. From this excellent Attribute, the greatness of God, I
have made several Inferences already, at the 12th verse of the 33d chapter; yet
I shall infer some things further here, both for our direction and consolation.

First, If God he great and greatest, then fear him greatly. Great is the Lord
(said David, in his thanksgiving-song, 1 Chronicles. 16.25.) he also is to be feared
above all gods; that is, above all the great powers on earth, and above all the
imaginary powers of heaven. Idols, who are the fancied powers of heaven, are
sometimes called gods in Scripture; so likewise are Princes or Magistrates, who
are eal powers on earth. Now, says David (who was one of those gods, and a
great one) fear him above all gods: Why? Because he is above all gods, he is
higher than the highest and he is greater than the greatest; therefore fear him
above all gods, yea, therefore fear, or worship him all ye gods (Psalm. 97.7.)
Many say with their mouths, God is great, yea, infinitely greater than man,
yet they fear men, especially great men, more than God.

Secondly, If God be great, then love him greatly. Shall this great God have
but little love from us? The Law of love, with respect to God, is expressed two
ways in Scripture; first, as to the truth of it; and secondly, as to the
measure or degree of it. The love which is given to God must be a true love, a
sincere love, yet not only so, but the love which is given to God must be the
greatest love; Thou shall love the Lord thy God with all thy heart, and with
all thy soul, and with all thy might, and with all thy strength; with all thy
heart sincerely, with all thy might and strength greatly.

Thirdly, If God be great, then serve him greatly, or do him great service.
Take heed of offering the lean and the lame, the halt and the blind to this
great King. A great King must not be put off with little services with small
pittances of duty.

Fourthly, If God be great, then believe him greatly; let us have great faith
in the great God. Jesus Christ rebukes his disciples ( Mat. 8.26.) O ye of
little faith; have you God to pitch your faith upon, who is great? have you his
power, and his mercy, and his truth, and his faithfulness, all which are great,
to rest upon? and have you but a little faith? That woman ( Mat. 15.28.) gave
glory to God in believing, when she believed greatly; and therefore Christ
cries up and magnifyeth the greatness of her faith, O woman, great is thy
faith.

Fifthly, The great God is greatly to be praised; he does great things for us,
therefore we must return great thanks to him. That also we have expressly (1 Chronicles. 16.25.) Great is the Lord, and greatly to be praised. The great God must
have great praises, for he does great things. As every sin we commi^ against
God has a greatness in it upon this consideration, because he is a great God
against whom we sin (Take heed of the least sin, for that is great, being
committed against the great God) so whatsoever duty (this of p^aise especially)
we perform to God, we should strive to raise it up to the g^eatest, to the
highest, because the great God, the high God is concerned in it, or it is
consigned to the great, to the high God.

Sixthly, If God be great, we ought to give him great submission, or to submit
greatly to him. Great submission to God is the substance of all duty to God. We
owe the full submission of our wills to the Will of God in a twofold respect.
First, to whatsoever he wills us to do, or to his commanding will. Secondly,
to whatsoever he will do with us, or to his disp sing Will. In these, and in
all things, let us strive to g^ea^en all the acting; of our souls toward God,
because he is great.

Secondly, If God be great, then we may infer for consolation.

First, Be not discouraged in prayer when you have great things to ask, when
your wants are great, and your necessities urgent, when you must have great
supplies, when small matters will not serve your turn (In many ca^es, it is not
a little help, it is not a small matter which will do the thing which we sue
unto God for) now here is a mighty ground of comfort for us, if we want great
things, we have a great God to go unto; and how great soever our wants are,
they are all but small to the greatness of that God unto whom we go ( Ephesians.
3.20.) He is able to do exceeding abundantly above what we ask or think; and
not only above what we actually ask and think, but indeed, beyond what possibly
we can ask or think, above what we are able to ask or think. Therefore let us
never be discouraged in prayer, because of the greatness of the things that we
have to ask of God.

Secondly, Be not discouraged, though as your wants, so your dangers and your
troubles are great. How great soever the danger is you would be delivered from,
God is greater, to whom you come for deliverance: And therefore when a great
Mountain stood in the way of the deliverance of the people of God ( Zech. 4.7.)
the Prophet speaks in his language, Who art thou? O great Mountain, thou shall
become a Plain before Zerubbabel; that is, before the power of that God in whom
Zerubbabel trusts and whose work Zerubbabel carries on. Hence that holy
confidence ( Psalm. 66.3.) Through the greatness of thy power, thine enemies
shall submit themselves to thee, or, they shall yield feigned obedience, as we
put in the margin, which some render thus, through the greatness of thy power,
thine enemies shall be found liars. All the readi^gs magnify the g eatness of
God. Through the g e^tness of thy power thine enemies, the enemies of thy
people, shall ^ubmit, they shall be found liars, they shall yield feigned
obedience, they shall not be able with all their greatness to stand i^ out
against the great God. Therefore be not discouraged at any time at the
greatness of danger. Though you walk through the very valley of the shadow of
death (that is to be in the greatest danger) yet as David did not, so do not you
fear, no not that great danger, while the great God is with you.

Thirdly, Be not d scouraged though your sins are great when you come to a^k
the pardon of them. As the greatness of sin puts a very great damp upon the
spirit of man in asking pardon, so the greatness of God should take off that
damp. My thoughts are not your thoughts (says the Lord Isa. 55.7, 8, 9.) in
this matter. There is nothing wherein God does more exceed man than in
pardoning sin ( Mic. 7.18.) If sin be great, the mercy of God is great too,
infinitely greater than the sin of man; if sin be great, remember we have a
great high Priest (Heb. 4.14.) not only a Priest, but a high Priest, and a
great high Priest; therefore fear not to ask the pardon, even of the greatest
sin, in his name and for his sake. And this is true it we respect either
national or personal sins; it may encourage us in asking pardon for nations,
how great soever their sins are. Moses, when the People had greatly sinned
against God, had recourse to this ( Numb. 14.18, 19.) The Lord is of great
mercy; pardon I beseech thee the iniquity of this people, according to the
greatness of thy mercy, as thou have forgiven this people from Egypt even until
now. Do thus also with respect to personal sins. David made the greatness of
his personal sin an argument to go to God for mercy ( Psalm. 25.11.) Pardon my
sin, O Lord, for it is great. He was so far from being disheartened by the
greatness of his sin, to a^k the pardon of it, that (according to our reading)
he had great hope of pardon, as well as s^w he had great need of pardon; and
all because he knew God was great in mercy. Or, if we read that text thus,
Pardon my sin, O Lord, though it be great, the sense is much the same; for as
the former makes the greatness of his sin a reason provoking him to hasten unto
God for pardon (as great diseases hasten us in seeking remedies) so the latter
shows that the greatness of sin is no stop to the mercy and free grace of God
in Christ, for the pardon of it. Christ in that Parable ( Mat. 18.24.) gives
instance of the greatest debt; he tells us of one that owed his Lord ten
thousand talents, a vast sum, a very vast sum; a talent being, according to the
lowest computation, three hundred pounds of money; ten thousand times three
hundred pounds is a huge sum; so that here was a great debt, now (says the
text) When the debtor had nothing to pay, he came to his Lord, or Creditor, and
he forgave him all. He did not say, would thou have me, or can I, forgive
such a debt as this? What, ten thousand talents? He forgave it as if it had
been a debt of two mites. Thus, and many other ways we may improve this first
Attribute of God, mentioned in the text, his greatness, both as to our
direction in duty, and consolatition in every extremity. Behold God is great,
And we know him not.

That Is the second thing. The words are plain, but the tense is difficult; for
it may be objected, Do not we know God? Elihu said but just now, in the very
verse before the text, Magnify his works which men behold, every man may see
it, man may behold it afar off? Surely if the works of God may be known and
seen by every one, God himself may be known, for he is known in his works, as
the Apostle argues ( Romans 1.20.) The things which he has made make him known:
how is this then said, That God is great and we know him not? Does not the
Prophet in denouncing that dreadful curse ( Jer. 10.25.) Pour out thy wrath
upon the hea^hen that know thee not, thereby intimate, that all the people of
God know him? Does not Christ tell us ( John 17.3.) This is eternal life, to
know thee the only true God. They who have eternal life, must have the
knowledge of the true God. But all true believers have eternal life already in
hope, and shall have it shortly in hand, therefore they know God. The Promise
of the New Covenant is ( Heb. 11.) They shall all know me from the least to the
greatest; that is, all my Vovenant People shall know me. How is it then said,
God is great, and we know him not? When Paul was at Athens, he sound an Altar
with that Inscription, To the unknown God (Act. 17.23.) They worshipped a God
whom they knew not, but certainly we must know whom we worship. Ye worship ye
know not what, was Christ's reproof of the Samaritans (John 4.22.) We know what
we worship; that is, whom we worship.

For answer to this, when the text says, God is great and we know him not; we
may say, First, That even heathens, the untaught, untutored, and uncatechized
heathens do, or, may know God, that is, they may know him in some degree or
other, they may, yea, they do know him (as the Apostle says, Romans 1.20.) so
far as to leave them without excuse; they have no plea, nor can they make any
apology for themselves. Secondly, It Is certain, all believers, I mean all true
believers, know God savingly, or so far as is sufficient for their salvation.
Every believer knows God. There is no faith in God without the knowledge of
God. Thirdly, Which shall be the point of Observation from this part, as well
as an answer to the question; None know God fully, perfectly, comprehensively.

That Is Elihu's meaning when he says, God is great, and we know him not; that
is, we know not how great he is, or we know not the utmost of his greatness.
God only knows himself fully and comprehensively. There is no proportion
between the greatness of God and the understanding of a man. The greatness of
God is infinite, the understanding of a man is but finite and limited; the
deepest understanding among men, yea, the understanding of Angels is but
shallow, compared with God. Thus we are to understand this text, God is great,
and we know him not. There is a greatness in every thing of God, transcending
the possibility of any created understanding. This some give for the reason,
why the Seraphims spoken of ( Isa. 6.) are said with two of their wings to
cover their faces, they were not able to bear the light of the knowledge of the
glory of God. For, though Christ, in that admonition which he gave, to take
heed of off^nding and despising the little ones, gives this reason for it. (
Mat. 18.10.) For in heaven there Angels do always behold the face of my Father
which is in heaven; though (I say) it be a truth, that the holy Angels, and
blessed Saints above, do always behold the face of God, yet neither Saints nor
Angels, not the Saints in glory, nor the glorious Angels, can fully comprehend
the greatness and majesty of God; and therefore the Prophet (as was said)
represented the Angels covering their faces with their wings. We have heard of
King Hiero putting the question to Simonides, a Philosopher, What God was, who
desi^ed (not being able to give a sudden answer) that the King would respit him
till next day; when next day came he desired a second, and when that came he
desired a third; and still the more he searched, the farther he was from
finding his answer. This is true, not only of Philosophers, who see but by the
dark light of Nature, but of those who are enlightened divinely, or from above,
they who receive much light from God, cannot comprehend the light of God; the
more they search into it, the more they see themselves short of it. The most we
know of God is not so much as the least part of that which we know not of him;
and when we know as much of God as is knowable by man, yet it may be said, as
in the text, God is great, and we know him not.

Hence take three brief Corolaries or Deductions.

First, If God be great and we know him not, that is, we are not able to
comprehend him; then we must rest satisfied with what God has manifested of
himself and of his will. God has manifested himself these four ways. First,
In his Word. Secondly, In his works of Creation and Providence. Thirdly, In his
Son. Fourthly, By his Spirit. These ways God is pleased to manifest himself,
or make himself known unto his People; now what knowledge of God can be
gathered up in these ways, what can be learned of him out of his word, out of
his works, by considering him in his Son, and by waiting for the help of his
blessed Spirit, we must labor to take in; but take heed of a bold pressing
into the secrets of God, or of a curious prying into the nature of God, which
indeed will but dazzle our eyes, and the more we think or look into it, the
blinder we shall be.

Secondly, If God be so great that we know him not, Then we ought not
presumptuously to enquire into a reason of the works and ways of God; for that
which is true of God himself, is true of his works and of his ways, we cannot
know them in the sense opened: Therefore the Apostle speaking about that
wonderful dispensation of God, the laying aside of the Jews and calling of the
Gentiles (Romans 11.33.) cries out, O the depth of the knowledge and wisdom of
God! how unsearchable are his Judgments, and his ways past finding out! As God
himself cannot be fully known, so neither can his ways nor works.

Thirdly, If God cannot be fully known, neither in himself, nor in his works,
Then take heed of murmuring or complaining of the ways, works, and dealings of
God. Will you find fault with that which you neither do, nor can fully know?
how little is it of any of the works of God, that we know! how little a way do
we see into them! let us not find fault with that thing, the perfections
whereof we cannot find out; say not, why is it thus? why does God let things go
thus? why are his providence ordered thus? there are many such queryings in
the hearts of men, and some such are expressed by the tongues of men. But
remember the Lord cannot be known in his works, therefore let us not complain
of his works, but, sitting down in silence, submit to them; let us (as David)
Be dumb because God has done it, (Psalm. 39.9.) David was silent, not only with
respect to the sovereignty of God, who, he knew, had power and liberty to do
whatsoever he pleased, but with respect to his incomprehensibility, because he
knew he was not able to know or understand the bottome-reason of that which God
had done. This some conceive, the special intendment of Elihu in this Text, as
reproving Job for his many complaints, and murmurings, and disputings about the
dealings of God with him in the extremity of his sufferings: Therefore, said
he, Consider God is great, and we know him not.

Yet let none be discou^aged in seeking after the knowledge of God, because
it is told us we cannot know God; yea let no man think to excuse himself in his
neglect of pursuing the knowledge of God, because this Text says we cannot
know him. Some possibly will say, If God be so great, that we cannot know him,
then why should we labor after the knowledge of God? or we hope this will
excuse us, if we do not know him, seeing we cannot. Take heed of such
reasonings; for though God cannot be known to the utmost of what himself is,
yet God may be known so far as is needful for us, and that is very far. We may
know God so far as concerns our duty to him, and our happiness by him; we may
know God so far as to honor him, and to enjoy him: and we must labor to know
him perfectly, though we cannot. The Apostle speaking of the love of God ( Ephesians.
3.17.) would have us labor to comprehend with all Saints, the height, the
breadth, the depth, the length, and to know the love of Christ that passes
knowledge. That the love of Christ passes knowledge, that it exceeds our
understanding, should not discourage us from laboring to know it; nor will it
excuse any that sit down idly, and do not study the knowledge of God, though he
passes knowledge; we must labor to know the greatness of Gods love, and the
greatness of Gods wisdom, and the greatness of Gods power, though the
greatness of God in all these is greater tha^ our n^rrow hearts can comprehend.
Behold, God is great, and we know him not, Neither can the number of his years
be searched out.

The Text is, Number of his years, no search: that is, Numerus annorum ejus, et
non est investigatio.
as we well translate it, the number of his years is such as cannot be
searched, we say, searched out; it is but one word in the Hebrew, properly
signifying, to search a thing to the bottom, that we may find out the utmost
of it. The number of Gods years cannot thus be searched out, we cannot find
them to the bottom. Elihu speaks of God after the manner of men; years
properly belong to man, and the things here below of this world: the life of
man, and the continuance of the creature, are measured by hours, and days,
and weeks, and months, and years, as these are measured by the motion of the
Heavens. But God is far above any such rule or measure of life, or of his
being, all these measures are improper unto God; there is no measuring him by
hours, days, weeks, months or years, or ages. The word which we translate
years, signifies changes. Years are changed or returned; there is a return of
the same time every year, Spring and Summer, Annus apud Hebraeos ((...)) ex sua
proprietate et Etyriologia nomen ha^et a mutatione, quasi dicatur mutato^us Ab
hae radice vestes d^untur (...), nam mu^mtur vateras^unt innovantur: ^t vutari
id^m quod vest^i (1 Reg. 14.2.)
and Autumn and Winter; thus the year changes, and turns about continually.
God is infinitely above all these charges and turnings of time ( Psalm. 102.25,
26, 27.) The heavens wax old, and as a vesture thou shall change them, and they
shall be changed, but thou art the same, and thy years fail not. The years of
God are not like the years of the world, which wear it ou^, and change it as a
vesture, is changed by time; the Lord is for ever the same. Thus one of the
Ancients glosseth those words of the Psalm, Thy years ^ay^e not: Thy years
(says he) neither go nor come; thy years stand all together, for because they
stand, they that go are not excluded by them that come; thy years are one day,
and thy day is not day by day, but to day; thy to day does not give place to
tomorrow, nor does it succeed to yesterday; thy to day is eternity, therefore
thou have begot thy coeternal, to whom thou saidest, to day have I begotten
thee. So then this expression, Neither can the number of his years be searched
out, is, according to our apprehension and understanding, a description not
only of very old age, but of eternity. We would think that man very old, the
hours, Augustine is in Psalm. 102. v. 28.
yea the minutes of whose life could not be searched out by a good.
A^ethme^ici^n much more easily may we tell how many years the oldest man has
lived: What then shall we think of him the number of whose years cannot be
searched out? this can speak nothing less than everlastingness. And this
eternity or everlastingness of God, though it be impartible, yet it has, I may
say, a double respect: First, to what went before; Secondly, to what is to
come. The eternity of God is such as cannot be searched out, either as to what
is past, or to what is to come; Aeternitas tempora omnia sine tilla succ^ssione
complectit r. Aeternitas est vitae beatae tota simul et perfecta possessio.
Boethius. Aetornum est unum esse, et totum simul esse, et nihil deesse. Greg. l.
16. Moral. c. 21. Aeternum est immu abile et totum impartibiliter. Dionys: cap.
10. de divinis Nomin:
indeed unto God there is nothing past or to come; for eternity, properly
taken, is an everlasting Now, it is not that which passes or moves away; and
therefore some of the Ancients elegantly describe eternity, to be the perfect
enjoyment of blessed life all at once; which because it is all at once together
and perfect, cannot be altered nor lessned. In eternity that which is past is
present, yea that which is to come is present in an eternal blessed life. It Is
so with God, and so in proportion with all those who are entered into eternity,
whatsoever they have had is always present with them, nor are they in the
expectation of any thing to come; they enjoy all in every moment, without the
want of any thing. It Is much more so with God; though years have succession,
yet the years of God have no succession of times or things.

Further, The eternity of God, which lies under this description, The Number of
his years cannot be searched out, is not a particular attribute of God, but
that which difuseth it self through all his attributes; he is eternal in all;
there is no searching out the Number of the years of any of the perfections of
God; his Wisdom is eternal, and his Power is eternal, and his Goodness is
eternal, and his Justice is eternal; there is no searching out the Number of
the years of God in any of these perfections.

Hence Note; God is an eternal being;

His years come not under account, or number. God is eternal, not only without
end, as created Spirits are, but without beginning, which no creature is, not
can be; He is eternal, not only without end or beginning, but without
succession or mutation. Some of the Ancients tell us, -- Stabilisque manens dat
cuncta moveri. Boet: de Confol: Metro. 9.
Eternity stands fast, but moves all other things. The eternal God is the first
Mover, himself being immovable. If so, then

First, All things are always present with or before God: Things past, things
to come are present with God, he were not eternal else. In that eternity or
eternal estate of glory which believers shall at last arive unto, even they
shall enjoy all at once, because all their enjoyments shall be in God, or God
shall be their whole enjoyment.

Secondly, God is infinitely happy and blessed. He has all that ever he had,
or that ever he can have, all at once, or already, nothing of his blessedness
is either to come to him or gone from him; therefore he must needs be
infinitely blessed. Here in this world some men have had a kind of blessedness,
they have been rich and great, they have been in power, they have had their
fill of pleasure, but now they have it not, all is perished and gone and past
away. There are others in expectation of great matters, of great riches, of
great honors, of great contentments in this world, but as yet they have them
not; we say of many, Their lands are not come into their hands, their estate is
but yet in reversion and expectation. Thus it is with men; some have had it,
and it is gone, and others though they may have it, yet it is not come. But now
with the Lord all is present, and therefore how infinitely happy is he! A man
would think himself very happy if he could have all the contentments that ever
he had scattered through the several days and years of his life gathered into
one moment; it is thus with God, and thus in proportion it shall be with us,
when we come to that blessed state of eternity.

Thirdly, If God be eternal, if there be no searching out of his years, then

Time is in the dispose and ordering of God. He that inhabiteth eternity, is
the Lord of time. God is said to inhabit eternity, (Isa. 57.15.) that is, he
is eternal, and therefore he is the disposer of all times; he that made time
will order time: he orders time as to persons, and he orders time as to
Nations, he orders times, and all the changes of times, he orders, not only
the duration of time, but the condition of times; all is from him, whose yea s
cannot be searched out. David said ( Psalm. 31.15.) My times are in thy hands,
that is, my personal times in all the changes of them, troublesome or
comfortable, joyful or sorrowful, are ordered at thy will, by thy power and
wisdom. And with respect to Nations Daniel said ( Chap 2.21.) He changes
times and seasons. The Lord puts a new face of things upon S^t^es and
Kingdoms; what changes has not, cannot the Lord m^re among the sons of men?
The reason of all is, he is eternal.

Fourthly, If there be no searching out the number of the years of God, if he
be eternal, then

How ought we to reverence and adore God! We have a Command from God to
reverence those who have attained many years in this world, which alas are
very few, none at all to the years of God; the aged, the gray headed must be
reverenced, ( Lev. 19.32.) And one reason of that Law may be, because the aged
have some shadow of Gods eternity upon them; they who have many years have some
resemblance of him, the number of whose years cannot be searched out; therefore
God will have them reverenced. Now if the ancient are to be reverenced, how
much more God himself, who is called ( Dan. 7.9.) The ancient of days!

Fifthly, If God be eternal, then, we may trust him, yea therefore we ought to
trust him, (Psalm. 74.12.) Thou art my King of old, commanding deliverances. O
how did David's confidence arise upon this, that God who was King of old, is
King now, and will be King for ever, ( Psalm. 10.16.) The Lord is King for ever
and ever; the Heathen are perished out of his Land, that is, they shall surely
perish. God will not always bear with evil men in his Land; For if because
God was King of all the Lands, he therefore drove the old Heathen out of
Canaan, and planted his people there; doubtless, if they who bear the name of
his people there, live so like the old Heathen that they may be called Heathen,
he will also cause them to perish out of his Land, and all because he is King
for ever and ever, and therefore can do it at one time as well as at another,
and now as easily as at any time heretofore. Trust in the Lord for ever, for in
the Lord Jehovah is everlasting strength, (Isa. 26.4.) David a Great Prince
makes it an argument to draw off our trust from men, from the greatest men,
from Princes, because they are not for ever, ( Psalm. 146.3, 4.) Trust not in
Princes, nor in any Children of men; why not? many reasons may be given why
not; but the only reason there given is their frailty, and the consequents of
it; His breath goes forth, etc. As if he had said, Suppose Princes are never
so good, and just, and gracious in the exercise of their Power, yet trust not
in them, for they die, their breath goes forth, and then all their thoughts
perish: all the real purposes which they had, as also the promises which they
made for your good, die with them, and can do you no good: The number of their
years may be searched our, and run out, their years are not for ever. Now the
contrary of that which is an argument used by the Spirit of God to draw off our
trust from the gods here on Earth, is an argument to draw on and engage our
trust strongly to the God of Heaven; His breath goes not forth, none, not one
of his thoughts shall perish; therefore trust in him.

Sixthly, If there be no searching out the number of the years of God, then, Be
not troubled if God seem to stay and not to do the work which you expect this
or that year: If God does it not this year, he has another year to do it in,
there is no searching out the number of his years. We may say of any man if he
does not his work this year, he may be gone before the next: but if God does
not his work this year, he may do it next year, or two or ten years hence; he
has time enough, even all time before him* therefore the Prophet, having said
( Hab. 2.3.) The vision is for an appointed time, but at the end it shall speak
and not lie, presen^ly adds, Though it tarry, wait for it: As if he had said,
The Lord who has all times and seasons in his power, will do his work in the
best time and season, he will do what he has promised, when it is most sit to
be done; if he does it not at the time when we expect, yet let us wait, he is
the Master of time. God who is eternal, cannot be scantied of time, The number
of his years cannot be searched out. It Is a known maxim among the wise men of
the world, Take time, and you may do any thing. What cannot God do, who knows
all times, and can take what time he will!

Seventhly, Which follows upon the former, God will carry on his designs
through all the world: He will carry them through, against all, ( Psalm. 92.8,
9.) Thou Lord art most high for evermore; Lo, thine enemies shall perish; thine
enemies who would hinder thy work, they shall certainly fall. Christ is called
The first and the last; He (says St John, Rev. 1.17.) laid his right hand upon
me, and said, fear not, I am the first and the last: Why should he not fear?
what did Christ offer to cure him of his fear? Christ does not give him a bare
disswasive, Fear not, but a rational ground why he should not fear. Fear will
not be blown away with a breath: Our passions are never truly quieted nor
attempered but by reason. Upon what ground then would Christ take off John's
fear, even upon this in the Text, I am the first and the last. As if he had
said, John why do thou fear? know thou not who I am, what a Lord and
Master thou servest? Why, John, I tell thee, I am the first and the last; and
therefore thou may be sure, I will do my work, and none shall let me. John
had wonderful things in vision; shall all these be done thought he? yea, says
Christ, Fear not, I will carry on my designs (all the designs that Christ had
in the world were then in vision) Eternity triumphs over all difficulties; The
Eternal will see the last man born, (as we say) he will have the last word,
and the last blow. I am the first and the last.

Lastly, From this Consideration of God, let us take a prospect of our selves,
what poor short-lived short-breathed Creatures we are. There is no searching
out the number of the years of God, but we may quickly search out the number of
our own years; our life is but a span long, ( Psalm. 39.5.) yea our age is
nothing before God. Did we consider the eternity of God, what should we judge
of our span-long life? we are said to be of yesterday. Some express man thus;
He is yesterday; as if he were not to day, but were already past while he is.
The best that can be said of him is this; he is but of yesterday, and possibly
he shall not have a to morrow: but the Lord is for ever and ever the same.

And though we are short-lived as to this world, though our years may soon be
told over, yet let us remember that God has called us to the participation of
eternity; though we have not the eternity of God, which is without beginning,
yet we shall have an eternity from God without end; every man is everlasting as
to his soul. The godly shall be blessed for ever; and there is an eternal
estate of woe and misery to the wicked, the number of the years of their sorrows
and sufferings, who live and die without Christ, cannot be searched out. The
number of the years of the joy and blessedness, and rest and happiness, and
tranquillity of those that believe, of those that are faithful, of those that
are godly, of those that walk with and fear God, I say the number of the years
of their joy and happiness cannot be searched out neither. No man can number or
tell how long-lasting the felicity of Saints shall be. As the number of the
years of God cannot at all be searched out, so he has given man as to his
future estate a numberless number of years: And it were well if we who enjoy
this life, and are dying every moment, would often consider there is a life
coming which will never die, the number of our years also in that sense cannot
be searched out.

The thoughts of eternity should swallow up all our time; yet alas, how does
time, or the things which are but temporary, swallow up, in most men, the
thoughts of eternity! Whatever we do in time, should be to fit us for
eternity; yet alas, most use their time so, as if they did not believe, or at
least hoped, there would not be, any such thing as eternity. Did we but spend
two or three minutes of time every day in the serious remembrance of our
eternal estate, it would be an effectual means, to make us both holy in and
contented with whatever temporal estate we meet with in this world. We should
be earnestly searching after God all our days, did we consider what it imports
to us, that the number of his years cannot be searched out.

Thus Elihu labors to draw Job to the consideration of God himself, who is the
Author of those great providential works, both of those he had spoken of
before, the works of providence, ordering men here in civils, as also of those
works of providence in natural things, of which he comes to treat largely, both
in the latter part of this Chapter, and in most of the next. Where we shall
find Elihu giving us as i^ were a Systeme, or body of natural Philosophy in his
discourse about the wonderful works of God, which he is calling Job to
consider.

JOB, Chap. 36. Verse. 27, 28. 27. For he makes small the drops of water: they
pour down rain according to the vapor thereof;

28. Which the clouds do drop, and distill upon man abundantly.


ELlihu having showed the greatness of God himself, in the former verse,
proceeds to show the greatness of his woe ks; he had done it before as to Civil
Administrations, and the ordering of humane affairs, in casting down and
lifting up the sons of men; he does it now in natural things, or in ordering
the motions of nature, still in reference unto man. He describes the greatness
of the works of God aloft or above in the Air and in the Clouds, as he had
before described the greatness of his works here below on the Earth.

The whole remainder of Elihu's speech in this Chapter and to the end of the
37th, is spent in a philosophical discourse about the Meteors, and those
various operations and changes that are wrought in the Air; he discourses of
Rain, of Thunder and Lightning, of Snow and Winds; from all which works of God
in Nature, Elihu would convince Job of the Justice and Righteousness of God (as
well as of his power) which was his chief purpose. He begins this philosophical
Lecture or Lecture of divine Philosophy with the Rain, in the two verses now
read; and he mingles much of that matter in this and the following Chapter. He
speaks here, I say, of the Rain, which is a dispensation of God usually both
very profitable and comfortable; what more profitable or more comfortable than
the rain? It is also a dispensation of God sometimes very dreadful and
hurtful: The Lord sends the very same Creature upon contrary services,
sometimes for good, sometimes for evil; a^ one time as a blessing, and at
another as a curse, to the inhabitants of the earth.

What Elihu speaks of the Rain in this Chapter, may be reduced to five heads.

First, He shows the manner of it is formation and generation, v. 27, 28.

Secondly, The vastness or huge extent of the vessels containing it, which are
the clouds of the air, spreading themselves all the Heavens over, v. 29.

Thirdly, He tells us of the sudden changes and successions of rain and fair
weather, of a cloudy and serene sky, v. 30.

Fourthly, He sets forth the different purposes of God in dispensing the rain,
which are sometimes for judgment, some^imes for mercy, v. 31, 32.

Fifthly, He intimates the Prognostics of it, or what are the signs and
fore^unners or foretellers of it, v. 33.

The two verses underhand, hold out the first point, the formation and
generation of the rain.

Verse. 27. He makes small the drops of water. That is, God (as it were) coins
and mints out the water into drops of rain: As a mighty mass of gold or silver
is minted out into small pieces, so a huge body of water is minted out into
small drops; that is the sum of these words according to our rendering. The
Hebrew word rendered, He makes small, has a twofold signification, and that
has caused a threefold translation of these words.

First, It signifies to take away, o^, to withdraw; according to this
signification of the word, (...)ademit, substraxit.
a twofold power of God is held forth about the drops of water.

First, Substraxit de^u stillas aqu^rum, sc^ ex mari, flumini^us ^^ loc is
humidis, quae fundunt pluviam ad nubeni ejus. Haustus vapor ex aqua cogitur in
nubem, quae dainde sundit pluviam. Merl: Qui ausert stillas pluviae. Vulg.
The power of God in drawing the water up from the Earth to make rain, for that
in Nature (as we shall see afterward) is the cause of ^ain; God draws up the
water from the Earth, which he sends down upon the Earth: he draws up the
vapors, and the vapors become a Cloud, and the Cloud is dissolved into rain.

Secondly, The word may very well express, according to other texts of Sc
ipture, the putting forth of the power of God in stopping, staying keeping back
and withholding rain from the ea^^h, when ^od has drawn water from the earth,
he can hold it from the ea^^h as long as he pleases. The Chaldee Pa aphrase
says, He forbids the drops to water the earth, or he sends forth a proh bition
to the clouds that they give no water. The vulgar Latin speaks to the same
sense, who takes away drops of rain, that is, from the earth. Mr. Broughton
renders, he withdraws dropping of water. In this sense I find the word rendered
expressly ( Numb. 9.7.) where certain persons are brought in by Moses thus
complaining, Wherefore are we kept back that we may not offer an offering to
the Lord with the children of Israel? It is a case; there were some, it seems,
suspended from bringing their offerings to the Lord, and they demand a reason
of it; to give which, Moses says, stand still, and I will hear what the Lord
will command concerning you. But I quote that scripture only for the force of
the word, wherefore are we kept back, or with held, which was for some
uncleanness. Thus you have the first signification of the word, and a double
translation upon it, both very pertinent to the nature of the rain, and the
Lords dealing with man in it, which is the subject Elihu is insisting upon.

(...) M^nuit, diminuis.
Secondly, The original word signifies to diminish, or lessen, or make a thing
small, so it is rendered ( Exodus 5.8.) when the children of Israel complained
that they were oppressed in making brick. This commandment came from Pharaoh,
The tale of bricks which they did make heretofore, you shall lay upon them, you
shall not diminish ought of it. It is this word. Again ( Deuteronomy. 4.2.) Ye shall
not add to the word which I command you, neither shall you diminish ought from
it. Man must not make the word of God smaller or greater than it is. It Is high
presumption to use either subtraction from, or addition to the word of God.
Thus also the word is used in the case of second or double marriages ( Exodus
21.10.) If he take him another wife, her food (that is the food of the first
wife) her raiment, and her duty of marriage shall he not diminish.

Our translators take up this sense of the word as noting the diminishing of a
thing in the quantity of it. He makes small the drops of water, or, he makes
the water fall in small drops; whereas if the water were left to it self, it
would pour down like a sea, or like a flood to sweep all away. This is the
work of God, and though it be a common, yet it is a wonderful work; He makes
small the drops of rain. A drop is a small thing, and therefore the Prophet
when he would show what a small thing, or indeed, what a nothing man is, yea,
all the nations of the earth are to God, says ( Isa. 40.15.) The nations are
as a drop of a bucket, and are counted as the small dust of the balance.
Behold, he takes up the Isles as a very little thing. The Spirit of God
pi^cheth upon this comparison, when he would set forth that great distance
between God and man. Man is but a drop to God.

But are not all drops small? why then does he say, He makes small the drops?
The reason is because, though all drops are sm^ll, yet some drops are smaller
than others, and we read of great drops in the Gospel History of Christ's agony
in the Garden, which was an immediate suffering in his soul, from the hand of
his Father, pressing him with that weight of wrath, which was due for our sins
( Luke 22.44.) He sweat, as it were, great drops of blood. As God made Christ
sweat great drops of blood for our sins, so he makes the Clouds to sweat small
drops of water for our comfort. He makes small The drops of rain. (...)
Guttavit, guttatim fluxit.


The Verb of this Substantive is used ( Joel 3.18.) In those days it shall
come to pass, that the mountains shall drop down new wine; by which we are to
understand, the plentiful effusion of the Spirit promised in the latter days.
David describing the Lords glorious march through the wilderness, says ( Psalm.
68.8, 9.) The earth sh^ok, the heavens also dropped at the presence of the
Lord; thou, O God, did send a plentiful rain, whereby thou did confirm
thine inheritance when it was weary. Which Scripture principally intends the
spiri^ual rain, which drops down upon believers, and refreshes their wearied
souls: And therefore by a Metaphor, this phrase, to drop, signifies, to
prophecy or preach the word of God; because that, like rain, falls silently,
-- S^binde Praeceptuci auri^ulis hoc instillare memento. Horat. Lib. 1. lip. 8.
and as it were in drops upon the hearers, it falls in at the ear, and soaks
down to the heart, it soaks quite through, as Moses spoke ( Deuteronomy. 32.2.) My
doctrine shall drop as the rain, and my speech shall destil as the dew. And as
the word is used in Prophesies of mercy and instruction, so of judgment and
desolation. Thus the Lord charged his Prophet ( Ezekiel. 20.46.) Son of man, set
thy face toward the south, and drop thy words toward the south, and prophe^^e
against the forest of the south field. Again ( Ezekiel. 21.2.) Son of man, set thy
face toward Jerusalem, and d^op thy words toward the hol^ place, and
prophecy against the land of Israel. Once more ( Amos 7.16.) Drop no^ thy word
against the house of Isaac. So tha^, I say, this dropping is us^d frequently,
as in a natural, so in a spiritual sense. He makes small the drops Of water.

(...) Forma duali, significantur aquae duplices.
The word is of the Dual Number in the Hebrew, and so it signifies both sorts of
water; the waters of heaven, and the waters of the earth, the upper and the
nether waters, the ^pper waters in the Clouds, and the nether waters in the
Springs. We find them spoken of together in the first of Genesis at the 7th
verse; God divided the waters which were under the firmament, from the waters
which were above the firmament. We find the upper waters spoken of singly (
Psalm. 104.3.) Who layest the beams of the chambers in the waters; Chambers are
above. And in the first of Genesis at the 9th verse, we find the lower waters
alone; Let the waters be gathered together under the heavens. Rabbi Selo.
exponit. (...) per (...) multiplicat, quia dum ita guttatim aquae decidunt
multiplicantur. Merc.
Under-heaven waters are the lower waters. One of the Rabbis renders the words
thus; He multiplieth the drops of rain; and the reason of it is (which falls in
with our translation) because the less any one thing is made, the more is the
general mass, out of which it is made, multiplied.

From the words thus far opened, we may note somewhat for our instruction.

Taking the former signification of the words, He draws up the drops of water,

Observe; The ordinary rain which waters the earth, is first fetched from the
earth.

Plavia est vapor calidus and humidus ex aquis and locis humidis virtute Solis
and Stellarum, usque ad m^diam aeris regionem elevatus, and ibi propte^ loci
frigiditatem in nubem condensatus, etc. Garc. de Meteorol. part 2. cap. 25.
God raises vapors from the earth, and then waters the earth with them. All
the rain which falls upon the earth was raised from the earth. If I were to
answer that question in nature, What is Rain? I might resolve it thus; Rain is
the moisture of the earth, drawn up by the heat of the Sun, into the middle
Region of the Air, which being there condensed into clouds, is afterward at
the will of God, dissolved, and dropped down again in showers. The Clouds, at the
command of God, hold fast, and at his command they break and let out their
waters upon the earth. This is, as was touched before, a very ordinary, yet a
very admirable work of God. As in spirituals, all those acts of grace in faith,
and love, and joy, etc. by which our hearts and souls are carried up to heaven,
come first from heaven; so that rain which comes down upon us from heaven, was
first fetched from among us by the mighty power of God. Rain, according to
natural Philosophy, is thus generated: The water and moisture of the earth
being attenuated by the heat of the Sunbeams, become vapors, which being so
rarefied and resolved into an airy substance, are by the same heat of the Sun
drawn up to the middle region of the air, where being again condensed or
thickened into water, they melt down into rain, at the appointment of God.

We may consider rain briefly in all the causes of it; Thus:

First, The efficient cause of rain is God.

Secondly, The instrumental cause is the heat of the Sun.

Thirdly, The material cause is the moisture of the Sea and watery Land.

Fourthly, The final cause of it, is, 1. Supreme; the glory of God. 2.
Subordinate; and that threefold. First, the benefit. Secondly, the punishment.
Thirdly, the instruction of man.

Secondly, From that other signification of the word, as it notes withdrawing
or keeping back, upon which some insist much,

Observe; God when he pleases can withold the water or the rain.

He can give a stop to the rain, and then the clouds yield us no more water
than a stone; He withholds the drops of water. The Lord threateneth the
Vineyard with this stop ( Isa. 5.6.) I will command the clouds, that they rain
no rain upon it; which is true of a natural and proper Vineyard, and of proper
natural rain, though it be meant there of the people of God, whom he
metaphorically, or improperly, calls his Vineyard; and the rain there
intended, is the rain of instruction usually falling upon them. Now as God does
often forbid the showers of the word, that they fall no more upon a people, as
he sends forth a prohibition to stop the spiritual rain; so he also stops and
prohibits the natural rain ( Amos 4.7, 8.) I have withheld the rain from
you, when there was yet three months to the harvest; and I caused it to rain
upon one city, and caused it not to rain upon another city; one piece was
rained upon, and the piece whereupon it rained not withered: so two or three
cities wandered unto one city to drink water, but were not satisfied. Thus in
case of disobedience to his divine Law, the Lord threatened to stop the common
Law of nature, and to make the heavens brass, and the earth iron (Deuteronomy. 28.23.)
And when the heavens are brass, that is, when they yield no more moisture than
brass, then the earth is as iron, that is, it yields no more food for the
sustentation of man or beast, than a bar of iron does. Such stops the Lord has
often put upon the courses of nature, and can do again when he pleases; though
I believe he never did, nor ever will do so, but when highly displeased and
provoked by the sin of man.

Take two or three inferences from it.

First, If the rain or drops of water come not in their season, let us
acknowledge the hand of God. It is God that has locked up the clouds whenever
they are locked up; God has forbidden the clouds to let down their rain
whenever they withold it. Men and Devils can no more stop the rain than make
it.

Secondly, When we want rain, let us go to God for it. It Is the prerogative of
God alone to help us in that straight; and therefore the holy prophet sends a
challenge to all other powers, or declares them disabled for this help ( Jer.
14.22.) Are there any among the vanities of the Gentiles that can cause rain,
or can the heavens give showers? neither the one nor the other can. The heavens
cannot dispose of a drop, though they possess a sea of water. God must hear
the heaven, before the heavens can hear the earth, that is, answer the
necessities of the earth. And as the heavens cannot give man rain, so neither
can the gods of man's making and placing there, such are all the vanities or
vain Idols of the Gentiles. The prophet having showed us that these cannot,
shows us who can give rain in the next words, Art not thou he, O Lord, our
God (surely thou art he) therefore we will wait upon thee, for thou have made
all these things. Solomon, at the dedication of the Temple, puts this as one
special case wherein they were to apply to God by prayer (1 Kings 8.35.) When
heaven is shut up and there is no rain, because they have sinned against thee,
If they pray, etc. then hear thou in heaven. The prophet sends the people in
that exigent to God ( Zec. 10 1.) Ask ye of the Lord rain, in the time of the
later rain. As if he had said, if ye would have rain you must ask for i^, and
be sure ye ask it of none but him; ask of the Lord. As it is God that gives out
or withholds the rain, so he gives it our or withholds it at the voice of
prayer. The Apostle says of Elias (Jam. 5.17.) he was a man subject to the
like passions that we are, and he prayed earnestly that it might not rain, and
it rained not on the earth, by the space of three years and six months; and he
prayed again, and the heavens gave rain. At hi^ word the Lord stopped rain, and
at his word he gave rain. Let us therefore confess that God is the author or
father of the rain; He causes vapors to ascend from the ends of the earth, he
makes lightnings for the rain (Ps. 135.7.) He covers the heaven with clouds,
he prepares rain for the earth (Ps. 147.8.) God covers the heaven with
clouds, by drawing up vapors from the earth, which are the matter of these
clouds, and in those clouds he prepares the rain, and by the rain sent down
makes the grass to grow upon the mountains. The increase of vegetables is the
effect of rain; God has the rain in his power, and to acknowledge him in it is
our duty. Deus sibi Soli clavem pluvtae refervat Targ. Hierosol. in cap. 3. Genesis
It Is a great part of our spiritualness to acknowledge God in naturals as well
as spirituals; or, that the key of the clouds, as well as the key of the heart,
is in the hand of God, and in his only. One of the Ancients speaking to this
point, said, Let us not ascribe rain to the Saints, much less to Witches.
Papists have their Saints to whom they pray for rain, and Atheists go to
Witches for rain. The modest and moderate Heathen will ^ise up against such in
judgment; they ascribed rain to their gods though false gods; they had
Epethites or Titles of Honor for their Idols, Imbriferi, serenatores.
testifying their faith in them and dependence upon them for the showers of
heaven, they called them shower-bringing gods, and fair-weather-making gods. If
heathens would yet asc^ibe the rain to their gods, not to men, not to any
inferior powers, how abominable are they, who professing the knowledge of
Jehovah, the only true God, do not acknowledge him alone in this! In times of
drought many will say, We hope we shall have rain when the Moon changes, or,
when the Wind turns; now though there be somewhat in nature, both in the change
of the Moon and turn of the Winds, as to the change of weather, yet to speak
much of, or expect any thing from either, argues some withdrawing of the heart
from God; and God to show the folly of such, has often withheld the rain,
though the Moon has changed more than once, and the Wind turned to all
quarters, and passed through all points of the Compass.

Thirdly, Let us take heed of provoking the Lord; he can quickly st^p our
Comforts, those common outward comforts, the rain and showrs of heaven, and
then (as to this Life) in how sad a case are we! As the Lord has not left
himself without witness (namely of his goodness) in sending rain and fruitful
seasons, so he can quickly leave a witness of his Justice, and displeasure, or
of his just displeasure, by withholding rain and (as a consequent of that)
fruitful seasons from us. Were it only to have rain and fruitful seasons, we
should take heed of displeasing God. If a man had such power as to withold
rain from your land, you would take heed of di^pleasing him. How dangerous then
is it to provoke God, who cannot only withold the rain from your land, but
can, as the Scripture says, make the rain of your land to be powder and dust
(Deuteronomy. 28.24.) that is, give you powder and dust instead of rain! When the rain
is long withheld the earth grows hard, and being much trodden or traveled
on, dusty; this dust being raised up by the wind, shall come down instead of
rain, or that is all the rain which I will give you. The Lord has our natural
comforts in his hand, as well as our spiritual and eternal.

Further, As this withholding of the rain sometimes, so the holding up of the
rain at any time, shows the great power of God; to hold the water in the air
is the work of God as much as to withold it from the earth. The water is a
heavy body, and all heavy things tend downward; is it not a wonder that such a
mighty weight of water should hang in the air, and be there held up? if it
were not held there, it would not stay there, but come down and drown all. What
holds it up? the Cloud is a thin substance, yet it holds the water as well as
the strongest vessel bound with hoopes of iron; But by what power? doubtless by
the power of God. The water has no consistence in it self, it is a fluid
slippery body, now what can hold the water that none of it leakes out, but the
power of God? There are many millions of drops in one little cloud, and every
drop is of it self ready to slip away, yet the whole cloud yields no more water
then a rock till God orders it. Let us contemplate the Almightiness of God, who
can hold such a mighty body of water in the air, or who (as Job spoke, Chap.
26.8.) b^^deth up the waters in his thick clouds, and the cloud is not rent
under them.

These notes arise from that translation, which imports the Lords power in
drawing the water from the earth, as also in withholding it from the earth
when there is need, and in holding it when there is no need.

We translate, He makes small the drops of ^ater. Not only has God made the
body of the water, which is one of the four general Elements, of which all
bodies are compounded and made, but he makes the water into small drops, or
makes small the drops of water.

Hence note; That the water falls from heaven by drop^, comes to pass by the
especial power, wisdom and goodness of God.

The water, if left to it self, would ^all whole like a sea upon us, or like a
mighty flood, in such quantities as would, instead of refreshing, overwhelm the
earth. When God drowned the world, it is said ( Genesis 7.11.) The same day were
all the fountains of the great deep broken up, and the windows (or floodgates)
of heaven were opened. We are not to imagine that heaven has windows o^
floodgates; but God did not put forth his mighty power to make small the drops
of rain, but let it come all at once: those waters which were before bound up
in the clouds, by the decree of God, were now, by his decree, let loose in a
wonderful manner and measure, and came down, not in drops, but in streams and
spouts; the clouds did not (as formerly) destil their burden, Pluvia in
nubibus, velut in linteo continetur, atque in illis velut compressa guttatim
distill^tur.
but ease themselves of it at once, or altogether. Rain ordinarily (as sweat
through the Pores of the skin) passes by degrees through the Pores of the
Clouds, yet God can let it out all at once. Seamen, who take long Voyages,
tell us, they meet with spouts of wate^, endangering great ships. So then, this
making small the drops of water, is to be ascribed to a threefold Attribute of
God.

First, It is a wo^k of his power, nor is it done without a kind of Miracle,
that the water comes down, as it were, through a sive, or watering-pot.

Secondly, It is a work of divine wisdom. The Lord knowing that the earth
cannot digest huge portions of water at once, divides it into little po tions,
that the earth may gradually receive and let it soak into i^s bosom, for the
feeding of Plants, and the supply of all c^eatu^es that live upon it.

Thirdly, It Is a work also of divine Goodness; for if God did not make small
the drops of water, if it should come down whole it would drown the earth,
instead of comforting and fattening it. Behold then, the Power, Wisdom and
Goodness of God in making small the drops of water!

Though Philosophers have attempted to find out and assign a reason in Nature,
about this falling of the rain in drops, yet they have not fully attained the
reason why, nor the manner how, God does this; we must ascribe it chiefly to
the power, wisdom, and goodness of God, in ordering it for the benefit of man,
yea of all living creatures. Plane admirabilem et tremendum in illu et per illa
fefe exhibet deus. Merc:
And surely Elihu leads us to consider the wonders of those things which are
common and natural, to convince us, that forasmuch as we cannot clearly see
the reason of those lesser things, we should take heed of prying into greater
and remoter secrets; and he would have Job particularly know, that seeing he
could not find out the way of God in these natural things, much less could he
find out the way and whole design of God in those his providential dealings
with him: He makes small the drops of water; and then as it follows in this
verse, They pour down rain according to the vapor thereof.

Though the water be made into small drops, yet he does not say, they drop
down, but they pour down rain; that is, the drops fall plentifully; that
frequent expression, in Scripture, of pouring down, every where implies plenty
or abundance. The promise of pouring out the Spirit in the latter days, (...)
fundit, fundendo purgaovit active, item percolatus ex^olatus, de faecatus suit.
Imber, nimbus plu ^a.
notes the abundance of the Spirit that shall then be given. The word signifies
also to strain, implying that the rain is contained in the Clouds, as it were
in a linen cloth, which being pressed, distills the water in small streams or
drops, as it were through a strainer. They pour down Rain.

There are three words in the Latin, the first of which notes a shower or
gentle rain; (...) pluvia, hi^^ (...) verbum transitivum in Hiphil significat,
fe^it ^luere, quo certe innuitur deum esse Authorem pluviae. Fagius in Gen*
the second, a stormy or fierce rain; the third, rain in general. Rain, in
this place, may be taken in all or either of these notions, for at one time or
other the Clouds pour down drops into all sorts of rain Rain (as I said) is
made of vapors drawn up, and here he says, They pour down rain According to
the vapor thereof.

There are two sorts of vapors; there are dry vapors, and moist vapors; dry
vapors (say Naturalists) are the matter of the wind, and the moist are the
matter of the rain; Now says Elihu, they pour down rain according to the
vapor thereof; that is, Pluviae quasi fluviae, eo q od fluant. Isidor. Quae
fundunt pluviam post nebulam ^jus. Pisc: (...) significat v^porem et nubem,
signific^t etiam calamitatem; hinc versus ita vertitur, nam subtrahit stillas
aquarum, quae fundebant pluviam ad calamitatem ejus. Jun:
look in what proportion the Sun draws the vapors into the Air, in that
proportion does the rain fall upon the Earth; or, in the sam^ proportion that
the vapor is drawn up, in that proportion is the rain let down.

Some render the word which we translate vapor, a cloud, that is, after the
water is drawn up into a Cloud, it pours down rain proportionably. Another
translation renders it, Affliction or trouble, and give the whole verse thus;
He draws up the drops of water, which poured down rain to their Calamity.
This the lea ned Author applies particularly to the Flood in N^ahs time; but I
shall not stay upon that. Our reading is clear; They pour down rain according
to the vapor thereof; that is, in the same proportion that vapors come up,
the rain falls down.

First, In that, as the rain is made of the vapor, so according to the vapor,
or in proportion to the vapor, such are the showers of rain; Note; According
to what is naturally received, returns are naturally made.

And if the Clouds of Heaven return to man naturally according to that they
receive from the Earth; how is man on earth bound morally, or in duty, to
return according to what he receives from Heaven. Let us mind our accordings
and proportions to the dealings and dispensations of God. The Clouds of the
air will condemn us, at least witness against us, if we receive much, and
return little. I pass this. Only here we may take notice of six things in
Concatination one with another: First, vapors are drawn up from the Earth:
Secondly, they are made into watery Clouds: Thirdly, from thence they are sent
back to moisten the Earth: Fourthly, the rain sent down is proportionable to
the vapor that went up: Fifthly, according to that proportion, the Earth is
made more or less fruitful; plentiful rains cause or produce plentiful
fruits ordinarily from the Earth, and little rains little fruits: Sixthly, and
lastly, man is nourished and has his outward Comforts increased or lessened in
proportion to the fruits which the Earth brings forth, or to the fruitfulness
of the Earth. All these things attend and depend upon one another. They pour
down according to the vapor thereof, and God draws up in proportion to what
himself purposes they shall pour down. Thus we see, how God by the Sun draws
out the moisture and sap of the Earth, to return it back with advantage.
Drawing up the moisture makes the Earth languish, and her fruits wither;
sending it down again, makes the Earth green, flourishing and fruitful. They
pour down rain, etc. And what more? Elihu answers Verse. 28. Which the Clouds do
drop.

(...) nunc Coelum, nunc nubes denot^t, a tenuissim^ earum Substantia. Drus:
Here he speaks more expressly, and tells us more clearly than before, what the
vapors are made up into, According to the vapor thereof, which the Clouds do
drop. As Clouds are made of vapors, so they are the receptacles or vessels of
rain, which they hold (as was showed before) as long as God pleases, and when
he gives the word, then they drop And distill upon man abundantly.

That Is another elegant word, implying the manner in which the rain comes or
falls, it is as by a distillation. Here also it is expressed for whose use or
sake principally the rain is sent. The Clouds (says the Text) drop and distill
upon man, yet we know men get themselves out of the rain as soon and as fast as
they can. The rain falls upon the earth, and abides there; yet it is said to
distill upon man, because the rain distills at man's request, and for man's sake:
That other creatures are cherished by the rain, is not for themselves, but for
man, as man is not cherished and maintained by those creatures for himself, but
for God. As the rain distills chiefly for the glory of God, so nextly for the
relief and comfort of man; and for man it distills Abundantly.

(...) Super hominem multum, vel super homines affluenter, ut (...) sit
adverbium, quod eu minus se proba^ mihi, quia Rab. hic scrilitur eum Cametz.
Drus:
There is a double reading of this word. Some take it as an Adjective to the
Substan^ive man, rendering thus, it distills upon many men; we take it
adverbially, Which distill, upon man plentifully, that is, in great plenty upon
man. We may take in both readings without strain to the Text, or departure from
the matter in hand. For as the rain alls or distills upon man abundantly, so
upon abundance of men; the rain, we know, falls sometimes very plentifully, and
at times, or one time or other all the world over, watering every man's ground,
and serving every man's turn or occasions. Therefore Elihu expresses the
blessing fully when he says, The Clouds distill upon man abundantly, or upon
abundance of men.

Hence Note, First; The Lord haih rain enough in store;

He has vessels plentifully filled for the watering of the Earth; and, The
Lord is so free in his dispensation of the rain, that as he gives it to many in
number, so to many in kind, he makes his rain to fall, (as well as his Sun to
shine) upon the just, and on the unjust, (Math. 5.45.) It shows the exceeding
goodness, as well as the bounty of God, that the evil partake of his benefits
as well as the good.

And, for our further improvement of this bounty of God, remember, that if God
be so abundant and liberal in blessings to us, we ought in proportion to
abound in duty toward him, or (as the Apostle exhorts, 1 Cor. 15.58.) we
should be steadfast and immovable, always abounding in the work of the Lord.
Some do only a little, (I may say) only here a stitch and there a stitch of
work for God, but we should abound in it; and that not only now and then by
fits, but be always fixed in it, especially we should do so, with respect to
that, which the rain is a Symbol of, the word of God. When God drops and
distills the rain of Gospel t^uths and holy soul-saving instructions abundantly
upon us, how should we abound in every good word and work! It was prophesied of
Christ ( Psalm. 72.6.) He shall come down as rain upon the mown grass, as
showers that water the earth. Some of the Ancients expound that place of the
coming down of Christ in his Incarnation; then indeed he came down like rain
upon the mown grass, he came down sweetly and powerfully. It Is true also that
Christ, who is God, the Word, the substantial Word, comes down as rain in and
with the declarative word of God preached and faithfully dispensed to the souls
of men: and when Christ comes down thus to us, we should rise up to him, and
return fruits of grace, according to the showers of grace, which we have
received. The Prophet gives us an elegant comparison of the natural and
spiritual rain in their effects and issues, ( Isa. 55.10, 11.) For as the rain
comes down and the snow from heaven, and returns not thither, but waters
the earth, and makes it bring forth and bud, that it may give feed to the
sower, and bread to the eater; so shall my word be, that goes forth out of my
mouth; it shall not return unto me void, but it shall accomplish that which I
please, and it shall prosper in the thing whereto I send it. Now what is the
pleasure of God in giving his Word? what is the arrand upon which he sends it?
It Is I grant, sometimes to harden, deafen and blind a people, ( Isa. 6.9, 10.)
it is sometimes to be a savor of death unto death, (2 Cor. 2.16.) These are
dreadful judiciary purposes of God in sending his Word; nor does it ever
please the Lord to send his Word upon this arrand, but when he is sorely
displeased by a peoples slighting and contempt of his Word. The thing which
prima^ily pleases him, the purpose which he chiefly pu^sueth in sending his
Word, is, that his people may have (as the Apostle speaks) Their fruit unto
holiness in this life, and in the end everlasting life. For these ends, the
Lord is daily distilling upon us the rain of his Word, both in commands and
promises, and in both abundantly. Therefore let us labor to abound in returns
of faith, of love, of hope, of self-denial, of zeal for God, and of
fruit-bearing unto God. If when God distills the natural rain, that should
provoke us to fruitfulness in spiritualls, how much more when he pours down so
much spiritual rain upon us! For the close of this meditation, consider, That

As the natural rain, First, softens the earth, and mollifies it; Secondly,
cleanses the earth, and washes it; Thirdly, enricheth the earth, and makes it
fruitful; Fourthly, comforts the earth, and makes every thing that moves upon
it, and grows out of it, to rejoice; Fifthly, sometimes drowns the earth, and
destroys the Inhabitants of it: As I say, the natural rain does all these
things, so also does the spiritual rain, the word of God. That, First,
mollifieth; Secondly, cleanses; Thirdly, fructifieth; Fourthly, comfort the
hearts of all those that receive it; and Fifthly, The rain of the word drowns
and destroys all those that rise up against it, or will not receive it.

JOB, Chap. 36. Verse. 29, 30, 31. 29. Also, can any understand the spreadings
of the Clouds, or the noise of his Tabernacle?

30. Behold, he spreads his light upon it, and covers the bottom of the sea.

31. For by them he judges the people, he gives meat in abundance.


ELihu having spoken of the wonderful work of God in forming and sending rain
in the two former verses, speaks next of the Clouds, which are as vessels
containing the rain, and in which the rain is carried and conveyed up and
down the world for the use of man, or for those services, to which God has
appointed it. He begins with a denying Question: Verse. 29. Also, can any
understand the spreading of the Clouds?

As if he had said, To what I said before, I add this, Here is another secret
in nature, Can any understand the spreading of the Clouds? He does not say, can
vulgar ignorant and unlearned persons understand, but can any? Can the wisest?
can the most learned? Can the best studied Philosophers understand the
spreading of the Clouds? Can they understand? That is, they cannot understand.

But have not men, especially learned men, understanding enough to ascend the
clouds, and discover the nature of them? Surely their understandings are very
mean, or very much clouded, who understand not what the spreading of the clouds
means.

I answer, though Elihu's question has a negation in it, yet not a total
negation, (...) does not exclude the understanding of men wholly out of (...)
cl^uds; he only denies man a full understanding of all thin^ (...) ^ch concern
either the nature or motion of the clouds. Wh^ (...) understand much about the
spreading of the clouds, but they cannot understand all. The best of godly men
unde^stand not much, or see but a little way into spiritual things: And the
wisest of worldly men do not, cannot, see all in natural things. Can any
understand The spreading of the Clouds?

(...) Expansiones vel differentias nubium, cum aliae steriles sint, aliae
pluviam, aliae grandinem mit^ant; Sed reclius expansiones vertitur. Merc:
Here are, First, the Clouds; Secondly, the spreading of them. The word which we
translate, spreading, has a twofold signification: First, (with the
alteration only of a point upon one letter) it signifies The difference of
things in any kind: And then the Text is read, Can any understand the
difference of the Clouds, that is, the variety that is among the clouds. The
clouds are not all of a likeness, nor all of a bigness; there are clouds of
many sorts and sizes: there are clouds which breed snow, and clouds which breed
hail, clouds which breed rain, and clouds which breed thunder and lightning.
Some clouds are empty, called clouds without rain or water, (Pro. 25.14. Jude,
v. 12.) and other clouds are full of water: There is a difference also of
clouds as to our sight and view, some are black, some white, some red, some are
greenish, others palish clouds, from which various colors and appearances,
Prognostics are made of the change of weather, as Christ told the Pharisees (
Mat. 16.2, 3.) Naturalists observe very many differences in the clouds, nor is
it without wonder, that the clouds which are made all of one matter (vapors
drawn from below) should produce such and so many different effects, that
(according to this reading) we have reason to put the question, Who can
understand the differences of the Clouds? We read it, and that well and full to
the Hebrew Text, Who can ^nderstand the spreading of the Clouds, or their
expansion?

The most cunning and knowing men in the mysteries of nature, cannot either
tell how far the clouds will spread, or to what point and part of the world
they will convey their water, and (as I may say) unburden themselves. Thus the
words refer back to the two former verses. The Clouds are spread as a Curtain,
or as a piece of Tapestry, or as a mighty Canopy; Who can understand the
spreading of them? The spreading of them; First, as they carry rain; or,
Secondly, the spreading of them (as some expound the place) as they convey the
Lightening, which the Scripture says, ( Math. 24.27.) Passes from one end of
heaven to the other, from the East to the West; who knows how far the
Lightning will spread in the Clouds? Thus some connect it with the following
verse. Who can understand the spreading Of the Clouds?

There is a special derivation of the word rendered Clouds, (...) nubes a
densitate est crassamentum a^^is. (...) vel a (...) stillare, vel a (...)
cadere.
from the Hebrew, Greek, and Latin, all pretending to the nature of the
Clouds: The Hebrew word properly notes the thickness or grossness of the
Clouds; the Greek word notes the dropping nature of the Clouds, being derived
from a root which signifie^h to drop, or (which is near the fame) to descend,
the root word signifying to fall; the Latin word is taken from covering,
because the Clouds mask or cover the face of Heaven, and often hide and screine
the shining of the Sun from us.

Now because Elihu is upon a work of nature, and insists upon it all along in
the next Chapter; I shall therefore to clear the matter, propose and answer
three Questions concerning the Clouds.

First, What is a Cloud, or what is the nature of the Clouds? A cloud is a
moist vapor drawn up from the earth or water by the heat of the Sun into the
middle region of the Air (as Naturalists divide the Air) where being by the
coldness of the place congealed, and as it were knit together, it hangs and
continues there, till it be broken up at the dispose of God, and sent down for
the comfort or correction of man in rain, snow, hail, etc. The clouds of
heaven derive their pedigree from the moisture found on earth, and to the earth
they return their moisture.

Secondly, Seeing the Clouds are such mighty bodies, and contain (as I may say)
whole seas of water in them, and water, being a heavy body, naturally descends
or tends downward (as all heavy things do) it may be questioned (and indeed it
is a wonder) how those Clouds are k^pt aloft in the Air? how comes it to pass
that such heavy bodies, such floods of water do not presently fall violently,
and at once shed themselves down upon, and overwhelme the earth? To that I
answer,

First, Some say the Clouds are kept up by that natural inbred heat or warmth
which is included in them; or that they are kept up by the superior heat of
the Sun, and Stars, which first drew them up.

Secondly, Others say, these mighty Clouds are held up by the wind; which
keeping them in perpetual motion, they fall not, they descend no^, but
according to a divine order, by which they are disposed of to several uses.

Thirdly, Others ascribe it to the hollowness or spunginess of their nature,
which receiving and taking in the thin air, they are more easily kept up.

But when we have searched to the utmost for reasons in nature, we must rise
higher, and resolve the question according to Scripture and divine Philosophy,
into the power and will of God. The holding up of the Clouds is Gods work as
well as the raising of them up; He gave this law or command unto the Clouds in
the day of their creation, that they should not fall down nor distill a drop,
but by his own commandment and appointment. Thus we find it expressed by Moses
in his description of the crea^ion, ( Genesis 1.6.) Let the firmament (that is,
Zanch: de operibus dei, ^. 2. c. 1.
the air, the inferior air next to the middle region) divide the waters from
the waters. Here is a divine sanction; there are waters above, and waters
below; And says God, Let the firmament divide the waters from the waters; that
is, those waters that are drawn up into Clouds in the air, a provision for
Rain, etc. let them be kept above, and divided from the Sea and waters that
dwell below. Thus there was a Law at first to keep quarter, as I may say,
between those waters. And Solomon speaking of the eternal Son of God, of his
co-eternity with the Father, brings him (under the name of Wisdom) speaking
thus of himself; I was with him (when he did this and that, and among the rest,
Prove. 8.28.) When he established the Clouds above; that is, when God made a
Decree that the Clouds should stay above, and not come down but at his call. So
it is expressed ( Job 26.8.) God binds up the waters in the thick Cloud, and
the Cloud is not rent under them. It Is not of it self that the Cloud (having
such a weight in it) does not rent and break, but, says God, it shall not. (
Pro. 30.4.) He has bound the waters in a garment. But what is the garment? His
own decree and pu^pose is the garment which binds up the waters. For as the
waters of the Sea are bounded by the Decree of God ( Job 38.11.) So likewise
the waters in the air are bound up by his Decree ( Psalm. 148.4, 6.) Praise him
ye heaven of heavens, and ye waters which are above the heavens; he has
established t^em for ever, and has made a decree which shall not pass. He has
established the waters which are above the heavens, as well as the waters below
the heavens; he has established them by a decree (like that of the Medes and
Persians) which shall not be disanulled. So then, here is the answer to this
second question, How it comes to pass, that the Clouds containing such floods
of water (which is an heavy body*) do not descend and overwhelm the earth? This
is by the power and decree, or by the powerful decree of God, who has caused
such a weak and thin substance, as the Clouds, made up only of Vapors, to hold
those mighty waters close, and keep them prisoners, that not a spoonful shall
shed forth till himself pleases. The Clouds, as some have well expressed it,
are like spunges filled with water, and till God lays his hand upon the
Clouds (that is, till he gives a word) and as I may say, squeezes or presses
them by his providence (as we squeez a spung full of water) the waters fall
not. Thus we see the reason, why Elihu makes so great a matter of the sp^eading
of the Clouds, and why the waters fall not presently together, nor presently
drop out of them, but in their season.

A third Querie concerning the Clouds may be this; Why are they placed above?
What is their use?

I answer, The use of the Clouds may be considered two ways; first, there is a
natural, secondly, a spiritual use of them.

First, there is a natural use of them, and that is twofold.

First, That they may contain water in a readiness to moisten and fatten the
earth: Stores and treasures of rain are kept in them to supply the necessities
of all earthly creatures.

Secondly, The natural use of the Clouds is, to attemper the the heat of the
air, and to be as a Curtain, or Screen between us and the Sun. If the Sun
should always shine fully upon the earth, we were not able to abide it; but
the Clouds coming between, do exceedingly qualify and moderate the heat and
fierceness of the Sun. These, besides others, are their natural u^es.

And if we look into the Scripture, we shall find many spiritual and gracious
uses, for which God has made the Clouds.

First, God has set his Bow in the Clouds, as a token of his favor unto
mankind, as a token of his general favor, that he will not drown the world
again ( Genesis 9.14, 15.) And it shall come to pass, when I bring a Cloud over
the Earth, that the Bow shall be seen in the Cloud; and I will remember my
Covenant which is between me and you, and every living creature of all flesh;
and the waters shall no more become a flood, to destroy all flesh. This is
alluded to by the Prophet ( Isa. 54.9.) as a token of the special favor of God
to his People, that he will never break Covenant with them. When Believers see
his Bow in the Cloud, they may be as well assured, that they shall be freed
from a deluge of wrath, as that the world shall not be overwhelmed again with a
deluge of waters.

Secondly, We find the Lord making use of a Cloud, or using the ministry of a
Cloud, in a g^acious way, for the conducting of his People out of Egypt quite
through the Wilderness unto Canaan. That I grant was more than an ordinary
Cloud, and lower and nearer the earth than usually Clouds are, yet it was
doubtless of the same nature with other Clouds ( Exodus 13.21. Neh. 9.19.) And
therefore, when the P^ophet would assure the Church of guidance and protection,
he tells them ( Isa. 3.5.) The Lord will create upon every dwelling place of
mount Sion, and upon her assemblies, a Cloud and Smoke by day, and the shining
of the flaming Fire by night: for upon all the glory shall be a defense. And we
at this day, may make this spiritual use (acco^ding to Scripture) of the
Clouds, which we behold, as to mind us how the Lo^d both protected and guided
the People of Israel through the wilderness, so to assure us that he will
protect and guide us through the World. Christ is this Cloud, a covering
protecting Cloud unto his Church; and we may sweetly meditate upon him, not
only when we behold the Sun, but as often as we behold the clouds.

Further, As Christ serves his Church like a Cloud, so the Clouds have done and
shall do many services to Christ. A b^ight Cloud overshadowed Christ in his
transfiguration ( Mat. 17.5.) A Cloud received him out of the Apostles sight at
his ascension ( Act. 1.9.) and he shall come again in the Clouds to judgment
Mat. 24.30. Luke 21.27.) He is also represented) sitting upon a white Cloud (
Rev. 14.14.

Thirdly, The spirit of God gives us another gracious use of, and meditation
upon the Clouds; that as often as we see thick and black Clouds, which threaten
a grievous sto^m, scattered, and the air cleared, this should put us in mind of
the abundant grace of God pardoning our sin ( Isa. 44.22.) I have blotted, as a
thick Cloud, thy transgression, and as a Cloud thy sins. False and faithless
Ministers are called Clouds without water (Jude v. 12.) And the faithful
Ministers of the Gospel, flee as a Cloud to water Souls, as the converted
Gentiles are said, to flee as doves to the windows (Isa. 60.8.) There are not
only natural but spiritual uses and improvements to be made of the Clouds, as
often as we behold them; and the Scripture in many places, leads and points us
to such meditations. It is said of Luther, that once beholding a great Cloud,
that promised, or had a great appearance of rain, in a time of drought, blown
away and dispelled, without yielding one drop of rain to refresh the earth; he
turned to some of his friends, and said, Such are the Promises of the world.
Men, said he, Tales sunt promissiones mundi.
make great and fair promises, pretending much good, and good will to those to
whom they are made, which yet vanish and come to nothing; and concluding his
observation upon the deceitful appearance of the Cloud, added the words of
Solomon (Prove. 25.14.) Who so boasts himself of a false gift, is like clouds
without rain. Such especially are all false teachers, they, if any, boast
themselves of a false gift, that is, they either pretend to a gift which they
have not, or they pretend their gift is of Christ, when it is not; these are
like Clouds without rain, or (as the text in the Epistle of Jude, even now
mentioned) calls them, they are Clouds without water, carried about of winds,
that is, which way so ever the wind of outward respects and advantages blows,
they are carried.

So much for answer to those three questions about the Clouds. Who can
understand the spreading of the Clouds?

Hence note; First, Even natural things exceed the reach of man's understanding.

How much more do spiritual things, the mysteries of Grace! Nichodemus was a
knowing man, a Master in Israel, yet how simply did he speak when Christ
proposed to him, and presented him with the necessity of a new birth! Nor has
a natural man a clearer insight in any other Gospel mystery (1 Cor. 2.14.) The
natural man receives not the things of God, neither can he know them, because
they are spiritually discerned. But he that is spiritual judges (or
discerns) all things; that is, he has a principle of spiritual
understanding, whereby he is able to make a right judgment of all things
necessary to his own edification and salvation.

Again; If the natural things which God has made (the spreading of the Clouds)
exceed our understanding, then how much more does God himse^f who made them!

Who can understand the spreadings of God? the immensity of God? the eternity,
the omnipotency, the infinity of God? That Is the thing Elihu chiefly aims at
in all this discourse. While he poseth Job, and all men, in the natural works
of God, he would convince Job, and all men, that neither he was, not any man is
able to comprehend the equity and righteousness of his proceeding in the darker
ways of Providence. And this he did, because Job had too often (upon the
matter) called God to answer, asking why it was so? instead of a silent
submission to what he did not understand, nor could see the reason of.

Further, consider this particular in nature, The spreading of the Clouds. We
see the Clouds every day, and we see their spreadings, that is common and
obvious to the eye; yet (says Elihu) who can understand these spreadings?
There is a greater latitude in the Clouds than we imagine; and if we cannot
fully understand the things which we see, how can we understand what we see
not? Who apprehends the true greatness of the Clouds, the greatness of the
Moon, the greatness of the Stars, the greatness of the Sun; all which our eyes
behold? We can neither understand by our eye, nor by the rules and reports of
the greatest Astronomers, the true magnitude or greatness of those heavenly
visible bodies; who then can take the true dimension (if I may so speak) of
things invisible? Who can understand the spreading of the Clouds?

Or the noise ( or noises) of his Tabernacle. (...) sonuit, perstrepuit,
denotat sonitum tumultus bellici Rab. Shel^
The word notes a dreadful noi^e, a noise with a tumult, such a noise as is made
when ruin and desolation comes upon a place, such a noise as the Prophet
describes in a time of war. Moab shall die with a tumult (Amos 2.2.) Who can
understand the ^^ise of his tabernacle?

This noise may be expounded two ways;

First, Of thunderclaps. When Clouds are discharged, their thunderbolts, like
cannon bullets, rattle through the air: Who can understand this noise of his
tabernacle? As no man can at all understand the thunder of his power (Chap.
26.14.) so not the All of his powerful thunder. This is a truth, and the text
may well take in that noise, the noise of the thunder. But because Elihu
speaks professedly and expressly of thunder in the next Chapter ( verse. 4.)
therefore (I conceive) the noise of his tabernacle, here may be somewhat else,
or less than that of thunder, that is, the noise of the winds, breaking out
from the tabernacle of God. What a busseling noise, what an outcry (as I may
say) the winds make we all know, especially when they become storms, and are
not only winds but tempests. There are sweet gentle gales of wind, which make
but a little murmur, or whisper in the air, we can scarce hear their voice; but
some winds roar, some winds come little short of thunder, for noise and
lowdness, and I suppose Elihu chiefly intends this noise, by The noise Of his
tabernacle.

But what is the tabernacle of God? I answer; That word Tabernacle is often
used in the Old Testament; properly it signifies a tent in war, a military
mansion, a flitting habitation, or portable house, having no fixed or settled
seat. The tabernacle under the Law was the place appointed by God for public
worship. Tabernaculu^ hi^ (...) dicitur unde Fes^tum Suc^oth i. e.
T^bernaculorum.
We read also of the Feast of Tabernacles (Lev. 23.34.) at which solemn Feast,
the Jews dwelt seven days in tents, to put them in remembrance, that God made
their forefathers dwell in tents when he brought them out of Egypt, as also to
mind them, that here they had no abiding place, but were to seek one to come.
And as this place of public worship, so any place for private dwelling was
called a tabernacle. Surely I will not come into the tabernacle of my house,
until etc. (Said David, Ps. 132.3.) that is, into my house, which though it be
a royal Palace, yet I look upon it, but as a movable tabernacle. But does God
dwell in a movable house? God is immovable, he makes no removes, yet
wheresoever God is pleased to show himself in his power and marvelous works,
there we may say his tabernacle is. The tabernacle of God, where this noise,
this mighty noise is made, is nothing else but the Clouds before spoken of. The
Clouds are Gods tabernacle; they are called so expressly by a word of very near
cognation unto this ( Psalm. 18.11.) He makes the Clouds his pavilion. A
pavilion is an extraordinary tabernacle; a pavilion is that tabernacle which is
proper to a King or to the General of an Army. Now says the Psalmist, He
makes the Clouds his pavilion; In them he shows his power and glory. They are
also called the chariots of God ( Psalm. 104.3. Deuteronomy. 32.6.) and he is said to
come in the Clouds, as a Prince in his chariot. He came in a thick Cloud (Exodus
19.9.) and he descended in a Cloud (Exodus 34.5.) which here is called his
tabernacle. So then, the Clouds, together with all that middle region of the
air, where the rain now, and fiery meteors, are generated, are in Scripture
allegorically called, the tabernacle of God; because there he seems often to
dwell or reside, for the producing of many wonderful works upon this inferior
world. We may take the word here in a double allusion unto a tabernacle, or
unto two sorts of tabernacles.

First, There were ordinary tabernacles, wherein men dwelt. The ancient Hebrews
dwelt in tents or tabernacles; these were tabernacles for civil use, or for
habitation; in allusion unto which, the Apostle speaks of the body, wherein
the soul dwells (2 Cor. 5.) When the earthly house of this tabernacle shall be
dissolved, we know, that we have a building of God, an hsuse not made with
hands, eternal in the heavens.

Secondly, There were tabernacles for military use, soldiers tents, or
tabernacles. As the whole heavens, so the clouds especially may be called the
tabernacle of God in both respects; they a^e his house, wherein he sits unseen,
and does wonders all the wo^ld over; in them he sh^weth his power, and appears
glo^iously, and as a great Prince or mighty General he sends out his edicts and
orders from the clouds, he commands winds, storms, tempests, snow and hail
for several dispensations to go from thence, according as his own infinite
wisdom sees fit, and the cases of men require, whether in ways of Judgment or
of mercy; as Elihu tells us, yet more distinctly, at the 31th verse, For by
them (says he) judges he the people, he gives meat in abundance. The clouds
are very fit and commodious for Gods use in any of these respects; either for
the terrifying and punishing of the wicked, or, for the helping and feeding of
them that fear him. Now forasmuch as the clouds are called the tabernacle of
God upon these accounts,

Learn first; There God is said to be especially, where he especially works.

God is no more in one place of the wo^ld than in another, as to his being and
existence; for he is every w^ere, he fills heaven and earth. We must not
think that God is shu^ up in the clouds as a man in his tabernacle; but because
God works much in the clouds, and does great things by the rain, thunder and
lightening, therefore the clouds, whence these Meteors issue, are called his
tabernacle. Wherever God works much, he is said to dwell. Why is God said to
dwell with them that are of an humble and contrite heart? even because he
works much in them, and much by them. So because many great works of God are
done in the Clouds, as we shall see more particularly hereafter, therefore the
Lord is said to dwell there as in his tabernacle.

Secondly, When it is said, Who can understand the noise of his tabernacle?

Observe; The most dreadful storms and tempests, the roaring winds which we
hear at any time, are sent out by God, they are the noise of his tabernacle;

They go when he says go, ( Psalm. 148.8.) Stormy winds and tempests fulfilling
his will. We may think, storms, of all things, least under command and order,
yet they are under an exact order. The most stormy winds go not an hairs
breadth besides, or beyond the commission which God gives them. As often as we
hear the roaring noise of the wind, much more, of thunder, let us remember,
it is the noise of his tabernacle.

Verse. 30. Behold, he spreads his light upon it, and covers the bottom of
the sea. Elihu insists still upon the works of God, He spreads his light.
Some understand by this light, the lightening; and it is a great truth, God
wonderfully spreads the lightening upon the da^k clouds, as if they were all in
a flame, That Is clear to the eye when it lighteneth; and God is s^yd ( Psalm.
144.6.) To cast forth his lightening; which comes near this word in the text,
he spreads it. But because in the next ch^pter Elihu speaks purposely of the
lightening, therefore I shall not stay upon that sense here, but decline it.

Rather take light in the common notion; He spreads his light, that is, the
light of the Sun, which is eminen^ly called Gods Light, upon it, that is, upon
the cloud spoken of in the form verse* and so the two parts of this verse,
yield us a de^crip^ion (as I conceive) of the weather-changes made by God. When
we have had much rain and storms, God can presently spread his light upon the
cloud, that is, cause the light and heat of the Sun to conquer the clouds and
scatter them.

And (he also) covers the bottom of the Sea. That is, by and by, (...)
he makes it very dark by the gathering of thick clouds; even as dark as the
bottom of the Sea, whither the light cannot come, or dark to the bottom of the
Sea. R^dices maris sunt profundissimae infimaeque illius parts.
The original is, the roots of the Sea, that is, the lowest parts of the Sea,
which we significa^tly translate, the bottom of the Sea. Some explicate the
whole ve^se, He spreads his light upon the face of the whole heavens, and
spreads the waters over the Ocean, so that no bottom* can be seen, scarcely
found. Mr. Broughton, by the roots of the Sea, understands the earth. Another
says, he makes mention of the roots of the Sea, because the waters of the Sea,
are as it were the roots of the Clouds, they chiefly supplying the matter of
which they are made. Vapors drawn from the waters of the Sea, by the heat of
the Sun, become Clouds, and these Clouds cover both Earth and Sea, far and
near. Thus it is matter of wonder to see such great and sudden changes in the
air; that the same Sun with its beams should exhale those vapors which are
condensed into Clouds, and that soon after, those Sunbeams should scatter and
dissolve those Clouds; or tha^ now the heavens should be so masked with Clouds
as to make all dark, and in a little space, all return to its former brightness
and b^^uty.

He spreade^h hi^ Light. Wha is there in the world that is not Gods? ^^re he
calle^h Light his.

Hence note; God loves to entitle himself to Light in an especial manner.

( Mat. 5.44.) He causes his Sun to shine, etc. The Moon is his as well as the
Sun, and the Stars are his as much as either; but because the Sun is the
greater Vessel and conveigher o^ Ligh^, therefore says Christ, He causes his
Sun to shine on the evil and the good, etc. God himself is Light, and the
Father of Lights (Jam. 1.17.) which is true not only of spiritual Light, by
which the things of God are discovered to us; but also of natural Light, the
light of the Sun, that is Gods Light too, he is the Father of it.

Secondly note; The changes which we see in the air, from fair to fowl weather,
from calms to tempests, are from God.

It is not in the creature to make one day or hour fair or foul. As Christ
gives the reason why no man should swear by his head, because he cannot make an
hair white or black, he cannot change the color of an hair, nor make a hair of
any color: So, it is not in the power of any man, to make one day fair or
foul, that is Gods peculiar; He spreads his Light upon the Clouds, and
covers the bottom of the Sea.

Verse. 31. For by them he judges the People, he gives meat in abundance. This
31th Verse gives us the effect of all that which Elihu had spoken before, of
the rain, of storms and tempests, and we may add, of lightening, and of
thunder; By them he judges the people and gives meat in abundance. Here are
two effects; First, an effect grievous; Secondly, an effect gracious: The
former proceeds from the justice, the latter from the mercy and goodness of God.

By them, that is, by the rain, by the winds, etc. he judges the people. To
judge is taken three ways in Scripture.

First, To judge, is to rule or govern. When it is said, such a man judged
Israel, the meaning is, he ruled and governed Israel: That Is the language of
the book of Judges every where, when their Governors are spoken of.

Secondly, To Judge, is to determine, or give sentence in a special case (
Deuteronomy. 25.1.)

Thirdly, To judge is to punish or afflict, and thus often in Scripture, when
God punishes any person or people, he is said to judge them ( Psalm. 51.4. That
thou may be cleared when thou judge, that is, when thou afflictest, or
layest thine hand upon me (says David) as God had threatened by Nathan, that
the sword should not depart from his house; this moved David to make
confession, Against thee, thee only, have I sinned: -- that thou might be
justified when thou speak, and cleared when thou judge. As if he had said,
my confession, O Lord, will be thy justification; all may see I have given thee
abundant cause to lay thy chastening hand upon me ( Heb. 13.4.) Whoremongers
and adulterers God will judge; though men let them pass, yet God will not, he
will punish them. Again, in that notable place (1 Cor. 11.31, 32.) If we would
judge our selves we should not be judged of the Lord. What it is to be judged,
the Apostle shows in the next words; But when we are judged, we are chastened
of the Lord. The Apostle warns the Church to take heed how they came to the
solemn assemblies, lest coming rashly and unpreparedly, the hand of God should
fall heavy upon them, by weakness, sickness and death. When Elihu says, By
them he judges the People. We are to take judging in this third sense; He
judges, that is, he afflicts and punishes men by these things. Thus the
Allusion is elegantly followed. The Lord from his tabernacle, or throne in the
Clouds, sends forth Edicts, and signs his Warrants, for the punishment both of
nations and persons; windy storms, rain and thunder, going forth as
executioners of his orders and appointments: By them he judges the people.

Hence observe; First, God can make a scourge of any of the creatures.

By them, that is, by the rain and by the wind, he judges the people. He can
use what instrument he pleases to afflict and chasten us with. Read the holy
Scriptures, read the Histories of the Church, and you will find all sorts of
creatures summoned one time or other, and sent forth as Gods messengers, to
punish the pride and stubbornness, the impenitency and perverseness of men's
hearts and ways. How many creatures did God make use of to punish Pharaoh
with, and many of them very contemptible ones; among the rest, the hail, rain,
and thunder spoken of in this place, were his instruments of vengeance in
plaguing that hardened King. Whenever God afflicts a people by the creatures,
he judges them by the creatures. Let us take heed, that we provoke not God to
turn those things which were given for our good, to our hurt; that he make not
what was made our servant, our punishment. God made all creatures serviceable
and useful to man, but through sin they become grievous and destructive to man;
By them he judges the people.

He gives meat in abundance. Escam ad copium. Heb. i. e. copiosum.
Here is the second effect wrought or produced by these creatures: He gives,
that is, God gives; meat, that is, all kind of food and provision, for the
life both of man and beast; and he gives it in abundance: He does not give it
scantly or nigardly, in small portions and pi^tances, but in full measure,
pressed down, heaped up, and running over. By them, that is, Dat escam multis
mortalibus. Hieron.
by the rain and by the wind, etc. God gives us our meat in abundance. One
translation says, He gives meat to many, that is, to all.

Hence note; First, Our daily food is the gift of God.

He gives meat. No man gets his own bread unless God gives it; God must give
it before we can get it.

Secondly note; God is a free, bountiful and liberal housekeeper;

He gives meat in abundance; he gives to very many, yea, to all, and he
gives very much; he gives meat to all the fowls of the Air, and to all the
fishes of the Sea, to all men and beasts living on the earth, they all receive
food from God: he gives food to all flesh ( Psalm. 136.25.) He fills every
living thing. (Psalm. 147.9.) He gives to the beast his food, and feeds the
young ravens when they cry. Christ makes this an argument of faith in God for
food and clothing ( Mat. 6.26.) Behold the fowls of the air, for they sow not,
neither do they reap, nor gather into barns; yet your heavenly Father feeds
them: are not ye much better than they? How little faith have you, who knowing
that God feeds the fowls of the air, yet cannot trust him for your food! He
gives food in abundance.

Thirdly note; Plenty and scarcity are at the dispose of God;

He can give meat in scarcity, as well as meat in abundance; he can give
cleanness of teeth as well as fullness of bread: And as he can strengthen the
staff of bread, so break it, and cause us to eat bread by weight and with care,
and to drink water by measure and with astonishment (Ezekiel. 4.16.) To eat by
weight and drink by measure, is to eat and drink in the want of bread and
water, as is expressed ( verse. 17.) And as these changes of our natural, so of
our spiritual food are from the Lord ( Amos 8.11.) I will send a famine (What
famine?) not of bread, but of hearing the word of the Lord. It Is the Lord who
sends plenty and scarcity of bread, whether for the soul or for the body.

Fourthly, In that he says, by them he gives meat in abundance,

Note; God uses natural means as the cause either of plenty or scarcity.

The Lord could give us abundance, if he pleased, without rain, but he rarely
gives abundance but by rain; he sends rain out of the Clouds to water the
earth, and make it fruitful. The Lord could make our souls fruitful in every
good work, without the preaching of the word, but he seldom does it (I believe
never when the word may be had) without the preaching of the word. And
therefore the Lord by his Prophet makes a comparison between, or a parallel of
these two ( Isa. 55.10, 11.) As the rain comes down, and the snow from heaven,
and returns not thither, but waters the earth, and makes it bring forth
and bud, that it may give seed to the sower, and bread to the eater; so shall
my word be, that goes out of my mouth, etc. The Lord uses rain and snow, yea,
wind and thunder, to fit the earth, as he uses his Word and holy Ordinances to
fit the soul, to bring forth fruit to himself. He could do both alone, but he
improveth that order of nature and grace which himself at first set up and
instituted to b^ing about these excellent ends. (...). Praebebit esc^m per
multam. Sept.
By them he gives meat in abundance.

The Greek translation renders all manner of muchness. From the whole learn,
what cause we have to acknowledge the goodness of God in every shower of rain,
and fleet of snow; for by them he gives us our meat.

We should hence also be minded to fear the Lord, and to take heed of his
displeasure. It is said ( Asts 12.20.) when Herod was highly displeased with
them of Tire and Sidon, they came with one accord to him; and having made
Blastus the Kings Chamberlain their friend, desired peace, because their
Country was nourished by the Kings Country. O how much more should we labor to
avoid the displeasure of God, and hasten to make our peace with him, seeing our
Country is nourished by his Country! The heavens nourish the earth, else the
earth could not afford any thing for our nourishment. We are fed rather from
the heavens than from the earth. The clouds drop down and make the earth fat,
to give grass for cattle and co n for man. Elihu speaks nothing of the Earth,
but of the Clouds, from them we are fed.

Lately consider, Elihu joins both effects expressly, By them he judges the
people, he gives meat, etc.

Hence note; The Lord can make the same creature either beneficial or hurtful
to us.

That which is an instrument in his hand for good to his servants, is often a
plague and a scourge to his enemies. The rain which at one time moistens the
earth, at another time drowns it; the rain which at one time cherishes the
creatures, at another time choaks them. The winds which at one time fan the air
and cool it, at another time enrage and vex it; the winds which at one time
sweeten and cleanse the air, at another time corrupt and infect it. The Lord
can with the same creatures, furnish himself for any dispensation: By them he
judges the people, and by them he gives meat in abundance.

JOB, Chap. 36. Verse. 32, 33. 32. With clouds he covers the light, and
commands it not to shine, by the cloud that comes between.

33. The noise whereof shows concerning it, the cattle also concerning the
vapor.


THese two verses have a Character of difficulty and obscurity put upon them by
several interpreters; Hujus et sequentis versus difficultas et obscuritas tanta
semper ab omnibus enarratoribus habita est ut vix alius in toto hoc libro, ne
dicum in toto sacro codice locus isto impenetrabilior esse videatur. Bold:
and some have concluded them the most difficult and darkest portion of the
whole Book of Job, yea, of the whole Book of God. And should I reckon up all
the various Grammatical constructions of these words, together with the
distinct interpretations given upon them, I should weary my self, and rather
perplex than advantage the Reader.

And therefore I shall speak to these two verses, First, as they are laid down
plainly in our translation, according to which (with submission to the
judgment of those learned Authors) I see neither any great difficulty nor
obscurity in them, and shall afterward give a brief account at least, of some
of those different readings and translations which I find upon them.

The words (as I conceive) according to the mind of our translators, and as the
Text clearly bears, hold out two things concerning the rain, of which Elihu
had spoken before.

First, What is naturally preparatory to rain or foul weather, that we have
in the 32d verse, With clouds he covers the light, and commands it not to
shine by the Cloud that comes between.

Secondly, We have that which is declaratory of rain, or (as some call them)
the Prognostics and signs of rain; these are laid down in the 33d verse, The
noise thereof shows concerning it, the Cattle also concerning the vapor.

Verse. 32. With clouds he covers the light. He, that is, God covers the
light with Clouds. We heard of the Clouds at the 29th verse, but the word there
used is not that which is used in this 32d verse. Vox (...) am^igua est, ad
manus and nubes, proprie volas denotat; ad nubes refero quia de iis hactenus
actum, et quia proprie curvaturas significat, quales in unaquaque mibo duae
sunt, convexa and concava. De Dieu, in loc.
The word here made use of by El^hu, signifies generally any thing that is
hollow or concave, as a spoon, platter, o^ bool, or such like utensils, which
are bowed with a unequal and concave superficies; it has also particularly two
eminent significations, both of which are made use of in this place by
Interpreters. First, it signifies the hand; so we translate it ( Job 16.17.)
There is no injustice in my hand. The word which here we translate a Cloud, is
there translated, a hand: Now, the hand, we know, has a hollowness or cavity
in it, unless when it is purposely held forth plain. The second signification
is that of the Text, a Cloud, which is also hollow, and (as most conclude) the
same word is put to signify a hand, and a Cloud, because Clouds usually ^t the
first appearance are but small, or like a hand, as Elijahs servant repo ted to
him, after his seventh going to view the Heavens (1 Kings 18.44.) Behold, a
little Cloud like a man's hand. In this sense we take it here in our
translation: Some render With his hand he covers the light, we say, With
Clouds He covers the light.

He covers or hides the light, that is, from our eyes, (...) Texit^,
abscondi^, imponendo aliquid quo tegos tanquam operculo vel vest.
he causes it to disappear, or not to appear to us: The woe d notes covering as
with a garment, or covering with any thing that intercepts and stops the sight;
and hence by a Trope it is applied to the pardon of sin ( Psalm. 32.1.) Blessed
is the man whose sin is covered. When the Lord pardons sin, he is said to cover
it, because he will not suffer it to appear against the sinner, nor be charged
upon him to condemnation. As pardon covers sins, so Clouds cover the Heavens,
and when they are covered the light is covered. With Clouds he covers the
light. The Prophet Jeremy in his Lamentations (Chap. 3.44.) complained sadly,
because God (who is light) had covered himself, Thou have covered thy self with
a Cloud, that our prayers should not pass through. As God does sometimes cover
himself, o^ hide the light of his Countenance from his people, as with a cloud,
that their prayers cannot pass through; so he often hides or cove^s the light
of the air with natural o^ proper Clouds, that the Sun beams for a time cannot
pierce no^ pass through; With Clouds he covers The light.

(...) tum lucom, tum solemn, a quo lux, vel quia est fons lucu, significat.
The word used by Elihu, signifies both light and the Sun, which is the
fountain, from whence light flows and issues; yea, the word signifies also
fire. The Sun, Moon, and Stars, are called (ignes) the fires of heaven, because
like so many fires or mighty torches they give light to us on earth. And by a
metaphor the word signifies Joy, Comfort, all sorts of good things; as on the
other side, by darkness, troubles and calamities of all sorts are
metaphorically expressed in Scripture. With Clouds he covers the light, And
commands it not to shine by the Cloud that comes between.

As if he had said, When a Cloud covers the light, it is the command of God
which puts the Cloud as a covering upon it. Those words [not to shine] are not
expressly in the Hebrew Text; the^e it is only thus; With Clouds he covers the
light, and commands it by that which comes between: nor is the word Cloud
expressed in the latter part of the verse, we put it in as a suppliment in
another Character, more fully to express the sense of the Text.

And commands it not to shine. The word which we translate to command,
properly signifies, to bid or command a thing to be done; Verbum (...) quod
significat praecipere, quum regit praepositionem (...) significat intordicere.
Pisc:
but when it stands in construction, as here, with Gnal, it signifies to
forbid or stay a thing that it be not done. ( Genesis 2.16.) God commanded the
man, or concerning the man, etc. As that command expressed a liberty to eat of
every other tree in the Garden, so it included a prohibition of eating the
fruit of the tree of knowledge, which is also expressed at the 17th verse. We
have a like construction of the word ( Genesis 28.6. 1 Kings 2.43.) He commands
it not to shine By the Cloud that comes between.

By that which come^h between, or by that which meets it, that is, (...)
occu^rit irruit aggressus est, per Metaphor^m intercessit occurrit deprecandi
cau^a. Hinc (...) per occurrens, sc: per occurren^em nubem, qua^interveniente
lucem solu tegit. Drus: Merc:
as we supply it, by the thick and da^k Cloud which meets and intercepts the
bright beams of the Sun. The root of the word signifies to meet with force
(not only occurrere but irruere) to rush upon, to invade, to assault, or to
charge, as an enemy is charged in battle; and it signifies, by a Metaphor, to
intercede, to make prayer or supplication for another, which is as i^ were a
coming between man and man. An Intercessor comes between two parties, the
party offending, and the party offended, he interposeth himself to make up the
breach, or to take up the difference, that if possible a reconciliation may be
made. The Latin word which we translate Latinely to intercede, is of the same
significancy; and this Hebrew word is often so rendered ( Jer. 7.16.) Pray not
for this people, nor make intercession to me; that is, thou shall not come
between me and this people to stop or stay me, that I break not out into wrath,
or from pouring out my wrath upon them. In other Scriptures it is used to note
an act of intercession between man and man ( Genesis 23.8.) as also an act of
address by prayer and entreaty, whether toward God or man, ( Job 21.15. Ruth
1.16.) And because the word properly notes meeting another with a kind of
violence, it intimates with what a holy violence, with what strength,
earnestness, and fervency of spirit, we ought to meet God, either in prayer for
our selves, or when we come as intercessors, and stand before him in the behalf
of others, whether Persons, Nations, or Churches.

Many Interpreters (as I shall show afterward) take the word in this sense here
for an Intercessor, or for a person that prays and intercedeth for another.
We, in our translation, expound it of a thing, and that thing of a Cloud that
interposeth or comes between us and the Light. He commands the light not to
shine, by the Cloud that comes between, or, by the Cloud that passes between
us and the light of the Sun.

Hence note; First, The best and sweetest mercies we have in this world, may
quickly meet with a stop.

When we have the Light, a Cloud may soon come between the Light and us: Which
as it is true of the natural Light and Clouds, so of that which is Light in a
figure, our most comfortable enjoyments; and that which is a Cloud in a figure,
troublesome and afflictive Providence. There is no light, of what kind soever
it is, but there may be a Cloud to intercept it, and come between us and that;
even the light of the favor of God, the light of his countenance, which is the
most blessed light of all, even that light has many a Cloud. The clouds of ou^
sins cause the Lord to cloud his face with anger and displeasure, and hinder
the light of his favor and loving kindn^ss from shining upon our souls.

Secondly, In that Elihu says, He c^mmandeth it not to shine,

Note; The Lord has a sovereign power over all creatures;

He sends forth his commanding word, not only to Angels and Men, but to Beasts,
yea, to inanimates, he sends out his orders and edicts to the Clouds of the
Air, to the Light of the Sun, to things without life, and they submit presently
and obey; he speaks to the light as if it were a ^ea^onable creature, he
commands it not to shine, and it shines not. The hosts of heaven and the
inhabitants of the earth are at the di^pose of God; the w^^le course of nature
moves and stands still at his word and plea^ure. The Sun stood still in the
days of J^shua at his command; and by the same command, the Sun wen^ backward
in the days of Hezekiah; and it is by his command that the Sun withdraws its
light, and is muffled up with Clouds at any time. He commands it not to shine.

Take these Inferences from it.

First, Then, what cannot God do? He that commands the light not to shine, and
it shines not; Is any thing too hard for him? who but God can stop the Sun
from shining? If all the Princes and Potentates of this world should join their
forces, their counsels together, and send a prohibition to the Sun, to stay its
light, and forbear its shining one moment, they were not able to do it; yet if
the Lord do but speak the word, the Sun shines not; he can give it a
prohibition, and supersede the going forth of its light to us: yea, he has
power enough, not only to cove^ the Sun with Clouds, but to turn it into a
Cloud, and to blot it out of the heavens.

Secondly, learn hence, In what dependence we are upon God for every thing. God
can keep the light from us every day if he pleases, and wrap us up in
perpetual darkness, as he plagued the Land of Egypt with thick darkness for
three days together. It Is true, the Sun rises and goes down in a natural
course, yet still by a divine order and commission. As God can sorbid the Light
by interposing Clouds, so he can sorbid the Clouds to give us showers, and bind
up all the sweet influences of heaven from destilling upon the earth to make it
fruitful. He can speak to our garments that they warm us not, to our food that
it nourish us not, to our physic that it cure and heal us not, to all our
relations that they comfort us not, to all our possessions and riches that they
content us not. O let us remember that we depend upon God for Rain, for Light,
for Sunshine, for all; it is at his word that they all put themselves forth to
do us good, and at his word they are all staid and stopped in their motion, from
doing or bringing us any good.

Le^ us remember also God can command another light not to shine; he can by a
word stop the progress of the Word, and stay that blessed and most beautiful
light, the light of the Gospel, from shining to us, by some Cloud or other
coming between. To how many nations of people, where that light sometimes
shined, has God long since sent a command, and it shines not! It shined
brightly in former Ages upon the African Churches, but now, for a long time,
God has said to the light of the Gospel, shine not upon them; there is scarce
any light at all, at most but a glimmering of Gospel Light in all that vast
continent, a quarter-part of the world. What mighty Dominions are now possessed
by the followers of Mahomet, both in Europe and Asia, where the light of the
Gospel did once shine very brigh^ly and gloriously! How famous were those seven
Asian Churches, men ioned and writ to by the command of Christ, and the
ministry of his servant and Secretary John (Rev. 1.2, 3.) yet now darkness
possesses all those places, and the Alcoran has thrust out the Gospel; and
whence is all this? Surely God commanded, and that light shined not, nor has
it shined with any b^ightness for many hundred years. Jesus Christ, who
threatened Ephesus with the removal of her Candlestick, has removed all those
Candlesticks, and put out their lig^^^ The same stop can God give to the
Gospel Light which has shined among us (blessed be his Name) for many years
together: Let us take heed that we forfeit not that blessed light, that we
provoke not the Lord by our abuse of it and unthankfulness for it, to send out
a command, that it shine not among us any more. We read in the Prophets how
divine light was prohibited both to the People and to the Prophets: The stop of
it to the People, we have ( Amos 8.9.) I will cause the Sun to go down at noon,
and I will darken the earth in the clear day. The Prophet speaks not here at
all of the stop of natural light, nor does he only intend the stop of that
metaphorical light, Prosperity in outward things, which the Lord does often
eclipse and da^ken, when men dream least of it, or have no more fear about it,
than ^hey have that the Sun will go down at noon day; but he, at least,
intends, if it be not his principal intendment, to show that a grievous
judgm^nt was hastening upon them, as to their spiritual enjoyments; that the
light of divine knowledge, what to believe, and what to practice, was
declining, and ready to go down, though they thought it was but noon with them,
and the day very clear. For as the famine threatened ( verse. 11.) is expounded
upon the place, by the Prophet himself, not to be a famine of bread, and a
thirst for water, but of hearing the word of the Lord; so the darkness
threatened in this 9th verse, is not to be restrained to the loss of their
worldly liberties and comforts, but extended to those which were spiritual and
divine, the failing of vision, and the removing of the light of the Word. And
as in this Prophet we find the light departing from the People, so in the third
of Micah (verse. 6, 7.) we find God commanding the light not to shine to the
Prophets (the false prophets he means there, for so he describes them, verse.
5.) Therefore shall night be unto you (the prophets who deceive my people, who
teach them vanity, and lead them to Idolatry and superstition; therefore, I
say, shall night be unto you) that ye shall have no vision, and it shall be
dark to you that you shall not divine, and the Sun shall go down over the
Prophets, and the day shall be dark over them. What the Lord means by all this,
you have expressed in the close of the 7th verse, There is no answer of God, that
is, God does not now any more manifest his mind and will by the Prophets, that
they might manifest his will unto the People. I close this point with the
renewal of my former admonition; Let us therefore take heed ^e provoke not the
Lord to command this light not to shine, either to Prophets or People, in our
Ho^izon.

Thirdly, He commands it not to shine by the Cloud that comes between.
Though (as I said) the word Cloud, be not expressed in the text, yet we know it is
a Cloud that usually comes between the light and us.

Hence note; Though God can do all things by his bare word, yet he ordinarily
uses means to bring about his purposes, whether for good or evil, whether in
mercy or in judgment, to the children of men.

There is something comes between. God has a Cloud, or somewhat like it, to
put between us and the light. (...) verse. 6.
The Apostle (2 These. 2.6, 7.) treating of Antichrist, the man of sin,
intimates, that he would have filled the world with the darkness of error and
superstition very quickly, by a full discovery of himself, had not something
withheld him, had not something come between him and his design for a time.
What was that? It Is generally conceived, (...), v. 7
that which did withold or come between the man of sin, and his purpose of
filling the world with the darkness of his wicked errors and abominable
worship, was the power of the Roman Empire at that time; Antichrist could not
put forth his power while that power stood in its strength. God could have
withheld Antichrist immediately from putting forth of himself, but he saw it
best to put a block in his way, the power of the Roman Empire, and until that
was thrust out of the way, the man of sin could never show himself fully, in
that unlimited exercise of his sinful power. Now, I say, as there was then a
with-holder of Antichristian darkness, somewhat that came between and hindered
its effectual working; so usually, I may say universally, somewhat comes
between to check and stop the course of the Gospel Light, or of any other
mercy. Sin is a Cloud of our making, and God in judgment makes that as a Cloud
coming between us and our mercies. He did so of old to Israel, and he told them
so by his Prophet ( Jer. 5.25.) Your sins have withheld good things from
you. Sin withholds good things, not formally, but meretoriously, that is, sin
is the meriting or deserving cause of their withholding. This one Cloud of our
sins, brings all the Clouds of trouble between us and our mercies; and the Lord
has always some Cloud or other of trouble at hand, in readiness to cover the
light, that it shine not to us, when we trouble and grieve him by those foggy
and filthy clouds of our sins. Thus far of that which is preparatory to rain,
Clouds covering the light. It follows, Verse. 33. The noise thereof shows
concerning it, the cattle also concerning the vapor. Hic versus difficillimus
est si quu in toto Jobo, in quo quot sunt expositores tot fere sensus
afferuntur. Merc. (...) Strepitus ejus quidam deducunt a (...) son^vit,
clamavit, vo^iferatus est, alii a (...) amicus, socius.


This Verse, according to our translation, as I touched before, carries on the
same thing. There we had the preparation as it were, for rain, Clouds gathered
and covering the Sun, so making dark weather: Now, says he, that the rain is
coming, the noise thereof shows concerning it. The word which we render
noise, taken from one root signi^ieth any troublesome clamor; and as derived
from another root, it signifies a friend or companion (as I shall touch
afterward) But at present leaving that, I shall open it according to our own
reading, as it signifies a noise. Some read his noise, that is, Gods noise, he
makes a noise in the air: And this noise of God in the air, is either, first,
the noise of the wind; winds often fore-run great raines; or secondly, the
noise of thunderclaps, that rattling noise heard from the clouds, which come
between us and the light; this noise shows concerning it, that is, this
shows fowl weathe^ is coming, or that rain (as we speak) is brewing in the
Clouds. Both the blustering winds and the rattling roaring thunder tell us
aforehand, and give warning, that the weather will suddenly change, or that
rain is at hand.

Hence Note; God by natural signs gives warning of a change in natural things.

When God is about to send rain, the noise that is in the Clouds tells the
world that it is coming. Some are very skilful in observing these things; such
we call, weatherwise. From this I would only infer, If God does fore-shew or
give signs of the change that he makes in natural things, then surely he does
much more give his people warning of the changes he is about to make in civil
things, in the States and Kingdoms of this world. There are some things which
do, as it were, predict or fore-shew such and such changes near, if we were
wise to observe them. The Jews were very inquisitive to know of Christ the
signs of the times; These signs they enquired of him, not so much out of
curiosity (which had been bad enough) as out of treachery, to int^ap him in his
words, yet mark what Christ said to to them ( Math. 16.1, 2, 3.3) He answered
and said unto them, when it is eve^ing, ye say it will be fair weather, for the
sky is red (a red sky shows concerning fair weather) and in the morning it
will be foul weather, for the sky is red and lowering. When the sky lowres,
or, as here in Job, when the Cloud comes between us and the light, that tells
us it will be foul weather. Now, says Christ, do you think that God has given
us such warnings about changes in natural things, and has he not given signs
which may fore-shew changes in other things, which more concerns us? Therefore
Christ checks them in the 3d verse, O ye hypocrites, ye can discern the face of
the sky, and can ye not discern the Signs of the times, that is, what changes
God will m^ke in the times? As if he had said, if you were wise ye might
discern the signs of ruin approaching ^o you and your City. A dreadful black
Cloud of destruction hung over the City of Jerusalem at that time, as Christ
had foretold them in several places of the Gospel: the time is coming (says
he) when there shall not be left one stone upon another; yet you cannot see the
signs of these things; you are very skilful to discern a fair day and a foul
day (there are natural prognostics of these things) but ye hypocrites cannot
discern the signs of the times: Do ye not think God has given you warning,
has he not fore-shewed what he will do with you and with this City? if ye were
wise ye might unde^stand that shortly it will be overthrown, and so it was by
Titus Vespatian not long after. God gives as clear signs of the changes that
shall be in times, as he does concerning the change of the weather: And that is
one thing which does very much fore-shew it, when God puts it into the hearts
of his Ministers unanimously to fore-warn approaching troubles. Such warnings
were given to Jerusalem, not only by Christ, Josephus, lib. 7. c. 12. de Belio
Judaico.
but afterward by others. Josephus in his History reports of one that could not
by any punishment be stopped from crying up and down the City, for several years,
after this manner, A voice from the east, a voice from the west, a voice from
the four winds, a voice against Jerusalem, and a voice against the Temple.
There was also (as the same Author reports) a voice heard in the Temple, Let us
depart hence. The Jews generally would not believe these voices, but went on
and were angry when any told them of a Cloud coming over their day, yet they
found them all verified in the subversion of their city, by the Romans. Such
fore-warnings were given the Palatinate, and other parts of Germany, before
those great evils came upon them. Some way or other God has always showed
when these showers were coming; and when a people grow weary of their warnings,
when they grow more profane and wicked under them, this is a sure sign, a
fatal prognostic, that God is coming with a shower of wrath, and is ready to
pour down a storm of vengeance upon them. And surely these warnings, both with
respect to natural changes in the Air, and civil changes in the affairs of this
World, argue the wonderful goodness of God, that he would have us prepare for
all dispensations: He will not send a shower of rain, but would have us
prepared for it; and when he is about to send those great showrs of Judgment
upon the world, he would have his people ready and prepared, and therefore by
some means or other he tells them before hand what is at hand.

(...) Pecus.
Thus, the noise thereof shows concerning it, or tells us the storm is
coming. But is there nothing else that fore-tels this? Yes, it follows, The
cattle also concerning the vapor.

The very beast of the field give notice of the vapor. The Hebrew is that
which goes up, (...)
so we read in the margin. The rain comes down, and the vapors go up; and the
going up of the vapor is an argument of the coming down of the rain. As the
noise or thunder in the Clouds sore-sheweth a storm, so the cattle concerning
the vapor, they tell us the rain is coming down by their apprehenson of the
vapor which goes up.

Some render, not vapor, but plants or herbs, trees or grass, these go up or
ascend out of the earth, as well as vapors. Our translation is plain. The
cattle also, the very sheep and oxen, yea the fowls of the air will tell when
we shall have foul weaher; before such storms come usually they run to
shelter, hiding and shifting for themselves as well as they can, against the
storm. Cattle presage rain. Plinius, lib. 18. c. 35. Natural History.
Virgilius, in Georg. l. 1.
Pliny in his Natural History speaks much of the natural sagacity that is in
beasts, swine, sheep and oxen, whereby they perceive change of weather. The
Poet Virgil also verifies largely and acurately of these things; reporting how
husbandmen that keep cattle will gather by what they see in the cattle what the
weather will be. The cattle also concerning the vapor.

Hence Note; Bruit Creatures, by a natural instinct, perceive the approaching
changes of the weather.

And why has God given them that natural instinct? Why are they quick-sented
and quick-sighted, yea many times mo^e quick-sighted than men are? Surely, it
is first, that those poor Creatures may provide themselves of shelter, and not
be abroad in the storm, rain or wind, in a time of danger, or inconvenient to
them. This may be of use to us. God would teach us by the very dumb Creatures,
the Bruits, what our duty is; the Cattle, the Swine, the Sheep will witness
against us, if we do not take notice of, nor observe, the signs of the various
dispensations of God, or when he is about to vary his dispensations. Can the
Cattle tell when it will be fowl weather, and are men so stupid (are they
especially that profess the Gospel so stupid) that they understand none of
these things? The Prophet Jeremiah (Chap. 8.7.) reproves the people of Israel
upon this account, by the fowls of heaven (as was showed upon another
occasion, at the 11th Verse of the 35th Chapter) The Stork in the heavens
knows his appointed time, and the Turtle, and the Crane, and the Swallow know
the times of their coming; that is, they will not stay in any place, where it
is not fit nor safe for them to stay, and they will not come to any place till
they know all things are suitable and ready for them: But my people knows not
the judgment of their God, they are more senseless than the very fowls of
heaven in this. And therefore the prophet checks them ( v. 8.) How do ye say,
we are wise, and the Law of the Lord is with us? You count your selves very
wise, yet ye are not so wise in this matter as the Stork and the Crane, and the
Swallow, for they observe their times, but you do not. It is a great part of
our wisdom to see what God is doing, or what he is about to do before he does
it. It is said ( Prove. 22.3.) A prudent man foreseeth an evil. When evil is
come every one can see it (though some will scarce see it then, as the Prophet
complained ( Isa. 26.11.) When thy hand is lifted up they will not see it) but
usually that which is done or doing we can see; when we feel an evil we can see
it; but the prudent, that is the godly man, fore-seeth the evil. How comes he
to foresee it? not by any hellish divination, not by star-gazing, not by
asking the Devil what shall be hereafter, as Saul did; he would foresee the
evil, but he went to the Devil, to a Witch for it (1 Samuel 28.) Now a godly man
does not foresee the evil by any such ways or means, but by a diligent
collection of things, compa^ing one with the other, or by the connection of
causes with their effects, and of antecedents with their cons^quents; by these
he plainly fore-seeth that such or such an evil is coming, even as the beast
fore-sees the storm is coming by the vapor, or that which goes up. The prudent
man fore-seeth an evil approaching by way of argument. For thus he reasons, if
God be an unchangable God, if he be as holy, as just, as powerful, as zealous,
as jealous now, as eve^ he was, and if sin be the same as ever it was, if sin
be as fowl in it self, if it be as loathsome and as burdensome to God, if it
be as pernicious and hurtful to man now, as ever it was, then surely when men
run such and such sinful courses, such and such will be the effects, such and
such the fruits. Thus a pruden man sees the effect in the cause, the
consequent in the antecedent. This was Solomon's purpose, when he said ( Eccles.
2.14.) The wise man's eyes are in his head. You may say, so are the fools eyes
too; Where are his eyes else? But when Solomon says, The w^se man's eyes are in
his head, his meaning is, they are there to purpose; the wise man well observes
and marks how things go, and whither things tend, he considers how things go,
and whither things are going; but the fool walks in darkness, that is, he
walks as if he had no eyes in his head, as if his eyes were in his heels, not
in his head. It is said, (1 Chronicles. 12.32.) concerning the men of Issachar, They
were wise concerning the times, and to know what Israel ought to do: They knew
what the times required, and what God required in those times, what special
duties were incumbent upon them, from the dispensations of God. It is a great
mercy, and a great part of our wisdom to be thus wise, and if we ar^ not, we
shall be found and judged more brutish ^han the bruit beast, for the Cattle
also give warning concerning the vapor, they give notice when rain and storms
are coming.

Thus I have held out the sense of the words, as they are laid down plainly in
our translation.

But there are very many differences among Interpreters (as was hinted before)
in the reading and rendering of these words; all which arise from some
diffi^ul^y in the Gramatical construction and copious signification of the
Hebrew text. I might give you more than three and three several intepretations
of these words, but, as I said before, I should rather perplex the Reader than
confirm him; yet I shall name three, when I have only showed which words in the
text occasion this variety in translation. First, the word rendered by us
Clouds, signifies also the hands. Secondly, the word rendered comes between,
signifies an Intercessor, or one that prays, as also an opposer, who stands
up against and resists ^he force of another. Thirdly, the word rendered noise
signifies (when de^ived from another root) a friend or familiar. Fou^thly, the
wo^d rendered cattle, signifies also possession, or that which is possessed,
and taken from another root, emulation or strife. Fifthly, the word which we
translate as an Adverbe, also, signifies likewise anger. Sixthly, the word
rendered vapor, signifies an ascension, or going up; and so plants or herbs,
which grow out of ^ne ground and ascend into the air according to their grow^h,
are elegan l^ expressed by it.

All these diffe^ences found in the single terms, are made use of by
Interpreters, as will appear while I give you a taste of three differen^ tr^
slations.

First, The common Latin translator renders thus, In his hands he hides the
Light, and commands it to come again; he speaks of it, or declares it to his
friend, that it is his possession, and that he may ascend or come to it. This
rendering is marvelous different from ours, yet there is some sooting for it in
the Original, and it may receive a useful sense.

The whole text being accordingly expounded as an argument of Gods great favor
to godly men; from whom, though he at any time hides the light, yet, it is but
for a time, he commands it to return again, and tells them as his friends,
light is their possession, and that at last they shall ascend up into light.

There is a second Classis of Interpreters, In utraque vole occultat lucem, and
praecipit ei super occurrente. Judicat hoc tumultus ejus aemulatio and ira
adversus ascendeutem. Bez.
who expound these two Verses wholly as a description of the Clouds meeting
together and assaulting one another, like two great Champions and Warriors in
battle. The learned Beza translates the first part of the 32d Verse conformably
to the Vulgar Latin last spoken of, He hides the light in either hand, or
both hands; and the latter part of that Verse, together with the whole 33d
Verse, in conformity to the sense now given; He gives it (namely the light or
Lightening) command concerning that which meets or comes against it (namely
where and how to receive the fo^ce or charge of the other cloud that is ready
to assault it) the noise, the strife, the anger of it against the ascender (or
cloud coming up) plainly declares this. Some of the Jewish Doctors insist much
in the description of this conflict between the Clouds above, and the ascending
Clouds, concerning which the reader may consult them for further information;
but the difficulties of this translation noted by Modern Expositers, especially
by Mercer and Merlin, are so many that it may suffice to name it.

Thirdly, Mr. Broughton, thus, By hands he covers the light, and charge it
as man does pray, declaring his favor toward him, the cattle and also plants.
The meaning is (which several others follow in translating and opening this
con^ext) That when God covers the light or causes darkness, yet at the
intercession or prayer of his people he makes a change and causes great
serenity, giving comfortable times, and thereby declaring his favor toward
them, yea, and toward the cattle and the plants, which feed upon ascend or
grow up out of the earth. Junius consents fully with this sense, whose
Translation and gloss upon it I shall present the reader, and submit all to his
judgment and consideration; With his hands he hides the light (that is, he
makes it dark as laying his hand upon it) and he f^rbids it (namely his hand to
hide the light any longer) because of him that intercedeth (that is, Noah in
the time of the general flood, and the Godly, who according to the example of
Noah come to God, Jam. 5.16.) declaring toward him (that is, the Godly man
praying and worshipping God) his good will, yea, toward the cattle and fruits
of the earth.

These are the most eminent conceptions which I find upon the text; all of them
containing truths, and such as may occasion useful meditations. But I rather
adhere to our own version, in which, as the power of God in changing the
weather is held out, so his goodness in giving signs and warnings of it, both
by the noises which we hear in the air, and by some unusual actions and
motions, which we may see among Cattle here upon the earth.

JOB, Chap. 37. Verse. 1, 2. 1. At this also my heart trembled, and it moved out
of its place.

2. Hear attentively the noise of his voice, and the sound that goes out of
his mouth.


THis Chapter concludes the Conference of Elihu with Job, and it consists of
three parts.

First, In it we have an enumeration, together with a description of diverse
Meteors, or wonderful works of God in the Air, Thunder and Lightning, Snow and
Rain; yet before Elihu speaks of them, he does two things by way of Preface, to
lead us with more reverence toward God, into that discourse of Nature, in
which much of God appears.

First, Elihu tells us, how himself was affected, either with the present
sense, o^ with the fore-ap^^ehension of those things concerning which he was
about to speak; At this also my heart trembled, and it moved out of its place.

Secondly, He stirs up the whole Auditory then present, and all others, to a
diligent attention and serious consideration of them. Verse. 2. Hear attentively
the noise of his voice, and the sound that goes out of his mouth.

Having spoken thus in way of Preface, Elihu proceeds, first, to a description
of Thunder, with its immediate forerunner, as to our sense (the eye being
quicker to receive its object than the ear) th^ugh in truth, and according to
reason, its companion, the Lightning, in the three Verses following (3, 4, 5,)
concerning both which he shows,

First, that they go not at random, but have a guide, he directs it, that is,
the Thunder and Lightning.

Secondly, He shows the extent of their motion and Gods direction, they are not
confined to this or that part, He directs it under the whole heaven, and his
lightnings unto the ends of (...) earth, in the same Verse.

Thirdly, He speaks of the irrevocableness of Gods decrees and orders about
them, at the 4th Verse, After it a voice roareth, etc. and he will not stay
them when his voice is heard.

Fourthly, He concludes about these and many other works of God, with an Elogie
of all his works. First, In their greatness; Secondly, In their
incomprehensibleness; or he concludes them, not only great, but wonderful and
incomprehensible (Verse. 5.) God thundereth marvelously with his voice, he does
great things which we cannot comprehend.

Having thus spoken of Thunder and Lightning, he proceeds,

Secondly, To show the power of God, which he describes in Snow and Rain.

First, from their efficient cause, at the 6th Verse.

Secondly, By their effects. First, Toward men, in the 7th Verse. Secondly,
Upon or toward irrational Creatures, the Beasts of the earth, at the 8th Verse.

Thirdly, He sets forth the Power of God in the Winds, concerning which we have,

First, Their original, whence they come (Verse. 9.)

Secondly, Their effects, or what they produce, cold and frost, in the latter
part of the 9th and 10th Verses.

Fourthly, He treats of the Clouds, and about them he declares four things.

First, The melting or dissolving of them into Rain, at the 11th Verse.

Secondly, The scattering and dispersing of them by the wind, in the latter
part of that Verse.

Thirdly, The disposing and ordering of them by the counsel and command of God,
at the 12th Verse.

Fourthly, Their uses, ends and operations, at the thirteenth Verse.

Thus we have the first general part of the Chapter opened, containing a
description of the Meteors, or manifold works of God in the Air, all which hold
forth and advance his mighty power and righteous administrations in this world,
toward the children of men; which was the point that Elihu had labored in all
along, and undertaken to demonstrate.

In the second part of this Chapter, Elihu (upon the whole matter) gives Job
serious counsel and admonition, wherein,

First, He stirs him up to consider these wonderful works of God, at the 14th
verse.

Secondly, He asserts and urges the weakness and inability of Job (or indeed
of any man) to understand them fully; this he does,

First, In general, at the beginning of the 15th verse, Do thou know when God
disposed them? etc.

Secondly, More particularly, in their several kinds.

First, Of the Rainbow, at the latter end of that 15th verse, and caused the
light of his Cloud to shine.

Secondly, Of the Clouds and their various motions, at the 16th verse.

Thirdly, Of the heat according to the wind (verse. 17.)

Fourthly, Of the Heaven or Sky (verse. 18.)

All which were such as he could not give a clear account of, and therefore at
the 19th verse, Elihu bids Job do it if he could, as for himself he durst not
venture upon it (verse. 20.) nor can any (says he verse. 21.22.) see far into
these natural things, or into the nature of these things. These are the special
points of his admonition to Job; and from these he passes to the

Third Part, or Conclusion of the Chapter, and of his whole discourse with Job;
wherein,

First, He makes a recapitulation of, or sums up all that he had said of the
unsearchableness of God in his works; this he does in the former part of the
23d verse.

Secondly, He sets down positively what God is, in a threefold Excellency.

First, Of Power.

Secondly, Of Judgment.

Thirdly, Of plentiful Justice, at the middle of the 23d verse.

Thirdly, He tells us what God will not do, at the end of the 23d verse, He
will not afflict; and from all, makes two inferences at the the 24th verse.

First, That therefore men ought to honor and to fear him.

Secondly, That therefore God is not in the reverence nor fear of any man, in
the close of that 24th verse; He respects not any that are wise of heart.

Thus I have given a prospect of the whole Chapter. Now to particulars,
beginning with those two verses by which Elihu leads in his discourse of those
wonderful works of God.

First, By showing how himself was affected with them.

Secondly, By calling upon others to be affected as himself was.

(...) Propter hoc.
Verse. 1. At this also my heart trembled. At this, that is, by reason of this,
or for this cause, or because of this; so the word is rendered ( Genesis 2.23.) She
(said Adam of his wife, or Second-self) shall be called woman, because she was
taken out of man. So here, at this, or for this cause, my heart trembles. It
may here be questioned, what it was at which the heart of Elihu trembled? I
shall give a double answer to that querie.

First, Some conceive that while Elihu was speaking about, or about to speak
further of that marvelous work of God, the Thunder, God, to confirm what he had
said, or should say, at that very instant caused it to thunder, that so Job
might be in a more humble reverential frame, and so the better prepared to
receive what Elihu had further to say unto him. That there was a storm at or
about that time, may appear from the first verse of the 38th Chapter; then the
Lord answered Job out of the whirlwind, and said; and we find that God has
often given great discoveries of himself in or by Thunder and Lightning. In
Thunder and Lightning the Law was delivered to Moses on mount Sinai (Exodus
19.6.) And to affect the people of Israel, when they had provoked God by their
peremptory and discontented way of asking a King, Samuel coming to deal with
them about it (1 Samuel 12.16, 17, 18.) said, Stand and see this great thing,
which the Lord will do before your eyes. Is it not wheat-harvest to day? I will
call unto the Lord, and he shall send Thunder and Rain, that ye may perceive
and see that your wickedness is great. And the Lord sent Thunder and Rain that
day, even while Samuel was speaking, for their conviction and humiliation, as
the next words show, and all the people greatly feared the Lord and Samuel.
Thus possibly while Elihu was about to speak of Thunder, for the humbling of
Job, God commanded it to Thunder for his deeper humiliation: and if so, the
cause why Elihu trembled is apparent enough; The terrible Thunderclaps which
then rent the Clouds and even shook the earth, might well cause him to tremble.

Secondly, We may understand these words (at this my heart trembles) with
reference to the whole matter which Elihu had before him; what he had begun to
speak, and was further to speak of Gods dreadful power, might shake his heart
with astonishment. The due apprehensions of the greatness of God, may soon
strike man into a fit of trembling; it did Job, as himself confessed at the
21th Chapter of this Book (v. 5, 6.) Mark ye, and be astonished, and lay your
hand upon your mouth; for when I remember, I am afraid, and trembling takes
hold of my flesh: as if he had said, Quoties mihi divinae majestatis abyssus in
mentem venerit, expaves^it ^or meum, etc. Brent.
while I duly consider the great things that I have spoken, and those greater
things (if greater may be) that I am about to speak, I cannot but tremble, and
stand as one filled with astonishment. How was the Apostle Paul amazed at that
most mysterious dispensation of God in casting off his ancient people the
Jews, the seed of Abraham his friend, for so long a time! ( Romans 11.33.) O the
Depth! etc. At this my heart trembles, that is, I am heartily afraid.

The heart is here put for the whole inner man, (...) Motus, commotus fuit
corpore aut anima, ex cura aut metu mali. (...). Sept.
or for all the powers of the soul; and the word rendered to tremble, notes a
disturbance of the whole man, both of soul and body. the Septuagint render it
by the same Greek word used ( Math. 2.3.) where (upon the wise men's coming from
the East, to inquire concerning the King of the Jews) it is said, When Herod
heard this, he was troubled, and all Jerusalem with him. That news of a new
King put them into a grievous fright, they knew not what to make of it, nor
which way to turn themselves, in such a turn of affairs, in such a new world
as that newborn King might make. This word is elsewhere in Scripture used to
note the suddenest surprise and the strongest possession of fear. Thus when
Isaac, through the subtilty of Rebekah, had given the blessing to Jacob which
he intended for Esau, it is said, that upon the appearance of his mistake, he
trembled exceedingly (Genesis 27.33.) Doubtless it did wonderfully astonish the
good old man, to think, that God should carry him beyond and beside his own
purpose, to bless the younger brother instead of the elder. This strange
disappointment by the overruling providence of God, put him to a stand, and
troubled his thoughts more than a little; especially, because he was now
taught, that by his carnal affections to Esau, he was running quite cross to
the mind of God, revealed (Chap. 25.23.) Read the same force of the word (
Exodus 19.16.) to which the Apostle re^e^^ing, says ( Heb. 12.21.) So terrible
was the sight, that Moses said, I exceedingly fear and quake. Read also the
same impo^tance of the word 1 Samuel 4.13. Chap. 14.15. Such was the Condition of
Elihu, he was deeply affected, t^embling ^ook hold of him. The Spirits run to
the heart in a time of fea^, or upon a sudden f^ight, as Ci^iz ns to the Castle
in a day of danger; and then the outward members (being dese^ted by the
spirits) grow cold and tremble. There is a natural infirmity called, The
palpitation or trembling of the heart; But this of Elihu was supernatural, at
least, somewhat more then natural, as arising either from the consideration of
what God h^d done, or of what himself was about to speak; and not only did his
heart tremble, but Cordis palpitatio and totius animae concursus ad cor in
pavoribus o^idens est. Galen. (...), Effluxit. Sept. Evulsum est. August.
Emotum est. Hieron. Salit seu subsilit Tharg. Hi^ verbis excessum quem Graeci
(...) vocant, puto denotari, quae ((...) effectus causam) admirationem cum
pavore subsequi solet. Bold. -- Et hum^nas motura tonitrua montes. Ovid. 1. Met.
Was moved out of its place.

Which is added to set forth the exceeding greatness of that fear which seized
upon him. The Text speaks as if his heart were indeed removed or taken out of
his body. It is usual in Scripture to affirm that as done which is like to be
done. The ship was said to be broken ( John 1.4.) and the net (Luke 5.6.)
because both were in eminent danger of breaking. We say of a man in great fear,
his heart is ready to leap out of or out at his mouth. One of the Ancients
renders here, my heart is plucked out; the septuagint, It flows out; the
Chaldee paraphrase, takes up the fo^mer expression; my heart leaps or jumps,
which as it does sometimes for joy, so often for ear, or at the unexpected
appearance of danger. Some conceive by this moving of his heart out of his
place, that Elihu was in a kind of ecstasy, that he was, as it were, car^ied
out of himself, upon the hearing of that dreadful voice of God, the thunder;
taking it so.

Note, Thunder is a terrible thing;

It has made and may make the stoutest heart to tremble. One of Christ's
Apostles was called Lebbeus (Mat. 10.3.) as much as to say* the hearty man, or
all-heart; Now he that is Lebbeus a man of the greatest courage, the most
hearty man, may be put to a tremble at this, when he hears it thunder.
Heathens have spoken much of this, and by a peculiar word have called those who
are much amazed men thunder struck, Hos Laetinus, Attonitos vocat. Attonitus
est, cui casus vicini fulminis and sonitus tonitruum dant stuporem. Serve: in
tertium Aenid.

Tonitrus dici videtur a terrendo, quod conterreat hominem. Aliqui, a tono and
ruendo, quia magno cum sonitu fiat and irruat. Suetonius de Augusto and
Caligu^a.


men being so much amazed at the sound of thunder. The Roman Historian reports
of that great Emperor, who commanded all the world, and made the nations to
tremble, that yet he himself trembled at this. Augustus Caesar, was so afraid
of thunder, that whenever he traveled abroad, he caused the skin of a Sea
Calfe to be carried about with him, because* it was in their superstition
believed to be an Amulet or preservative against any hurt by thunder. And the
same Author tells us of another of that rank, a heathen Roman Emperor, that
was so afraid of thunder, that he would hide his head when he heard it, and
sometimes ran under a bed for shelter. I shall have further occasion to speak
of the terribleness of thunder, at the 4th and 5th verses; I touch it here,
because, according to our interpretation, this was it at which the heart of
Elihu trembled.

Secondly, Taking the words more generally, as this trembling might arise from
the consideration of any other of the wonderful works of God,

Note; The great appearances of God in his power may and should affect us even
with fear and trembling.

The heart of man may well move out of his place when he considers how dreadful
God is in his place, and what wonders he both does and can do. David casting
his eye up to the heavens and the host of them ( Psalm. 8.) concludes with
admiration (v. 8.) O Lord our God, how excellent is thy Name in all the world!
They who have but little knowledge of the works of God, cannot be much affected
with them; they who know them deeply cannot, but be deeply affected with them.
Fools and ignorant persons slight or lightly pass by any thing that God does
or speaks; but they who are wise hearted will lay both his Word and Woe ks to
heart, their hea^ts will tremble and be moved out of their place. Holy King
David advises the Kings and Judges of the earth to serve the Lord with fear
and to rejoice with trembling (Ps. 2 11.) And the holy Apostle Paul exhorts
all Christans to work out their salvation with fear and trembling (Philip.
2.12.) Now if we are to tremble in our daily service, how much more under
dreadful providence!

For the close of this point, remember there is a fourfold trembling or moving
of the heart at the appearances of God, or at the discoveries of his Power and
Glory in his Word and in his Works.

First, That which is natural. ( Isa. 7.2.) When it was told the house of
David, saying, Syria is confederate with Ephraim; his heart (that is, the heart
of Ahaz) was moved, and the heart of his people, as the trees of the Wood are
moved with the wind. And when Felix heard Paul reasoning of righteousness,
temperance, and the judgment to come, he trembled: The Judge trembled at the
voice of the prisoner. It Is natural for man to fear and tremble at the report
of any truth which renders him guilty, or of any trouble which over-masters his
ability to withstand or avoid it.

Secondly, There is a Legal trembling, proceeding from a spirit of bondage, or
the dreadful apprehensions of the wrath of God against sin ( Romans 8.15.) This
in many is precedaneous to their true conversion, and, as a needle, makes way
for the spirit of grace and adoption, by which thread they are united and
fastened unto God through faith, and walk in a child-like fear before him all
their days.

Thirdly, There is a penal or judiciary fear and trembling. God in judgment
sometimes fills the heart of sinful man with fear, as the punishment of his
sin. They who have no fear of God in their hearts to keep or over-aw them
graciously from sinning and living in a course of sin, are delivered up to a
spirit of fear, which continually pursues them with dreadful apprehensions of
the wrath of God, and of some imminent and impendent evils, ready to fall upon
them for their sins; A dreadful sound is in their ears (as Eliphas told Job,
Chap. 15.21.) yea, as he speaks there ( verse. 24.) trouble and anguish make him
afraid; they prevail against him, as a King ready to battle. The Lord
threatened it as one of the sore Judgments that he would bring upon his People
the Jews, for their disobedience ( Deuteronomy. 28.65.) I will give thee a trembling
heart; yea, he threatened ( Isa. 52.17.) to give them the dregs of the Cup of
trembling. Ezekiel (Chap. 12.18.) was commanded to tremble, as a sign to the
People of that penal fear and trembling which God would send upon them. Such
was that trembling spoken of ( Ezekiel. 26.16.) Then all the Princes of the Sea
shall come down from their Thrones, and lay away their Robes, and put off their
broidered garments, and shall cloth themselves with tremblings. Doubtless they
had little mind to such change of raiment, they had rather have been clothed
with rags; but the Lord would make them do it. And as those confederate
Princes or friends of Tirus should cloth themselves with trembling, so it is
prophesied ( Zech. 15.2.) that Jerusalem should be, not only a burdensome
stone, but a cup of trembling to all her enemies. As if the Lord had said, This
shall be their punishment who would make my Jerusalem tremble, I will make them
tremble at the remembrance of Jerusalem, or at the sight of those great things
which I will do against them, and for Jerusalem.

Fourthly, There is a spiritual, a gracious trembling and moving of the heart;
that is it which this point calls us to, and to which, in those places lately
mentioned, both David (Psalm. 2.11.) and the Apostle ( Phil. 2.12.) call us to.
It was well with Ephraim, when it was thus with him ( Hos. 13.1.) When Ephraim
spoke trembling he was exalted, that is, when he was in a trembling, humble,
self-denying frame, he prospered, and all things succeeded well with him. The
Lord is never better pleased with us, than when he sees us in these tremblings
( Isay. 66.2.) To him will I look that is poor, and of a contrite spirit, and
trembles at my word; These trembling ones are the men that God has an eye
upon and respect unto. The prophet Habakkuk spoke of himself ( Chap. 3.16.)
much like Elihu in the text, When I heard, my belly trembled, my lips quivered
at the voice, etc. The prophet foresaw a day of trouble, and trembled at it,
and this gave him assurance that he should not tremble when he saw it, for
(said he in the next words) I trembled in my self that I might rest in the day
of trouble. The more we tremble in our selves, the more rest we have in God.
None have so little fear when trouble comes, as they who fear before it comes.
Noah, by faith moved by fear, prepared an arc to the saving of his house (Heb.
11.7.) Thus to fear a flood is the best way to escape it. It Is not courage, but
stupidity, not to fear and tremble, when we hear of the judgments of God. They
who tremble graciously shall never tremble despairingly. At this my heart
trembles, etc.

Elihu having thus showed how himself was affected, with a gracious fear and
trembling, labors to affect others also with the same fear, in the next verse.

Verse. 2. Hear attentively the noise of his voice, and the sound that goes out
of his mouth. We have here a doubling of the word in an unusual way. That
Hebraisme is ordinarily read, Plus est, inquit Rab. David, quam audiendo
audite, nam infinitum postp^^titur; ego nihil aut p^rum ref^rre puto, hoc an
illo m^do eff^r^s. Drus.
hearing hear, but in this place, it is hear in hearing; which one of the Jewish
Doctors says, has a greater emphasis than the ordinary Hebraisme hearing
hear. Others find nothing of such a difference in those differing Heb aismes:
however both call for greatest heed in hearing what is spoken, when it is either
said hear in hearing, or hearing hear; we should, as our translation gives the
sense fully, Hear attentively.

There is a twofold hearing.

First, A hearing with the ear of the body: there needs little stirring up of
that ear to attend the voice of thunder here spoken of; that speaks so loud
that men cannot (if they would not) but hear, that commands audience and
attention, that boreth the ear and makes its own way. The deafest adders can
hardly stop their ears so, as not to hear the voice of that (not muttering
charmer, but) but rouz^ng speaker, Thunder.

Secondly, There is a hearing with the ear of the mind, a spiritual hearing,
such as the Prophet spoke of ( Hab. 3.2.) O Lord, Non solum auditum excitat,
sed intelligentiam postulat.
I have heard thy speech, etc. that is, I have heard it fully, clearly,
understandingly, affectionately, obedientially. Elihu is here stirring up, not
so much the outward sense, as the affections, with all the powers of the inner
man, to attend and take notice of that which was then to be heard; what was
that? Hear attentively The noise of his voice.

(...) Commotio, perturbatio animi prae metu vel prae ira. Audite audiendo cum
tremore vo^em ejus. Merc.

(...) Omnem sonitum articulatum aut inarticulatum significat, and in genere
(...) umque strepitum.


The word here rendered noise, signifies both an angry noise, and an awful fear (
Ps. 4.4.) such a noise as causes fear, or such a fear as is caused by a
dreadful noise; Hence some read the words, Hear his voice with trembling; we
say, hear the noise of his voice.

According to the former interpretation the noise of his voice is the noise of
thunder; that, if any thing, makes a noise, a dreadful noise, as was touched
before, a noise like the roa^ing of a Lion. Hear the noise Of his voice.

The word voice is taken in general for any sound, articulate or inarticulate (
Ezekiel. 1.24.) and it may very well signify thunder, because thunder in several
scriptures is called absolutely, A voice, the voice of God, and whole volyes of
Thunder are called voices of God (Exodus 9.28.) Pharaoh entreated Moses, that he
would entreat the Lord that there might be no more mighty thundrings, we put in
the margin, voices of God. It is said ( Exodus 20.18.) the people saw the
Thundrings, the Hebrew is, voices; the meaning is, they heard the Thund^ings,
as if they had been so many voices, or they heard as it were voices when it
thundered. Thus it is said ( Rev. 4.5.) Out of the Throne proceeded lightnings,
and thundrings, and voices. Again (Chap. 10.3.) seven thunders uttered their
voices. Hear attentively the noise of his voice, that is, the noise of of his
Thunder speaking aloud and aloft in the air.

And the sound that goes out of his mouth. The word imports secret, silent
meditation, (...) Sermo meditaetus, proprie meditatio. Sermonem etiam
significat ore prolatum.
as also an audible sound of voice or words spoken; and it may be applied
particul^rly to that more gentle, quiet, or whispering sound of thunder, of
which I shall have occasion to speak further at the 4th verse. Some Thunders
speak very loud, others give a kind of gentle sound. Philosophy tells us, that
this difference in thunder arises from the different constitution of the
clouds in which it is bred, and through which it breaks. The greater may more
properly be expressed by the words in the first part of this verse, The noise
of his voice, and the lesser by these in the latter part, Tonitruorum unum
genus est cujus fit grave mu^mur, aliud genus est acre, quod crepitum magis
dixerim quam sonum, aliud frangor est subitus and vehemens quo edito concidunt
homines, etc. Sen. l. 6. Not. q. c. 27.
The sound that goes out of his mouth.

Now, Whether it be the noise of his voice, or a whispering soft sound, both or
either must be attended; Hear attentively the sound That goes out of his mouth.

Thunder is said to go out of the mouth of God, as words go out of the mouth of
man; and as men, especially the minds of honest men, are known by the words
which go out of their mouths, so God makes himself known to the world, or
makes the world both know him and fear him in his power and greatness by the
noise and sound of thunder.

Elihu charge Job to attend diligently this noise, this sound, and he calls
it the noise of Gods voice, the sound that goes out of his mouth.

Hence observe, First; God speaks to man in Thunder, or, Thunder is the voice
of God to man:

And so it is often called in Sc^ipture; the 29th Psalm, almost throughout, is
a proof of it, Thunder being there seven times called, The Voice of the Lord.
The very Heathens had that apprehension of Thunder, Poetae Jo^em tonant^m, and
tonitr^^^m ^oc^m Jovis vocare solent.
calling it, the Voice of the Gods. Jupiter was si^named, Thundering Jove. H^re
we have Jehovah, the true God, the living God, sending out his Voice in
Thunder. That Voice spoken of by David (Psalm. 68.33.) is usually interpreted of
T^under. Lo, he does send ou^ his Voice, and that a mighty Voice. Thunder may
be called the Voice of God in a double respect.

First, Because it is a great and mighty voice; and then those words (of God)
have only the force of an Epithete. Quod magnum e^t divi^^m esse dicitur* (...)
As the Cedars of God, the Rivers of God, are great Cedars and Rivers, so a
great Voice is called the Voice of God. God is great, and therefore great
things are ascribed to him.

Secondly, Thunder is called the Voice of God, because God forms, and puts it
forth by his power, as a man does his voice. God may be said to utter his Voice
when he sends out the Thunder: And as Thunder is put forth by, or speaks from
God, so it puts forth, or speaks much of God, it speaks and puts forth much of
the Power and Majesty of God. When it thunders, we should think we hear God,
the God of glory speaking to us. Some will excuse themselves, they are
ignorant, they have never been taught to know God: But did such never hear it
thunder? that ^eacheth much of God, so much as will make them inexcusable, who
obey him no^, who tremble not at his Power and Majesty. Thunder calls for, and
more, it commands, our fear of, our reverence and submission unto Go^,
e^^^cially when God, together with this voice, sends his arrow^, bol^s o
bullets, to do great things against his enemies, as he did against Pharaoh
(Ezod. 9.23.) and against the Philistines (1 Samuel 7.10) Yea, the Lord
threatened to distress Jerusalem with Thunder, and with Earthquake, and with
great noise (Isa. 29.6.) Now, if Thunder be the Voice of God, or the noise of
his Voice, then take these brief Inferences from it.

First, Let us see what a powerful and mighty God we have! When it thunders,
every believing soul may ^ay, This is the Vo^ce of my Father; what cannot he do
for me that can speak thus?

Secondly, If God has such a dreadful Voice, if he thunder with his Voice, we
should learn to secure, aim, and fence ^ur selves against the dread and danger
of Thunde^, by the actings of Faith in him, and of Repentance and godly Sorrow
for our sinnings against him. Some of the Heathens have given pitiful counsel
what to do in time of thunder. Seneca was a wi^e man, Adversus tonitrua and
coelorum minas subterraneae damus, dei defussi in altum specus remedia sunt.
Sen. lib. 6. Nature. quest. cap. 4.
yet he directs to poor shifts, in such extreamities; The remedies (says he)
against Thunder and the Batteries of the heavens, are underground houses, caves
or holes of the earth, to hide our selves in. These were the best helps he
could advise his Roman Gallants to, when God uttered his mighty voice in
Thunder. But Christians know better how to hide themselves, even in the
goodness of God, against those terrible appearances of his Power.

Thirdly, If God speak with such a Voice as this in the Air, take heed of
slighting his Voice whenever he speaks in the Church, as Athiests and
Epicures do. He who speaks so loud in Thunder can thunder upon us at any time.
The Word preached, if not obeyed, will at last come upon all those who obey it
not, with as great a terror as Thunder.

Fourthly, Let us not be amazed and frighted at Thunder as Heathens or
Unbelievers.

Fifthly, Let us not think lightly of it, as if it either came by chance, or
merely from natural causes.

Sixthly, Let us fear the God of Thunder, not fear Thunder as a God.

Some have superstitiously thought Thunder was a God, and adored it: so it is
reported of the Lithuanians anciently, Lithuani fulmon deum esse pu^abant, and
propterea illud adorabant. Cromeru^, l. 15. Hist. Pol.
and possibly some of them do so to this day.

Secondly, In that Elihu calls so earnestly for attention to this voice, Hear
attentively the noise of his Voice,

Learn; Those things which are most easy to be heard, possibly may not at all
be understood.

Who does not hear when it thunders? but how few are there who attend or
understand the Thunder, or hear Thunder attentively? God speaks to us, not only
with a sti^^ voice, few hearing or attending him, but though he thunders few
attend him; yea, those woe ks of providence which speak louder than Thunder, and
shine cle^rer ^^an the Lightning, yet are neither heard no^ seen. As When his
hand is lifted up some will not see (Isa. 26.11.) So when his Voice is li^ted
up, when it is lifted up, not only like a trumpet, but like thunder, when he
speaks most audibly, yea most terribly, some will not hear; and he is not heard
by many, much less diligen^ly attended to, how loudly, how terribly soever he
speaks. The Lord often thunders by the voice of this Word; what are his
te^rible threats but loud thunderclaps? yet few hear, or though they hear, yet
they attend not. Not to hear the voice of God in his Word, is as if you did not
attend to the voice of Thunder. Every word of God, though spoken with a still
voice, has a greater force in it than Thunder from the Clouds. As the terrible
works of God are signified by Thunder ( Rev. 10.3, 4.) So the terrible words of
God, his threatening words against impenitent sinners, are resembled to Thunder.
And therefore such as the Lord fitted among his own Apostles for that
dispensation, are called in Scripture Sons of Thunder (Mark 3.17.) And they who
dispense the Word with a strong voice and fiery zeal, are truly so called to
this day, and may be said both to Thunder in their Exhortation, and to Lighten
in their Conversation. And indeed the Word of God truly and faithfully
dispensed by any is like Thunder. For,

First, As Thunder, so the Word spoken is the Voice of God, and a more
excellent and distinct Voice than Thunder; that only showing in general that
God is, or that he is great and powerful; this showing us distinctly, who and
what God is, and what he requires of us.

Secondly, Thunder throws down and dissipates high things; So does the Word of
God (2 Cor. 10.5.)

Thirdly, Thunder is irresistible by any power of man, it will make its way
through all opposition; so is and does the Word of God.

Fourthly, Thunder pierces very subtly, it reaches the bones quite through
the flesh; the Word of God does more, it divides soul and spirit, and the
joints and marrow, and is a discerner of the thoughts and intents of the heart
(Heb. 4.12.)

Fifthly, Thunder breaks the hardest things which resist it, but not soft
things; so the Word of God breaks the stout, but binds up the contrite spirit;
it resists the proud, but gives grace to the humble (Jam. 4.6.)

Now if the Word of God be in all these respects like Thunder, Let us not only
hear, but attend, or as the text says, hear attentively the sound of his voice.

If any ask, when do we both hear and attend with the inward and outward ear,
the Thunder of God, or his voice both in his works and in his word? I answer,

First, When we are stirred up to high and holy thoughts of God. We are never
rightly affected with the Word of God, till our hearts are wrought up to, and
deeply, at least truly, affected with the God of the Word.

Secondly, When our hearts are raised up in thankfulness for any discoveries of
God in his goodness and mercy to us, who can so easily destroy us by his power.
He that trembles at this voice of God, and has no sense nor taste of his
goodness, nor is moved to praise and serve him, trembles only like a bruit
beast.

Thirdly, When we learn to depend and hang upon him for all, as he that can do
all things graciously for us, as well as speak so terribly to us; then we hear
diligently the noise of his voice, axd the sound that goes out of his mouth.

For the close of this matter I shall only add; That though we ought to be
affected with the voice of God in his Word, as with his voice in Thunder, yet
let us not stay in that, which notes chiefly, if not only, that dread of God
which the word leaves upon our spirits; but let us look after and labor for
that effect of the Word, which like the beams and light of the Sun, may warm
our hearts with joy, and leave strongest impressions of the kindness and favor
of God upon them. Mr. Forbes, opening that Scripture ( Rev. 14.2.) where St.
John says, He heard a voice from heaven, and that of three sorts.

First, He heard a voice, as the voice of many Waters.

Secondly, As the voice of a great Thunder.

Thirdly, He heard the voice of harpers harping with their harpss. Upon
consideration of this threefold voice, which St. John heard, the forenamed
worthy Author, takes up a meditation to this pu^pose. The word of God (says
he) has three degrees of operation in the hearts of men.

First, It comes into men's ears, as the sound of many waters, which is a kind
of confused noise, and commonly brings neither terror nor joy, but a
wondering acknowledgment of a strange force, and more than humane power; as we
read of those ( Mark. 1.) who having heard the word of Christ were astonished
at his doctrine (v. 22.) and were all amazed (v. 27.) insomuch that they
questioned among themselves, what thing is this? what new doctrine is this? But
knew not what to make of it.

The second degree is, that the Word of God comes to the ear of man like
Thunder, which causes not only wonder, but greater astonishment and amazement.
Both these may be in a wicked profane person, and are often found upon common
professors.

But ^here is a third degree or effect of the Words operation, which (strictly
taken) is proper and peculiar to the Elect, and that is, when the Word heard is
as the voice of harpers harping with their harpes; that is, when the Word does
not only affect us with admiration, or strike the heart with astonishment and
terror, like the sound of many waters, and the voice of Thunder; but also
fills it with sweet peace, and joy in the Holy Ghost, when the Word is like
melodious music to the soul, ravishing us with divine delights, and raising us
up to a heavenly life, while we are here sojourning on this earth.

JOB, Chap. 37. Verse. 3, 4, 5. 3. He directs it under the whole heaven, and
his Lightning unto the ends of the earth.

4. After it a voice roareth: he thundereth with the voice of his excellency,
and he will not stay them when his voice is heard.

5. God thundereth marvelously with his voice: great things does he, which we
cannot comprehend.


ELihu having showed in the two former verses, how much himself was affected
with what God then did, or with what himself was about to say concerning the
doings of God; having also called upon others for due attention, and labored
to make the same impression upon their spirits that he found upon his own; he
proceeds to speak to the special matter.

First, To the works of God in those terrible fiery Meteors, Thunder, and
Lightning, which he does in the three verses now under discussion; and then
goes on to speak of other wonderful works of the wonder-working God, in the
following part of this Chapter, as was before showed, in laying open the whole.

Verse. 3. He directs it under the whole heaven. This verse holds forth the
divine guidance of those things which seem most remote from any guidance; He
directs it under the whole heaven. Here we may consider,

First, In whose hand this guiding power is; He, that is, God directs it.

Secondly, how far he guides, or the extent of his guiding power; it is not
limited, but universal, far and near, even under the heaven, and to the ends of
the earth.

There is some variety, as of reading, so of interpretation, about this verse,
arising from the various significations of that word which we render directs;
there is a threefold sense given of it. Aliqui a Rabinic^ (...) quod est
resolvere, humectare, exprimere. Hinc and September ab illis (...) Tish^i
dictus, q^^si expresso^^^, quod eo ^^^se fiat Vinde^^a. Merc.


First, As taken from a root which signifies to press or sqeeze, and so it is
applied to the pressing of grapes, which causes the juice or liqour of them to
flow out: And upon that consideration the seventh month of the year, our
September, has its name among the Jews from this word; because then the
Vintage being ready, the ripe Grapes are gathered and pressed into Wine. From
this notion of the word, some render the text thus, he presses or dissolveth
it under the whole heaven; that is, God presses the Cloud as a bunch of Grapes
is pressed (these Intepreters make that the anteced^nt to it, he presses it,
that is, the Cloud) and so causes it to rain. It Is God who presses and (as I
may say) squeezes the Clouds by his power, and then showers fall down and
distill upon the ea th under the whole Heaven. That Is a t^u^h, and some-where
else spoken of in this book, where we read of Gods melting or pressing the
Clouds as we do a bunch of Grapes or a spung, so causing them to give forth
rain.

Alii a (...) intueri respicere, considerare, quasi Deus omnia sub coelo
consideret. Sed nec Grammatica convenit (tum euim (...) dicendum fuerat) nec
sensus admodum, propter affl^^um Merc. Subier omnes coelos ipse confiderat.
Vulg. (...) a radice (...) quod est dirigi re, rectificare.
Secondly, Others derive the word from a root that signifies to behold
attentively, to behold and consider: Thus the latin translator renders it, he
considers under the whole heaven; that is (according to this interpretation)
there is a Providence of God, a wise and an unerring Providence of God at work
in all places, he considers and takes notice of all things under heaven, the
least motion of the Creature falls under his inspection, He beholds, or
considers under the whole heavens; that is a truth also; yet, I conceive (with
others) the Grammar of the Text will not well comply with this reading:
Therefore

Thirdly, I conclude our own translation most suitable both to the Original
text, and to the scope of this whole Chapter. Now, according to our rendering,
the word comes from a root which signifies to set a thing right or strait, and
from that a person who is right, a man of a right spirit, who squares and
orders his actions by a right rule, and to a right end, is expressed ( Chap.
1.1.) where Jobs character is given by this word, A man perfect and right, we
say, upright, that is, a man that has right aims, and walks by a right rule.
Moses (Deuteronomy. 32.15.) calls the people of God (collectively as one man)
Jeshuru^, that is, a people that are or should be right and upright with God.
Thus here, he directs it, that is, God does, as it were, by a strait line,
level or take his aim, when he discharges the Thunder in the Cloud: As he that
discharges his gun, small or great, or shoots an arrow, levels and directs it
at a mark, so the Lord directs it. What is this it? It Is plain, by what
follows in the latter part of the verse, where the Lightning is expressly
mentioned, that he means the Thunder or the Thunderbolt, for the Clouds are,
in that case, charged with bolts: we have had many dreadful instances, as well
in ancient Histories, as in our own time, of Thunderbolts like Bullets shot
from the Clouds. As if Elihu had said, whither-soever the Thunderbolt goes,
to what quarter of the world soever it is designed, it receives commission and
direction from God, what to do, and where to fall, whom it shall smite, or what
mark it shall hit; He directs it under the whole heaven, And his Lightning to
the ends of the earth.

Naturalists define or describe Ligh^ning thus; Fulgui seu coruscatio est
flammae mic^tio ab exhalationi^us accensi^, and e nubibus erumpentibus exorta.
Arist. 2. Meteor. cap 9.
It Is a bright shining, caused by exhalations fired in and violently breaking
out of the Clouds. The Hebrew is, his light. The Sun is the fountain of Light,
and that is eminently Gods Light; but the Light here spoken of, is not the
ordinary Light shining in the Air, by the rising of the Sun; this Light is
Ligh^ning, which is a sudden flas^ing or breaking forth of light from the
Clouds; as when a gun is fired or discharged, a light flasheth from it; such is
that which Authors of all sorts call Lightning, and here the Scripture calls
his Lightning. At the 3d Verse the Thunder was called his Voice, the Voice of
God; and in this, the Lightning is called his Lightning; Elihu appropriates it
unto God himself, his Lightning. This Lightning has more than light in it, it
has heat and fire in it; though we do not always feel it, yet many have, the
effects of heat and fire appearing sadly upon them. And this is such a fire as
water cannot quench; and therefore we often read in Scripture, Ignis sua natura
in verticem surgit; and si nihil illi prohibet, assendet; fulmen autem cadit
eadem necessitate, qua excutitur; nihil itaque dubii relinquitur, qui^ divina
illi virtus insit. Seneca.
of Lightning joined with the Rain ( Psalm. 135.7. Jer. 10.13. Jer. 51.16.)
which may be remark't as one of the wonders of it. There is a second, that the
Lightning is said to fall from heaven. When the disciples brought a report back
to Christ what great things they had done, what conquests they had got over
evil spirits, Christ answered ( Luke 10.18.) I saw Satan like Lightning fall
from heaven. Lightning falls from he^ven; for though Lightning of its own
nature (being fiery) should ascend, yet it descends through the power of God.
Naturalists observe it as a wonder, that the Lightning should descend: Seneca
demonstrates, it could not be, unless there were a divine power in it, that the
Lightning should come down from heaven; and as Elihu said before, he directs
it, or the Thunder, under the whole heaven; so we are here to take up that word
again, and say, He directs his Lightning To the ends of the earth.

(...)A^a, proprie avium est. (...). Sept.
Here is the act, and the extention of the act, to the ends of the earth; the
Heb^ew is, the wings of the earth, so the word is used ( Genesis 1.21.) God
created great whales, etc. and every winged fowl. The ends of the earth are
called the wings of the earth, because they are the farthest out-stretchings of
the earth; as a bird when she flies stretches out her wings to the utmost.
They are also called, The corners of the earth (Ezekiel. 7.2.) Thou son of man,
thus says the Lord God unto the land of Israel: an end, the end is come upon
the four corners of the land; the Hebrew is, upon the four wings (or ends) of
the earth; as if he had said, an end is come upon the East and West, North and
South. These four wings, or extremes of the earth, are the same which Christ
called the four winds (Mat. 24.31.) where speaking of the Resurrection at the
last Judgment, he shows how all that are raised shall be brought to one place
or general Session, and he shall send his angels with a great sound of a
trumpet, and they shall gather together his Elect from the four winds, from one
end of heaven to the other, that is, from the four ends, corners, skirts, or
wings of the earth. The utmost extremity of a garment or of a land, according
to the Hebrew, is called, the wing of it. Now forasmuch as Elihu represents
God, thus directing both the Thunder and Lightning,

Observe first; All the motions of the Creature, even the most violent, and, to
appearance, contingent motions of the Creature, are under the direction, yea,
under the dominion of God.

Thunder and Lightning go the way which God appoints and chalketh out to
them; they move not of themselves, they move not whither men or devils would
have them, but whither God would have them. The Devils, I grant, have great
power in the Air, yet it is limited by, and wholly subordinate to the will and
power of God. As the reasonable creatures and their motions, that is, the
motions of Men and Angels, are under the direction of God, as Jeremiah speaks (
Chap. 10.23.) It is not in him that goes to direct his own steps. The Hebrew
uses a word there which may be rendered to prepare, to establish, or to
confirm, neither of which are in him that goes; we render it according to the
present text, it is not in him that goes to direct his own steps; who directs
them then? It is God that directs the steps of man. It is not in the power of
man to direct his own steps, he is not able to do it; and besides that, he has
not the liberty or privilege to do it, he may not do it, he ought not to do
it; it is the duty as well as the safety of man to leave the direc^ion of his
ways and steps to God. It Is God that directs the steps of man, yea, the
indirect steps of man are under the mighty power of God; the very wanderings of
men are under the guidance of God; the motions, yea commotions, the actions,
and the most disturbed actions of man are under a most certain disposure and
disposition of God: When men do they know not what, God knows and orders what
they do. Now (I say) as God directs reasonable creatures, men or angels, so
unreasonable creatures in their motions; the motions of the beasts of the
earth, and the motions of the birds of the air, are all directed by God; yea,
the motions of the very inanimate creatures, of those that have no motion in or
of themselves, but whose motion is by some outward violence and pressure put
upon them, even their motion also is directed by the hand of God. Thunder and
Lightning are inanimate liveless creatures, they have no motion of their own,
but by impression and violence, yet God directs their motion as truly, as he
does the motions of those c^eatures which move by the most deliberate actings
of their own will, reason, and understanding. What is there so violent in its
motion as Thunder? What is there so swift in its motion as the Lightning? of
which Christ being about to give his people warning, Christus non venit clam
aut invisibiliter ut illi volunt, qui jactant se habere christum in deserto, in
urbe, in claustro, in conditorio, sed palam, ut fulmen editum per omnia lucet.
Coc.
not to believe those deceivers, who say, Lo here is Christ, etc. says (Mat.
24.27.) For as the Lightning comes out of the East, and shines even unto the
West, so shall also the coming of the Son of man be; that is, as the Lightning
instantly passes from one part of the heaven to the other visibly, so shall
the coming of the Son of man be, a sudden, swift, and visible coming^; Ye shall
not need to go into corners to show or see him, for he shall come as the
Lightning discovering himself to all by the brightness of his coming. There was
such an apprehension of the swiftness of the Lightning among the Ancients, that
though the Latin word signifying to Lighten, is accented long, Ad
signific^ndam hanc e nubibus subitae lucis eruptio nem ^ s erat antiqu^^ media
syll^ba ^^rrepta ut ^^^erent fulg^^^. Sen. lib. 2. Not quest. cap. 56.
yet because Lightning is so swift in motion they were wont to pronounce it
short; Lightning being so quick and active, they thought it was not suitable to
draw it out in speaking by a long pronunciation. But though Lightning have such
a violent and swift motion, yet it is under Gods command and direction, and it
shall make no more haste than God will. An arrow flies with a very violent and
swift motion, yet it is God that directs the arrow, he di^ects it more than
the man that shoots it; and when a shot is made, as we say, at random, God then
di^ects it; as in that notable history of Ahab, when he, against the counsel of
God given him by Micaiah, would needs go up to the battle at Ramoth Gilead (1
Kings 22.34.) the text says, There was a man who drew a bow at a venture, we
put in the Ma gin, He drew a bow in his simplicity, he had no special inten^ion
against Ahab, he did not aim at Ahab when he shot his arrow, but God car^ied it
to the right mark, to fulfill that which he had determined and spoken concerning
Ahab; yea, he directed it not only to the right man* but to the right place,
the joint of his armor. When in battle, arrows, and darts, and bullets are
sent forth, as so many thunderbolts, the Lord directs them and hands them
whither they shall go, whom they shall hit, and where. God also directs the
thunderbolts of his Word, where and whom they shall hit. And (to the point in
general) that the Lord has a guidance over those things that are most
contingent, we may see in that of Moses, when he gave a Law from the Lord about
the man that goes with his Neighbor to cut Wood; Providentia non est incerta
cut vaga.
If (says he) the head slippeth from the helve, and lights upon his
neighbor that he die, he shall flee into one of those cities and live* (Deuteronomy.
19.5.) The reason of this Law is expressed ( Exodus 21.13.) because in such
con^ingent cases God delivers him into his hand; the man had no intent to hit
his Neighbor, but fetching a blow, the head slieth from the helve, and both
hits and kills him; and to show that this contingency was ordered by God, the
text says, God delivered him into his hand.

And forasmuch as God has such a power over the motions of the creature, it
may be matter of comfort and encouragement to us, not only with respect to
Thunder and Lightning, that we should not fear them, as the heathen, who
neithe^ know nor fear God; but we may take comfort from hence also, with
respect to the most violent and hurried motions that we see here below. When we
find men acting like Thunder and Lightning, without deliberation, when they are
all in passions and perturbations, yet let us know, these violent mo^ions shall
not fall any where by chance or hap hazar^, nor by their own ^way, but as God
appoynts and overrules them; they shall either fall quite besides the mark
which men aimed at, and so do no hurt to any, or if they do, God orders what
hurt they shall do* He directs it under the whole heaven. Let us carry this
conside^ation always with us, and it will be a great stay to our minds in all
the violent motions of the creature.

Again, from the extent of this divine direction or providence of God, as to
these things; He directs it under the whole heaven, and unto the ends of the
earth, that is, every where;

Note; The providence of God reaches to all places.

His orde^s go forth into all lands, his dominion is under the whole heavens
and unto the ends of the earth ( Psalm. 65.5.) He is the confidence of all the
ends of the earth, and of them that are afar off upon the Sea. God is not
helpful to his people in one place of the e^rth, and not in another, or helpful
to them upon the earth, and not upon the Sea, but to the ends of the earth, and
upon the broad sea he is their confidence, that is, they may con^^de and trust
in him wheresoever they are. Hence that expostulation in the prophet ( Jeremiah
23.23.) Am I (says the Lord) a God at hand, and not a God afar off? Some would
circumscribe and limit the Power of God, as if being a God near at hand he
could not be a God afar off too, or to those who are scattered to the ends of
the earth. But while he puts the question, am I a God at hand and not afar off?
he puts it out of question, that he is a God afar off as well as at hand. The
Syrians said and pleased themselves in their conceit (1 Kings 20.28.) The Lord
is God of the hills, but he is not God of the valleys; therefore they would
change the battle, as if he could order things here and not there; but all
shall find and feel him (as they did) a God both of the hills and of the
valleys, a God both of the Land and of the Sea, a God both at hand, and afar
off. It is said of the Empire of the Sun ( Psalm. 19* 6.) his going forth is
from the end of the heaven, and his circuit unto tke ends of it, and there is
nothing hid from the heat thereof: much more may I say of the Empire of God,
his going forth is from one end of the earth to the other, and there is nothing
hid from his wisdom and government. One of the Ancients gives his sentence
clearly with this truth; Qui summa regit extrema non deserit, and qui utique
praesens and equalis est, etiam in dissimilibus, sil i ipsi dissimilis non est.
Gregor.
He (says he) that rules in the highest heavens does not forsake the ends of
the earth, he is every where present, and every where alike present; though the
places are unlike, yet the presence of the Lord is a like when need requires
it. That Is further matter of comfort, that under the whole heaven and unto the
ends of the earth we may find the Lord ready for us, and disposing all things,
not only for good, but for the best. He directs it etc.

Verse. 4. After it a voice roareth, or, after it he roareth with a voice. (...)
pro (...) Elli^ sis praepositionis (...) Post eum. Vulg. Pro volunte ac jubente
illo: ut post deum sit post ille praeceperit. Drus. Anteambulones and
praenuncii supremi regis adventantis.
There is another reading of these words, some give it thus; after him a voice
roareth, That is, after his command; God willing and giving forth an order for
it, a voice roareth, that is, at his command or word the voice roareth, or
follows. As if the scope of Elihu in this Text, were to show, that neither
Thunder nor Lightning stir a foot or hairs breadth, till they have a word from
God, as indeed they do not. For, though Thunder and Lightning may be called
Gods Vshers or Heralds that go before him and proclaim his approach ( Psalm.
18.12, 13, 14.) yet they follow and come after him; They go before him as to
action, yet they come after him as to commis^^on, they go not till he says go,
or has given them commission to go. That Is a profitable reading of the words.

Our translation says, after it a voice roareth, that is, after the Lightning,
or as soon as it has Lightened a voice roareth. Our experience teaches us that
Thunder follows the Lightning; which we are not to understand according to
the nature of the thing, for so Thunder and Lightning are, as it were, born and
brought forth together; there is no difference between them at all in time, but
there is a difference as to order, at least as to order in our apprehension;
and so the one may be said to come after the other, the Thunder after the
Lightning; as when a gun, lesser or greater, is discharged, if you are at a
distance you may see the fire a considerable time before you hear the report,
Segnius irritant animos demissa per aurem quam quae sunt oculis subjecta
fidelibus. Horat.
and possibly the bullet hits the mark before the sound hits to the ear, though
the discharge be made in a moment; which some say is because the eye is a
quicker sense than the ear, but rather, because light does in a moment strike
through the air, but the sound comes by certain circuits, and fetches a longer
compass before it comes at the ear, as has been touched lately before, as also
at the 26 verse of the 28 chapter. And besides this, or any other reason of the
thing in nature, constant experience teaches us that we see the light first
and then hear the voice; and therefore Elihu speaks here very congruously to
both, After it a voice roareth. And as the reason of this in nature (as was
showed) is that more speedy passage of the light through the air than of the
sound, so a moral reason may be given of it, which take in this observation.

God minds or warnes us of his Judgments before he sends them. Fulguratio
ostendit ignem fulminatio ^mitit, illa (ut-ita dicam) cominatio est, and
conatio sine ictu, ista jaculatio cum ictu. Sen. lib. 2. Not. Quest. cap. 12.
When you see Lightning you say there will be Thunder by and by; as natural
Lightning gives warning of Thunder, so God gives warning from his word, and
providence, when a Thunderclap of judgment, in any kind, is coming. God never
sends a judgment, but we hear of it before we feel it; God speaks before he
strikes ( Matthew. 24.) Behold, I have told you before. Lightning tells us
Thunder is at hand. God does not use to strike his people with a Thunderbolt,
before he has given them notice by a flash of Lightning; indeed judgments
always surprise the wicked; how much Lightning soever has been dashed in
their eyes, yet the Thunder comes unawares. The day of the Lord will at least
come as a snare upon all carnal men, though they have had frequent calls to
prepare for it. God in the course of nature teaches us the course of his
providence, Lightning gives warning that Thunder is coming, and happy are they
who take warning by his Lightning, and so escape the stroke of his Thunder;
after it a voice Roareth.

It has been already showed that Thunder is the voice of God; here Elihu tells
us what kind of voice it is, it roareth. (...) rugivit propri^^m leonis.
The word signifies the roaring of a lion, it is also applied to the roaring of
the Sea, that is a dreadful roaring. Naturalists tell us there are several sorts
of Thunder; every Thunder is not a roaring Thunder, they give five or six
gradual denominations of Thunder;

First, There is a shreeking or crashing Thunder. 1. Stridens.


Secondly, There is a hissing Thunder, 2. Sibilans.
as when red hot iron is put into water.

Thirdly, There is a cracking Thunder, 3. Crepans.
as when a bladder is broken, or a chestnut in the fire.

4 Tumultuans.
Fourthly, There is a rumbling Thunder. We sometimes hear only a rushing in the
clouds, no crack of Thunder breaking our.

5. Rugiens. etc. Garcae^s Meteorolog.
Fifthly, There is a roaring Thunder, as this text speaks, a voice roareth.

Sixthly, There is a whispering Thunder, I may call it a kind of silent o^
still-voyced Thunder; possibly that was such spoken of (1 Kings 19.12.) After
the fire, a still small voice. As also that when Jesus Christ was baptized by
John in Jordan (Matthew. 3.17.) And lo, a voice from heaven, saying, This is my
beloved Son, in whom I am well-pleased; It Is conceived, that voice came in a
still whispering Thunder. Such doubtless was that Thunder ( John 12.28, 29.)
when Christ prayed, Father, glorify thy Name; then came there a voice from
heaven, saying, I have both glorified it, and will glorify it again. At the
hearing of this voice, the people that stood by, said that it thundered, others
said, that an Angel spoke to him. This voice was an articulate sound coming
with the Thunder; and the Hebrew word which we commonly translate voices,
signifies thunder. The Jewish Writers tell us that ( Bath col) the daughter of
voice (which they reckon the only way of divine revelation, left them after the
Babylonish Captivity) was the will of God made known to them immediately from
heaven by this sort of Thunder. Thunders and voices are often joined in the
Book of the Revelations (Chap. 4.5. chap. 8.5.) implying, the revelation of
those prophetic wonders, was made by Voices accompanied with Thunder. And thus
those two texts which seem contradictory may be reconciled, Act. 9.7. it is
said, They who journied with Paul, stood speechless hearing a voice. But ( Act.
22.9.) Paul says, They saw indeed the light and were afraid, but they heard
not the voice of him that spoke to me. The voice which they heard in the 9th
Chapter was the voice of Thunder, and the voice which they did not hear the
22d, was the distinct articulate voice of Christ, saying, Saul, Saul, Why
persecutest thou me?

From this consideration of Gods gradual speaking to us in the Clouds, we may
be led to consider how gradually he speaks to us in the Ministry of his Word;
there he speaks sometimes whisperingly, gently, he at first awakens the ear a
little, but at last he roareth with his voice. If we will not hear, he has
louder and louder voices, which we shall hear whether we will or no. At the
giving of the Law ( Exodus 19.19.) The voice of the trumpet sounded long, and
waxed louder and louder. There are different degrees in the loudness of the
voice when God speaks to his people. We should take warning by the light that
shines, we should hear the smallest voice, the first whisperings of God, and
not put him to his roaring voice. God is said to roar out of Zion (Joel 3.16.)
yea, many times he roareth upon Zion, because of the disobedience and
negligence of the Citizens of Zion. After it a voice roareth, the words that
follow speak the same thing, He thundereth with the voice of his excellency.

This is the first time that we have the word Thunder expressed in the text,
though the sense of the whole place speaks thunder. (...) Tonuit, intonuit,
commotus fuit prae indignatione. Tonitru est fragor editus ex plaga compactorum
ignium e nube erumpeutium. Plin.
The word which signifies Thunder, signifies any great noise or dreadful cry
( Ezekiel. 27.35.) ( Psalm. 96.11.) it signifies also the voice of any one that
complains or bemoaneth his or her condition, or that is troubled or fretted
at the crosness of relations: It is said of Peninnah, she provoked her (that
is, Hannah) sore (or, as the Margin reads it, angered her) for to make her fret,
because the Lord had shut up her womb: The word is that of the text, to make
her thunder, or to cause a tumultuation in her spirit, like that in the Clouds,
Tonitru est horrendus sonus in nube spissa, qui excitatur ab exhalatione calida
and sicca, conclusa intra nubem, quae cum fremitu quaerons exitum, magna
violentia erumpit and undique nubem concutit. Garcae. Meteorolog. ex Aristot.
lib. 2. Meteor. c. 9.
when heat and cold contend for the masteryes.

Thunder is so unquiet and tumultuous, that any thing which is so, may by a
figure be called Thunder. The text speaks of proper Thunder; and if we enquire
among Philosophers about the nature and generation of Thunder, some tell us
briefly, Thunder is a crashing or cracking noise made by the stroke of enclosed
fires breaking through the louds. Or thus, Thunder is a dreadful sound in a
thick Cloud, caused by the hot and dry exhalation shut up in the bowels of it,
which seeking passage out makes its own way with mighty violence.

But though the matter here treated upon by Elihu be philosophical, yet I must
remember that mine is a Divinity, not a Philosophy Lecture, and therefore it
may suffice me to touch these things, and leave the Reader, who desires to know
more of them, or of other mysteries in Nature, to seek his satisfaction in
those learned Authors who professedly handle this subject of Thunder; and shall
here only take notice that Elihu does not only say, He thundereth, but He
thundereth With the voice of his excellency.

(...) Excellentia elatio, supernia verbum medium est.
That Is an explication of he roareth. The voice of his excellency, is his high
voice. The word signifies pride, because they that are in high places are so
apt to be proud, or because high-mindedness is the same with pride. Proud men
think themselves higher than their brethren, as Saul was above the people by
head and shoulders; therefore the same word signifies pride and light. The
Lord thundereth with the voice of his highness or excellency of his greatness.

(...). In voce ^^ntutum^^iae suae, Sept. Sco^ia explicant in voce^^in ^rum
plena.
The Septuagint says, He thundereth with the voice of his reproach, or with his
reproaching voice. A man that is angry poures out his displeasure in reproaches
upon such as have provoked him. God knows how to Thunder just and deserved
reproaches upon provoking sinners. The Scoliasts explain that translation of
the seventy, with the voice of his reproach, thus, with ^r by a voice fall of
threatening; and it is a truth, the mouth of God is full of threatenings, and his
heart of indignation, against presuming sinners. We may put all these together,
yet I conceive our own reading most suitable; He thundereth with the voice of
his excellency, like a great Commander in war, of whom God speaks ( Job.
39.25.) in the most high-strained, rhetorical description of the strength and
courage of the horse; He smells the Battle afar off, the thunder of the
Captain, and the Shoutings. When an Army is engaged in Battle, there is not
only a thundering of the Guns, but of the Captains and Commanders, they speak
highly, they thunder with a voice of their high courage and excellency; much
more does God in the day of his Battle thunder with the voice of his excellency.

Hence note; God works like himself, he makes his excellency and his highness
appear to the children of men. in the very works of nature.

And does he not often so it in his works of Providence, whether for the
Salvation of his faithful people, or for the Destruction of his enemies? I
shall not stay upon this point, having met with matter of the same purpo^t more
than once before. He thundereth with the voice of his excellency, And he will
not stay them when his voice is heard.

It Is questioned, who are meant by them, He will not stay them; (...) calcaneum
tenuit. Aliqui exponunt retardabuntur impersonaliter, vel retardabit aliquis
fulmen vel fulgur cum deus emittere petit. Scult. Neque differt illa cum
audienda est vox ejus. Jun: i. e. fulgetra tonitruum praenuncia exhibet. (...)
non differt? i. e. praemittit. Jun:
Some understand the rain and showers, which usually follow upon, or after a
great thunder; and we commonly call them thunder showers. Others understand the
Lightning and the Thunder; as if he had said, When Gods purpose is declared
that there shall be lightning and thunder, he will not stay them, or take them
by the heel, as the word properly signifies: whence Jacob had his name,
because when Esau was coming into the world, Jacob took him by the heel, as if
he would have stayed or stopped his birth, at least have got into the world
before him; and therefore Esau said ( Genesis 27.36.) Is he not rightly called
Jacob? for he has supplanted me these two times. Which some render according
to the letter of the Text, My brother may well be called an Heeler, for he has
heeled me these two times. In this sense the Lord will not stay the birth and
breaking forth of these terrible twins, Thunder and Lightning. Lastly, learned
Junius referrs them to the Lightnings only, rendering, He does not defer them,
when his voice is to be heard; which he thus expounds, He sends lightning
before, foretelling thunder will follow. But I conceive the former exposition
more clear, which refers this not staying, or he will not stay, both to
thunder and lightning, in consort or together.

Hence note; When once God speaks the word, and is resolved upon the doing of a
thing, there is no stopping of him, nor will he stay his work.

He will not take thunder and lightning by the heel, when he has bid them go.
We have a parallel sense to this, c^ncerning the thunder and lightning of
divine Judgments ( Zeph. 2.1, 2.) Gather your selves together, O gather your
selves together, before the decree bring forth. As if he had said, If once the
decree bring forth, if once God declare that wrath shall come, there is no
recalling of it, He will not stay it when his voice is heard; for then ( Isa.
43.13.) The Lord will work, and n^ne shall let him; he will not stop it
himself, and none else can. Thunder and lightning shall come; whosoever stand
in their way must down. And as none can let God by power, so none shall let
him by prayer, if once he be resolved, ahd has sent forth his decree;
therefore do not provoke the Lord to give out the word, for then your case is
desperate. There Is no opposing the work of God, or God in his working. He will
not stay them when his voice is heard.

Verse. 5. God thundreth marveilously with his voice; great things does he that
we cannot comprehend. Consider how often this word is repeated, He roareth with
his voice, He thundereth with the voice of his excellency, and here, He
thundereth marveilously. This may teach us, First, (which has been noted
before) that the works of God in nature are to be heeded. Secondly, that we are
very backward to heed them. Thirdly, this is so often ascribed to God, least we
should think that thunder is only a work of nature.

God thundereth marveilously. Tonat mirabilia. Hebr: Numerus pluralis indicat
ingentem admirationem and stuporem mortalium ad vocem tonitrui. Pined.
The words may be read, God thundereth marvels; it is in the plural number: We
render well, God thundereth marveilously; but there is a greater Emphasis,
taking it in the plural number, God thundereth marvels. Consider thunder and
lightning in a proper, or in a metaphorical sense, there are many marvels or
wonders in them. Naturalists observe many marvels in natural thunder and
lightnings; these sometimes melt the sword without hurt to the scabbard;
dissolve the metal, not consuming the purse; break the bones, and not the
flesh; these spoil the Wine without staving or breaking the cask; kill or
stifle the child in the womb, and not the mother. God thunders marveilously in
these things.

Again, how many marveilous Judgments has God wrought by thunder! how often
has he destroyed the enemies of his people, and the blasphemers of his great
Name, by thunder and lightning from Heaven! Anastatius the Emperor, an
Eutichian persecutor of the Orthodox Christians, was slain by thunder. The
History of the Church, speaks of a Christian Legion or Brigade of Christians in
the Army of Aurelius the Emperor, who earnestly prayed (the whole Army being
in a great strait) that God would appear for their help, and the defeating of
the enemy; whereupon the Lo^d sent rain for their relief, as also thunder and
lightning, by which the enemy was discomfited and destroyed: whereupon that
Legion was called, The thundering Legion. When Julian the Apostate, merely to
despite the prophecy of Christ ( Mat. 24.) who had said of the Temple at
Jerusalem, there should not be left one stone upon another; Julian, I say, in
despite of this prophecy, yea, to despite it, gave command for the building of
the Temple at Jerusalem, and upon his command there was a great quantity of
materials brought together for that purpose; but the Lord seeing the pride of
this enemy, sent a marveilous thunder, with an Earthquake, which not only
amazed the workmen, but scattered those materials, and put a stop to the work.

Now as there are many marvels wrought by natural thunder and lightning, so
also by that which is spiritual. Nor will it be unuseful for us to consider
them upon occasion of what is said of natural thunder in this Scripture.

God thundereth marveilously in the dispensation of his Word, or in his
dealings with the souls of sinners, to bring them home to himself, and to turn
them from their sins. We may (not excluding the proper sense) profitably
expound the whole 29th Psalm in this spiritual sense; wherein the Lord under
the Allegory of a terrible thunder-tempest, seems to give a prophetical
description of his mighty power in propagating the Gospel to the ends of the
earth; which goes not out as an empty sound beating the air, but with
wonderful efficacy, convincing the world of sin, and of their need of Christ to
save them from their sins. And to show that this is the scope of the Psalm,
David begins it with a strong exhortation, ( v. 1, 2.) Give unto the Lord, O ye
mighty, give ye unto the Lord glory and strength: Give unto the Lord the glory
due unto his Name; worship the Lord in the beauty of holiness. As if David had
said, O ye, the mighty Princes and Potentates of the world, who in most places
and times have contemned God and his holy worship; and being your selves either
irreligious, or engaged in a false religion, have used your power against, and
hindered the progress of the Gospel, and the advancement of true religion; I
advise and admonish you to lay down that spirit, to embrace the Gospel, to love
the power of godliness, to propagate the true knowledge of Jesus Christ, and to
encourage the faithful dispencers and professors of it, both by your favor
and example, worshipping the Lord in the beauty of holiness.

If any should ask, Why is the Lord to be so worshipped? why must he have such
high honors from those that are high? what does he in the World which calls
for such adoration? David answers Meteorologically as well as Theologically, he
answers from the Clouds ( verse. 3.) The Voice of the Lord is upon the Waters,
the God of glory thundreth; the Lord is upon many Waters; The voice of the Lord
is powerful, the voice of the Lord is full of Majesty. As if he had said,
Although the Lord Jesus Christ will not set up an outward, pompous, political
Kingdom, such as that of Cyrus or Alexander, etc. yet by the Ministry of the
Gospel he will erect a spi^itual Kingdom, and gather to himself a Church, that
shall abide for ever, out of all the Nations of the earth: For the Gospel shall
be carried and preached to, not only the people of Israel, the Jews, but to
the Gentiles all the world over, that the minds of men may be awakened,
enlightened, and moved with that unheard of Doctrine of Salvation by Christ,
which had been hid from Ages and Generations.

And though many shall be hardened against, and oppose that glad-tydings, yet
because the God of glory thundereth, that is, because the voice of the Lord is
powerful and full of Majesty; he accompanying the Ministry of the Gospel with
power and terror like that of Thunder, home to the Consciences of men, for
their conviction and conversion, therefore it shall do great and glorious
things, subduing the greatest and stoutest sinners to the obedience of his
Will. This Thunder will cast down the strong holds of sin, and every thing that
exalts it self against the knowledge of God, and bring into captivity every
thought to the obedience of Christ, (2 Cor. 10.4, 5.) This is it which the
Prophet David intends (according to this allegorical interpretation) by the
effects of Thunder, elegantly expressed ( verse. 5, 6, 7, 8, 9) The Voice of the
Lord breaks the Cedars, yea, the Lord breaks the Cedars of Lebanon; that
is, proud and high-minded men, who are (in their own conceit) as tall as
Cedars, these he will make to see that they are but shrubs, these he will
humble and break their hearts by true repentance, for the pride of their
hearts, and all the abominations of their lives. Further ( verse. 6.) He makes
them also to skip like a Calf, Lebanon and Syrion like a young Unicorn; that
is, the Lord by his thundering powerful voice, first, will make them skip as
frighted with fear, and secondly, as revived with joy. Yet more ( verse. 7.) The
Voice of the Lord divides the Flames of fire; that is, will send and divide to
every one as they need (1 Cor. 12.11.) the holy Spirit, who is compared to and
called Fire ( Mat. 3.11.) and who came as with a Thunder-storm of a mighty
rushing wind, and with the appearance of cloven Tongues, like as of fire, and
sat upon each one of the Apostles, (Acts 2.2, 3.) Nor did this Voice of
Thunder, accompanied with divided fl^mes of fire, reach Jerusalem only; for, as
it follows ( verse. 8.) The V^yce of the Lord shakes the Wilderness, the
Wilderness of Kadesh; that is, the Lord by the voice of the Gospel shall go
forth with power to those Gentiles, who are like a wilderness, barren o^
goodness, and unmanur'd in spirituals, though they dwell in well-governed
Cities, and are well-furnished with Morals. It shall go forth also to those
Gentiles who inhabit wast wildernesses, and are not so much as reduced to
civility: These wildernesses the thundering voice of the Lord has shaken
heretofore, and does shake at this day, and will yet further shake, that the
fullness of the Gentiles may come in. Many of these wildernesses has the Lord
turned into fruitful fields, and pleasant lands, by the voice of the Gospel
sounding among them. For in these wildernesses (as it follows verse. 9.) The
voice of the Lord makes the hinds to calve; that is, they that were as wild,
as untaught and untamed as the hind or any beast in the forest, he brings to
the sorrows of their new birth, to Repentance and Gospel-humiliation: And in
doing this He (as the Psalmist goes on) discovers the forests, that is,
opens the hearts of men, which are as thick set and full grown with vanity,
pride, hypocrisy, self-love, and self-sufficiency, as also with wantonness and
sensuality, as any forest is overgrown with thickets of trees and bushes,
which deny all passage through, till cleared away by cutting down or burning
up; Such an opening, such a discovery does the Lord make in the forests of
men's hearts, by the Sword and Fire, that is, by the Word and Spirit of the
Gospel; and when all this is done, the forest becomes a Temple, and as that
verse concludes, In his temple does every one speak of his glory. And if the
floods of ungodliness rise up against this people, whom the thunder and
lightning of the Gospel have subdued to Christ and framed into a holy Temple,
then the Psalmist assures us ( verse. 10.) The Lord sits upon the flood,
that is, it is under his power, he rules and over-ruleth it: yea, The Lord
sits King for ever, and ( v. 11.) The Lord will give strength to his people,
the Lord will bless his people with peace. Thus the Lord thundereth
marveilously and these are glorious marvels which he thundereth; he converts
sinners. The thunder of the Gospel frights them out of sin, and the grace of it
gives them peace.

Thus, though I like not their way who are given to allegorize the Scriptures,
yet, I doubt not but we may make a profitable use both of this and many other
Scriptures by way of allegory. This being an undeniable truth, which is the
ground of it, That the Lord puts forth, as it were, the power of Thunder and
Lightning in the preaching of his Word, these two things are to be marked.

First, That Thunder and Lightning are a kind of Word of God to us, they tell
us (though confusedly, yet plainly enough, for the conviction and condemnation
of gainsayers) there is a God; the greatest Princes of the world have taken
notice of Thunder and Tempest that there is a God over all, governing all; nor
needs there any more teaching than that to condemn Athiests and Mockers at
Religion. We say proverbially of some men, who make a rude noise, they are so
loud that we cannot hear God Thunder for them; yet know there is no noise can so
drown the voice of Gods Thunder in the Clouds, but it will condemn all that
hear it not, so as to acknowledge God in it.

Secondly, We should mark, that as Thunder and Lightning are a kind of Voice or
Word of God to us, so the Word of God, or the Voice of God, speaking in his
Word, is a kind of Thunder and Lightning to us, very mighty, very powerful,
even clothed with an irresistible power and might. And therefore if we take the
Prophet David in 29th Psalm before mentioned, speaking, in the former part of
it, of the effects of Natural Thunder only; yet toward the close of the Psalm,
he applies it to the Word of God, while he says (v. 9.) And in his Temple
does every one speak of his glory; that is, the Word and Ordinances of God,
ministered in his Church, or Temple, will put every one to acknowledge and speak
of the glorious Power of God, even much more than the mighty Thunder which
sounds in our ears, or the subtle Lightning which flasheth in our eyes.
There is a far more royal power in the Thunder of the Word, than in the word of
Thunder; This terrifyeth only to Conviction, but that terrifieth to Salvation;
for after God speaks terror there in his Threatenings, he speaks comfort in the
Promises; and when he has affrighted us with a sense of our sins, and of his
wrath due to us for our sins, as with an horrible tempest, he presently
refreshes us with the gentle gales of revealed grace, and with the pleasant
amiable Sunshine of his favor by Jesus Ch i^t. And therefore in respect both
of the Natural and Spiritual Thunder, considered in the circumstances and
consequences of it, Elihu might well conclude, as he does, in the last words of
this Verse and matter, Great things does he, which we cannot comprehend.

We may take these words, not only as intending the great things of the
Thunder, which indeed are such as we cannot comprehend; but, as a transition
from Thunder, to those other great things that God does, set forth in the
latter part of the Chapter.

Great things does he. God does the least things, but he can do great things,
he does great things Which we cannot comprehend.

The Hebrew is, He does great things, and we know not; F^cit magna and non
cognoscimus. Heb.
which may be expounded two ways.

First, We know not, that is, we take no notice of them. God does great things,
and we are very backward to consider them.

Secondly, We know not, that is, he does such great things, that let us
consider and study them as long as we will, let us break our brains to find out
the greatness of them, yet we shall never find it out; He does great things
that we cannot comprehend. The text is clear, and the sense profitable in
either Interpretation^; he does great things which we do not consider, or he
does great things, that when we have considered them, and done the most we can,
we cannot come to the full knowledge of them. Naturalists speak much of the
causes of these things, yet the clearest sighted among them, could not see the
bottom of them, nor reach the utmost reason of them. Great things does he,
which we cannot comprehend.

Hence note; It is both proper and easy to God to do great things.

He is the great God, so great that doing great, things is no weariness to him.
The t^xt does not say, h^ has done great things, o^ he will do great things,
bu^, he does grea things, he is always doing g eat t^^^gs; and (...) is a
po^nt improveable for the comfort of the people (...) God. When a great matter
is to be done, we say, who shall do it (...) when we are in great troubles and
dangers, we s^y, who shall deliver us? If small matters be to be done, we think
we o^ other men like our selves can do them; but when great m^^^^rs are to be
d^ne, we hardly believe, that God can do them for us; yet it is all one with God
whether the thing be great or little that is to be done, if he please to
undertake the doing of it. It is questioned ( Amos 7.2.) By whom shall Jacob
ar^se, for he is small? They looked to this and that creature, and saw Jacob so
small and low, that they thought he could never rise again; but remember Jacobs
God is great, and he does great things, this great thing especially, to raise
them that are low and small. Whatever your condition is, remember God is
great, and can as well do great things as little, as easily make a world as
give you a morsel of b^ead; there is nothing hard to God; He does great things,
and (according to the strictness of the Hebrew text) we know not, that is, we
consider them not, we take little notice of them.

Hence observe; The sons of men are commonly very slight thoughted about the
great works of God.

When God thunders ma^vel^, we know them not, we lay them not to heart. The
Prophet ( Isa. 5.12*) shows how busy the ca^eless Jews were in their mi^th
and jollity, but they regarded not the work of the Lord, neither considered the
operation ^f his hands. When God is doing great things, o^e man is getting
wealth, another taking his pleasure, but they regard not at all, or have very
little regard to what God is doing.

Again, from our reading, Great things does he, which we cannot comprehend,

Note; God does great things that are beyond the greatest of our apprehensions,
such things, as after all our study we are short in, and short of.

As it is our sin that we take not pains enough to know the great things that
God does; so God does things so great, that when we have done our best, or,
after all our pains, we cannot know them fully: though we know their outside,
yet little of their inside, though we know their effects, yet little of their
causes and contrivances. To know a thing, is to know it in the causes of it,
Scire est per causas scire.
to see the reason of it. A man knows not the things that he knows, till he
sees the reason of what he knows. How little does man know of, or see into the
reason of the great things that God does? How little do we see of the marvels
that are in the works of God? The love of God passes knowledge (Ephesians. 3.19.)
Though we labou^ to know it (and it is our sin that we labor not more to know
it) yet we cannot, it surpasses all our knowledge. And as that love of God,
which is the first mover of all the good and great things that he does for his
people, ^^^seth our knowledge, so the things that are the effects of that love
to his people are so great, that they pass our knowledge. Hence we may infer
these two duties.

First, Let us be much in the admiration of the great things that God does.
Where knowledge ends, there admiration should begin. It was a shame for a
Philosopher to admire, because he was supposed to know the whole compass of
nature; but it is no shame for a Christian to admire, there being many things,
not only in the ^pecial dispensations of grace, but in the common dispensations
of providence, which he cannot know comprehensively, the whole compass of which
he cannot graspe or take in with the best of his understanding.

Secondly, Let us take heed of censuring the works of God. Some are very bold
in passing their Verdicts upon the great things that God does; this, and that
is not so well done, this and that might have been otherwise done. The great
things which God does please not many men if hey hit not their interest, how
apt are they to find fault; But seeing God does great things that we cannot
comprehend, let us take heed of censuring any of the great things that God
does; no man should judge or censure that which he does not, cannot know, and
fully understand: But usually they who understand things least, censure them
most, and they are most apt to judge, who have the weakest judgments.

JOB, Chap. 37. Verse. 6, 7, 8. 6. For he says to the snow, be thou on the
earth: likewise to the small rain, and to the great rain of his strength.

7. He seals up the hand of every man, that all men may know his work.

8. Then the beasts go into dens, and remain in their places.


ELihu having set forth the wonders of divine power in Thunder and Lightning,
gives us other instances, to the same purpose, in this context.

First, In the Snow.

Secondly, in the Rain. And he describes the Snow and Rain three ways.

First, By poynting at their Author or producer, in the 6th verse [He] that is,
God, of whom he spoke in the close of the former verse.

Secondly, He shows the way or manner of their production [he saith] it is
done by a word, or command, that is, by a word of command; he says to the
Snow, he likewise says to the small Rain, and to the great Rain of his
strength, be ye on the earth.

Thirdly, He discribes the effects, or consequences, at least, of Snow and
Rain; and those are of two sorts.

First, What respects man, at the 7th verse, He seals up the hand of every
man, that all men may know his work. Th re we have the first effect, the
sealing of man's hand, together with the design or intent of God in it, that
all men may know his work.

The second effect respects the beasts of the earth, at the 8th verse; then,
that is, when God has commanded the Snow and the Rain to be on the earth, then
the beasts go into dens and remain in their places. Thus w^ may conceive the
parts and general scope of these three verses, Verse. 6. For, he says to the
Snow.

That causal particle [for] in the front of this verse, imports a reason, or an
account given in these words, of what was s^id before at the 5th verse, God
does great things which we cannot comprehend; then presently follows, for he
says to the Snow, etc. As if Elihu had said, not only are Thunder and
Lightning, but Snow and Rain to be numbered and reckoned among the great and
marveilous works of God; for he says to the Snow.

He says; That is, as has been showed already, he commands. What God says,
shall be, must be, his words are laws, he says to, or commands the Snow. Not
only does God give commands to rational creatures, men and Angels, but to mere
sensitive creatures, the beasts and to senseless creatures, to vegetives or
plants, yea, to inanimates, to things without any life at all, such are Snow
and Rain; yet, as if Snow and Rain had an ear to hear, and an understanding to
mind a command from God, the text represents God speaking to these, He says to
the Snow, etc.

The Snow falls in silver showers every year, and covers the face of the earth;
All men behold it, but few understand either what it is, or why it is sent.
Take this brief description of it from the School of Nature.

Snow is a moist vapor, drawn up from the earth, to, or near, Nix est v^ or
humidus in mediam aeris regionem subvectu^, ubi in nub^m condensatur and
cong^latus, instar lanae carmin^tae des^e^dit te^ parts, ^te^dum magnas,
int^rdum exiguas, antequam in guttas resol^atur. Garcae. Meteor. c. 29.
the middle region of the Air, where it is condensed or th^ckned into a Cloud,
and falls down again l^ke carded wool, sometimes in greater, sometimes in
lesser flakes.

Snow and Rain, are made of the same matter, and have their breeding in the
same place, only they differ in their outward fo^m, as is obvious to the eye,
and their season; Rain falls in the warmer seasons, the Clouds being
dissolved into Rain by heat, or when the cold is more remiss; Snow falls in
the sha^per seasons, the Cloud being ^hickned by the cold. Hence Solomon's
com^a^ison ( Prove. 26.1.) As Snow in Summer, so honor is not co^ely for a
fool. Snow is a goodly white robe upon the Winter-body of the earth, or upon
the body of the earth in Winter; yet how unseemly is it upon the body of the
ear^h in Summe^, hiding and obscuring, as well as hurting, that which is the
natural beauty and ornament of it; Thus honor is a precious robe, yet no way
fitting the back of a foolish or undeserving person. Snow is very improper and
unnatu^^l in Summer, because the coldness of it hinders the ripening of the
corn, and other fruits of the earth: And therefore when Solomon says ( Chap.
25.13.) As the cold of snow in the time of Summer, so is a faithful messenger
to him that sends him. His meaning is no^, that the falling of ^now is either
com^ortable or seasonable in the time of Summer, but that snow gathered in
Winter, and reserved (as the custom is in hot countries) till Summer, being
put into drink does exceedingly cool it, and so refreshes those who are ready
to faint wi^h heat.

But not to go further from the Text in hand; we see that Snow and rain have
the same original, both being formed out of vapors. As in man's body (who is a
little world) from the Stomach there ri^e up vapors to the Head, which by the
coldness of the brain are changed into, and sent back again in Rheumes and
Catarrs: So vapors drawn up from the Earth into the Air, are sent back in Snow
and Rain. Solomon desc^ibing the infirmities of old age, alludes to this, while
he warnes the young man, that thus the Cl^uds will return after the Rain (Eccl.
12.2.) which may be understood either more generally of that succession of
troubles to which old age is subject, or more particularly of Rheum and Phlegm
wherewith old age is molested; the defluxion of the Rheum being as the Rain,
and the gathering of new matter, which continually distilleth from the Head
upon the Lungs, being as the returning of the Clouds after the Rain. He says
to the Snow Be thou on the earth.

The place where Snow is generated is in the Air, from thence it receives a
command to dispatch it self to the Earth, and there to abide; He says to the
Snow, be thou on the Earth, that is, cover the face of the earth, be thou as a
mantle upon the earth, or as a white sheet spread over the whole face of it,
until I call or take and dissolve thee into water. The same command which is
here thee off expressed concerning the Snow, is also sent forth to the Rain; He
says to the Snow be thou on the earth, Likewise to the small rain, etc.

That is, he says to the small Rain, do thou descend upon the earth. By small
Rain is meant any gentle Rain, softly and sweetly dropping and de^tilling out
of the Clouds. Now as God orders this small Rain, so likewise, as it follows,
The great Rain of his strength.

The whole O iginal Text, (...) Et imbri pluviae and imbri pluviarum potentiae
ejus. Heb.

Imber est agmen coelestium aquarum and pluviarum. Nonius. Coacervatio haec
nominum et genitivus i^^e pluralis vehementissimum and proc^llosum imbrem,
guisicat. Merc. Cum du^ nomia copulantur idem fere signific^ntia quorum
p^^^^ius ponitur lo o adjectivi alterum determin^ntu, si fuerit pluralis numeri
erit superlativae significationis. Bold.

Imber pluviarum, quasi ox multis pluvi^^ const^ns. Drus.


which we render the small Rain and the great Rain of ^is strength, has a
great Elegancy in it, word for word t^us, He says to the shower of Rain, and
to the shower of Rains of his strength. The word Rain in both is the same, only
the former is in the singula^, and the latter in the plural number, which
hightens or increases the sense, as Critics and Grammarians tell us, and
therefore we render small Rain and great Rain; to which Elihu gives this
further addition in the clo^e of the verse, The great Rain Of his strength.

Of whose strength? surely of the strength of God; as if God did in some Rain
put forth his mighty st^ength, and make bare his own Arm in the showrs which he
sends upon the earth. The great Rain of his strength is that violent Rain which
comes forth from God and shows forth to us the great strength of God: For
neither of those two Epithetes sm^^^ and great are expressly in the Tex^, yet
b^th the scope and Grammatical const^uction of the words justify that
Translation, A shower of Rain in the singular number implying a mild gente
Rain, or, as we call it, a small Rain; and a shower of Rains in the plural
number implying a continued, vehement, fierce Rain, or as well call it, a great
Rain, especially having that remarkable adjunct following, of his strength.
When the Lord p omised to give showers of Rain for the a king ( Zach. 10.1.) he
meant a plentiful strong Rain; by which also he intended to signify the
abundance of spiritual gifts and graces, which he would pour down upon the
Church. So much for the opening of this verse, For he says to the Snow, be
thou on the Earth, likewise to the small Rain, and to the great Rain of his
strength.

First, From the cau^al pa^ticle, for, which refers to the former words, God
does marveilous things which we cannot comprehend, for, he says to the Snow,
and to the small Rain, etc.

Observe; The Snow and Rain are to be written in the Catalogue of Gods
wonderful works.

W^a^ more common than Snow and Rain? and yet, as common as they are, they have
wonders in them. Some of the Ancients h^ve observed many Wonders in the Snow,
such as these.

Fi^^t, That being in its own na^u^e so extremely cold, yet it is formed in
that p^rt o^ the Air which is comparatively near the ea^^h, and so has mo^e
hea^ in it.

Secondly, That Snow being so exceeding cold, does yet by Gods Command fall in
some very h^t Countries, even in the hottest of Summer. Geog^aphers tell us of
Snow in many places of Tartary, which are extremely hot.

Thirdly, they give this as a VVonder, That whereas it never Snows at all upon
the Main Ocean, yet there is an Island spoken of by Pliny, Plin. lib. 6. cap.
32. Not. Histor.
called ( Nivaria from Nix) the Snow Isle, which, though compassed with the
Sea, is always covered with Snow.

Fourthly, this is given as a Wonder, That Snow being so apt to melt by heat,
yet Mount Aetna, which is full of Sulphur, and casts out flames of fire
continually, has the Head of it hidden continually under or covered with a Cap
of ^now.

Fifthly, That in some places Worms are bred and live in the Snow of a fiery
color.

Sixthly, That the Snow, though it be very cold and chilling, has in it a
fecundating or fatning power, as to the earth, is also wonde^ful. Snow is a
great cherisher and nourisher of Plants and Trees, of Corn and G^ass; and
therefore David says ( Psalm. 147.15, 16.) He gives Snow like Wool, and hoary
Frost like ashes. There are three things considerable in Snow, for which it is
compared to Wool. First, for the whiteness of it. Snow is white as Wool; Snow
is so exceeding white, that the whiteness of a Soul cleansed by pardoning
Grace, in the blood of Christ, is likened to it ( Isa. 1.18.) and the latter
part of the same verse intimates, that the whiteness of Snow bears resemblance
to that of Wool. The whiteness of Snow is caused by the abundance of Air and
spirits that are in that pelluvid Body, Causa albedinis est Spiritus aerisque
copia in corpore diaphano. Arist. lib. 2. de Mundo.
as the Naturalists speak: Any thing that is of a watery substance being frozen
or much wrought upon by cold, appears more white. And hence it is that all
persons inhabiting cold Climates or Countries, are of a whiter complexion than
they who inhabit hot.

Secondly, Snow is like Wool for softness, it is as pliable to the hand, as a
Lock or Fleece of Wool.

Thirdly, Snow is like Wool (which may seem strange) with respect to the
warmness of it. Though Snow be cold in it self, as I said before, yet it is to
the earth as Wool, or as a woolen cloth or blanket, that keeps the body warm.
Snow is not warm formally, yet it is warm effectively and vertually, and
therefor is it compared to Wool; and for that respect also the hoary Frost is
said to be like ashes, in the same place of the Psalm: Ashes are warm, Frost is
cold, yet that is a known expression, burning cold, that is, Vre^s frigus.
Pruinam dici volunt Grammatici quasi urinam, quod urat arbores and flores.
there is an effect in Frost, in the hoary Frost, of heat; things are kept warm
by that which is contrary to warmth, Frost and Snow. Naturalists have beat
their Brains, but can assign no satisfying reason of these things, and
therefore we must ascribe them especially to the power and wisdom of God.
These particulars laid together are a sufficient witness, that even Snow and
Rain a e to be reckoned with, and numbered among the wonderful works of God.

Hence Note, Secondly; God can do what he will by a word speaking.

And as himself can do what he will by his word, so he can make the creature do
what he will by his word. This goodly Fabric of the World was made by his
word, and all the creatures in the world will presently act upon a word from
God ( Psalm. 33.9.) He spoke and it was done, he commanded and it stood fast;
Gods saying is doing. This is a point of high consolation to all the people of
God; whatever their affliction is, God can command them out of it; whatever
their wants are, God can command a supply for them. He that says to the
natural Snow and to the Rain, to Storms and Tempests, be ye upon the earth,
can also say to the Snow and Rain, to the Storms and Tempests of trouble, be
ye not upon the earth; He can do or undo, by his word, as himself pleases.
It Is also matter of great terror to all that rise up against, and disobey the
word of the great God; for though they (...) they see nothing at hand to
interrupt them, nothing to check them in the way of their lusts, though they
look upon themselves beyond the ^each of d^nger, yet it is but a word speaking
from God, and they are wrapped up in Snow, and hurrican'd with a Storm and
Temp^st; He says to the Snow, etc. This irresisible force of a word from God,
was n^^ed also upon those words in the 9th Chapter ( verse. 7.) He c^^mandeth
the Sun and it rises not. The Sun will not appear, or (...) will hide it self
in an Eclipse, or Cloud, and da^ken the whole ea ^^, if G^d do but give a
command.

Thy dly, t^ke the point yet more strictly and restrainedly, as here in the
text, He says to the Snow and to the Rain.

Snow and Rain are at the command of God. Non ti^i videantur casibus moveriqui
verbo Dei in omni motu suo deserviunt. Quo vult Deus illuc fertur nubes s^ve
pluviam sive nivem, sive grandinem portat. August. in Psalm. 148.
(Psalm. 147.15, 16.) He send h forth his commandment upon earth, his word
runs very swiftly; that word referrs to the particular matter in hand, as
appears in the very next Verse, and the two which follow; He gives Snow like
wool, he scatters the h^ar Frost like ashes, he casts forth his Ice like
mo^sels etc. David applies the swift running of Gods word to these things; and
how swiftly these run on his errands we may see (1 Kings 18.44.) For whereas
there had been no rain for three years and a half, according to the word o^
El^jah the P^ophet, God did but say to the Rain, come, and it came; and though
E^ijahs Servant, at first, saw a very small appearance of it, only a Cloud like
a man's hand, yet presently the whole heavens were masked over with Clouds, and
there was a mighty rain, The great rain of his strength. Rain, and Snow, and
Vapors quick^y fulfill his word (Psalm. 148.8.) God is the Lord of hosts, and
these creatures are his host, these as well as men and ang ls are his hosts (
Psalm. ^4.10.) Who is this king of glory? the Lord of hosts is the king (...)
glory; and it is the great glory o^ God, that he has such ho^^s at his command:
None of the P^inces o^ Powers of this woe l^ have any such; How long may they
send their commands to the Snow before it will come, or to the Rain before they
can get a drop of it! neither the one nor the other will stir at the command of
man, but at the command of God they haste away.

And if when the Lord says to the Snow and to the Rain, come, and they come,
abide upon the earth, and they abide there, how will this reprove and condemn
thousands of the children of men, to whom the Lord speaks and speaks again and
again, he sends out his commandment, and his word runs very swiftly to them,
yet they stir not, they move not! Surely Snow and Rain will rise up in
judgment against those, to whom the Lord has said, do this, and they did it
not, to whom the Lord has said, do not this, yet they did it. The word
represents all sorts of Creatures below man, as well as the Angels above man,
readily obeying the command of God, to teach man how readily he should obey his
commands, and how greatly he shall be condemned if he do not, and that not only
by the Angels in heaven, but by the Snow and Rain that fall upon the earth.

Fourthly, From the destinction which is here made of the rain, the small rain,
and the great rain of his strength,

Note; In what degree or quantity soever the rain falls, it is by the special
appointment of God.

If it be a small, gentle, soaking rain, it is because God has spoken to the
small rain to go; if it be a great, a violent, a smoking rain, a rain of his
strength, it is because God has said to the great rain, go: We are not to
stick in second causes, but to have our hearts raised higher, both as to the
rain it self, and to the proportions of it. He makes small the drops of rain,
as it is said at the 27th Verse of the former Chapter, and he can make great the
drops of rain, of the drops of rain g eat; he can cast the rain into what mold
he pleases, great or small; it shall be a sweetly-distilling rain, or it shall
be, as Solomon speaks, a fiercely sweeping rain (Prove. 28.3.) where he
compares the poor man that oppresses, to a sweeping rain. God has sweeping
rains, and as it is said ( Ezekiel. 13.13.) overflowing showers in his hand; and he
sometimes sends, not a watering shower, not a refreshing or comforting shower
in mercy, not a shower to enrich and fatten the earth, but an overflowing
shower to drown the earth and destroy the fruits of it in his anger; and this
is true, whether you take the shower properly, or metaphorically. If you take
the shower properly for that which falls from heaven, he sends the refreshing,
and he sends the overflowing shower; or if you take it metaphorically (a shower
may signify any kind or degree of judgment) he can send one judgment which
shall be as small rain. and he can send another which shall be as great rain,
as the rain of his strength, an overflowing shower: He can send forth (as that
allusion is used, Jer. 12.5.) his footmen, and he can send forth his horsemen,
greater or lesser Judgments, as himself pleases; he proporti^ns and cuts them
out according to his own infinite wisdom and righteous will.

Lastly, From these words, He says to the snow, abide on the earth, or be thou
on the earth, stay there, and so to the rain,

Observe; Snow or Rain continue or stay upon the face of the earth till God
calls them off.

When he says, be ye upon the earth, upon the earth they will be, until the
same power that sent them, fetch them back again. These hosts are like a well
ordered and well disciplined army, wherein Soldiers sent out by the order of
their General or superior Officers, must stay at their post where they are
appointed, they must abide, till called off, upon pain of death: Be thou there,
says the Commander to his Soldier, be thou there till I fetch thee off; and
when, after signal given, the battle begins, the Soldier never leaves charging
or pursuing the enemy, till the trumpet sound a retreat. So it is in this case,
God says to the Rain, be upon the earth till thou have wrought my purpose and
done all my pleasure, and there it is.

Thus we see the efficacy of Gods command upon these Me^eors, the Snow and the
Rain; now follow the effects, or what comes of it.

First, we have that effect which respects man; Verse. 7. He seals up the hand
of every man.

He, That is, God, Seals up the hand;

Sealing, in Scripture, has a threefold signification.

(...) Pro^rie claudere, occultare.
First, It notes the hiding of a thing, or the keeping of it secret and close;
that which is sealed, is also concealed ( Isa. 8.16.) Bind up the Testimony,
seal the Law among my disciples. There is a time wherein God commands the Law
to be sealed, and the Testimony to be bound up, and that is a very sad time;
for though there are various apprehensions about the meaning of this command
given the Prophet, yet the most probable intendment of it is, that God would
not have him lose any more time in dealing with those faithless and profane
scoffers of his message, but reserve those sacred mysteries, as secrets, to be
communicated only to the faithful, who would with due reverence and faith
religiously receive them. Seal the Law among, or for my disciples, that is,
such as desire to learn, or have been taught and learned of me, and by learning
are become spiritually skilful and learned, as the word is rendered ( Isa.
50.4.) Woe to sinners when the Testimony is bound and the Law sealed; which is
the import (I conceive) of that place in the same Prophet ( Isa. 29.11.) And
when in the Revelation (Chap. 4.1.) a Book sealed with seven seals was showed
to John, he wept ( verse. 4.) because no man was found worthy to open, and to
read the Book, etc. implying, that the Book was full of divine secrets, hidden
from the eyes or understandings of men, and so must have continued, if the Lion
of the Tribe of Judah, the Root of David, that is, the Lord Jesus Christ, had
not prevailed to open the Book, and to lose the seven seals thereof. Sealed
things are hidden things. Is not this (said the Lord, Deuteronomy. 32.34.) laid up in
store with me, and sealed up among my treasures? That is, is it not kept close
and hidden there? are not their cursed treasures of sin laid up among my
righteous treasures of wrath? The Church ( Cant. 4.12.) is called, a Fountain
sealed, because the waters by which she is refreshed and made fruitful are a
hidden thing to the world, or because the Church must keep her self apart and
distinct from the profane and unbelieving world. That Is one thing, we seal
what we would hide or keep close.

Secondly, the word imports sometimes, to finish or complete a thing. When a
Writing is perfected then we seal it, when a Letter is made up we seal it; to
that purpose the word is used ( Dan. 9.24.) Where the Prophet speaking of
Christ's coming in the flesh, and what he should then do, says, He shall finish
transgression, that is, he shall complete, by the sacrifice of himself, all the
sacrifices for transgression. Christ had no hand in any transgression, as to
the doing of it, but in this sense he finished all transgression; that is, he
finished the sacrifices of atonement for transgression, that so our
transgressions might not be charged upon us. Further, that word, as there used,
may very well bear the first sense of sealing; He shall seal transgression,
that is, he shall cover or hide our transgressions, for that is the effect of
the Mediatorship of Jesus Christ.

Thirdly, To seal a thing is (in common sense) to confirm it ( Jer. 32.10, 11.)
I (said the P^ophet) subscribed the Evidence and sealed it; that is, I
confi^med it and made it good in Law. Now when it is said here, He se^leth up
the hand of every man, I conceive we are to take it in the first sense, that
is, he hides or shuts up every man's hand. The hand is the chief instrument of
working, and therefore to say, God shuts up or seals the hand, is an elegant
Metaphor, signifying that God puts a stop or stay to, or that he takes men off
from their work. If a man's hands be bound or sealed up he cannot use them.

But how does God seal up the hand of every man, of every working man or
labourer? By the Snow and by the Rain, says Elihu; because when God sends
abundance of Snow upon the earth, or when he sends the great Rain of his
strength, men cannot work; Hiems in^rs dicitur quod homines ^^gat desidere
inertes and complicatis m^^ibus.
in a deep snow, or in a great rain, without doors, Laborers are hindered from
their labor: And hence anciently, Winter had this title given it, dull or
sluggish Winter; because in the extremity of winter weather, many men are
forced to sit (as we say) with their hands in their pockets, or folded under
their arms. He seals up the hand of every man, that is, by tempestuous and
fowl weather, he binds their hands and presses them together as with a Seal.

In manu omnes homines obsignabit. Mont.
The Hebrew is, In the hand he will seal, or, seals every man. From which
strict reading, some have made a very impious interpretation of this Text,
thereupon grounding that (as most use it) most unwarrantable Art of Chiromancy,
as if God did put certain Lines, Prints, or Seals upon the hand of every man,
from whence it may be collected and concluded, what (as some call it) his
Fortune or Destiny will be in the world. Which, as it is an opinion wicked in
it self, so altogether hetrogeneal to this place, the tendency whereof is not
to show how things shall work with men hereafter, but how they are often
hindered or stopped in, or from their present work. (...) Vehementia omnem
hominem recludit. Merc. pagn.


There is yet another reading of the place, thus, He seals up every man with
strength. The word which we translate hand. h^y translate strength, and refer
it to God; he with streng h, or by his mighty power shuts up every man. The
word hand may be rendered strength, because by the hand men act violen^ly and
put forth their strength. And God may be said to show his strength in ^o so^t
and fluid a thing as snow and rain, that thereby he may give proof, how easily,
or with how small a matter in appearance, h^ can stop any man from his work and
purpose. There is a truth in this ^eading, but I rather take the words as they
stand in our translation, not as noting the hand or power of God sealing men,
but ^ods sealing the hands of men, putting them off from or besides their
labor. Thus by Snow and Rain he seals or shuts up the hand of every man;
and why so? the reason is given in the next words, That all men might know his
work.

God by extraordinary Snowes and Raines stops men from their work. But what, Is
it that they should be idle? No, but that they may know his work. Whose work?

Some understand it of man's own work; As if the meaning were this; God stops
men a while from further or present work, that they may take a view of their
past works; or he takes them off from their civil works and employments, that
they may employ themselves in considering their moral works; as the Prophet
admonished the Jews ( Isa. 1.5.) Now therefore, thus says the Lord of hosts,
consider your ways. Another Prophet reproved them for the neglect of this duty
( Jer. 8.6.) No man says, what have I done? The Lord often brings his people
to hard sufferings that they may know their own doings or works. This is a
profitable sense; yet I rather conceive that the work here intended is Gods
work, and so I shall prosecute the words, That all men may know his work.

This wo^k of God may be taken two ways.

First, More st ictly; thus God by rain shuts up the hands of men from their
wo^k, that they may know, those extraordinary storms of Snow and Rain, which
drive them in from their labor, and shut up their hands from working, are his
special work. Great Snowes and Raines declare to all men the great power of
God, who does not only astonish men by terrible thunder and lightning, but can
by Snow and Rain (his much weaker weapons) put them beside their purpose, and
stop their work.

Secondly, Take his work more largly; God seals up the hands of men, that
they having a vacancy from their own work may consider his; he does as it were
force them from what they were doing or intended to do, that so they may have
leisure to take notice of what he has done, That all men may know his work.

Hence note, First; God can hinder or stop any man or all men in their work.

He, when, and as he pleases, can seal up the hand of every man. If God has a
mind to work, none can let him ( Isa. 43.13.) Who can seal the hand of God? I
may say also, whose hand cannot God seal? How easily did the Lord seal up the
hand of the the builders of Babel (Genesis 11.7.) They were hot upon a mighty
work; but God by confounding their tongues, sealed their hands, and they (as
it is said, v. 8.) Left off to build the City.

Secondly, When the text says, God seals up the hand of every man, that all
men may know his work,

Observe; How diligent soever men are about their own works, yet they are slow
enough, too too slow to take notice of the work^ of God.

When the hand of God is lifted up some will not see it, they are not only
backward to see it, but opposite to the seeing of it; and though others do not
set themselves against, yet they do not set themselves to the knowledge of his
works. It Is a great and common sin, our not studying to know the works of God;
we should study the works of God as much as we do the word of God; we should
study both his work of Creation, and his works of Providence, whether works of
Mercy, or of Judgment; we should endeavor to know all his works.

From the universality of the expression, that all m^n may know his work,

Note; God would have all study this Book, the book of his works.

They whose business and labors lie in fields, the Plow-men and the
Vine-dressers, he would have them know his works, as those special works of
his, the Snow and the Rain, so his works in general. The meanest of men cannot
excuse their ignorance of the works of God, seeing the Text and Point tell us,
God drives them many times out of the field, home to their houses, and will not
let them do a stroke of work more abroad, on purpose that they might know his
work.

Hence note, Thirdly; The aim and intendment of God in keeping us at any time
from our work, is that we may know more of his works.

It is a great part of our wisdom to answer the designs of God in all his
providence to us. We seldom think what God intends by a wet day, by a rainy
day, by a tempestuous day, we little think the aim of God in calling us from
our works, is to call us to the consideration of his work. Some men would never
find a time to bestow their thoughts upon the works of God, if God did not take
them off from their own work; they would never be at leisure, if he did not
give them a leisure, a vacation time, and as here in this text, seal up their
hand. God has various ways to take men off from the hottest pursuits of their
own works; he takes many off from them by sickness, he binds them as prisoners
to their beds; others are taken off from their own business by proper
imprisonment, and restraint of liberty; and why? what is the reason of this? is
it not that they may know his work, that they may well consider the dealings of
God with them? A sick bed is a School, and so is a Prison, where we should
study both the Word and Works of God. Let us remember, whenever God takes us
off from our Callings by sickness, or restrains our liberty by imprisonment,
his gracious purpose is, that we may know his work. Possibly when we had
liberty to go about our own work, we could find little, or would not find much
leisure to meditate upon the works of God. Well, says God, I see I must take
you off from your works, else you will never be Students in mine. That Is the
effect of Snow and Rain, with reference to man, He seals up the hand of every
man that all men may know his work.

But here we have another effect, with respect to beasts.

Verse. 8. Then the beasts go into dens, and remain in their places. (...)
Potius fera quam bestia, a viva^itate, nam eadem vox vitam significat. Drus.
There are two words in the Hebrew which signify bruits, or beasts. The word
here used properly signifies wild beasts, the other tame beasts, such as are
for our use, and brought up to our hand. The text intends the wild beasts, the
beasts of the forest, the beasts of prey, they go into dens, these seek
shelter in snow time, or when the great rain of the strength of God falls
upon the earth. The Psalmist ( Psalm. 104.20.) describes the beasts ordinarily
going out of their dens when the night comes; Then (says he) all the beasts of
the forest go forth. Here we have the beasts, whether night or day, driven to
their dens by a storm, or by the Snow; then they go to their dens and places of
shelter, or, as we speak, to Covert. The word rendered Dens, signifies a place
of ambush, or of lying in wait; such are the dens of wild beasts; as it is said
of the wicked ( Psalm. 10.9.) He lies in wait secretly, as a Lion in his den,
(...) Ereb, a verbo Arab, insidiari. Et ingreditur bestia in insidias, i. e. in
latibula unde insidiatur. Merc.
to catch the poor, etc. It is this word. Such kind of retreats have the wild
beasts, they have their dens, which are al^o places to watch for their prey:
And as they often go to their dens upon choice, or of their own accord, so they
are sometimes driven to them (as in the text) for shelter against a storm. Then
the beasts go into dens, And remain in their places.

They not only go into dens, but there they remain, they keep home, the storm
keps them in. As when the flood of waters, the great rain of Gods strength, was
upon the earth, Noah was shut into the Ark, and there he remained ( Genesis 7.) he
did not only go in, but stayed in till the flood was assuaged; so it is said
here of the beasts, they remain in their places, they will not budge nor peep
out till the storm be over.

Hence note, First; The Providence of God in various seasons, affect the very
beasts of the earth.

Those creatures which live only a life of sense, yet partake somewhat of
reason, at least, they act according to reason; they are sensible of what God
does, though they know not that he does it. And is not this a great reproof to
those, who are not only not sensible of, but slight those ^everer dispensations
of God? how beast-like are those men, who have not so much sense of the
dealings of ^od as the beasts have! who though they have a knowledge beyond
bruits, yet they use their knowledge no better, no nor so well as bruits; and
so they are either (as the Prophet says) brutish in their knowledge, or as
the Apostle Peter (2 Pet. 2.12.) They are as bruit beasts (in humane shape)
made to be taken and destroyed. How can they avoid being taken and destroyed by
the judgments of God, or as Elihu expresses it, by the great rain of his
strength, who take not so much notice of them, as to see their danger and get
into a hiding place? For,

Secondly, When the beasts go into dens and remain in their places, what is it
that moves them to it? Surely it is to be (as we say) out of harms way.

Hence note; Every creature by the light of nature would get out of danger.

Great snowes and rains of strength are dangerous or g ievous to beasts,
therefore they avoid them; they will not stand in the open air while a storm
lasts, if they can help it. Beasts will save themselves as well as they can;
and if so, then take these two Inferences from it.

First, For our instruction. We are sent to school by God himself more than
once to the beasts and creeping things of the earth. Solomon sends us to the
Ant, a creeping thing, he bids us consider her ways, and be wise. Elihu, in
this text, sends us to the wild beasts of the earth, to Lions and Bares, to
Tigers and Wolves, and bids us consider their ways and be wise. Here is matter
of instruction for us; What is that? Get out of harms way, make haste out of
danger; when the cold Snow comes, and the great Rain of the strength of God,
take heed you be not found abroad without a a shelter. Surely God who has
provided dens for the beasts, and places for those wild creatures to hide
themselves in, has not left us without a niding-place, when the great rains of
trouble fall, or threaten to fall. God invited his people of old, where to look
for and whither to go for shelter in such a rainy day ( Isa. 26.20.) Come my
people, enter thou into thy Chambers, and shut thy door about thee; hide thy
self as it were for a little moment, until the indignation be over-past. For,
Behold, the Lord comes out of his place to punish the Inhabitants of the earth
for their iniquity. As if he had said, Hide your selves till the storm be over,
till the great rain of my streng h be gone. God, who has put an instinct into
the creatures to go to their dens, to their places in a stormy season, does
specially call to men, and among men, specially to his own people, when it is a
time of indignation, to go into their Chambers and hide themselves till it be
overblown. Do not stand out in the rain, do not stand in the storm, get into
your chambers; what are these Chambers? surely not the chambers of our houses,
they are poor refuges, the rain of his strength will break or soak into those
chambers, how well soever roofed or ceiled. The chambers in which the people of
God are called to hide themselves, are God himself; the Power of God, the
Faithfulness of God, the Truth of God, the Goodness of God, in these Chambers
he calls his people to hide themselves. Solomon assures us ( Prove. 81.10.) The
Name of the Lord is a strong tower, the righteous runs into it and is safe.
As God has taught the beasts to run into their dens, so he instructs us in his
Word to run into his Name, as to a strong tower, where we may be safe. David
said ( Psalm. 57.1.) Under the shadow of thy Wings shall be my refuge until this
calamity be over-past; That is, I will put my self under thy protection, while
the stormy showers last. The Hen g^thereth her young ones under her wings; so
would Christ the Jewish Nation, both for comfort and safety, and they refused
him; What followed? The next verse tells us, Desolation. What could save them
when the Roman Eagle spread her wings against them, who would not come under
the wing of Jesus Christ! ( Matthew. 23.37.) It Is not any worldly refuge, not any
arm of flesh, but the shadow of the Lords wings that can hide us in an evil day
from the evil of the day. They who get and keep close to God by Fai h, need not
fear the worst storms which this world can raise against them.

And hence, let sinners in general take warning; suppose you should live all
your days in this world without a storm, I mean, without any outward trouble,
yet remember, there will be a stormy day, the day of the great rain of the
streng^h of God will come, he will rain down vengeance upon all the ungodly in
that day; Upon the wicked he shall rain snares, fire and brimstone, and an
horrible tempest in that day (Psalm. 11.6.) Therefore see that you have a refuge
against that day, when many shall (as it is said, Rev. 6.) Call to the rocks,
hide us, and to the mountains, fall upon us, cover us from the presence of him
that sits on the Throne, and from the wrath of the Lamb. Although we should
have prosperity or fair weather as long as we live in this world, yet there is
a day of wrath coming; be not then to seek of a hiding place, which is only to
be had in and by Jesus Christ; He is the man chiefly intended by the Prophet (
Isa. 32.2.) That shall be a hiding place from the wind, and a covert from the
tempest. If you are without him in that day, you stand naked to the wrath of
God, and that will quickly soak into you, or sink you for ever.

Secondly, As the beasts going to their dens for shelter, may instruct us, so
it may reprove and upbraid us, and it will be at last a dreadful reproof, upon
all that are backward in this thing, to provide themselves of a Covert against
the Storm. The Jews (as has been formerly touched) were upbraided with the
Crane, the ^urtle, and the Swallow, because they knew the time of their coming
( Jer. 8.7.) They knew when such a Country would be unfit, or unsafe for their
stay, and therefore they removed to places more comfortable to, and commodious
for them: But (says he) my people know not the judgment of the Lord. As if he
had said, my people have not so much wit or forecast as the Crane, and the
Swallow, they know not what is good and safe, much less, what is best and
safest for themselves; let it snow and rain never so fast, either they stand it
out and out-dare it, or they seek such coverts from it, as cannot be a covering
to them.

It Is said, the very Vermin, Mice and Rats, will (by a natural presage) come
out of a house that is ready to fall. They are more senseless than Mice or
Rats, who hasten not to a place of safety, when they perceive the foundation of
that sinful State wherein they stand, sinking, and the walls cracking on every
hand. How faithless then are they, how presumptuous and senseless who hasten
not out of Babylon, when they hear the Scriptures of truth saying not only that
Babylon shall fall, or is falling, but, as of a thing already done and past,
Babylon is fallen, is fallen! Is it not dangerous to stay in a falling house,
in a house which shall so certainly fall, that it is said, and said again, it is
fallen, it is fallen. O take heed of a hard heart when you hear of a falling
house, or of a storm ready to fall upon your heads. When God threatened Pharaoh
to bring a storm of hail upon the land of Egypt (that was indeed a rain of his
strength) a mighty rain of hail, the text says ( Exodus 9.20.) He that feared
the word of the Lord amongst the servants of Pharaoh, made his servants and his
cattle flee into the houses; but they whose hearts were hardened, let them stay
abroad, and so they perished. Sinners, you hear of a worse storm of hail
threatened than that which fell upon Egypt, even the great rain of the strength
of the Lords wrath, revealed from heaven against you; shall the beasts in such
a day of distress go into dens, and remain in their places, and do you think to
abide the day of the Lords terrible coming? Do you think to stand it out when
he appears? The Prophet foreshewing the day of Christ's first coming in frail
flesh, said ( Mal. 3.2.) Who may abide the day of his coming? and who shall
stand when he appears? for he is like a refiners fire, and like fullers soap.
Now if the day of Christ's first coming was such as sinners could not abide,
when he came only with refining fire to fetch out the dross of their sins, and
purge away their corruptions, shall sinners (impenitent and unbelieving sinners
I mean) presume that they shall be able to abide or endure that day of his
second coming, when he shall come with consuming fire to punish and take
vengeance on them for their sins! Away with these vain confidences, which (as
the Prophet told the Jews, Jer. 2.37.) the Lord will certainly reject, and in
which you can never prosper, and go into those holes of the rock, the wounds of
a crucified Savior, in which, and in which only, you may be safe and saved for
ever, from the Snow and great Rain of Gods strength, the power of his anger,
which none know at present ( Psalm. 90.11.) but all must feel, who are not
sheltred from it by Jesus Christ, who delivers us from the wrath to come (1
These. 1.10.)

JOB, Chap. 37. Verse. 9, 10, 11. 9. Out of the South comes the Whirlwind, and
cold out of the North.

10. By the breath of God Frost is given; and the breadth of the Waters is
straightened.

11. Also by watering he wearieth the thick Cloud: he scatters his bright
Cloud.


ELihu having spoken of Thunder and Lightning, as also of Snow and Rain, with
their effects upon man and beast, at the 6th, 7th and 8th verses last opened,
he in the 9th and 10th verses speaks of the Winds, with their effects; first,
Cold* Secondly, Frost: or, first, of the VVind; secondly, of the Cold; and
thirdly, of the Frost; and then at the 11th verse, of the wonderful works of
God in disposing and dispersing the water in the Clouds, for the refreshing of
the earth by Rain in its season.

In the 9th and 10th verses (I say) he discourses of the Winds; and though
there be four Cardinal or principal Winds, the East, West, North and South,
which are subdivided into thirty-two Winds according to the Mariners Compass,
yet here Elihu treats by name of two Winds only, the South-VVind, and the
North-VVind; which two are often and eminently spoken of in Scripture; which
two, as they come from directly contrary Points in the Heavens, so they produce
contrary effects, famously known among men, on earth. And therefore, I
conceive, Elihu gives instance only about them, as being more generally taken
notice of.

Verse. 9. Out of the South comes the Whirlwind, etc. The word which we render
the South, properly signifies a Chamber, an inner Room, or secret place, (...)
Cubiculum interius, penetrale; omne quod in intimis partibus est.
a Chamber within a Chamber, which is the most private, retiring Room or
Chamber. Genesis 43.30. Judge. 16.9. 2 Samuel 13.10. 1 Kings 20.30. Cant. 3.4. We
say, Out of the South, etc. And the Reason why the South is expressed by that
word which signifies a secret Chamber, is, because the South Pole is situate
or placed in the most secret part of the World, Polus Antarcticus occultatur a
nobis, u^pote depressus ^ub nostro Horiz^nte, secundum qu^ntitatem qua Polus
Arcti^^s super Horizo^tem elevatur. Aquin (...). ^proriptuariis superveniunt
d^lores. Sept.
as to them who inhabit Northern Climates; they who live nearest the North
Pole, are farthest removed from the South. And as the same word in the Hebrew
Tongue signifies the South and an inner Chamber, so at the 9th Chapter of this
Book ( verse. 9.) we read of the Chambers of the South. The Septuagint ^ender,
He brings the Wind, or Whirlwind, out of his Cellar. Cellars or Store-hou^es
being secret places, and removed out of sight, for the keeping of Goods and
VVares that are laid up there; and it is elegantly expressed, that Winds come
out of Storehouses, as if God did lay them up, till he has ^ccasion to draw
them forth, and use them.

Some render it by a general word, Out of a secret place comes the Whirl wind.

We say best, Out of the South; First, because it is expressly opposed to the
North in the Text; Secondly, because Southern Winds are the strong^st and most
vehement Winds, as the No^thern are the coldest. For though we find by
experience, that strong Winds blow from all Quarters of Heaven, yet usually
the South brings forth the strongest Winds; and therefore in Scripture a
sudden and violent VVind is called a VVhirl-wind out of the South. When the
Prophet would describe an unavoydable coming of Judgment, he says ( Isa.
21.1.) As Whirlwinds in the South pass through, so it comes etc. And again (
Zech. 9.14.) The Lord God shall blow the Trumpet, and shall go with Whirlwinds
of the South. Both places expressing it, according to what was most usually and
commonly known, great Winds coming out of the South. Redeamus tua benignitate
ab ex^lio et c^ptiv^tate, ea celeritate, qua turbo et proces^a erumpunt ab
australi plaga. Bold.
That place ( Psalm. 126.4.) is rendered by ^ome (not as we, Turn again our
Captivity, O Lord, as the Streams in the South, but) Turn again our Captivity,
as Storms or Whirlwinds in the South. The Church prayed that God would make
some sudden change of things, like that made by Southern Storms and
VVhirlwinds. Yet we are not to understand it, as if all Southern Winds were
VVhirlwinds or tempestuous; favorable refreshing Winds come from thence
sometimes, as may be collected from the 17th verse of this Chapter, and from
Canticles ^he 4th, verse the 16th, and as is expressed ( Acts 27.13.) The
South Wind blew softly. So that Elihu speaks of what is often and usually done,
not of what is always done, when he says, Out of the South comes The
Whirlwind.

That Is wind with an addition, (...)
a Whirlwind is more than an ordinary wind. Wind is one of those Meteors, which
God the Author of Nature has provided for the use of man: It is called by one
of the Ancients, the agitation or flux of the Air. Much might be spoken about
the natu^al causes and matter of winds, but I shall not insist upon that. A
VVhirlwind is a tempestuous wind; Turbo, a Graecis (...) a Plinio vortex
vocatur. Ventus est Aeris fluxus seu agitatio. Damasc. l. 2. de Orthod fide. c.
8.
the G eeks have a special word for it, and so have the Latins, both importing
violence, or that which troubles and turns all upside down, and throws every
thing out of its place: Such a boisterous thing is the VVhirlwind, it is a
tossing, tumbling, breaking, disturbing wind; this VVhirlwind Comes out of the
South.

It comes. A like or the same expressi^n is applied to the Sun, ( Psalm. 19.3.)
He has set a Tabernacle for the Sun, which is as a Bridegroom coming out of
his Chamber, and rejoices as a strong man to run a Race. As the Sun comes
every morning out of his Chamber by Gods appointment; so does the VVhirlwind at
special times appointed by God. It Is fitly said such fierce and un^uly winds
come forth, for they are as it were kept fast in prison till God takes off
their Bonds, and opens their Prison-dore, and then out they come furiously and
boysterously, to do the work God has commanded and designed them to. Out of
the South comes the Whirlwind.

When Elihu says, The VVhi^lwind, the great VVind comes out of the So^^h, he
does not express, yet in^imates, who it is that brings the VV^i^lwind out of
the South: The Whi lwind comes, but it does no^ come before it is sent. The
sco e o^ Elihu all along is, to show the mighty power of God in ordering and
disposing the Meteors, and among them, these mighty winds.

Hence No^e; Winds come at Gods appointment.

He is the Au^ho^ of them* he is the disposer o^ them, he rules their most
unruly motions. The H^athen Poets ^eign d a god of the winds, whom they called
Aeolus, wh^ was Pictured or Sta^ued puffing the winds out of hi mouth. But it is
Jehovah who has the winds in his power, the winds and the Whirlwind. Neither
the Heathen god Aeolus, nor the god of this World the Devil, nor the Devils of
this World, Witches and Conjurers, have any power of their own over the least
breath of wind, either to raise or lay it. Agur describing the Excellency of
God, both in himself and in his working, says among other things ( Prove. ^0 4)
He gathers the Wind in his Fist; implying, tha^ God h^th the ^inds in his
hand, even as a man carries a thing in his hand, or holds it in his Fist,
keeping it there, or letting i^ out at pleasure o^ as he lists. ( Psalm.
135.7.) He brings the Wind out of his Treasure. We read the same in the P
ophet ( Jer. 10.13. Je^. 5.1, 16.) These Treasures out of which God b^ings the
win^, ^ome call the Secrets of Nature, or secre^ natural Cau^es; but I conceive
it is an allusion to the Customs of men, who lay up things useful in private
places, that they may have them at hand when occasion calls: Christ teaches
us, in imitation o^ them, to get and keep by us such Treasuries of saving Truth
( Math. 13.52.) To be sure, God has the winds ready, he has a s^o e and stock
of them, which upon any occasion he can b ing forth.

God makes a twofold use of the winds, or, there are two general purposes, for
which he b ings them out of his Treasures. First, for good; Secondly, for hurt
to the VVo^ld: First, in Mercy; Secondly, in Judgment.

First, God b^ings them fo^th out of his T^e^^ures in a way of Mercy, and for
good to M^nkind. And there is a sixfold good or good use, for which God b^ing^
the winds out of his Treasure.

Venti Aquilonares dicuntur sco^ae coeli, quod reddunt aerem mundum. Vatabl:
First, to cleanse and ^u^ge ^he Ai^; therefore, by some, the winds are called
The Brooms of Heaven When the Ai^ is corrupt and foul, God sweepeth it by
these Brooms. And we find, when Judgment is threatened, a negative is put upon
the wind as to this use, ( Jer 4.11.) A dry wind of the High Places of the
Wilderness, toward the Daughter of my people, not to fan or to cleanse, etc.
Implying that one merciful use of the wind^, is to fan and to cleanse the Air,
as Co n is fanned and cleansed.

Secondly, God brings the winds out of his treasure to temper the Air. Wh n
the Ai i^ cooled by a gentle B i^ze, we count i^ a mercy in ho^ seasons. And
such is the goodness o^ God, that in t^ose places where the heat is most
troublesome, there are many cool B^iezes. We read ( Genesis 3.8.) of the cool of
the day, or (as the Margin has it) the wind of the day, implying that the
extreme heat of the day is usually assuaged and cooled by the wind. The Prophet
( Jer. 14.6.) describing a time of drought, says, The wild Asses did stand in
the high places, they snuffed up the wind like Dragons. To snuff the wind in
time of drought, is a great refreshing; wind refreshes the body as well as
food, and it is some refreshing in famine, or want of food.

Thirdly, The wind is a Rain-bringer. We say when the wind rises there will be
rain. Thus (1 Kings 18.45.) before the mighty rain which Elijah foretold, we
read of a wind; The Heaven was black with clouds and wind, and there was a
great rain. When Elisha told those three Kings distressed for want of water, Ye
shall not see wind, neither shall ye see rain, yet that valley shall be filled
with water (2 Kings 3.17.) he thereby employed, that wind is the ordinary
forerunner of rain. We, indeed, translate ( Prove. 25.23.) The North wind
drives away the rain; yet we put in the Margin, The North wind brings forth
the rain. It is true of both; the wind scatters and drives away the rain,
the wind also brings rain.

Fourthly, The wind causes vegetables to flourish. A sweet gale of wind is not
only good for man and beast, but for the grass, and for the herbs, for plants
and trees, the blowing of the winds makes them flourish; in allusion unto
which the Church speaks ( Cant. 4.16.) Awake, O North wind, and come thou
South, blow upon my garden, that the spices thereof may flow out; that is, that
my Graces, my faith in thee, (...) love to thee, etc. may put forth and appear.
The spiritual wind, the breathings of the Spirit, draw forth spiritual fruit
from the heart, and in the life of believers, as the natural draws forth the
natural fruits of the Earth.

Fifthly, The winds are beneficial and helpful for the drying up of the waters,
they make the earth clean as well as the air. It is said ( Genesis 8.1.) after the
whole world was drowned, God made a wind to pass over the earth, and the waters
assuaged. The wind is a dryer as well as the Sun.

Sixthly, There is a great use of the winds, as to artificials. What mighty
things are done by the wind? By it, Mills are turned to grin'd Corn a Land, and
Ships are moved to carry both Men and Merchandiz^ at Sea; there were hardly any
passing from Nation to Nation* (...) dis-joyned by water, but by the advantage
or help of winds; by the help of winds Merchants bring treasure and precious
things from one end of the earth to the other. These and many more are the
common benefits of the winds, for which the Lord brings them out of his
treasures.

Secondly, The winds have their evil effects, God sends them sometimes for a
pl^^^e, o^ in a way of Judgment.

First, Winds (...) ^^^ect the air; the Lord can send, as a cleansing, so a co
ru^ting ^ind.

Secondly, As wind b^ings rain, so it hinders or blows away the rain.

Thy dly, The Lord sends the wind to break and overthrow all that st^nds before
it. What does not the whi^lwind overthrow? Houses and Trees at Land are blown
down; Goodly Ships at Sea, richly laden, have been sunk and over-set by
tempestuous winds. God sent a whirlwind out of his treasure, which caused the
Mariners in Jonah to cast their Merchandise into the Sea, and Jonah himself
too. What cross and tempestuous winds did the Apostle Paul meet with in his
voyage to Rome (Acts 27.)

Further, That the Lord brings the winds out of his treasure, is matter of
great comfort to all that have an interest in the Lord; He can command the
winds for them, and against their enemies; the wind comes out of his Chamber,
and it shall do as he commands. It is said ( Nahum 1.3.) The Lord has his
way in the whirlwind, and in the storm, and the clouds are the dust of his
feet: That is, he rules whirlwinds, he walks in and works by the whirlwind,
and by storms. And as we may take it properly, so metaphorically; that i^^^in
the most tempestuous dispensations and providence, when the world is, as it
were, in an Haricane, as boisterous winds in some places are called. In the
greatest concussi^n^ and confusions, whether of things or persons, the Lord
carries on his work in a regular course. As the great tossings of the air by
natural winds, so the greatest tossings of affairs by the st^ong and various
passions of men's spirits in the wo^ld (which we may call civil winds, yea
whirlwinds) are under the ordering of divine power and wisdom. The Prophet (
Isa. 17.13.) admonishes the wicked to take heed and give glory to God: For
(says he) the Nations shall rush like the rushing of many waters; But God
shall rebuke them, and they shall flee far off, and shall be chased as the
chafe of the mountains before the wind, and like a rolling thing before the
whirlwind. A rolling thing is unsteadfast at all times, and a whirlwind will
make that roll and tumble which is very steadfast; it makes Trees to shake, it
makes strong Towers tremble: Now if the whirlwind causes things that are
fixed and strong to shake and move, what will it do to those that are light and
unfixed, rolling things! That which is (as men judge) fixed and steady as a
Rock, shall be as a rolling thing before the whirlwind of the Lords
displeasure. The Margin of our Bibles calls this rolling thing, Thistle-down.
We know what the down of a Thistle is, which at ^ome seasons of the year falls
off, and is the lightest thing imaginable. When there is not a breath of wind
stirring, the Thistle-down will stir, roll, and move from place to place; what
then, think you, will become of Thistle-down before a mighty wind, a whirlwind?
The wicked shall be as Thistle-down before the whirlwind; but the people of God
need not fear, for (as it is said of the Sea, so of the wind) his way is in it,
he rules the proper, and he rules the metaphorical whirlwinds, which toss and
tumble the state and affairs of this world. To close this matter,

We may take notice of several wonderful things in and about the wind; and
because Elihu ranks this among the great works of God, who does marveilous
things which we comprehend not, Nulla propemodum regio est, quae aliquem ventum
ex se Nascentem, and circa se cadentem non habeat. Sen: l. 5. Nature: quest. c.
17. Plin: l. 1. cap. 47. In iusula Lesbo Oppidum Mytilene magnifice aedifi^atum
est, sed imprudenter positum, quod in ea civitate cum Aaster* flat, homines
aegrotant. Vitru: l. 1. c. 5.
not only in Thunder and Lightning, in Snow and Rain, but in the winds,
therefore I will reckon up seven wonders which peculiarly concern the winds.

First, This is considerable, That there is scarce any Country but b^eeds some
wind or other, which blows most there, and exercises a peculiar force upon it;
these are called Provincial Winds. The North-west wind (says Pliny) is proper
to the Athenians, other parts of Greece having little acquaintance with it. The
North-east wind afflicts Calabria. And that several other winds, are congenial
to other Countries, whereof some are benign and favorable, others vexatious
and uncomfortable to them, may be seen in the Authors quoted in the Margin.

Secondly, It Is a wonder that the same wind in one Country causes fair
weather, in another rain and storms.

Thirdly, That the same wind is in one place very healthy, and in another
causes sickness by corrupting the air, and so the blood and spirits of men. A
learned Author says, when- ever the South wind blows in such a Country or
City, the people fall sick.

Fourthly, That Is also observable, that some winds are hot and dry, others cold
and moist, according to the temperature of the places from whence they come,
and thorough which they pass to us.

Fifthly, It Is marveilous that in some parts of the world, the wind blows
constantly one way; such are called trade winds. Expert Seamen know where to
fetch a wind, when once they get to such a point they never miss it. The
Etesian winds are famously known in History, blowing out of the East or
North-east yearly at one time, for the space of forty days together; these
Cicero called Anniversary winds.

Sixthly, Yet in most places nothing is more unconstant than the wind;
inconstancy it self is Embleamed by the winds. No man knows when or where to
have them certain for an hour; Hence we say, Take the Wind while it serves.
Wind and tide tarry for no man.

Seventhly, That Is also wonderful, That winds blow at once from contrary
points, North and South, etc. at the same time. Daniel (Chap. 7.2.) saw in a
vision the four Winds striving together upon the Sea; All the winds were let
loose together, contending (as it were) for victory. Naturalists dispute and
question whether contrary winds can blow at once; Arist: l. 2. Met: c. 6.
Aristotle, the great Philosopher, affirms they cannot, because (says he) the
one must needs beat back the other. That Is true; yet, what hinders but that for
a time there may be such a conflict or battle fought between them, as may
extremely trouble both the air and waters, and shake vehemently such things as
stand in their way on earth? The Natural Historian reports, Plin: l. 2. cap: 92.
That two considerable Cities in the Corinthian Bay, were suddenly swallowed up
by the Sea, which inundation was caused by the fierce blowing of the North and
South wind at one and the same time. Out of the South comes the whirlwind,
(...) A radice (...) eventitare dispergere. Per ventos dispergentes
intelliguntur venti aquilonares, qui dispergunt nubes, et aerem ventilant.
And cold out of the North.

The Hebrew is out of the scattering or fanning Winds comes cold; Mr Broughton
renders, And cold from the fair weather-Winds. Our translation determines it.

Cold out of the North. Boreas (...) dicitur quia gignit (...) serenitatem.
Honier; Odyss^e.
Common experience teaches us, that the Northern coasts are cold, yea the
coldest coasts: The eoldest freezing winds come out of the No^th, as the
strongest out of the South. Here is North and South, and here are the several
effects of them; the South breaths warmth, and the North cold.

Hence Note; Cold comes at Gods call.

Now the South wind blows, and then it is warm, anon the N^^th wind blows,
and then it is cold. God has his special storehouses for heat and cold, he
brings cold out of his North n storehouse, and not only heat but whirlwinds
out of his storehouse in the South. Cold is disposed of by God as heat is,
sometimes for the good, sometimes for the hurt of the creature. Cold is both
needful and hurtful; cold is needful to the body of man, and cold is
needful to the body of the earth; therefore God has that in his t^easure to
se^ve the uses of man with. Changes from heat to cold, set forth, First, Gods
power; Secondly, His care: If the air were kept always at one rate, or in the
same temper, neither windy nor sto^my, neither very hot nor very old, we
possibly would like it better, but it would be worse for us. Changes in ^he air
are so useful, that nature could no ^be well preserved without them; we would
have all things alike, we would have it always warm weather, always fair,
but God sees it is best for us, there should be changes in natural things for
our natural good. It is also best for our spiritual good to have providential
changes. God sees it needful to leave us sometimes under clouds and da^kness,
to bring cold as well as heat out of his treasures, to send us chilling times
as well as springing times; cold is as good for our inner man as heat, storms
as calmes, foul weather as fair. Now for a season (says the Apostle, 1 Pet.
1.6.) if need be ye are in heaviness through manifold temptations. The coldness
of the air kills the weeds in our grounds, Frigora tempestiva arborum et
plantarum conferunt faecunditati. Garc: Meteor:
so does the cold of affliction and tribulation the weeds of corruption in our
souls. Seasonable cold makes trees and plants more fruitful in their seasons:
The cold nipping frosts of affliction, dispose our souls (through the blessing
of God*) to a gracious fruitfulness in every good word and work. We would
always have it spring and Sunshine, peace and safety, but God knows it must
be otherwise; perpetual shining and fair seasons are reserved for Heaven.
While we are on Earth the cold of adversity is as advantageous to our spiritual
condition, as the coldness of the air is to ou^ natural. Out of the South
comes the whirlwind, and cold out of the North.

Verse. 10th. By the breath of God frost is given, and the breadth of the waters
is straitened. In the former part of this verse, we have the supreme cause of
frost, and in the latter an effect of it. By the breath of the Lord frost is
given, or, he gives frost by his breath. The Hebrew is active, we translate
passively.

By the breath of the Lord. Fl^^^ deo, i. e. deo ipsum flatum causante.
That is, God breathing or blowing; not that the Lord uses breathing or blowing
properly, he is a Spirit: But the Lord is said to breath or blow when he
commands the wind to blow or breath. The winds are called Gods brea^h, o^
spirit. Some of the Hebrew Doctors, understand nothing else but his bare will
and command, or the intimation of his mind to have it so; but I rather take it
for the frost-making winds which are sent by God. By the breath of the Lord,
that is, when the Lord appoynts and orders cold winds to come out of his
treasure, when the Lord gives out the word of command, A verbo dei dat G^lu.
Chald: pro a voluntate dei dat gelu, sc: Arcturus.
cold winds issue forth, and then frost appears. David affi^mes in general, (
Psalm. 33.6.) By the word of the Lord were the Heavens made, and all the Host of
them by the breath of his mouth. The Heavens and their Host^, all the powers
and virtues of them, all the influences and ^fficacies of them are given out by
the breath of the Lord. And among other things that are given by the breath of
the Lord Frost is given.

Frost is cold in excess, frost is great cold; every cold is not freezing cold.
The word which we rende^ frost, i^ o^^en rendered ice, and it comes from a root
which signifies to m^ke bald because frost and ice cover the grass (which is
to the ground as hair to the head of man) and so make the su face of the Earth
smooth like a bald head. Frost also makes the surface of the Earth, not only
smooth, but bright and shining like a bald head. By the breath of the Lord
frost is given.

Hence Note; Frost is the gift or dispe^sation of God.

Changes in the air, as well as changes in the estates, lives, or hearts of
men, are from the Lord ( Psalm. 147.17.) He gives snow like wool: he
scatters the hoar frost like ashes: He casts forth his ice like morsels;
who can stand before his cold? It is Gods ice and his cold as well as his rain
or his Sunshine. When the Psalmist says, He scatters the frost, he casts
forth his ice, he says the same thing in substance which Elihu does here, By
the breath of the Lord frost is given: There is a continual dependence of all
creatures in their motions and operations, as well as in their beings, upon the
will of God, it is by his word that frost is given. Some deny the working of the
first cause with the second cause^, any otherwise than as God once gave them a
working power, and conserveth that power once given them. Whereas indeed God
has not only given a general power to the creature, not only has he said,
There shall be frost sometimes, and heat sometimes, and fair weather sometimes,
but whenever the heat or cold or frost come, they come by a particular order
from him. As all things, men especially, have their being in him, so their
working and moving from him; and that not only because he makes us in general,
working, moving creatures, but as to every special work and motion. This the
Prophet asserts, while he puts those reproving questions ( Isa. 10.15.) Shall
the axe boast it self against him that heweth therewith? or shall the saw
magnify it self against him that shakes it? as if the rod should shake it
self against them that lift it up, or as if the staff should lift up it self,
as if it were no wood. Living and natural creatures move no more without God,
th^n artificial and liveless instruments (such as the axe and saw, the rod and
staff) can move themselves without the hand or help of man. By the breath of
the Lord frost is given, And the breath of the water is straightened.

This is an effect of the former. Frost drinks up the waters, Glacies est copia
aquae in angusto.
and so straitens them: some-define ice, which is made by the frost, to be
store of water in a little room, or narrow compass. Every years experience
tells us, that the waters are pinched with the frost. Waters which were out
before a frost, are fetched in or contracted by the frost; hence it is said (
Chap. 38.30.) The waters are hid as with a stone, which is of the same sense
with this express^on, The breadth of the water is straightened; God brings the
wate^s into their old bounds, or into narrower bounds than before, by frost.
From this effect of frost, that the breadth of the water is straightened by it,

Note; Cold is a straitner.

It Is so in natural things, it is so also (to mind the reader of that occasioned
this note) in spirituals and morals. Take coldness as it is an ill disposition,
or an indi^position upon the heart, it straitens us, as to the doing of any
good; for, as Christ has foretold us ( Mat. 24.12.) that because iniquity
shall abound (in the latter days) the love of many shall wax cold: So
whenever love or zeal, or any grace in us waxes cold, piety, in all the acts
or whole compass of it, will certainly decline and be straightened. He that
before had a large heart, becomes narrow-hearted, and is pinched in his spirit
by this sinful coldness. Warmth enlarges, Cold straiteneth. God sends the
cold of afflictions upon many bad men, to straiten their Lusts, else they would
keep no bounds, they would overflow all; and it is the great design of Satan to
send a cold upon, or to frieze the spirits of all good men, that they may be
straitened and made unfit for the service of God. Take heed of a coldness in
your disposition, for that will be a straitner of your graces; but welcome the
frost of affliction, that may be a st^aitner of your corruptions. There is
nothing we should fea^ more (except the loss of them, and the favor of God
with them) than to feel our graces straitened; nor is there any thing (except
the favor of God) which we should more desire, than to feel our lusts and
corruptions weakened and abated.

Et rursum latissime funduntur aquae. Vulg Ego consenserim illis qui
participium (...) non arctum ve^ angustum, sed ^ fusum aut solutum potius
reddunt. Sic aquiloni facultatem efficiendi gelu, Austro liquandi and fundendi
attribuit. Bold.
Some render this latter part of the ve^se not as we, The breadth of the waters
is straightened; but, The waters are dissolved into their breadth. As if Elihu had
said, the ice or frost being dissolved, the waters return to their wonted
latitude. The word rendered straitened, may be derived from a root which
signifies to dissolve, to melt and pour out. Thus, as according to our
translation, we take the latter part of the verse as an effect of the first,
frost being that whereby the breadth of the waters is straightened; so according
to this translation, it stands in opposition to the former, By the breath of
the Lord frost is given, and he again (by his breath) diss lveth the water.
Thawing as well as freezing is from God. Thawing is the melting of the ice; as
metal is melted in the fire, so ice is melted by the heat of the Sun. Thus the
North makes ice, and the South unmakes or melts it. The power of God is to be
seen in dissolving those huge rocks and mountains of ice into water, as well as
in congealing those mighty floods o^ water into icy rocks. David celebrateth
the power of God in this also ( Psalm. 147.18.) He sends out his word, and
melts them (that is, the morsels of ice spoken of verse. 17.) He causes the
wind (a warm thawing wind) to blow, and the waters flow, that i^, those waters
which were bound up by the cold, flow away by heat. Some insist much upon this
translation. It is of the Lord that the waters are enlarged or straightened,
frozen or dissolved. I leave it with the Reader. which to pitch upon (both are
safe and honorable to God) and proceed to the next verse. Vox (...) composita
est praepositione (...) and nomine (...) quo significatur irrigatio, a verbo
(...) irrigare. Pisc.


Verse. 11. Also by watering he wearieth the thick cloud, he scatters his
bright cloud. There is a fourfold reading or exposition of the former part of
this verse; By watering he wearieth the thick cloud.

First, thus, For watering, or, that he may water the earth, Cum tempus
irrigandi terrant est cogit and condensat nubes illasquo magna aquarum copia
gravidas effi^it. Inde apud Hometum. (...), i. e. nubium congregatur Jupiter.
Bold.
he wearieth the thick cloud, that is, he calls up so much vapor as burdens
or wearieth the thick Cloud, that he may have sufficient for the watering of
the earth by rain. God causes his vapor to ascend, says the Prophet ( Jer.
10.13.) that is, he draws up much water by vapors, as the matter of clouds, or
as the matter out of which clouds are made, and he fills the cloud so full of
water, that it can scarce bear the weight; and all this he does for the
plentiful watering of the earth.

Secondly, thus, He causes the cloud to give out, or spend its water till it
be weary. We say of any thing that is spent to the last, it is ti^ed and
wearied. Thus the Lord by watering wearies the thick cloud, commanding the
clouds to pour rain upon the earth, till they are tired, till they have spent
all their store, Mercerus.
and cannot yield a drop more. Yet because to water the earth is the most
proper and natural business of the cloud, therefore,

Thirdly, A learned Expositor conceives, that the cloud is not we^^ied by
watering or raining upon the earth; but that on the contrary the cloud is said
to be wearied or troubled, when, while it is about that work, it is scattered
or dispersed by the Sun or Wind.

Fourthly, Others refer this wearying of the cloud, to the command which it
receives for the watering of very remote parts of the earth. The Lord says to
this or that cloud, ^emove far off, go and water such a Country (it may be a
hundred, yea, many hundred miles off the place from whence the vapou s were
exhaled) and there disburden thy self, or fall down in showers. When the Lord
sends the cloud a long journey, we may say, it is even wearied, as a man or
beast is that has gone a long journey.

Frumen^um desiderat nubes. Vulg. Cibus arborum imber est. Plin. l. 17. cap. 2.
I shall not trouble the reader with that wide interpretation of the Latin
translator, rendering thus, The cloud desires corn, or the cloud labors for
corn, that is, to make the earth fruitful, and bring forth abundance of corn.
Some of the Ancients have taught that there is a kind of natural marriage,
between the earth and the clouds, or between the clouds and the corn, or any
other fruits of the earth. Rain is the food of the earth, that is, of Fruits
and Plants; to which the Prophet ( Hos. 2.22.) makes an elegant allusion. But I
pass this.

The second interpretation I judge most congruous to the scope of the text,
which says clearly, Also by watering he wearieth the thick cloud.

Whence note; Those creatures which have greatest stores to give, may quickly
have none left to give.

Here is a cloud and a thick cloud ( Elihu does not speak of an ordinary, but
of a thick cloud) yet upon the Lords command to give showers the cloud is quite
spent and wearied. Though men have the greatest affluence, the largest stores
and stock^, of wealth or riches, yea of gifts and graces, yet they may be
wearied, and even drawn dry. The thickest clouds, that is, they who have the
greatest treasures of strength, of wit, of learning and knowledge, are soon
wearied, exhausted and emptied, unless they live in dependence upon God; Only,
God himself can never be wearied by watering. How much soever God gives out to
us, he is not at all emptied, but remains everlastingly equally full. And if
God will speak to the meanest creature, even to that which seems most empty,
it shall water others and not be wearied. The thick clouds, they who have much,
may be spent, while he that has but a little shall not be spent. The Prophet
said to the poor woman (1 King. 17.14.) The oil in the cruse, and the meal in
the barrel shall not waste. The woman might draw out of the oil as long as she
would, and still there would be a supply of oil, nor would the barrel be weary
in yielding meal. The Lord can make the creature unwea^ied, and establish it to
us for good. A full cloud will soon drop away, if the Lord forbear supplies;
and a few drops shall be as an eve^lasting spring where the Lord gives out
supplies. We may al^o allude to that (2 King. 4.2.) There was a poor widow, and
the creditors were ready to seize her two sons for bondmen, and, says she, I
have nothing but a little pot of oil, and what will that do toward payment?
Well, says the Prophet, Go borrow thee vessels abroad of all thy neighbors,
even empty vessels, borrow not a few, and thou shall draw out of the pot, and
the pot of oil shall not be wearied by giving oil into the vessels. God
speaking to the pot of oil it yielded a continued supply; the oil never ceased
till the woman had not a vessel to receive it. If God says to the least
pittance of temporals, which a man has in this world, hold out, it shall not
fail nor be weary; it is so likewise in spiri uals, the Lord can make a little
grace hold out, the thinnest cloud shall not be wearied by watering.

Again, By watering he wearieth the thick cloud, that is, God gives out
showers to water the earth abundantly.

Hence note; God is very free and liberal;

He will empty the thick cloud upon the earth to make it fruitful; He gives not
only a few drops, but abundance* and this is most true in spi^ituals. How does
the Lord shower down and empty even whole clouds of good things upon the soul!
as he has promised, so he once did, and still does sometimes (and will mo^e in
the last times) pour out the Spirit, which is an allusion to those showers of
rain powered from the clouds: And as the Lord powers out his Spirit, which can
never be wearied or drawn dry; so the Lord makes use of many thick clouds
(which hold much spiritual rain) even to weariness, for the refreshing of
wearied souls; I mean such Ministers as he has furnished with great gifts and
graces, such as are not (as the Apostle Jude compares some Teachers) Clouds
without water, but (as true and faithful Teachers should be) full of water. The
waterings of any Apollo are at the Lords dispose^: He says, drop thy word
here, drop thy word there, and thou shall not drop thy word any more here or
there. The Lord has often been so bountiful to Nations and Churches, that he
has even wearied many thick clouds to water them with the rain of his word.
That of the Psalmist (though it be true of the rain properly taken, falling
upon the earth) is most true of spiritual rain falling upon the Churches (
Psalm. 65.10.) Thou waterest the ridges thereof abundantly, thou setlest the
furrows thereof. And so is tha^ also to be understood ( Psalm. 68.9.) Thou, O
God, did send a plentiful rain (or rain of liberalities) whereby thou did
confirm thine inheritance when it was weary. Thou did even weary the thick
cloud, to confirm, that is, to refresh thy weary people.

And seeing they who carry and dispense the Word are in Scripture
emblematically expressed by Clouds ( Isa. 60.8. Who are these that flee as a
cloud, and as the doves to their windows? The Preachers of the Gospel come as
so many clouds, and the Prophet tells us, the Word comes down as rain and snow
from heaven (Isa. 55.10.) which supposes a cloud from whence it comes; for,
says the Lord, So shall my word be that goes out of my mouth, it shall not
return unto me void, but it shall accomplish that which I please; Seeing, I
say, the dispensers of the Word are compared to clouds) let them that sit under
the droppings of these clouds take heed they be not unfruitful, or like that
ground which drinks in the rain, yet bears nothing but briars and thorns,
whose end is to be burned. God has wearied and quite spent many of these thick
clouds by continual dropping upon, and watering the souls of men, yet how
barren, how fruitless are they! If but one of the clouds of heaven be wearied
in watering the earth, we soon after discern the face of the earth refreshed
and renewed by it: And shall God weary those he^venly clouds by watering men on
earth, and men remain unrefreshed, unrenewed! Clouds of sorrow and darkness
will at last weary all those with their waterings and droppings upon them, who,
when God has wearied his Clouds by watering them with the word of life from
Heaven, yet remain altogether barren and unfruitful. By watering he wearieth
the thick Cloud.

He scatters his bright Cloud. The former part of the verse spoke of a thick
Cloud, Nubes ex cujus discussione lucem restituit. H^nc appellat nubem lucis
dei, qua dispulsa lux et serenitas inducitur. Merc:
this latter speaks of a bright Cloud: The Hebrew is, The Cloud of his light;
which I conceive is here added; First, to show that Clouds of all sorts serve
the purposes of God; the thick Cloud, and the bright Cloud, the dark Cloud, and
the light Cloud, are made use of by him. And as he does weary the Cloud, that
is full of water, so he scatters the Cloud that is full of light, or, he
scatters his bright Cloud.

Yet some considering it is not said in the letter of the Text, Nubem lucis,
non dicit lucidam, sed quae lucem abscondit. Coc:
A light Cloud, but a Cloud of light, understand by a Cloud of light, such a
Cloud as hides and hinders the light, and which being scattered, light and
fair weather succeed. Yet rather as before. But why is it here said, that he
scatters his bright Cloud? possibly, because he has no use of his bright
Cloud, but of his thick Cloud only, when he would water the earth. And indeed
Clouds which are only bright, or which have much light, but no water, are of
little use. Some have much light of knowledge, but no water of instruction to
drop upon others; such Clouds God disperseth and scatters. It is not an outward
fair appearance, which can bring us into acceptance with God, The bright Cloud
shall be scattered, if it have no rain in it, to water the earth.

Again, Some translate, His light scatters the Cloud. So the text may be
read according to the letter of the Hebrew; as if the meaning were this, God by
the Sunbeams dispels or disperseth the Cloud; for Clouds are scattered
sometimes by the wind, sometimes by the Sun. That which gathered the Cloud, may
also scatter it. The Sun draws up the vapors, of which Clouds are formed or
compacted, and soon after the Sun dissolveth the Clouds, which it had
gathered. The same power makes and unmakes the Cloud, gives it a body, and
takes it away; His light scatters the Cloud. That Is a truth also: For as
brightness or light is scattered among the Clouds, and makes the Clouds appear
bright, so brightness or light scatters Clouds, or causes them to disappeare.

Elihu having thus discoursed of wind and cold, of freezing and thawing, of
working some Clouds to weariness, and of scattering others, proceeds in the two
following verses, to show the special uses which the Lord makes of all those
motions in the air, and impressions upon the Earth, with the Inhabitants of it,
whether in a way of Judgment or of Mercy.

JOB, Chap. 37. Verse. 12, 13. 12. And it is turned about by his counsel: that
they may do whatsoever he commands them upon the face of the world in the
earth.

13. He causes it to come, whether for correction, or for his land, or for
mercy.


IN the former verse Elihu spoke of the Clouds, of the thick Cloud wearied with
watering, and of the bright Cloud, scattered by the Wind or Sun. In these two
verses he further sets down two things more generally concerning the Clouds.

First, He shows whence the motion of the Cloud is, and by what or whom
directed; It is turned about by his counsel, in the beginning of the 12th
verse, and he causes it to come, at the beginning of the 13th verse. There we
have the Sp^ing of the Clouds motion.

Secondly, Elihu shows the purpose, or the design of the Lord in turning about
the Clouds by his counsel; which design is laid down two ways.

First, In general, That they may do whatsoever he commands them upon the
face of the world in the earth; that is the first purpose of God in moving the
Clouds, they are to execute his Commands; and that is his general purpose.

Secondly, We have his special purposes or designs laid down in the close of
the 13th verse, and they are threefold. He turns about the Cloud, and
causes it to come, First, For Correction. Secondly, For his Land. Thirdly, For
Mercy.


He causes it to come (says Elihu) whether for Correction, for his Land, or
for Mercy; all these purposes and designs God has in moving and ordering these
vast and mighty bodies of the Clouds, which hang like Mountains in the air.
Thus you have the parts of these words, with their scope and tendency. More
distinctly.

Verse. 12. And it is turned about by his counsel. First, Vapors are raised and
condensed into Clouds by the counsel of God, he causes the vapors to ascend
from the ends of the earth, ( Psalm. 135.7.) Which vapors (as was showed
before) are the material cause or matter of the Clouds.

Secondly, As by the counsel of God the vapors are raised, of which Clouds are
made; so this Text tells us, that by his counsel the Clouds are moved, and
ordered in their motion; which motion of the Clouds is very various; sometimes
one way, sometimes another, sometimes forward, sometimes backward, or retrograde;
sometimes their motion is circular, as the word here used by Elihu seems to
imply, It is turned or whirled about; (...)
according to that of Solomon (Eccl: 1.6.) The wind goes toward the South, and
turns about unto the North; it whirleth about continually, and the wind
returns again according to his Circuit. We have here three words expressing
the motion of the wind; First, it goes; Secondly, whirleth about; Thirdly,
returns again; and all this according to its circuits. It is said of Samuel
(1 Samuel 7.16.) He went from year to year in circuit, to Bethel and Gilgal, and
Mizpet, and judged Israel in all these places. Thus the winds according to the
Commission they receive from God, ride every year in circuit, now they are in
one quarter, and anon in another, and wheresoever they come they may be said to
do judgment in a way of favor to some, and in a way of displeasure unto
others. The wind has his Circuits, and as the Circuit of the wind is, such is
the Circuit of the Clouds; the motion of the Clouds is from the wind, some say
from the Stars, but most generally, as to the natural cause, it is from the
wind, which way the wind moves, that way the Clouds move. And though the motion
of the Clouds and Winds seems exceeding unsteady and changeable, up and down,
without any certain rule in Nature, yet they observe their Circuits, and run
their compass as God appoynts them. Mr Broughton renders, And for varieties,
he turns himself in his wise Counsels for their operation, for whatsoever he
Commands them; It is tur^ed about (say we) By his Counsel.

It should seem that God even calls a Council, which way the Clouds shall be
directed, they go by his Council: The word in the Hebrew is a very significant
one (that I mean) which we render his Counsel, others his skill, his art or
cunning, and there are not a few who render it, they are turned about by his
Engines, as if God did use (as it were) artificial Engines to turn about those
mighty bodies of the Clouds; (...) Proprie rei nauticae peritia, q^ae
intractandis funibus potissimum c nsistit, unde nominis appellatio. Drus:
Convertuntur artifi^io ipsus. T^^: Ipsa quoque incircuitibus volvitur maclinis
ejus, Merc: Vertitur solertiis ejus. Drus:
Properly the word signifies the Ropes and Tackling of a Ship, in ordering
which Ropes and Tackling the whole management of the Ship does consist. The
Mariner shows his skill and art in steering his Ship a right course, which he
does, not only by guiding the Rudder, but by ordering the Ropes and Tackling
this way and that way, to compass or avoid the wind. And the Hebrew word
(Tachbuloth) here used, has a very great nea^ness in sound, to the Tackling of
a Ship. This is a most elegant Metaphor, showing how the Lord does, as it were,
steer the course of the Clouds, or guide the Clouds, as the Seaman does his
Ship; his Counsels may be compared to the Tackling and the Ropes, or rather to
the Helm, by which the Ship is guided; God is as the great Pilot sitting at
the Stern, and he turns these Clouds as his Ship, he turns them about as a Ship
tacks this way and that way, to reach her Port and there unlade. The Rain,
Snow, and Hail, are the Lading which these swift Ships, the Clouds, carry from
place to place, to serve the providence of God toward man. This divine
conduct of the Clouds is very admirable! the Lord knowing what parts of the
Earth need those Commodities, Rain, Snow, etc. which those aerial Vessels are
laden with, for the enriching of the world. We render it by his Counsel, that
is, by those means which he in his Wisdom and Counsel uses to turn the Clouds
about, they are turned: we translate the word ( Pro. 1.5.) Wise Counsels, and (
Pro. 20.18.) Good advice, there Solomon says, With good advice make war. And
indeed good advice is the best tackling for Ships in a war at Sea, and the
best ammunition for a war at Land: Council is a noble, a notable Engine: The
greatest things on Earth are turned about by it, and so are those great things
in the air, the Clouds, They are turned about by his Counsel, That they may do
whatsoever he Commands them.

Here Is the general design and purpose of God, in turning about the Clouds
whithersoever he please, it is that they may do whatsoever he Commands them;
where we have the Clouds set forth,

First, In their obedience, They do the Commands of God.

Secondly, In the universality of their obedience, They do whatsoever he
Commands. Elihu compares the Clouds and Meteors to good servants, who are
ready to do what God their Master requires of them; and not only so, but they
do his Commands every where, or wheresoever he requires them, they do all his
Commands, and that in all places, as the Text speaks in the next words, Upon
the face of the world in the Earth.

That is, wheresoever there is Earth, or a World, (...) orbis pars terra
habitabilu, Graece (...).
habitable or unhabitable, thither, or so far does God send the Clouds in his
service, or for the executing of his will.

Further, when he says, Upon the face of the World, his meaning is, upon the
outside or uppermost part of the World; and because the Heavens, even the
uppermost Heavens are a part of the world, with which the Clouds have nothing
to do, their business lying here below, therefore (I conceive) Elihu determines
it expressly, in the Earth. The Clouds are not raised or made for the use and
service of the world above, but of the world below. They do whatsoever he
Commands them upon the face of the World in the Earth.

Hence observe, First; The motion of the Clouds is not of themselves, nor
merely from any natural cause or power, but of God;

He as it were by certain Engines and weights, turns them about; they move not
unawares, nor by the unce^tain changes of the Air, but according to his
direction and unchangeable purpose; It is turned about by his Counsel. The
creatures do not govern themselves, nor are they Masters of their own motions;
The way of man is not in himself, surely then the way of the Cloud is not in it
self. Clouds take their course according to the order and command which they
receive from God.

Again, The Clouds are thus turned about by the Counsel of God, that they may
do whatsoever he commands them.

Hence note; Clouds are sent about work; there is somewhat to be done by every
Cloud.

God will not have a Vapor arise, nor a Cloud stir for nothing, he commands
them to be doing. And if God send Clouds abroad to work, much more does he send
man forth into the world to do work, and appoints him what work to do. The
first Man was no sooner made, and set up in a state of created perfection, but
he was presently set to work, he must be doing ( Genesis 2.15.) And the Lord God
took the man (or Adam) and put him into the Garden of Eden, to dress and to
till it. From the Angels in Heaven to the worms that creep upon the earth,
there is no creature but has somewhat to do; yea, not only the living and
rational creatures, but (as here in the Text) the very inanimate creatures, the
senseless creatures, the Clouds, have somewhat to do, God sends them forth upon
his business. Every creature has a service, has somewhat to do: And therefore,
it will be ill with those whom God finds idle, or doing nothing, or nothing to
any good purpose. That servant had been doing, to whom Christ in the Pa^able is
represented thus speaking at the last day, Well done good and faithful Servant.

Thirdly observe; The Clouds are faithful and ready Servants, they do
whatsoever the Lord commands them.

They are Gods Messengers, and they will do any or every E^rand, which he sends
them about, and trusts them with. It Is the duty and commendation of a Servant,
to do whatsoever he is commanded. A man's servant must do all his Masters just
and lawful commands; he must not take up this or that command to do it, and
pass by the rest. The Rule is plain ( Col. 3.22.) Servants obey your Masters in
all things: Much more must a Servant of God obey him in all things. ( Acts
13.22.) I have found David a man after mine own heart; he shall fulfill all my
Will. David was a trusty servant; he was not like Saul, who did the Lords work
to halves. The Clouds are trusty Servants, they do whatsoever God commands
them; and we may distribute the commands which God gives the Clouds, into two
Ranks.

First, The command of God to the Clouds is sometimes for the hurt o^ punishment
of man. God threatens and he executes vengeance by the Clouds ( Ezekiel. 13.13.)
Winds conveigh the Clouds, and the Clouds pour down overflowing showrs in the
anger of God, and great hailstones in his fury, to consume and ruin all
before them.

Secondly, Clouds execute the command of God in a way of favor; as they
execute his threatenings, so they fulfill his promises ( Hos. 2.21, 22.) Both
these commands to the Clouds are expressly mentioned in the next verse, I only
touch them here.

Now forasmuch as the Clouds are here described under the notion of the pressed
and faithful Servants of God, doing whatsoever he commands, take these
Inferences from it.

First, If Clouds do whatsoever God commands them, then surely Christians ought
to do whatsoever Christ commands them: Shall the Clouds of God out do the
children of God in obedience? We find that admonition often urged in the
Scripture of the New Testament, especially in the 13th of Matthew, and in the
1st 2d and 3d Chapters of the Revelation, He that has ears to hear, let him
hear. But behold a wonder, they that have no ears hear! The Clouds have no
ears, and yet they hear, and more than hear, they do the commands of God. What
shall we say, when Clouds hear and obey, and men do neither? Let us learn Duty
from the Clouds. We are sent to the School of Nature in holy Scripture, almost
throughout. Elihu seems to say, Go to the Clouds, O ye that are either slothful
or disobedient, consider their work and be wise; they are continually doing
whatsoever the Lord commands them.

Secondly, If the Clouds do whatsoever God commands them, then here is matter of
comfort to all who do what God commands them; surely God will not command the
Clouds to do them any hurt who are doing his commands. If you can say that you
do the commands of God, you may rest assured God will never give the Clouds a
command to do you hurt. I do not say but an affliction may drop out of the
Clouds upon a man that is doing the commands of God; or, the Clouds may have a
command to drop affliction upon him that is doing the commands of God: but the
Clouds drop no hurt upon any that do the commands of God. And therefore seeing
the Clouds, even those Clouds that carry Storms and Tempests, Thunder and
Lightning, Snow, Hail, and Rain, the great Rain of his strength, seeing I say,
these Clouds, that are the Treasuries and Magazines of such terrible things,
are at the command of God, let not his faithful people fear; for when the Winds
are Stormy, when the Clouds are black, and carry, as we think, nothing but
wrath and death in them, God will take care of them, and charge his Clouds to
do them no harm. Clouds, whatsoever they are doing, are doing Gods commands,
and doubtless he will not give them any commands for their hurt who keep and do
his commands.

And as it is matter of comfort to the faithful Servants of God, that he
commands the Clouds in the Air, so that he also commands those Clouds which
are raised in the hearts of men, or that sit and appear in their faces and
foreheads. We often see Clouds gather in the Brows of displeased mortals. As
some are clouded with sorrow, so others are clouded with anger and wrath. Those
black Clouds in the faces of men are as dreadful as the blackest Clouds in the
Air; yet the Lord who commands the Clouds in the Air, commands the Clouds of
anger and choler, of wrath and indignation, rising out of the hearts, and
appearing in the faces of men, and can blow them over, or blot them out,
whenever he pleases.

Thirdly, If the Lord by his commands orders the Clouds, and the Clouds are
ready to execute his commands, then let us have high thoughts of the power of
God, and of his commands. If men refuse the commands of God, if the stout and
hard hearts of men will not stoop to them, the Clouds of Heaven, yea, the clods
of the earth will. Whatsoever God commands, he will have it done; not one
title, not one Iota (as Christ spoke of the Law) shall fall short, or fail, or
be unfulfilled. If such and such will not, others shall; if Jews will not,
Gentiles shall; if the Jews will not carry it like the children of Abraham,
God can and will raise up children unto Abraham of the Stones of the street; he
will nor want instruments to answer his Counsels, nor to execute his commands.
God will shake Heaven and Earth, but he will have his Will done, and his
decrees perfected, yea, he will dissolve and ruin them rather than not have
his Word fulfilled. That of David (Psalm. 136.2.) Thou have magnified thy Word
above all thy Name, is true of the word of command, as well as of the word of
p^omise. God will magnify the word of his promise above all his Name, and he
will also magnify the word of his command above all his Name; that is, his
Word is as a glass, wherein his Name, that is, his Holiness, his Power, his
Goodness, his Faithfulness, his Mercy, his Justice, and his Wrath, are to be
seen, and shall be seen in the accomplishments of it toward the children of
men. Therefore fear and admire this mighty God, who will find means for the
executing of his Word, for the doing of all that he has spoken; The Clouds
shall do whatsoever he commands them, upon the face of the World in the earth.

Fourthly, If the Clouds are turned about by his Counsel, if he does, as it
were, hale the Ropes to turn the Clouds which way soever he pleases, then,
Whenever you see the Clouds gathered by the wind, remember God has somewhat
to do, there is somewhat to be done; these Clouds are the Servants of God,
there is some command or word of God or other to be fulfilled. We do not, as we
ought, consider the Counsel of God in the motion of the Clouds; yea, some when
the Clouds gather, and the storms of Wind or Rain, of Thunder and Lightning,
break forth, are more ready to think of the Counsel of the Devil, than of God,
they are apt to say, surely, There Is Conjuring abroad: What Is that, but the
executing of the Devils Counsel? whereas we should say, God does it by his
Counsel. Take heed of neglecting God when you see the Clouds; do not attribute
their motion, or the most dreadful Storms that proceed from them, to any thing
beside the Counsel of God; for there is not the least vapor can rise out of
the earth, for the making of a Cloud, but he causes it to ascend; there are
not any materials gathered toward the constituting of a Cloud, but they are
under Gods hand, he causes the vapors to ascend: and there is not the least
breath of wind can stir to move the Clouds (Clouds are moved with the wind) but
as God has appointed; neither bad Angel, nor good, can stir a Cloud, but as
God wills. And therefore look to the hand and counsel of God in all these
things, take heed of staying in any work of Nature, do not ascribe these
impressions and perturbations in the Air to the power of the Devil and wicked
Arts; all is of the Lord, whatsoever is done. One of the Ancients said
concerning the Devils, when they desired leave to enter the Swine, Why should
any of the sheep of God be afraid of the Devil, when the Devils cannot have
power over the Swine without leave from God? The Devil cannot move a breath of
wind, but according to the will of God; though he be the Prince of the Air, yet
there is a Prince above him, to whose commands all are subject, both in Heaven
and in Earth.

Fifthly, If it be so, that God commands the Clouds whenever they come with
their storms or showrs, then ascribe the praise of all the good you receive
from the clouds to God, and be humbled under the hand of God, whenever you
receive outward damage from the clouds, do not say it is a chance.

Sixthly, Learn hence the greatness and the sovereignty of God, say as they did
admiringly ( Math. 8.27.) Who is this, that both the Winds, and Seas, and
Clouds obey him! None of the words of the Lord shall fall to the ground, as an
Arrow or Dart that misseth the Mark, or as water spilt, that cannot be gathered
up again; which latter allusion is specially intimated (1 Samuel 3.12, 19.) Here
in the Text Elihu sets forth the Power and Sovereignty of God, having all
creatures at his beck and command, as has been showed already from other
passages in this Book, and more will occurr hereafter. The Sovereignty of God
over men can never be duly acknowledged, till we acknowledge his Sovereignty
over Winds and Rain, Hail and Snow, which lie in the Bowels and bosom of the
clouds, and from thence are dispensed to the earth, at the will of God.

Seventhly and lastly, If the clouds do whatsoever God commands them, if they
be such faithful servants to God, then surely the clouds will one day rise up,
or come forth as witnesses against all that resist the commands of God: Not to
obey them is bad enough, but to resist them is far worse. Christ would awaken
the Scribes and Pharisees, by telling them ( Math 12.41.) The men of Nineveh
shall rise up in the Judgment against this Generation, and shall condemn it,
because they repented at the preaching of Jonah; as also the Queen of the
South, because she came from far to hear the wisdom of Solomon. If Jesus
Christ u^ged those instances of the men of Niniveh, and of the Queen of the
South, to terrify that Generation for not obeying his commands, or for not
receiving the Promises of the Gospel; doubtle^s then in the g eat Day, the very
clouds and winds shall come in as witnesses against all those that have
resisted the will of God in any of his commands. Have the Clouds (will he say)
done whatsoever I commanded them? and have you resisted? have you cast my words
behind your back, when the very Clouds have taken up, embraced, and fulfilled
them? The Clouds will be a swift witness against all those that rebel against
the commands of God: The Snow and Rain, the Winds and Storms fulfilling his
word, will bring in a casting Evidence against all those who have cast his word
behind their backs. All this we may read and see in the commanding power of God
over the Clouds, and in their readiness to obey.

Elihu proceeds.

Verse. 13. He causes it to come, whether for Correction, or for his Land, or
for Mercy. He, that is, God causes, It, that is, the Cloud; He causes the
Cl^ud to find (so the Hebrew) to find every place and every person, concerning
whom it has received command and commission from God. Thus the word is used by
Moses (Numb. 32.23.) If ye will not do so, behold, ye have sinned against the
Lord, and be sure your sin will find you out; that is, the punishment of your
sin, and that Judgment which God will pour out upon you for your sin, will find
you out wheresoever ye are. In this sense the Cloud will find us out; we render
well, He causes it to come, that is, to come to that place or person, to that
Nation or People, to which himself has appointed it: He causes it to come,
Whether for Correction, or for his Land, or for Mercy.

Here are three ends or purposes of God, in communicating and commanding forth
the Clouds, and we may take those three ends two ways.

The first of these and the last concern Man more specially; the second
concerns all other creatures, both Plants and Beasts of the earth; it concerns
all, from the Cedar in Lebanon to the Hysop on the wall, among the Plants, and
from the Lion to the Mouse, or to the least of living or sensible creatures
among the Beasts; all which God, according to his Sovereign Power, and Justice,
does either comfo^t or afflict as he pleases.

Again, The ends which God aims at respecting Man, are either for Correction
or for Mercy.

(...) Sive ad virga^, (...). Sive in disciplinam.
First, He causes the Cloud, with whatsoever is its burden, Hail, or Rain, or
Snow, to unlade and disburden it self, for correction, The Hebrew is, for a
Rod, so we put in the Margin. A Rod is for correction; therefore we translate
for correction, for disci^lin^. God sends t^^ Clouds to whip or discipline a
people. Fu^ther, the w^^d signifies a Rod under a twofold Notion.

Fi^^t, A R^^ or a S^^ff to smite or strike with, in which sense it is called (
Prove. 22.15.) The Rod of correction; and at the 8th verse of the same Chap er,
The Rod of anger; as also ( Isa. 10.5.) O Ass^rian, the Rod of mine anger
(says God) Here Is a R^d to smite with.

Secondly, It signifies a Rod to govern with, or to rule with; and hence this
word denotes the Scepter of a Prince. The two great Emblems of Magistracy are a
Sword and a Scepter. The Scepter is in the fashion of a Rod or Wand, which
imports chastening and correction; and from hence it was that the chief of the
Tribes of the Children of Israel (Numb. 17.2.) were commanded to take every one
of them a Rod, according to the house of their Fathers, twelve Rods, and to
write every man's Name upon his Rod, and lay them up in the Tabernacle of the
Congregation, etc. Now those Rods given in by the Princes of the Tribes, were
as so many Emblems of their Power and Authority, because to the chief
Magistrate the punishment of the faults and miscarriages of all under his
government did belong. And hence the same word signifies a Magistratical Rod or
Scepter of Government, and a Tribe or whole Family under the Rod o^ Scepter of
a Governor, because as Rods or B^anches g^ow from one Root, so many Tribes or
Families from one Father; thus the Twelve Tribes of Israel sp^ung from Jacob.
And that is the Reason why the Latin Translator renders this place, not as we,
( whether for correction) but, Whether for a Tribe; the meaning of which
reading, Whether for a Tribe, or for his Land, is thus given, Whether it be
for one particular place, or for the whole Country or earth in general, as will
further appear in opening those words, For his Land. This Translation of the
Vulgar Latin, and the Inte^pretation given upon it, suits well with that of
the Prophet ((...) 4.7) where the Lord says, I caused it to (...) upon one
City, and not upon another: Here was Rain for a Tribe, and not for his Land,
not an universal Rain all the Land over; he causes it to rain upon one City,
not upon ano her, upon one Tribe, not upon another; that is a good sense, and
the word will bear it.

Yet I rather take it here for a Rod, which imports chastening or correcting,
as we translate, Whether it be for Correction. They that carried the Rod or the
Scepter, had also the power of correction in their hand, as was touched before;
and that may be one Reason why when God sent Moses to Pharaoh (Exodus 4.17.)
upon that great Message, the deliverance of the children of Israel out of
Egypt, he commanded him to take his Rod in his hand; which Rod held out these
two things. First, that M^ses came not as a private man to him, but like a
Prince, like an Ambassador from the great King, or like one whom he had
appointed to take upon him the government of that people, with a Scepter in his
hand. Secondly, to let Pharaoh know, that as God sent him with a power, or
clothed him with a Commission to treat with him, so with a power to scourge or
plague him, even with ten Plagues. As if the Lord had said, O Pharaoh, See
thou this Rod in the hand of my servant Moses; assure thy self, thou shall have
stroke upon stroke, plague upon plague, if thou will not let my people go. But
of that by the way. He causes it to come for correction, or for a Rod.

Hence note; God can correct us by any of his Creatures.

He can make any thing a Rod; he can make nearest Relations a Rod. A Son is
sometimes a Rod to his Father; how often have miscarrying and undutiful children
been made a Rod of correction to their Parents? and they are usually so, when
Parents have not duly corrected their children for their undutifulness and
miscarriges. What are cruel men but Rods to other men? Some men have been the
scourges of Mankind. Attila, once a great Commander in War, and King of the
Hunnes, was called The Rod or the Scourge of God. Flagellum Dei.
And so God himself called the Assyrian the Rod of his anger ( Isa. 10.5.)
David called all wicked men in g^^^ the Sword of God, in his prayer for
deliverance from them ( Psalm. 17.1^, ^^) Deliver my soul from the wicked, thy
sword, from men which are thy hand, O Lord (thy correcting hand, men ordained
for Judgment, and established for Cor^^^tion, as the Prophet spoke of the
Chaldeans, Hab. 1.12.) Who have their portion in this life. And as the Lord
makes men, so the Beasts of the earth, a Rod for the correction of Man. Thus
the Lord threatened by his Prophet, I will send among them, Sword, and
Pestilence, and noisome Beasts.

Here in the Text we have a Rod made of a Cloud, a strange kind of Rod; I Will
send it for a Rod, it shall come for correction. Parents correct their children
wi^h Rods, God corrects the world with Floods; first, with unseasonable,
secondly, with superfluous Rains. O what severe corrections has God laid upon
the world by the Clouds! The Clouds have been terrifying, destroying Rods (
Exodus 9.18, 23.) Clouds have destroyed the Fruits of the earth for the sin of
Man, and taken away the hopes of the Harvest. Rain from the Clouds has ruined
the dwellings of men, and spoiled both Co^n and Cattle; Rain from the Clouds
was that overflowing scourge, which destroyed the whole earth in the days of
Noah; then God caused the Cloud to come, I cannot say for correction, but for
ruin, for an universal ruin and devastation. And as God then made the Clouds
a ruin to the world, so he often makes them a correction (1 Samuel 12.18, 19.
Ezra 10.9.) we have had many examples, both of sweeping Rains, and dreadful
Thunders, Lightning and Tempest, coming forth from the Clouds.

The Apostle says ( Romans 1.18.) The wrath of God is revealed from Heaven
against all ungodliness, etc. God has revealed his wrath from Heaven chiefly
in and by the Ministry of his Word; he may be said also to reveal his wrath
from Heaven against sinful man in and by the Ministry of the Clouds; they have
often lifted up their Voice like a loud Trumpet, and louder than a Trumpet, to
tell the sons of men of their tran^g^ession, and to reprove them for their sin.
And therefore when we see extraordinary gatherings of the Clouds, we should
take instruction, lest we provoke the Lord to send, or cause them to come for
correction. The Clouds drop down many good Lessons and admonitions, and if they
are not attended to, the next thing they drop is a Rod or Correction; He
causes it to come, whether for correction, Or for his Land.

For whose Land? Some refer it to the Cloud, that is, Pronomen (sua) alii ad
nubem reserunt, ut dicat, pro terra in qua genita juit. Drus.
for the Land out of which the Cloud was made; for the Vapors which arise out
of the Land by the attractive power of the Heavens make Clouds. As if the
meaning were, he causes the Cloud to fall down upon that Land out of which it
was raised: whereas oftentimes a Cloud is made of Vapors raised from one Land
or Country, and by the command of God is carried to another Land or Country
very far off.

But I rather take the Antecedent to his to be God himself; His Land, that is,
Gods Land, or the Land of God. But then the Question is, what are we to
understand by his Land? has God a Land distinct from others, as the Princes of
the World have? are not all Lands his? I answer,

First, The truth is, all the World is Gods Land; so that wheresoever the
Clouds fall they fall upon his Land ( Psalm. 50.12.) The World is mine, and the
fullness of it, says the Lord. God is the great Landlord of all the World.

Secondly, Sometimes in special the habitable part of the World is called the
Land of God ( Psalm. 24.1.) there being a part of the World supposed
uninhabitable, or wherein no man dwells.

Thirdly, His Land, that is, the Land which God does peculiarly own ( Exodus
19.5.) You are a peculiar Treasure unto me above all people, for all the earth
is mine. As the Israelites were the Lords peculiar people, so some Lands are
his peculiars, he specially calls them his Land, Peculiariter terra Dei vocatur
terra sancta in qua Dei cultus exercetur. Sic nominat unamquamque gentem cui
been vult.
and entitles himself to them beyond all other Lands. The Land of Canaan was
called The Lords Land, because he was known and worshipped there ( Hos. 9.3.)
We may say in general, Look in whatsoever Country or place God is truly known,
honored, and worshipped, that is his Land, and that is the Land here chiefly
intended (say some) by his Land. He causes it to come, whether for correction,
Or for his Land.

That is, for the good and benefit of that Land wherein his Name is professed,
and himself truly worshipped. That Is a good sense; For doubtless the Lord takes
more care of such a Land, than of any other Land. The eyes of the Lord were
upon the Land of Canaan, he took care of it from the beginning of the Year to
the end thereof, even to water it with the Rain of Heaven ( Deuteronomy. 11.12.) Thus
it is said ( Psalm. 68.9, 10.) Thou O God did send (or shake out) a plentiful
Rain (a Rain of munificences or liberalities) whereby thou did confirm thine
Inheritance when it was weary: Thy Congregation has dwelt therein Every Land
to which God bears special respect and good will (which whenever he does, he
does it with respect to the people inhabiting there) may be emphatically called
His Land. Yet,

Fourthly, Forasmuch as the latter word for mercy, seems to imply that special
favor which God bestows upon his own people, in sending forth the Clouds with
Rain; therefore by His land I rather conceive the earth in general is meant; or
yet, to take it more particularly, that part of the earth which no man claims,
which is sca^ce habitable by man, that which is a wast Wilderness or Desert for
wild beasts, that Land which is overgrown with Trees and Bushes, a Land which
no man dresseth or bestows any culture or husbandry upon, even for that Land
does God take care, as his Land, thither he sends Rain, that the Beasts may
have Pasture, and Plants moisture, that it may be watered and provided for, as
well as those Lands that men by their care and industry manure as their own
peculiars. It Is said (Chap. 38.26.) He (that is, God) causes it to rain on the
earth, where no man is, on the Wilderness, wherein there is no man. Thus in the
T^x, He causes it to come for his land, a Land which has no owner but himself.

Hence Observe; God has an universal respect to, and care over all his
Creatures.

Wheresoever God has a foot of Land in the World (though no foot of man comes
there) he sends the Clouds to do it service, for the sake only of wild Beasts
living there, and of Trees and Plants growing there. ( Psalm. 36 6) Lord, thou
prese^^st Man and Beast: Not only does God preserve men, but b^^^ and where no
men are God provides for beasts, that they may have food and live. We may hence
argue as the Apostle did in another case, (1 Cor. 9 9.) Does God take care for
Oxen? Has he respect to the wast Lands, to the wild Beasts of the Wilderness?
surely then he will take care of inhabited Lands, he will cause the Cloud to
come and water the Land where men dwell, especially where good men dwell; to
them he causes it to come (as it follows in the Text)

For Mercy. The third Message about which the Clouds are sent or caused to
come, is for favor. God dispenceth mercy by the Cloud, he causes it to come
for mercy. (...) Dei propensam omnibus benefaciendi voluntatem denotat.
The Original word rendered mercy has a great significancy in it, this
especially, a bountiful goodwill toward others, without respect to merit, or
any antecedent obligation. When here it is said He causes it to come for Mercy,
we are to understand much more than was meant before, when it is said, He
causes it to come for his land, to feed the beasts, and nourish the Plants;
and I conceive we may give a twofold interpretation of it.

First, For Mercy, that is, for some eminent uses, besides those that are for
mere necessity, to water the earth. Rain is sent,

First, To purge; Secondly, to cool the air; Thirdly, to cherish and comfort
the fruits of the Earth. But besides these common and ordinary ends of sending
rain, somewhat extraordinary seems to be intended, when the Text says, He
causes it to come for mercy, or favor. What Is the favor or special me^cy
that comes by rain? Surely it is the sending of such a rain and such a blessing
with it, as causes the earth to bring forth abundantly. The Lord can more than
supply wants, he can give plenty, he can give as much in one year as may serve
for two or three. Sive ad Benignitatem, sc^ut benign fiat terrae citra
necessitatem, ut cum pluv^^ descendit summo aestu ad aerem refriger^ndum. Drus.
Thus he p^omised ( Levit. 25.21.) Then I will Command my blessing upon you in
the sixth year, and it shall bring forth fruit for three years; the sixth year
was the year before the Sabbath-year, for then they were not to till the
g^ound; Now if you carefully observe my Sabbath-year (says God) you shall have
no want, though you do not sow. This is a mercy, when God sends in a double or
treble Crop, when he not only sends enough to serve the tu^n or to keep us
alive, but abundance and plenty, so that the floars shall be full of wheat, and
the fats shall overflow with wine and oil, as the promise is expressed, Joel
2.24.

Hence note; God is not only a just, but a bountiful Master;

He does not only give us enough for necessity, but for delight and
contentment; if we use his boun y well, and turn not his blessings to his
dishonor, plenty will be our mercy. The Clouds come sometimes for Correction,
God sweepes away even our necessaries, by raines, which are therefore in
Scriptu^e called sweeping raines; at other times the Clouds come for mercy, and
empty themselves to fill us with the blessings of the earth; that, we both by
corrections and favors may be led to repentance, and receive further mercy,
not only mercy from the Clouds, but mercy above the Clouds. Thus the words
stand in a fair opposi^ion, and one part of the verse illustrates the other.

Yet I conceive there is somewhat further in these wo^ds, for mercy, or in mercy
and free benignity; which may intimate thus much to us, That even the Rain from
the Clouds, and fruits of the earth, are not given us of desert, but of free
favor and mercy.

They come for mercy, or as a mercy. God does not seed the World because he
owes them any thing, but because he is merciful; we do not oblige him to give
us a drop of rain, or a morsel of bread; sweet showers from Heaven, and
plentiful harvests on Earth, are acts of grace, mercy, favor, and good will
unto man. God pays men wages in nothing but in punishment, when God
punishes, he pays wages, that which is deserved; if God send the Clouds for
Correction, we have what our sins have procured and brought upon us; but if he
send plenty, we have mercy, a gracious bounty or largess from the hand of God;
our daily bread is not pay nor wages, but reward and mercy, much less is that
which is more or beyond our daily bread. We by sin deserve that the Heavens
should be (as the Lord th^eaten'd his ancient people in case of disobedience)
as b^ass, and the Earth as iron; but we have not deserved that the Heavens
should drop fatness, and the Earth yield her increase; this is mercy. Not only
are we to look upon the Pardon of sin as a me^cy, and Redemption by the blood
of Christ as a mercy, and Justification through his Righteousness as mercy, and
eternal life as a mercy, or coming from mercy and free grace; but we are to
receive every bit of bread as coming to us through mercy, freely, and not upon
any account of our own workings or deservings. And if we cannot deserve a
shower, no nor a drop of rain from the Clouds, if we cannot deserve a Crop of
Corn from the Earth, then surely we cannot deserve grace or peace from God, or
eternal life and happiness with God.

Therefore how should we magnify and admi^e the mercy and free grace of God
for spiritual things, when we see such cause of magnifying him, even for
temporal good things! if the Clouds are favorable to us, it is of mercy.

Further, That notion may be well improved, which some give of this word,
reading the Abstract by the Concrete; we say, For mercy, they say for the
merciful, that is, for the liberal, benign, and merciful man, the man of a
large heart to d^ good: God causes the Cloud to come sometimes for Correction,
usually for his land, to conveigh common comforts, and he has his times
wherein he causes it to come for the merciful, that is, in special favor to
those that are merciful, and good, and g^acious, both as they have received
grace from God, and as they have done good things for and among men: He that
waters, shall be watered also himself, (Pro. 11.24.) Thus you see the
threefold Message that God sends the Clouds upon, either to Correct men for
their sin, or for his Land, that the Creature in general may have subsistence,
or for special favor and mercy to his peculia^ people, and for those above the
rest, of good men, who are merciful and ready to do good.

JOB, Chap. 37. Verse. 14, 15, 16.

14. Hearken unto this, O Job, stand still and consider the wondrous works of
God.

15. Do thou know when God disposed them and caused the light of his cloud to
shine?

16. Do thou know the ballancings of the clouds, the wondrous works of him
which is perfect in knowledge?


THis context begins the second part of the Chapter, wherein Elihu

First, exciteth Job to a serious contemplation of the wonderful works of God;
this is expressed in the 4th verse.

Secondly, He urges the weakness and inability of Job, and indeed of any man,
to understand the full compass of those works: And this he does

First, In general, as to them all, in the beginning of the 15th verse, Do
thou know when God disposed them?

Secondly, he shows his inability as to particulars, or the several kinds of
the works of God:

First, As to his causing of the Light to shine, in the close of the 15th verse.

Secondly, As to his weighing or ballancing of the Clouds, verse 16th.

The sum of these three verses, together with the two next which follow, make
up an earnest exhortation, that Job considering, and comparing that great power
and wisdom of God, which appear and shine in those forementioned works, with
his own weakness and insufficiency, would therefore humble himself, and not
venture any further to contest or plead with God.

And because many of the Lords providential works are unsearchable, as well as
these which are natural, therefore Elihu would not have J^b busy himself in
any curious prying into those which concerned his present condition. For, if
there be infinite and unerring wi^dom tempered with mercy, and justice with
goodness, in all the outward dispensations of God, ordering the motions and
Meteors of the Heavens, the Clouds, the Rain, the Snow and Hail, the Lightning
and the Thunder; then surely Job ought to sit down convinced, that there is a
like temperament of eq^ity with severity, and of goodness with sharpness in
all his dealings with men, and was with him in particular. That Is the scope and
purpose of Elihu all along, in reading Job this Philosophical Lectu^e, or in
putting Questions to him about the things of Nature, and the regiment of God in
these inferior heavens, the Air, where all things seem to move without rule,
or by no rule other than what Nature alone imposes.

Verse. 14. Hearken unto this, O Job. We have more than once met with this
awakening exhortation, which calls for such an harkening, as if a man were to
be all ear in attending what is spoken. We may well render it, Ear this, O Job,
take it, drink it in at thine ear; Hearken

Unto this; Elihu does not exhort him to attention in general, but draws it
down to some special matter, Hearken unto this, O Job. Which words may have a
double reference, either

First, to what he had said before (verse. 13th) telling him how God sends the
Rain and causes the Cloud to come, either for correction, or for his land, or
for mercy; Hearken unto this, O Job, here is a lesson for thee, remember it
well, God sends forth these servants of his, the Clouds to do his work, either
for correction or for mercy, either in favor or in judgment; Hearken unto
this, O Job: Or,

Secondly, The words may refer to that which follows, and so, as one calls
them, they are an Exordium, a brief Exordium, or short preface to what Elihu
had further to say; as if he would a little relieve the spirits and quicken the
attention of Job, by acquainting him, that he had some new matter to lay before
him. As if he had said, I have not yet uttered all my mind, I have somewhat
more upon my heart, which I cannot hold in, both for thy conviction and
instruction; Hearken unto this, O Job.

Yet it may be questioned, why Elihu should thus stir up his attention, either
to consider what he had spoken, or what he was now about to speak? Was Job a
heedless, an un-attentive hearer? We may conceive he was occasioned to give him
this spur, or excitation, for these three reasons, or at least some of them.

First, We may suppose, that Job having been entertained with a long discourse,
began to grow weary and slacken his attention, and therefore, as when we see
one in a congregation remiss in hearing, or sleeping out a weighty point, we
jog him, or say, Hearken to this; so Elihu here.

Hence note, First; A good hearer of the Word, may sometimes want an awakening
word.

He that is not (as Job was not) a first, nor second, nor third-ground-hearer,
but (as Job was) a fourth-ground-hearer, one that hears with a good and
honest heart, yet, even he may a little let down his watch, and give just
occasion to the speaker for such a short diversion as Elihu here used, Hearken
(I pray) to this. There is a willingness of spirit in all fourth-ground, or
right-hearted hearers, yet, there is also, even in them, a weakness of the
flesh; corruption may be stirring, temptation may be working, therefore it is no
unnecessary jealousy in the Ministers of the Gospel, sometimes to mingle or
interweave such passages as these, in speaking to them, pray hearken, stir up
and awaken your selves: There may be need of this (I say) where there is a
general good bent of heart. Some pretending hearers are like the Idols of the
heathen, who have eyes and see not, ears and hear not; who, when they are
hearing, set themselves, at least give way, to sleep, and willingly yield to
the drowsiness of their spirits; this shows an evil heart: but a good man may
be overtaken with drowsinesse, and find much indisposition to duty, while he is
in duty, and then he will count it a favor, to hear such a word as this cast
in, Pray hearken.

Secondly, Elihu might afresh provoke him to more serious attention, because
the matter he had to deliver, was of more importance, or did more nearly
concern him, than what he had said before.

Hence note; Though the whole truth of God is to be attended to, yet there are
some truths that call for special attention.

Here is an accent put upon the point in hand, Hearken to this. We should not
let any truth fall to the ground, truth is precious quite through, and we may
say of truth as of gold, the very filings of it are precious. We save the least
dust of Gold, every grain of it is of worth, and so is every grain, or the
least dust of divine truth. One jot, one tittle of the Law (says Christ, Mat.
5.18.) shall in no wise pass till all be fulfilled; Surely then, no jot, no
tittle of it should be lightly passed by, by us. Yet there are some divine
truth like studs of mass gold, or as jewels, which ought to be more carefully
attended to, and laid up in the cabinet of the heart; Some truths have an
emphasis, a Selah set upon them, O hearken to these. Christ says in the
Gospel, about the tything of mint, annise and cummin, These things ye ought to
do, but be sure ye do not leave the weightier matters of the Law, Judgment,
Mercy and Faith undone (Matthew. 23.23.) so say I, attend to the least truths,
but be sure ye attend to fundamental truths, to those truths upon which the
whole weight of the soul stands; Such is, The great Mystery of Godliness, God
manifest in the flesh; and the great Grace of Faith in that Mystery: These,
with several others, are the fundamentals, the very vitalls of Religion; all
falls and dies, unless ye stand fast and live in these: O hearken unto them.

Thirdly, Elihu may be conceived to speak thus to Job, because he saw him about
to interrupt him; possibly he might perceive a little passion stirring in him,
therefore, not only to keep up his attention, or to wind up his watch, but to
repress and keep down some stormy troubled motions rising in his spirit, Elihu
made this short interlocution or digression, Hearken to this, O Job, suffer me
to speak out, do not take me off, I have not yet done.

Hence note; Patience is necessary in a good hearer;

And that not only for the doing what is heard, but for the hearing of it. As
we can never bring forth the fruit of that which we hear without patience, so
neither can we without patience hear that which should make us fruitful. The
great grace to be exercised in hearing the Word, is Faith; yet we have need of
Patience in hearing the Word, and that in a double respect.

First, We have need of Patience, as to continuance in hearing. Some would fain
have done presently, they cannot sit it out, an hour is an year to them, the
word is a weariness to them, they soon think they have enough.

Secondly, There is need of patience for submission to what is heard. How short
soever the Sermon is, yet when it pincheth the conscience and pricketh the
heart, it is not easily born. They who hear quietly some wo^ds of truth, will
not endu^e some other; we hardly continue hearing with any patience, when to
us, the word heard, is a hard saying, and bares hard upon either, our
consciences or our practices; when the singer is, as it were, laid upon, and
presses the sore, few can endure it. It Is easy to hear pleasing things, but
that which crosses our spirits or our ways calls for patience. When Stephen,
the Proto-martyr, preached to the Jews, and brought the word home to their
consciences, by that close application ( Acts 7.51.) Ye stiff-necked and
uncircumcised in heart and ear, ye do always resist the Holy Ghost; as your
Fathers did, so do ye. At this word, or, when they heard these things, they
were cut to the heart (says the text) and they gnashed on them with their
teeth; their patience was quite spent, they could hear no longer. And when St.
Paul spoke to that great Assembly ( Acts 22.1, -- 22, 23.) They gave him
audience unto this word (I will send thee to the Gentiles) and then lift up
their voices and said, away with such a fellow from the earth, for it is not
fit that he should live: Then they cried out, and cast off their clothes, and
threw dust in the air. Thus they raved and were enraged, like angry, yea like
mad dogs, when once their title was questioned, or (as we speak) their
coppy-hold touched, by the mention of the Gentiles, whom they greatly despised,
and judged themselves so much above. Hearken to this, to this pinching word, to
the word that strikes upon your lusts. The length of a Sermon spoils the
patience of some, but the strength and searching power of it, spoils the
patience of more. A sincere heart is willing to hear all, and is most pleased
to hear that word, which gives deepest wounds to any corruption of heart or
transgression of life. Such words are wholesome, though bitter or sharp, and the
more they make us smart, the more medicinal and healing they are. (...) Stat,
sc. permentis rectitudinem. Aquin.
Hearken unto this, O Job, Stand still and consider the wondrous works of God.

Elihu not only desires Job to hearken, but to stand still and consider.

There is a twofold standing still.

First, Bodily. I do not conceive Elihu imposing any such gesture or composure
upon Job, as to stand still and not stir his body. The Hebrew is but one word,
stand up. There is a liberty as to any comely gesture of the body in hearing; a
man may lawfully sit as-well as stand and hear, yet to stand up and hear,
shows a readiness of the mind, and a hungring desire after the Word.

Secondly, There is a standing still of the mind. The body may stand as still
as a stake or stone, while the mind is in strong motion, yea, while there are
most vehement commotions and perturbations in the mind. This still-standing of
the mind in hearing what is spoken may be taken in a double opposition.

First, To any impatience, unquietness or uncomposedness of the mind when the
word is spoken.

Secondly, To any irreverence, slighting or disregarding of the word spoken. To
stand still is to get the spirit quiet, to hear patiently; or to stand still is
to get the heart into a reverential frame, to hear affectionately. So then, to
stand still implies both patience and reverence. We have like admonitions in
the 30th chapter of this book ( verse. 20.) and chapter 32d ( verse. 16.) Yea,
that admonition of Balaam was of like sense with this ( Number. 23.18.) Rise up
Balak, and hear. When Balaam was about to deliver his parable, and declare the
mind of God concerning Israel, he called upon Balak to rise and stand up, that
is, to entertain the message with respect. Hearken unto this, O Job, stand
still.

Hence note; We ought to be in a gracious quietness and composure of spirit
when we are called to hear and mind what God has done or spoken.

Further, We ought to have a quiet, sedate, composed spi it, not only when we
hear doctrinal truths delivered from the word of God, but also when we hear of
the providence and various works of God. As this word, stand still, may refer
to the words going before, Hearken unto this, so to those which follow,
Consider the wonderful works of God: And then the duty required in them reaches
both his Word and Works. It is a great power of grace which causes the heart
to stand still in this sense, that is, to be in a quiet frame when the works of
God trouble us, or are troublesome to us. Thus M^ses bespake the Israelite
(Exodus 14.12.) Stand still, and see the salvation of God. It was a very
t^oublesome time with the Israelites, they were ready to give themselves and
all they had for lost, when Moses exhorted them to stand still. Nothing but
faith in God can make us stand still when we are ready to fail, and that will
certainly do it. Unbelief makes the heart as unquiet as theirs was upon the
report of a war against Judah (Isa. 7.2.) And his heart (that is, the heart of
Ahaz) was moved, and the heart of his people as the trees of the wood are moved
with the wind. It Is hard travel of soul to stand still and see the salvation of
God, when every thing seen threa^ens des^lation. The Lord is represented
requiring us to do so ( Psalm. 46.10.) Be still, and know that I am God. When
the Psalmist had spoken of the desolating works of God, he added this word from
the Lord, be still; as if he had said, the Lord commands you ^o be of a quiet
and composed spirit, when all things seem to be in a hurry or confusion; for,
he had said before ( verse. 8.) Come, behold the works of the Lord, what
desolations he has made in the earth! Yet even now (says the Lord) Be still,
and know that I am God. David at the beginning of the Psalm had professed a
f^rm purpose in himself and in all the faithful with him, for such a
still-standing, how-ever things moved or matters should go, yea, tumble in this
world ( verse. 1, 2.) Though the earth be moved, and though the mountains be
carried into the midst of the sea, though the waters thereof roar, etc. We will
not fear, God is our refuge and strength. How comely is it for man thus to
stand still in a silent and believing consideration of what God has done or is
doing; to which Elihu called Job expressly, in the next words, stand still;
Consider the wondrous works of God.

Here is, First, Consideration.

Secondly, Consideration of the works of God.

Thirdly, Consideration of the wondrous works of God.

To consider, (...) a (...) intelligere.
is the special work of the Understanding, or of the intellectual Powers. To
consider, is the most proper work of a rational creature. It is no easy matter
to consider our selves, what we are, and what we have done, or what we are
doing ( Hag. 1.7.) Consider your ways: But it is a harder matter to consider
God, as good in his being and na^u e, and as good in his workings and
operations. That Is the business of this text, ^ons^der the wondrous works of
God; consider them in the fullness of them, and consider them fully. In which
sense the Prophet reproves the Jews for their non-consideration, Israel does
not know, my people do not consider (Isa. 1.3.) They do not consi^er what I
have done, nor what I am doing; they are an inconsiderate and regardless
people, and therefore a people not to be rega^ded. There Is nothing worth the
taking notice of in a people or person, who take no notice of the works of God.
They who will not consider his doings will quickly be inconsiderable, and of no
account with him. Consider the wonderful works of God.

Consideration is opposed to two things;

First, To slightness of Spirit, or the light passing over of what we hear or
see.

Secondly, to unquietness and passionatess of spirit, because of what we hear
or see. Some lightly pass things by, others think of the works of God in a
passion, or with a kind of rage; they are rather vexing themselves about the
wondrous works of God, than considering them. Consideration is a wo^k that
stands between these two extremes, slightness and unquietness of spirit.
Consideration requires a serious soul, and if right, it makes the soul patient.
They who once consider the works of God rightly, will rest in them satisfiedly.
Consider the wonderful works of God.

Elihu was speaking of those works of God in the Air, the Meteors, Clouds and
Rain, etc. as under the rule of his providence; now says he, Consider

The wonderful works of God. This informs us, that the works of God are very
considerable.

First, In natural things; that is, what God does in disposing the course of
nature, must be duly considered by man.

Secondly, In civil things, that is, in what he does in ordering the affairs
of men; and these either public in Nations, or private in Families: In all
these God has his workings, and his works in all must be considered.

Thirdly, In spiritual things, what he does in ways of grace upon the souls of
men, in convincing and converting them, in humbling and comforting them, which
are his choicest and most excellent works of all. Now, though all these works
of God are to be conside^ed, the last especially; yet the works of God here
set before Job, are those in Nature, and the providential disposure of them:
these are no small matters; Elihu calls them, and so they are, wonderful;
Consider the wonderful works of God.

These works of God in and about natural things, may be dist^ibuted into those
that are common and ordinary, or those that are rare and extraordinary. Elihu
is not treating here about the rare, extraordinary works of God, but about the
common and ordinary works of God in the Clouds, the Rain and Winds, etc. yet he
calls them wonderful; Consider (says he) the wonderful works of God.

From the connection, in that Elihu bids Job stand still, and then consider the
wonderful works of God;

Observe, First; We can never consider things aright, till our minds come to a
rest and are quiet.

We cannot make a true use of our reason, when we are much moved with passion;
we must stand still before we can consider. Moses, when the bush bu ned and did
not consume, said, I will now turn aside and see this great sight, why the bush
is not burnt, (Exodus 3.3.) He went near and stood, considering that wonderful
woe k of God; He was not in a fright, he was not scared to see a burning bush,
but he stood in a well composed frame of mind, to consider what his eyes
beheld, or the meaning of that strange sight.

Secondly, Note; The works of God are matter of great consideration.

As the word of God is to be conside ed, so his works, and none can profitably
consider the word of God, unless they consider the works of God too; His works
are a Comment upon his word, the word of God is exemplified in his works; what
God speaks that he does. We may find the word of God transc ib^d in his
works, I (says David, Psalm. 77.12.) will meditate also of all thy works, and
talk of thy doings. The Character given of a godly man ( Psalm. 1.2.) is, He
meditates in the Law of God night and day; and ( Psalm. 119.148.) M^ne eyes
prevent the night watches, that I might meditate in thy word. N^w ^^^g d^y man
should meditate the word, so the works of God nigh^ and day. David was resolved
to do so in the place before-men^ioned; as also ( Psalm 143.5.) I (says he)
remember the days of old, I meditate on all thy works: I muse on the work of
thy hand. Did we rightly consider the works of God, how just, how goo^ they
are, we would b^ more in doing good works, and we should do ^u^ good w^ ks
better. If any ask, How are we to consider the works of God? I answer,

First, Consider them in their number, that they are many. The wonde^full works
of God are innumerable; he does not only one, not only two or three, but many,
very many wonderful works: Many, O Lord my God (says David, Psalm. 40.5.) are
the wonderful works w ich thou have done.

Secondly, Consider the wonderful works of God in their kinds o^ sorts, works
of Creation, or works of Providence. The works of God in Providence are very
va^ious; His works in the Heavens, and his works on the Earth, his works of
j^dgment, and his works of mercy, his works of patience, and his works of
vengeance, his works in delivering us from evil, and his works for the
continuance of our good, ^^e very various; and it is our duty to consider them
all. Whatsoever or how^oever God is pleased to wo^k, the thoughts of man should
work upon it, and give him the glory of it.

Thirdly, The works of God are to be considered, as in their number and kinds
or so ^s, so in their circumstances: As we are to conside^ ou^ sins, not only
in their kind, but circumstances, which exceedingly agg^avate and heighten sin;
so circumstances in the works of God must be considered, for they exceedingly
heighten the works of God: As the circumstances of a sin may make a sin, li^tl^
for ^he ma^ter, very great and exceeding sinful; so a circumstance in my woe k
of God may make it (though little in it self) great and wonde full. We leave
out the very strength of a woe k of me^cy, when we pass by the circumstances of
it: A work of me^cy done in such a ^ime, in such a way, a work done for such a
people, for a people so undeserving, renders the work much more considerable,
and valuable. The Lord (says David, Psalm. 111.4.) has made his wonderful
works to be remembered. The old translation says, The merciful and gracious
Lord has so done his marveilous works, that puts a so upon his works, he has
not only done them, but, he has done them so, in such a way, with such
circumstances, he has put such marks, such accents upon them, that they are to
be remembered, that they cannot but be remembered. It is but an half
consideration of the works of God, to consider them abstractly and nakedly,
without their cloathings, that is, their circumstances of time, place, persons,
when, where, how, for whom, and by whom they were done.

Fourthly, We should consider the works of God, in their aims, ends, and
tendencies; not only what they are, but what they lead to, what the purpose of
God may be in them, with respect to our selves, with respect to the Church,
with respect to the world, is very considerable. There is not a drop of rain
that falls from Heaven, but it has a purpose in it, and that not only to feed
and nourish man by making the earth fruitful, but to make our hearts and lives
fruitful.

Or thus, We are to consider the works of God in their aims, First, as to God,
to set forth his power, wisdom, goodness. Secondly, as to man; First, to draw
man nearer to God; Secondly, to raise him up in thankfulness; Thirdly, in
holiness and conformity to the will of God. Now, if this be to consider the
works of God, then we may infer;

Though there be many who see the works of God, yet there are but few who
consider them. It is an easy thing to see the works of God, that is only
eye-work, but to consider them is difficult, that is head-work and heart-work
too. Though I conceive, that word rendered to see, is sometimes used in the sense
of this Text, for consideration ( Isa. 26.11.) When thy hand is lifted up they
will not see. They could not choose but see with their eyes, that such things
were done, but they did not see, or rather would not see, as seeing notes
considering, the hand and aim of God in doing them: They who have no mind to
answer and submit to, to p^ofit by, and confo^me to the works of God, have no
ca^e, nor will they take the pains, to get such a sight of them. So that while
most see the works of God ocularly, while they see the outside, the bulk and
body of them, they see not the works of God spi^i^ually, no nor so much as
rationally. It Is not a glance of the eye, but the study of the min^ which is
required in seeing the works of God. And hence it is that though there are
store of spectators and talkers of the works of God, yet there are few
considerers of them. Every one almost will be speaking of the great things
which God does, saying, What do you hear? or do you not hear what is done, what
is come to pass? but where is the consideration of what is done, or of what
has passed? who stays his thoughts, and breathes wisely upon the works of
God? They are wise indeed who do so, as David concluded, after a long and most
excellent discourse of the works of God, ( Psalm. 107.43.) Who is wise and will
observe these things (as if he had said, None but the wise will nor can observe
them) even they shall understand the loving kindness of the Lord.

Thirdly, What are those works which Elihu here calls the wonderful works of
God? Surely those described both in the foregoing and subsequent part of this
Chapter are (which are no prodigies in Nature) the Winds, Rain, Frost, Snow,
Thunder and Lightning: These are the matter of his discourse, and of these he
says Consider the wonderful works of God.

Hence observe; The common, constant, and ordinary works of God, are full of
wonders.

Though we rightly distinguish the works of God (as was touched before) into
ordinary and extraordinary, common and wonderful, yet did we fully understand
them, there is a kind of wonder and miraculousness in all the works of God,
even in his most common, ordinary, or every days works. What is more ordinary
and common than the generation and formation of man, Yet (says David, Psalm.
139.15.) I will praise thee; for I am fearfully and wonderfully made;
marveilous are thy works, and that my soul knows right well. And the reason
why we do not look out the wonders of that and of many other common works of
God, is, because they are so common. The very falling of the Rain has a wonder
in it, the blowing of the Wind has a wonder in it, the motion of the Clouds
has a wonder in it, the growing of every spire of grass out of the earth has
a wonder it it, the budding out of every leaf and blossom on the tree has a
wonder in it; yet because these things are common, we do not think nor call
them wonderful. Every one would think i^ a wonder to see a dry rod, a rod cut
off from the tree, blossom, as Aarons did ( Numb. 17.8.) but who thinks it a
wonder, to see a tree well rooted in the earth blossom every Spring? yet there
is a wonder, a wonderful work of God in that al^o. Magnitudine rerum
cons^etudo subducit: I^a enim compositi su^^us, ut nos, quotidi ant etiamsi
admiratione digna sint. tran^eam. Sen: l, 7. Not: quaell: c. 11.
A Heathen Philo^opher could say from his own ob^e^vation of things and
persons, Custom takes away admiration. Such is the genius or spi it of mankind,
that we never admire what we often see or meet with, though in it self it be
never so admirable. Who admires the motion of the Sun every day? yet the Suns
motion every day is as miraculous and stu^endious, as its standing still was in
that day of Joshua's battle with the Kings, or as its retrograde motion or
going back was in that day of King Hezekiah's recovery from a mortal disease.
That such a vast body as the Sun, should take and fulfill such a journey,
should pass such an unconceivable space in twenty-four hours, is an amazing
wonder, Sol spectatorem, nisi cum d^fi it, non habet; nemo observat lunam, nisi
laborantam.
yet no man wonders at it. I^ has been said, The Sun and Moon have hardly any
beholders (they can scarcely get a look from us) unless when Eclipsed, and then
all men stand gazing and wondering at them, every one will be looking toward
them with hands lifted up, and say, O strange! yet the Eclipses of the Sun and
Moon are far easier to the conceptions of R^ason, than the motion of the Sun
and Moon is, considering the vast course they run and perform every day. We
admire things out of course, or when their course is disturbed, yet the
constant course of things is much more admirable; every time the Sun rises,
every time the rain falls, every time the wind blows, every time the tide
turns, we have a wonderful work of God presented to our contemplation.
Though Astronomers and Philosoph^rs have spoken much of the reason or cause of
these things, yet they cannot reach the bottom of them. The Stoics differ from
the Peripateticks, each having probable and plausible a^guments for their
opinion about natural things; yet none of them hit the matter fully, because
there is a wonderfulness in them which God is pleased to hide from man, as also
because they were not at all guided by a divine Light in the disquisition of
them, but merely by humane reason and n^turall understanding.

Let this be remembered, The o^dinary works of God have wonders in them. I
shall conclude this point with paralelling the extraordinary and ordinary works
of God, as to the real wonderfulness of them, by two Scripture miracles. The
stopping of the fire from burning the three Children, was a wonderful work of
God; so also is the making of such a creature as burning Fire, yet who wonders
at it? It was a wonderful work of God to stop the mouths of those hungry
Lions from devouring Daniel; so also is the making of a devouring Lion, yet who
wonders at it? Now, seeing there are wonders even in the ordinary works of God,

We may take much comfort in our straits, for it is no hard matter with God to
work wonders; he works some for us every day, they are his daily works. If we
need a miracle to save us in an eminent danger, God can do it; when we see no
means in the world to produce such an effect, yet we are never the further from
it. Gods ordinary works are full of wonder; He does the hardest things with as
much ease, as those which we call and count the easiest.

Elihu having thus awakened the attention of Job, and called him in general to
that internal work of consideration about the external works of God, he (I say)
having done this, descends to particulars in the next verse, and those which
follow.

Verse. 15. Do thou know when God disposed them, and caused the light of his
Cloud to shine? Here Elihu begins to come upon Job thick and threefold (as we
say) with his questions, he puts him many questions, and hard ones; and so does
God also, Chapter 38th, 39th, and 40th. And as here Elihu, so there God poseth
or examineth Job in the things of Nature. If we look from this verse to the end
of Gods discourse with Job, we may find this question, Do thou know? put
more than twenty times to Job. But why are these posing questions put so often?
I answer, to humble Job and silence him from questioning the dealings of God
with him; why did God alter my condition? why have I been thus afflicted? why
emptied from vessel to vessel, said Job? I would feign know the reason of my
sufferings. Well, says God* answer my questions first; I would know this or
that of thee; and so says Elihu in the behalf of God, Do thou know when
God disposed them? (...) ordinare, statuere, decernerae.


The word rendered dispose, signifies to order, direct, appoint, and determine;
to dispose is all these. Do thou know when God disposed them?

What? Some refer the them, to all that had been spoken of before, to the
Clouds, the Rain, the Thunder, the Lightning, the Light; Do thou know when
God did order the Clouds to Thunder and Rain, or the Sun to shine? As if he had
said, God disposed of these without asking thy advise; did he acquaint thee
with the orders he sent to the Clouds, or with the commands which he gave to
the Lightning and the Thunder? Can thou tell when God will work, or what he
will work in the Clouds? He may be making preparation for fair weather or
soul weather there, and thou never the wiser, but altogether uncertain of what
he is about. Thus he humbles Job, and labors to take him off from his
murmurings and complainings, as also from over-bold queryings and questionings
about the providential wo^kings of God with, and toward him, by bringing him
under a full conviction of his great inability to understand or comprehend the
natural works of God, or when God set the Law and gave the Rule to or about
these things; Do thou know when God disposed them?

Hence Note; First, God did not only make the world, and all the furniture of
it, but he disposes the motions of every creature in it:

All things move as they are influenced by his power, and directed by his
wisdom. The date of Gods order for disposing the creature is from the
beginning, yea from everlasting. As the model of the Creation, what things
should be, was with him from everlasting, so was the model of Providence, how
all things should be governed and disposed of. The government of the world is
as much of God as the Creation o^ giving of it a being. From the Stars in
Heaven, to the Worms creeping upon the Earth, all creatures were and are
guided in their course by him; he has set them bounds which they cannot pass,
and sent out his word to them which they fail not to observe. Heathens,
generally, did not acknowledge God to be the Maker of the world, nor did they
acknowledge him the disposer of it, but ascribed all the vicissitudes here
below to blind Fortune, or to uncertain Chance. Aristotle, the foreman, the
wisest of that rank, thought the World was eternal; he could not find how it
had a beginning, and therefore concluded it had none: yet others of the wise
Heathen had a notion that there was a beginning, that there was a first-worker,
but when or how he wrought they could not tell. And as the wisest men, who had
but the light of nature and reason to teach them, were very dark about the
beginning of all things, so also about their motion, they thought that all
things either moved of themselves, or that the supreme Power having put Nature
into a course, it acted alone, so that God never meddled about particulars.
Whereas we are taught and assured, by this Scripture-Text, and many more, that
God not only made all things, but disposes all things, even to the fall of a
Sparrow upon the ground, or to the loss of an hair of the head ( Math. 10.20.)
Christ says also ( John 5.17.) My father works hitherto, and I work.
Creation was a work ended in six days, but Providence is a wo^k that never
ends; thus God always works, though always at rest. That Is the lesson here
intended.

It may be matter of much comfort to us, that all things are ordered by God,
that he disposes of Thunder and Lightning, of Rain and Wind, of Snow and
Frost; much more may it comfort us, that he disposes the affairs of men, of
his Church and People. Known unto God are all his works, from the beginning of
the world (Acts 15.18.) and therefore the Prophet brings in the Lo^d thus
speaking of himself ( Isa. 46.9, 10.) I am God and there is none else, I am God
and there is none like me, declaring the end from the beginning, and from
ancient times the things that are not yet done. He that knows what the end of
all things will be, must needs dispose of all second causes, and intermediate
acts leading thereunto. The reason why men often mis-reckon and fail of their
expectation about the ends and issues of things, is, because they have not all
the means in their power, yea, I may say, they have not any of the means fully,
no nor at all in their own power. The way of man is not in himself, how then
can his ends be? only God knows what shall be the conclusion, because he has
the full disposure of all the premises, means, and ways, by which the
conclusion is brought about. Let us adore and consider the power of God, as
well in disposing of the creature, as in making of it.

Again, Do thou know? etc.

Surely thou do not. The question here, as often elsewhere, carries in it a
strong denial.

Hence Note; Men know little of the works and ways of God.

Some men are called knowing, and others ignorant, but all men are deficient in
their knowledge both of the nature and works of God. Do thou know? But was
Job some ignorant simple person? Surely no, Job was one of the wisest as well
as greatest men of that age, he was as well versed as any in the study and
knowledge both of natural and spiritual things; Nor is he changed by Elihu here
with ignorance simply, but with ignorance as to this, this was too high and too
hard for him. We may with reverence enough question their knowledge in some
things, who are very knowing men in m^st things.

There are some things which it is a shame for a man not to know. The Apostle
speaks often in that language ( Romans 2.4.) Desp^sest thou the riches of his
goodness, and f^rbearance, and long-suffering, not knowing that the goodness of
God leads thee to repentance? What a shame is it that any who know any thing
should not know and understand the scope of the mercy of God to sinners; What!
know thou not, that fo^bearance leads to repentance? Again, the same Apostle
in the same Epistle puts the like upbrayding question ( Romans 7.1.) Know ye not
(for I speak to them that know the Law) how that the Law has d^min^on over a
man as long as he lives. He is n t worthy to be reck^ned as a piece of
mankind, who is altogether unknowing; no^ is he worthy to be reckoned among the
men of his profession, who knows not the common principles of it. While the
Apostl^ sp^ke to those who knew the Law, he presumed they were not ignorant of
that Rule in Law, that the Law which has or should have dominion over all men
living, has no dominion over any man beyond this life. Now (I say) as it is a
shame for any man not to know th^se things which are requi^ed of him, and
specially concern him, so it is a presumption for any man to seek the knowledge
of those things which are purposely reserved and hidden from him, ( Deuteronomy.
29.29.) Secret things belong to God, revealed things to us and to our children.
Christ says of the latter day, of the day of Judgment, ( Math. 24.36.) Of that
day and hour knows no man, no not the Angels of Heaven, but my Father only:
and he removed the cu^iosity of his Apostles immediately before his asc^nsion,
for e^qui ing after that kind of knowledge ( Acts 1.7.) It is not f^r you to
know the times or the seasons which the Father has put in his own power. As it
is not profitable, so not lawful for us to look after the knowledge of those
things, which God has locked up and kept secret. Let us take heed we be neither
sound unknowing in those things which it is a shame for us not to know, not
curiously prying into the knowledge of those things which are restrained from
our knowledge. But (to the present point) i^ may be much matter of humiliation
to us, that of those things which we have a liberty, and it is our duty to know,
we know so little. Job had free liberty to know, and search after the knowledge
of those things about which Elihu put his questions, the Meteors of the air,
and the motions of those superior bodies; yet Elihu, knew he could say little
in answer to these questions, when he asked him, Do thou know? etc. And
therefore his purpose was to humble Job, while he made him see and know his own
ignorance. And did the most knowing man in the world know his own ignorance,
that would (I am sure it might) make him very humble. We are apt to be very
proud of a very small portion of knowledge, a little puffs us up; whereas the
sense of our defects in knowledge may both make and keep us little in our own
eyes: We should be thankful for that little which we know, and humble because
we know so little.

Elihu having by the Question now opened, convinced Job in in general that he
knew but little of the works of God, proceeds in the close of this verse, and
further forwards, to convince him further of his defectiveness in knowledge, by
putting the same question about many other particulars: And the first
particular about which he puts the same question, is the Light of the Cloud;
Do thou know when God disposed them, And caused the light of his Cloud to
shine?

He questions Job again about another point, the weighing the Clouds ( v. 16.)
Do thou know the ballancing of the Clouds, the wonderful works of him that
is perfect in knowledge? As if he had said, Gods causing the light of his Cloud
to shine, and his ballancing the Cl^uds, are wonderful works, even the
wonderful works of him who is perfect in knowledge; and tell me Job, Do
thou know these things? Do thou know when God disposed them, And caused the
light of his Cloud to shine?

We must here repeat the former question; and, Do thou know when God caused
the light of his Cloud to shine? yea, some read this latter part of the ve^se
in dependence upon the former; Do thou know when God disposed them, tha^ he
might cause the light of his Cloud to shine? But I rather take it as a distinct
Question. In which, con^^der, he does not say, That he may cause the light of
his Sun, but of his Cloud, to shine. It Is the Sun properly that shines, Clouds
do not: The Sun is the Candle of the World, the receptacle and vessel of light.
Clouds are but vessels or receptacles of water, they are not properly
diaphanous, but opacous, or gross, ^hick bodies: How then is it here said, He
causes the light of his Cloud to shine? I answer, The Cloud does not shine by
any connatural or intrinsic light, but by that which is adventitious, and
accidental to it. And,

(...) a (...) Splenduit inclaruit.
There is more in that word shine, than the ordinary shining of the Sun; the
Hebrew root signifies not only to shine, but to break forth with shining in
some very illustrious manner) Deu. 33.2.) The Lord came from Sinai, and rose up
from Seire unto them, he shined forth from Mount Paran. Moses carries a
metaphor or borrowed speech quite through the verse, rep^esenting God as the
Sun shining forth and showing himself to the people of Israel, in three seve al
places, and as it were in as many distinct deg^ees of glo^ious manifestation.
His glory shined first from Mount Sinai, where he gave the L^w. Secondly, from
Mount Seir or Edom, where (as I may say) he gave the Gospel, commanding Moses
to make a B^az^n Se^pent, that they who looked on it might be cu ed of the
poisonous wounds given them by the fiery Serpents, ( Numb. 21.) An illustrious
type of Christ ( Job. 3.14.) Thirdly, the glory of the Lord shined from Mount
Paran, where Moses, by command from the Lo^d, made repetition of the Law,
adding sundry Evangelical explications of it. In all which the Lo^d shined
forth with a glorious brightness, infinitely exceeding that of the Sun. David
in three of his Psalms speaking of the wonderful appearances and discoveries
of God, First, to save his people; Secondly, to judge and destroy his enemies,
uses this word which here we translate shine, (Psalm. 50.1.) The mighty God,
even the Lord, has spoken and called the Earth from the rising of the Sun, to
the going down of the same; out of Zion the perfection of beauty God has
shined. That beauty with which God shines out of Zion in the divine splendour
and holiness of his worship and ordinances is very glorious. Again, ( Psalm.
80.1.) Give ear O Shepherd of Israel, thou that leadest Joseph like a flock,
thou that dwell between the Cherubims, shine forth; that is, declare thy
self in thy mighty power, as it follows ( verse. 2.) Before Ephraim Benjamin
and Manasseh, stir up thy self, and come and save us. And as the gracious
appearances of God for the saving of his people, so likewise the dreadful
appearances of God for the destruction of his enemies, are expressed by this
word ( Psalm. 94.1.) O Lord Ged, to whom vengeance be^ongeth, O God, to whom
vengeance belongs, show thy self: The Hebrew is (and so we put it in the
Ma^gin) shine forth. Thus the word notes no ordinary shining, but shining both
with vengeance, and with salvation; which latte^ falls in well with the
Interpretation of the light shining in the Cloud, which I shall open a little
further.

And causes the light of his Cloud to shine. There are three Interpretations
of these words.

First, Some by the light of the Cloud, understand the lightning, which (all
know) breaks through the Cloud, and shines out wonderfully before it Thunders.
The light of lightning is a wonderful light. Scisne quod deus nubem esset
discussurus ac ea discussa serenitatem invecturus. Merc: Iris est lux in nube
rorida et egregium opus deis de illa malumus exponere, cum ante sulguris
mentionem fecerit. Scult:


Secondly, Others understand, by the light of his Cloud, the light of the Sun
scattering the Cloud, and as it were, tu ning the Cloud into light, making
light where none was, or nothing but a thick dark Cloud.

Thi^dly, Several learned Interpreters expound the light of his Cloud, by the
Rainbow, which is also a very illustrious light, and that is eminently the
light of Gods Cloud, it is his light in the Cloud. We may also call it a light
of the Cloud; for though the light of the Sun falls upon the clouds, yet the
light of the Sun at other times is not so properly called the light of the
Cloud, as the light of the Rainbow is, or as when the light of the Sun,
reflecting from or upon the Cloud, causes that Meteor, which we call the
Rainbow; and therefore it is emphatically exp^est by this circumlocution, the
shining of the light of his Cloud. The shining light of the Rainbow has in it
a great appearance of God, for the help, salvation, and deliverance of his
people, it is a token of the good will of God to man. And that we should rather
expound this place of the Rainbow, than either of the Lightning, or the
Sunshine, I shall briefly give these four Reasons, upon which I ground the
Exposition.

First, Elihu had spoken of the Lightning and of the Sunshine in the former
parts of his discourse, and therefore it is not probable that he should return
to either so soon.

Secondly, In this whole philosophical Lecture of Elihu, wherein he ente^s into
the treasures of these lower Heavens, there is no mention at all of the
Rainbow, unless we fix it upon this place; therefore seeing he had spoken of
the Lightning and of the Sunshine, in the former parts of his discourse, and
speaks not at all afterward of the Rainbow, it is most probable that he intends
it here.

Thirdly, He is speaking of the wonders of God in the Clouds; and surely his
discourse would have been imperfect, if he had omitted this, Mirabilium
mirabilissimum; Naturae arcanum. Graeci vocant iridem Thaumantias (...) ab
admiratione, rum admirabilem figuram in aere exprimat.
which as some express it, is the most wonderful of wonderful things among
the Clouds, and one of the great secrets in Nature; I say he should have
omitted a great part of that which belongs to the doctrine of the Meteors (all
Meteorological Writers particularly handling this Doctrine of the Rainbow) if
it be not found here.

We may take a fourth Reason of this Exposition, because this light is said to
shine in his Cloud: it is true, all Clouds are his, that is, Gods Clouds; but
the Cloud in which the Rainbow does at any time appear, is in a way of
peculiarity and higher significancy called the Cloud of God, or Gods Cloud. All
the Clouds are as Gods Bow, out of which he shoots his Arrows and Bolts; they
are also called the Seat of God, on them he sits as upon his Throne. Again,
they are called his Chariot, upon them he rides in his Majesty; but the
Rainbow-cloud, is, as it were, the Royal Robe or Diadem of God, the special
Clothing of God. The Lord says at the 13th verse of the 9th of Genesis, where
we have the first mention of the Rainbow, I do set my Bow in the Cloud; the Bow
is Gods, and the Cloud is Gods, he is entitled to them both in a very eminent
and special manner. God calls it his Cloud, and his Bow; Not only, First,
because he made the Cloud, and the Sunbeams by which the Bow is made. But,
Secondly, and chiefly, because he has put it to a special use, and given it a
mystical signification.

And therefore here we may take notice, that whereas the Rainbow is naturally a
sign of Rain, for it is always accompanied with Clouds, or at least with a
Cloud ready to dissolve and melt into Rain, and is therefore called by the Poet
( Nuncia Junonis, Virg. Aeneid. 4.) the Harbingresse of Juno: yet on the
contrary God appoynts it as a sign of fair weather. And indeed God often works
by contrary means, lest we should stick in means, and ascribe the effect, more
than is due, to them. So then the Rainbow has two different significations,
the first natural, of Rain, nor does God promise to hinder or alter this course
of nature. Secondly, preternatural or instituted, of fair weather; which
Philosophy, and the world, is altogether ignorant of; only the Church and
people of God understand it by faith upon the testimony or revealed will of
God, that as often as the Bow appears in the Cloud, they have a renewed
assurance that God will remember the Earth, and moderate the Rain: nor does
this depend upon the nature of, or various colors appearing in the Rainbow,
but purely upon the will and institution of God. And therefore we ought by a
firm faith to embrace the word of promise, to which this sign is annexed;
without that, the Rainbow is nothing else to us, but the image or
representation of the rays of the Sun or Moon, impressed upon the Clouds.

I shall not insist upon any large discourse of the Rainbow, only take two or
three things. This Meteor has three Att^ibutes above the rest; First, it is
the most illustrious and beautiful; Secondly, the most desirable and
comfortable; Thirdly, the m^st strange and wonderful of all the impressions
visible in the air. This is properly expressed by a Bow, because the form of
it usually is semicircular. Luther says he saw a Rainbow in the form of a
perfect Circle; and others report they have seen it in the form of a strait
line: But in whatever form it appea^s the natural cause of it is the
reflection of the Sun or of the Moon (for there are Rainbows in the night as
well as in the day) it is caused; I say, by the reflection of the light of the
Sun or Moon) upon or from a watery or dewey Cloud opposite to either. Iris ab
(...) quod est dicere sive loqui. Iris est arcus, qui ex reflexione luminis,
^um solaris tum lu^^ris, in nubem ro^id^^ oppositam gignitur. Garcae.
The Latin word Iris, is derived from a greek word, which signifies to speak
or to relate something: The Rainbow is elegan^ly so called, because it foreshews
sometimes rain, sometimes fair weather. A Rainbow in the morning is a sign of
showers, in the afternoon it betokens serenity, and always it proclaims to us
the p^omise of God for the moderation of rain; or it speaks thus much to all
the world, that God will so measure out the Rain from the Clouds, that it shall
never swell to an universal Deluge, or to a drowning of the whole wo^ld again.
Thus the Rainbow has a speech, a language of mercy in it toward the present
world. It speaks also the Justice of God upon the old world, minding us of that
Deluge of water that drowned them for their sin; they had so defiled the Earth
by their evil manners and profaneness, by their will worship, Superstition and
Idolatry, that God in wrath sent a Flood of water, not to wash, or refresh, but
to destroy them: The Rainbow minds us of that dreadful Judgment of God upon a
corrupt World. And although the Rainbow gives us assurance that the World shall
not be drowned again, how sinful soever it is, yet some, from the various
colors of the Rainbow, whereof one is red and fiery, tell us, it proclaims
that the World shall at last be consumed by Fire. The Apostle Peter is plain
that it shall be so, (2 Ep: 3.10.) The Elements shall melt with fervent heat;
nor is it merely a fancy, to say, that the fiery colors in the Rainbow are
set there by God, to mind us of it.

Some have questioned whether the Rainbow were before the Flood or no? The
reason or ground of the question is given from that saying of God ( Genesis 9.13.)
I will set my Bow in the Cloud: it seems then there was no Rainbow before the
Flood.

I answer, The Rainbow may be considered two ways; First, as to its natural
being; Secondly, as to its mystical use. If we consider the Rainbow as to its
natural being, it was before the Flood, for the causes of it were before the
Flood, which are watery Clouds and the shining of the Sun: Now when sufficient
causes appear in act, the effect does certainly follow. But as to its mystical
use, it was not before the Flood. Water had its natural elementary being and
use, before Baptism was instituted, but it had not a spiritual use till then:
we may say the same of the Rainbow. Some I know of the Moderns, Luther and
Melancthon assert, it was not in being till then; but we have reason to vary
from that opinion, with reverence to those worthy men: For God did not say in
the 9th of Genesis, I will make or create my Bow in the Cloud, but, I do set my
Bow in the Cloud, and it shall be there for a token of a Covenant between me
and the Earth. The Rainbow had no such signification, nor was it set in the
Cloud for any such purpose, before that time. So then,

Take the Rainbow as to its mystical use, so I grant, it was not before the
Flood; till then God had never caused the light of his Cloud to shine as a
Covenant-token. The Rainbow, had always a natural signification in it, but
that is not all, it has now also a Theological, divine and mystical
signification, and is become as the Seal of that Covenant with mankind; for God
instituted the Rainbow as a Sacramental sign (so we may express it for our
better understanding) both between himself and the whole World in general, and
in special between himself and his Covenant people ( Genesis 9. v. 12, 13, 14,
15.) It was given (I say) on purpose to Seal the truth of the Promise, that the
whole Earth should no more be overwhelmed with a Deluge or Flood of water:
Which though it be such a promise as the whole Creation has the benefit of,
yet the faithful only understand the mystery of it, and have their faith
exercised upon it, and strengthened by it. So that while the Rainbow is the
sign of a temporal Covenant to all creatures, the godly may look upon it, with
reference to all spiritual and eternal mercies by Christ, in whom all the
promises of mercy are Yea and Amen, (2 Cor. 1.20.) And there is a great fitness
in it to hold forth mercy both temporal and spiritual, in several particulars.

First, This Rainbow is in the Cloud, and God placed it in the Cloud, because
out of the Cloud came the Rain which drowned the old world. God could have
drowned the world only by letting out, or breaking up the Springs of water from
the earth, but he opened the Cataracts of Heaven also to do it. And therefore
God, to secure the world against such another vengeance from the Clouds, put
his Bow in the Cloud.

A second significancy of mercy in the Rainbow, is, because the Bow is bended
upwards, or Heavenward, the Bow does not stand bent to the Earth, or downward,
the string of the Bow is toward us, not the back of it. He that would shoot
has the bottom or back of the Bow in his hand, and the string is toward
himself; but God, that he might show he does not intend to shoot that Arrow any
more, holds the string of the Bow downwards, which no man does that has a mind
to shoot. The Lord by this Bow in the Cloud shoots no man, unless it be (as
one well expresses it) with admiration and love; or I may say, the Lord having
shot his Arrows of immoderate Rain from the Region of the air for man's
chastning, seems to return to Heaven with his Bow reversed, as a token of peace
and serenity to the wo^ld, or that in Judgment he remembers his Covenant-mercy.
The wicked are said to bend their Bow, they make ready their arrow upon the
string, that they may privily shoot at the upright in heart, (Psalm. 11.2.) But
he that tu^ns the string of his Bow downwards, is not ready, nor seems minded
to shoot at all.

Thi^dly, This bow shows mercy, because there is no Arrow seen at it, or with
it.

Concisit iris aquas alimentaque nubibus assert. Ovid: 1. Metam:
Fourthly, It shows or signifies mercy, because the Rainbow usually appears
when Rain is ready to come, implying that the Rain shall not hurt us; and so we
have a support of our faith, as soon as we have any appearance of fear.

Fifthly, Whenever the Rainbow appears, there is clearness in some part of the
air; for it cannot be but when the Sun shines. In the time of the Flood the
light of the Sun was wholly obscured. All the days which the world had during
that dreadful Rain, we^e (like the day described, Joel 2.2. Zeph. 1.15.) days
of darkness, and of gloominess, days of Clouds and of thick darkness.
Therefore it is said, ( Genesis 8.22.) Day and night shall continue for ever:
Intimating that in the time of the Flood the day was so ob^cured, so black,
that it could scarcely be known to be day, or distinguished from night. But now
when the Rainbow is seen, the Sun shines, to give assu^ance that though there
be an appearance of Rain, Lux in rube rorida mill effi^it colores et varias et
pulcherrimas lucis temperationes. Plin: Nature: Hist: l. 12. c. 24.
yet the light of the day shall not cease.

Sixthly, The various colors of the Rainbow are very significant for our
comfort, making (as some Naturalists have told us) a thousand sweet delights
for the eye, by the admirable mixtures and shadowings of colors therein
discernable.

Seventhly, The Natu al Historian assures us, that where the Rainbow at any
time touches the Earth (as we may often observe it does) it leaves a fragrant
smell upon the grass, shrubs and bushes. Thus you see how properly and fitly
the Rainbow is called The shining of the light of his Cloud, as also what
significations of favor are discernable in it. From this explication of the
words, we may note; First, After troubles and storms, God will give his people
comforts and calmes.

He causes the light of his Cloud to shine. Clouds are dark things, but while
the Cloud shows Rain, Gods light in the Cloud shows fair weather. That Is
matter of rejoicing to all that fear God, as with respect unto that particular
Judgment of the Deluge, so of all evils and troubles which fall upon them in
this wo^ld. This light shining in the Cloud may comfort and refresh us in the
darkest night of sorrow. It is said ( Psalm. 97.11.) Light is sown for the
righteous, and joy for the upright in heart: And in the 4th of the Revelations
(which is as it were a Prologue or Preface to all the Prophesies of the dark
times that should come upon the world, and over the Church of God in this
world) we find Jesus Christ is represented with a Rainb^^ about him ( verse. 3.)
I was in the spirit, and behold a Throne se^^ ^eaven, and one sat on the
Throne, and he that sat was to look upon like a Jasper and Sardix stone, and
there was a Rainbow round about the Throne, in sight like to an Emrald. From
this Throne it is that Jesus Christ does, as I may say, dispense all the
affairs of his Churches and people. Now though Jesus Christ in the
providential or mediatorial government of his Churches, does often send Clouds
upon them, and though Clouds and darkness are round about him, yet the Throne
has a Rainbow about it: And why a Rainbow? to show that Jesus Christ is
mindful of his Churches and people, to save them when the Serpent casts out
Floods to drown them. It Is said ( Rev: 12.15.) The Serpent cast out of his
mouth water as a Flood after the Woman, that he might cause her to be carried
away of the Flood; but Jesus Christ that sits upon the Throne, has a
Rainbow about h^^, which gives assurance that the Floods shall not quite
overwhelme the Church, she shall be delivered, though it be in a Wilderness,
from those mighty water-floods of persecution raised and caused by the Serpent
and his seed against the seed of the Woman, or against the Woman and her seed.
Though Christ may suffer great Floods of sorrow and tribulation to be powered
upon them, yet there is a Rainbow about the Throne to which we may look, and
get our faith confirmed, that the Woman and her Seed shall not be swallowed up.

Take one place more ( Rev. 10.1.) I saw another mighty Angel coming down from
heaven (that was Jesus Christ) clothed with a cloud (that is, with dark
dispensations, such as his people should not well know what to make of; but
what follows?) and a Rainbow was on his head. That Prophecy leads into a
description of the greatest pressures and troubles that ever the Church of God
was to suffer in this world. Jesus Christ was clothed with a Cloud, but, for
the comfort of his Church, there was a Rainbow on his head, there was light
shining in this Cloud, to bear up the spirits of his people, that the mischief
should not be to their destruction, though it might be very much not only to
their trial, but correction. And we find the Church supported, though not
directly under this notion of a Rainbow, yet by a promise plainly hinting, if
not referring to it ( Isa. 54.9.) In the 8th verse the Prophet tells us, that
the poor Church was in very great trouble; Why? Surely because of some cle^^ly
providence, which interrupted the light of Gods counte^ from shining upon
them, at least to their apprehension; for thus he b^spake the Church, In a
little wrath have I hid my face from thee, for a moment (there was the Cloud)
but with everlasting loving kindness will I have mercy on thee, says the Lord
thy Redeemer (there is the Rainbow) for this is as the waters of Noah; for as I
have sworn the waters of Noah shall no more go over the earth (which was
signified by the Rain bow) so have I sworn that I will be no more wrath with
thee, nor rebuke thee: For the mountains shall depart, and the hills shall be
removed, but my kindness shall not depart from thee, neither shall the Covenant
of my peace be removed any more, says the Lord that has mercy on thee. Then
follows, O thou afflicted and tossed with tempest, and not comforted, behold, I
will lay thy stones with fa^r colors, and thy foundations with saphiers, and I
will make thy windows of agats, and thy gates of carbuncles. As if he had said,
though I ^^^e hid my face yet I will return, for this is as the waters of Noah;
that is, I have as certainly resolved in my self that this unnatural flood
shall not drown thee, as I once promised, and am so resolved still, that the
natural flood shall never drown the world again; and mark how he expresses it,
as I have sworn. When we read the history in Genesis, it is not said, that the
Lord swore; but the Lord to show that his word is as good as his oath, tells us
that what he spoke to Noah, was as if he had sworn it, especially seeing he
gave such a sign for the performance of it. I might show from other Scriptures,
that God is sometimes represented swearing, when yet we read of no oath
formally given: It is said ( Exodus 32.13.) God swear to Abraham and his Seed;
to which the Apostle refers ( Heb. 6.13, 17.) God confirmed it by an oath; yet
if we look those scriptures, Genesis 12.2, 3. Chapter 15.7. Chapter 17.7. we find only the
Lord said, etc. The Lords saying is as good that is, as sure as his swearing,
and shall as certainly be performed.

For a conclusion of this matter; let it be remembered, that the Lord by causing
the light of his Cloud to shine, at first gave, and still gives a sign, or a
seal to strengthen faith. Signs and seals are appendices to the Covenant, or
great Charter of all our mercies. Signs and seals are visible words, God
speaks by them to the eye. I will set my Bow in the Cloud; God says, the Bow
shall be a sign, he also has made Water a sign in the holy Sacrament of
Baptism, and he has made Bread and Wine signs in the holy Sacrament of the
Supper; God has been pleased, from the beginning so far to condescend to man's
weakness, as to give him, not only his Word or Promise, but Signs to confirm
it. And therefore did the Lord give a sign, because, as himself has both an
all-sufficient power, and full purpose to perform his promise, so he would
have the faith of all that are under the Covenant well assured of his
faithfulness in performing it.

Thus we see the spiritual usefulness of this interpretation, taking, the light
of his Cloud, for that illustrious sign the Rainbow set by God in the Cloud,
and most fitly called the light shining in his Cloud; which he does not cause
to shine ordinarily or every day as the Sun does, but at special times,
testifying his eminent favor to some, and his care over all mankind. Know
thou when he caused the light of his Cloud to shine? Elihu proceeds further
with Job upon interrogatories.

Verse. 16. Do thou know the ballancing of the Clouds, the wonderful work of
him that is perfect in knowledge. Here Is another question. The general scope of
all these questions was handled before, I shall now only point at that which
this question specially aims at. Mr. Broughton reads, Do thou know the
poysing of the thick vapors? This is a wonderful wo^k of God. The Clouds are
huge ponderous bodies; who is able to guess how much a Cloud weighs?
Librationes nubis appellat eleganter meo quidem judicio, cum in aere appensae
velut librantur a Domino. Merc. (...) Vertitur libramenta, a (...) ponderavit,
ad trutinam dire^it mutata in.
yet God ballanceth the Clouds, he, as it were, puts them into scales, and
knows what they weigh; he so orders them, that one part does not overpower the
other, but both hang with an even poise in the air; this is a wonderful work of
God. Do thou know how God does this? or, how he makes the Clouds bigger or
lesser, how he places them higher or lower, according to the service and use
to which he has appointed them? Can any man do this? Can any man fully
understand how such vast bodies as the Clouds should be poised or balanced?
how they hover over our heads, and are kept from falling upon us? We must have
recourse to the wisdom and power of God for this. Do thou know the
ballancing of the Clouds?

Hence we may infer, First; If man knows not the ballancing of the Clouds,
then much less can he balance them. And

Secondly, Note; It Is by a divine power that the Clouds are upheld and
balanced.

All heavy things tens downward; what then but God keeps the Clouds up, which
are so heavy? It Is a wonder that we have not Seas of waters, rather than
showers poured upon us from the Clouds. They that travail far at Sea, see the
Rain coming down by spouts, or like a flood in some places; and certainly the
Clouds would come down every where like a stood if God did not hold them up.
From which particular instance Elihu would have us take up this general truth,
that,

All things are kept in an even balance by the wisdom and power of God. The
things of the world, if God did not balance them, how would they tumble and
fall awry, yea, run to ruin! were there not a ballancing operation in the arm
of God, over all the affairs and businessess of men, what a hudle and confusion
would all be in? We read in Scripture of four things which God is said to
weigh or to balance, they are all very considerable.

First, It is said, God weighs the waters ( Job. 28.25.) which may be
understood, not only of the waters above in the Clouds, but of the waters also
in the Sea; he knows to a dram, to a grain, how much all the waters weigh.

Secondly, Which are also vast things, It is said ( Isa. 40.12.) He weighs
the mountains in scales, and the hills in a balance. And as both these are
true taken literally, so they are true also if you take them mystically or
metaphorically. St John was showed the judgment of the great whore, in a
vision, who sits upon many waters (Rev. 17.1.) Who are meant by waters is
explained there (v. 15.) even Peoples, and Multitudes, Nations, and Tongues.
The people of the world are compared to waters, and well they may, for their
instability; Unstable they are as water (Genesis 49.4.) and for their aptness to
swell and rise up into floods. Now the Lord weighs these mystical Waters,
Multitudes, and Nations: he knows exactly what they a^e, what they would be,
and what they would do. And as by waters common people or nations, so by
mountains and hills the great the mighty ones of the nations are expressed;
Princes and honorable men are as great mountains. Thus spoke the Prophet, The
day of the Lord shall be against the mountains (Isa. 2.) that is, against the
mighty men of this world; Hence that deriding question, Who art thou O great
mountain before Zerubbabel? (Zac. 4.7.) That is, O thou great man, who art
thou? surely, thou art not so much as a mole-hil before the God of Zerubbabel,
who when he comes down, the mountains melt down at his presence (Isa. 64.1.)
who, if he does but touch the mountains, they smoke (Psalm. 144.5.) as if
struck with Thunder. God weighs these mountains of the earth, that is, he
considers and unstands them exactly. God weighed him who was the greatest
mountain, of a man, in his time; Belshazzar was the sole Monarch of the earth,
he had almost the whole known world at his command, yet the Lord said of him (
Dan. 5.22.) Thou art numbered, thou art weighed, and thou art found too light.

Thirdly, As God weighs men of all sorts, so he weighs the actions of all
sorts of men (2 Samuel 2.3.) By him actions are weighed, that is, all actions are
weighed by him; the least actions are weighed by the mighty God, and so are the
greatest, he knows how to poyse them, and so make use of them, that they ^ay
effect what is answerable to his own counsel and purpose. This is it which the
Prophet intended, when he said of the Lord, Thou most upright do weigh the
path of the Just (Isa. 26.7.) that is, the motions, and goings, or doings of
the Just. The paths of the Just come often into very uneven balances in this
world, every one will be weighing them, one gives this judgment of them, and
another that, few hit right, the most of men being either blinded with
ignorance of them, or prej^diced wi^h malice against them: But the comfort of
the just is, the most upright weighs their path, and will give the just
weight of them.

Fourthly and lastly, God weighs the very spirits of men. All the ways of
man are clean in his own eyes, but the Lord weighs the spirits (says
Solomon, Prove. 16.2.) The Lord does not only weigh actions and paths, that is,
the whole outward course and tenor of our lives, but he weighs our spirits,
that is, the principles from which our actions flow, and by which we are
carried on in our paths; he finds one man to be of a light, of a vain spirit,
and another man to be of a proud high spirit, a third to be of a covetous,
having, holding spirit; a fourth of an envious spirit, that cannot bear the
good of another; and a fifth to be of a revengful spirit, that will do another
as much hurt as he can. Again, the Lord by weighing finds out them, whosoever
they are, that have a weighty, serious spirit, that have an upright sincere
spirit, that have a heavenly gracious spirit; God knows who they are that have
a spirit for the things and ways of God in the midst of all contradictions of
men; and having thus weighed the spirits of men, he disposes of them and deals
with them accordingly. And I may add this to the question in the text, Do
thou know the ballancing of spirits? Surely no, for thou know not the
ballancing of the Clouds (which may be known much easier) The wondrous works
of him which is perfect in knowledge.

Mr. Broughton renders, The miracles of the perfect in knowledge. As if he had
said; the shining of the light in his Cloud, and the ballancing of the Clouds,
are to be numbered among the wondrous works of him that is perfect in
knowledge. The wonderousness of Gods works was touched at the 14th verse, I
shall not stay upon that here; only mark how Elihu describes God by a
periphrasis or circumlocution; he does not say the wonderful works of God, but,
the wonderful works of him That is perfect in knowledge.

This is a description of God, and such a description as will fit none but God;
who has and who only has, not ^nly knowledge, but the perfection of it. We
need not name God, when we speak of him that is perfect in knowledge, it can be
meant of none but him. Elihu, at the 4th verse of the former Chapter, said to
Job, He that is perfect in knowledge (meaning himself, as that text was
expounded) is with thee. In what sense Elihu might say of himself, that he was
perfect in knowledge, was there showed; and here it must be showed and
confessed, that neither Elihu was, nor any, the most knowing, are perfect in
knowledge like God, or as God is. The Apostle says of the best knowers in this
world (1 Cor. 13.9.) We know in part, and we prophecy in part; we behold
darkly, as in a glass. They that have the clearest eyesight, the purest
intellectuals, know but in part, and see but darkly, which is far from
perfectly; therefore, I say, this description of perfect in knowledge, has a
peculiar meaning here, proper only to God, as will appear more particularly in
opening this Observation from it.

God is not only full of knowledge, but perfect in knowledge; or, The knowledge
of God is perfectly perfect. That Is perfectly perfect to which nothing can be
added, and from which nothing can be taken. Such is the knowledge of God; it is
impossible to add any thing to it, and it is as impossible to diminish it: God
cannot forget or unlearn any thing already known, nor can he know any more
things, no nor any thing mo^e, than he already knows; therefore he is perfect
in knowledge. More distinctly, the knowledge of God is pe^fect; For,

First, He knows all things; whatever is knowable he knows. He knows

First, All things past.

Secondly, He knows all things present.

Thy dly, He knows all things to come ( Isa. 46.10.) He declares the end from
the beginning. Now he that knows all things past, present, or to come, is
perfect in knowledge.

Secondly, He is perfect in knowledge, for he knows all things at once, in one
prospect o^ by one aspect; he does not know one thing after another, nor one
thing by another, he knows all at once.

Thirdly, He is, perfect in knowledge, for he knows all things as they a^e, ^e
does not know things according to appearance, only or as they are held fo^th to
be. Many will make fair shows, and offer both themselves and their actions as
very good, holy, righteous, religious, yet the Lord who sees through them,
sees them (...) naught qui^e through ( Heb. 4.12.) All things are naked and
manifest to him: He sees to the skin, he sees through cloaks and ^iz^rds,
yea, he sees through skin and all, he looks into the breast; the breasts of
men are to him, as if they were cut open, as the word there imports.

Fourthly, He is perfect in knowledge, For he knows all things in himself.
God does not go out o^ himself to search here and there for knowledge and
information. We run to this and that b^ok, to this and that man, to fetch in
knowledge and yet we know but little when we have done all; but the Lord knows
all things in himself, without search or study.

Fifthly, He knows all things unerringly; he knows them so as there is not
the least mistake in his knowledge; that is perfect knowledge. How many errors
are there in our knowledge? how much darkness in our light? But God is light,
and in him is no darkness at all.

Sixthly, He knows all things everlastingly; all things are before him
always. Some men quite love the knowledge of many things which they have
known, but all that God knows (which is all) abides in the same clearness
and fullness with him forever.

Seventhly, He knows all things as perfectly as if he had but one thing to
know, therefore he is perfect in knowledge. We use to say of a man that has a
knowledge scatte^ed upon many matters, or that is knowing in many Arts, and
Trades, and businesses, we say, this man is something in every thing, and
nothing in any thing; Aliquis in omnibus, nullus in singulis.
he has no full knowledge of any one thing, his knowledge being divided upon
or among so many things. But such is the perfection of Gods knowledge, that he
knows all things as perfectly as if he had but one thing to know. To him that
is infinite, one and all, is all one. And from hence (to close up the whole
point and this verse) take these five inferences.

First then, To know, is to be like God, for God is a God of knowledge. O how
unlike God are ignorant persons!

Secondly, The more perfect our knowledge is, the more like we are to God, for
he is absolutely perfect in knowledge.

Thi^dly, If God be perfect in his knowledge, then, We need not fear any good
which we do, unseen of men, shall be lost, for God sees and knows it. Though
your left han^: know not what y ur right hand does, yet never fear what you
have done shall be buried, for God is perfect in knowledge.

Fourthly, If God be perfect in knowledge, No evil-doer has any ground of
hope, that any evil he does can be hid, though done never so much hiddenly, or
in the dark. God is so perfect in knowledge that to him, darkness is no
darkness; the da kness and the light to him are both alike.

Fifthly, If God be perfect in knowledge, Then he fully knows the needs of his
people all the world over; he knows the state of every one for soul and body.
This Christ makes an argument of support in our greatest needs ( Mat. 6.32.) Be
not careful what ye shall eat, etc. be not dispondently careful or fearful
about any thing, for your heavenly father knows that ye have need of all
these things. Men in straits use to say, if such a friend did but know of our
wants, he would help us. Here is comfort to the people of God, he knows their
state in general, and their straits in particular, for he is perfect in
knowledge. We may rest assured, that he who has so p^^fect a knowledge,
mingled with perfect compassions, will in due time give us perfect help out of
all our straits, and a perfect supply of all our wants.

JOB, Chap. 37. Verse. 17, 18.

Do thou know, etc.

17. How thy garments are warm, when he quieteth the earth by the south wind?

18. Have thou with him spread out the sky which is strong, and as a molten
looking-glass?


THis context shows yet further, the utter insufficiency of man to comprehend
those wonderful works of God, concerning which Elihu spoke in the close of the
15th verse. And here we have a conviction of man's insufficiency two ways.

First, In reference to his ignorance of what God does upon him, verse. 17. Do
thou know how thy garments are warm? etc.

Secondly, To his weakness, in giving God any assistance about what he has
done, verse. 18. Have thou, with him, spread out the sky which is strong? etc.

Thus Elihu comes nearer to Job than before, not only convincing him of his
ignorance in those things which were far above him, but even in those that were
about him; not only with respect to the Clouds of heaven, but to the clothes
upon his ba^^^ And it has troubled some Interpreters upon these words, while
they considered the seeming lowness and meanness of the matter in question,
which here Elihu puts to Job, as also, how Elihu (having discoursed of so many
wonderful works of God, in the former part of the Chapter, his wonderful works
in Lightning, in Thunder, in Rain and Snow, in the motion of the Winds, in
ballancing of the Clouds, and in the admi^able aspect and appearances of the
Rainbow; It troubles some Interpreters, I say, to consider how Elihu, after a
large discourse of these greater matters) should come at last to speak of Jobs
garments, and the warmth received by them. What cognation or proportion is
there between those high and great things above, and the garments which he
daily wo^e? Do these deserve to be reckoned up among the secrets of Nature? or,
was Job so stupid, that he could not give a reason of their warmth? Know thou

Verse. 17. How thy garments are warm, when he quieteth the earth by the South
wind? So we are to resume that part of the question out of the former verse,
though not expressed here. As there he said expressly, Do thou know when God
disposed them? do thou know the ballancing of the Clouds? So here he says
impliedly, Do thou know how thy garments are warm?

Some make this and the former verse one entire sentence, qui^e leaving out
those wo^ds, Do thou know, in the latter part; Do thou know the ba^^ancing
of the Clouds, O thou whose garments are warm upon thee, when the earth is
quieted by the South wind? Have thou, with him, spread out the Sky, which is
strong, and as a molten looking glass? The meaning of which reading is briefly
this; O thou, who can not bear thy clothes in a hot day, but art forced to
leave thy labor, and retire to thy rest, when the earth is quieted, the Sun
being far ascended to the South (that is the time of heat) Did thou, with him,
spread out the Sky, which is strong as a molten looking-glass? Did thou work
in the Furnace, or in that fiery heat with God, when he did, as it were, like a
mighty Founder, cast the whole Heavens into that glorious mould, or form, in
which they appear and seem to move? The words are an allusion to those Artists
who work in Metals, and cast them into Vessels of one sort and size or
another, for the several uses and services of man: Such a thing is the Sky
over us, which is therefore here compared to a molten looking-glass, that is,
to a glass made of molten metal. Thus, I say, some read the context as one
entire sentence, and there is a clearness in it.

But I shall keep to our own reading, and so we have two distinct questions;
Do thou know how thy garments are warm? Have thou, with him, spread out the
Sky? (...) Pro (...) Vt Exodus 34 18.


I begin with the first, Do thou know How thy garments are warm?

Can thou give an account of that sudden change, whence it is that the South
wind ceasing to raise storms in the earth, there should presently succeed such
fervent heat, that thou art not able to bear thy own ordinary clothes? The text
is, that, or how it comes to pass, that thy garments are warm. As if Elihu had
said, I have dealt with thee about higher and greater ma^ters; I will now put a
question to thee which is more familiar, Can thou tell me how thy garments
are warm? Su^ely it thou ar^ not able to give me a clear reason about that, how
art thou able to enter n^o the more reserved secrets of God? tell me, if thou
can, How thy Garments are warm?

(...) Pos^^t, (...) torte quod vestimentum sit pri^^ hominis contra (...)
pers^^ (...) and te^^^m^ntum. Brix.
The wo^d which we t^anslate garments, has a very co^si^erable significancy in
it, coming f om a root rendered dec^i^, ^al^hood, and a lie. The g^rments which
we wear a^e both a tegumen^ o^ covering of our nakedness, and a testimony of
our perfici^usness and fal^eness with the great God. Be o^e man sinned he wore
no garments, nor had he need to wear any, innocence was his clothing; nor was
the natural man ever so gloriously adorned, decks and dressed, as when he had no
garm^nts besides his innocence. When man prevaricated and dealt falsely with
God, when he s^nne^ and broke the commandment (his nakedness appea^ing and his
^hame) he then got a simple cove^ing, such as he could make for himself of
fig leaves, till God p^ovided him a covering of skins. Garments began with our
sin, till then (says Moses, Genesis 2.) the man and the woman were both naked,
and were not ashamed; but when once man had sinned, then shame came into the
world, and then both God and Nature p^ovided garments to cover his shame. All
this the word imports, that we, through sin, having lost our natu^al garments,
our robe of created innocence and integrity, we are constrained by s^^me to
take up these artificial garments or coverings to hide our nakedness. It is not
unprofitable for us to remember, (...) Incaluit calidus fuit; itaque Chami
nomen vel a calore, vel a nigredine factum; Neque ut videtur sine numine, cum
quae Chamo contingit Aphrica immodico a stul^boret. Bochart.
that the Spirit of God in the Original language has expressed our ga ments by
such a word, as leads us to the original of them* our dealing falsely with God
and sinning against him. D^st thou know how thy garments Are warm?

The word which signifies to heat, or make warm (I note that by the way also)
was the name of one of the sons of Noah; he had three, called Sem, Ham, and
Japheth. Ham or Cham was that son who saw his fathers naked^ess, and told his
two brethren without, not g^ievingly, but deridingly, which brought a curse
upon him. This Cham had his name from heat; and that portion and part of the
world which, according to the opinion of the learned, was assigned to the
posterity of Cham, is one of the hottest climates in the world; the inhabitants
of those Countries by reason of the extreme heat of the Sun, being black, are
called Blackmores. Aphrica Ammonia dicta, cum ob cultum Ammonis i. e. Solis,
tum praecipue ob astus solares quibus exposita est. Fuller Misc.
And all Africa was called Ammonia, either because the Idol of the Sun was
wo^shipped there, or because the Sunbeams are always hot and fie^y upon it.
Yet as the word notes that extreme heat which causes blackness, so any
moderate heat; Did thou know how thy garments are warm?

From the notation of the word rendered garments,

Observe first; When we put on our clothes we should remember our sin, or, Our
garments are memorials of our sin.

The covering of our natural nakedness is a discovery of our spiritual; and
therefore when we cover our natural nakedness we should think of our spi itual.
It Is sin alone which makes us shamefully naked. Moses saw the people were
naked, when they had made the golden Calf ( Exodus 32.25.) not that they had no
clothes on them, but they had got a new sin upon them, and had lost their
former integ^ity, which was a better ornament than clothing, as also the
protection of God, which was a better guard or defense than armor. Our
garments, which are an occasion of pride to many, should be an occasion of
humiliation to all. Let us take heed of sinning in the use of garments, seeing
it was sin that brought in the use of garments. I only mind the reader of it
from the notation of the woe d.

Secondly, What is here said of garments? Know thou how thy garments are
warm? That is, warm thee, or, keep thee wa^m.

Hence note; Garments are given for warmth.

That Is one use or service of garments. There is a fourfold use of garments.

First, To cover our nakedness and hide our shame.

Secondly, To distinguish our sex, man from woman. The law of M^ses fo^bad the
man to wear the woman's apparel, or the woman the man's ( Deuteronomy. chap. 22. verse.
5.)

Thirdly, Garments are useful for ornament. There are garments of glory and
honor, garments to set forth the state and condition, as well as the sex of
the person wea^ing them. Aaron and his sons had garments made them by Gods o^n
appointment, for glory and for beauty (Exodus 28.2, 40.) The Kings and Princes
of the world wear garments becoming their state and Majesty; and inferior
Magistrates have their proper garments, suiting their offices and dignity.

Fourthly, (Which is the common use of garments, and that which the text speaks
of) they are for warmth, to keep out the cold, and to defend us from the
injuries and violence of the weather; yet we sca^ce know, or do not fully know,
how that comes to pass.

Hence observe, Thirdly; How our garments warm us is a secret, and that they
warm us is from the blessing of God.

Though there be a natural cause of this warmth, yet there is some what of God,
yea, much of God in it. The effect of that natural cause depends wholly upon
the concurrence and power of God. That Speech of the Prophet to the Jews newly
returned from Babylon, and neglecting the Lords house, while they too much
attended the building of their own, does fully evince this for truth ( Haggai
1.6.) Ye have sown much, b^^ bring in l^ttle (naturally they that sow much,
should bring in much, but God can stop the influences of the heavens, and the
increase o^ the earth, and though the seed time be great, ^he harvest shall be
small) again, ye eat (and then sure they we^e satisfied; no, says the Prophet,
ye eat) but ye have not enough; which not only implies that they had not
enough to eat (though that might be a truth) but, that though they did eat
enough, yet there was not a nutritive virtue in the meat, it did not content o^
satisfy the stomach and ^enue their strength: He adds, ye drink but are not
fi^^ed with drink, which also implies, not only that they had but ^ little to
drink, but tha^ their drink was not comfortable o^ thi^st-quenching to them.
Las^ly (which is the instance of the text) Ye cloth you, but there is no
warmth. What was the reason of all ^his, That they did eat and had not enough,
drink and were not filled, put on clothing and were not warm? The text gives
answer (v. 9.) Because I did blow upon it, or blow it away; that is, I sent out
a curse which blasted all your creature enjoyments, and blowed away the
comforts and usual efficacy of them; so that ye had only a shel without a
kernel, or only skin and bones without the marrow and fatness of all, my favor
and blessing. That our clothes warm us, as well as that our meat and drink
nourish us, is from the blessing of God.

Fourthly, When he says, Know thou how thy garments are warm?

Note; Man cannot give a full account or reason of common things, or of his
daily comforts and enjoyments.

What Is more common than for a man to wear garments? what then to find his
garments warm upon him, or himself warm in his garments? and why a man's clothes
warm him we need not go to enquire of a great Philosopher, any man, any common
man can give or assign a cause of it. Yet there is somewhat in it beyond
natural causes, which few take any notice of, and none can sufficiently or
fully apprehend. Second causes produce their effects, the temperature of the
air is a cause of warmth, and the garments we wear, warm us by exciting and
drawing out the congenial warmth within us; yet Elihu puts on the question
further than that, Quum tranquilla est terra. (...) plerumque intransitive
usurpater. Pisc. Amerid^e. (...) Mericies quasi (...) habitatio olta, quod Sol
in^sto plaga altius incedat.
Know thou how thy garments are warm, When he quieteth the earth with the
South Wind?

Or as some translate, When the earth is quiet by the South Wind. Mr. Broughton
reads, when the land is still. The original is only the South, When he quieteth
the earth, or when the earth i^ quiet by the South; that is, when gentle winds
or briezes blow from the Southern parts. The word rend^ed South or South wind,
comes from a root signifying an high habitation, because the Sun is highest
when it is in the South, that is its Meridian or high both elevation and
habitation. And as when the Sun comes into the South, it is in its highest
elevation above us, so it is hottest in opperation upon us. Quiescit ab austro
dum non flagellatur ab austro procelloso. Loc. vide eum.


So that, by the South, he means the Spring and Summer time, when the Sun
makes his Southern progress. And because usually our garments are warmest upon
us, when the South wind blows, therefore we render it by the South wind. The
South wind sometimes brings sto^mes, as was showed at the 9th verse, Out of
the South comes the Whirlwind; but mostly the South wind brings a calm and
heat ( Luke 12.55.) When ye see (says Christ) the South wind ^low, ye say,
there will be heat, and it comes to pass. As the North wind u^^ally blows
cold, so the South wind usually blows hot, o^ b^ingeth heat. Here Is a natu^al
cause of warmth, the quieting of the earth by the South wind.

B^t is the earth at any time unquiet? If not, why is it said, he quieteth the
earth? He^e by the earth we are to understand that part of the Air which is
nearest to the Earth. Terra est (...) pr^^ inqu^^ terrae. Pisc.
The Earth taken strictl^ is no^ unquiet, but the Air, in which we (who are
upon the Earth) breath, the wind blowing, is unquiet and stormy, and when God
commands down the storm and sends a calm he is said to quiet the Earth. So
then, by the Earth, we are to understand the Air immediately compassing us, who
dwell and move upon the Earth; and God quieteth the earth with the South, or
South wind, when we on earth are quiet and quit from troublesome or tempestuous
weather.

Hence note; The natural quietness of the Air which we have on Earth, is of God.

When there are no sto^mes nor blustering winds in the Air, God shows both his
power and goodness, he then quieteth the Earth; we are to acknowledge God in
it, and bless him for i^, when the Earth is quiet. The di^ciples ( Matthew.
8.26.) being in a great storm at Sea, and f a ing the V^ssel would be over-set,
and that they should perish in the Waters, Christ s^id to the Sea, Peace, be
st^ll; and presently the e was a great calm. He that quiets the Sea, quiets the
Earth too. Christ has c^lmes or peaceable winds, as well as storms and stormy
winds at his dispo^e.

And if the natural quietness of the Earth be the work of God, then much more
is the civil quietness of it. God alone gives quietness among men, he makes
them of one House, and them of one Nation to liv^ qui^t. When there are no
winds, no tempestuous winds blowing in the sky, there may be sto^mes and
tempests in the Spirits of men; and when there is a tempest within, only he who
forms the spirit of man within him (Zech. 12.1.) can keep it from breaking
out. There are civil storms as well as natural, and the former are much more
troublesome and dangerous than the latte: God raises those sto^mes in
judgment. He sent an evil Spirit betwee^ Abim^lech and the men of Sichem (Judge.
9.23.) That is, be either gave Satan (^he gre^^ master of mis-^ule) leave to
kindle jealousies and ^nimosities between their, or he gave them up to t^eir
own evil, curious and malicious spi^i^s, which burried them or (...) their
(...) vexation and destruction: now, as God raises (...) storms in judgment,
so he either p^even^s or rebukes them in mercy. It is God who quiets both the
spirits of Princes in governing, and the spi^its of people in submitting and
obeying. He has a South wind, some benign and favou^able wind, which he
breathes upon the child^en of men, and th^n they a^e quiet, and then all is
quiet: God being quiet toward, Tranquillus Deus tranquillat omnia.
that is well-pleased with, and favorable unto man, he quiets all things. If
the Lo^d do but say the word, what storm, what tempest, what wrath, what rage,
what outrage soever there is in the earth, all is hush^ and still. Elihu
affi^med this strongly when he put that challenging question ( Chap. 34.29)
When he gives quietness, who then can make trouble; whether against a nation
or a man only? Natural quietness, much more civil, but above all, spiritual
quietness is of the Lord.

When there is the greatest unquietness in the Air, and in the affairs of this
wo^ld, when (as it is said of those times, 2 Chronicles. 15.5.) There is no peace to
him that goes out, nor to him that comes in, but great vexations are upon all
the inhabitants of the countries, men contending with and (like beasts) ^ea^ing
one an other, yet even then there may be spi^i^ual quietness in the soul of a
believer; he may sit still and unmov^able, in the savou^ and love of God,
though the earth be moved (yea ^emoved) and the hills carried into the midst of
the Sea. This is eminently the wo^k of of God; he can give quietness to the
soul in ^h^ midst of all worldly unquietness. Christ said to his disciples, and
in them to all believers ( John 16.33.) These things have I spoken to you that
ye might have peace; in the world ye shall have tribulation. The meaning of
Christ is not to assu^^ his di ciples, that the^ shall have peace in him after
they have had tribulation in the woe ld, but that their inward spi^itual peace
shall Synchronize or be contemporary with their outward wo^ldly t^ibulations.
To have trouble without, and peace within, at the same time, This is the
special gift of God. The text tells us, God quieteth the earth; and as that
gift of natural quietness is a mercy, so civil quietness is a great mercy, and
spiritual quietness, quietness of heart and tranquillity of mind, especially in
the midst of tribulations, is the greatest mercy of all. We should pray
earnestly, that God would keep the earth quiet, o^ quiet the earth, when ever
we find it unquiet, by some gracious South wind, but above all, that he would
quiet our spirits by the sweet breathings of his blessed Spirit, that though at
any time there should be nothing (which God forbid) but unquietness on the
earth, yet we may have much quietness in our hearts.

Again consider, the former context told us of storms and tempest^, of thunder
and lightening, of snow and rain, driving men from their labor in the field,
to their homes and houses, and the wild beasts of the fields to their dens and
coverts: Now this text speaks of warmth, of calmes, and quietness, He quieteth
the earth by the South wind.

Hence observe; There is a continual vicissitude in natural things.

As no day of the year is of the same continuance or length as to light, so
very few are of the same complexion or tem^er as to heat and cold, fair or fowl
weather, storms or calmes. Now if there be such a vicissitude in natu^al
things, then do not wonder that there is a vicissitude in civil things, or in
the affairs and condi^ions of men in this wo^ld. If after the fair weather of
health and peace, the fowl weather of s^ckness and trouble come upon us, if
after calmes we meet with storms, let us not be troubled. A heathen Poet said,
Nemo confidat nimium secundis, nemo desperet meliora lapsis: Res Deus nostras
celeri rotatas turbine versat. Sen. in Thyesle.
We should not be diffident in a stormy day, that we shall never have
quietness, nor should we be confident in a quiet day, that we shall never have
a storm. David, a holy man, was once exceedingly out in both; in his adversity
he said, I shall never be established; that was the sense of his saying, when
in his haste he said, all men are liars (Psalm. 116.11.) In his prosperity he
said, I shall never be moved. The Lords favor had made his mountain stand
st^ong, and he began not only to think but conclude it would always stand in
the same strength, till his experience consuted that fancy, Thou did hide thy
face, and I was troubled (Psalm. 30.6, 7.) It Is good for us to be in expectation
of, and preparation for all sorts of changes, seeing all things here below are
changable. That great Monarch said ( Dan. 4.4.) I Nebuchadnezzar was at rest in
mine house, and flourishing in my palace, yet presently he saw in a dream,
that all his flourishing prosperity was but like a dream that passes away; and
while those boasts of an earthly greatness and settlement were in his mouth (
verse. 30.) Is not this great Babylon that I have built for the house of the
Kingdom, etc. There fell a voice from Heaven (verse. 31.) saying, O King
Nebucadnezar, to thou it is spoken, the Kingdom is departed from thee. All
sublunary things, the surest and best settled estates, not only of the men of
this world, or of worldly men, but of all men, even of good men, in this world,
are as subject to changes, as the Moon is, or as the wind and weather.

Lastly, Whereas, when Elihu to the question, Know thou how thy garments are
warm, puts this addition, when he quieteth the earth with the South wind? Job
might say, that is an answer to the question. If you ask me, how my garments are
warm? I answer, By Gods quieting the earth with the South wind. But here is
something more intended; though this be a cause of warmth, yet not all the
cause. It is possible for the weather to be warm, and our garments not warm. It
was showed before, that God is able to suspend the working or effects of
nature; as, through his power a man may be in the fire and yet the fire not
burn him (it was so with the Three Children in Daniel) so a man may be in the
Sunshine, and his clothes not warm him. God can stay or stop the influences and
effects of the Sun. The shining of the Sun and the quietness of the Air are
true reasons of the warmth we feel in our garments, yet not all the reason. And
therefore Elihu would convince Job by this question, that if he could no^ give
the whole reason of Naturals, much less could he of providentials. And as he
convinces him of his insufficiency, and incompetency to deal and debate wi^h
God, by his ignorance ab^ut the warmth of his garments that cove^ed him; So in
the next verse, he convinces him of weakness and inability, by calling him to
consider the mighty power and self suffi^iency of God, who alone, without any
of his or of any man's assistance, made and spread out the mighty garment, the
Sky, which enwraps and covers all men and all things on earth. That Is the
general import of the following question.

Verse. 18. Have thou with him spread out the Sky, which is str^ng, and as a
molten l^^king-Glasse. (...) P rtitur pro praeterno; h^c ex ipsa sententia
liquet. Deus enim sec^^t expandit coelus cum eos crearet^n^^ expandit eos (...)
plius. Pi^c:
The word which we render, and is here used as a V^^b, to spread, b^a^eth an
allusi^n to Metals, which a^e beaten on by an hammer in^o plates. The Nowne
signifies the Fi^mam^n^ ( Genesis 1.) because it is an expansi^n, or thing spread
out. I (...) the Ve^b is applied to the work of God upon the Earth ( Psalm.
136.6.) where the Psalmist puts this among the praises of ^od, o^ the things
for which God is to be pr^ie^, To him who st^e^che^ out the earth. The
st^e^ching or spreading out of the (...) is the work of God, as well as the
spreading out o^ the H^^^^n. The earth i^ a solid op^^ous and globous body, yet
it is said (...) str^tched out, because as there is a ^^undness in the Earth,
so a mighty exten^ and vastness. To him that stretched out the earth ab ve the
waters, to him give thanks. But though the Earth be al^o stretched out, yet
more properly (of which Elihu here sp^aks) the Sky. Have thou with him spread
out (...) Coelum vel nubes vel aerem signifi^^^, unde aliqui conjunctim de
omnibus accipiant. Scult: Coeli si^ dicti a tenuitate substantiae, et valet
articulum accusati vicasus. Pisc: Apud Hebraeos idem significant Shamaiim and
Schehbkim; ita apud Latinos coelum and Ether; interdum aer mediae regionis ubi
sunt nubes hoc nomine significatur. Merc:
The Sky?

The word ren^red Sky, is put sometimes for the Air, sometimes for the Clouds, as
also for the Heavens above both the Clouds and Air. Several of the lea^ned
expound it here of the Ai^, that is, of all below the Moon; others of the
Heavens which a^e above. Have thou with him spread out the Sky, or the Heaven?

This spreading forth of the Sky may have a th^ee-fold reference.

First, To the eternal Council of God b^^^e ^ime. As if he had said, Wast thou
with God when he decreed or purposed to spread out the Heavens?

Secondly, To the woe k (...) God in the b^ginning of time. Wast thou with God,
when he did ^ctu^lly sp^ead out the Sky or Firmament in the second days work
of C^^^tion? ( Genesis 1.6.)

Thirdly, (which some insist much u^^n) to the daily or frequently renewed wo^k
of God in o^de ing and alte^ing the face and mo^ion of the Heavens. A^ if he
h^d ^ai^, Have thou with him, when the Sky seeming to be wrapped up in
d^rk^ess, and rent with thunder and storms; have thou then with him scattered
the darkness, and cleared up the air, making all strong or whole again? Thus he
is supposed speaking of a thing often done, even after every storm, not of
spreading the Sky at first.

The Vulgar Latin renders it ironically, in the second sense; Tu forfitan cum
illo fabricatus es coelos. Vulg:
Thou perhaps did join with him in making the Heavens! As if Elihu had said,
It Is like, or belike thou wast with him when he made the Heavens; Thou surely
wast the Giant or Mighty man who assisted at the spreading out of that vast
Canopie. Did thou poor worm, contribute thy help, or lend thy hand to God in
the creation of the World? are we beholding to thee that the Heavens which we
behold, compass in all things with their embraces? you speak of your self at
such a rate, as if you had been a partner or coadjutor with God in the
Creation, and had with him spread out the Heavens. Thus the words are a strong
Negation; Thou had nothing to do with God when he spread out the Heavens in
the work of Creation; why then art thou so busy with God about the works of
his Providence, and particularly about his dealing with thy self? The sum of
Elihu's argument in this matter may be thus conceived; If God call not man in
other things as a Counselor or Judge of his actions, nor can be required of
any man to do so, nor may any man presume to speak against his ordering the
Heavens and Meteors, which yet concern the great good or hurt of thousands;
then it must needs be a very unequal thing that any one man should expect of
God a reason of his particular dealing with him, but patiently submit unto it,
not at all questioning, either his justice or his goodness, how greatly and
grievously soever he is afflicted.

First, Taking the Heavens, either st^ictly, or, as many do, synecdochecally, a
part being put for the whole work of Creation,

Note; God made the world;

He sp^ead the Heavens, and stretched out the Earth, Heaven and Earth a^e the
wo^k of his hands.

Secondly, God had no partner in his work. Have thou with him spread out the
Sky? The Scripture is much in exalting the honor of God, as the sole Agent and
Efficient in setting up the frame of the Wo^ld, ( Isa 44.24.) Thus says the
Lord, I am the Lord that makes all things, that stretches forth the Heavens
alone, that spreads abroad the Earth by my self. The P^o^het brin^s in God
speaking thus, to com^^^t his ancient people when they saw none to help them.
What cannot God do alone, who stretches out the Heavens alone? Cannot he bring
back the Church of the Jews out of Babylon alone, who stretches out the
Heavens alone? cannot he raise up Cyrus for his Shepherd, and move him to make
Proclamation for their return, when there was none to move him about it? He
frustrateth the tokens of the liars, and makes Diviners mad. Those lying
Diviners said, the Jews were fast enough for coming out, but God frustrated
their tokens, and made them mad at their disappoyntments. Now as this may
exceedingly comfort and encourage the people of God all the world over in their
greatest straits, that God made the world, and spread ou^ the Sky alone, so it
does exceedingly advance the power and glory of God. If a man have but a great
Carpet or Coverlet to un^old, he must call in the help of two or three to
spread i^ and hold it up, one man cannot do it alone: But God spread out the
H^aven, that mighty Canopie of the Heavens alone. And his spreading of it was
the making of it; The mighty God by one act gave the Sky both its being and its
form: And all this he did without either Counselor or Coadjutor. No man ever
did any very great thing in the world, but it was either by the help of other
men's heads in contriving, or by the help of their hands in effecting. To be a
sole-Agent of Great things, is the sole-priviledge of the Great God. And surely
if the Lord God had no assistant in the great work of Creation, he needs no
assistance in his greatest works of Providence. He who made the world without
help, can do what he pleases in the world without help. Our help (says the
Psalmist 124.8.) is in the name of the Lord, who made Heaven and Earth; but the
Maker of Heaven and of Earth, fetches all his help from his own Name.

Elihu having magnified the power of G^d in spreading out the Sky, takes
occasion to give us a description of the Sky, Have thou with him spread out the
Sky Which is strong, and as a molten Locking-Glasse?

We have here two things considerable in the Sky; First, the strength of it;
Secondly, the clearness of it. But is the Sky strong? that may be thought an
improper and incong^uous Epithete: The Sky seems to be a weak thing, and the
Ai^ will scarce bear a feather; yet says he, Have thou with him spread out the
Sky which is strong? How are the Heavens or Sky strong? Philosophers and
Interpreters upon this place, have largely discoursed the matter of the
Heaven^, which to our sense are a very thinn substance, and therefore seem to
have little strength in them.

I answer, Though to sense and view the Sky or Heavens seem to have little
strength in them, yet indeed their strength is beyond that of Rocks and
Mountains. The learned Languages, both Greek and Latin, express the Sky by
words which properly signify strength and firm^ess; Firmitas tribu^tur coelo
propter immutabilitatem, unde Septuaginta dicunt (...) Latini Firmamentum.
and we following the Latin word commonly call it in our English tongue, The
Firmament, as much as to say, a firm thing. When the Apostle would set forth
the steadiness (or as we translate) the stedfastness of the faith of the
Colossians, he makes use of this word ((...) Chap. 2.5.) As if he had said, I
rejoice to behold the firmament of your faith, or that your faith is as fi^me
as the Firmament. Surely then the Sky or Firmament is very strong, else the
strength of faith (which being strong, is the strongest thing, both actively
and passively, in the world) had never been expressed by it. The Heavens are
said to be strong (as says is) because of their lastingness and duration. The
Angels are pure Spirits, they are purer and of a more spiritual substance than
the Sky or Heavens, yet they are strong, so strong and powerful, that they are
called Powers; their strength is not a corporal strength of flesh and bone, as
ours, and that of beasts is, nor is it a strength by compactness of earthy
parts, as that of Stones and Metals is, but it is a strength of lastingness and
activity arising from their spiritualness. Thus the Sky, especially taking it
for the Heavens above the air, is pure, there is a spiritualness in its nature,
and so a strength of lastingness in it, (...) fusile a (...) suadere liqui
sacere, non a (...) coar^are. Merc:
beyond that of any earthly or elementary body. The Heavens are not made up of
contrary qualities, as elementary bodies are: In them heat and coldness,
moisture and dryness, are mingled together, and these contending with each
other, at last subdue each other; whence all elementary bodies become weak and
corruptible. The Heavens have some cognation with elementary bodies, yet
without the contrariety of active qualities. Heaven is like the Element of the
Earth, in regard of firmness and solidity; it is like the water, in regard of
its moveableness; it is like the air, in regard of its pellucidness or
clearness; it is like the fire, with respect to its activeness. Heaven shines,
yet it is without heat; it is solid, yet without dryness; it is compact, yet
without moystness; it is diaphanous and pellucid, yet without po es, or those
small and unsensible holes, whereby swea^ and vapors pass out of the body. So
then the Scriptu^e calls Heaven st^ong or firm, not as gross bodies are
called fi^me and strong, bu^ because of its perpetual consistency and (as to
nature) indissolubility; which does the more highly advance and commend the
power of God, who has given it a strength and firmness, beyond that of R^cks
and Adamants: For how fluid and moveable soever the Heavens are to view, yet
they are the most strong and durable part of the whole Creation. Have thou with
him spread out the Sky which is strong, And as a molten Looking-glass.

Some ^ead these words as an en^^^ ^^nrence, Which is strong as a m^lten
Lo^king-Glasse. So Mr Broughton, Could thou make a Firmament with him of the
^^ir, settled as Glass molten? We put it disti^c^^ in two parts, which is
strong, and as a molten Looking-glass. Poe^^ v^teres (...) app^llarunt.
Some of the old Poets u^ed a like Epithete concerning Heaven, they called i^,
The Brazen Heaven. What the Lord threatens as a judicial affl^ction ( Deuteronomy.
28.23.) The Heaven that is over thine head shall be B ass, that Heaven
resembles in its natural constitution, it is like B^asse, o^ like a molten
Looking-glass, by reason of its shining brigh^ness. That which we commonly
call Glass, or a Looking-Glass is molten: of which we read ( Ex^d 38.8.) M^ses
made the Brazen Laver of the Looking-Glasses of the Women. The godly women
among the Jews made a bette use of they Looking-Glasses, than to dress
themselves by, they off^red them to the service o God in the Tabe^n^cle.

(...) Est videre; inde vijus and sp culum. R^b: Kimhi in lib: rad:
One of the J^wish Doct^^s wa^ns us to consider that the word which we rende^ a
Looking-glass, may be taken for a look, or for the appearance ^f a thing: As
if ^e had said, The Heavens are not only strong, but clear, L oking like, or
being, o look on, like a thing that is mol^^n. Glass is a diaphanous splendid
body, we may see through i^, or see the representation of objects in it. Thus
the Heavens are strong as steel, and clear as a molten Looking-glass.

Hence ^bserve;

First, The Heaven are durable, they are strong.

Secondly, The Heavens are transparent, they are as a Lo^k ng Glass.

From this latter we may infer, There is much to be seen in the Heavens;

They are a L^oking-Glasse which represent many things to us. It has been
said, The whole world is a Looking Glass, Se^ulum spoculum.
every Age we live in is a Looking-glass, in which many, both things and
persons, are discovered: I may say much more, the Heavens are a Looking Glass,
wherein we may behold much of God, and much of our selves. And because the
Heavens are called a Looking-glass, it should mind us to look upon the
Heavens; they may mind us,

First, What God is, who has made the Heavens ( Psalm. 19.1.) The Heavens
declare the glory of God, and the Firmament shows his handy work. We may see
God by the Heavens;

First, In his nature, that he is pure and holy. He that has made such a pure
thing as the Heaven is, how pure is he! There is no dirt in the Sky, no filth
in the Heavens, no uncleanness there; the dust or filth of this world can get
but a little into the air, it cannot reach the Heavens. The purity of God is
such as may shame the purity of the Heavens, and make them blush; though the
Heavens are the purest part of the world, yet comparatively to God they are
impure. This Eliphaz asserts expressly ( Chap. 15.15.) Behold, he puts no
trust in his Saints, yea, the Heavens are not clean in his sight. Biluad puts
it yet further ( Chap. 26.5.) Yea, the Stars (which are the most pure and
resplendent part of the Heavens) are not pure in his sight.

Secondly, The Heavens are a Glass, wherein we may behold the power of God.
How unconceiveable is his power, who has made such a Canopie, and spread it
over the heads of all Creatures! And if the visible Heavens are so glorious,
what is the Heaven of Heavens! The Heaven which we see, is but the pavement of
that which is unseen. God has made such a Ceeling for this House below, as
never needed mending, or repair, he has set such a Roof upon it as abides all
weathers.

Thirdly, We may see in this Glass the wisdom of God, ^is wonderful wisdom
in contriving and fitting such a beau^ifu^l roof for this great House, the
Wo^ld* We admire the skill and wisdom of Architects in some pieces of their
wo^k. O the wisdom of God in this!

Fourthly, We may see in the Heavens the unchangeableness of God. If he has
made the Heavens of such a lasting nature, that they have continued many
thousand years without alteration; surely then he himself has continued and
will continue for ever without change, as he is at this day. The
unchangeableness of God infinitely exceeds that of the Heavens. We find the
Spirit of God by holy David infinitely preferring the God of Heav^n, before the
Heavens ^f God, in his unchangeableness ( Psalm. 102.26, 27.) Of old have thou
laid the foundation of the Earth, and the Heavens are the ^o^k of thy hands;
they shall perish, but thou shall endu^e; yea, all of them shall wax old l^ke a
garment, and as a vesture shall thou change them, and they shall be changed:
but thou art the same. The Heaven^ have but a shadow of unchangeabl^ness,
compared with God, With whom is no variableness nor shad^w of changing.

Fifthly, In this Glass of the Heavens we may l^ok upon or contemplate the
wonde full goodness of God to the so^ of men, ( Psalm. 8 3.) When I consider the
Heavens, the work of thy singers, the Moon, and the Starr^ wh ch thou have
ordained: What is man that thou art mindful^ (...)? and the son of man that
thou visitest him? When-eve^ w^ b^ old the Heavens, it should mind us of the
mercy an^ (...) of God to man two ways. Fi st, in making the H^avens (...)
use, while he dwells on the Earth. Secondly, (...) he h^^h p epared and provided
him such a dwelling house, when he shall leave this Earth (2 Cor. 5.1.) We know
that when the earthly house of this Tabernacle shall be diss^lved, we have a
building of God, an house not made with hands, eternal in the Heavens.

Again, The Heavens are a Looking-Glass, wherein we may b^^old our selves.

First, We may behold our weakness and impurity, and so our unlikeness to the
H^avens, much more to the ^od of Heaven. When ^pposi es are set one by o^ ^ver
against the other, they illustrate each other. In the spotl^ss Heavens, we may
^ee our spo^s; The pure Heavens may show us our im^u i^y.

Secondly, As in the Heavens we may see what we a^e, so what we should be. The
purity of the Heavens tells us we should be pure, they tell us we should be
heavenly-minded, that is, set our minds chiefly upon heavenly things; yea, that
our minds should be like the Heavens, pure and spotless. It is said of the
Church ( Cant. 6.10.) Who is this that looks forth as the morning, fair as
the Moon, clear as the Sun? Such, in a qualified sense, are all the parts and
true members of the Church. Shall a man say, he hopes for an inheritance in the
Heavens, when his mind is earthly, or when he minds only earthly things?
Worldly men are not only earthly-minded, but their minds are earth, and
themselves are called earth ( Jer. 22.29. and Rev. 12.16.) Surely then they are
earthly. On the other hand, godly men should not only mind heavenly things, but
be a Heaven before they come to Heaven. The Church on Earth is called Heaven (
Heb. 12.26.) Yet once more I shake not the Earth only, but also Heaven; that
is, the Church state. St John says ( Rev. 12.7.) There was war in Heaven: But
is there war in Heaven? is it not all peace and joy th^^e? How then says that
Scripture, There was war in Heaven? By H^aven there he means the Church on
earth, which is called Heaven; First, because there is not a more lively
repres^ntation or resemblance of the highest Heavens (which is the habitation
of Gods holiness, and of his glory) than the Church here below, which is a
company of Saints and faithful ones. Secondly, because the Church, while on
Earth, has more to do in Heaven, and for Heaven, then in or for the Earth; and
that in three respects.

First, Her birth is from Heaven, being bo^n of God.

Secondly, Her traffic is in and for Heaven. The Apostle says of himself, and
of all such as are truly the Church of God ( Phil. 3.20.) Our conversation is
in Heaven; our trade is in Heaven. Though we have business on Earth, yet that
which is our business indeed is in Heaven. The Church has more to do in Heaven
than on Earth; her pains and labors, her cares and endeavors are more for
heavenly than for earthly things. They that bestow most of their labou^ upon
ear^hly things, are earthly. In all things we ought to be heavenly, and in
every thing we do, we ought to be doing for Heaven.

Thirdly, Because her Head and her Inheritance is in Heaven. Here she is a
stranger, there is her home; nor is she ever truly at home, till she comes
thither.

Thus as H^aven is a Glass, wherein we may se what we ought to be now; we
should labor to be pure, ^^^an, and of an unvariable temper, as the Heavens
are; so what we shall be, and shall have hereafter: It Is such a Glass as God
has made for us to behold our selves in, and above all to behold himself, his
blessed self in. Let us dress our selves by this Glass every day.

Let it not satisfy us to look upon the Heavens, that we may see and be taken
with their own beauty and excellency, as Philosophers do in their discourses of
Heaven; but let us see God in them, let us see Grace and Glory in them. The^e
is so little of God in the discourses of Philosophers (says one) that they are
colder than the Frost and Snow, of which they often discourse. But let us see
God in this Looking-Glass of the Heavens, and therein also let us see our
selves, and learn to be fitting and preparing our selves for heavenly joys and
enjoyments. We have never looked well upon or in this Glass, till we have
mended our dress, and are become better and more beautiful by looking in it.

JOB, Chap. 37. Verse. 19, 20.

19. Teach us what we shall say unto him, for we cannot order our speech by
reason of darkness.

20. Shall it be told him that I speak? if a man speak, surely he shall be
swallowed up.


ELihu having (in the former part of the Chapter) rehearsed many of the
wonderful works of God in natural things, beyond his reach, bids Job reach them
if he could, or, he invites Job, if he could, to give ^im some di^ection, what
account to give unto God about them, p ofessing that he himself knew not, could
not tell what to say; telling him als^, that he was much assured no man else
could; If a man speak, s rely he shall be swallowed up.

As if Elihu had said, Now thou have heard the work of God thus at large
discoursed, I appeal to thee, if any man know how to d spute or fault his
doings; as for our part^, we cannot tell what to allege or reply against the^,
because we cannot see the depth of ^is w^sdom, nor reach the b^ttom of his
administrations. And so the whole context may contain an a^gument from the less
to the g^eate^. If we are igno^ant of, or can hardly apprehend these natural
things, how much more must we be ignorant of, and unable to search into the
secrets and reserved cases of divine Providence? We know little of our selves,
how much less of God! That Is the general scope and intendment of these two
verses.

Verse. 19. Teach us what we shall say, for we cannot order our speech by reason
of darkness. There is a twofold interpretation of the former part of this 19th
verse; some expounding it as a serious motion, or a motion in good ea^n^st made
by Elihu in his own name, o^ in the name of those about him, that Job would
give them counsel in that matter, Teach us, show us what we shall say unto him;
as for our pa ts, we are compassed about with so much darkness, that we know
not what to say fu^ther, or more than we have al eady, about ^hese matters;
from whence he would infer or intimate, that much less did he or they about
him, know what to say more of Jobs matters, or of the dealings of God with him.
Thus, according to this interpretation, Elihu seems to prosecute what he
^pake formerly; I desire to justify thee, I would gladly unde^take the
patronage of thy cause, or find out a way how to acquit thee of all those rash
speeches, and impa^ient complaints, that proceeded from thee; but as yet, for
my part, I see not how to do it, and therefore, if thou do, pray show me.

Irrisorie subdit dicens, ostende nobis, etc. Aquin.
Secondly, And that more generally, these words are expounded, as if in them
Elihu had put a kind of slight or scorn upon Job, triumphing and in^ulting over
him, as his inferior in disputation. As if he had said, Go to now, O Job,
seeing thou think thy self so wise and just, that thou art able to plead and
debate thy cause with God himself; teach us, who are nothing to thee, and who
ingeniously confess our selves ignorant, how to resolve those questions lately
proposed to thy consideration: We are overwhelmed with deep darkness, and have
no hope to dispel it, or get out of it, unless thou can give us light. Thus,
I say, the words are generally expounded, as spoken with a kind of stomach, or
carrying in them the sense of a secret subsannation; as if Job were mo^ ^ole to
see than they all that were about him, as if they (...) and blind, Age magistrum
and he alone had the wit. Now you that are so g eat a Master, and so ready a
Teacher, come show us, play the Maste^, and act the Tutors part, teach us what
we shall say to him.

But I rather adhere to the former exposition, tak^ng the words as a plain
motion, though not altogether without a mixture of reproof. Teach us what we
shall say; If thou would have us say anything in thy cause, give us
instruction. An Advocate, when his Clyant comes for counsel, tells him, if you
would have me plead your cause give me instructions, open your case to me, that
I may plead it for you; thus here, teach us, show us what we shall say, give us
directions if thou art able. Job had said ( Chap 23.4.) He would order his
cause before God, and fill his mouth with arguments; pray, says Elihu, give us
some of those arguments now; as for me, and those that are with me, we are
utterly unprovided what arguments to use, how to argue, how to plead any thing
for the justification of thy speeches and behavior in thy affliction;
Therefore teach us what we shall say unto him.

The text is, make us to know. Teaching makes men knowing; he that teaches
another endeavors to conveigh knowledge into him; and therefore the same word
may very well signify, to teach and make to know, forasmuch as the tendency of
teaching is for the beginning or for the increasing of knowledge. Teach us What
we shall say unto him;

That is, to the Almighty. God is the An^ecedent to this Relative he, what
shall we say to God in thy defense? we would do our best, our utmost, if we
knew how. There are two so^ts of persons who call for teaching.

First, Usually they desire others to teach them, who are convinced or sensible
of their own ignorance, and would be delive^ed from o^ brought out of it. Thus
David prayed that God would teach him, that he would teach him his Statutes
(Psalm. 119.33, 66.) The sick man in the 34th Chapter of this Book is
represented humbly craving this favor ( verse. 32.) That which I see not teach
thou me. Here Is the true genius and desire of a lea^ner, he would be taugh^, he
is convinced that he wants knowledge very much or is very ignorant, and
therefore he would be taught. But,

Secondly, Some call upon others to teach them, merely to convince them of
their ignorance and inability to teach them, or to show that it is a great
presumption in them to pretend to the knowledge of such things as they call
upon them to teach. In this latter sense we are to understand this desire o^
motion of Elihu, saying to Job, Teach us what we shall say unto him, (...) is,
what defense we shall make for thee, or what for our selves, if ^e were in thy
case, or had such a mind to plead with God, as thou have expressed more than
once. Elihu moves Job to teach them, knowing that he was not able to teach
them, or to let him know that he had not knowledge enough to teach them in that
matter. Teach us what we shall say unto him, For we cannot order our speech by
reason of darkness. A fa^ie tenebrarum. Heb.


In this latter part of the verse Elihu gives Job a reason why he and his
fellows would (though they knew he could not teach them) be taught by him. As
if he had said, we plainly and clea^ly acknowledge that we are in the dark
about these matters, and Cannot order our speech by reason of darkness.

The word here rendered to order, may have a double allusion;

First, To a Military;

Secondly, To a Judiciary ordering.

It is an allusion to the Military ordering of an Army or Camp, because words
in speech ought to be put into good order, to be duly ranked and drawn out as
soldiers to battle.

They al^o that have to do in Causes and Courts o^ Justice ought to order their
words aright, they must not speak at random, or what comes next, but they must
weigh the plea they make, and put every thing in its due place. Thus says
Elihu here, We cannot order o^^ speech, we cannon tell how to ^^aw up our
reasons, we are over-matcht in this business, we know not how to plead before
God in thy case, nor what defense to ma^^ for thee; thou pretendest to be able
to contend with him, but we are not, we cannot order our speech. Why not?

By reason of darkness. It is darkness that usually hinders the putting of
things in order: Darkness in the Air does so, much more darkness of the
Understanding. There must be light of one kind or other for the ordering of
every matter. Where darkness is there must needs be confusion: and therefore
Elihu gives a very good account, why they could not order their speech, when he
says, We cannot do it by reason of darkness. What da^kness? there is a twofold
da kness,

First, There is darkness proper, or natural. Once there was darkness, because
light wa^ no^ come or created; of that Moses speaks ( Genesis 1.3, 4.) Darkness
was upon the face of the deep. Now there is darkness eve y night, caused by the
departure of light, or the going down of the Sun; as also sometimes by the
Eclipse of the Sun ( Matthew. 27.45.) There was darkness over all the land, when
Christ was crucified. It was not this kind of darkness, that hindered Elihu from
ordering his speech; for a man may order his speech though he have neither
Sun-light nor Candlelight; a man needs no other light, but that of Reason and
Understanding to order his speech by.

Secondly, Darkness in Scripture is taken improperly and metaphorically; and so
we are to understand it here, We cannot order our speech by reason of darkness.
And this darkness, which I call improper or metapho^ical, is of several kinds.

First, Trouble and sorrow in Sc^iptu^e language are called darkness ( Psalm.
18.28.) Thou, O Lord, w^lt lighten my darkness, that is, thou will bring me ou^
of a sorrow^ul, into a joyful state. ( Joel. 2.2.) It is a day of darkness; what
is that? a day of trouble and affliction. Hence the state of the damned in Hell
is called darkness, yea, utter darkness (Math. 22.13.) because it is a state of
sorrow, even of everlasting sorrows. This da^kness of sorrow and trouble will
hinder a man very much from o^dering his speech. He that is compassed about
wi^h, especially if discomposed by sorrow, is unfit to speak before men of
understanding; yet, I conceive, this was not the da^kness here mean^.

Secondly, Darkness in Scripture notes the state of a natural man, as
unregenerate and without faith. Ye were sometimes darkness, says the Apostle (
Ephesians. 5.8.) that is, ye were sometimes unconverted, or in a state of nature,
which is called darkness, not only there, but often elsewhere (1 Thessalonians. 5.4.)
Brethren, ye are not in darkness, that is, ye are not in a sinful condition,
grace has shined unto you, yea, it has shined into you, or as the Apostle
speaks (2 Cor. 4.6.) it has shined in your hearts, to give you the light of
the knowledge of the glory of God, in the face of Jesus Christ; he it was who
came on purpose into the wo^ld, as to give life to them that were dead, so to
give light to them that sit in darkness (Luke 79.) It Is a truth also that this
kind of darkness does exceedingly hinder a man in speaking, especially when
some things are to b^ spoken. He that is in the darkness of a natural
condition, will be to seek (as we say) or knows not how to order his speech
before God, in any spiritual matter. Yet, neithe^ is this ^ere meant; for Elihu
was not a man in this kind of darkness, he was doubtless a godly man, a man
that had much acq^aintance with, and in the things of God: Therefore it wa^ not
because of this darkness that he could not order his speech before God.

Thirdly, Darkness is put for the deserted estate of a godly man ( Isaiah.
50.10.) Who is among you that fears the Lord, and obeys the voice of his
servant (he that does so is su^ely a godly man, or in the state of grace: who
is there of this sort among you) that walks in darkness, and has no light,
God having withdrawn the light of his countenance from him? Now it is a very
great truth (and sadly experienced by some) that this kind of darkness does
exceedingly hinder a man from ordering his speech before God. A poor soul, that
is walking in the da^kness of a spiritual, troubled, deserted state, that is
bewildred with fear and doubt about the savor of God to him, and his
acceptance with him, knows not what to do or say before God, he knows not
how to order his speech in prayer or discourse. This darkness hinders us
mightily in ordering our speech before God. Yet I conclude, that neither is
this the da^kness here understood, which is a darkness following upon the
present going down or setting of the Sun of Righteousness upon the soul, who
was himself once thus grievously benighted, when nailed to the Cross, he cried
out, my God, my God, why have thou forsaken me.

Fourthly, Darkness taken for that remaining ignorance or impe^fection of
knowledge which abides even in the best, in the holiest of men after their
conversion, while on this side Heaven. Thy ignorance is da^kness (1 Cor. 13.9.)
and this is that darkne^s which Elihu here intends, when he says, we cannot
order our speech by reas^n of darkness. As if he had said, Though I, and they
with me, a^e not altogether rude nor ignorant of God and his ways; though we
have received (through grace) a competency of divine light, to guide us through
this world, yet we are sensible of so much dimness and darkness, that we cannot
order our speech before God, nor direct our selves what to say for thee, as
thou have handled the matter.

Further, The darkness that (as Elihu says) hinde^eth man in o^dering his
speech before God, may be taken, not only for the darkness of the man, or of
the person speaking, as has been showed already, but also for the darkness of
the matter, or of the things about which he is called or occasioned to speak.
As there is a darkness of the Subject, so a darkness of the object, which David
thus expresses ( Psalm. 49 4.) I will utter dark sayings upon the harp: And
again ( Psalm. 78.2.) I will open my mouth in a parable, I will utter dark
sayings of old. A pa^able is a da^k saying, that is, a mysterious saying, a
sentence not obvious to every understanding; there is a secret in parables (
Prove. 1.5, 6.) A man of understanding shall attain unto wise counsels, to
understand a proverb (or parable) and the interpretation, the wo^ds of the wise
and their dark say^ngs. When Elihu says, We cannot order our speech by reason
of darkness, we may take it in this latter sense, as well as in the former; for
as there is, and will be, some mixture of darkness with light in our minds,
till we come to that inheritance of the Saints in light (Col. 1.12.) so there
may be a darkness in the matter to be spoken of. Some truths are so mysterious,
secret and hidden, they are so obscure, or lie so deep, that they are, by us,
even unsearchable and unperceivable; and then we cannot order our speech about
them by reason of their darkness, though possibly our selves may have attained
some good measure of light. And as there are many things in the doctrine of
Faith very dark to us, so also in those dealings of God with us, which reach
our sense; we see and feel that which we know not how to give a reason or an
account of. The light of the Sun is clear and shines into our eyes, yet there
is a difficulty to understand the nature of Light. We are in the dark, even
about Light it self; how much more are we in the dark about the hidden and dark
works of God, in many of his dispensations toward the children of men! And
surely then, we cannot order our speech (concerning them) by reason of darkness.

Hence note; First (taking darkness in the improper sense) Ignorance is
darkness.

If that ignorance which remains after conversion be darkness, then surely
much more is that which dwells in a natural man unconverted. Knowledge is the
light of the mind: The under^tanding, if fu^nished with knowledge, is as the
Sun in the Firmament; but a man who has no knowledge nor understanding, is
like the Air without the Sun, nothing but darkness; and so much ignorance as
abides in any man, so much darkness abides in him. The natu^al man is
altogether ignorant, as to the understanding of spiri^ual things spiritually,
that is, savingly, and therefore he (as to them) is altogether darkness, he is
(as Job spoke in another case of a land, Chap. 10.22.) a man of darkness, as
darkness it self, and in him the light is as darkness; he cannot see by reason
of darkness, nor can he speak, to purpose, of the things of God, though he may
speak very wisely about the things of the world, by reason of darkness, or
because his very Reason (which is the natural light of man) is darkened.

There are s^x things, which a natural man, by reason of this da^kness, cannot
see to order, neither his speech nor his person about.

First, He cannot see what he should be, and what he is commanded to be, holy,
just and righteous.

Secondly, He cannot see what he should do, o^ is commanded to do, ju^t and
righteous things.

Thirdly, By reason of this darkness he cannot see, what he ought not to do, or
is commanded no^ to do, unjust, evil and unrighteous things. He has not a
discerning about either the affirmative or the nega^ive part of divine
c^mmandment^; and hence it comes to pa^s, that as he does not what he ought, so
he does what he ought not.

Fourthly, By reason of this darkness, it must needs be, that he cannot see
what he has done against the commandment, his sins of commission, nor what he
has neglected to do acco^ding to the commandment, his sins of Omission.

Fifthly, If so, he cannon see what he ought to repent of* and turn from. Some
repent not of that which ^hey see to b^^^^ but no man can repent of that, in
particula^, which he see (...) be evil. I grant every godly man makes it his
daily work, to ^epent of his unknown sins, as well as of those which he know. (
Psalm. 19.12.) Who can understand his errors? that is, all the errors,
wanderings and mistakes of his life; and therefore David prayed in the close of
the verse, cleanse thou me from secrets faults, that is, from those faults and
sailings which are secrets to m^, or which I know not of. But though a man may
truly repent of (...) unknown sins, yet no man repents of sin, who does not
know sin.

Sixthly, By reason of darkness a man does no^ se^, nor kn^wes he the things
that he hopes for; he possibly has great ho^es of heaven, or of eternal life,
yet knows not in any measu^^ what they are indeed, nor how to order his speech
about either, because he is in darkness. So then, the state of an unregenerate
person is darkness, and therefore he cannot see at all and much darkness may
remain in a person regenerate, and the^^fore he c^nnot see all (1 John 1.5.)
God is light, and in him there is no darkness at all; but though the people of
God h^ve light and are light, yet in them there is darkness. And because
wheresoever ignorance is, there is darkness, according to the deg^ee of that
ignorance, we may take these Inferences from it.

First, To be in an ignorant condition is to be in a very uncertain condition,
for such are in darkness. Now, as Christ speaks ( John 12.35.) He that
walks in darkness knows not whither he goes. In what an uncertain
condition is that man who is daily going, yet knows not whether he goes?
whether he be going right or wrong, whether he be going for his good or for his
hurt, whether he be going homeward or from home, whether he be going to a
palace or a p^ison, whether to life or death, to heaven or hell. Thus, it is
with a man in darkness, and proportionable to the darkness that is in any man,
is the uncertainty of that man's condition; and therefore till a man be got out
of this darkness of ignorance, he is in a very uncertain condition, he knows
not whither he is going, though he be ce^tainly going downward, and that to
destruction.

Secondly, If igno^ance be darkness, in what degree soever it is, then,
ignorance is very dangerous Darkness subjects us to danger. As a man is in an
uncertain condition while he is in darkness, so in a dangerous condition. If
the blind lead the blind, both fall into the ditch. O how dangerous is the
state of that man who is altogether in darkness! We find these two put together
( Isa. 9.2. repeated Matthew. 4.16.) To them that sat in darkness, and in the
valley of the shadow of death, is light risen up. How near are they to danger,
who are even in the valley of the shadow of death? Thus it is with those that
are in a state of darkness; and so far as da^kness is in any man, he is in
danger to be misled, and to err both in opinion and practice. Woe to those
who, when light is come into the wo^ld shall be found loving darkness rather
than light ( Job. 3.19.) these are in the greatest danger, the danger of
condemnation, yea, this is the condemnation.

Thirdly, To be in an ignorant condi^ion, is to be in a very uncomfortable
condition; darkness is uncomfo^table. And though such as are in spi^i^ual
darkness are not sensible of their danger (and therefore take up their
comfo^ts, rejoice in the crea u^e, and sing care away) yet their danger is not
the less, but mo^e; and when once a man is made sensible of his darkness, he is
(...) about with many fears, doubts and sorrows, etc. The da^kness of the
night is very uncomfortable, in comparison of the light of ^^e day; what then
is the darkness of sin and ignorance, in comparison of the light of grace and
of the knowledge of God! And therefore we should,

First, Pity the ignorant, those especially who are totally ignorant and
alienated from the life of God, through the ignorance that is in them, as the
Apostle describes them ( Ephesians 4.18.) We pity those that are bodily blind,
because (as we ^ay) ^^ey are dark, they cannot see the Sun; ^urely, if bodily
darkne^s, o^ the da^kness of the bodily eye, be to be pitied, if such are to
be p^ayed for that they may receive sight, how much more is the da^kness of the
soul to be pitied, and the blindness of the mind! and the efore are othe^s ^o
pity them the more, because they (not seeing their danger, nor their misery by
it) do not at all pity themselves.

Secondly, If ignorance be darkness, and that an uncertain, a dangerous and an
uncomfortable condition, then we should use and improve all the means we can,
or, within our comp^ss, ^o^ the curing of our own souls and others of this
evil; how should they that are in a state of ignorance desire knowledge! The
great end of sending the ministry of the Gospel to any people, is to op^n their
eyes, and turn them from this darkness to light ( Acts ^.18.) Christ says to
the Church of Laodicea, in that c^^ ( ^^v. 3.18.) I counsel thee to anoint thy
eyes with eye salve, th thou may see; that is, use those means that are
proper for (...) gaining of true knowledge in the things of God. Thou pre ^^ st
to have knowledge, but thy darkness is more than thy ligh^, and thy ignorance
more than thy knowledge; therefore I coun^el thee to buy of me eye salve, that
thou may see.

Secondly, Forasmuch as Elihu says, We cannot order our speech by reason of
darkness; we, though knowing men, know not what to say.

Note; There is much darkness remaining in those that have most light in this
world.

They that know much and have the clearest sight, are yet dark in many things;
what they see is but little to what they see not (1 Cor. 13.9.) We know but in
part, and ( verse. 12.) We see through a glass darkly. The sight that we have of
things, though in a Gospel-way, is but a kind of dark sight, we see through a
glass darkly. Elihu saw himself compast about with much darkness; and who may
not find darkness yet abiding in him? Whatever our light or knowledge is, all
that we know is not half so much as that which we know not; this should humble
us. We are very apt to be proud of that knowledge we have (Knowledge puffs up)
but did we remember how much ignorance is mixed and amassed with our knowledge,
how much darkness with our light, we should see little reason to be proud of
it, or pufft up with it.

Take these Inferences of duty from this second Note.

First, We should always be praying for Light. Every good gift, and every
perfect gift is from above, and comes down from the Father of Lights: If we
would have light from the Father of lights we must ask it.

Secondly, Let the most seeing take heed of presuming that they see all. Some
think they know enough, yea, that they have all knowledge, what is it that they
know not? But Elihu and his friends said well, We cannot order our speech by
reason of darkness. Bernardus non vidit omnia. In his quae dicuntur de Deo
maxima scientia est ignorantiam fateri. Cyril. Cat. 6.
Do not say you know all, how much soever you know. It is an old rule and a
true one, whether you take it with respect to actions or propositions, The
wisest man sees not all. And one of the Ancients has rightly taught us, That
the best and highest point of our knowledge, is to confess our ignorance in the
things of God.

Thirdly, If the darkness of ignorance be not quite dispelled from the most
enlightened and knowing souls, Then, As they who have received most light of
knowledge, have cause enough to be humbled in themselves, so to beware of
despising others.

Thirdly, When Elihu says, We cannot order our speech by reason of darkness,

Observe; Ignorance is a very great hinderance in our approaches and addresses
to God.

As God himself is light, so they who come to God, need much light: They need
light,

First, About their own condition.

Secondly, About the dispensations of God under which they are.

Thirdly, About the nature and tenor of the Covenant.

Fourthly, About the nature and divine properties of God, with whom they have
to do.

Fifthly, About the excellency, faithfulness and all sufficiency of Christ, who
has done all for them.

Sixthly, About the freeness of the grace of God toward them.

Seventhly, About the power and working of grace in them, especially of that
grace of Faith.

If we want the grace of Faith, we know not how to order our speech before God,
nor can we come to God without faith ( Heb. 11.6.) and i^ we want the knowledge
of these things, we must needs want faith in them, or rather in God concerning
them. A dark soul is a confused soul; how then is it possible that he should
order his speech before God, who is himself confused and out of order? Persons
must be well composed, before their actions, speeches or addresses can.
Therefore if you would have free access to God, and order you^ speech before
him aright, labor for a clear light, or as the Apostle speaks ( Col. 2.3.)
for the full assurance of understanding, to the acknowledgment of the mystery
of God, and of the Father, and of Christ; that is (as I conceive) of God the
Father, in and through his Son, our Lord Jesus Christ. That Is the g eat study,
and glory of Christians; they have the most excellent subject in the world to
study upon, and grow up in the knowledge of. Other Sciences consider and
contemplate the Creature, and the things of this Life; but Christianity winds
up the soul to the meditation of the Creator in the Mediator, whom to know is
Eternal Life.

Fourthly, As da^kness is considered in the Object,

Note; The things of God are so m^^^eri^^^, that we know not how to speak of
them as we oug^^: O^, There is a da kness in the W^rd, Ways and Work^ of God,
which we cannot overcome.

The best have not ligh^ enough to look through all the darkness and obscurity
that is in the Works and Word of God. I do not affirm this, to cast that
repro^ch of obscurity upon the Wo^d of God, which the Papists do: The Word of
Go^ has in it abundance of light, yea, it is a light; there is enough in it so
plain, that any who have any ^rue light, may see much of it, and be able to
order their speech, com^o^^ably and competently, that is, acceptably, before
God ab^ut it. Yet there is a mysterious da^kness in many parts of the Word and
Works of God, which our light is not clear enough to master and get through.
God has purposely done and spoken some things, which stand as secrets, which
our eye cannot pierce into, that he might keep us low and little in our own
eyes. As there is enough in the Word, which the si^plest may understand and
spe^k of to ^alvation, so there are some things there to po^e the wisest, and
hold them in a silent admi^ation. The Apostle Peter (2 Epist. 3.16.) speaking
about the Epistles of Paul, says, In them there are some things hard to be
understood: He does not say, all things in the Epistles of Paul are hard to be
understood, but some things a^e, and they are so for our exercise and trial. As
those things are altogether secrets to us, which God has not revealed, so some
things are in a great deg^ee sec^ets to us, though God has revealed them; and
if so,

Then, First, Let us believe when we cannot understand. Faith has a knowledge
about all general Principles; yet he that has no more Faith in some special
Scripture-P^inciples and Mysteries than he has knowledge, will have but little
Faith in them. Though we must have a knowledge about every thing we believe,
yet we may be much more in believing many things, than we are in knowing them;
we may have much Faith in that, of which we have but little knowledge. As Faith
is the evidence of those things which cannot be seen at all by the eye of
sense, so it is the evidence of some things to us, which are very little seen
by the eye of the understanding. The blessed Virgin said, How shall this be?
When she was told she should have a Son, she could not understand the thing,
there was a darkness in it, yet she believed it.

Secondly, When we find darkness in the Works or Truths of God, which are the
Object of our Faith, Let us adore what we cannot see, and admire where we
cannot apprehend.

Thirdly, When we find darkness in any of the works of God, Let us be sure to
forbear to censure or question those works. How vain a thing is it to judge,
when we do not understand, or to say that is not done well, which we know not
how it is done! Doubtless, We cannot order our speech (about such things)
before God, by reason of darkness; and therefore we should tremble to speak
rashly or hardly of them. Elihu heightens the point yet further in the next
words.

Verse. 20. Shall it be told him that I speak? if a man speak, surely he shall
be swallowed up. I find another rendering of these words, in such a tenor as
this; Is there any need that he should be told what I speak? As if Elihu's
meaning were, that God, being omniscient and every where present, needs not
any to bring him a report what men say or do; he knows our doings, and hears
all our sayings, though none tell him. I hearkened and heard (says the Lord,
Jer. 8.6.) He that planted the ear, shall he not hear? he that formed the eye,
shall he not see? If any man behave himself amiss, or speak amiss, God sees
it, God hears it. The Omnipotent needs no helper, the Omniscient needs no
informer, no intelligence^, to bring him an account o^ what is done o^ sp^ken:
Is there any need (says Elihu, acco^ding to this reading) that he should be
told what I speak?

We render Shall it be told him that I speak?

Verbo forensi vide^ur t^ us esse mit^o versu^. An nar^abitur, vel in act^
^eferretur. Merl.
Here some, instead of the word told translate record; shall it be recorded,
registered or written in a book, that I speak, that is, that I have undertaken
thy cause as thou have stated i^? Shall this be recorded, and the record sent
to God, that I intend to be thy Advocate? surely no; neither I, nor any man of
wisdom or discretion will undertake to sp^ak in this matter, after thy manner.
Shall it be told him that I speak? An aliquis audebit ei narrare quum locutus
fue^o si^; na^p^ ut t^ locutus es de gube^natione Dei. Pisc.
I dare not, I would not have it told him that I will, for a World.

Hence Note, First; No man who understands himself, will venture upon the doing
or speaking of any thing that may provoke God, or be displeasing to him.

Will any wise man be an Advocate to plead a Cause, which he knows will, upon
just g^ounds, offend and distaste an ear^hly Judge? The Prea^her (says Solomon,
meaning himself, Eccl. 12.10.) sought to find out acceptable words; the Hebrew
is, words of delight, or, words of the will: He means not flatte^ing words,
or men-pleasing words, but such words as may profit men, or please men for
their profit, that is (a^ the Apostle speaks, Romans 15.2.) for their good to
edification. Now, if we should not provoke men, but seek to find out (in the
sense given) words acceptable to them, should we not much more take heed of
speaking any thing to the provocation of God? should we not seek to find out
words of delight and acceptance with him, words of his Will, that is, words
every way agreeable to his holy will?

Secondly, As Elihu feared such a report should be made to God,

Note; It is high presumption to do or speak amiss, not fearing God should know
of it.

We are afraid to do that evil which may be reported to great persons, who have
power to punish us: It such a man be told (say some) what we have done, what
will become of us? Many are not afraid to do evil, who yet are afraid it should
be told their betters what evil they have done. Servants will sometimes thus
check children in a Family, when they have done amiss, We will tell your
Father, we will do your errand to your Mother; that is a dreadful word to a
child that has any ^everence of Father or Mother, to say, I will tell your
Father and Mother of you. The Lord knows all that we do amiss (as was said
before) though no man tell him; but shall it be told to God what such and such
men speak or do, and will they speak or do it still? shall it be told God what
they speak, and against whom they speak? shall it be told God whom they
reproach, whom they revile? and will they venture it? It Is dangerous when such
Tales are truly told in the ears of God against the men of the World; they were
better have Tales told, and reports made against them to all the Princes of the
earth, than have reports made to God against them. To have a poor soul, upon
just grounds, telling God, what evil men have done against him, how they have
sland^ed and reproached him, how they have oppressed and vexed him, will come at
last to a sad account against them. Shall it be told God that I speak? (says
Elihu) And shall it be told God that we do evil, and we regard it not? Shall we
answer those that tell us, they have told, o will tell God of our evil doings,
as impudent child^en and servants do such as threa^en them with telling their
P^^ents and Masters of their evil doings, What care we? do if y^u will? O let
us take heed how we do or speak that, which, if told in the ears of God, may
cause blame, and bring his displeasure upon us. There are a s^rt of
Tale-bearers very odious in the sight of God and all good men; such are spoken
of, Prove. 11.13. Prove. 18.8. But they who bring reports to God (as Joseph did
to his Father Jacob, concerning his brethren, Genesis 37.2.) of the evils done by
men, such Tale-bearers (if I may so call them) do but their duty; and as their
reports are accepted with God, so they hasten wrath upon evil men ( Luke 18.7.)
Shall it be told him that I speak?

If a man speak, surely he shall be swallowed up. Si dixerit, Heb scil. apud
se, illud nempe, se velle talem sermonem Deo narrare. Pisc.
That is, if any man speak, if a wise man speak, and if he speak as wisely as he
can, and place his words in the best o^der he can, yet if he shall desire (as
Job has done) to come near unto ^od, and plead with him, surely he shall be
swallowed up. Job, in the hottest of those desi^es to plead with God, did not
(as ha^h formerly been noted in favor of him) challenge God; he di^ not think
himself a Match for God in pleading his cause before him, he (good man) was far
from such a presumptuous spirit: yet because he insisted so much upon that
desire of pleading his cause with God, Elihu had reason to check him in such
language as this, If a man speak, surely he shall be swallowed up. We that are
dust and ashes may not be so bold with God, it is best for us to lie at his
foot, and let him do what he will with us, only beg of him that we may improve
his dealings, and profit by his corrections; if the wisest and holiest of men
shall speak otherwise, Surely they shall be Swallowed up.

The word implies, that a man so speaking shall be ruined and brought to
naught. Mr. Broughton renders, Would any man plead when he shall be undone? No
man but a mad man would speak in a business wherein he must needs be ruined. We
say well, swallowed up, that is, both he and his understanding shall be utterly
confounded. This phrase of speech is often used in Scripture when a greater
power undertakes a lesser: thus fire swalloweth up stubble, and oppressors
their poor underlings. David says of his enemies, with respect to the
greatness of their malice ( Ps. 56.1. Ps. 57.3) They would swallow me up.
Possibly they had not power enough to do it, or no fitting opportunity to do
it, but they wanted no will to do it, They would swallow me up if they could,
that is, they would make an utter end of me, or dispatch me quite. So this word
is used in several other places ( Isa. 28.7.) They are swallowed up of wine.
Some swallow down the wine so long, till the wine swalloweth them up, the wine
gets the mastery over them, and they are no longer (as we speak proverbially)
their own men. The Apostle gives order concerning the incestuous person that
had been cast out of the Church (2 Cor. 2.5.) receive him (says he) lest he be
swallowed up of overmuch sorrow, that is, lest sorrow get the mastery of him.
It is not good that the floods of sorrow (though it be a sor^ow for sin) should
prevail over us, so as to swallow us up in the gulf of despair. Again, while
the Apostle ^^sures us, and would have us triumph in that assurance, that death
shall never do a godly man any hurt, he thus expresses it (1 Cor. 15.54.)
Death is swallowed up in victory, that is, in and by the victory of Jesus
christ: He, by dying, quite overcame death; he did not only wound it, and worst
it, or get the better of it, or ^our it, but to^ally ruined it, as to any power
of hurting us; all which, and whatsoever else concerns the death of death, and
the destruction of the grave, is wrapped up in that one word, Death is swallowed
up in victory. And therefore also it is said by the same Apostle, (2 Cor. 5.4.)
Mortality shall be swallowed up of Life. Jesus Christ has brought in such a
life through the Gospel, as shall at last put an utter end to Mortality. Our
Mortality now by degrees puts an end to, or swalloweth up our Lives, but then
Life will quite swallow up, or put an end to our Mortality; that is, our
Mortality shall be quite removed and taken out of the way, by that Life which
Christ ha^h purchased for his people by his own death. All these Scriptures
show the force of the word, here used by Elihu, when he says, If a man speak,
surely he shall be swallowed up.

If a man speak; How? or to whom? The answer is, If a man speak to God, he
shall be swallowed up. But shall every one that speaks to God be swall^wed up?
Not so; therefore we must go to the manner of speaking. If a man speak to God,
not keeping his distance, if a man speak to God without a Mediator, he shall
be swallowed up, as a drop of water is swallowed up of the Ocean, or as a spark
of fire is swallowed up in a great flame, Perdetur vir ille fulgore
celsitudinis and Majestatis ejus perstrictus
or as the light of a Candle, or Glowworm, is swallowed up by the Sun; there
is no standing for the Creature before God, in such a nearness of access, but
by faith in a Mediator; If a man speak he shall be swallowed up. Man is no
match for God, or he is a most un^qual match.

Yet further, these words may note the conquest of the mind or understanding of
man, by an object which is too high and excellent for it; for then his
thoughts, yea and his Reason too, are swallowed up, and he is carried out of
himself, as a man in an ecstasy or trance. When St. Paul was caught up to the
third heavens, and heard unspeakable words, he was swallowed up with the
greatness of the matter, and was in a divine ecstasy, whether in the body he
could not tell, or whether out of the b^dy he could not tell (2 Cor. 12.2, 3,
4.) Thus (says Elihu) shall that man be swallowed up, who over-boldly speaks
to God about the great mysteries of providence, or about any matter too high
for him. And therefore, O Job, thou have not done well to speak so often of
pleading with God; and surely, if any man after thy example, speak
complainingly of what God has done, or himself has suffered at the hand of
God, he is sure to be undone, He shall be swallowed up.

Hence observe; Man is not able to bear the Glory and Majesty of God.

God dwells in the light which no man can approach unto (1 Timothy 6.16.) Man's
darkness is not able to comprehend Gods light; if he venture too near it, he
will soon be swallowed up. The vulgar Latin renders that place ( Proverbs
25.27.) He that is a searcher of Majesty shall be oppressed by the Glory; Qui
persc^utator est ^^^^statis ^^^^metura gi^^i^. Vulg.
that is, whosoever searches boldly into the Majesty of God, shall be
swallowed up by the Glory of God. We translate that text in the Proverbs thus,
For men to search their own glory, is no glory. There is a truth in the former
translation, though it be not a true translation, for, a man that searches
into the Majesty of God, shall be overpowered with his Glory. And as man is
soon overpowered, or swallowed up by the Majesty of God, so also by and in the
Mysteries of God. Ch ^^^ told his disciples ( John 16.12.) That he had many
things to say unto them, which they were not able to bear. If they who had
received so much grace, could not bear the deeper mysteries of the Gospel,
spoken to them by Christ clothed with frail flesh, how much less can any man
bear the Majesty o^ God in speaking to him, or, God speaking to him in his
Majesty! And so some translate and read the words of Elihu in the text under
hand, For if he speak, man shall be devoured or swallowed up; that is, if God
speak, man (who before thought himself Somebody, or that he was able to reason
with him) will be quite confounded in himself by the infinite wisdom of God,
his tongue will faulter or cleave to the roof of his mouth, and he rendered
unable to speak one word in his own defense. Moses (Exodus 19.12.) was commanded
to set bounds about Mount Horeb, that the people might not come too near; the
reason was, that the people might by those bounds be warned, not to be curious
or over-bold in their approaches to the Majesty of God, nor over-busie in
prying into his Secrets. As if it had been said, if you come to near, you will
be even swallowed up. Moses repeating to the Israelites the terrible Majesty of
God in giving the Law at Mount Horeb, minds them in what a trembling frame they
then were ( Deuteronomy. 5.24, 25, 26.) And ye said, behold the Lord our God has
showed us his glory, and his greatness, and we have heard his voice out of the
midst of the fire; we have seen this day that God does talk with man, and he
lives (which implies, that man, in this life, cannot bear the fuller
manifestation of God, and live) Now therefore, why should we die? for this
great fire will consume us: if we hear the voice of God any more, then we shall
die. What was this great fire? It was God himself, that is, an extraordinary
appearance of God, who is several times in Scripture expressed by fire. As if
they had said, We acknowledge that we have had wonderful condescension and
mercy from God, that we have heard him speak and live; but, that we live, is
not only a mercy but a miracle; therefore we poor worms dare not run the
hazard a second time, if we hear him speak any more, we shall die: Therefore
they desired Moses (who in that was a type of Christ, Gal. 3.19.) to go near,
and be as a Mediator between them and God, that they might not have to do with
God immediately, but receive the Law by his hand. Such is the infinite Majesty
of God (though it will be our blessedness in the next life, for ever to enjoy
it) that here in this Life we are not able to receive it. The Glory of God is
so pure, that man clothed with corruptible flesh and blood cannot sta d before
it; the very glimpses of it astonish, and leave us for dead, Rev. 1.16, 17. Man
must dye before he can see God and live; his body must be glorified before, he
can bear that weight of glory, which consists in beholding the face of God, or,
in knowing him (in our proportion) as we are known (1 Cor. 13.12.)

But though (as the Israelites there said of themselves) we cannot hear God
speak and live, yet cannot we speak to God and live, or, and not be swallowed
up?

I answer it in these three things. First, If a man speak to God, as
questioning his dealings with him, or, as calling God to an acc^^nt (which in
some ^ence Job did, and therein went beyond ^i li^e) (...) shall be ^allowed up.

Secondly, (...) ^k to God, as presuming that he can c^^^ (...) and Go^, o^ all
^he dealings of God with (...) su^^ly be swallowed up. The thoughts of (...)
^h^^gh^s, and his ways a^^ve our ways, as h gh ^s the (...) ^b^ve the earth,
Isa. 55.9.

Thy ^ly, (...) speak to God in our own name, or in a self-right (...) ^^n also
we shall surely be swallowed up. Job (a^ we h^v^ ^^^ui^^e^ him before) never
attempted to speak to God in his own rig^^eousnesse, though he often magnified
his own righteousness both befo e and toward men. Woe to all the
righteousness of man before the most righteous God. But Job was too bold
(according to the first answer) in asking an account, or a reason of God,
concerning his sufferings; there was his failing, and for that he received this
check by Elihu, If a man speak, he shall be swallowed up.

The meanest, the poorest believing soul may come and speak, and speak boldly
to God in the name of J sus Christ ( Heb. 4.16.) Thus we may come and welcome,
co^ing thus we s^all no^ be ^ allowed up with the M^j^sty, much l^sse ^ith the
wrath or displeasure of God. If coming thus we a^e swallowed up, it will be
only wi^h the love and favou^ of God, ^ith the g^odn^sse and kindness of God:
And to be swall^wed ^p thus, will be the sweetest morsel that ever we
swallowed, even perfect blessedness and life for evermore. When once death is
swallowed up in victo^y, and mortality of li^e, th^n shall we be swallowed up
in glory. And therefore whatsoever the Lord does with us or ours in this world,
let us be silent before him, humbly adoring his Sovereignty and Wisdom, not in
the least questioning either his Righteousness or his Goodness; for if a man
speak so, Sur^ely he shall be dreadfully swallowed up.

JOB, Chap. 37. Verse. 21, 22. 21. And now men see not the bright light which is
in the Clouds: but the wind passes and cleanses them.

22. Fair weather comes out of the north: With God is terrible Majesty.


THe two verses last opened, may be taken as a Parenthesis to the former
discourse concerning Gods wonderful works in nature, forming those dreadful
impressions of Thunder and Lightening, Storms and Tempest, in the Air; whereby
Elihu having represt (as he supposed) the swelling of Jobs spirit, by calling
him to teach them what to say to God in his cause, for they (as he had handled
it) could not order their speech, by reason of darkness, nor durst Elihu
venture that it should be told God, he intended to speak, knowing, or foreseing
that if he made such an attempt, he might soon be swallowed up by the
incomprehensible greatness and glory of God.

Elihu, I say, having made this little diversion, or digression (as he had done
sometimes before) to cool and calm the spirit of Job, he returns to his
former matter, in these words, and considers further the works of God, in those
higher Regions, the Aireal heavens, how he muffles up, and covers the light,
and how he unvailes and opens it again by his own power, and according to the
pleasure of his will. The words are plain, according to our translation; I
shall open them briefly as they are here set down, and then give out a further
reading of them, which raises the scope and intendment of Elihu yet higher.

Verse. 21. And now men see not the bright light which is in the Clouds. And
now. Some have conjectured, that at this very instant of time while Elihu was
discoursing, there happened a sudden change in the Air, or in the face of the
Heavens; therefore he says, and now, do not the heavens grow dark, so that men
cannot see the b^ight light which is in the Clouds? as if here were a
preparation to that Whirlwind or Tempest, out of which God himself is said to
speak to Job, at the beginning of the next chapter.

Yet, I apprehend, we need not expound the word [now] so st^ictly, with respect
to the present season or moment of time, but rather to the present matter; as
we often use that particle Now, both in speech and writing, not so much to
denote the direct instant, or present time, as for a leading word to the matter
which is to follow.

And, now men see not (or they cannot see) the bright light which is in the
Clouds. Light is the most visible thing in the world; though indeed we are not
so properly said to see the Light at all, as to see all things by the light;
for it is Light which makes manifest, as the Apostle speaks ( Ephesians. 5.13.)
But though Light be (in vulgar sense) so visible in its own nature, and (in
strictest sense) that which makes all things visible, yet by accident, or by
some providential interposition, light it self is not always to be seen. Light
is often hidden from our eyes, and then (as Elihu speaks here) men see not the
bright light. The word which we translate bright light, (...) Pr^prie candidus.
unde (...) Candens l^pra. Drus. Proprie d^notat n^vi^ instar egregi^ splendidum
and candi dum esse. Rab. Kinhi.
signifies the whiteness of Snow, and I find it applied ( Lev^t. 13.2.) to the
whiteness of Leprosy; if there shall appear in the flesh a bright (or shining)
spot, a spot like snow, then, etc. And hence it is said of Gehazi (2 Kings
5.27.) that when his master called him to account about his going after Naaman,
and found him flatte^ing and faulty, he laid that sore judgment upon him, The
leprosy therefore of Naaman shall cleave unto thee and unto thy seed for ever;
and he went out of his presence a leper as white as Snow. It is this word,
which signifies, as any extraordinary whiteness and clearness, so the cle^^ness
and whiteness of Snow in particular, which has a kind of transparency in it,
and is full of light: Yet the light which is in the Clouds when the Sun
shines, is much more bright than Snow. Now, men see not the bright light Which
is in the Clouds,

Or, in the Sky; for the word here used (as has been showed before) signifies
the Sky, the Firmament, and sometimes the Air, as well as the Clouds, (...)
Aethera tenui ejus substantia, nam (...) significat comminuere. Drus.
and it imports the natural thinness of those Celestial Bodies, in that higher
and upper Region of the World. Men see not the bright light which is in the
Clouds. Light is properly in the Sun; the Sun is the vessel, the vehicle, the
seat, the chariot of Light; but as Light is in the Sun subjectively, so Light
is in the Clouds objectively, and also as they are a Medium through which the
Light is conveyed and passes to us. Yet sometimes men see not that bright
Light which is in the Clouds, for Clouds being very thick or thickened, they
become to us as an opacous Body, through which the Light can neither find nor
make its way, and then there is no beholding the Light of the Sun shining upon
them in its greatest brightness; while the Air is thus Clouded, Men see not the
bright Light which is in the Clouds.

Hence note; God can make that which is most visible in it self, invisible unto
us.

There is always bright Light in the Air, when and where the Sun is up, and
gotten above the Horizon. The Sun shines continually, how dark soever the
weather be; but God can draw such a Curtain of Clouds, Vapors and Mists, in
the day time, between us and the bright face of the Sun, that we cannot behold
it. Light always is, but Light is not always to be seen; when Clouds come
between, the Sun is darkened in the clear day.

We may infer as a further improvement of natural things, to those which are
spiri ual, That the light of God's face, or countenance, that is, the light of
his favor, shines ever toward his faithful servants, though it be not always
seen, Clouds coming between may shadow them from that blessed Light ( Psalm.
97.2.) Clouds and darkness are round about him, that is, his dispensations a^e
da^k and cloudy; yet, as then, Righteousness and Judgment are the habitation
of his Throne, that is, as then he does right to all sorts of men, so, then
also Mercies and Loving-kindnesse stand round about his Throne, or, as the
Apostle expresses it ( Heb. 4.16.) his Throne is then, A Throne of Grace, that
is, he has Grace or Favor in his heart, to bestow upon all his People, who
come to him, not with a presuming, but a believing boldness. Our sins and
transgressions are called, a Cloud, a thick Cloud (Isa. 44.22.) I have blotted
out as a thick Cloud thy transgressions, and as a Cloud thy sins. Sins are
Clouds, and those Clouds often hinder us from seeing the bright light of the
face of God shining upon us; and as our sins usually hinder us from seeing that
bright light which is in the face of God, so God sometimes, to try the graces,
the faith, the patience of his people, or to see what they will do, how they
will behave themselves in a dark and deserted state (God I say, sometimes for
these and such like ends) with-draws himself, and will not suffer them to see
the bright light of his pleased face. As the light of the things of this world,
so of that other and better world, is often hid, or the comfort of them is
concealed from us. Light is sown for the Righteous; it does not always spring
up and appear to the righteous. Luther chiefly insists upon this mystical
interpretation or application of the text, giving it out by way of similitude;
As (says he) the light of the Sun is many times covered with a Cloud, and
sometimes hindered by Eclipses, so the light of comfort, or peace and joy in
this world, is hidden from the eyes of the people of God; yet by and by he
sends a comfortable and powerful gale, to blow away or disperse those Clouds,
and then the light of his countenance and favor shines freely upon them again.
And let this be remembered, that when their day is a day of darkness and
gloominesse, yet the Light shines still, the favor of God is toward them
still, though it appears not; and when they have been a while exercised under
this Darkness, Light will return as it follows in the text, Men see not the
bright light which is in the Clouds, But the wind passes and cleanses them.

The wind passes. Quest. But what is the wind?

Answ. The wind is a hot and dry exhalation, raised from the Earth by the power
of the heavenly bodies, which being repelled or forced back by the coldness of
the middle Region, moves obl^quely or flantingly, sometimes very violently
through the air. The Latin word (ventus) signifying the wind, is derived by
some Grammarians from a word (vehementia) noting the vehement or forcible
motion of it, or as others (a veniendo) from a word signifying to come, because
it comes this way and that way, at times every way; or as our blessed Savior
expresses it ( John 3.8.) The wind blows where it lists, and thou hear
the sound thereof, but can not tell whence it comes, and whither it goes.

The supreme or supernatural cause, both making and moderating or governing the
wind, is God himself: For though that text in the Holy Gospel last mentioned
says, The wind blows where it lists, yet is to be understood only in
reference to man; it blows where it lists, for all man, man can neither
direct it, nor control or check it. But as to God, the wind blows where he
lists, not where it self lists; it is he who gathers the wind in his fists
(Pro. 30.4.) It Is he who brings them out of his treasures (Psalm. 135.7.)

The natural remote cause of the wind, is the power of the Sun and Stars (as
Philosophers well agreeing with reason ^^ll (...) dr^wing up those exhalations,
and attenuating them into a ^i^^e (...) for that pu^pose.

The na^ural, near, or next cause (say they) of the winds, is the c^l^ness of
the middle Region, which will not suffe^ the a^^i^in^ exhal^^ion to rise
higher, but thrusts it back, and so i^ ^^ove ^hithe^ o^ thither, side-wise, or
along this lower Region o^ ^he air r^wards the Earth, doing those services, and
sometimes ^^^nge exploy^^, with which experience acquaints us daily.

By ^his Meteor, the wind, the life of man is in a great measu^e maintained.
For though it be a truth, that no man can live (as we say) by the air; yet it
is as true, that no man can live without the air: Did not the Lungs inspire and
expire, draw in and send our fresh air, man would soon be suffocated and dye;
and it is most certain, that the heart, and blood, and whole body of man, are
very much affected, according to the nature of the wind or air, in which they
brea^h. Pliny tells us, that man may live without food seven days, but no man
can live one hour, being wholly intercluded from wind and air. And hence the
Latin word (anima) which signifies the s^ul, not only as to the substance of
it, (which is immortal) but as to the subsistence of it in the body (in which
respect it is mo tal, being no more than life, this word I say in the Latin) is
supposed to come from that Greek word ((...)) which properly signifies the
wind. The same notion of life may be collected from the Hebrew word Nephesh,
which is indifferently translated, Soul, Life, Wind. And so the life of man is
not only called wind (as Job called his, Chap: 7.7.) because of the frailty or
speedy passing of it away; but because the continuance or abi^ing of it in the
body, is by the taking in and sending out of wind.

I have already at the 9th verse of this Chapter, showed the several uses which
God has appointed the winds unto, both in a way of Mercy, and of Judgment:
They purge the air, they gather the Clouds for Rain, they scatter them, and so
make fair weather, they move the waters, which otherwise by standing still
would putrify, corrupt, and grow unwholesome, yea infectious both to man and
beast, they refresh the Earth, and cause all sorts of vegetables to flourish,
they are also, as it were, the food and nourishment, the meat and drink of man's
life; there is no living without them.

I shall not stay further to discourse or discover the nature and the wonders,
or the wonderful nature of the wind, having done somewhat toward it (as was
said) before at the ninth verse. Only take notice of this use of the wind, with
respect to the Clouds, mentioned expressly in this Text, The wind passes And
cleanses them.

It was said in that former part of this Chapter (where Elihu spoke of the
wind) That the winds are the Broomes of Heaven, they sweep the Heavens, they
drive away the Clouds, the mists and foggs which dull and obfuscate the air.
The expression here in the Text sorts well with that Metaphor, The wind passes
and cleanses them, that is, the wind passing through the air, cleanses it
from those Clouds, and so causes the light of the Sun to shine forth freely
and fully to us again. The wind at one time gathers the Clouds, and the wind at
another time scatters them: The wind is a clea^ser. So much is supposed in that
Negative expression ( Jer. 4 11.) where the Lord threatens to send a high wind
from the Wilderness, but not to fan nor to cleanse. I (says the Lord) will
send a high wind; but to what purpose? not for those profitable and comfortable
purposes, to fan, cool, and cleanse the Air, but rather to wither and blast the
fruits of the Earth, or to overthrow and bear down all before it. The text in
hand speaks of a comfortable purpose of God in letting the wind out of his
Treasures, it blows away the Clouds which obstruct the passage of the Light
to us: The wind passes and cleanses them.

Hence note; Whatever stands in the way of our comforts, God can quickly
remove it.

When Clouds cover the light from us, God has ^is wind ready to chase them
away, and clear up the weather. Never did any such thick and dark Cloud of
sorrow and trouble hang over the heads, or fill the hearts of the people of
God, but he had means at hand to dispell and scatter it, or he could scatter it
himself without means. When dreadful Clouds of danger looked black upon and
threatened the Church of God during the Reign of Julian the Apostate, Athanasius
said, It is but a little Cloud, N^becula est, cito transibit.
a wind will shortly cleanse it away. His meaning was, now we are compassed
about with fear and trouble, but peace and prosperity will not stay long before
they return.

This is true also if we carry it yet in a more spiritual way, as to those
Clouds of sorrow which often darken and afflict our minds in the midst of
outward prosperity, or in the clearest Sunshine-day of peace that ever was in
this world; when these inward Clouds dwell, as it were, upon the soul, the Lord
has a wind which passes and cleanses them away too. What is that wind? it is
his holy Spirit. The word in the text, Bolduc:
is used often to signify, not only the natural wind in the air, but that
divine wind the Holy Ghost, who is compared unto the wind in many places of
Scripture, and his opperations are like those of the wind: For as the wind
blows where it lists, we hear the sound thereof, but know not whence it
comes, nor whither it goes; so (says Christ) is every one that is born of
the Spirit (John 3.8.) And as our Regeneration is wrought by that secret, yet
strong and powerful wind, so likewise is our consolation. The Spirit of God
does those ^ffices in our hearts which the winds do in the air: As the wind
dispells and sweeps away the Clouds which are gathered there; so the Spirit of
God cleanses our souls from those Clouds and foggs of ignorance and unbelief,
of sin and lust, which are gathered in, and would, else, abide for ever upon
our hearts. From all these Clouds the holy Spirit of God cleanses us in the
work of Regeneration: And from all those Clouds which trouble our Consciences,
the holy Spirit cleanses us in the work of Consolation.

Some Interpreters expound the words only in this mystical sense, quite
rejecting the proper. But though, by allusion, we may improve the words to this
spiritual sense, yet doubtless Elihu speaks here of the winds properly taken,
or of the natural winds, and their sensible effects; and so, according to our
reading, this Text, as it has been opened, teaches us what sudden changes God
makes in the Air. Now the light is shut up, or shut in, and anon it is let out
again, and all by the powerful hand of God, who does administer these things to
us interchangeably, as himself pleases.

Secondly, The text, according to another reading (which others insist much
upon, and conceive pertinent to the scope of Elihu) runs thus; ^im enim non
respi^iunt (homines) lucem (quum) nitida est in superioribus nubibus, quas
ventus transiens purgavit. Translatio Jun:
For now men cannot see the bright light in the Clouds, when the wind passes
and cleanses them. Mr Broughton translates clearly so, his words are these;
And now men cannot look upon the light, when it is bright in the Air, then a
wind passes and cleanses it. And then the sense of the whole verse is plainly
a setting forth of the excellency, or superexcellency rather, of the light of
the Sun, which is so clear and splendid, that if the Air be but cleansed from
Clouds, if it be but a pure Air, no man is able to face it, nor his eye
directly to behold it. We behold all things by the light of the Sun, but no man
can steadfastly behold the light in the Sun; no man can look right up to the
Sun, when it casts forth its fiery rays, and shines bright upon us. And this
some conceive so genuine and clear an exposition of the Text, that the light of
it may seem to obscure and darken all others. Now, according to this second
reading, the whole verse, with that which follows, contains an argument to
confirm the former proposition, laid down at the 20th verse: If a man speak, he
shall be swallowed up, that is, if a man come too nigh unto God, and be
over-bold with him, he shall even be swallowed up of his brightness and that it
is so, I prove thus (says El^hu) The very light of the Sun, Nemo potest
adversis oculis ^itidum solemn contueri, quis ergo ferat praesenti^m Majesta^^
dei. Jun:
which shines in the Air, is so bright and so powerful, that no man is able to
hold up his eyes against it: And if so, then from the lesser to the greater,
his argument rises thus; If when the Sun shines brightly, no man is able to
look upon it, then much less are we able to behold the bright Majesty of God,
or to comprehend his greatness. This rendering has a very profitable sense in
it, leading Job to reason thus with himself, I plainly see by all that has
been discoursed, that for as much as I am not able to bear the brightness,
which breaks through the Clouds, nor the noise of Thunder (of which Elihu spoke
before) for as much as I am not able to bear the fiercenes^ of a great Rain,
nor the coldness of the Frost, nor the impetuousness of the Wind, nor the
violence of a Tempest, for as much as I am not able to bear the clear light of
the Sun shining in my face, therefore surely I am much less able to bear the
Majesty and glory of God, if he should unvaile or open himself unto me. Thus I
say, Elihu leads Job to an humbling conviction, that he could not stand before
the glorious Majesty of God, because he was not able to endure the brightness
of the Sun shining upon him. If the light of the Sun, the Created light, be too
excellent for mortal eyes, then what is God the Creating light? what is God,
who dwells in light, who is light, and in whom there is no darkness at all?
It Is a Maxim in Nature, Excellens visibile visum destruit.
A ^isible object exceeding bright, dazles the eye, and even destroys the
sight. And why was all this spoken to Job? Surely to bring him upon his knees
(as afterward it did) to humble him, to take him off from his frequent appeals
or desires of approach to God for the debate and determination of his cause.
The sum of all in a word is as if Elihu had said, O Job, thou can not see the
bright light of the Air, if the wind do but fan it and cleanse the Clouds, how
then shall thou be able to dispute thy cause before God, to whom the most
glorious light of the Sun, is but a Cloud, yea but as a clod of earth? The next
words carry on this conviction yet further.

Verse. 22. Fair weather comes out of the North: with God is terrible Majesty.
The former part of this verse has a respect to the latter part of the former;
The wind passes and cleanses them, fair (or bright) weather comes out of the
North. It has been showed before in opening the 9th verse of this Chapter,
that the South wind ingenders the Rain, and causes foul weather, here (says
Elihu) fair weather comes out of the North. The North wind (says Solomon,
Pro. 25.22.) drives away Rain, so does an angry countenance a backbiting
tongue. The North wind blows coldly, yet it blows clearly, it clears the Air
from Clouds. We render, Fair weather comes out of the North. (...) Aurum.
The word translated fair weather, signifies gold; gold comes out of the
North. Fair weather in its season, is worth much gold, and may well be called
golden weather; the Sun in such seasons gilds both the Air and Earth with his
precious beams. And I find an ancient Interpreter sticking much upon the strict
signification of the Hebrew word, maintaining that gold is to be taken here
properly; Out of the North comes gold, because (says he) in the Northern
Countries, through the greatness of Cold, the heat in those parts is so pent in
the bowels of the Earth, that it more fully concocts and refines the gold, than
in other places: Out of the North comes gold, that is, the purest gold. But, I
conceive, that was not at all the business of Elihu here; and I find the
Scripture in another place expressing that which is shining, beautiful, and
precious, by gold, (Zach. 4.12.) The oil which the two Olive-branches emptied
out of themselves through the two golden pipes, is called gold, or golden oil,
that is, Lux quovis auro splendidior. ^ez:
bright oil, pure oil; and so because the light of the Sun shining in fair
weather is purer and more defecate than the purest gold, therefore this
Scripture expresses it by gold; through the North a golden comes, says Mr
Broughton.

Again, Some taking the word gold here metaphorically for any precious thing,
take the word North metaphorically also for any evil thing, that is, for any
affliction, trouble, or sorrow which we meet with in this world; these are
indeed as a cold chilling North Wind, and so they will needs give the sense of
this Scripture mystically thus, Out of the North comes precious things; that
is, afflictions (which are as a cold chilling North Wind) make us more
precious; or, through cold chilling afflictions, we are made more and more
precious. Job says, and this text may have such an allusion (and I give it no
further) to that ( Chap. 23.10.) When he has tried me, I shall come forth
gold; that is, I shall come forth precious. Whether God does try us by the
North or by the South, whether by the heat of prosperity, or by the cold of
adversity, if we are under his trial, and are faithful, we come out gold, we
come out more precious from our trials, than we came in. The Apostle has a
like allusion (1 Pet. 1.6, 7.) Ye are now for a season in heaviness (if need
be) through manifold temptations, (that is, troubles, tribulations and
afflictions) That the trial of your faith, being much more precious than of
gold that perishes, though it be tried with fire, might be found to praise,
etc. Thus Out of the North comes Gold, or this precious thing, a tried faith.
That Is a truth from the allegorical sense of this place; but I shall not stay
upon it.

The proper meaning is, Elihu would have Job, and all men know, God has his
several Climates or places, out of which he sends and dispenceth fair and foul
weather; foul weather comes out of the South, and fair out of the North.

Out of the North comes fair weather. The Hebrew word rendered North,
signifies hiding, (...) abscondit occuliavit, hinc (...) septentrio aquilo,
quasi abscondita quia sol ibi multo per annum temp re ibi non conspiciatur.
because the remote parts of the North are much hidden from the Sun, a great
part of the year being quite dark; and therefore the Northern Climate may well
be called the hidden part of the world. Some put a Question upon those words of
David (Psalm. 75.6.) Promotion comes neither out of the East, nor out of the
West, nor from the South: Here are three of the four Winds specified, and it
is said, Promotion comes from neither of them. But why is it not also said,
that Promotion comes not from the North? that is the question. I answer, It were
answer enough to say, that we ought not to put questions curiously about such
things; it should satisfy us that the Spirit of God is pleased to say it is
so, and no more. Yet some tell us, the reason why it is not said, Promotion
comes not from the North, is, because indeed it comes out of the North,
which, say they, is intimated in the Hebrew word for the N^rth, which signifies
^idden or secret. Promotion comes not from the East, nor West, nor South, but
from the North, (says this Author) it comes from the North in a figure or
mystery, that is, it comes from some hidden providence or secret hand, which
many take no more notice of, than we do of the furthest part of the North. God
promotes many in this world to power, and sends them great prosperity, we see
not how or which way: The causes and contrivances of it are hidden close, and
in the breast of God. This also is a truth; in that sense we may say, Fair
weather comes from the North. Promotion is visible, but the manner of it is a
secret, we see not the causes for which, nor the ways in which it comes. It
is enough to touch these niceties, and to touch them can do no hurt, while the
matter arising from them, has the clear consent of, and is harmonious with
other plain places of Scripture. Fair weather comes out of the North, and (as
it follows) With God is terrible Majesty.

This is the Epiphonema, the exulting conclusion of both these verses, yea, of
Elihu's large discourse concerning the works of God in Naturalls. As if Elihu
had said, All these things God does; and tell me then, is not terrible Majesty
with God? in God, or with God is terrible Majesty. The word which we render
Majesty, (...) celsitudo majestas; a (...) quidem dedu^unt, quod est confiteri,
celebrare, laudare. (...). Theod: (...). Symmach: Ad deum formidolo a laudatio.
Vulg:
comes (say Grammarians) from a root which signifies to confess, to
acknowledge, to celebrate, because Majesty, Greatness, or Excellency is and
ought to be much acknowledged, confessed, and celebrated: The word notes in
general, any laudable or praiseworthy thing. With God all that is, which is
worthy to be and ought to be commended, praised, honored by men and Angels. We
translate well, With God is Majesty: Others, With God is praise. Jacob says of
Judah, the Kingly Tribe ( Genesis 49.8.) Thou art he whom thy brethren shall
praise. The Vulgar Latin expresses it thus; With God is fearful praise. Some
read the words as a Doxology, or giving of glory unto God, not as we, With God
is terrible Majesty, but, unto God be reverent or terrible Majesty; that is,
let the Glory and Majesty of God be acknowledged in all these things, which
have been spoken of, in all those strange changes and impressions which he
works in the air, and which are obvious unto the eyes of the Children of men.
With God is Majesty, with God is praise, or unto God be praise for all his
works; and not only praise and Majesty, but Terrible Majesty,

Majesty to be feared, to be reverenced, to be dreaded, to be trembled at. With
God is terrible Majesty.

Hence note; First, Majesty belongs eminently unto God.

With God is Majesty. As the Scripture, speaking of power, says, Power
belongs unto God (Psalm. 62.11.) that is, properly, and fundamentally all
power is in God; whatever power is in the Creature, it is but a derivative
from Gods power. So Majesty is originally and fundamentally in God; whatever
the Majesty of the Kings and Princes of this world is, it is but a stream, a
ray issuing from the Majesty of God, or, (...). Magnificentia. 70.
as the Greek version has it, from his Magnificence. We may discern the
Majesty of God in every thing that he is, or is spoken of him; The Majesty of
God is in his Greatness, his is a Great Majesty; The Majesty of God is in his
Highness, his is a High Majesty; The Majesty of God is in his honor, his is a
most honorable Majesty; the Majesty of God is in his Word, he speaks with
Majesty, his is a most Majestical Word; the Majesty of God is in Works, Majesty
is stamped and printed upon all that he does. What shall I say? there is Majesty
in the Wisdom of God, and Majesty in the Justice of God, and Majesty in the
Goodness of God, and Majesty in the Power of God, there is Majesty in the Love
of God, and there is Majesty in the Wrath of God, there is Majesty in the Truth
and Faithfulness of God; every thing God has, has a Majesty in it; therefore
he is said ( Psalm. 93.1.) to be clothed with Majesty. (Psalm. 96.6.) Honor and
Majesty are before him. I, says David (Psalm. 145.5.) will speak of the
glorious honor of thy Majesty, and of thy wondrous works. Everywhere the
Scripture sets forth the Majesty, the wonderful Majesty of God.

Note, Secondly; Gods Majesty is a terrible Majesty.

The Majesty of Kings is dreadful and terrible; but I may say, the Majesty of
Kings, the Majesty of Solomon, and of Ahashuerus, the Majesty of
Nebuchadnezzar, and of Alexander, either, first, in their Robes; or, secondly,
in their Buildings; or, thirdly, in their Feastings; or, fourthly, in their
Followers and Attendants (which four do chiefly hold out the Majesty of
Princes) is but a mean thing, a very little thing, a nothing, in comparison of
the Majesty, the Glorious Majesty, the terrible Majesty of God: His is a
terrible Majesty indeed. And therefore they are rebuked ( Isa. 26.10.) Who will
not behold the Majesty of the Lord. What? not behold such a dreadful Majesty!
such a terrible Majesty! The Scripture sets forth not only the Majesty, but the
terribleness of the Majesty of God; read at leisure, ( Deuteronomy. 7.21. Nehem. 9.32.
Psalm. 47.2.) Therefore say unto God, how terrible art thou in thy works! (P^.
66.3.) Say this unto God, for ( verse. 5.) He is terrible in his doings toward
the children of men, even to all sorts of men, to the great as well as to the
small, to the high as well as to ^he low, to Princes as well as to the People (
Psalm. 76.12) He is terrible to the Kings of the earth. God is terrible in his
Majesty to those who have the most terrible majesty. And as the Lord can appear
terrible out of all places, so he is most terrible out of his holy places
(Psalm. 68.35.) that is, terrible Judgments are sent by God out of his
Sanctuaries or holy places, upon all them who profane or despise, who pollute
or abuse ^his holy things. Take these two Inferences from the consideration of
the terrible Majesty of God.

First, We need not fear the terribleness of any creature, while we have the
terrible Majesty of God with us. As he has been, so still he is (as the
Prophet spoke, Isa. 25.4, 5.) A strength to the poor, a strength to the needy
in his distress, a refuge from the storm, a shadow from the heat, when the
blast of the terrible ones is as a storm against the wall. And therefore the
Prophet concluded in the latter end of the 5th verse, The branch of the
terrible ones shall be brought low.

Secondly, If God has such terrible Majesty, then, as it is a comfort to his
people against the terrible ones, so what a terror should this be to those who
are not his people, especially to those who are openly rebellious, who kick
against his Majesty, and will not behold with reverence the Majesty of the
Lord! Let them remember, With God is terrible Majesty. The P^ophet foretells a
day, wherein the Majesty of the Lord will terrify the most potent sinners, and
make them at their wits end ( Isa. 2.10, 12, 19, 21.) Enter into the Rock, and
hide thee in the dust, for fear of the Lord, and for the glory of his Majesty.
For the day of the Lord of hosts shall be upon every one that is proud and
lofty, and upon every one that is lifted up, and he shall be brought low; it
shall be upon the Cedars of Lebanon, etc. that is upon those that are high like
the Cedars of Leba^an, and strong like the Oaks of Bashan: And they shall go
into the holes of the Rocks, and into the caves of the earth, etc. And why all
this? the Text answers ( verse. 19.) For fear of the Lord, and for the glory of
his Majesty, when he shall arise to shake terribly the earth. O the
terribleness of Gods Majesty, to all those who tremble not at his Majesty! to
the proud, who are lifted up in their own thoug^ts, who are high in their own
imaginations! yea, the Majesty of the Lo d will be terrible to all impenitent
sinners in that day, I may say, mo^e distinctly, in these four days.

First, In the day of Conscience, or when their own Consciences are a terror
to them. How sad is it for a man to have God and his own Conscience ter^ible to
him at once! When sinners are awakned, when God sets their sins in order before
them, they are a terror to themselves, as it is said of Pashur (Jer. 20.3.)
The Lord has not called thy name Pashur, but Magor Missabib, that is, fear
round about; I will make thee a terror to thy self, thy own Conscience shall be
terrible to thee. A man had better fall into the hands of the most cruel
Tyrants in the World, than into the hands of his own Conscience. But when a man
is a terror to himself, then to have the Lord a terror to him likewise, to
have God appearing in terrible Majesty, how dreadful is it! The awakened
Conscience of a sinner carries in it, as a thousand witnesses, so a thousand
terrors; and God in his anger is more terrible than a thousand consciences.

Secondly, God is terrible to sinners, in the day of outward trouble, when, as
David speaks ( Psalm. 65.5.) By terrible things in righteousness he answers
the prayers of his People. When God is doing terrible things in the World, how
miserable is their case, to whom God also is a terror in that day! A godly man
when God is doing the most terrible things, shaking Heaven and earth, and (as
it were) pulling the world about our ears, yet, because he finds God at peace
with him, he is well enough. But as for impenitent sinners, when God is doing
terrible things, what will become of them? I may bespeak them in the words of
the Prophet ( Isa. 10.3.) What will ye do in the day of your visitation, and in
the desolation which shall come from far? to whom will ye flee for help, and
where will ye leave your glory? As if he had said, wh^, or what can be a comfort
to you, when God is a ^errour to you? And therefore, another Prophet fore-seing
such a terrible day coming, makes this earnest deprecating prayer ( Jer.
17.13.) O Lord, be not thou a terr^ur to me in the evil day. I know an evil, a
terrible day is at hand, but Lord I beg this of thee, that thou will not be a
terror to me in that day; if men should be a terror to me, and God a terror
too, it would be in^upportable. Yet thus it will be with the unrighteous, when
God does terrible things in righteousness, and such things he will do in the
latter days. Take heed, lest God appear with terrible Majesty to you, in such
a day.

Thirdly, How terrible is God to impenitent sinners (when awakened) in the day
of death! What is Death? In this Book Death is called The King of Terrors.
Now, if when Death is making its approaches to a person, who lives in a
contempt of the ways and word of God, if when his breath sits upon his lips,
ready to depart, and the King of Terrors is ready to tear his caul, and to
rend his heart strings asunder, if then, I say, God appears in terrible
Majesty, what condition will such a one be in? To have Death the King of
Terrors, and the Living, the ever-living God in terrible Majesty falling upon
a poor creature at once, is a thousand deaths at once.

Fou^thly, What will sinners do in the day of judgment? that will be a terrible
day indeed. The Apostle (2 Cor. 5.10.) having said, We must all appear before
the judgment seat of Christ, to receive according to what we have done in the
body, whether good or bad; presently adds, knowi^g therefore the terror of the
Lord, we persuade men; that is, knowing how terrible the Lord will be to
impenitent sinners, to all whom he finds in their sins, knowing this terror of
the Lord, and how terrible the Majesty of the Lord will be to such, in that
day; we persuade men, we do all we can to pluck them out of their sins, and
turn them to God in Christ Jesus, who saves his people from their sins; for, to
be sure, that will be a most dreadful day to sinners. Thus the M^j^sty of God
will be terrible to the wicked and ungodly, especially in these four days.
Only they who fear the Lo^d and take hold of his name by faith* shall be able
to stand before his terrible majesty. God will not be a terror, but a comfo^t,
to them that fear him in every evil day.

Fu ^her, the word (as was showed before) signifies not only Majesty, but
Pra^se, With God is ^errible praise, dreadful praise.

Hence note, First; The Lord is most praise worthy.

With the Lord is praise. The Psalmist every where s^ts fo th the
praise-worthiness of God, and presses this duty upon us. I shall not stay upon
it, only remember, with the Lord is praise, that is, he is to be praised. And
from the attribute of his prai^e, or that, with the Lord is terrible praise,

Note Secondly; Even in those things which the Lord does most graciously for
us, and is to be highly praised by us (even in th^se) he is to be feared,
dreaded, and reverenced.

God is to be praised, not only with joy and thankfullness, but with fear and
reverence; for with him is terrible praise. It is the express word of Moses, in
his song after the destruction of the Egyptians in the Red Sea ( Exodus 15.11.)
Who is a God like unto thee, glorious in holiness, fearful in praises? We should
not be afraid to praise God, no, we should be most forward to praise him, but
we should have a holy fear upon our hearts, when we praise him. Praise is the
work of heaven, from whence fear shall for ever be banished; there will be
perfect love, and perfect love Casts out fear, (1 John 4.18.) Whatever fear
has torment in it (as all fear out of Christ has) we shall have nothing to do
with in that blessed life: And even in this life, praise, which is the work of
heaven on earth, should be performed with such a spirit of love, and joy as is
without all base, tormenting fear; we should have so much love to God in, and
for all the good things he does, for our souls especially, ye and for our
bodies too, in dealing out daily mercies, that it should cast out all that fear
which has torment in it. Yet there is a fear which should p^ssess our spirits
while we are praising God, a fear of reverence I mean, which fear (I doubt not)
will remain in heaven for ever; Glorified Saints shall praise God with that
fear, that is, having an everlasting awe of the Majesty of God upon their
hearts. He is fearful in praises; and therefore let us so praise him, as
remembering our distance, so praise him, as to be afraid of miscarrying in the
duty, and so instead of praising, displease him, in stead of honoring, grieve
him. This duty of praise is very dreadful. The Psalmist says, there is mercy,
or forgiveness, with thee, O Lord, that thou may be feared (Psalm. 130.4.) Not
only is the Lord to be feared in his wrath, and in the executions of his
justice, but he is to be feared in his mercy, and in that greatest expression
of his favor toward us, the forgiveness of our sins. When we are in the
highest exaltations of the mercy of God, and of the God of our mercies, yet
then should our hearts be affected with his fear. It is both our duty and our
commendation so to fear God, as not to sin against him, or to be kept from
sinning against God by the fear of God, that is, lest God should punish us for
our sins, and give us to eat the bitter fruit of our own evil doings: But to
fear God, because we hear, and are assured, that he is ready to pardon our
sins, especially, to fear him when he has given us a comfortable assurance,
that our sins are pardoned; or, even t^en to be filled with the fear of his
great and reverend Name, when we are actu^lly praising him, and magnifying his
free grace in Christ, for the pardon of them; this shows a truly gracious
spirit indeed. With God is terrible Majesty, and with God is terrible prais^;
he is at once to be praised and feared. All this Elihu would fix upon the heart
of Job, from the consideration of the works of God, his providencial works, in
the Air; how much more should this fear affect us, when we behold his terrible
works of providence upon the Earth? turning the world, as it were, upside down,
by the wonderful vicissitudes and revolutions which his hand brings to pass,
respecting either Persons and private Familyes, or whole Kingdoms and Nations.
With God is terrible Majesty.

JOB, Chap. 37. Verse. 23, 24. 23. Touching the Almighty, we cannot find him
out; he is excellent in Power, and in Judgment, and in plenty of Justice: He
will not afflict.

24. Men do therefore fear him: He respects not any that are wise of heart.


THese two Verses conclude the whole discourse of Elihu with Job. The 23d verse
is Doctrinal, the 24th is the Use or Application of the Doctrine.

In the 23d verse we have a fourfold Doctrine held out concerning God.

First, The Doctrine of his Incomprehensibleness, We cannot find him out.

Secondly, Of his Power, He is the Almighty, he is excellent in Power.

Thirdly, Of his Righteousness, he excells in Judgment, and plenty of Justice.
But though he is thus full of Justice, yet he is also very Gracious, and
therefore,

Fourthly, We have the Doctrine of his Mercy and Tenderness toward the
Creature in the last words of the Verse, He will not afflict. God is infinitely
above man in Power and in Wisdom, yet he never uses either the one or the
other to the oppression or wrong of any man; He will not afflict. This is a
very suitable peroration of the whole Narrative or matter declared, which Elihu
had so long insisted upon.

And having laid down this fourfold Doctrine concerning God, he shows us the
use of it in the 24th ve^se, where we have a practical Inference from what was
before asserted concerning God; Men do therefore fear him, or, therefore men
ought to fear him. As i^ he had said, Seeing God is thus incomprehensible, thus
powerful, seeing he is thus excellent in Judgment, and in plenty of Justice,
as also in Goodness and Mercy; therefore good men do, and all men should fear
him This is a very natural and undeniable Inference, yet Elihu does not leave
it bare, but adds a strong inforcement in the close of the verse, why all men,
the greatest of men, the wisest of men should fear God, For he respects not
any that are w^se in heart. The wisest, the greatest of men cannot carry it
with God, by their wisdom or policy, by their g^^a^ness or power, therefore let
them fear him. This is the sum and scope of these two verses.

Verse. 23. Touching the Almighty, we cannot find him out. That is, He is
un^earchable and incomprehensible. The Original strictly read, i^, The
Almighty, we cannot fi^d him out. The Almighty, (...) O^nipotens nominativus
absolute positus Pisc.
is a Nominative absolute, as Grammarians speak; we supply that word (Touching)
As if he had said, should we enter upon a discourse of the Almighty, we cannot
find him out. Touching the Almighty. That, God is Almighty, and what the word
Shaddai, here rendered Almighty, does import, has been showed and opened
already in other places of this Book, especially in the fifth Chapter at the
17th verse, and in the eighth Chapter at the 3d and 5th verses; thither I refer
the Reader for further satisfaction in that matter, and pass from it here;
Touching the Almighty We cannot find him out.

This also I shall pass over in a word, having spoken to it more fully ( Chap.
11.7.) where Zophar puts this Question, Can thou by searching find out God?
Can thou find him out unto perfection? In which Questions, Zophar challenged
Job, or any man else, to set their understandings upon the tenters, to put all
their abilities to the utmost stretch, to find out God if they could, being
assured they could not find him out unto perfection. So then, this assertion in
the Text, We cannot find him out, bea^ing the same sense with those Questions,
I shall not stay upon it. Only,

Note; God cannot be compast by the enquiries of man.

Touching the Almighty, we have but this to say of him, We cannot say much of
him, or, how much soever we say of him, we say but a little of what he is, or
of what may be said of him, for we cannot find him out. We may find God, but we
cannot find him out. God is to be found by every humble, faithful seeker of
him. The Prophet ( Isa. 55.6.) calls us to that duty of seeking with an
assurance of finding, Seek ye the Lord whilst he may be found; and so does
David (Psalm. 32.5.) For this, that is, for pardon of sin, for grace and mercy,
or, for this, that is, upon the experience which I ^ave had of thy readiness, O
Lord, to pardon my sins, even as soon as I confessed and acknowledged them, for
this (I say) shall every one that is godly pray unto thee, in a time when thou
may be found. God may be found to do us good, and show us mercy, when we
seek him rightly; there is a finding time, or a time while God may be found.
Some give no other limit to this while, or finding time, than the limit of this
life; Dum adhuc in ha^ vita estis. Rab. Jonath. Deus invenire potest i^biquo
and quovis tempore ante obsignata decreta. Aben^ ezra.
And to be sure if he be not found while we are in this Life, he can neither be
sought no^ found after this Life. Yet more strictly, to seek him while he may
be found (as one of the Rabbis glosseth that place) is to seek him before the
Decree comes forth, as the Prophet Zephany speaks ( Chap. 2.2.) It is possible
we may seek God, and seek him too late, and then there is no finding of him;
Only they shall seek and find him, who seek him in the finding time, and they
who do so shall certainly find, as was said before, God ready to do them good,
and show them mercy.

But how much soever, or how early soever we seek him, we cannot find him out,
that is, we cannot find out how good, how merciful God is, or the utmost extent
of his goodness and mercy, which Zophar in the place before cited, calls a
finding of him out to perfection. I may give you a five-fold Negative to show
wherein God cannot be found out.

First, We cannot find him out as to the infiniteness of his E^sence and Being,
that is beyond the line of a created Understanding.

Secondly, We cannot find him out, as to the excellency of his Attributes, or
the manner of his being; who can tell how wise God is, how holy, how just, how
powerful, how good! We may easily find his divine perfections all the world
over, we may find them in every leaf of the book of the Scripture, yea, in
every leaf of the book of the Creature, but we cannot find them out any where
to perfection.

Thirdly, We cannot find out the depth of his Counsels. God has some (Arcana)
secrets which he has reserved in his own power, as Christ told his disciples
in the first of the Acts (verse. 6.) when they would needs be prying into that
secret of his council, the time of restoring the kingdom to Israel. There are
many councels of God locked up in his own bo^om, which we cannot find out, nor
must we be bold and curious in searching into them.

Fourthly, The Lord cannot be found out, no not in his works of Providence,
which are acted outwardly, or by which he brings forth his councels to act (
Psalm. 77.19.) His footsteps are not known; not only are not any of his secret
councels known, but some o^ his very footsteps, his treadings, his goings are
not fully known. God goes so that we cannot find where he g^eth, he leaves no
track (as we say) behind him ( Romans 11.33.) How unsearchable a^e his Judgments
(not only his councels, but, how unsearchable are his Judgments) and his ways
past finding out. That Is the very expression of the text. There are many
providence of God, which we find and feel, which we see, and cannot but see,
yet we cannot find them out, that is, we are not able to give a direct answer
why God does this or that, nor how this or that was done. Consider that
Scripture (2 Chronicles. 31.20, 21.) where we have a most singular character of
Hezekiah, and of his government; Thus did Hez^kiah throughout all Judah, and
wrought that which was g^od, and right, and truth, before the Lord his God; and
in every w^rk that he began in the service of the house of God, he did it with
all his heart, and prospered. So the 31th chapter concludes; yet the 32d begins
thus, After these things, and the establishment thereof, Sennacherib King of
Assiria came and entered into Judah, and encamped against the fenced Cities. One
would have thought, Hezekiah being thus zealous for the Reformation of the
Church of God, in Judah and Jerusalem, and having done all that concerned it
with a perfect heart, that surely such a Prince should have lived in peace and
prospered all his days; yet, presently his Kingdom was invaded by a potent
enemy, Sennacherib comes against him, and fills him, and all his people, with
fear of utter subversion. This was a secret of providence, very hard to find
out, a depth, which who can fathom? That when a good King with his Counsel,
had been endeavoring a true Reformation, and that with a perfect heart, he
should presently see war at his gates. Solomon says ( Pro. 16.7.) When a man's
ways please the Lord, he makes his enemies to be at peace with him: Yet it was
no sooner said of King Hezekiah that his ways pleased the Lord, but the very
next paragraph of his Chronicle reports an enemy making war upon him.

Fifthly, Take this also; We cannot find out God in the dispensations of his
Free Grace in the Gospel; ^here are such mazes, such mysteries of love, and
goodness, and kindne^s in Jesus Ch is it, as (though it be our duty to be
searching after them, and in them, all our days, though we ought to be
continually digging in those golden Mines, to find out the treasures hidden
there, yet) we can never find them out. Therefore the Apostle ( Ephesians. 3.8)
calls them, The unsearchable riches of Christ; not, unsearchable, because it is
unlawful to search after them, but, unsearchable, because when we have searched
to the utmost we cannot find them out; as he speaks in the close of that
chapter; that we may be able to comprehend with all Saints, the height and
depth, and length, and breadth, and to know the love of Christ that passes
knowledge. Under all these considerations (and many, many more) God is past
finding out. Whence take three brief Inferences.

First, Do not search too far (that is, beyond what is written) into the
counsels of God, no nor into the works of God. For though, as it is said (
Psalm. 111.2.) the works of God are great, sought out by all them that have
pleasure therein; yet they that have the greatest pleasure in them, cannot in
all points find them out. It is our duty to search the works of God, but to
think we can find out the bottom of his works would be our sin.

Secondly, If the Almighty cannot be found out, no not in his works of
providence, then, Take heed of censuring or finding fault with his works. Shall
we censure what we cannot know, and find fault with that which we cannot find?
He that censures what another does, should first have the full compass of what
he does, and be able to look quite through it, which the most eagle-eyed soul in
the world cannot, as to what God does in this world. And therefore though you
see no reason for what is don, do not complain, for there may be a reason for
the doing of it, which you do not see; and the reason is often such, and lies
so deep, that you cannot see it. And know this is reason enough, why you should
forbear censuring what is done, because God does i^, though you can give no
other reason why it is done.

Thirdly, If God be past finding out in his works, and much more in himself,
then be not so much as discontented with his works. You are not yet come to the
bottom, you have not seen the last man born (as we say) you know not what God
will make of it, till he has done all; therefore take heed of murmuring and
discontent, ( Zech. 2.13.) Be silent, O all flesh, before the Lord, for he is
risen out of his holy habitation. Though his rising be visible, yet we cannot
see all the concernments and intendments of his rising; therefore be sil^nt
altogether from fear and discontents, and though not from all enq^i ies about
it, yet from a presumption of finding out all by enqui^ies: For, As touching
the Almighty, we cannot find him out. That Is the first.

(...)
He is excellent in power. T^at's the second. Mr. Broughton reads, He is huge of
strength. The word rend^ed excellent, properly signifies, to increase. There is
no increase of the strength of God; what he is, he ever was, and ever will be;
there is neither increase nor diminution of his strength. But because things
which are always increasing grow to a huge bigness and strength, therefore he
is said to increase in strength, or (as our translation imports) to excel in
power. He that excels in power is excellent in power. The word rendered power,
implies the power of doing (the Greeks call it (...)) or, of activity, a power
put forth in working; he is excellent in power, that is, in ability to do
whatsoever he pleases; and when it is said he is excellent in power, in this
kind of power, i^ notes, that the power of God in doing, does wonderfully excel
all tha^ ever he has done. Ejus virtus in infinitum excedit omnes effectus
suos. Aquin.
The effects or acts of the power of God are nothing, as I may say, to the
faculty of his Power; he can do more than he has done: He is so far from
having over-acted himself, I mean from having done more than he can do again
(which has been the case of many mighty men, and may be the case of any man,
how mighty a doer soever he is) that he can do infinitely more than he has
done, if he himself pleases; he is excellent in power, or of excelling power.
I have (as was lately said) opened this point, of the power of God, in other
places of this Book, whither I refer the Reader; yet taking the power of God
(as the word is properly here intended) for his working power,

Note; The working power of God is excellent, so excellent that it exceeds the
apprehension of man.

There is a twofold power of God, and in both he is excellent.

First, His commanding power, his power of Sovereignty, or Authority; that is a
most excellent power, it is a power over all, whether things or persons.

Secondly, His power of working or effecting that which he commands. Some have
a power of commanding, yet want a power of working, they want a power to effect
that which they command: but whatsoever God has a mind to command, he has an
hand to effect and bring it about; he can carry on his work through all the
difficulties and deficiencies which it meets with in or by the creature; He can
do his wo^k though there be none to help him in it, though all forsake him, and
withdraw from his work; yea, he often works though there be not so much as
an Intercessor to move him to work ( Isa. 59.16.) He saw that there was no man
(to do any thing) and wondered that there was no Intercessor to entreat him to
do somewhat for them. Things were in a great exigency, and there was not only
no man that would put forth a hand, but there was no man that would bestow a
word for redress, no man would bespeak either God or men for help: What then?
must the work stand still or miscarry? no, says the text, His own arm brought
salvation unto him, that is, set it ready at hand for him to bestow upon his
people; or, his own arm brought that salvation to his people, which they
greatly needed, and he graciously intended, though he had not the contribution
of a word toward it from any creature here below, one or other. God alone is
self-sufficient, and to man All-sufficient. Such is the working power of God,
that he can work, not only when he has but a little help, but when he has no
help at all.

Secondly, The excellency of the wo^king power of God appears in this, that he
can and will p^oduce the desired effect, and bring his work to pass, though
many, though all men oppose it and rise up against it, though they set both
heart and hand, wit and will, power and policy, to cross, yea to crush it. The
Lord is so excellent in power, that he both can and will do his work through
all opposition; though mountains stand in his way, though rocks stand in his
way, he will remove them, or work through them. ( Isa. 43.13) I will work, and
who shall let it? Neither strength nor craft, neither multitude nor magnitude,
neither the many nor the mighty can let it, if the Lord undertake it. Take a
double Inference from this.

First, It Is matter of great comfort to all that fear God in their weakest
condition and lowest reducements, when they are fatherless, and have none to
help them. As the Lord is excellent in his wo^king power, so he usually takes
that time, yea stays that time, till his servants are under the greatest
disadvantages, till they are at worst, before he will put forth his power and
work. The Apostle says of himself (2 Cor. 12.10.) When I am weak, then am I
strong, that is, then have I the strength of the Lord coming into my help. And
as it is with respect to particular persons, so to the whole generation of his
children, when they are weak, then are they strong, that is, then they have the
strong God, the God excellent in power, appearing and working for them.

Secondly, This al^o is a sad word to all that stand in the way of Gods working
power; His working power quickly works through all power, and can work it down.
Babylon is a mighty powerful enemy, but ( Rev. 18.8.) we read of the downfall of
Babylon, and that her ruin shall come as in one day: But, how shall this be
effected? The answer is given in the close of the verse, For strong is the Lord
God which Judges her. Suppose there should be no power in the world strong
enough to pull down Babylon, yea, suppose all the powers in the wo^ld should
stand up for Babylon; it is otherwise prophesied, for, the Kings of the earth
shall hate the whore and shall make her desolate, and naked, and eat her
flesh, and burn her with fire; but suppose, I say, all earthly power should
appear for, rather than against Babylon, yet this is enough for us to rest in,
strong is the Lord which Judges her. He is excellent in power, and as it
follows, In Judgment.

This comes in, lest any should think, because God is so excelent in power, so
mighty in strength, that therefore he would carry things by violence or by mere
force, as the sons of men, the mighty Nimrods of the world sometimes do: If they
have strength and power to do such or such things, they regard not Judgment nor
Justice, they look not whether right or wrong; therefore Elihu, when he had
said, God is excellent in power, presently adds, and in Judgment. As if he had
said, Though the Lord excel all in power, and is able to crush the mightyest as
a moth, yet he will not oppress any by his power; the worst of men shall find
the Lord as much in judgment and righteousness, as he is in strength and power.
And therefore, O Job, be assured, God has not done thee any wrong, nor ever
will. This I conceive to be the scope of Elihu in the connection of these two,
The excellency of God in Judgment, as well as in Power.

But what are we to understand by judgment, in which Elihu says God excells?
In answer to this Querie I shall first show that Judgment is taken four ways in
Scripture, and then prove that God is excellent in Judgment, with respect to
every one of them.

First, Judgment is an ability of judging. A man of judgment, and a wise man
are the same. When we say, such a man, is a man of Judgment, or a judicious
man, we mean, he is a prudent man, he is able to discern things that differ, he
knows how to order, state and determine doubtful things aright. In this sense
we are to understand it here, the Lord is excellent in judgment, that is, in
wisdom and prudence to set things right, and to give every one his right, he
sees clearly how to manage all his affairs and purposes by righteous means
to right ends. The prophet gives God the glory of this title expressly ( Isa
30.18.) The Lord is a God of judgment: Blessed are they that wait for him. That
is, the Lo^d is infinitely furnished with wisdom, he knows exactly, not only
what ought to be done, but how and when to do it; therefore wait for him. And
it is encouragement to wait, when we have a person of judgment and
understanding, a discreet and prudent person to wait upon. God is a God of
judgment, in this sense, theref re blessed are they that wait for him.

Secondly, Judgment in Scripture is taken for that moderation, or due measure,
which is observed in any thing that is done. This follows the former; for
unless a man have a Judgment or true understanding in the thing it self, he can
never hit a right measure of it. Thus, I conceive, that Scripture is to be
understood ( Math 23.23.) where Christ denouncing or thundering out woes thick
and threefold against the proud hypocritical Pharisees, he tells them, Ye pay
tithe of Anise and Cummin, and have omitted the weightier matters of the Law,
Judgment, Mercy; that i^, either they did not give a right judgment according
to Law, or their legal Judgments were given with rigor, not at all attemper'd,
mixed, and moderated with mercy. Of such the Apostle James speaks ( Chap.
2.13.) He shall have judgment without mercy that has showed no mercy, and
mercy rejoices against Judgment. In this sense the Lord is excellent in
Judgment; For as he has wisdom and understanding to see what is just and
^ight, so in Judgment he remembers Mercy: His patience is great before he gives
Judgment; and his moderation is great when he gives it. He deals not with us
according to our sins, nor rewards us according to our iniquities, (Psalm.
103.10.) that is, his Judgments are not proportioned to the greatness of our
sins and iniquities; For (as it follows at the 11th verse of that Psalm) as
high as the Heaven is above the Earth, so great is his mercy toward them that
fear him. Therefore the Prophet brings in the Church praying thus ( Jer.
10.24.) O Lord, Correct me (I conceive it is not a direct prayer for
Correction, but a submission to it: As if he had said, I will not murmur, nor
rebel against thy Correction; O Lord, Correct me) but with Judgment, that is,
with due moderation: It cannot be meant of Judgment, as it notes the effect of
divine displeasure, but Correct me moderately, or, as another text has i^, in
measure, as thou usest to correct thy people. This meaning, is plain from the
opposition in the next words, Not in thine anger, least thou bring me to
nothing. Anger transports men to do things undecently and without mode^ation;
we quickly exceed our limits, if carried out in passion; and though, that anger
which the Scripture attributes often to God, never transports him beyond the
due bounds of his wisdom and justice, yet when God is said to do a thing in
anger, it notes his going, as it were, to the utmost bounds of justice; this
caused the Church to pray, O Lord, if the cup may not pass from me, if it
cannot be, but I must be corrected, then I humbly and earnestly beg, thou
would be pleased to correct me in Judgment, not in anger, least thou bring me
to nothing. What the Church prayed for here, the Lord promised elsewhere ( Jer.
30.11.) I will not make a full end of thee, but I will correct thee in measure,
and will not leave thee altogether unpunished. Thus God is excellent in
Judgment: He abates the severity of his proceedings, and allayes the bitterness
of the cup by some ingredients of mercy.

Thirdly, Judgment in Scripture is put for the reformation of things when they
are out of order. In this sense it is used ( John 12.31.) Now is the Judgment
of this world. Our late Annotators tell us, that by Judgment is meant
reformation: As if Christ had said, I am come to set all things in order, that
have been out of order and disjoynted in the Jewish Church, and every where
else; Now is the Judgment of this world. In this sense God is excellent in
Judgment, or he excells in this Judgment, that is, he is for reformation, he
will set all things right, he will make crooked things strait, he will make the
rough places plain. John the Baptist came before Christ in this work, yet in
this work Christ is before or exceeds John the Baptist. The Lord (Isa. 4.4.)
will purge away the iniquity of the daughter of Zion with a spirit of Judgment,
and with a spirit of burning, that is, with a reforming and a refining Spirit:
And the Lord will send forth this Judgment unto victory (Matthew. 12.20.) that
is, he will do it thoroughly, he will ove^come all the difficulties, and put by
all the obstacles which hinder the perfect reforma ion of things as well as ^f
persons. That Is the importance also of that great promise ( Isa. 1.25, 26.) I
(says the Lord) will turn my hand upon thee (or take thee in hand) and purely
purge away thy dross, and take away all thy tinn, (that is, all those
corruptions which have crept in upon thee) and I will rest^re thy Judges as at
the first, and thy Counselors as at the beginning: Things and persons are
usually best at first. The new broom (^ay we) sweept clean. As time consumes
all things here belo^, so it co^rupts most things; and therefore when the Lo^d
promises to restore them to a primitive purity, he promises the purest
restoration; all which is summed up in the 27th verse, Sion shall be redeemed
with Judgment; which is not only, if at all, intended of a redemption by
Judgment on her enemies, but by that reformation which ^od would work upon
themselves, in taking away their dross and tinn, Restoring their Judges as at
the first, and their Councellers as at the beginning. Such a Judgment is spoken
of ( Isa. 30 22.) Ye shall defile also (that is, utterly disgrace and deface)
the Covering of thy graven Images of Silver, and the Ornament of thy molten
Images of Gold; thou shall cast them away as a menstruous cloth, thou shall say
unto it, get thee hence. This is the Judgment of reformation, which God has
and will further work among his people, till Sion be built up in perfect
beauty, and Jerusalem become the praise of the whole earth. Thus also God is
excellent both in power and in Judgment.

Fourthly, Judgment signifies those evils which God brings upon impenitent
sinners; that is a very frequent notion of Judgment in Scripture, and the Lord
is excellent in this Judgment; and that

First, Upon his own people, when they provoke him and sin against him (1 Pet.
4.17.) If Judgment begin at the house of God, what shall the end be of them
that obey not the Gospel. There Is Judgment beginning at the house of God, that
is, God will bring evil upon his own house, the Church, even sore troubles and
persecutions. The Lord will not spare them, who have been slight with him,
forgetful of him, formal in profession, or wanton and vain in conversation.
This is a great part of the Lords excellency in Judgment, he brings Judgment
upon his own house. The Lord, says the Prophet ( Isa. 5.16.) shall be exalted
in Judgment, and God that is holy shall be sanctified in righteousness, that
is, in bringing his righteous Judgments upon Israel, his peculiar people. We
find that Gospel Prophet Isaiah often interweaving the wyre and whipcord of
corporal bondage, with the silk and scarlet thread of Sions d^liverances.

Secondly, In Judgment toward his enemies ( Psalm. 149.9.) He will execute on
them the Judgment that is written, and that is no inconsiderable, nor easy
Judgment. The servants of God may smart sorely under these Judgments, but the
wicked and rebellious shall perish, and sink under them. How dreadful is that
profession or protestation which the Lord made by Moses (Deuteronomy. 32.41.) If I
whet my glittering sword, and my hand take hold of Judgment, I will render
vengeance to mine enemies, and will reward them that hate me.

Some, possibly, may object, Surely there is no such appearance of Gods
excellency in Judgment upon the wicked of the wo^ld, the enemies of his name
and ways. It grew to a Proverb ( Mal. 2.17.) Ye say, every one that does evil
is good in the sight of the Lord, and he delights in them, or where is the
God of Judgment? Evil men seem to be good in the eyes of the Lo^d when they
enjoy good; and if it be so, (said some) Where is the God of Judgment?

I answer, First, the Lord has left testimony enough upon Record, and written
it in the blood of many thou^ands, to justify himself, that he is excellent in
Judgment, by taking vengeance on the wicked. Did he not excel in Judgment upon
the sinning Angels? (2 Pet. 2.8. Jude 6.) was he not excellent in Judgment,
when he destroyed the whole world for sin? when he burnt Sodom and Gomorrah
with fire for sin? How many instances might I give of this from Scripture? God
has sufficiently declared himself excellent in this punitive Judgment.

I answer, Secondly, God indeed does not presently execute J^dgment upon all
the wicked; we should rather be lead by sense than by faith, if he should do
so, if he should smite sinners as soon as they provoke him; yea, if God should
take that course, he must even break the world to pieces, and destroy whole
generations at once.

Thirdly, God suffers sinners a while, that his councels may be fulfilled; for
though the wicked obey not the command of God, yet they fulfill the council of
God ( Acts 4.28.) and they do it chiefly when he withholds Judgment from
them.

Fourthly, Unless the Lord did a little give stop to the execution of Judgment
in this kind, it would neither appear how good, nor how bad some men are. Let
some have but a little power in their hands, and the world at will, then you
shall see whither they will go, and what they will do. And when bad men are
suffered to go on unpunished, and to be a punishment to others, then it appears
more fully how good some are, and that in a twofold respect. First, because
they refrain from evil, though they see that they also possibly might do it
(impune) and not suffer in this world. Secondly, because ^hey hold fast both
their profession and practice of Godliness, how much soever they suffer for it
in this world from evil men.

Fifthly, God is executing Judgments upon wicked men, while he seems to spare
them from judgment ( Pro. 1.32.) The prosperity of fools slays them. Some
think a wicked m^n is migh^ily favored when he is in prosperity, no, that
prosperity is his destruction, and destruction is Judgment in perfection. The
table of a wicked man is made his snare, his full table fa^tens his heart,
which is the sorest of all judgments. To be un^ensible is worse than any
punishment of sense; to be hardened or heartned in doing evil, is more penal
than the suffering of any evil. Now while wicked men escape the suffering of
evil, they grow resolved, that is, hardened and heartned in doing i^, or to do
it. Take Solomon's observation or experience in the ca^e ( Eccles. 8.11.)
Because sentence against an evil work is not speedily executed (upon themselves
or others) therefore the heart of the sons of men is fully s^t in them to do
mischief. So then, there are many invisible judgmen s upon wicked men, when we
see no hand touch them, nor judgment near them; God give^ them up to vile
affections, and to a repr^ba^e mind ( Romans 1.26, 28.) to their own counsels (
Psalm. 81.12.) and to strong d^lus^o^^ by ^^hers (2 These. 2.11.) The^e heavy
loads o^ judgment may be on their hearts, upon whose backs we see not s^ much
as a gain weight of judgment. Thus the Lord is excell^nt in judgment in all
the notions of it; I have in^^anced fou^e.

Now, l^st any should think that God at any time breaks the rule of justice in
his zeal for this latter sort of judgment, or while he is pouring out
vengeance upon the wicked, therefore it foll^ws in the next place, (...)
And in plenty of Justice.

God executes great wrath upon sinners, but there is great Justice, Justiti^
est const^ns and perpetua voluntas suum cuique tribuendi. Justin:
plenty of Justice in it. There is store and abundance of justice and
righteousness in his most rigorous ju^gments. A little justice is a most
precious thing; how precious then is plenty of j^stice! Justice in it self is
the giving of every one his due; and where justice is in any man, it constan^ly
bends and enclines his heart to do so, his especially with whom there is (as in
God) plenty of justice. And indeed, whatever God has, he ha^h plenty of it;
He has mercy, and plenty of it, he i^ plenteous in mercy (Psalm. 103.8.) And
with him i^ ple^teous redemption, (P^al. 130.7.) There is also plenty of
justice in him.

Some men have no Justice at all in them; though their office and place be to
do J^s^ice, yet they have nothing of justice, no tincture of it in them; They
neither fear God nor regard man, to do him any justice, as the unjus^ Judge is
described ( Luke 18.2.) and with most Justice is a very ^carce Commodity, they
have but a very little of it, and they dis^^ibute it very poorly and sparingly.
Where almost is the man to be found that has plenty of justice in himself, and
distributes it plentifully to others? There was surely a great scarcity of
Justice in the Justicers of Jerusalem, when the Lord by his Prophet ( Jer.
5.1.) offered to pardon the whole City, if upon the sending forth of his W^it
of Enquiry, the name of any one man could be returned that executed Judgment. O
that Dearth of Justice! and in what place may we hope to find plenty of justice
among men, when so little of it was to be found in Jerusalem, the City of God?
yet this may comfort us, that though there be little of it in or among men,
there is plenty of it in God. And that there is plenty of justice in God, I
would demonstrate these five ways.

First, He has plenty of justice, who deals justly with every man. God gives
every man his due, all his due, and nothing but his due. More distinctly, take
this in two branches. First, he that rewards all that are good, with good, not
this or that man, not his kinsman, or his friend only, but every man that is
good, with good, he has plenty of Justice: Thus does God. The respect which
God has to the persons of good men, is like the respect which good men have to
the commands of God, it is universal, he respects them all. As they give him
plentiful obedience, having a respect to all his Commandments, so he gives
them plentiful Justice, he has respect to all their persons, to all their
workings, to all their ways, which are holy, just, and good. Again, Secondly,
He has plenty of Justice, who punishes all that do evil, not winking at, nor
sparing friends or kindred. Surely then there is plenty of justice in God; for
as he rewards all the good with good, so he rewards all evil men with evil;
that is all the reward they shall have, and they shall have plenty of it ( Psalm.
31.23.) He plenteously rewards the proud doer. The proud shall have and drink
up the last, the residue, the remainder, the very dregs of the bitter cup, of
the cup of trembling, as the Hebrew elegancy used by the Psalmist intimates.
Tribulation and anguish upon every soul of man that does evil; for there is no
respect of persons with God, (Romans 2.9, 11.) As he will punish none but
evildoers, so he will punish them every one, except they repent.

Secondly, With the Lord is plenty of Justice, for he knows the whole Compass
of Justice, he has the clear Idea of it in his understanding, he knows all the
rules of it, or rather is the rule of it. All the rules of Justice came out
from him, and are but the signification of his own mind, therefore he must
needs know them, and be well skilled in them. Some men have a good mind to do
justice, yet have no plenty of it, because they are unskilful in the rule of
it, the Laws both of God and man. A Judge that is blind through ignorance, and
has not a gift of knowledge and understanding in the Law, faulters in doing,
or is unfit to do Justice, as much as ^e that is blinded with gifts, o^ biased
by relations and private passi^ns; he that is blind the former way cannot have,
and he that is blinded by any of the latter ways will never d^ plenty of
Justice. But as the Lord has an infinitely clea^ eye as to the rule, ^o no
gift can blind him, nor can any relation put ou^ his eyes from seeing a faul^,
nor divert him from punishing it ( Isa. 27.11.) It is a people of no
understanding (either to do go^^, or to depa^t from evil) therefore he that
made them (that is a near rel^^ion) will not have mercy on them, and he that
formed them (that is the ^ame) will show them no favor. As if the Lord had
said, Justice shall be done, though the work of my own hands be u^done by it;
There Is plenty of justice. And as God knows the rule of the Law perfectly, and
will not be turned aside from it; so he knows the matter of fact perfectly, and
cannot be mislead about that; Upon which mistake some, who have great knowledge
of the rule of the Law, yet do not plenty of justice: they often condemn the
innocent, and acquit the nocent, because they find not out the truth of their
cause, but are misinformed about it. But, the Lord is a God of knowledge, by him
actions are weighed; he knows not only the matter of Law but the matter of fact
too, and therefore with him there is plenty of Justice.

Thirdly, There must needs be plenty of Justice wi h God, because he knows the
spirit and hear^ with which every man acts, he knows whether a thing be done
maliciously, or merely by a surprise of passion (Justice is guided much by that
consideration in some cases) The Lo d knows the heart, wherewith every thing is
done, and the design or aim of every man in doing it. As he will make manifest
the Councels of the heart, at last to all, so now the Councels of the heart a e
manifest to him; therefore he must n^eds be plentiful in justice.

Fourthly, God is clothed wi^h sufficient power to execute justice, therefore
wi^h him there is plenty of it. Some have a good mind to do justice, they know
the Law and the fact too, yet are shortened and straightened in doing justice,
because they have not power, or are not able to carry it out against potent
offenders, but are forced to forbear the doing of justice, because at present
they cannot. The doing of justice requires strength of hand, as well as
strength of Law, and integrity of heart. David had a good mind to do justice
upon Joab (though nearly related to him) ^^en he had, under a pretense of
friendship, slain Abner; but he ^aw himself under a necessity of forbearance at
that time, and therefore said, I am this day weak (though anointed King) and
these sons of Zerviah be too hard for me. But there are no sons of Zerviah too
hard for the Lord, he can call them to an account at any time: David knew that
very well, and therefore he referred Joab to Gods Justice in the close of that
verse (2 Samuel 2.39.) The Lord shall reward the doer of evil according to his
wickedness. Can thine heart endure, or can thine hands be strong in the days
that I shall deal with thee? says the Lord by his Prophet ( Ezekiel. 22.14.) They
cannot, therefore with him is plenty of Justice.

Fifthly, The Lord cannot but have plenty of justice, for his very nature is
justice. Man does that readily and plentifully which he does naturally; it is
as impossible for God not to do justice, as it is for him not to be. A man may
be unjust, and yet be a man, but God cannot be God, and not do justly. Seeing
then it is his nature to do justice, there must needs be plenty of justice with
him: And how severe soever the judgments of God are, there is nothing but
justice in them. Justice, Justice, shall thou follow, was the command of God to
the Judges of Israel by Moses, that is, as we translate, that which is
altogether just shall thou follow (D^ut. 16.20.) As that promise of peace,
peace, notes plenty of peace ( Isa. 26.3.) so this command of doing Justice,
Justice, notes plenty of Justice. Certainly then the Lord himself will do
j^stice plentifully. Justice, Justice will he d^. Take two Infe^enc^s from this
assertion.

First, This truth is matter of comfort to, and sweetly smiles upon the i^st,
that the Lord has plenty of justice in him; for then, doubtless, he will
perform all his good words of p omi^e to them. It Is the part of a just man to
perfo^me his word; God is faithful to his word, whatever men are. It has been
said, If you would know what some men mean never to do, then lo^k to their
promises. Eorum quae appetebat ne qui quam prae se ferebat, and eorum quae
dicebat ne quicquam facere col^b^t. Suidas de Tiberio.
It was a very dishonorable Character which Suidas gave of the Roman Emperor
Tiberius; He never made show of having what he desired, or had a mind to, nor
ever minded to do what he had promised. But God, the great God, is so true and
just to his word or promise, that his people may take strong consolation from
every word of promise. ( Tit: 1.2.) In h^pe of eternal life, which God that
cannot lie has promised. No man could ever challenge God of any faylure in
promise. There are four things ascribed to God in Scripture, which may assure
us that he will be just in performing all his promises. First, He remembers
them all ( Psalm. 111.5. Psalm. 115.12.) Secondly, He is unchangeable and in one
mind, ( Job 23.13, 14.) Thirdly, He is the Almighty, and ever furnished with
power to perform them. Fourthly, He is most faithful, and will not deny nor
falsify them ( Heb. 10.23.)

Secondly, This truth has a most dreadful aspect and frowns terribly upon
the ungodly and unjust. That God has plenty of Justice, Justice enough to
bestow among them all, is enough to confound them all; though they make a
Covenant with death, and with hell are at agreement, yet their Covenant and
agreement shall be dissolved, ( Isa. 28.15, 16.) The Scripture speaks Justice
often to sinners, specially to those unjust ones, who weigh the violence of
their hands (Psalm. 58.1, 2.) that is, who oppress with a kind of exactness, who
do not tumble it out palpably, or in a lump, but weigh it out, now a little,
and then a little: The Lo^d knows how to deal with such cunning perverters of
Justice, and will at last make them acknowledge, both that themselves had no
justice in them, and that himself has plenty of it. And who now, laying these
five considerations together, will not ackn^wledge, that the Lord has plenty
of justice? But the inference which Elihu makes from it in the close of the
verse, seems, if not a kind of denial, yet a great abatement of it, for having
said, He is excellent in plenty of Justice, the next words are, He will not
afflict.

This may seem at first hearing, a strange connection; will he not afflict? how
then has he plenty of Justice? Does not God afflict? who afflicts then? have
men the power of affliction in their hands? or has Satan the power of
affliction in his hand? Affliction comes not forth of the dust, neither does
trouble spring out of the ground, said Eliphaz (Chap. 5.6.) Says not the
Scripture every where, affliction comes down from heaven, or that it is of God?
did not Job say ( Chap. 1.21.) The Lord has taken, that is, afflicted me, by
taking away my all of this world? and does not God himself say ( Psalm. 89.30,
31, 32.) If his children forget my Law, I will punish their transgression with
a rod, and their iniquity with stripes? How then says Elihu, God will not ^ffl
ct?

I answer, First, In general, Elihu speaks thus in answer to a doubt, or to
remove a fear arising upon the whole, of what had been said of God. For if God
be such a God, so excellent in power, and in Judgment, and in plenty of
Justice, then surely our case is very sad, may some say, who can abide to be
near or stand before such a God? O, says Elihu, fear not, He will not affl
ct. More particularly, I answer,

First, Though God be excellent in Judgment, and plenty of Justice, yet it may
be said, he will not afflict, because in some sense, he has not a will to
afflict, or he does not afflict with his will, that is, he delights not to
afflict, he has declared himself more ready to show mercy, than to execute
judgment. In one Prophet he says, Ex cord. Heb: ex animo libens. Vatabl:
I have no pleasure in the death of him that dies (Ezekiel. 18.32.) and another
Prophet says of him, He does not willingly afflict, nor grieve the children of
men (Lam. 3.33.) This P^ophet was there bemoaning the greatest affliction that
ever befell the people of God, yet, says he, God does not afflict willingly,
he does not afflict with his heart, as the word there is exp^essed in the
Margin; when he afflicts, it is as it were a work of his hand, not of his
heart, yea a work that he would gladly rid his hands of. What once that c^uel
Tyrant Nero said when he was to ^^^ne a Warrant for the Execu^ion of an
offender, O Qu^m vellem nes^ire lit^ras!
How glad should I be if I could not write my name! (This spoke he, possibly,
when his heart wa^ as full of blood as it could hold) yet thus he spoke to
signify a great un^illingness to afflict. This is most true of the great God;
though he be a God of excellent power and judgment, and plenty of justice, yet
he does not afflict willingly; he could be glad, that he might never have an
occasion to afflict, that he might never be provoked ^o draw his sword, no nor
so much as to use his rod in this woe l^.

Secondly, It may be said, God will not afflict, because he never afflicts
without a just cause; his unlimited power never tempts him, nor does any
passion transport him to a desire of taking undue revenge upon any; he has
plenty of Justice, and therefore cannot afflict, but when he sees great reason
for it. Did not our sin call for our affliction, were there not some great
p^ovocation on our part, or some profit to come to us by it, we should never
hear of, nor feel his rod. The Apostle says ( Heb. 12.9, 10.) We have had
Fathers of our flesh, who for a few days chastened us after the^r own
pleasure, they to ease themselves, have put us to pain, but the Lord does it
for our profit, that we might be partakers of his holiness. There is just cause
we should be afflicted, when we provoke God by sin, or when he would purge us
from our sin, or make us more holy. And as it may be said, God will not
afflict, because he does not afflict us but when there is cause for it, so

Thirdly, Because he does not afflict us but when there is need (1 Pet. 1.6.)
nor more than there is need; we shall not be afflicted an hour longer, nor have
a grain more of weight in the burden of our cross, nor a drop more of gall and
wormwood in the cup of our sorrows than we have need of ( Isa. 27.7, 8, 9.)
Has he smitten him, as he smote those that smote him? in measure, when it
shoots forth thou will debate with him. As if it had been said, he shall have
no greater a measure than is both useful and needful; First, to humble him for
his sin; secondly, to subdue and mortify his sin; thirdly, he shall have no
more than is needful to exercise his graces, his faith and patience; no more,
fourthly, than is needful to make him thankful for deliverance, and sensible of
mercy when it comes. Thus, as God, who has plenty of Justice, will not afflict
us, but when there is need, so not more than is need.

Fourthly, It may be said, He will not afflict, because he does not afflict us
more than we can bear; he tenderly considers our strength, what we are able to
stand under, and how long we are able to stand under it; he will not break our
backs nor our hearts (unless by godly sorrow for, or from sin) by affliction.
God (says the Apostle 1 Cor. 10.13.) is faithful, who will not suffer you to
be tempted above that you are able, but will with the temptation also make a
way to escape, that ye may be able to bear it. Hence when it is said ( Lam.
3.33.) He does not afflict willingly, etc. it foll^weth ( verse. 34.) to crush
under his feet all the prisoners of the earth. The Lord makes many his
prisoners, yet then his bowels are opened toward them, he will not crush, nor
tread them down, as mire in the streets. I (says the Lord, Isa. 57.16.) will
not contend for ever, etc. For (if I should) the Spirit should fail before me,
and the souls which I have made. I know what your spirits can bear, and I will
contend no longer than I know you are able to bear it. Hence that Promise (
Psalm. 125.3.) The rod of the wicked shall not rest upon the lot of the
righteous, least he put forth his hands to evil. The Lord knows the rod may
prevail over us so, as to put us upon the doing of evil, and therefore he will
take order that it shall not.

Thus we may safely understand this assertion, He will not afflict, that is, he
afflicts not willingly; he afflicts not till there is need, nor will he afflict
more than needs, nor more than we are able, or himself will enable us to bear;
he will either support us under, or give us deliverance out of all our
afflictions in due time.

I might hence, or from the whole, infer a double duty.

First, Be Patient under affliction.

Secondly, Be Comforted in affliction.

For God does so afflict, that he may be truly said not to afflict, But having
met with occasions for the ministering of such like counsels to the afflicted,
from other passages in this book, it may suffice only to mind the Reader of
them here.

This spoke Elihu in the close or peroration of his discourse, to stir up Job
to consider all the dealings of God with him; he would have him sit down with
these four Doctrinal Conclusions upon his heart, that God is Excellent in
Power, and in Judgment, and in plenty of Justice, he will not afflict. Surely
he will not afflict more in measure, nor longer in time than is need, as Job
seemed in his passion, to intimate and charge God, for which he had several
reproofs before.

Thus far I have opened these words, as they stand in our translation. There
are two or three different readings, especially of the latter part of the
verse, which would not be altogether omitted, and therefore I shall touch at
them, and then proceed to the next and last verse of this Chapter, which is
also Elihu's parting word, or the conclusion of his large and close discourse
with Job.

The first different reading is much insisted upon by some Interpreters. Take
it thus; Omnipotens quem non assequimur amplus est virtute, sed judicio and
m^gnitudine justitiae non affliget. Merc.
The Almighty, whom we cannot find out, is great in power, but he will not
afflict in judgment and plenty of justice. This translation transposeth those
words, which we place in the end of the verse, he will not afflict, to the
middle of it, and it renders the copulative particle And, by the adversative
But: This makes the sense of the whole verse more plain and easy than the
former, as also to rise up more fully to the purpose of Elihu. As if he had
thus summed up all that he spoke before, or had contracted it into this sum.

Which things, seeing they are so, as I have declared, we may certainly
conclude, Quamvis sit potentissimus tamen homines ante creatos tanti facit ut
non utator omnipotentia sua ad eos summo jure and pro meritis eorum
affligendos. Jun.
that the Almighty is so full of majesty and power, that we are no way able to
reach, compass and find him out: Yet notwithstanding he is so full of goodness
and mercy, that he is very sparing toward men, and will not afflict them
according to their demerits, nor up to the extremity of justice. This
exposition holds out clearly that temperament of the power and justice, with
the goodness and mercy of God, which Elihu undertook to demonstrate, at the
fifth verse of the thirty sixth Chapter, and so forwards; He is great in power,
but he will not afflict in judgment.

Take this note from it; How great soever the power of God is, yet he does not
afflict sinful man according to the greatness of his power, nor the utmost line
of his justice.

The Lord is full of mercy, full of sparing mercy, he spares his people, as a
man spares his own son that serves him (Mal. 3.17.) And indeed if God should
afflict in plenty, that is, in extremity of justice, what would become of the
best, of the holiest of men? Who can withstand the power of the great God? who
can stand in judgment before him, if he should mark iniquities? (Psalm. 130.3.)
Woe to the most innocent man alive, if God should mark iniquities, and not
forgive iniquities. And therefore it follows in the next or 4th verse of that
Psalm, But with thee is forgiveness. As God is most bountiful in giving, so is
he most merciful in forgiving. This holds the head of believing and repenting
sinners above water, and keeps them from sinking into the bottomless gulf of
despair, that they have a forgiving God to go unto, and that there is none
like him in forgiving ( Mich. 7.18.) None forgiving so freely (Isa. 42.25.) ^o
abundantly (Isa. 55.7.) none so constantly and con^inually as he. There is
forgiveness with thee; it is a continued a perpetual act. Now because God
pardons so freely, he does not, he will not, he cannot because he will not,
punish extremely. God deals with sinners in measure, because he deals with
them in a Mediator. Though he be great in power, yet he will not afflict
according to the greatness of his power or the plenty of his justice.

Secondly, Some of the Jewish Doctors render the latter part of the verse thus;
whereas we say, He is excellent in judgment, and in plenty of justice, he will
not affl^ct, they say, Judi^ium and copiam justitiae non affliget. i. e. jus
non pervertet Merc. ex Rabbinis.
He will not afflict judgment and plenty of justice; that is, as they give the
gloss, Though he be great in power, yet he will not pervert justice. We may
well say justice is afflicted, when it is perverted; and then justice is
perverted, when any man is wronged, or when at any time the wronged, or
wrongfully afflicted, are not righted and relieved. Thus God will not afflict
justice. These translators do not join the word afflict (as we) to the person
of man, but to the justice of God, or the actings of his justice. He is great
in power, but he will not afflict, he will not oppress judgment and justice.
This is doubtless a great truth in it self, yet I doubt whether it be the truth
intended by Elihu in this place. Certainly, God will not do any man wrong,
though he has power enough, all power in his hand, yea, God will do all men
right; though he be great in power, yet what affliction soever he lays upon
the creature shall be no affliction to justice or judgment, to that justice or
judgment with which God is clothed, and will declare by executing it among
the children of men. But I pass this as over-nice.

Thirdly, Others render thus, He is excellent in power, Non respondebit. Tygur.
Probarem si esset (...) in font nunc cum sit (...) non potest aliter legi,
quam affliget, vexa^. Drus. Merc.
and in judgment, and plenty in justice, he will not answer. The wo^d which we
translate, to afflict, with some alteration in the Hebrew pointing, signifies
also to answer; and so the words carry a sense of the absolute sovereignty of
God, who is so great in power, and in judgment, and plenty of justice, that he
will not answer; that is, though men complain of his justice, or think he has
done them wrong, or at least is over-severe toward them, yet he will not come
to an answer, he will give no man a reason of his ways. Of this Elihu spoke
expressly ( Chap. 33. v. 13.) He gives not an account of any of his matters.
God is so powerful that no man can call him to an account, and so just in the
use or exercise of his power, that there is no reason why any should. But
though this also be a great truth, yet because Elihu had asserted it fully
before, as also because this translation is grounded upon a change in the
ordinary pointing of the Hebrew word, from which I conceive, with others, we
ought not easily to recede, therefore I shall not stay upon it.

Nor shall I more than mention that apprehension of some Raboins, who thus give
out a 4th sense or interpretation of the words; whereas we say, As touching the
Almighty, we cannot find him out, Omnipotentem non invenimus multum robore and
judicio; Et tali^ sit, tamen talem eum non experimur in m^ndatis sui^, ut
immodice nos oneret, aut immodicam a no^is exiget justitiam, etc. Rabbi Selc.
moth and Rambam.
he is excellent in power, and in judgment, etc. They say thus, although the
Almighty be great in power and in judgment, and plenty of justice, yet we find
him not so; That is, we do not find him putting out the g^eatness of his power,
or the exactness of his justice, in the commands which he has laid upon us, or
in the duties which he has required of u^; he does not over-burthen us, nor
exact hard things of us. And they instance in the rules which God gave about
offerings and sacrifices; he required (say they) of some only a turtle dove, or
a pair of young pigeons, of others but a lamb, or a bullock, such things he
required for sacrifice as were of easy price, and might easily be obtained, he
did not put us upon the getting of strange and rare beasts, as Buffes, or
Unicorns, or any sort of creature which may put us to much pains in getting
them, or to much expense in buying them. And as in these, so in other things
God has graciously condescended to our weakness, as appears every where in the
Law. Thus the Jewish Writers make out their translation: and though it be a
truth, that in one sense the Ceremonial Law was (as St Peter, in that council
at Jerusalem declared Acts 15.10) A Yoke, which neither they nor their fathers
were able to bear, yet there was much favor mixed with it, which caused the
Lord to appeal in that point to their own consciences, or to make themselves
the Judges ( Much. 6.3.) O my people, what have I done unto thee, or wherein
have I wearied thee? testify against me. And as God, though great in power,
did not over-lay the Jews, so much less has he over-laid us Christians with
duty (1 John 5.3) His Commandments are not grievous. And Christ said of his
yoke and burden ( Mat. 11.10) My yoke is easy, and my burden is light. Christ
may lay what burdens he pleases upon us, but he is not pleased to lay any
grievous burdens upon us. This therefore is a truth, both as to them and us,
yet I conceive it beside the design of Elihu in this place, and I only mind the
Reader of these different interpretations, of all which some good improvement
may be made. So much of this verse: The whole discourse of Elihu concludes in
the next.

Verse. 24. Men do therefore fear him: He respects not any that are wise in
heart. This verse contains two things.

First, a practical inference, by way of use, from that fourfold doctrine held
forth in the former verse, concerning God. As if Elihu had said, For as much as
the Almighty is incomprehensible, so that we cannot find him out; for as much
as he is mighty in power, and judgment, and plenty of justice, so that we can
neither avoid him nor delude him, therefore men do fear him.

Secondly, We have an enforcement of this Inference, by a cogent reason, For he
respects not any that are wise in heart. Who these wise-hearted ones are,
whom God respects not, will appear in the opening those words, Men do
therefore fear him.

The word rendered Men, properly signifies, weak or feeble men, (...) Vir miser
and imbecillus.
as also men in affliction, men under the afflicting hand, or rod of God. This
strict acception of the word, renders the opposition more clear, setting the
lowest of humane frailty, against the highest divine power. Yet we need not
stand strictly upon the Grammatical signification of the word, but may take
men, in all their divisions and forms; men, be they high or low, afflicted or
in prosperity, ought therefore to fear him.

Only, it may seem most suitable, in way of application, to Job, for Elihu to
use this word in that restrained sense; Afflicted feeble men do fear him, As if
he had said. O Job, thou art a weak man, a man greatly afflicted, thou have
been long under the rod and chastning hand of God, therefore thou ought to
fear him, and not expostulate the matter with him, as thou have done. Men do
Therefore fear him.

This illative, Therefore, has reference (as was intimated) to all that was
said in the former verse, yet we may take it specially in these two
particulars. Therefore men do fear him; Why?

First, Because he is so great, so immense, so incomprehensible, so powerful,
so just, because he has such plenty of justice, therefore men do fear him.

Secondly, Therefore men do fear him; Why? Because, though he be clothed with
power, justice and judgment, yet he will not afflict, that is, he will not
afflict extremely, in any of those four senses before given; he moderates his
power by compassion in his sharpest dispensations toward his people; there is
a great mixture of love and mercy with his justice, therefore men do fear him.
As if Elihu had thus bespoken Job: Others fear God because they experience or
find him kind and good to them, even in afflicti^n, how then comes it to pass,
that thou have from the beginning carried it, as if God mixed no kindness nor
showed any tenderness in his afflicting of thee? why is it that thou have
cursed thy day? that thou have complained that ever thou wast born, that thou
have so often wished for death? Why have thou said that thou art not only
pressed, but even oppressed, that though thy cause be good, yet thou have born
the heaviest loads of evil? Why do thou strive with him? These are no
arguments of thy fear, but of an impatient and fretful spirit, if not of a kind
of rage and fury against God himself; These are no proofs that thou do
acknowledge his goodness in afflicting thee, and so fear him, for by these thou
do rather charge and accuse him of harshnesse and severity.

Now though it may be said (as it has often in the opening this Book) that Job
spoke such words partly in the heat of his passion, partly through the
greatness of his pain, partly through the infirmity of his flesh, as also
being much moved and provoked by the grievous censures of his friends: yet
notwithstanding all this, his words were such as neither could, nor ought to be
wholly excused; so that Elihu might say, Men do therefore fear him. But, O Job,
thou have carried it, as if thou did not fear him, thou have not behaved thy
self like other men, under the same, or a like afflicting hand of God. For
though Job is to be reckoned among men that feared God, yea, in the highest
form of those that feared him, yet he failed much in his affliction, as to the
expression of this holy fear.

Thus we have that twofold reference, in which Elihu says, Therefore do men
fear him.

First, Because of his great power.

Secondly, Because of that great tenderness which he uses in the exercise of
his power: Which yet Job did scarce acknowledge, as appeared by his
complainings and murmurings about the dealings of God.

Men do therefore fear him, so we render, Ideo timebunt eum homines. Mont.
Verbum futuri temporis solet denotari idquod debet, quod expedit fieri, quare
timebunt idem erit, quod timere debent, timere jubentur
yet it is considerable, that the Hebrew runs in the future time, Men will
therefore fear him, that is, men should therefore fear him, or men therefore
ought to fear him. Words in the Hebrew of a future signification, bear the
importance of a present duty; what good it is said men will do, is as if it had
been said, they do, or ought to do. And as to the duty here spoken of, the fear
of God, we may make this conclusion, All good men do fear God upon those
accounts, and all men should, or ought to fear him. The thing is to be done,
whether men do it or no. Where an express command is given, every man
concerned is bound to obey; and where, or who is the man that is not concerned
in this command, fear the great and gracious God? Men do therefore Fear him.

What it is to fear God, was showed largely at the 28th Chapter of this Book
and the last Verse, Deum vereri, Deum timere. Proprieveretur Deum pius, timet
superstitiosus. Tamen hanc differentiam interpretes non observant; nam passim
timere usurpant pro vereri. Drus.
therefore I shall not stay upon it hear: Only remember the word signifies, a
gracious, a child-like fear, not a servile flavish fear. There are two words,
by which the fear of God is expressed in the Latin tongue, which we may
express thus, to fear God, or, to be afraid of God. Good men fear God, but
wicked men are afraid of God. Now though the words are often used
promiscuously, and to fear, is sometimes taken in the worser, sometimes in the
better sense, yet, here we are to take it in the best sense, Therefore do men
fear him, that is, they ought to stand in awe and not sin against him, they
should submit to, not dispute his dealings. The fear of God, in the general
notion of it, is nothing else, but Piety and Religion, or the whole worship of
God. To say a man is godly or religious, is all one as to say, he is a man
fearing God. Now, whereas usually a general rule is urged to lead in a general
practice, here a general practice is urged as leading to a general rule. Men do
therefore fear him.

Whence we may take this general Observation; It is the duty of all men, of
every man, to fear God.

Men, one or other, ought to have high and honorable thoughts of God, they
ought to have holy and reverentiall thoughts of God, they ought to put far away
from them all slightness, and vanity of spirit, when they think or speak of
God, they ought to put far from them all boldness and presumption, when they
have to do with God. To put away all flight and bold thoughts of God, to take
up high and reverential thoughts of God, this, this is to fear God. Yet a
little further, and more distinctly, I conceive here in this place, to fear
God, stands in a fourfold opposition.

First, Men should fear him, and not murmr at what he does.

Secondly, They should fear him, and not lightly pass by what he does.

Thirdly, They should fear him, and not question him about what he does.

Fourthly, They should fear him, and not curiously search or pry into what he
does.

The Lord having such power to do, such wisdom in doing, such a mixture of
mercy with justice in all that he does, men should only admire and improve his
doings, not murmr at, nor lightly pass by, nor question, nor curiously pry
into what he does. Thus to fear God as faithful in all his works, and to fear
offending him in any of our own work^, is the sum of Godliness. Hear the
conclusion of all (says Solomon Eccl. 12.13.) Fear God, and keep his
Commandments: this is the whole of man, that is (as we translate) the whole
duty of man.

Secondly, Taking the word men more strictly, as signifying, not strong, or
mighty men, but weak, afflicted men;

Note; When God is afflicting us, we ought to be much in the fear of God.

What? when the hand of God is upon us, shall our hearts be lifted up against
him? or in our selves? what! shall not our hearts stoop when our backs are
burdened with sorrows, and bowed down with a cross? Not to fear God when we are
at furthest remove from fear, or trouble in the world, is an argument of a very
bad heart; but not to fear him when fear is round about us, or, when himself is
chastening and correcting of us, argues a much worse frame of heart. Holy
David gave this character of his enemies ( Psalm. 55.19.) Because they have no
changes, therefore they fear not God. What shall we say of them who fear not
God though they have many changes? such changes, I mean, as Job felt, and cried
out of in the bitterness of his soul ( Chap. 10.17.) Changes and war are
against me: And it is conceived, that Elihu aimed particularly at Job in this
passage, as if he were the man, who, though under great changes, and in great
troubles, ye^ behaved himself unlike those who truly fear the Lord.

Thirdly, Note; It is so much the duty of man to fear God, that it may well be
supposed of all men, that they fear him.

He can scarce be looked upon as a man, who does not fear God. Does he know
himself to be a weak man, who does not tremble at the remembrance of the
Almighty God? Does he know himself to be a sinful man who does not tremble at
the remembrance of the holy, of the most holy God? This duty of fear is due to
God upon so many accounts (even common accounts) from man, that we may
conclude, surely, every man fears God. Shall we not fear him who is
incomprehensibly great in power and in judgment, and in plenty of justice?
What! not fear him who made us, and preserves us, who feeds and clothes us?
What! nor fear him in whose hand our breath is, and all our ways? These, and
many more, are common accounts, upon which all men may see both reason and
their own engagement to fear God. So then, as because it is so much the duty of
a Son to honor his Father, and of a Servant to fear his Master, therefore the
Scripture supposes all Sons and Servants doing it ( Mal. 1.6.) A Son honors
his Father, and a Servant his Master. He does no^ say, a Son ought to honor
his Father, and a Servant his Master, but, he honors, or does honor. That
person deserves not the name of a Son that does not honor his Father, nor is
he worthy the name of a Servant that does not honor his Master. Now, I say, as
the Scripture takes it for granted, upon this ground, the naturalness of the
duty, that every Son honors his Father, and every Servant his Master, so it
does, and so may we, that every man fears God. And doubtless, if a Son or
Servant deserves not to bear the name of these relations, unless they honor
and fear Father and Master, how much less do they deserve to be called Men, who
do not fear God, the Almighty God!

Again, from those two particular heads, upon which this fear is gr^unded:
First, Therefore, with respect to the power and justice of God; Secondly,
Therefore, with respect to the mercy and tenderness of God,

Note, First; God is to be feared because he is so full of power and justice,
then especially, when by some eminent and special act of providence, he
declares his power, and is doing justice.

By how much the more God puts himself forth in his power and justice, by so
much the more he is to be feared. It Is prophesied ( Rev. 15.3.) that when God
shall show forth his great power, and execute the severity of his justice upon
Antichrist, then, they who shall get the victory over the beast, and over his
image, etc. shall sing the Song of Moses, the servant of God, and the song of
the Lamb, saying, Great and marvelous are thy works, Lord God Almighty, just
and true are thy ways thou King of Saints. What follows? Who shall not fear
thee, O Lord, and glorify thy Name? The vengeance to be poured upon Babylon
will be so great a demonstration of Gods power and justice, that it will give
occasion to all men, the faithful especially, yea, it will call upon them aloud
to fear God: Who shall not fear thee? As if he had said, surely there is no man
so stupid, so stout-hearted, or so hard-hearted, but if he see God in, or at
this woe k, he will have dreadful apprehensions of him, and fear before him. Yet
this is not spoken of such a fear as Christ has foretold shall seize upon and
possess the hearts of men before his glo^ious appea^ing ( Luke 21.25, 26.)
There shall be signs in the Sun, and in the Moon, and in the Stars, and upon
the Earth, distress of Nations with perplexity, the Sea and the Waters roaring,
men's hearts failing them for fear, etc. It shall not be (I say) such a fear, a
hea^t-failing, but a heart-enlarging fear; not such a^ fear as they have, or
rather, as has them, who have their hope only in this life (these shall fear
with an amazing, desponding, despairing fear) but such a fear as they have,
who, through grace, have risen up to a full assurance of hope, or, are begotten
again unto a lively hope, by the resurrection of Jesus Christ from the dead, to
an inheritance incorruptible, and undefiled, and that fades not away, reserved
in heaven for them.

The second ground of this fear, is the mercy and goodness of God, who though
he be thus powerful and just, yet he will not afflict, that is, he will not
afflict without mercy and tenderness to his people.

Hence observe; God is to be feared because he is so gracious and full of
compassion, even while he does afflict.

There is mercy with God not to afflict, that is sparing mercy, and therefore he
is to be feared; there is mercy also with God in moderating our afflictions,
that is sparing mercy too, and therefore he is to be feared. The graciousness of
God manifested sometimes in sparing to afflict us, and often in afflicting us
sparingly, should move us to fear him both greatly and always: and if sparing
mercy should move us to fear him, then much more should forgiving and pardoning
mercy. When the Lord ( Exodus 34.6, 7.) Passed by before Moses, and proclaimed,
The Lord God, merciful and gracious, long-suffering, and abundant in goodness
and truth, keeping mercy for thousands, forgiving iniquity, transgression and
sin, etc. At this proclamation of grace, Moses (verse. 8.) made haste, and bowed
his head toward the earth and worshipped. How graceless then are they, who
when they hear that God is gracious, merciful, and abundant in goodness, fear
him not, but grow wanton and abuse his kindness!

Now they who fear God, upon the due consideration, either of his power or
goodness, find their hearts,

First, Much enlarged in the service of God, or in doing the work, and walking
in the ways of God ( Isa. 60.5.)

Secondly, This fear keeps their hearts to a close communion with God ( Jer.
32.32.) I will put my fear in their heart, and they shall not depart from me.
We usually not only depart, but run from those whom we fear; but the true fear
of God, Covenant-fear makes us cling about, and keep close to him.

Thirdly, This fear keeps up good thoughts, and high estimations of God in the
worst times, or when he is pleased to bring the greatest troubles upon us. An
Israelite indeed, who fears the Lord and his goodness (Hos. 3.5.) will say
(let God do what he will with him) Truly God is good to Israel (Psalm. 73.1.)
Let us consider whether we have these effects of a gracious fear working in our
hearts upon the rememb^ance both of the power and mercy of God. Men do
therefore fear him: He respects not any that are wise in heart.

These words (as was touched before) press the former duty of fearing God,
inferred from the greatness and excellency of his power, judgment, j^stice, and
mercy, yet further upon us. As if he ^ad said, Men do therefore fear him; Why?
Because, He respects not any that are wise in heart, that is, in general, he
respects none who are so wise, or wise in such a way, as not to fear him upon
those forementioned grounds.

He respects not. The word is, sees not. There is an elegant paranomisie in
this verse, (...) Videre. (...) ^imer^.
the words which signify to fear and to respect or see, being very near in
sound. God does not see them with respect, who do not see him with fear: He
sees not any that are wise in heart. It cannot be meant of the ordinary sight
of the eye, that, he sees not the wise in heart; God sees clearly who they
are: Nor can it be meant of the common apprehension of the mind, that, he
knows not the wise in heart; God understands fully what they are; It must be
meant then of a seeing with liking, or special approbation: God sees not the
wise in heart so, as to like or app ove them. Our translation is full and clear
to that fence, He respects ^ot, o^ he regards not any that are wise in
heart, that is, he takes no notice of them, they are not pleasing to him. Or
thus, He respects not any that are wise in heart, that is, as they fear not
him, so he is not afraid of them. He respects not any that are Wise in heart,

O^, w^se of heart. But some may say, Does not God respect nor regard, does no^
he take notice of those that are wise of heart? Whom then does he respect or
regard? of whom will he take notice, if not of the wise in heart? Has the Lord
any respect for fools, for ignorant men, for idiots, for sotts? Surely men
that are wise in heart, are not only very amiable but honorable in the eyes of
God; Why then is it said, He respects not any that are wise in heart?

I answer, The wise in heart, are of two sorts.

First, there are some wise in heart, who are so only in their own opinion, in
their own conceits or eyes; they have great thoughts of their own wisdom, and
therefore as they are apt to despise men, so they are far from the fear of God.
There is a wisdom in some men opposed to the fear of God, whereas true wisdom
in any man is the beginning of that fear, as that fear is called the beginning
of wisdom (Psalm. 111.10.) Qui sibi videntur esse sapientes. Vulg.
The vulgar Latin vary h the forme^ part of the verse, yet renders this
latter part by way of glos^, rather than translation, They that seem to
themselves to be wise; and indeed the wise in heart, whom God respects not,
are the proudly wise, the selfishly wise, such as are wise only in themselves
and to themselves, such as have only that wisdom which the Apostle calls, the
wisdom of the flesh, or, the carnal mind (Romans 8.7.) which is not subject to
the Law of God, nor indeed (till mortified) can be. He that is carnally wise
disputes the commands of God, and takes the boldness to censure his works; such
wise men God respects not, yea, they are under his greatest disrespect.

Secondly, Others are truly wise, graciously wise, wise for their souls, wise
for heaven, wise for happiness, submitting their wisdom to the will of God, and
doing his will: They that are thus wise in heart, the Lord respects, and highly
respects; how can he do otherwise? seeing this is the character of God himself
( Job. 9.4.) He is wise in heart, and mighty in strength. And as God is wise in
heart, so according to their line and measure, they that are godly, are wise in
heart too. Therefore taking our translation, the wise in heart intended by
Elihu, must needs be those that are only carnally wise, politickly wise,
na^urally wise, that is, wickedly wise, or at best vainly, or vain-gloriously
wise.

Further, should we take the wise in heart, for those that are truly wise,
graci^usly wise, yet it must be ackno^ledged, that even ^hey may so mis-behave
themselves, as to miss present respect from God. And doubtless, Elihu observing
that Job had spoken somewhat highly of himself, and did not carry it humbly
enough under the hand of God (though his spirit was broken and brought down at
last) checks him here, by telling him, God respects not any that are wise in
heart, no not him, in that case and frame of spirit, as lifted up in his own
wisdom.

Yea, Taking wise in heart, in this best sense, for the graciously wise, it is
not for their wisdom and holiness that God respects or favors them. As he
will not chastise them without cause, nor correct them but for their good; so
when he does them good or raises them up, when he shows them any favor, or
gives them any mercy, he does it not for their wisdom-sake, or holiness-sake,
but for his Sons-sake, or for his own Namesake. Acts of favor from God, are
purely from his free grace, not from any desert in man; so that every way his
mercy is from himself, and undeserved by us. He respects not any that are
wise in heart.

First, As the wise in heart stand in opposition to those that fear God, spoken
of before, being so stout that they do not humble themselves in his fear,

Note; True wisdom is always joined with the fear of God.

Yea, as Job concluded ( Chap. 28.28.) The fear of the Lord, that is wisdom,
and to depart from evil (which none do but they who fear the Lord) is
understanding.

Secondly, Note; God regards no man for his wisdom, who does not fear him.

Let men be never so learned and wise, never so prudent and politic, if they
have not the true fear of God before their eyes, he values them not, he will
not cast an eye of favor upon them, they shall have no countenance with him,
no honor from him. The most wise, the only wise God cares not for the wisest
of men, who stand so much upon their own understanding, as to stout it out with
him. He is not at all moved (unless to displeasure) by their wisdom, who are
puffed up with a conceit of their wisdom.

Thirdly, When it is said, He respects not any that are wise in heart,

Note; Wisdom, without the fear of God, will do no man good at last, nor can it
keep him off from evil.

Let no man think by his wisdom, policy, or subtilty, to keep himself out of
the reach of God. If men will not fear and honor him, he knows well enough
how to deal with them, and to recover his honor upon them.

Note Fourthly; Let men be as wise and crafty as they will, God is not afraid
of them, as if they could do him any hurt, or spoil his designs, as if they
could out-wit him, and overthrow his counsels.

Some take upon them, as if they by their wisdom could hinder Gods purposes,
and counter-work him, as if they could overreach or undermine him. We are much
afraid of wise men; If such a wise man, if such a headpiece, be against us, we
think surely he will works us a great deal of mischeife. When David found his
son Absalom rebelling against him, and Achitophel joining with him, he prayed
that God would turn his counsel into foolishness (2 Samuel 15.31.) David feared
that Achitophels going over to Absalom, might have carried the whole business
against him: But God does not regard a whole conclave of Achitophels, he cares
not a straw for their plottings and contrivings. The Lord is so far from
fearing the counsels of the wise in heart, that he can destroy them by their
own wisdom, and not only undo their counsels, but undo them by their
counsels: The pit which they have dug, they shall fall into it themselves,
and be entangled in the lime-twiggs which they have set up for others. All this
the holy Prophet intended when he said of God ( Isa. 44.25.) He frustrateth the
tokens of the liars, and makes the diviners mad: He turns wise men backward,
and makes their knowledge foolish. Diviners grow mad when they see things
issuing quite contrary to their predictions and expectations. He that can
destroy the wise with their own wisdom, needs not fear the wisdom of the
wisest. It Is the noblest way of vanquishing an enemy, when we wound him with
his own weapons, and turn his own Artillery upon him. Thus God deals with the
wise in heart; they are nothing in his hands, they cannot put the least stop to
what he has a purpose to do; but he can put a stop to all their purposes. The
foolishness of God (says the Apostle, 1 Cor. 1.25.) is wiser than men. He
says also in the third Chapter of the same Epistle ( verse 19.) The wisdom of
this world is foolishness with God; for it is w i^^en (and that writing is
taken out of this Book of Job, Ch^p: 5.13.) He takes the wise in their own
craftiness. And again, The Lord knows the thoughts of the wise, that they are
vain; and vain he knows them to be in a twofold respect: First, because
sinf^ll or evil in themselves; Secondly, because he knows how to make them
barren or abortive, successless and ineffectual unto the wise: So that they all
become like most Adventurers at a Lottery, going out with their hearts full of
hopes, but returning with their hands full of blanks, Disappoyntment,
Disappoyntment, being written upon all their counsels and undertakings.

Again, Taking the wise in heart for those who are truly wise, godly wise,

Learn, Fifthly; God will not forbear, when he sees cause to afflict those who
are indeed the wisest and holiest of men.

Let no man think, that because he is wise or holy, he must not therefore be
touched or meddled with. Some conceive the chief design of writing this Book,
was to let us see this truth, That let men be never so holy, never so upright,
or godly, yet they must not claim privilege from the cross, nor complain when
they are under it, that God deals not well with them. In this Job overacted,
supposing there was no cause why such a man as he, should have such severe
chastenings and rebukes; but let men be never so wise, never so good, God may
see cause to lay his chastening rods upon them; and had the Lord nothing else
to say for it, his sovereignty will bear him out in it against the best of men.
The clay must neither say to the Potter, why have thou made me so? nor why have
thou marred me so? Be silent O all flesh (good as well as bad) before the Lord.

Lastly, Observe; Whatever favor, whatever mercy God bestows upon the
holiest and wisest of men, he does it not with respect to any wisdom,
holiness, or goodness in them, but for his own Name sake, or because he will.

He respects not the wise in heart. No man can merit the least favor from
God; his is free grace. All good comes to us through the Son of his love, and
it was merely of his love, that ever his Son came to us and dyed for us.
Therefore let us not say, such a one was a good man, such a one was an holy
man, therefore it was so and so with him. As what we are or can do cannot
oblige him (when he sees cause) from giving us correction, so he is un-obliged
as to what we are or can do, in giving us salvation, whether temporal or
eternal. He respects not the wise in heart.

There are yet two other readings of the words, which I shall set before the
Reader, and then conclude all.

The word which we translate respects, Is certe non invenit sapientes,
quoscunque intuetur. Bez:
signifying properly to see, some keep to that propriety of it, and render the
text thus; He sees not all wise in heart; that is, when the Lord looks among
the children of men, he does not find many, yea scarce any of them wise. Thus
the sense runs in connection with the fo^mer part of the verse, Men should be
so wise as to fear God, and not dispute any of his proceedings; But he sees
or knows that all are not so; yea he finds that a great many, even the most
of men by much are very fools. The truth is, all men naturally are no better (
Psalm. 14.2.) The Lord looked down from heaven upon the children of men, to see
if there were any that did understand and seek God; but he did not find one
wise in heart among all the children of men, as Descendants from the first
Adam. And when he comes among the best of men, men of a second birth, the seed
and descendants of the second Adam, he does not see them so wise as to give him
glory in every condition, nor under every dispensation, yea, he finds a great
deal of folly in their hearts. Taking this sense of the words, Elihu seems here
again to give Job a close rebuke, as not having behaved himself so wisely under
his sufferings, as became a man professing the fear of God. It Is rare to find
a man wise throughout, a man having true wisdom of heart, and o^dering himself
according to the rules of that wisdom, in all the turns and changes of his
life.

Secondly, The latter part of the verse is translated thus; Men, though never
so wise in heart, Non videbit cum omnis sapiens cord, vel non v debunt cum sc:
deum) omnes sapientes ^orde. q. d nullus eorum ipsum videbit. Drus:
cannot see him. This reading runs the construction of the words quite another
way: The former said, He sees not all wise in heart; this says, Men wise in
heart cannot see him. The sense of which reading may be thus conceived; The
wisest men cannot see God, he is both invisible and incomprehensible. As men
cannot see him at all by sense, so neither can they comprehend him by reason;
As the eye cannot take him in who is invisible, so neither can a finite
understanding take him in, who is infinite in understanding. We have a sight of
God through faith in this life: Thus Moses saw him who is invisible (Heb.
11.27.) We see him here darkly, through a glass, the glass of his word and
works, of his ordinances and providence (1 Cor. 13.12.) But the clear sight of
him face to face, the sight of him as he is, is reserved to hereafter (1 Cor.
13.12. 1 John 3.2.) These two latter readings of this latter part of the verse,
hold out useful truths for further meditation; but I adhere to our own as more
clear in the original, as also more suitable to the scope and intendment of the
foregoing discourse.

Elihu having said this, sits down and is silent, leaving Job to meditate upon
and consider what he had said.

And now, no sooner had Elihu wound up his bottom, and made an end, but
behold, God began and took Job in hand; he spoke to him out of the whirlwind,
at the beginning of the next Chapter, and brought him upon his knees before he
had done with him, as will appear further, if the pa^ience of God give time
and opportunity to go so far. To him be all the praise and glory, who has
helped thus far. Ame^.

A TABLE Directing to some special Points noted in the Precedent EXPOSITIONS.
A
ADvocate, To be one for God a great honor, as well as a duty. 140. Three
ways of being an Advocate for God. 141. They who are Advocates for God, should
have audience, and may have courage. 142 Aetna, the top of it said to be
covered always with snow. 472 Affliction, many cry and complain in it, who
look not to God in it. 65. God comforts his in affliction. 73. To cry in
affliction, and not to repent, is very sad. 87. The sorest afflictions of this
life are little to what God might lay upon sinners. 115. God expects the work
of faith and patience in affliction; and if he see it not, he will afflict
more. 120. God looks for two things in time of affliction. 121. God afflicts
his children with fatherly anger. 123. A good man under great affliction, may
not be sensible of Gods hand. 129 Wh^ are sensible in affliction. 130. Ends of
affliction. 131. The best men may fall into the worst afflictions. 221.
Afflictions are grievous to the flesh. 223. How G^d shows us (...) work in
affliction. 224, 225. Afflictions are persuasions. 232. Affliction has a loud
voice. 233. Gods design in affl^ction. 234. Not profiting by lesser draws on
greater ^fflictions. 253. Affliction a seas n for prayer. 267. They that are
humbled in affl ction, are near deliverance from affliction. 278. Hard to keep
our selves from sin in times of great affl^ction. 320. Any affliction is to be
chosen rather than sin. 327. Six ways affliction good: sin not at all. 328,
329. Affliction compared to cold weather. 495 God can afflict us by any of his
creatures. 515. In what sense God may be said not to afflict, showed in four
things. 631, 632. God does not afflict man in extremity. 634. God sometimes
afflicts the wisest and holiest men. 648 Africa, called Ammonia, and why. 559
Anestatius the Emperor slain with Thunder. 460 Anger, how the Lord is angry
with his children, and visits them in anger. 124, 125 Apostates, their case
desperate. 304, 305 Appeals to our selves very convincing 4 Arm, what it
signifies in Scripture. 57 Artaxerxes, long-hand, why so called. 41 Athanasius,
his saying concerning the troubles^me reign of Julian. 601 Attila called the
scourge of God. 515 Attributes of God how distinguished. 177 Augustus Caesar,
his fearfulness of Thunder. 437
B
Babylon, dangerous being in it, because threatened with falling, or with a
fall. 485 Ballancing or weighing, three or four things which God is said in
Scripture to balance. 550, 551 Bath col, what. 456 Beasts of the earth, how
they teach us. 75. How we are taught more than the beasts of the earth. 76, 77,
79. Men act sometimes below the beasts. 81. Beasts affected with the
providence of God in changes of weather. 482. This a reproof to many men. 483
Beholding a far off, may import four things. 355 Belial, son of Belial, who.
16 Benefits, common benefits of God to be much acknowledged. 150 Blaspheming
the name of God, what. 34 Blood of Christ, what kind of sinners that will not
ransom. 304 Bounty of God, he thinks nothing too good for his good servants.
287 Breath of the Lord, what. 496
C
Cattle, foreshew weather-changes. 427 Why G d has given them such a natural
instinct. 427 Cham, the name of one of Noah's sons, what it signifies. 558
Changes, God gives warning of them. 425. Changes in all things, both natural
and civil. 564. Changes, the state of the righteous subject to them in this
world. 222. No condition so bad, but God can change it to a g^od one. 248
Chiromancy, an unwarrantable Art. 478 Choice, sin must not be our choice,
whatever we are put to choose. 324 Church, why called Heaven in Scripture. 573
Circumstances increasing sin. 229. Consideration of circumstances do
exceedingly heighten both our sins and the mercies of God. 361 City, two
mystical Cities how built. 35 Clouds, their differences and spreading. 399,
400. Three questions answered about the Clouds. 401, 402. Uses of the Clouds
both natural and spiritual. 403. Clouds without water like the promises of the
world. 405 Clouds the Tabernacle of God. 407 The same word signifies a hand
and a Cloud, why. 417. Cloud, how it may be said to be wearied. 500. Preachers
of the Word compared to Clouds. 502. Clouds are moved by the counsel of God.
505, 507. Clouds have their work, or somewhat to do. 508. Clouds are faithful
servants, they do all that God commands. 508. Inferences from it. 509, 510.
Clouds sent for correction. 5^5, 516. It Is a divine power which ballanceth the
Clouds. 550 Cold comes at Gods call. 495. Cold how both useful and hurtful.
495. Cold compared to affliction in the effects of it. 495, 496. Cold is a
straitner. 498. True in spirituals as well as in naturals. 498 Command of God
twofold. 233 Conscience, how terrible to be under the terrors of it when God is
angry. 609 Consideration, what it is. 528. Consideration opposed to two things.
529 Conversion, what done to a sinner in it. 39 Covenant, the benefit of the
new Covenant. 240 Creation, the sole work of God. 567. An Inference of comfort
from it. 568 Creature, that God has made a man a new creature, a strong plea
with God. 69. Creatures necessary to one another, but none to God. 44, 45. God
can correct us by any of his creatures. 515. God has a care of all his
creatures. 518. God disposes the motions of every creature. 536 Crying, of
three sorts. 264 Custom takes away admiration. 534
D
Danger, every creature would get out of danger, or harmes-way 483. Inferences
from it, both for instruction and reproof. 483, 484 Da^kness twofold. 578.
Improper darkness taken four ways in Scripture. 579. Darkness or obscurity
how in the Word of God. 586 Death, they who live like the wicked shall have
their death. 272. Death, how an ascending. 313. How sad their condition is, who
seek relief by death. 316. To wish for death in most a vain wish. 317. Death
when terrible. 610 Deliverance from evil is the work of God. 276. Deliverance
in, though not out of affliction. 277 Dependence of man upon God for every
thing. 420 Despising, what it is. 169. Who are not despi^ed by G^d. 169, 170
Discipline, what. 231 Distress puts all men upon calling to God, yet few do it
aright. 64 Distrust questions all that God is. 122 D^opping the Word, what it
notes. 387 Duty, man seldom misseth trouble from God, when God misseth duty
from man. 21
E
Ear, the opening of it, what. 230 Ear opened by affliction. 232 Eclipses of
Sun and Moon, why wondered at, and not their ordinary shining and motion. 534
Effects, God can stop the effects of all natural causes. 565 Ends of our works
to be looked to, especially the end of Gods works. 363. What the great ends of
Gods works are. 364, 365. Ends of the earth, why called wings. 450
Establishment as well as preferment is from God. 215 Eternity of God has a
double respect. 378. Eternity, what it is. 378 Inferences from the eternity of
God. 378, 379. Thoughts of eternity should take us up. 383 Eresian winds, what
they are. 494 Evil of trouble prepares for the receiving of good. 278
Exaltation, of several sorts, all from God. 335, 336. God can exalt those that
are lowest. 336 Excessiveness or exceedingness of sin opened. 227 Eyes of God,
what. 201. A fivefold eye of God upon the righteous. 202, 203. How the eyes of
God are always upon his people. 206. Objections answered. 207, 208. The
happiness of the righte^us showed in this. 208. The duty of the righteous never
to withdraw their eyes from God. 210. A threefold eye to be kept always upon
God. 210
F
Faith appropriates God as our own. 151. Faith should be great, because God is
great. 370. Faith quiets the mind. 528. The strength and firmness of Faith,
like what, 569. How needful Faith is in our coming to God. 586 Fatness, what
it signifies in Scripture. 286 Fear, how in Heaven. 611. Fear of God, what.
639. It is the duty of all men to fear God. 640. Fear of God set in a
fourfold opposition. 640. God to be feared when afflicting us. 640, 641. Why it
may be supposed that all men fear God. 641 God is to be feared, because he is
so powerful and just. 642. God is to be feared, because so graci^us and
merciful. 643. Three effects of the true fear of God. 643, 644 Fetters and
Bonds, what they signify in Scripture. 220 Finishing of a thing twofold. 241
Foreseeing of evil, how by a prudent godly man. 427, 428 F^ost, how like
ashes. 473. what frost is. 496. Why the same word signifies frost and baldness.
496. Frost the gift of God. 497
G
Garments, what the Hebrew word signifies, and how it leads us to consider our
first fall in Adam. 558, 559. A fourfold use of garments. 559, 560. That our
garments warm us is from the blessing of God. 560 Gift, a Gift, what? 40.
N^thing can be given to God or received by him as any addition to him. 42, 43.
Glory of God, the end of all his works. 364 God, is expressed in Scripture by a
word of the plural number, and what that may import. 65. God, no
unrighteousness in the dealings of God with man. 11. God self-sufficient needs
nothing, receives nothing of man. 42, 43. Heathens had such apprehensions of
God. 44. Four inferences from it. 44, 45. How God is or may be seen. 103, 104.
Sight or discovery of God to the soul very sweet. 104. God knows the right of
every man's cause, and will do every man right. 109. Whom God does not, whom he
does despise. 170, 171. God has a due regard to all sorts of men. 171. God
has a wonderful magnificent heart or Spirit. 184. The magnificence of Gods
heart discovered in three things. 184, 185. The Will of God the Rule of
righteousness. 346. His righteousness in all things. 347. How God may be said
to increase. 368. Greatness of God. 369. In what se^ce God is not known. 373,
374. God eternal. 378. God is a liberal housekeeper. 413. Motions of all
creatures under his command. 450. It is easy to God to do great things. 465.
God can do all with a word. 473. Inferences from it. 473. God is very l^beral.
501. God is not only a just but a bountiful master. 520 God perfect in
knowledge, the perfection of his knowledge showed seven ways. 553, 554. Five
inferences from it. 554, 555. How men speaking to God must be swallowed up,
showed in three things. 594. How we may speak to him and not be swallowed up,
unless in his love. 594. How God cannot be found out. 614. In what he cannot be
found out, showed several ways. 615, 616. Three inferences from it. 617. Power
of God excellent two ways. 619. God cannot be seen. 650 Godly, not always
sensible of their defects and failings in grace. 128 Good men apt to make sad
conclusions against themselves. 105 Good, doing good. They consult their own
good best who do most good. 248. Three fruits of doing good. 248 Gospel light,
how it has removed or been taken from many places. 421. Grace, free to the
best and wisest. 649 Greatness, the great God is no enemy to greatne^s, a^
such. 182. The greatness of God, wherein. 369. Several inferences from the
greatness of God, both for direction and consolation. 369
H
Hand of God and man, how they differ. 41. Hand and strength signified by the
same word. 478 Hard things easy to God. 465 Hearing twofold. 440 Hearer, a
good hearer of the word may s^metimes want an awakening word. 524. Patience
necessary in a good hearer, and that in a double respect. 525. Composure of
Spirit necessary in a hearer. 527 Heaven, how to be looked upon. 26, 27. The
Heavens are a divine glass, a natural Alphabet, etc. 28. Heavens declare five
things concerning God. 20 Heavens are strong and transparent. 570. Heavens as a
looking-glass, how. 571. In the Heavens we may see God in five of his
excellencies. 571, 572. In them we may see our selves. 572, 573. Heedfulness,
how necessary. 318. Five things to be heeded. 319 Hell, how both large and
straight. 281. Hidings of God, the lot sometimes of good men. 105 Hypocrite, an
hypocri^e in heart, who meant by it, showed in three particulars. 257, 258. The
bad condition of a hypocrite in heart, set out in three things. 259. The
hypocrite in heart grows w rse by affliction. 261. Policies of hypocrites will
avail them nothing. 262. God extremely angry with them. 262, 263. Hypoc^ites
humble not themselves though God humble them. 265. The closest hypocrite shall
fare no better than the deboistest sinner. 273.
I
Jerusalem, warning of its ruin by the Romans. 425 Ignorance, what ignorance
inconsistent with godliness. 253. Heedless ignorance an undoing to many. 255.
Ignorance is darkness. 581. Six things which a man cannot see how to order
because of the darkness of ignorance. 581, 582. Three inferences from it. 582,
583. Duties arising from this notion of ignorance. 583, 584. Much darkness of
ignorance remains in the best while in this world. 584. Three inferences from
it. 585. Ignorance is a great hindrance in our approaches to God. 585
Impatience and distrust, provoking sins. 121. Hard to keep from impatience in
hard times. 320. Impatience our sin, though troubles great. 321, 327 Impenitent
persons, their danger. 304 Iniquity and a vain thing expressed by the same
word. 233, 234, 319. To have any regard to iniquity is the mar^ of a wicked
man. 322 Intercession, what it is. 419 Judging, it is our duty t^ judge our
selves. 99. Three things required to a right self- judging. 99, 100. Sel^-
judging preserves us from rash judging the ways of God or his dealings with
us. 100. Self- judging keeps us humble. 101. Judging or to judge, taken three
ways in Scripture. 411 Judges, blind two ways. 628 Judgment taken three ways
in Scripture. 108. Judgment of the wicked, in what sense a good man may be said
to fulfill it. 290, 291. Judgment day terrible to sinners. 610. Judgment taken
four ways in Scripture; how God excels in every one of them. 621. Why God does
not presently execute judgments upon the wicked. 625 Julians purpose of having
the Temple at Jerusalem rebuilt prevented by an earthquake and thunder. 461
Justice of God. 108, 109. God is righteous though it appear not. 110. That God
is just should cause us to trust him. 114. Justice and Judgment how or whether
they differ. 292. There is no avoiding divine Justice. 294. Justice a scarce
commodity among men. 626. Plenty of Justice in God, showed five ways. 627,
628. Two Inferences from it. 629
K
Key of the Cl uds in Gods hand. 391 Know, to k^ow taken three ways. 127. Not
to know, or we know not, signifies two things. 465. It is a shame not to know
some things. 538. It is a presumption to seek the knowledge of other things.
538 Knowledge, not to do according to what we know, is very shamful. 82
Kn^wledge fetched from afar, what. 143, 144. Knowledge is worth our longest
travel. 146. What the perfection of knowledge is, or, who is perfect in
knowledge. 157, 158. Kn^wledge of God. 175, 176. In what sense a good man may
die without knowledge. 253, 254. In what sense God is not known by any. 373,
374. Inferences from it. 355. Yet this must not discourage us in seeking after
the knowledge of God, nor w^ll it excuse any who neglect to know him. 376. Men
know little of the works or ways of God. 538. Knowledge but in part here. 584
L
Land, what Land God especially owns as his. 517 Law, no iniquity in acting
according to Law. 346 Life, shortness of it. 382. Yet man has an Eternity to
wait for. 382 Light within us of great force. 5. How that Principle is abused.
6. Light, God loves to entitle himself to Light. 410. Light about seven things
needful in those who come to God in any duty. 585. Light properly not seen.
596. Light of ^ods countenance sometimes hidden. 598 Lightning, what it is.
449. Two things wonderful in it. 449. The swiftness of it. 451 Look and see,
what th^se two words joined imp^rt. 24 Looking-glass, how the heavens are so.
57^ Love to God should be great because he is great. 370 Luthers godly ^ear and
resolution. 288 Luthers meditation upon a Cloud. 405. Luther saw a circular
Rain-b^w. 543. His opinion when the Rainbow began. 544
M
Magistrates, why called sh^elds in Scripture, not swords. 61 M^gnifying of God
two ways. 350 Our magnifying the works of God a m^st necessary duty. 358. How
or when we magnify the works of ^od showed in five things. 359, 360 Five sorts
fail in magnifying the works of God. 365, 366. Three m^tives to it. 367
Majesty and glory of ^od, man not able to bear it. 592. Majesty of God 606. It
is terrible. 607. Two inferences from it. 608 M^ker, God is so to us three
ways. 65, 68. It is good to look to God as our Maker at all times, specially
in afflicton. 67. Five duties from the consideration that God is our Maker. 68.
God is to be honored as our Maker, 150. The Maker of all men can be
unrighteous to no man. 151 Meditation, two things should be the daily
Meditation of a Christian. 241 Meekness, to be high in Power and meek in
Spirit, shows a God like Spirit. 172 M^n, in what sense all men are alike. 50.
Showed in f^ur things. 50. Men of tw^ sorts. 353 Mercies of God, unless we are
bettered by them, it had been better for us not to have received them. 364
Merciful men have special favors from God. 521 Merit, no merit in the best of
men. 649 Mighty men apt to despise others. 173 Mightiness of man four fold. 57.
Mightiness of God in two things, or of two sorts. 160. The mig^tine^s of God
set forth in seven assertions. 161, 162. Five Infere^ces from the mightiness of
G^d. 164, 165. Mi^acles, God does ^ot Mi acles to preserve or deliver the
wicked. 191, 192. Mi acl^s as easy to God as his ordinary works. 535.
Mode^ation of Spirit procee^s from true greatness of Spirit. ^86 Modesty a
great virtue, and the grace ^f all our graces. 158 Motions of the creature,
most violent and in appearance contingent, under the dominion of God. 450
N
Name of God, what. 73 Nature, work^ of God in nature ought to be searched. 145
Necessity, no man necessitated to choose a sinful evil. 283 Negatives in
Scripture often carry a strong affirmation. 153, 187, 188. Nero, his seeming
clemency. 631 Night, God gives his people occasions of rejoicing in the night
as well as in the day. 71. God gives his people a rejoicing frame of spirit in
the night. 72. Night taken two ways. 312 North Wind makes fair weather. 603.
why promotion is said not to come out of the North. 605
O
Obeying and hearing expressed by the same word. 237 Obedience due to the call
of God either by his word or works. 237. Obedience to God profitable to man.
247. No obedience where no service. 250. Good men fail in obedience. 251
Oppression of three sorts. 56. Oppression a common sin. 58. Oppression is a
crying sin. 59. Power is commonly abused to oppression. 59. Yet when poor
oppress, that worst. 59, 60. It is best to have recourse to God when oppressed
by men. 67. Oppression cannot bring down the pride of man. 88 Oppressors mind
not God. 62 Opp^essed persons will be crying and complaining. 86. Some under
Oppression do nothing but cry and complain. 87
P
Pardon of great sins, what may encourage us to ask it. 372. The greatness of
pardoning mercy in G^d. 634, 635 Passion, not to be quieted but by Reason. 382
Perfection twofold. 157 Persuasion, what it is. 280 Pleasure distinguished of,
in what pleasures to spend our days is a mercy. 243. How that Promise of
spending their days in pleasure, is made good to the godly. 245, 246 Plenty
and Scarcity are at the dispose of God. 414. God uses natural means as the
cause either of Plenty or Scarcity. 414 Poor in Spirit how pleasing to God.
195, 196. Poor taken two ways in Scripture. 195. Poor shall have right done
them by God. 197. Objections answered. 198, 199 Poverty it self an affliction,
and the poor afflicted by others. 194, 196. Power of great use to do good, and
a great temptation to do bad things. 60 Power of three sorts. 335. They who
have Power are apt to do wrong. 347 Power of God in c^mmanding and working, how
excellent! 619 Prayers of the proud and impenitent are not heard. 89, 92. The
Prayers of vain persons are vain things. 93. What prayers are vain, showed in
seven particulars. 93, 94. How much God values holy prayers, showed three
ways. 66 Holy p^ayer not always presently answered, but never disregarded.
96. A dreadful judgment not to have prayer regarded. 97. Not to pray in time of
affliction, very sinful, showed in three things. 267. Prayers of the wicked not
esteemed by God. 307 Praise, God fearful in praises. 611 Presumptuous sin,
what. 35 Presumptions of evil men described. 106 Presumption to do or speak
amiss, not fearing God should know it. 589 P^ide, oppression cannot bring down
the proud heart of man. 88. Pride a bad Mother of three bad children. 169.
Pride and high-mindedness the same. 458 Promises, some make them not minding to
perform them. 629. Four things ascribed to God in Scr pture which assure us he
will perform his promises. 630 P^omotion comes usually in a secret way. 605
Pronounes, mine, thine, have a great emphasis. 149 Profaning the Name of God,
what. 34 Prosperity, what. 242. Promises of outward prosperity, most in the Old
Testament. 246. Outward prosperity given many Godly. 288 Protection of God
toward man, twofold. 191 Providence, when they seem to cross Promises and
Prophesies, yet trust. 113 Providential care of God toward his people is
perpetual. 206. Some works of Providence very plain. 357. The Providence of God
reaches to all places. 453. The Government of the world is as much of God as
the creati^n of it. 536. Heathens dark about Providence, ascribed all to
Fortune and second Causes. 536, 537. Comfort to the godly that all things are
under the Providence of God. 537
Q
Question, one question put more than twenty times to J^b, and why 535
Q^ietness of the Air, much more of men's Hearts, is of God. 562. Christ can make
the heart quiet in the midst of all outward u^quietness. 563
R
Rain, fi^e things spoken of it. 384, 385. Rain comes first from the earth 388.
The causes of Rain. 389. God can withold the Rain when he pleases 389. Four
Inferences from it 90, 39^. That the water falls from Heaven in drops of R^in
is of God. 393. God has store of Rain in his treasury. 397. R^in, a comparison
between that and the Word of God. 397, 398. R^i^ s^all and great 471. Great
Rain of Gods strength, what. 471. In what quantity soever the Rain falls, it is
by the special appointment of God. 475. For what purposes Rain is sent. 519.
Rain undeserved, it is of free mercy that we have Rain. 520 Rainbow, the
signification of it. 542, 543. The form and cause of it. 543. Why expressed in
the Greek by a word that signifies to speak or show forth. 544. Whether the
Rainbow were before the fl^^d. 544, 545. The fitness of the Rain bow to assure
mercy, showed in seven particulars. 545, 546 Ransom, what it is, several sorts
of it. Nothing but the blood of Christ can ransom sinners, nor will that
deliver some sinners. 304 Remember, taken two ways. 349 Reward and punishment,
without them Religion would vanish. 14 Riches, God regards not men for their
riches or any outward greatness. 306 309 Right, how God gives it the poor. 195
Righteous, man righteous three ways. 39. A twofold notion of the righteous.
21. The Righteous always under Gods eye. 202, 203. Righteous highly esteemed
and exalted by God. 213 Righteousness essential to God. 11 Righteousness of two
sorts. 8, 9. The righteousness or righteous actings of men contribute nothing
to God. 41. Three grounds of it. 42, 43. How and whom righteousness does
profit. 51, 52. Cautions about it. 53. Righteousness, when and how ascribed to
God. 147 Rods of two sorts. 514.
S
Scholars great, not always the wisest men. 177 Scourge, God can make any
creature a scourge to man. 412 Sealing in Scripture has a threefold
signification. 476. Sealing up of the hand, what it signifies. 478 September,
how expressed in the Hebrew, and why. 448 Servant, what it signifies, every
believer a Servant. 238 Service and Worship often the same in Scripture. 237.
God expects our se^vice, and then especially, when we suffer under his hand.
237. To serve God what, or the service of God described. 238, 239. To se^ve God
our Freed^m. 240. Service of God pleasant and easy in a twofold respect. 240.
Service of God not lean but pr^fitable. 240, 241 Sight of God twofold,
immediate, mediate, and that by a threefold means. 102. The sight of God, or
his discovery of himself to us very sweet to the the soul. 104 Signs of
changes in the weather, and other natural things. 424. Inferences from it as to
other things. 424 Signs why given by God. 549 Sin, how sinful it is to say,
there is no profit in leaving sin. 17. The benefit or profit of leaving sin.
19. God receives no hurt or damage by the sin of man, how many or how great
soever his sins are. 31. Yet sinners shall be dealt with as if they had hurt
him, and why. 31. How the sins both of good and evil men turn to the glory of
God. 32. Sin considered in a threefold opposition. 33. Sin does six things to
God, yet cleared how no damage to him. 34, 35, 36. The least sin hurtful. 47,
48. Sin hurts the whole Creation, but chiefly man. 48, 49. The sad effects of
sin, as well as the filthy nature of it, should move us to avoid it. 48. Sin
hurts others, but th^se most who commit it. 49. Sin is v^cal. 92. God does not
severely mark the sins of his people. 116. Sin, man's work. 224. God does not
suffer sin to grow potent in his people. 226. There is an excessiveness in some
sins. 227. In what sense sin may reign in a righteous man. 228. Sin may be seen
and not the exceedingness of it. 228. The exceed^ngness of sin showed in three
things. 228, 2^9. Sin a vain thing, how. 234. God will not indulge sin in any.
293. Sin should have no respect. 321. Sin not to be chosen in any case. 324.
Sin strictly taken cannot be chosen. 325. Upon what accounts sin is chosen by
many. 325, 326. They make a very bad choice who choose sin rather than
affliction. 372. Sin worse than any the worst affliction. 330, 331 Singing, an
act of Praise. 352 Sky, two things considerable in it, clearness and strength.
568. How the sky may be said to be strong. 569 Snow, what it is. 469. When it
usually falls, 469. Six things wonderful concerning the Snow. 472. Snow how
like w^ol, showed in three things. 472, 473. Sno^ and Rain at the command of
God. 474 Sodomites, how expressed in the Hebrew. 271 Song in the night, what.
70, 71, 73 Sovereignty of God over all creatures, three Inferences from it. 14,
20 Soul, how taken in Scripture. 268 South, why expressed by a word that
signifies a secret place. 487. Whirlwinds come from it. 488 Sparing mercy, God
will not spare his own if they obey not. 252 Speaking, two things of great use
in it. 139. Speaking of two sorts. 232, 233 Spirits of men weighed ^y God. 552
Standing-still twofold, that of the mind to what opposed. 527 Star-gazers,
their vanity. 27 Storms in the hearts of men allayed by God. 562 Straight, who
may be said to be in it. 282. No straight so great but God can deliver out of
it. 283 Strength of heart, wherein it consists. 175. 183. Strength of wisdom,
in God twofold. 175. There is no strength against the Lord. 311 Suddenness of
divine Judgments. 300 Sufferings did not hurt the Martyrs, and why. 51 Sun in
its brightness cannot be looked upon. 602 Swearing, the Lords saying as much as
his swearing. 549 Sword, how taken in Scripture. 252
T
Tabernacle, what. 407, 408 Teacher, God is pleased to be a Teacher of his
people. 338. The teachings of God above all teachings. 339. How God exceeds all
Teachers, showed in seven things. 339, 340. Three Inferences from it. 342.
Several Evidences of our having been taught of God. 342, 343, 344. Teaching,
It Is man's shame when he acts not according to the teachings of God. 82.
Teaching is to make us knowing. 576. There are two sorts of persons who call
for teaching. 577 Terribleness of God to sinners in four days. 609 Thundering
Legion. 460. Thunder a terrible thing. 436. Thunder the Voice of God. 440, 442.
Thunder called the Voice of God in a twofold respect. 442. Six Inferences from
it. 443. Word of God like Thunder, showed in five things. 444. Thunder Gods
Hera d. 454. Thunder, how it follows L^ghtning. 454. Why we see the Lightning
before we hear the Thunder. 454. Six degrees or s^rts of Thunder. 455. Thunder
described. 457. Marvels in Thunder. 460. The effects of the Word like those of
Thunder. 461, 462. Two Inferences from it. 464 Tiberius the Roman Emperor,
his Character. 630 Time at the dispose of God. 379 Trembling, what. 436. Great
appearances of God should make us tremble. 437. A fourfold trembling. 437, 438
Troubles are streights. 281, 282 Trusting in God a Duty in darkest times. 112.
T^ust in God fixes the heart. 113. Some not to be trusted. 114. We should trust
God more upon experience of what he has wrought. 365. The Eternity of God a
gro^nd of trusting him. 380 Truth will prevail though many be against it. 23.
No matter if we are alone, so Truth be on our side. 23. Some speak Truth with
false hearts, others speak falsely with a true heart. 153. To speak truth a high
commendation of the Speaker. 154. Truth taught us by God, four effects of it.
342, 343, 344. Some Truths are specially to be attended to. 524
U
Valentinian, his zeal and advancement. 213 Vanity, what and who. 92 Visiting
of three sorts. 119 Unde^standing, how an unde^^^an^ing man may be said not to
unders^a^d. 81 Uprightness, That which is not done uprightly, will not be done
constantly. 266
W
Waiting on God in hardest times. 112 113. Warnings, G^d gives them before he
sends great Judgme^ts. 425, 426. Warning, God gives wa^ning before he strikes.
455 Water of two s^rts. 388. Wa^er held up in the Air by the Power ^f God. 392
Way of God, what it is. 345 Whirlwind, what. 489 Wickedness, what. 47 Wicked
men out of Gods Protection, he takes not care of them. 189. How God does and
does not preserve the lives of the wicked. 189, 190. Wicked not so much
preserved as reserved. 191. Wicked men of two sorts. 192. Their life sad. 192.
God will at last utterly destroy them. 193. God will not be taken off by any
outward respect from destroying them. 301 Winds, four Cardinal. 487. What the
Wind is. 489. Winds come at Gods appointment. 489. God makes a twofold use of
the Wind. 490. Six uses of it for mercy, or for the good of man. 490, 491.
Winds the Broomes of Heaven. 490. Afflicting effects of the Wind. 492. Seven
Wonders observable in the Winds. 493, 494. What the Wind is. 598. Causes of the
Wind. 599. Life preserved by the Wind. 599. Spirit of God compared to the Wind.
601 Wise in heart of two s^rts. 645. In what se^ce God resp^cteth not any that
are wi^e. 645, 646. G d regard^th not the ^i^est men who do not fear him. 646.
The wi est men cannot hinder the C^u^sels of G^d by their wisdom and p^licy.
647. Thoughts of the wi^^ va n in two respects. 648. None ^ise by nature, nor
are any erfectly wi^e in this world though they have grace. 649 Wisdom, how
ascribed to the Fowls of the Air. 77. The Wisdom of F^wls, etc. is of God. 78.
Wisdom of God, wherein the strength of it consists. 175. How God is only wise.
177, 178. Wisdom practical, what. 177. Six Inferences from the Wisdom of God.
179, 180 Wishes, we apt to make strange wishes in times of distress. 315 Words,
rash words turned against the Speaker. 12. Sharp words sometimes most
profitable. 13. Word of God, how like Rain. 397, 398. Word of God preached, how
like thunder, showed in five things. 444. When the Word of God is duly
attended, showed in three things. 445 Three degrees of the Words coming to us.
445, 446. Word of God, how it may be said to be dark. 586 Woe ks of God in
Nature to be exactly considered, especially the Heavens. 26. Some works of God
beyond our apprehension. 466. Two Inferences from it. 467. Men slow to consider
the works of God. 480. God would have all men study his works. 480 God stops
men in their work, that they may consider his works. 481 Works of God of all
sorts to be considered. 529, 530. How the works of God are to be considered,
showed four ways. 531. Inference from it. 532. The common and ordinary works
of God are full of wonder. 533 Works, good works how profitable to our selves
and others. 52, 5^. Work, ours showed us by God in affliction in a twofold
respect. 223. Sin is properly our work. 224. The faultiness of our work most
clearly discovered in affliction. 225. Works of God of all sorts are to be
magnified. 351. Works of G^d visible or invisible. 353. Men apt to forget and
have low apprehensions of the works of God. 356. It is our duty to magnify the
works of God. 358. How they are magnified, showed five ways. 359, 360. The
Ends of God in any woe k much to be eyed. 363. What those Ends are. 364, 365
Wo^ld, a godly man is content with a little of, but not satisfied with all the
world. 288 Worldly comforts and mercies, may soon meet with a st p. 419 Wrath
of God, what and where. 296. Wrath appears in works of Judgment. 297. We
should by all means beware of the wrath of God. 298. Wrath of God a fire,
infinitely more dreadful than fire. 299
Y
Years, the measure of man's Life, not of Gods. 377. The word in Hebrew
signifies changes, and why. 377 Youth, to die in youth, what, showed three
ways. 269.
A TABLE OF Those Scriptures which are occasionally cleared, and briefly
illustrated in the foregoing EXPOSITIONS. The First Number directs to the
Chapter, the Second to the Verse, the Third to the Page of the BOOK.
Chap. Verse. Page. Genesis. 1. 6. 402. 2. 1, 2. 241. 2. 16. 418. 7. 11. 393. 9.
12, 13. 545. 15. 16. 191. 16. 14. 204. 21. 6. 119. 22. 14. 205. 25. 8. 273. 27.
33. 435. 27. 36. 459. 31. 29. 60. 37. 11. 117. 38. 26. 9. 45. 8. 360. 49. 20.
243. Exodus. 1. 17. 187. 4. 17. 515. 4. 43. 238. 5. 8. 200. 9. 16. 184. 14. 11.
122. 15. 11. 6^1. 18. 21. 109. 18. 22. 187. 20. 4, 5. 119. 32. 25. 559. 38. 8.
570. Leviticus. 25. 21. 519. 26. 41. 327. Numbers. 9. 7. 387. 14. 17. 185. 16.
45. 241. 16. 46. 297. 17. 2. 514. 23. 14. 172. 32. 23. 513. Deuteronomy. 4. 2.
387. 5. 24. 593. 11. 12. 205. 16. 20. 629. 19. 5. 452. 28. 23. 390. 28. 24.
392. 29. 29. 176. 31. 29. 224. 32. 15. 448. 32. 31. 4. 32. 34. 427. 33. 2. 540.
Judges. 9. 23. 563. Ruth. 1. 6. 119. 2. 1. 58. I Samuel. 1. 6. 457. 2. 3. 175,
109. 12. 6. 64. 15. 23. 263. 22. 8. 230. II Samuel. 15. 31. 647. 16. 10. 360.
23. 15. 241. 24. 14. 283. I Kings. 2. 4. 318. 20. 28. 453. 22. 34. 45^. II
Kings. 3. 17. ^91. 4. 2. 501. I Chron. 12. 32. 428. 16. 25. 36^. 29. 10, 16.
42. II Chron. 20. 12. 282. 28. 13, 22. 261. 31. 20, 21. 616. Job. 9. 23. 302,
14. 10. 15. 14. 21. 7. 188. 21. 25. 243. Psalms. 2. 1, 2. 31. 2. 3. 221. 2. 12.
298. 7. 3. 195. 8. 3, 4. 27. 9. 9. 336. 10. 3. 173. 10. 16. 380. 11. 4. 203.
12. 5. 196. 14. 2. 649. 16. 3. 42. 16. 7. 73. 17. 3. 72. 17. 13, 14. 516. 18.
11. 408. 18. 41. 90. 25. 10. 11. 25. 11. 372. 29. 1, 2, 3, 4, etc. 461, 462 30.
4. 125. 31. 6, 7. 281. 31. 15. 379. 31. 23. 627. 32. 5. 615. 32. 7. 111. 32. 9.
83. 36. 4. 322. 36. 8. 286. 39. 5. 178. 42. 8. 72. 46. 10. 5^8. 49. 20. 81. 51.
3, 4. 147. 51. 4. 412. 51. 15. 183. 52. 1. 173, 60. 55. 23. 192. 5^. 1. 484.
58. 1, 2. 630. 66. 3. 371. 66. 18. 322, 95. 68. 8, 9. 38^. 69. 33. 268. 72. 6.
397. 73. 1. 363, 11. 73. 13. 18. 75. 6. 605. 77. 6. 72. 77. 19. 616. 78. 8, 32.
365. 80. 1. 541. 81. 11. 331. 81. 16. 287. 84. 11. 189. 90. 11. 127, 185, 298.
92. 6. 353. 99. 12. 339. 102. 14. 31^. 102. 17. 96. 10^. 25, ^6. 377. 103. 10.
116. 104. 34, 35. 104. 106. 7. 12^. 107. 42. 9^. 13. 111. 2, 7. 32. 111. 2, 4.
358. 115. 3. 161. 116. 12. 43. 126. 4. 249, 488. 130. 3. 117. 136. 2. 511. 138.
6. 90. 146. 3, 4. 380. 147. 15, 16. 472. 147. 18. 499. 150. 2. 369. Proverbs.
1. 32. 625. 6. 6. 83. 6. 12, 13. 203. 10. 22. 285. 15. 29. 89. 16. 2. 552. 16.
3. 18^. ^0. 12. 231. 21. 18. 302 21. 17. 244. 21. 27. 229, 258. 21. 3^. 179.
22. 3. 427. 25. 13. 470. 25. 23. 491. 25. 27. 592 26. 1. 469. 28. 3. 59. 30. 4
40^. 31. 31. 356. Ecclesiastes. 1. 6. 505. 2. 14. 428. 8. 11. 626. 12. 2. 470.
12. 10. 588. Canticle^. 2. 14 96. 3. 1. 73. 4. 9. 210. 4. 12. 477. 4. 16. 491.
Isaiah. 1. 2. 83. 1. 3. 529. 1. 15. 90. 1. 31. 211. 1. 25, 26, 27. 623. 3. 11.
193. 4. 4. 6^3. 5. 6. 389. 5. 13. 255. 5. 20. 325. 6. 2. 374. 8. 2^. 6. 8. 16.
476. 9. 13. 235. 10. 6. 190. 10. 3. 609. 10. 25. 1^8. 14. 27. 163. 17. 13. 4^2.
21. 1. 488. 25. 6. 2^6. 26. 7. 551. 26. 11. 532. 27. 4, 5. 172, 18^. 27. 7, 8,
9. 632. 27. 11. 628. 28. 7. 5^1. 28. 10, 11. 138. 28. 22. 2 1. 28. 26, 29. 179.
30. 18. 114. 30. 20. 6 3. 30. 30. 57. 30. 33. 281. 32. 4. 34^. 33. 16. 337. 36.
18. 297. 38. 11. 10^. 40. 28. 163. 41. 23. 1^6. 42. 18. 25. 43. 3. 303. 43. 4.
172. 44. 25. 647. 45. 14. 220. 45. 19. 97. 48. 17. 341. 49. 16. 207. 50. 11.
106. 53. 1. 57. 54. 7. 12^. 54. 9. 548. 55. 10, 11. 397. 59. 16. 162, 619. 62.
6. 357. 63. 3. 162. 65. 20. 270. 66. 1. 212. 66. 2. 195. Jeremiah. 3. 5. 6^. 5.
1. 627. 5. 25. 423. 5. 26. 27. 6. 6. 58. 7. 16. 419. 8. 6, 7, 8. 84, 427, 485.
1^. 23. 4^0. 10. 24. 622. 17. 13. 6^9. ^3. 23. 4^3. 29. 6. 205. 32. 32. 642.
48. 11. 88. Lam^ntations. 1. 12. 25. 3. 33, 34 151, 268. Ezekiel. ^. 7. 59. 4.
16. 414. 7. 2. 450. 18. 25. 362. 22. 6. 60. 29. 20. 190. 36. 20. 34. Daniel. 3.
29. 276. 5. 2^. 551. 7. 2. 494. 9. 24. 477. 11. 6. 57. Hosea. 2. 8. 127. 4. 18.
40. 5. 14. 267. 7. 9. 130. 7. 14. 87, 265. 12. 7. 58. 13. 1. 439. Joel. 3. 18.
387. Amos. 7. 2. 466. 8. 9, 11. 4^^. Micah. 3. 6, 7. 422. 7. 18. 125. Nahum. 1.
3. 184, 492. 1. 4. 182. Habakkuk. 1. 10. 310. 2. 3. 301. 3. 8. 182. Zephaniah.
2. 1, 2. 459. 3. 12. 197. Haggai. 1. 6, 9. 560. Zachary. 3. 9. 209. 4. 7. 371,
551. 4. 12. 604. 8. 19. 155. 9. 14. 488. Malachy. 1. 3. 217. 1. 6. 641. 1. 14.
263. 2. 17. 624. 3. 2. 486. Matthew. 3. 17. 456. 7. 29. 341. 10. 42. 53. 11. 19.
7. 11. 30. 636. 16. 1, ^, 3. 424. 20. 28. 3^3. 23. 23. 621. 23. 37. 484. 24.
12. 498. 24. 31. 450. Luke. 1. 6. 39. 1. 68. 119. 12. 19. 242. 18. 2. 173. 18.
14. 8. 21. 25, 26. 642. 21. 34. 244. John. 3. 8. 601. 6. 44, 45. 342. 8. 36.
303. 9. 4. 313. 9. 31. 90. 9. 40. 25. 12. 28, 29. 456. 12. 31. 623. Acts. 1. 7.
539. 1. 25. 272. 4. 19. 4. 9. 1. 118. 17. 25. 42. 17. 30. 117. Romans. 1. 18.
296. 1. 19, 20. 28. 1. 26. 331. 1. 28. 6. 2. 14, 15. 5. 2. 24. 34. 3. 4. 147.
3. 8. 326. 5. 7, 8. 302. 7. 1. 538. 8. 26. 94. 9. 20. 13 9. 22. 18^. 11. 17.
286. 12. 1. 36^. 16. 27. 177. I Corinthians. 2. 14. 405. 3. 19. 648. 10. 14,
15. 4. 10. 22. 168. 11. 31, 32. 412. 13. 12. 103. 15. 54. 591. II. Corinthians.
2. 5. 591. 2. 17. 154. 4. 6. 103. 4. 17. 344, 223. 5. 11. 104 5. 10. 610. 5. 4.
591. 7. 9. 20. 9. 8. 166. 10. 4. 310. 12. 2, 3. 156. 13. 8. 155. Ephesians. 2.
3. 260. 3. 8. 617. 3. 19. 467. 3. 20. 165. Philippians. 1. 23. 283. 4. 6. 246.
Colossians. 1. 16. 212. 1. 21. 257. 2. 5. 569. II. T^essalonians. ^. 6, 7. 423.
5. 1. 363. I Tim^thy. 2. 8. 95. 6. 6. ^4^. 6. 15, ^6. 178. Titus. 3. 8. 5^.
Hebrews. 6. 6. 305. 10. 26. 3^5. 10. 34. 25^. 11. 25. 330. 11. 27. 103. James.
1. 27. 119. 4. 3. 9. 5. 1. 196, 243. I Peter. 1. 6. 632. II Pe^er. 2. 9. 191. I
John. 3. 5. 39. 4. 18. 611. Jude. 0. 1. 193. 0. 10. 82. 0. 25. 177.
Revelati^ns. 1. 17. 381. 3 3. 93. 3. 18. 584. 4. 1. 477. 4. 3. 547. 9. 6. 316.
10. 1. 548. 12. 15, 16. 191 547. 14. 2. 445. 15. 3. 642. 17. 1, 15. 551.

FINIS.

