MOUNT PISGAH: OR, A PROSPECT OF HEAVEN. BEING An Exposition on the Fourth
Chapter of The First Epistle of St. Paul to the Thessalonians, from the 13th.
verse, to the end of the Chapter.

Divided into Three Parts.

By THO. CASE, Sometimes Student in Christ-Church Oxon, and Minister of the
Gospel.

(...)
(...),
etc. Naz. Orat. LONDON, Printed by Thomas Milbourn, for Dorman Newman, at the
Chirurgions Arms in Little-Brittain, near the Lame-Hospital, 1670.

TO THE Honorable, and his much Honored Son-in-Law, Sr. ROBERT BOOTH, Knight,
Lord Chief Justice of the Common Pleas in Ireland. Grace, Mercy, and Peace.
Dear Sir,
THese Meditations presented to you, were first intended for a diversion to
your and my sorrrow, Conceived by the death of that Excellent Child your
Firstborn, your Benjamin; but his Precious Mother's Ben-oni, for she brought
him forth, not with the hazard only, but with the loss of her own Life; his
Birth was her Death: from which very moment of time, You were pleased to
concredit his Education to his tender Grandmother, your Pious Mother, and my
Self; a Depositum, than which there could nothing have been more Sacred to us
in the world: I am sure we were as tender of it, as of our own Lives; yea
verily our Lives were bound up in the Child's Life. ^er. 31.20.
He was indeed Natus deliciarum, a Delectable Child, in whom Nature and Grace
seemed to be at a strife, which should excel in her workmanship: and as he grew
in age, so he grew in sweetness of disposition, and in all Natural and Moral
Endowments, of which his Age was capable: yea he out-grew his Age, and was
always beforehand with his Education; Imbibing instruction faster then we
durst (rationally) infuse it, for fear of hurting the tender Vessel: So that he
seemed to be a Man before his Childhood was expired: As many Loved him as knew
him; and were in dispute with themselves, whether such Maturity did Prophecy
an Eximious Life, or an Immature Death: I must confess (whether my infirmity or
no, I know not) I was often offended at the mention of the latter, as too
boldly intrenching upon God's Prerogative: But such (it seems) was the Divine
Decree, so it proved; His work was done betimes, and ours about him before we
thought of it; and while we said of him in our hearts, as once Lamech said of
his Son Noah, Genesis 5.29.
This Child shall Comfort us; he shall live with us; God said Nay, he shall
leave you, and shall live with me; for before he was Eleaven years old, God
snatched him out of our Tuition, and removed him into an Higher Form; where he
should learn no more by the sight of the eye, and hearing of the ear, which are
subject to mistake; but by clear and perfect Vision; where he knows more than
we could teach him; yea able to teach us what we are not capable to understand;
while we see but in a glass darkly, he is seeing Face to Face. Oh could I but
write what he is able to dictate concerning the Facial Vision which I am now
(with fear and trembling) but peeping into; what a rare Exposition should I
publish to the world, upon the present Context before us? such as Eye never
Read, nor Ear ever Heard, nor can ever enter into the heart of man, until we
enter into that Light where he is; where his intellectual Eye is married to the
Sun of Righteousness, and his naked will is swimming and bathing it self in
Rivers of pleasures for ever. This may be indeed (what these papers wished to
be, and that is all) a perfumed Handkerchief to wipe off tears from your eyes,
and fill your Soul with joy; Your loss is his infinite gain.

It was a satisfaction good enough for an Ethnic, who, when one brought him the
tidings of his Eldest Son's death, was able to reply, Scio me genuisse
mortalem: Your Comfort may express it self in a higher strain, Scio me
genuisse Immortalem; for though Nature did not make him Immortal by his
Generation, Grace has made him Immortal by his Regeneration: So that all that
you and I have to do, is but to breathe after that Perfection, of which
(through Grace) I am humbly confident he is already possessed: Let us so run that
we may obtain. As for my self, so many deaths have been rushing in upon me
(deep calling unto deep) as have not only retarded the birth of these
Conceptions, but threatened their burial in the same Womb which Conceived them,
which is the just cause they have stuck so long in the Birth. But since it has
pleased the Living God to let me live to see the travail of my Soul, though
miserably mangled in the Birth by unskilful hands: Such as they are, Dear Son,
I dedicate them to your Name, to be as an Absolom's-Pillar, until God may raise
up a Living-Monument in the room of that which he has removed: And because
this may be too weak and obscure, let me provoke you (Sir) to erect to your
self a Monument that may be worthy of you; Let your own Life be a Name to you
when you are dead; a Name better than of Sons and Daughters; by filling that
Honorable Station, wherein God has fixed you, and all your other Relations,
with such Fruitfulness, Wisdom, and Fidelity, that all that know you, may rise
up and call you blessed; yea, that your Name may be as a sweet Perfume to
Posterity: Live your own Life and your Son's too.

As for me, I cannot long Survive, having so often received in my self the
Sentence of Death; 2 Cor. 1.9. Psalm. 90.10.
I have lived already one full Age of man, and am nowin the third year of my
LABOUR AND SORROW, and it is little I can do for God; I must Decrease, but may
you Increase; yet pray for me, that I may live much in a little time; and that
my self and your Aged Mother may like those Trees of God, Psalm. 92.14, 15.
bring forth more fruit in old age, then in the beginning, to show that the Lord
is upright, etc.

Farewell Honored Son, and God All-Mighty make you amends for the loan which
you have lent to God, if not in the Stream, yet in the Fountain. He Bless you,
and make you a Blessing: So prays

Your Faithful, and most Affectionate Father-in-Law, THOMAS CASE.

To my Worthy Son-in-Law, WILLIAM HAWES, Dr. in Physic; AND To Mris. ELIZABETH
HAWES his Virtuous Consort, Grace, Mercy, and Peace.
Dear Son and Daughter,
IT is not (certainly) without some special design of Providence, that these
Meditations which were conceived upon the death of your hopeful Nephew, the
only Son of your Elder Brother, Sir Robert Booth, now in Ireland; should not,
by reason of those distempers which have ever since pursued me uncessantly, as
you (to your trouble) know; be able to come to the Birth until this time, when
our sorrows are doubled in the death of your precious Child Martin Hawes, your
Firstborn: Possibly, (as we may rationally conjecture) that we should not too
soon forget the Affliction and the Misery, the Wormwood and the Gall; but that
our Souls having them continually in remembrance, might be humbled in us, Lam.
3.19, 20.

Possibly; that the Children being every way alike, both in Person and in
Disposition, one and the same Plaster might give ease and cure to the wound;
and one and the same Monument perpetuate their Memorial unto Posterity.

Truly they were a pair of lovely Babes; Babes in Age, though men in knowledge
and understanding; of whom we may (in their Capacity) sing as David once in his
Funeral Elegies of Saul and Jonathan,

They were pleasant in their lives, in their death they were not divided.

Their lives indeed were short; so it seemed good to the Divine Wisdom, after
He had showed two such excellent pieces in the Light for a while; timely to lay
them up amongst his Jewels, lest they should receive hurt or stain from a
present evil world. But although their lives were short, yet verily they were
precious, such, as allowing them this Abatement, that they were Children;
neither Parents nor Standers-by could rationally have wished they had been
otherwise then they were. And though there were some distance of years, yet
there was the greatest parity of Persons observed between them, that though
they were but the Brother 's and Sister 's Sons, you could not (had they been
together) have distinguished them from natural Brethren, or Tynnes (rather) of
the same Birth.

For Elegancy of Person, Loveliness of Countenance, Solidness of Judgment,
Acuteness of Wit, Tenaciousness of Memory, Sweetness of Disposition, Universal
Innocence, and Modesty in behavior; Obedience to Parents (Next or Remote)
Submission to Governors, Observance to Superiors, Love to Equals,
Condescension to Inferiors, and candor to all.

And (that which deservedly is of higher value with God) Reverend Attention to
his Word Read or Preached, together with some suitable ability to give a
methodical repetition of both; Studious in learning Catechisms, of which they
were able to give such a rational account, as if they had been Candidates for
the University; as many, both of the Nobility and others in the Parish of Giles
's in the Fields can (at this day) witness: Love to the best things, and a due
respect to the best men; with a more then a Childish dislike of, and adversness
to what they understood to be evil, etc.

These Desirablenesses according to, yea and above the rate of Children,
rendered them so like one another, as if one Soul had animated two bodies; or
one and the same Conception had been formed up into two Patterns, though
reserved to be seen successively; to the end (as it were) that the Elder might
outlive himself in the Younger; Aut Utrumque putabis esse verum, aut Utrumque
putabis esse pictum: You would have deemed them to be either the same Person,
or two Pictures; one the Original, the other a Copy.

Sic oculos, sic ille manus, sic ora ferebat: He that had seen one, might have
known them both.

And as they were alike in their Lives, so in their Death they were not
divided; or if a little, in time, not at all in the manner and Circumstances.

They both Lived with us, but died with you; they lived with the Divine, but
died with the Physician, to show that neither Religion does kill, nor Physic
can keep alive.

Nevertheless, though they died with you, they came not to dye, any further
than the hidden Decree of the Divine will had before determined.

They died alive as it were, Death gave them so little warning. Neither Parents
or Children understood wherefore they came; until within a very few days, Death
showed his Commission, and as soon Executed it.

They died both of them in the absence of their Trustees, who though one step
higher in the Parental line, were not (I am sure) half a step lower in Parental
affection, which the Divine eye Saw, and pitied; and therefore out of
Compassion, hiding from us what he was about to do; As he snatched us from the
Elder, by sending us abroad: So He snatched the Younger from us by sending him
Home to his Fathers House: So pitying our Infirmity, who otherwise (possibly)
might not have parted with them so willingly, nor have born their loss so
patiently. The loss of two such choice Patterns of Divine workmanship, could
not but have been an heartbreaking object to us, as it was to you, but that
their constant absence from you, was a preparative, whereby the terror of
death was something abated: their very absence, so long before was a little
death.

That which sweetneth it to us all, is, (that God has not left us to mourn as
men without hope) that in the Context before us, The Children are not dead, but
sleep, they sleep in Jesus.

If any Stander-by shall judge (possibly) that my affection has transported my
Charity into their excess; my Apology is this, that I had rather be guilty of
an Excess in Charity, than a Defect in thankfulness. I know we cannot expect
such rational accounts of Grace in Children, as may be found in Adult Saints,
but that that doxologie, out of the mouths of Babes and Sucklings, thou have
ordained strength, Psalm. 8.2. does not exclude Children, though not confine the
meaning of the words so narrow; is the judgment of the old St. Ignatius, who
from those Scripture instances of Samuel, Josiah, and others, denies not but
that the Spirit of God working in young ones, does many times give out early
discoveries of the Grace of the Covenant, when Elder Persons (...) (Ignat.
Epist. ad Magn.) do only carry their Gray-haires as a badg of their Ingratitude
to God.

As for your dear Children, God has not left himself without fu^ther witness
in their death, of an interest in them; Those heavenly whispers which the
tender Aunt, laying her ear to the pale lips of her dying Nephew, as he lay
upon his back, with eyes fixed Heavenward, when he wanted strength to make his
heart audible, God -- Christ -- Grace, etc.

And her own dear Child's delight in that little Book, A Guide to Heaven, a book
little in bulk, but great in Excellency; which as it caused him to make it his
Vade Mecum while he lived; his Golden Cup, out of which he drank his Mornings
draught every morning in his Bed: So it caused him to take it with him as his
Viaticum to Heaven, when he came to dye. For it was found with him when dead:
These I say are overplusses of Divine Grace, and witnesses of Divine Love, to
those dying Babes from their Heavenly Father.

Wherefore Dear Children, let not the Consolations of God seem small unto you,
but improve them for your own Comfort, and quickening, in the holy Education of
the surviving Treasures of your Blood; that if they live, you may have comfort
in their Lives; or if they dye, you may have hope in their Deaths.

Be steadfast and immovable, and always abounding in the work of the Lord, for
as much as you know, your labor is not in vain in the Lord.

And accept of this imperfect Monument, set up for your continual Inspection,
and the blessed Childrens Memorial: By

Your Faithful, and most Affectionate Father-in-Law, THOMAS CASE.

To the Reverend Author.
SIR,
THis Paper comes to you, with a design to beg a larger draught of that
discourse of yours, on 1 These. 4.14. whereof in the other days converse, you
were pleased to give me a taste; and to beg it not for my self only, but a more
common good; what more profitable Argument can you recommend to the World, than
a discourse about those better things which are Reserved in Heaven for us? You
know better than I, that all true Wisdom consists first in a fixed intention
of the end; next, in a choice of apt means; lastly, in diligent pursuit; our
great End and scope is, or should be, to be for ever with the Lord; which if
men would more steadily fix and propound to themselves, they would sooner
understand their way, for their End would shine to them all along their Course,
and level and direct all their actions, yea, not only become a measure to them,
but a motive to quicken them to seek what they hope for, with Industry,
Vigilance, and Self-denial, and so cast off those many Impertinencies and
Inconsistencies, with which we usually sill up our Conversations; and with all,
the Labors, Sorrows, and difficulties of the way, would be the better
overcome. Sir, what have we Ministers to do, but to Convince people of the
Truth and worth of things unseen? We owe it to the inconsiderate part of the
world; the far greatest part of mankind is sensual and brutish, and blind, and
cannot see a-far off, therefore live as if they only came into the world to
Eat, Drink, and Sleep, or to camber themselves with much serving. That they may
do well here, We cannot enough awaken these sleepy Sensualists, that they may
remember Home, and make earnest and serious preparation for the World to come.
We owe it to the Afflicted part of the World, whose true and proper solaces,
and supports, are to be drawn from the Everlasting Estate of the Blessed.
Comfort one another with these words, says your Apostle: Yea, we owe it to the
better and more serious part of the World, who need continually to be warned to
open the eye of Faith, and shut that of Sense, to overlook things seen, which
are Temporal, but to have always in the eye of their Faith and Hope things
unseen, which are Eternal and Glorious; how little would Temptations make
Impressions upon us, could we learn to wink out both the Terribleness and
Amiableness of the Creature? and how would all present things be lessened in
our opinion, estimation, and affection, had we once but the Eagle-eye of Faith,
to look beyond the Mists and Clouds of this lower and vain World, to that
Blessed Estate above? Sir, Let your discourse go Abroad, and try what it can do
to the Cure of in Unbelieving and Inconsiderate World. I know what you Object,
the many writings of this kind Extant; But necessary things must be often
enforced, and every one has his peculiar gift and way of Writing; which if it
relish not with all, meets with an answerabl^^ ^^^st in other Readers; and
surely discourses are most apt to edify, which come from them who have a
deeper sense of the World to come than others have; and where is that to be
presumed to be, but in them who are in the very Confines of Eternity; where
your Good Old Age, and late soar Sickness have placed you, and so given you a
stronger sense and clearer Prospect of the things you write of: Sir, trust it
with Gods Blessing, and let the Church enjoy this increase of its Treasure. I
am,

Yours in all Christian Observance, THOMAS MANTON.

TO THE READER.
The Author Wishes Grace and Peace from God our Father, and from the Lord
Jesus Christ.
Reader,
TO help the Weaker sort of Christians, in the understanding of this more dark
and difficult Context, which contains the Description of our Lords last
coming; and to quicken the more slow and drowsy Spirits to a greater vigor in
the pursuit of the Glory which is to be Revealed at that Coming; have I (not
without the importunity of diverse Friends, (sensible of their need of the
meanest helps) put my self upon the Publishing of these more private Essaies,
Calculated only for the use of mine own Family.

Yet since they may (by the blessing of God) be of a larger Influence; Bonum
quo communius, eo melius.
and knowing that Good, is so much the more Good by how much it is a more
diffusive Good, I chose rather to adventure my name, than be guilty of
Sacriledg, in not Casting in my Mite into the Public Treasury of the
Church's Service. I must confess, had I consulted a Reputation to my self, I
could never have made choice of a more improper Season; wherein, endless
Opinions and Interests do inevitably expose a man that will be writing to a
necessity of Censure; (not the most gentle Condemnation of the times:) and the
unskilfulness and inadvertency of Mechanique Artists, whom the Learned
Montacute, late Bishop of Norwich justly calls,

Animalia ad perdendam Remp. Literariam nata, Vid. Thean, thropicon. p. 6.
does not a little gratify the malevolence of opposite parties; who are glad
of any shadow that may justify their disparagement of others, who are not of
the same Sentiments with themselves.

As for me, I can truly say, Acts 20.24.
none of these things trouble me; But being by the good Providence of God,
hitherto spared and kept alive, I have looked upon it as my duty, (the
Death-Watch every night (in my bed) sounding in mine ears) to leave some
Watchword behind me, to awaken this sleepy and secure Generation; wherein the
most, I would it might not be said, the better part of Christians have lost the
sight of Heaven; and are digging hard into the Earth, to search whether
possibly, they might not meet with a Summum Bonum between this and the Center!

But oh, that before they go off the Supersicies, they would look back, Rev.
2.5.
to see from whence they are fallen, and Repent, and do their first works.

Behold, I am here showing you, the thing which you are so eagerly pursuing; It
is risen, it is not here: Oh that you would (with Moses) get up into the Mount,
from whence you might take the Prospect of that good Land, where only
Blessedness dwells.

I must Confess the Vision is much darkened by the dimness of the Eye, and the
feebleness of the Hand, which drew this imperfect Land-skip: But this I dare be
bold to say, that by the Optick-glass of Faith, upon the knee of Prayer, a man
may make such a discovery of glory here, as, when he comes down from this
Mount, may serve, quite to extinguish all the Glory of this nether World; and
to fix the eye (with that Act. 7.25.
proto-Martyr) steadfastly looking up into Heaven, to see the Glory of God, and
Jesus standing on the Right Hand of God; which if it may be (in any measure)
the fruit of these poor labors; let them take the praise of men, whose portion
it is; while I shall with more alacrity; leave these (...): So the Septuagint
Translates the Hebrew Text.
Tents of Kedar, where my Pilgrimage has been thus far prolonged; and mount up
to that full-eyed Vision, where Blessedness and Eternity are of one length,
Ever with the Lord; Ambitious of that Epitaph, by a Learned hand, set upon the
Monument of that incomparable Culverwell: What this to know, as we are known
should be,
The Author could not tell, but's gone to see.
And who, for that little moment, while inter vivos, is Thine, Christian
Reader, in Tears and Prayers.

THOMAS CASE.

A TABLE Of the Scriptures; more or less Explained in this Treatise.
Genesis Cap. 2. Ver. 2. Page 96. Part 3. Job. cap. 19. ver. 26, 27. page 87.
Psalm. cap. 16. ver. 7. page 150. ver. 16. page 10. cap. 19 ver. 7. page 63.
cap. 25. ver. 14. page 131. p. 3. cap. 27. ver. 8. page 49. p. 3. cap. 32. ver.
1. page 135. in tot page 98. p. 3. cap. 39, ver. 5^ page 91 cap. 45, ver. 7,
page 24, Margent. cap. 49, ver. 12, page 106, p. 3 cap. 63, ver. 2, page 49, p.
3 cap. 89, ver. 47, page 87, p. 3. cap. 103, ver. 13, page 148, p. 3 cap. 110,
ver. 3, page 16 cap. 136, ver. 13, page 143 part 3 Proverb. Cap. 16 ver. 4 page
88. p 3^
cap. 23, ver 5, page 113, p 3 Eceles. Cap. 12 ver. 3, 4, 5., page 92. ver. 14.
page 131.
Cant^cles. cap. 2, ver. 16 page 32 cap 7 ver. 12 page 132 p 3 Isaiah. Cap 1
ver. 18 page 135
cap. 26 ver. 14 page 84. Marg ver. 19, page 16 cap. 30 ver. 18 page 133, p. 3
cap. 45 ver. 23 page 73, ver. 24 page 147, cap. 53 ver 5, 6, 7. page 10 cap 57
ver. 18 page 148 p 3 cap. 66 ver. 5 page 129 Jerem. Cap. 31 ver. 20 page 148.
p. 3 Ez^k. Cap. 1^. ver. 6 page 162
cap. 37 ver. 3 page 99 Mala^. Cap. 3 ver. 17 page 127 Matthew. Cap. 5 ver. 17
page 145, 146
cap. 6 ver. 25. and 34 page 113. p 3 cap. 7 ver. 25 page 171 cap. 13 ver. 26
ad 31 page 116 -- ver. 43. page 4 part 3 cap 19 ver. 28 page 66 cap. 25 ver. 34
page 175 cap. 26 ver. 39, 42, 44. page 150 cap. 27 ver. 2 page 10 part 3 Mark
Cap. 13 ver. 32 page 56 part 3 Luke. Cap 12 ver. 20. page 140, part 3
cap. 13 ver. 26 page 1^1 -- ver. 43 page 3. part 3 -- ver. 28 page 46 part 3
cap. 27 ver. 37 page 67. I^h^. cap. 6 ver. 39 page 19, 76.
-- ver. 55.63 page 28 -- ver. 70 page 171 -- page 7 part 3 cap. 11 ve^. 11.
page 2 -- ver. 25 page 48 cap 12 ver. 32 page 105 cap. 14 verse 3 page 79 --
verse 19 page 18 -- verse 20, page 57, part 3 cap 16 verse 2 page 118 cap. 17
verse 12, page 122 -- verse 21, page 29 -- verse 22, page 25 -- verse 24, page
19, part 3 cap. 20, verse 15, page 72, part 3 Acts. Cap. 1, verse 9, 10. page
108
cap. 17 Verse 31, page 76, 79 Romans cap. 1. verse 4 page 12
cap. 3 verse 9 page 147 -- verse 31, page 144 cap. 5 verse 1 page 154 -- verse
15, ad fin, page 158 cap 7 verse 24 page 39 cap. 8 verse 3 page 144 -- verse 34
page 147 -- verse 35, 38, 39. page 35 cap. 9 verse 8.14^ page 149 cap. 10 verse
4 page 145 cap 14 verse 9 page 15. 1 Cor. cap, 1 verse 30 page 30 cap 6 verse
2, 3, page 49 cap. 7 verse 12 page 61, Marg. -- verse 31 page 70, part 3 cap.
15 verse 12, 13.20. page 19 -- verse 35 page 86 -- verse 37 page 88 -- verse 41
page 5 part 3 -- verse 42, 43, 44. page 89 ad 95 -- verse 51 page 65 2 Cor. cap
2 verse 16 page 25
cap. 4 verse 17 page 89 part 3 -- verse 18 page 104 part 3 cap. 5 verse 1, 2
page 141 part 3 cap. 12, verse 2, page 3, part 3 -- verse 4, page 3, part 3 --
verse 2, 4 page 62 Galat. cap. 2. verse 19. page 155.
-- verse 20. page 29 cap. 5. verse 24, page 30 cap. 6, verse 14, page 30
Ep^es. cap. 1, verse 23, page 17
cap. 3, verse 10, page 17, part 3 cap. 5, verse 25, page 162 -- verse 27, page
162 -- verse 30, page 24 Philip. cap. 2, verse 7 8, 9. page 20, 21. part 3.
-- verse 10, page 73 cap 3, verse 6, page 157 -- verse 20, page 112 -- verse
21, page 82, part 3 -- page 97, 21. part 3 Colos. cap 1, verse 27, page 43
cap. 2, verse 9, page 23, part 3 cap. 3, verse 4, page 29. 1 These. cap. 4,
verse 14, page 9.12, 21.45.
-- verse 15, 16, 17. page 56, 57. 67. 70. 76. 80. 86. 104 -- page 1.84, part 3
1 Timothy cap. 3. verse 16, page 24, p. 3 -- page 51, part 3 Titus. cap. 1, verse
2, page 90, part 3
cap 3, verse 8, page 91, part 3 Heb. cap. 1 verse 2, page 19, part 3
-- verse 3, page 23, part 3 -- page 90 cap. 2, verse 11.16, page 26 -- verse
16, page 149 cap. 7, verse 26, page 157 cap. 10, verse 7, 9. page 149 cap. 11,
verse 24, 25, 26. page 101 ad 104. part 3. 1 Peter. cap. 1, verse 4, page 73.
part 3 -- verse 5, page 24, 36 -- verse 8, page 76, part 3 -- verse 15, 16,
page 44, part 3. cap. 2, verse 9, page 31. 2 Peter. cap 1, verse 19, page 63
1 John. cap. 3, ver. 2. cap. 4 ver, 17. page 102 cap. 3, verse 21, page 172 --
verse 2, page 30, part 3 cap. 5, verse 3, page 30. Jude. verse 6, page 164.
Revel. cap. 1, verse 4, page 75, part 3
cap. 5, verse 11, page 38, part 3 cap. 11, verse 12, page 1^9 cap. 21, verse
9, page 163 -- verse 25, page 96, part 3.
Scriptures Misquoted.
PAge 6. Line 3. for Prove. 14.23 Read 14.32. p. 8. ma^gem, for Mark 10.4. r.
10.14. p. 24. marg^ for Ephesians. 2.29. r. 5 30. p. 51. marg. Psa. 94 6. r. 94.21.
p. 62. marg for 1 Cor. r. 2 Cor. p 73 l. 5. for Phil 2 20. r. 2.10. p. 74.
marg. for Rev. 6 26, 27, r 6.16, 17. p. 78. marg. for 1 Cor. 15 9. r. 15.19. p.
82. marg. for Number. r. Exodus p. 90. marg. for 2 These. 2.10. read 1.10. page 99.
marg. for Ezekiel 27.3. read 37.3. page 113, marg. for Isa. 10, 34, r. 40.31. page
118, marg for 1 John 16.2. read Joh. -- marg for Prove. 17.17. r. 9.71. page 121,
marg. for Joh. 10, 6. read 17 6. page 128. marg. for Heb. 1, 11: read 2 11,
page 130, line 34, for 2 Chronicles. 22, 23, read 32, 31, page 135, marg. for Jerem.
read Isa. -- marg. for Number, 23, 24. read 23, 21, page 137, marg. for Acts
13.19, read 3, 19, page 145, marg. for Matt. 5.27, read 5, 17, page 155, marg.
for Psa. 30, 3. read 130, 3.

PART 3. page 2, marg. for Luke 21, 46, read 21 36, -- marg. for Rev. 3, 2, r.
14, 4, page 8, line 16, for Mat. 24.21. read 24 51, page 29, marg. for Matt. 8,
10, read 18 10, page 30, marg. for Joh. read 1 John page 31, marg. for Genesis 13,
24, 30. read 32, 24, 30, page 34, marg. for Psalm. 48, 2, read 84, 2, page 38.
marg. for 1 King 4, 25, read 4, 29, page 46, marg. for Man. read Matthew. page
^^, marg. for Mark. 12, 32 read 13, 32, page 60, line 31, for Matr. 25 24, r ad
25 34 page 62, marg. for Matt: 18, 1. read 8, 11. page 79, marg. for Romans read
Revel. page 81, marg. for Ephesians. 5, 1. read 4, 24, page 110, marg. for 2 These. 1,
9. read 2 Cor. 4, 4. page 125, marg. for 2 Cor. read 1 Cor, page 132, line 13.
for Cant, 6, 12, read 7, 12 page 135, marg. for 1 Cor 9, 52. read 9.25 page
150. marg. for. 1 Pet. 1 18. read 1.8. page 153. line 1^. for Psalm. 94.10, read
94.19. p. 164. l. 20. for (...), read (...). In the first Epistle Dedicatory,
p. ^. l. 6. for weak, r. mean. In the second Epistle Dedicatory are these 3
pages mistaken in the Title, v^z. p. 7, p. 10, and p. 11. for The Epistle to
the Reader, read The Epistle Dedicatory. And in the same Epistle, page 9. l. 9.
for their excess, read this excess, page 10. line 3. r. (...).

MOUNT PISGAH: OR, WORDS of COMFORT, OVER THE Death of our Gracious Relations.
1 These. 4.18. Wherefore, Comfort one another with these Words.
THese words! what words are these? Scripture words in their general Nature;
more particularly, the Words of Comfort, contained in this Context from v. 13.
I would not have you to be ignorant Brethren, etc. down to my Text.

For, therein does the Apostle (by the dictate of the Holy Ghost) lay down a
model or platform of Consolatory Arguments, as so many sovereign Antidotes
against immoderate sorrow for our precious Relations which are departed: And
with these words, the Apostle would have Christians be able to comfort
themselves and one another. Comfort one another with these words.

For the handling of the Text, I will do these two things.

1. I will show you what these words are, and open the sense and meaning of
them, as they lie in the order and method of the Context.

2. I will improve them for 1. Comfort 2. Counsel.


For the first of these,
The words of Comfort laid down by the Apostle in this model, 10 Words of
Comfort.
may be reduced unto 10 Heads, some of them very comprehensive, and all of them
like mother of Pearl (dissolved) exceeding Cordial and Restorative.

The first word of Comfort is this, The first word of Comfort.
namely, That our precious Relations, over whose departure we stand mourning
and weeping, are but fallen asleep; I would not have you ignorant, Brethren,
concerning them which are asleep. We may say of departed Saints, as our Savior
said concerning the Damsel, Math. 9.24. They are not dead but sleep: the same
phrase he also used to his Disciples concerning Lazarus, John 11.11.
our Friend Lazarus sleeps. A notion which the Disciples at first understood
not, because their understandings were not yet enlightened; they dreamed of a
natural sleep says the Text; of taking Rest in sleep. And yet, as men in their
sleep do sometimes dream true, so did they in this dream of theirs, speak truer
than they were aware of; they said, Lord, if he sleeps, he shall do well; it is
true indeed, the Saints of God do but sleep, when they lie down in the Grave;
that, which we call death (in such) is not death indeed; It is but the Image of
Death, the shadow and metaphor of death, deaths younger Brother; a mere sleep,
and no more. The Holy Ghost, who best knows what things be, has phrased it
so, and that, not so little as twenty times in Scripture, to show, that it was
not a sudden expression, incautelously dropped from the Pen of any one of the
Secretaries of Holy Writ; but the true, proper, and genuine notion of death
suggested to them by the infallible dictate of the Spirit of God; they do but
sleep; and if they sleep, they shall do well: their sleep shall be sweet unto
them; as sweet as once the Prophets was, Jer. 31.26.

I shall not follow the Analogy that is between Death and Sleep, in the
latitude of it, sufficient to our purpose it will be, to take notice of two
main properties of Death, which do carry in them a lively resemblance of sleep.

The first is, Is^. Ligath su^^^.
That sleep is nothing else but the binding up of the senses for a little time;
a locking up of the Doors, and shutting of the Windows of the body for a
season, that so nature may take the sweeter Rest and Repose; being freed from
all disturbance and distractions: Sleep is but a mere Paerenthesis to the
Labors and Travels of this present life.

Secondly, Sleep is but a partial privation, a privation of the Act only, not
of the Habit of Reason. They that sleep in the Night, do awake again in the
Morning, then there is a regress or return of the habit to its Act again: The
Soul returns to the discharge of all her Offices again: In the internal
faculties; to the act of Judging, and discourse in the Intellect; to recalling
things for the present, and recording things for future use in the memory; It
returns to its Empire and command in the will, to its judicature in the
Conscience, Excusing, Accusing, Condemning, Et sic in caeteris: So likewise the
soul returns again to the execution of all her functions in the external
senses; to seeing in the eye, to hearing in the ear, to tasting in the palate;
as also to working in the hands, to walking in the feet, and so in the rest. In
a word, the whole man is Redivivus, restored again to its self as it were by a
new Providentia est continuata Creatio.
Creation; that which lay as senseless, and useless, tantum non, dead all the
night, is raised again more vive and fresh, and active in the morning, than it
lay down at night.

Such a thing as this (for all the world) is that, which we commonly call
Death, but with this considerable advantage, that in the interim of Death the
soul acts more vigorously than before, as being released from the weights and
intanglements of the body.

First, It is but a longer and closer binding up of the senses; Nature's long
vacation; The Grave is a bed, wherein the body is laid to Rest, with its
Curtains drawn close about it, that it may not be disturbed in its repose; so
the Holy Ghost pleases to phrase it. Isa. 57.2.
He shall enter into peace, they shall rest in their beds, every one walking in
their uprightness. Death is nothing else, but a Writ of ease to the poor weary
Servants of Christ, a total Cessation from all their labor of nature, sin, and
affliction. Rev. 14.13.
Blessed are the dead that dye in the Lord, that they may rest from their
Labors, etc. While the Souls of the Saints do Rest in Abraham's Bosom, their
bodies do sweetly sleep in their Beds of dust, as in a safe and Consecrated
Dormitory. Thus Death is but a sleep.

Secondly, And then again, as they that sleep in the night, do awake in the
morning; so shall the Saints of God do: This heaviness may endure for a night,
(this night of mortality:) but joy comes in the morning: In the morning of the
Resurrection they shall awake again; Psalm. 17.15.
it will not be an everlasting night, an endless sleep, but as sure as we awake
in the morning, when we have slept comfortably all night, so sure shall the
Saints then awake, and shall stand upon their feet, and we shall behold them
again with exceeding joy.

Oh Blessed morning! How should we long and wait for that morning, more than
they that watch for the dawning of the day?

It is an error in Philosophy, to call Death a total privation of the habit,
Divinity has corrected that error, while it has taught us to call the
dissolution of Nature in the Saints, (at the most) but a sleep; Mors ista quam
adeo perhorrescimus adeo timemus non est exitus sed transitus veni et eterum
qui nos in lucem reponat dies. Sen.
which in the Philosophers own notion, is but a partial privation, and does
admit of a Regress or returning again to the habit, or former state and
capacity, more beautiful, active, and vigorous than ever; as hereafter shall
appear.

A comfortable notion! which were it realized by Believing, would be able to
silence our complaints, and to still all our moan-makings over our departed
Christian friends and Relations; how sweet and precious soever they have been
to us.

For, do we indeed take on so, when any of the Family are gone to Bed before us,
in the Evening? Do we, indeed, cry out, woe and alas, my Father is fallen
asleep, my Mother is laid to Rest, my dear Yoak-fellow is gone to bed before
me; my sweet Child, the delight of mine eyes, the joy of my heart, his eyes are
closed, the Curtains drawn close about him, and I cannot awake him? Do we I say
thus take on and afflict our selves in this case? no surely, he would be
accounted little better than a Madman, or a Fool, that should do so; Oh fie,
then fie for shame, why do we so here? the case is the same; only if the night
be a little longer (which yet no man can determine before hand) the morning
will be infinitely more joyous, and make us more abundant compensation for our
patience and expectation: why are we so unlike our selves in one, and in the
other? Surely, because we either forget our notions, or believe them not; we
call the absence of our Friends by a wrong name. We say, my Father is dead, my
Mother is dead, my Isaac is dead, my dear Yoak-Fellow is not, and these be
killing words: Dead! the Letter kills. (...).
Death is the most terrible of all terrible things, the very name of it strikes
a chilness, and coldness into our hearts; enough to kill us before our time;
(for even worldly sorrow many times causes death.) Call we then things, as God
calls them; make we use of the notions, which God has suggested to us: say we,
my Parent is gone to bed, my Yoak-Fellow is at Rest, my beloved Babe is fallen
asleep So also in Scripture, is death termed a departure, 2 Timothy 4.6. an
absence from the body, a going from home, an uncloathing, 2 Cor. 5 4.8. Job.
15.11. An entering into peace, a going to rest, Isa. 57.2.
, and behold, the terror of death will cease.

If God has clothed this horrid thing Death with softer notions for our
comfort, let not the Consolations of the Almighty be a small thing with us. Oh
how comfortable lives might we live, had we but the right notions of things,
and Faith to realize them! Our Friends are not dead, but sleep.

Comfort one another with this Word.

The second Consolatory Argument is,
The hopeful condition of these our sleeping Relations, 2d. Word of Comfort.
Blessed be God, we are not without hope of their happiness, even while they
thus sleep.

There be indeed that dye, and neither carry away any hope with them, nor leave
any hope behind them, to th^^ surviving Relations: but the Righteous has hope
in his (...), Prove. 14.23. when our gracious Relations dye (we n^^^ ^^se the
word sometimes, that we may be understood) there is hope; They are infinite
gainers by their death. Sometimes, they dye full of hope in their own sense;
Job. 19.25 26, 27.
I know says J^b, that my Redeemer lives, and that he shall stand at the
latter day upon the earth; and though after my skin, Worm, destroy this body,
yet in my flesh I shall see God, etc. Oh Blessed hope^! And thus holy Paul, 2
Cor. 5.1.
We know that if the earthly house of this Tabernacle were dissolved, we have a
building of God, an house not made with hands, Eternal in the Heavens; Glorious
Triumph! And thus again, we may find him in his own name, and in the name of
other of his Brethren, and Companions in Tribulation, and in the Kingdom, and
patience of Jesus Christ, marching out of the field of this world in a
Victorious manner, with Colors flying, and Drums beating; and thus insulting
over Death as a Conqueror, 1 Cor. 15.56.57.
Oh Death where is thy Sting? Oh Grave where is thy Victory? The Sting of Death
is Sin, the strength of sin is the Law; but thanks be to God which gives us
the Victory, through our Lord Jesus Christ! And thus 2 Pet. 1.11. An abundant
entrance is administered unto them, into the everlasting Kingdom of our Lord
and Savior Jesus Christ; Oh the superabundant Consolation of the Heirs of
promise! And, if any of the Saints of God (at any time) their Sun have set
under a Cloud, so, that they are not able to express their own hopes; yet they
leave behind them sollid Scripture evidences of God's everlasting Electing
Love; and of their effectual vocation out of the world, into the Kingdom and
Fellowship of his dear Son Jesus Christ our Lord; Evidences of saving vocation,
Gal. 5.22, 23.
such as are, The Fruits of the Spirit, Love, Joy, Peace, Long-suffering,
Gentleness, Goodness, Faith, Meekness, Temperance, Their Poverty of Spirit Holy
Mourning For Their own and Other men's Sins. Math. 5.3.


Their hungering and thirsting after Righteousness. 6. v. 8.
Their purity of heart, visible in the holiness of their lives. Their peaceable
and peacemaking dispositions. 9.10, 11, 12. Chapter 5.8.
Their patient bearing of the Cross. Their keeping of the word of God in the
precepts of it, and keeping close to it in the Truth of it. Their superlative
Love to Christ. Math. 10.37.
Their Cordial Love to the Saints. 1 Jo. 3.14.
Their Contempt of the World. 1 Jo. 2.15.
Their Love of Christ's appearance. 2 Timothy 4.8.
In a word, Their conformity to Christ their Head. Romans 8.29.

These, and the like Divine Virtues, although not seldom more visible to a
judicious stander by, than to themselves, and not to be weighed, but with some
grains of allowance, in the balance of the Sanctuary; these, I say, may
administer abundant matter of hope, and rejoicing to surviving Friends, that
those Relations, which are fallen asleep, were a people whom God has set apart
for himself, precious in his sight, honorable and beloved of him; a people
formed for himself, to show forth his praise, Col s. 1.13.
and made meet to be partakers of the Inheritance of the Saints in Light.

Yea even in them, whose Sun goes down in the morning of their Youth.

A teachable Spirit, Math. 13.16. Isa. 28.9. 71 Psalm. 5. Jo. 16.8. 1 John 2.13.
John 17.3.
Pious Inclinations, Sense of a lost Estate by Nature, A Competent knowledge of
God, and of Jesus Christ in his Offices, A real sense of the need and use of
Christ, 1 Pet. 2.7. 2 Timothy 3.15. Ps. 119.13.
An early acquaintance with the Scriptures, A good understanding of the Word
Preached, not without some savor of it. Respects to Gods Sabbaths, And in a
word, 1 Kings 14.13.
Any good thing toward the Lord God of Israel.
These early Impressions (I say) where ever they are found, (though according
to different ages and capacities more or less legible in them) are so many
hopeful Indiciums that God has been at work upon their hearts betimes, and
that he does not untimely take them away in judgment, but are polished Jewels,
which he has, of special grace laid up, and secured from the violence, and
profanation of a reprobate world.

Nay, once more: Those very Babes and Sucklings, whom God is pleased to remove
from us very early; snatched from their Mothers Breasts: yea possibly, who pass
swiftly from the Womb of their Natural Mother, unto the belly of the Earth,
their Original Mother; even these I say, they being A Covenant seed; Appendices
of their believing Parents, Children of promise, Act. 2.39. Consecrated unto
God by their Baptism, or, by the Tears and Prayers of their holy Parents (in
the want of it) having a right to the mercies, 1 Cor. 7.14. Romans 9.11. Mar.
10.4. Luke 1.44. Gal. 1.15. Renatiante quam nati. Aug.
privileges of the Covenant, as well as to Baptism.
Among whom is dispersed God the Father's Election. God the Son's purchase. God
the Holy Ghost's Influence and Operation.


Even these are not to be looked upon as a lost Generation, but may in the
warrantable judgment of Scripture Charity, be hopefully reputed for an Holy
Seed, Gods adopted Children; owned by Christ, and in him heirs, co-heires of
the Kingdom of Heaven; by special prerogative advanced to their Inheritance,
(as it were) before their time.

Upon this Foundation stands our hope, concerning our Godly Relations, which
are fallen asleep, of what age, or state soever; we are not to mourn for them
even as others, which have no hope. Let them mourn excessively, who know not
the Scriptures, nor the power of God in raising the Dead; who bury their
Relations and their hopes together in one Grave: but you, that (upon these
Scripture evidences) have good hope through grace, concerning your deceased
Friends, that while you are mourning on Earth, they are rejoicing in Heaven;
that whiles you are Clothed with black, they are Clothed in white, even in
the long white Robes of Christ's Righteousness; while you are rooling your
selves in the Dunghill, they are sitting with Christ upon his Throne. Do not, (I
beseech you,) profane your Scriptural hope, with an unscriptural mourning; give
not the world occasion to judge, either your selves to live without Faith, or
your Relations to dye without hope: but let your Christian moderation be known
to all men, that it may be a visible Testimony to all the world, of God's grace
in them, and of your hopes of their glory with God. Therefore comfort one
another with this word also.

A third word of comfort follows, and that is, A third word of Comfort

Our gracious Relations are not alone in their Death; The Captain of their
Salvation did march before them, through those black Regions of Death and the
Grave, Jesus died; this is implied in the following words, If we believe that
Jesus died: This is a third consolatory Argument, and it carries in it strong
consolation. Our sweet Relations in dying, run no other hazard, than Abraham,
Isaac, and Jacob did, no other hazard, than all the Patriarchs. and Prophets,
and Apostles did, in their generations, they all died, and were resolved into
their first dust.

Yea, what shall I say? They run no other hazard, than the Lord of all the
Patriarchs, Prophets and Apostles did, Jesus died; this is wonderful indeed,
the Lord of Life died! The eternal Son of God was laid in the Grave!

If our Children die, we know we begot them mortal: The Son of God had no
principle of mortality in him i.e. No sin in him to deserve it, nor disease to
cause it.
and yet he died.

Be our Children never so precious to us, they cannot be so precious to us (God
forbid they should) as the Lord Jesus was to His Father, who testifies
concerning him from Heaven with a loud voice, This is my well-beloved Son,
Math. 3.17.
in whom my Soul is well pleased: And yet God gave up this well beloved of his
Soul to the death, Jesus died!

And we indeed justly: Death is but our wages, wages as truly earned, as ever
was a penny by the poor hireling for his days labor; both we, and our
Offspring have forfeited our lives over, and over again by continual
reiterated Treasons against the supreme Majesty of Heaven and Earth: yea the
best blood which runs in our veins is Traitors blood by succession from our
first Rebellious Parents, for which God might justly have executed the sentence
(at first imposed) even as soon as ever we draw our first breath, Thou shall
dye the death, Genesis 3.

But He! what evil had he done? He was holy, harmless, undefiled, Heb. 7.26.
Isa. 53.61.71. Heb. Ho has made the iniquity of us all to meet in him.
separate from sinners -- He did no sin, neither was there guile found in his
mouth; He fulfilled all Righteousness; and yet Jesus dyed! And why so! Surely
he was wounded for our Transgressions, he was bruised for our Iniquities, the
Chastisement of our peace was upon him, and by his stripes we are healed; we
all like Sheep have gone astray, we have turned every one to his own way, and
the Lord has laid upon him the Iniquity of us all! Jesus Christ was the
Center, in whom the sins of all the Elect of God did meet, and unite together,
to make Him, as it were the common sinner. For God made him to be sin for us,
who knew no sin, that we might be made the Righteousness of God in him; and
under the insupportable burden of our sin, he swet, and wept, and bled, and
groaned, and gave up the Ghost.

Behold! Romans 8.31.
So God the Father Loved us, that he spared not his own Son, but delivered him
up to the death for us all; and shall we think much to give up the dearest
Treasures of our blood, in death, to Him?

So much did God the Son love us, that, He died for love of us; he died the
first death, that we might not die the second death; he died for us, that we
might live with him; And shall we count our lives, or the lives of our dearest
Relations too dear for him? especially, when no such advantage can accrue to
the Lord Jesus by our death, as did accrue to us by his death? also, in as much
as neither we nor ours, are in any capacity to reap the fruit, and advantage of
his death, until we dye also! and the sooner we dye, the sooner shall we reap
those fruits.

Behold! God's Firstborn was laid in the Sepulcher; and shall we think God
deals hardly with us, if we follow our firstborn to the Grave, and leave them
there, till our Lord himself come to awaken them?

Especially, since therefore Jesus died, and was buried, that he might
sanctify death to us by his death, and by his being buried, might perfume the
Grave, and make it a sweet Dormitory, or bed of spices for his members to rest
in, until the Morning of the Resurrection.

Oh Christians, Let us comfort our selves, and one another with these words
also, Jesus dyed.

The fourth word is yet more Cordial, A fourth word of Comfort.
and that is, although Jesus dyed, yet He rose again. He died indeed, but he
rose again from the dead. God suffered his dear Son to be laid in the
Sepulcher, but he did not leave him there, nor suffer any taint of Corruption
to seize upon his precious Body. And to that end, Christ made have to rise
again out of the Grave, he rose the third day, and that very early in the
Morning (says the Text) as soon, as ever it could be called day: The Alarm no
sooner went off (as it were) but the Lord Jesus did lift up his Royal head, and
put on his Glorious Apparel, and came forth out of his Grave, as a Bridegroom
out of his Chamber, in State and Triumph.

And this was the Cordial, which our Lord himself took before his passion. Thou will not leave my Soul in Hell, Psalm. 16.10.
neither will thou suffer thine holy one to see Corruption: Therefore my heart
is glad, and my glory rejoices, etc. This was his Triumphant Song: And it may
be ours, as well as his; yea therefore ours, because his (whether in reference
to our selves, or to our gracious Relations.) For therefore was not Christ left
in Hell (i. e. in the state of the dead) that he might lift up us also out of
the pit, and therefore his body saw (i. e. sustained) no corruption or
putrefaction (no not for the least particle of time) that our mortal bodies
might not inherit Rottenness and Oblivion in the dust, for ever. And indeed, in
this phrase in the Text, Jesus arose again, there be three things implied,
which interest every believer in this Triumph of Christ's Resurrection, etc.
Jesus rose again, implies three things.


First, Power. Secondly, Right. Thirdly, Office.
First, 1st. Power. (...)
Jesus Rose again, it implies Christ's power, Viz. That Jesus Christ rose by
his own power. It is not said, Jesus was raised, which might have spoken Him
passive only in his Resurrection, but Jesus rose, which speaks Him active;
namely, that he rose as a Conqueror by his own strength; as Himself
professes, I have power to lay down my life, and I have power to take it
again. Joh: 10.18.
What power that was Romans 1.4. will tell us, declared to be the Son of God with
power, according to the spirit of holiness, by the Resurrection from the dead.
It is true, it is elsewhere said that Christ was raised from the dead by the
Glory of the Father, Romans 6.4. And likewise that he was quickened by the Spirit,
Pet. 3.18. To show that neither the Father nor the Holy Ghost were excluded
from a joint share and concurrence in his Resurrection, but here as elsewhere
it is said also, that Christ rose, to show that he was not merely passive in
his Resurrection, as the Children of the Resurrection are, but that he rose
also by the mighty power that was seated in his own Royal person.

The divine Nature in Christ, to which the humane nature was personally united,
Alteram Christi naturam intelligamus, nempe (...). Verbi incarnati potentia.
was that Spirit of Holiness, by which the Lord Jesus did rise Triumphantly
from the dead. In the same language, speaks another Apostle; he was put to
death in the flesh, but quickened by the Spirit, i.e. by the Divine essence
which was in Christ. Death and the Grave had swallowed a morsel, which they
could not keep: but as the Whale, when it had swallowed Jonas (in this, the
Type of Christ) was forced to vomit him up again, (...).
it being impossible Christ should be holden by death: The power of the word
incarnate, loosed or dissolved the bonds of Death, as a thread of Tow is
broken, when it is touched with the fire. Yea (Sampson-like, herein also
another type of his) Jesus Christ did break in sunder the bars of the Grave,
and carried away the Gates of death upon his shoulders, making a show of them
openly.

Thus Jesus rose again, as a Conqueror by his own power, and this is our
Triumph, and Rejoicing: For surely, He, that thus raised up himself, can raise
up us also, and will indeed raise us up by the same power, Phil 3 21.
whereby he is able to subdue even all things unto himself.

Secondly, Jesus rose again; it implies his Office; Second. Office.
he rose as a Jesus, a Savior, the Mediator of our peace; who having finished
the work he came about, namely to satisfy divine Justice, and to bring in
everlasting Rightcousness, so making peace by the blood of his Cross; God the
Father sent a public Officer from Heaven, to open the Prison doors; Math.
28.2.
an Angel to rool away the stone from the mouth of the Sepulcher; thereby
proclaiming to all the world, that the debt was paid, and, that God had
received full satisfaction for the sins of the Elect, saying as it were,
Deliver him, for I have received a Ransom.

This is another ground of our Triumph, that Jesus rose, that is, he rose, as
our Jesus, our Savior, and so by dying, has delivered us from death, and from
him, Heb. 2.14. 1 These. 1.10.
that had the power of death, which is the Devil. -- Jesus who delivered us
from the wrath to come.

Thirdly, Jesus rose again, it implies his right to us, 3ly. His right and
interest.
and interest in us. He rose as our Jesus, i. e. as a public Head, in whom all
believers are considered. Jesus Christ as he died not in a private capacity
(for he had no sin of his own, Goel in the Hebr. signifies both a Redeemer and
the next of Kin, because the right of Redemption belonged to the next of Kin.
for which death might have any dominion over him) so neither did he rise again
in a private capacity, but in a public capacity, as he was our Goel, our next
of kin, unto whom the right of Redemption did belong: He rose as our sponsor
and surety, yea as our Husband and Bridegroom having espoused us to himself on
the Cross; He rose as the Captain of our Salvation, the public Head, and
Representative of all the Elect of God.

And this consideration lays another foundation for our Triumph in Christ his
Resurrection. Christ's Resurrection our Triumph, On a two sold account. 1.
Account, all the Saints are risen in Christ already judicially, legally.


And that upon a twofold account.
1. In as much as Christ being a public person, all the Saints of God are
risen already in Christ's Resurrection, that is to say, judicially, legally, as
in their Sponsor, and in their stead. In the sense of the Law, what the sponsor
or surety does, the principle debtor is said to do also: when the surety is
laid in prison, the principle is laid in prison also; when the surety pays
the debt, the principle is accounted as if he had paid the debt himself; when
the surety is discharged, the debtor is discharged also, because in the sense
of the Law, the principle and surety are but one person.

Thus the Lord Jesus as our Sponsor and Representative, having paid the debt,
we are reputed, as if we had paid it our selves; he being discharged, we are
discharged; he rising from the dead, we also rise in him, and with him: So
speak the Scriptures.

Dead with Christ, R^m. 66. Ephesians. 2.5.
Quickened together with Christ, raised up together, and made to sit together in
Heavenly places in Christ Jesus.

Whatsoever he does, as our Mediator, we are said to do the same in a juridical
sense.

Hence our Blessed Savior calls Himself, John. 11.25.
the Resurrection: I am the Resurrection and the Life, etc. He does not say,
egoresuscito etc. (It is Tertullian his observation) but ego sum Resurrectio;
not I raise the Dead, but I am the Resurrection; to show, that, as in Adam all
dye, so in Christ (the second Adam) all (his spiritual seed) shall be made
alive; that, as the first Adam was puteus mortis, a pit of sin and death, to
all his natural posterity; so the second Adam is fons vitae, a Wellspring of
Righteousness and Life to all his believing seed. So again, He says, not, I
give Life, but I am the Life, to show that it is but one and the same Life,
which Christ and Believers Live, Col. 3.3.
that his Life (he being their Representative) is their Life. When Christ who
is our Life, etc.

This is a word of Comfort indeed; The Saints of God are risen already in
Christ their Head; those precious pieces of beauty and delight, the loss of
whom we lament with brinish tears and sighs dipped in blood; they are risen, they
are not here, they are quickened together with Christ, raised up together, and
made to sit together with Christ in Heavenly places: I say, (in a forensical or
Court-sence) reputed so in Christ their Head and Surety. This is much: but this
is not all, there is yet a second account, and that is,

Secondly, Second Account. The Saints shall use with Christ really. The Saints
shall arise again in their own persons.
Jesus his rising again gives us infallible assurance of their, and our future
Resurrection: As they are risen with Christ legally, so they shall rise with
Christ really and personally.

God, in the Resurrection of Christ, has given to the world an instance and a
pledge of the Saints Resurrection in the last day.

There is an inseparable connection between the Resurrection of Christ and the
Resurrection of the Saints, and it is fourfold: scil.

A Connection of 1. Merit. A sour-fold Connection between Christ's Resurrection
and the Saints Resurrection, etc 1. Connex. of Merit.
2. Influence. 3. Design. 4. Union.


The first Connection that is between Christ's Resurrection and the Saints
Resurrection, is a Connection of Merit.

The Lord Jesus by his Death purchased both the Persons and the Privileges of
the Elect of God. Romans 14.9.
To this end Christ both died and rose again, that he might be the Lord both of
the dead and the living: In the former verse the Apostle asserts the absolute
dominion which the Lord Jesus has. over us; whether we live or dye, we are the
Lords: Here, he tells us what right or title that is, whereby he holds that
dominion, scil. by the right of purchase; For this end Christ both died, and
rose, and revived [Rose and Revived] that is, rising again he did revive; by
his death he merited of the Father, that both in death and in life, both dying
and rising again, he might dispose of the Saints to his own advantage. Why, now
the Lord Jesus having bought his Elect at so dear a rate, if the Saints should
not rise again, he should lose his purchase; there were no more Merit in the
death of Christ, than in the death of any of the Sons of Adam; and even in this
respect Christ had died in vain, and risen in vain.

A second Connection between Christ's Resurrection, 2 Connection of Influence.
and the Resurrection of Believers, is a Connection of Power, and Influence.
There is power in the Resurrection of Christ, for the quickening of the dead;
Psalm. 110.2.
This is that which the Psalmist calls the dew of Christ's Youth; from the
womb of the morning, thou have the dew of thy Youth. In the Hebrew it is more
than the dew of the morning, thou shall have the dew of thy Youth: The
Resurrection of Christ is called his Youth, wherein he did as it were spring
and grow forth again: and the quickening influence of his Resurrection is
compared to the morning dew, to show, that what virtue there is in the dew of
the morning, to cause the languishing plants of the Earth to revive and
flourish, that (and much more) power and efficacy there is in the Resurrection
of Jesus, to quicken and revive all his Saints, after they have lain all the
night of their separated state, in the Grave: So the Prophet Isaiah interprets
it in words at length, Isa. 26.19.
thy dew is as the dew of herbs; to what end? it follows; and the Earth shall
cast forth her dead: The dead shall arise by virtue of this dew; the warm
animating influence of Christ's Resurrection. Hence it is, (as I have hinted
before) that our Lord calls himself the Resurrection and the Life, namely to
intimate to us, that by the same spirit of holiness, whereby he raised himself
from the dead, he will also quicken their mortal bodies. This is a second
Connection, which inseparably links in the Resurrection of the Saints with the
Resurrection of Christ: For surely, were it not so, the Resurrection of Jesus
Christ would signify no more, than the Resurrection of Lazarus, or any other
of the Saints mentioned, Math. 27.52, 53. Yea, the Resurrection of Christ would
not be of so great virtue, and influence, as the dry bones of the Prophet, the
very touch whereof raised the dead man, 2 King. 12.21.
which was cast into his Grave.

Thirdly, There is between the Resurrection of Christ, Third Connection of
Design.
and the Resurrection of the Saints (at the last day) a Connection of Design.
The Lord Jesus had a design upon the Saints in his rising again from the Dead:
and what that was; he tells us in the last passionate prayer before his
passion, John 17.24. Father, I will that all those, whom thou have given me, be
with me, that where I am, they might be also: Therefore Christ arose and
ascended, that he might come again and awake them out of their Graves, and take
them home to himself into Mansions of Glory: So he comforted his Disciples
before his departure, Joh. 14.3. If I go, and prepare a place for you, I will
come, and receive you unto my self, that where I am, there you may be also.

Christ counts not himself full, Ephesians. 1.23. The Head is not complete without
the Members. Although: I thus sense the words, yet I would not be thought to
exclude every other meaning, as knowing that (...) signifies as well quod
impletur as quod implet.
till he has all his Members with him; therefore is the Church called, the
fullness of him that fills all things: mark it, Christ is the fullness of all
things, and yet the Church is called, the fullness of Christ: how so? Christ is
the fullness of the Church, as the Head is the fullness of the Members (supplying
them with Life and Influence) and the Church is the fullness of Christ, as the
Members are the fullness of the Head, making of it a complete and perfect man;
Christ is the fullness of the Church for internal animation, and the Church is
the fullness of Christ for external consummation. The Church is Christ's outward
not inward fullness, see Jeans on Colos. 1.19. page 19.

This is then a third inseparable Connection, between Jesus rising again from
the Dead, and the Saints rising again; because without this, Christ should
loose the very plot and project of his own Resurrection, and be defective even
in his state of Glory, as an Head without his Members. This must not be, it
cannot be.

And this casts us upon the fourth Connection, Fourth Connection of Union.
(before we are aware of it) sc. A Connection of Union. The Connection, which is
between Christ his Resurrection, and the Saints Resurrection; is that very
Connection, which is between him and them, namely the Union which is between the
Head, and Members; The wicked rise not by virtue of Christ's Resurrection, there
being no such. Union between Christ and them, they are raised by a general
power of Christ as a Judge.
Christ is the Head, Ephesians. 1.22. and the Saints are the Members of his body, v.
23. his Mystical body.

It would not be proper here to discourse largely concerning the nature of this
Union, especially, in as much, as I shall have occasion to meet with it again
in the process of this discourse, sufficient to my design it is to show you how
this spiritual Union that is between Christ and Believers, is one of the In
Nature we see that the Winter Trees which seem to be dead, revive again in the
Spring; because the Body, Arms, and Grains of the Tree are joined to the
Root, where the Sap lies all the Winter, and by means of its Conjunction, it
conveys vegetation to all parts of the Tree: Even so our life is hid with
Christ in God; And in the day of the Resurrection, by reason of this mystical
Conjunction, Divine and quickening Virtue shall stream from Christ to his
Elect, and cause them to rise again, etc.
Foundations whence the Resurrection of the Saints is necessarily inferred upon
the Resurrection of Christ himself. For if the Head be risen, the Members
cannot be long behind; witness the Word of Christ to his Disciples, (and in
them to all Believers, a word more precious than the whole Creation) Because I
live, ye shall live also. The Resurrection of the Saints is bound up in the
Resurrection of Christ, as the effect is bound up in the cause, because I live,
you shall live; because Jesus rose again, Saints shall rise again. Christ is
our life; and therefore, when Christ shall appear, we shall appear with him in
Glory.

Can the cause be without the effect? can the Head live, and the Members remain
dead? Yea, can the Saints life live, and they themselves continue in a state of
death? This is an happy contradiction, a blessed impossibility! Oh write this
comfortable word upon your hearts Christians, Christ is our life: Christ is
your Life, and the Life of your Christian Relations; and as sure as Christ as
risen, they shall rise, and because he lives, those Members of his, for whom
you weep and bleed, (as dead) shall live also with him. Surely if the Devil,
and all the powers of darkness were not able to keep Christ in the Grave,
neither shall they be able to hold one of his Members there for ever! Hence you
shall find the holy Apostle disputing from the Resurrection of Christ, to the
Resurrection of Christians; If Christ rose from the Dead, 1 Cor. 15.12.
how say some that there is no Resurrection of the Dead? and back again from
the Resurrection of Christians, ver. 13.
to the Resurrection of Christ; if there be no Resurrection of the Dead, then
Christ is not risen. Indeed the form of words is Negative, but the sense is
Affirmative; and for the greater assurance, it is repeated over and over in the
following verses; backward and forward as Convertibles; grant one, and ye grant
the other; deny one, and ye deny the other. And the result is this, But now is
Christ risen from the Dead, ver. 20.
and become the first Fruits of them that sleep; Christ is risen, Christ rose
as the first fruits, in which the whole Harvest is considered.
and risen as our first Fruits, as a pledge and part of the whole Harvest; for
if the first Fruits be holy, the Lump is also holy; if the first Fruits be laid
up safe in Gods Barns, the whole Harvest shall (in due time) be safely brought
in thither also, only it must stay its time appointed by the great
Husbandman, whose method is this, first, Christ the first Fruits, and
afterward, they that are Christ's at his coming.

Be of good cheer Christians, weep not; it is the Fathers good pleasure, that
not a Sheaf, not an Ear, not one grain be l^st; so witnesses the Truth, and
the Life; the Truth to testify it, and the Life to make it good; John 6.39.
this is the Fathers will which has sent me, that of all which he has given
me, I should lose nothing, but should raise it up again at the last day. (...).
nothing of all that, etc. i.e. not the least Person, nor the least Member of
the least person, how mean, and contemptible soever.

Will this content thee, Christian? Thy sweet Relation is not lost, but sown,
and that which is sown, is not quickened, unless it dye. At the Harvest time,
thou shall have thy seed again; revera faenore interitu, injuria usura, lucro
damno: Tertul. de Resur.
when that, which thou call perishing, shall be thy improvement; thy
treasure is not cast away, but put to use; and thy loss shall be thy gain.

Christians, This believed, is a word of Comfort indeed, so the Text tells us;
If we believe that Jesus died, and rose again: thy dead men shall live,
Together with his dead body shall they arise.

Obj. But what, not else?

Answ. Oh not so! not our Resurrection, or the Resurrection of our gracious
Friends, depend upon our Faith, but our assurance and comfort of their
Resurrection depends upon our Faith.

The Resurrection of the Saints stands upon a surer foundation than our Faith,
it stands upon a fourfold foundation, as you have heard.

Sc. The Merit. Influence. Design. Union, which is between Christ and his
Saints;
A Foundation which stands surer than Heaven and Earth: Heaven and Earth may
pass away, but not one of these Foundations shall ever pass away, or fail; The
Foundation of the Lord, stands sure, 2 Timothy 2.19. So then not their
Resurrection, but our comfort in their Resurrection, is that, which depends
upon our Faith. Sense stands blubbering and crying, my Parent is dead, my
Yoke Fellow is lost, my dear Child is perished: No says Faith, no such matter,
they are alive, they are safe, they are happy. And all this, Faith infers
upon Christ His Resurrection: So that whosoever has Faith enough to put
Christ's Resurrection into the premises, may by the same act of Faith, put the
Saints Resurrection into the conclusion. He that by an eye of Faith, can look
upon Christ's Resurrection, as past, may by the same eye of Faith, see the
Resurrection of the Saints as to come: he that by Faith can say, Christ is
risen; may with the same breath of Faith, say also, The Saints shall rise:
because I live, you shall live also: as a pledge and instance whereof, when
Christ arose, many of the Saints which slept, were enlarged out of the Prison
of the Grave (the heart strings whereof were now broken) to attend the
Solemnity of their Lord's Resurrection, Math. 27.52, 53.
and were as an other kind of first fruits of the last Resurrection of all
Believers.

By all these evidences, and demonstrations, Jesus Christ now in Heaven, speaks
to his mourners, as once he did (in the days of his flesh) to Martha, thy
Brother shall rise again; so he speaks to us, man, woman, thy Yoak-fellow shall
rise again, thine Isaac whom thou loved'st, shall rise again. And oh, that we
had but Faith enough to answer with Martha! I know he shall rise again in the
Resurrection at the last day: This would be a sovereign Cordial to keep our
hearts from fainting under our sorrows. If indeed we have not Faith to realize
this comfortable truth, our dear Relations, if they could speak, would cry to
us out of their Graves in some such language, as that, in which our Savior
rebuked the women which followed him to his Cross, Daughters of Jerusalem weep
not for me, etc. So ours; Son, Daughter, Husband, Wife, Father, Mother, (and
whatever other dear Relations) weep not for us, but weep for your selves, and
for the unbelief of your own hearts.

I, Christians, there is the springhead of all our misery, Hinc illae Lacrymae!
our unbelief; It is unbelief which robs us first of our sweet Relations, and
afterward of our comfort in their gains: and, if we look not to it the better,
it will keep us and them asunder to all Eternity: we cannot enter in, (to their
rest) if we continue in our unbelief: Mark 9.24.
cry we then with the Father of the Child, I believe, Lord, help my unbelief.
If we believe, that Jesus rose again, even so them also, which sleep in Jesus,
will God bring with him, which brings me to the fifth word of Comfort.

Them that sleep in Jesus.
The first word of Comfort in this model was, Fifth word of Comfort, the Saints
sleep in Jesus.
that our Christian Relations departed this life, are not dead, but fallen
asleep. -- Here follows a word of Comfort, of a richer import, which tells
us, that as they do but sleep, so they sleep in Jesus.

This expression notes to us, that blessed and admirable Union, which is
between Jesus Christ, and his Saints, 1 Cor. 15.18. They who are fallen a sleep
in Christ.
an Union frequently set out to us in Scripture under a twofold notion.

Scil. 1. Christ in the Believer. 2. The Believer in Christ.


First, Christ in the Believer, Romans 8.10. If Christ be in you, the body is
dead, etc. Colos. 1.27. Christ in you the hope of Glory; and here in the Text,
they are said to be in Jesus.

Secondly, The Believer in Christ, 1 Cor. 1.30. of him are ye in Christ Jesus;
who of God is made, etc. 2 Cor. 5.14. If any man be in Christ, he is a new
Creature, Colos. 1.2. the Saints in Christ. See both together, John 14.20. You
in me, and I in you. 15.4. Abide in me, and I in you. 5. He that abides in me,
and I in him.


These expressions are the same for substance, both setting forth to us the
Union it self, a mutual intimate in-dwelling, or in-being between Christ and
his Saints; He in them, and they in him, so making one.

They differ somewhat in the notion and import of the phrase, hinting to us a
different mode and fruit of this mutual In-being, viz. Christ is in the
Believer, by his Spirit, 1 Jo. 4.13. and 1 Cor. 12, 13. The Believer in Christ,
by Faith, John 1.12. Christ in the Believer, by Inhabitation, Romans 3.17. The
Believer in Christ, by Implantation, Jo. 15.2. Romans 6 35. Christ in the
Believer, as the Head in the Body, Col. 1.18. as the root in the branches, Jo.
15 5. Believers are in Christ, as the Members are in the Head, Ephesians. 1.23. as
the Branches in the Root, John 15.1.7. Christ in the Believer, implies Life
and Influence from Christ, Col. 3.4. 1 Pet. 2.5. The Believer in Christ,
implies Communion and fellowship with Christ, 1 Cor. 1.30. When Christ is said
to be in the Believer, we are to understand it in reference to sanctification.
When the Believer is said to be in Christ, it is in order to justification. It
is Christ without us, 1 Cor. 1.30. Righteousness.
that justifies; it is Christ within us, that sanctifies. Grace (in the
Apostles phrase) is Christ formed in the heart. Gal 4.19.



These and the like expressions, hold forth that transcendent, and mysterious
Union which is between Christ and the Believing Soul, whereby they are not only
joined together; but in a sober Gospel-sense united, oned as it were; Christ
becomes one with them, and they one with Christ.

This Union with Christ, for the clearer and safer understanding of so great
and precious a mystery, Six or seven properties of this Union.
I shall endeavor more fully to open in these six or seven distinguishing
properties, It is a 1 Spiritual, Union. It is a 2 Real, Union. It is a 3
Operative, Union. It is a 4 Enriching, Union. It is a 5 Intimous, Union. It is
a 6 Total, Union. It is a 7 Indissoluble, Union.


The first property. It is a Spiritual Union. First property, It is Spiritual.
When we speak of this Union, we must abstract from all that is gross and
fleshy; there is nothing in it obvious to sense, perceptible by the eye, or by
the ear, or by the touch, or taste; it is not effected by any corporeal contact:
Christ, and the Believer are not tied together by any material bonds, and
fleshy sinews, but their Union is a pure, immaterial, sublime Union; altogether
Spiritual; and that upon a double account.

First, partly in as much as by this Union, Christ, 1 Cor. 6.17.
and the Believer are made one Spirit; He that is joined to the Lord, is one
Spirit: not only, one Spiritually, but one Spirit: not as exclusive to the
body it self, Ephesians. 2.29.
for we are Members of his Body, of his Flesh, and of his Bones; but expressing
to us the top and perfection of this Union. He, that is joined to an Harlot; is
one flesh, in an impure, and carnal sense. Man and Wife, 1 Cor. 6 16.
though their conjunction be more honorable, yet are but one flesh also, in a
conjugal sense: For two, says he, shall be one flesh; I, but he that is joined
to the Lord, is one Spirit; an Union infinitely more honorable, than that in
Marriage; the Believer is joined to Christ, into one, and the same Spirit; he
is animated, and acted by one and the same Spirit with Christ, though in a
different degree and measure, for God gave not the Spirit by measure unto him.
Jo. 3.34. (...).
Christ as Mediator (for in that capacity Believers are United unto him, and
not merely as second person) received the Spirit without measure Christ was
anointed with the oil of gladness above his fellows, Psalm. 15.^. (...) he had a
larger effusion of the Spirit poured out upon him, than all other Kings and
Priests and Prophets.
.

Believers have but their stinted measure and proportion, and yet
notwithstanding the Spirit of God dwelling as truly in them, as it did in
Christ himself; (though not essentially) they thereby become one Spirit with
Christ.

And then again, It is a spiritual Union.

2. Partly, because the bones and ligaments of this Union, are not Carnal, but
Spiritual; Scil. the Spirit whereby Christ Unites himself to the Believer on
Christ's part; The presence of the Spirit makes this Union, by virtue of which
God communicates with us, as with his Sons, and we communicate with God, as
with our Heavenly Father: The exercises of Communion on both sides, are managed
by the Spirit of Christ, Gal. 4.6. -- And the bond of Faith on the Believers
part, whereby the Believer is United to Christ, as the Cion is engraffed into
the Stock, and thereby grows up to be one with the Stock: So is the Believer
implanted into Christ by Faith, Ephesians. 3.17. grows up in him, receives life
and nourishment from him, and is preserved in him to life eternal; kept by the
power of God, through Faith, unto Salvation, 1 Pet. 1. Behold! (...)
here is the subordination of these two bonds; Faith keeps the Believer, and
the power of God keeps his Faith; Per organum ^^lei and Sp^ritus Christi
virtu^^^^.
now the Spirit of God, is that power. Upon this twofold account then, is this
Union a spiritual Union, viz. 1. Because an Union of Spirit. 2. Because
effected by spiritual bonds.

A second property of this Union. It is a real Union, A second Property. Real
in a tenfold opposition. Entia Rationis.
and that in a tenfold distinction.
First, In opposition to an imaginary Union, it is no metaphysical notion, or
like those things which Logicians call Intellectual beings; or your
Mathematical Lines, which have their existence only in the understanding and
fancy.

Secondly; Nor is it a Relative Union only; as Father and Child, Master and
Servant are united: such an Union there is between Christ and Believers; but
that is not all.

Thirdly; Neither is it a legal Union only. Christ and the Believer are not one
only, as the Debtor and the Surety are one in Law, in a forinsecal sense, i.e.
in the interpretation and judgment of the Court. In this sense they are one
indeed, viz. in the judgment of God, as a Judge, (as I have formerly showed)
but not only so.

Fourthly; Nor is it an Union only of assent in point of doctrine and judgment,
though so much it is, for says the Apostle in the name of all Believers. We
have the mind of Christ. 2 Cor. 2.16. (...).
The Believer, (so far as he is a Believer) is of the same mind, judgment, and
opinion with Jesus Christ in all things. And this truly gives them a kind of
oneness; whence a firm and steadfast continuance in the Faith, i.e. in the
doctrine of Jesus Christ, Fides quae creditur.
is called an in being in Christ, John 15.4.6. and an abiding in Christ, 1 John
2.24.28. Scil. a professional or doctrinal Union with Christ. This the Saints
of God have, but neither is this all.

Fifthly; Nor yet is it merely an Union of consent; The Believer is not one
with Christ, only by consent of wills. The Arrians whilst they blasphemously
deny the Deity of the Son, betray a double ignorance (and if but ignorance,
there sin is the less) the one in the doctrine, or assertion it self; the other
in the ground, which they allege for it, which is Christ's own words, praying
to his Father for Believers, John 17.22. that they may be one, even as we are
one; whence they (supposing Believers to be one with the Father and the Son,
only by consent of wills) do infer, neither are the Father and the Son one in
any other sense. But say we, they err in the very foundation: we acknowledge
indeed Believers to be so far one with Christ, Idem velle, Idem nolle vera est
amicitia.
and that is a very sweet and precious union: to will and nill the same things,
is an high degree of love and oneness; but to say no more of the Union betwixt
Christ and his Saints, is to say too little.

Sixthly; Neither is this Union barely a Sacramental Union; whereby Christians
(in either of the Sacraments, or any other Evangelical institution) are in an
Elemental professional way joined to Christ, and Christ to them. Thus all, good
and bad, Elect and Reprobate, Simon Magus as well as any of the Believing
Samaritans, Acts 8.12, 13. Judas as well as Peter: all I say, are made one with
Christ in an external professional use of those Gospel-institutions; while in
the mean time a real Believer, in a true, living, spiritual, saving way, is
made partaker of Christ, and of all his benefits in all Gospel Ordinances.

Seaventhly; In contradistinction to the Union which we have with Christ, by
virtue of his assuming our humane nature. Christ was incarnate in the Womb of
the Virgin, and thereby was personally united to our flesh; which is the
highest advancement of the humane nature, that can be conceived, Heb. 2.16. For
verily he took not upon him the nature of Angels, but the seed of Abraham;
Christ assumed man's nature, being God from all Eternity; he took on him the
one, to the other; and so made of those two natures, one person: by this we
have a kind of Union with Jesus Christ, ver. 11. He which Sanctifies, and they
which are Sanctified, are both of one, i.e. of one God, say some; the Son of
God, and Saints are all of one God the Father: others understand it of Adam;
Christ as concerning the flesh, and all the sanctified, are of one common root
and Father, though, by a different generation. But [of one] here is to be
referred principally to the nature, whereof both the sanctifier and sanctified
are partakers, i.e. Acts 17.26. (...).
they are of the same blood and kindred, of the same mould and constitution, of
the same humane nature. This is a near and an honorable Conjunction; for by
this means Jesus Christ is become our Immanuel, God with us, bone of our bone,
and flesh of our flesh: but yet this Conjunction is common to all, sanctified
and unsanctified, profane and holy; and verily it will be found an high
aggravation of sin in the great day, that sinners should dare to profane and
prostitute that nature to sinful purposes, Heb. 2.11.
which the Son of God has sanctified by so wonderful an assumption of it into
one and the same personality with the divine nature. Thus the sanctified are
one with him that sanctifies, but that is not all.

Eighthly; It is real in contradistinction to that contemplative Union which
the Saints have with Christ in their holy Meditations. Meditation does bring
the object and the faculty together, and makes them one: And thus the Saints
are (often) united to Jesus Christ in holy contemplation, whereby they let in
Christ into their Souls, and their Souls into Christ, and become as it were One
Spirit, or one in Spirit, with him: but neither is this all, for even common
gifts and parts may produce this Conjunction, as well, as Grace; Art may thus
Unite Christ, and the understanding, as well, as Faith. One may be thus United
to Christ for a time, and yet be separated from Christ for ever.

Again, Ninethly; It is a real Union in contradistinction to Reconciliatory
Union. Falling out separates between person and person; Reconciliation makes
them one again; Reconciliation is the Atonement of Enemies: and thus indeed,
God and Sinners are Reconciled by Christ; by him we have received the
Atonement; those whom sin made two, Romans 5.11. (...). Reconciliation.
Christ makes one. This is a choice fruit of Christ's death, a concomitant of
our Union with Christ, yet not the very Union it self, or not the whole of this
Union: there is between Christ and Believers the Union of Friendship, 2 Cor.
5.18, 19. But neither is that all.

Tenthly and lastly; This Union is real in contradistinction to affectionate
Union. Crederes unam animam in duobus esse divisam. Min. Fell. Oct.
Love is as an uniting affection, it makes the lover and the beloved one; as if
two persons had but one Soul between them: thus Christ loves the Saints, Rev.
1.5. and the Saints love Christ again, 1 Pet. 1.8. Christ's love to them is the
cause; their love to Christ, is the effect, 1 Jo. 4.19. Yet this Union is,
rather a fruit of that Union (we are now speaking of) than the Union it self;
as in Marriage, the conjugal bond, and conjugal love are distinct things:
Indeed Love does Unite Christ and the Saints, but Love is rather the fruit of
this Union, than the Union it self; there is somewhat more real in this Union,
than the Love it self.

None of all these, reach the nature of this Union. The Scripture describes it
to be a real and a solid Union; as real as that beween Head and Members, Root,
and Branches; for, although it be a Spiritual Union, yet does it not therefore
cease to be real; things are not therefore less real, because Spiritual, yea
therefore more. God, who is the most absolute, and real Being (a Being which
gives Being to every thing which has a being) is most spiritual: John 4.24.
God is a Spirit; and the nearer any being or excellency approximates unto God,
the more real it is, the more it self; as we see in Angels, and the Souls of
men.

Our Savior his giving of us his Flesh to eat, is not, as the Papists believe
(or rather, as they would make us believe, they do believe) literal and carnal,
the truth it self bearing witness, John 6.63. The Flesh profits nothing, q.
d. If you could literally tear my Flesh with your teeth, and pour my Blood down
your throats, this would not profit you at all in point of Salvation. What then
will? Why, the words which I speak, are Spirit and Life, i. e. they are to be
understood in a Sacramental and spiritual sense, etc.

And yet although Christ's Body be not food in a fleshly, but in a spiritual
sense, Jo. ^.55. (...). Truly or Verily.
it is not therefore less real; no, my flesh is meat indeed, and my Blood is
drink indeed, it is neither painted nor Enchanted meat, but real and
substantial; yet not corporal but spiritual; yea, it is so real, that in
comparison of that, all other corporal food is but imaginary and metaphorical:
it is but like bread, it is but like wine, painted bread, Quasi food.
and painted wine; not so indeed, and in truth, compared with Christ in the
holy Supper.

Such is this Union, although, yea, because, it is not a corporal, but a
spiritual Union; therefore it is so true and real, that in comparison of it,
all Unions and Conjunctions in nature, are nothing else but so many figures and
shadows: It is as real as the Believer himself, as real as Christ himself;
Christ, and the Believer are not more really one in themselves, than they are
in, and with one another 1 Cor. 6.16.
spiritually. Yea our Lord carries us one step higher; It is an Union as real,
as that essential Union between the Father and the Son. John 17.21.
As thou Father art in me, and I in thee; that they also may be one in us, as
i. e. as truly, as verily, though not substantially; It notes (I say) the
reality of the Union, though not the kind and manner of it.

Third Property.
Thirdly; This Union is an operative Union. Third Property, operative. Gal.
2.20. Colos. 3.4.
Christ is in the Believer, as the soul is in the body a principle of life and
operation. I Live says the Apostle; but as if he had said too much, he recals
what he had said, yet not I; but, Christ lives in me; q. d. It is not so much
I that live, as Christ in me. Christ is my life, it is he that animates me, he,
that acts me, it is he, that does all his work in me, and my works for me; It
is he that believes in me, that desires in me, (whatsoever is good, and
spiritual) it is he that repents in me, and loves in me, and prays in me. My
meaning is not to gratify the Antinomians; for though the Acts be efficiently
from Christ, yet formally they are wholly ours; Christ is the next Efficient
Cause, but not the next Formal Cause: though he be the immediate cause in
respect of the virtue and power by which we act; yet he is only a mediate Cause
in respect of the Order of acting; and therefore properly the act only
denominates us, and not him. Though the act be mine, the strength is his; I can
do all things through him that strengthens me; I am but the instrument only,
which his hand manageth; it is his Finger that touches me, his skill that
makes the Music. It is such an Union as from whence the Believer, by Faith
draws life, and virtue from Jesus Christ to all spiritual and saving intents,
and purposes.

The influence of his Death, for the mortifying of his Corruptions; they that
are Christ's (by virtue of this blessed Union) have Crucified the flesh with
the Affections and Lusts, sc. Gal. 6.14.
by virtue derived from his Cross, The power of his Resurrection, for the
quickening and strengthening of them to all the Acts and Operations of Grace;
Phil. 3.10.
yea, whereby all the Offices of the holy Life, become sweet, facile, and
complacential; those duties, and employments, which unto the Unregenerate man
are hard, 1 Jo. 5.4.
and grievous, and even so many impossibles, by Faith, improving its Union with
Christ, are made light, easy, and Connatural, even as the operations of
another nature: All this the Apostle would have us to understand, when he
says, his Commandments are not grievous There is a (...) in the words, more
is understood than expressed.
.

A Fourth Property is like unto this, Fourth Property, enniching.
and that is
4. This Union is a Soul-enriching Union. By virtue of this blessed Union, the
Saints are invested into all the unsearchable Riches of Jesus Christ; as by
virtue of the Marriageknot, the Wife is enstated into all the Reveneues, and
Privileges of her Husband. 1 Cor. 1.30.


Of him are ye in Christ Jesus, who of God is made unto us Wisdom,
Righteousness, Sanctification, and Redemption. Observe Christians!

In Christ Jesus: there is the Union, and thence flows Communion, and Fellowship
with him in all his privileges, Wisdom, Righteousness, Sanctification, and
Redemption. Here you have the very Epitome, and summa totalis of the Gospel;
Christ in four words.
the whole Christ in four words; the benefit, and fruit of all his Offices,
suitable and sufficient to supply all the defects and indigences of the
Creature: For behold! here is Wisdom for our Folly; Righteousness for our
guilt; Sanctification for our impure natures, and Redemption for our (every
way) lost and undone condition: wisdom to make us wise to salvation, there is
the fruit of his prophetical Office; they shall all know me, Jerem. 31.34.
Righteousness for our justification; Romans 10.4.
Christ is the end (or complement) of the Law for Righteousness to every one
that believes Finis impletionis; or if you will, rather fints intentionis: The
scope of the Law; He to whom the Law leads and directs us for justification,
Gal. 3 24. It equally answers my design.
, there is the fruit of his Priestly Office; Sanctification, to begin holiness
where it is wanting, and to increase it where it is begun, (Christ is a
Fountain of holiness, as well as a Fountain of happiness) there is the fruit of
his Kingly Office; he sets up his Kingdom in the Soul, Romans 14.17. Redemption,
fully, and finally to deliver us from the power of darkness, from wrath to come,
from all the remainders of sin, and misery; and to translate us into the
Kingdom of Grace and Glory; there is the joynt-fruit of all his Offices.

Behold Christians! This is the rich and precious fruit which grows upon the
Offices of Jesus Christ, and all made ours by means of this glorious Union.
First, in Christ, then follows Wisdom, Righteousness, Sanctification, and
Redemption.

Yea, one step higher yet: By virtue of this Union with Christ, Believers are
made
Believers are not only made partakers of the fruits of Christ's Offices, but
are invested into the very Offices themselves. Was he anointed to be a King? so
are they: he has made us Kings, etc. Rev. 1.6. Kings,
was Christ anointed to be a Prophet? Believers also partake of the same
unction. 1 Jo. Prophets,
2.20. Ye have an unction of the holy one, and ye know all things. Was Christ
anointed to be a Priest? so are they, Priests.
ye are a chosen Generation, a Royal Priesthood. 1 Pet. 2.9.
Here are two Offices twisted together, Royal, there is their Kingly Office;
Priesthood, there is their Sacerdotal; a Kingdom of Priests, Exodus 19.6. 1 Pet.
2.5.
as Moses phraseth it; Priests, as they stand in relation to God, to offer up
spiritual Sacrifice to God, acceptable by Jesus Christ: and Kings in respect of
men, to rule over others, and themselves too.

This is much, and yet this is not all;
By virtue of this Union, Believers share with Christ in all his (communicable)
titles and dignities. Is he a Son? Gal. 4, 5.
so are they; Christ, the Son of God by Nature; they the Sons of God by
Adoption. Was Christ the Heir of all things, Heb. 1.3? Believers are Heirs also
in him, and with him. If Children, Romans 8.17.
then Heirs, Heirs of God, and joynt-Heirs with Jesus Christ; though they are
not joynt-Purchasers (by their good works) as the Papist would make them, yet
they are joynt-Heirs (by grace), as God has made them; sc. by virtue of their
Union with Jesus Christ.

Does Christ call God his Father, and his God? behold! He, Heb. 2.11.
(being not ashamed to call them Brethren) lets them know that he is their God,
and Father. God to my Brethren, and say to them, John 20.17.
I ascend to my Father, and your Father, to my God and your God.

Once more: Has the Father appointed him a Kingdom? so does he appoint unto
them a Kingdom, Luke 22.29. Has the Father assigned him a Throne? so does
Christ assign unto his Saints a Throne also. To him that overcomes, will I
grant to sit with me, Rev. 3.21.
in my Throne, even as I also overcame, and am set down with my Father in his
Throne.

My Brethren! what a Soul-enriching, beatifical Union is this! There be Unions
in nature, which convey nothing, communicate nothing, but empty, and
insignificant titles, which make the person admitted into them, not a whit the
richer, the better, not a jot the more noble or happy: but this Union (as that
divine essential Union between the Father, and the Son does invest Christ into
all divine properties and prerogatives with the Father, so this between Christ
and the Believer) invests the Believer into the whole Christ, and all his
riches, and all his glory, in so much as the Spouse gives in the whole account
in this vast and invaluable sum. Cant. 2.16.
My Beloved is mine, and I am his; he is mine; the whole Christ is mine in his
natures, offices, excellencies, prerogatives, and inheritance; In all he is,
and in all he has, it is all mine, for my good, and for my glory: This is the
voice of her Faith, and then I am his, this is the voice of her love, I am his,
in all I am, in all I have, in all I can make by my interest in the world; and
if it were a thousand times more, he should have it all, and all too little for
him, who has loved me, and washed one in his own Blood, and has taken me into
so rich and glorious an Union with his own self. To him be glory for ever,
Amen. This is the fourth Property.

I proceed to a fifth property of the Union, Fifth Property, an intimous Union.
and it is a near, inward, intimous Union. To hint the intimateness of this
Union, the Holy Ghost in Scripture, carries us through the climax of all Unions
under Heaven, and compares it with them, of what nature and kind soever,
Whether Artificial, Whether Political, Whether Natural,
Wherein, although you may find different degrees, one exceeding another, yet
all falling short of this blessed Union, in respect of closeness, and intimacy;
It tells you that, look how the house and foundation are one, so are Christ and
Believers, 1 Pet. 2.4, 5, 6. yea higher.

It tells you, that; look how Husband and Wife are one, so is Christ and his
Saints, Hos. 2.19. Ephesians. 5.30. only with this incomparable difference, Husband
and Wife make but one flesh; 1 Cor 6.16, 17.
but Christ and the Believer make one Spirit ut supra.

It tells us (yet higher) that look how the Head and Members are one, so is
Christ and his Church, 1 Cor. 12.12. how root and branches are one, John
15.1.6. so Christ, and Believers; and closer yer, the Scripture tells us, that,
look how Food, and the body are one, so also is Christ, and the Believer one;
hence we hear of eating his Flesh, and drinking his Blood, John 6.51, 53, 54,
55, 56. and nearer yet (if nearer can be.)

It (...), that look how the Soul and Body are one, how Life, and the subject
wherein it resides are one, so is Christ and the Believer, Colos. 3.4. when
Christ who is our life shall appear, etc.

Behold, here (Christians) is an Union which amounts tantum non to an identity;
say only with Cyprian, it is not such an Union as is between the two natures in
Christ, Non miscet personas nec unit substantias. Cypr. It is indeed an Union
of persons, but not a personal Union Mystici Theologi. A Believer
trans-essentiated into God, and Bread and Wine transsubstantiated into Christ,
are much of a Language. So they call the Holy Ghost, auram zephyri caelestis
and pardon of sin, Deos superos, manesque pacare. Card. de Bemb.
which makes them but one person; not such an Union as is between the three
glorious Persons in the blessed Trinity, who notwithstanding the distinction of
their personality, are but one nature and essence, and you cannot say or think
too highly of this Union; yea whatsoever you can say, or think, will be short
of the intimacy and excellency of this Union.

Only we must tell the world, that those mystical divines (amongst the
Papists) as they call themselves, who talk of the Saints being trans-
essentiated into God; and those Seraphicks amongst us (as they would be called)
but Phanatiques more truly and properly, who rant at the same rate [Christed
with Christ, and Godded with God,] these speak as men so ambitious of being
accounted sublime, and Angelical in comparison of all other men, whom they
scorn as illiterate Literatists, that they think it a lessening to them to
speak in a common and sober Dialect; and rather, then not speak bigger words
then other men, they fear not to speak Blasphemy; The Lord convince them.

Notwithstanding, I must add this to what I have said, that because no Union
under Heaven was close enough to express the oneness which is betwixt Christ
and the Believer; therefore our Lord Jesus himself carries us up to Heaven,
there to contemplate the essential Union, which is between the Father and the
Son, Jo. 17.
and puts them into the same parallel; As thou Father art in me, and I in thee,
that they may be one in us; yet still we must be careful to understand the
words of Christ in a sober sense, lest, whilst our Lord does honor our Union
with himself, by comparing it to divine Union in the Trinity, we do in the
least dishonor that Union by levelling it with ours; we must duly remember,
that this comparative particle as, does not here intend equality, but likeness
o^^y; the truth of the intimacy, and not the nature, or the degree of it; to
lift up this mystical Union above all other Unions in nature; but we must still
keep the divine Union in its own place. This is the fifth property.

The sixth property. Sixth property total.

It is a total Union. The whole Christ is United to the whole Christian; as the
whole humane nature in Christ, is joined to the whole divine nature; so the
whole person of a Believer, is joined to the whole person of Christ; yet not so
as to make Christ and the Believer but one person; but as (in the conjugal
Union between Man and Wife) making up one (mystical) body; or, as in the body
natural, every Member is joined to the head, and the head to every member: so
is Christ and the Believer.

Yea, once more. By virtue of this Union with Christ, the Believer is likewise
united to the whole divine nature and essence in the Deity, though not
essentially; and he is likewise united to each person in the Trinity, the
Father, and the Holy Ghost, as well as to the Son, John 17.21. Behold, that
thus it is done to the man, whom God will honor! Thanks be to God for this
unspeakable Grace.

This is the sixth Property.

The Seventh and last Property.
This Union is an indissoluble Union. Seventh property, Indissoluble.
This Union between Christ and the Believer, is not capable of any separation.
They are so one, that all the violence of the world, or all the powers of
darkness, can never be able to make them two again.

Hence the Apostle's Triumph Challenge, Romans 8.35.
who shall separate us from the love of Christ? If the question did not imply a
strong negation, ver. 38, 39.
the Apostle himself does give us a negation in words at length, neither death,
nor life, nor Angels, nor Principalities, nor Powers, nor things present, nor
things to come, nor height, nor depth, nor any other creature, shall be able to
separate us, etc.

A long Catalogue, consisting of a large induction of various particulars! but
in all these it is observable; he only instanceth in the creature, nor any other
creature, -- he leaves out God, and why? because God himself is the Author of
this Union; 1 Cor. 1.30.
of him are ye in Christ Jesus; It is of God, and that

Upon a threefold Account,
1. It is of God's Preordination. This Union of Christ and his Saints, was the
design of God's everlasting, Electing Love. Ephesians. 14.
He has chosen us in him, before the Foundation of the World. As the Union, so
the very purpose of it, was founded in Tanquam in capite, though not tanquam in
causa; not as the cause of Election, but as the cause of the good of Election;
for it is not said for him, but in him. Vid. Twiss. vindic. grattae, lib. 1.
part 2.

Digres Prim. Secund. Tert.


Christ, He has chosen us in him.

2. It is of God the Fathers efficiency: the Father tyeth this Marriage knot
between his Son and his Spouse; for, we are his Workmanship, Created in Christ
Jesus, etc. The new Creation, it is God's work, and it is founded on Christ, or
in Christ, created in Christ Jesus, etc.

3. It is of Gods support. As in the first Creation, when God had finished the
world, he took not his hand off; but upholds it still by the word of his power,
Heb. 1.3. So in this second and new Creation; when he has wrought it, he takes
not off his hand; if he should, it would quickly collapse into its first
nothing. How comes it then to pass it does not? why says the Apostle, 1 Pet.
1.5. you are kept by the power of God, through Faith to Salvation: Faith keeps
the Believer in this Union; but the power of God keeps Faith. Why now, if after
all this, God should at any time suspend the influence of this power; or, by
any malice, or fraud of men, or Devils, suffer this Union to miscarry, he
should fail and cross his own project, he should desert his own design; this
cannot be.

Here is the Foundation then, upon which the Apostle erecteth this Triumph: God
who only can dissolve this Union will not; the Creature, which only would
dissolve this Union, cannot; so it stands on a surer bottom then Heaven and
Earth, our life is hid with Christ in God. The Believer is in Christ, as Christ
is in God, hence the unseparableness of this Union: John 10.28, 29.
There is no more pulling the Believer out of the bosom of Christ, then there
is of Christ out of the bosom of his Father.

And therefore once more, upon this account it is, that our Lord compares this
blessed Union to that substantial Union between the Father and the Son, that
they may be one, as we are one, namely to express, as the reality and
inwardness, so also, the indeficiency of this spiritual Union, as thou Father
art in me, and I in thee. As, i.e. as fixedly, as inseparably, as immutably.

This is the transcendent excellency of this Union above all others, it is
Eternal. Indeed it had a beginning, but it shall never have an end. All other
Unions may suffer a dissolution; a Whirlwind may throw the house off from its
foundation, Job. 1.18, 19.
as we see in the case of Job's Children; a Bill of Divorce may dissolve the
Union betwixt Man and Wife: in case of the violation of the Marriage Bed. Math.
5.31, 32.
An Axe may dissolve the Union between the Head and Members.

Death dissolves the Union between the Soul and body, etc.

I, but nothing can dissolve the Union between Christ and the Believers;
nothing shall be able to separate us, etc.

My Text gives us a further instance of this; the Saints sleep in Jesus; The
Union cease not, no not in the Grave. The Saints sleep in Jesus.
Observe the progress of it, it began in their Regeneration; then they received
their first Implantation into Christ, Romans 6.3 4, 5. whence the Apostle makes
Regeneration, and being in Christ synonimous, Romans 6.3, 4.

Next, they are said to live in Christ, and Christ in them, Gal. 2.20.

Then to show there is no in and out; In to day, and out to morrow,
in this Union (as some fondly dream) we read of their abiding in Christ, not
only by way of precept (which might (possibly) imply duty only, as John 15.4,
5.) but by way of promise also, as 1 John 2.27. Ye shall abide in me; which
certainly does express assurance, and establishment for ever, Romans 4.16.

Therefore they are said in the next place, to dye in Christ; Blessed are the
dead that dye in the Lord: so verse 16. after the Text, makes mention of the
dead in Christ; so that, that which dissolves all other Unions, dissolves not
this, death it self; when the Union between body and Soul is dissolved, the
Union between Christ and Believers dissolveth not.

Yea, see one strain higher yet; not only in death, but even after death, The
Soul sleeps not. Heb. 12.23.
this Union holds; the Saints are said to sleep in Jesus; that part of the
Saints, which is capable of sleep, is not capable of separation from Christ;
while their more noble part is united to Christ in Heaven, amongst the Spirits
of just men made perfect; Christ is United to their Inferiors and more ignoble
part in the Grave, their very dust; they sleep in Jesus.

Thus I have opened unto you the blessed and admirable Union which is between
Christ and his Saints, and it is most excellent, and transcendent properties,
scil. as it is 1. Spiritual. 2. Real. 3. Operative. 4. Enriching. 5. Intimous.
6. Total. 7. Indissoluble.


Opened, did I say? Alas it is impossible! This Union is a mystery; a great
mystery, Ephesians. 5.32. next to that Union betwixt the three glorious persons in
Trinity, and that other (like unto it) between the two natures in Christ,
profound and ineffable! 1 Cor. 2.14. Quia nihil animal animali superius,
cogitare potest.
the heart of man is not able to conceive it, nor the tongue of an Angel to
express it: the natural man knows it not at all, no more of it, than a Swine
knows what the Union is between the Soul and body in man; it is above his
principle, 1 Cor. 2.14. The spiritual man understands it very imperfectly;
all we know is rather, that it is, than what it is; the full and perfect
knowledge of it, is reserved for the future state; so our Lord has told us,
John 14.20. At that day ye shall know, that I am in the Father, and you in me,
and I in you; then, and not till then: we shall never perfectly understand this
Union, until we come fully to enjoy it.

In the mean time, if a short improvement of such a rich point might not be
judged too much improper in such a contemplative discourse, as this is; a few
things might be hinted from hence, by way of Use.

Use
First; Here we may discover the main Foundation, 1 Perseverance stands not in
the nature of Grace.
and Reason of the Saints perseverance; surely it consists not in the nature of
Grace, infused in their Regeneration; this differs not specifically from the
Grace which Adam received in his first Creation; that was the Image of God,
Genesis 1.26, 27. and so is this, Colos. 3.10. and therefore of it self, cannot
produce any higher or more noble effects under the one Covenant, then it did
under the other.

Secondly; 2. Nor in freedom of will.
Nor does it consist in the liberty and rectitude of their own Wills, though
Regenerate; for if Adams free will did him so little service in his perfect
state, when it was entire, free, without any mixture of servility, how little
security (think you) can the liberty, Ex nolentibus facit volentes. Aug.
wherewith Christ makes the will free in the new Creation, afford the Saints,
wherein the state of Grace is yet imperfect? and the freedom of their wills
mixed with so much bondage, that it made the holy Apostle look upon it, little
different (for the present) from a captivity, Romans 7.24.
and to cry out (to astonishment) for a Redeemer to come in and make a rescue?
O Wretch that I am, who shall deliver me? etc. He found by experience, that if
it were not more for a Christ, than for the freedom of his own will, that body
of death, which he carried about him, would infallibly prove his total and
final ruin: but [I thank God for Jesus Christ our Lord] there was his
security. But, 1. In the Covenant of Grace.


Where then shall we bottom the stability and fixedness of the Saints? surely
upon a twofold Foundation.

First; Divine Compact. Grace in the Saints is under a Covenant; God the Father
has Astipulated with the Mediator for his spiritual believing seed; not only
to repair the Ruins of the first Creation (his Image) in them, but to uphold
and secure it from ever dissolving and decaying again totally or finally
partial, temporary decays and recidivations there may be; but says the word of
the Covenant, to the Redeemer (in Reference to his divine offspring) my Spirit
which is upon thee, Isa. 59.21.
and my words which I have put into thy mouth, shall not depart out of thy
mouth, nor out of the mouth of thy Seed, nor out of the mouth of thy Seeds
Seed, says the Lord, from henceforth and for ever.

Adams grace was under no such Covenant, and therefore left to it self; it was
exposed to the power of Temptation, and perished. This is one account of the
Saints perseverance. But

Secondly; Secondly, Union with Christ.
The next and immediate Foundation of it, is, this blessed Union whereof we are
now speaking; by virtue whereof the true Believer is so made one with Christ,
as Christ is one with his Father, ut supr. -- As we are one, as, that is (as it
has been expounded) spiritually, really, operatively, enrichingly, intimously,
indissolubly; -- in a word infallibly, and availeably to all saving intents and
purposes. Here is the ground and foundation of the Saints perseverance; Rev.
3.1.
They are not only fixed Stars in Christ's right hand (if no more, it would be
hard pulling them thence.) But their lives are bound up in the same bundle with
Christ's own life; Jo. 14.19.
our life is hid with Christ in God. Christ and his Saints have, as it were,
but one life between them, and that life is Christ's; whence Christ himself
makes the inference; because I live, Col. 3.3.
you shall live also. Upon such an instance, it may be questioned, and
(possibly) without breach of charity, whether they who deny the infallible
perseverance of the Saints, did ever truly study or believe the notion and
nature of the happy and glorious Union which is betwixt Christ and them The
inseparableness of the Union, is given as the account of the Saints
perseverance. Nothing can separate us. Romans 8 39.
.

If we should form what has been said unto such a Syllogism as this, namely,
They that are United to Christ by a spiritual, real, operative, enriching,
intimate, inseparable Union, can never totally or finally fall away; But all
true Believers are so United.
Therefore they can never so fall away.

I say, cast all into such a form, and we find that both the Premises and the
Conclusion, are of Christ's own making; Because I live, ye shall live also. And
therefore, until I hear that Christ is dead the second time (which I am sure I
shall never do, for Christ being raised, dies no more, Romans 6.9.
death has no more dominion over him, etc.) I dare not believe this doctrine;
The possibility of the Saints total and final Apostasy.

Only, because Satan can transform himself into an Angel of Light, and the
heart is deceitful above all things, Caution.
and desperately wicked, my earnest advice, and obsecration to all such as do
pretend to this blessed Union, (as to mine own Soul), is. To give all
diligence, upon solid Scripture-evidence (that is to say) by the precious and
powerful influences of this Union upon their Souls; and by the gracious
Reciprocations of Faith and Love, and sweet, holy communion with the Father and
the Son, etc. by these. I say, and the like, to secure the Assumption, But I am
thus United to Christ,

And the Conclusion need not fear the gates of Rome, or Hell; but the Believer
may boldly send forth St. Paul's challenge, Who shall condemn? What shall
separate? 1 Cor. 15.57.
Thanks be to God, who has given us the Victory through our Lord Jesus Christ.

In the second place. Second Use.

Hence we may take notice of the honor and dignity of the Saints, how meanly
and basely so ever reputed, in, The Dignity of the Saints. 1 Cor. 4.13. (...).
and by a reprobate world, even as the filth of the world, and the offscouring
of all things, the scraping of their Shoes, or the common Town-Dung-cart, into
which every one cast's their soil and draught: I say, though the Saints of God
are thus base and contemptible in the opinion of the ignorant World, yet they
have another rate and value set upon them in Heaven: Heb. 11.6. Heb. 2.11.
Cant. 4.8.11. Rev. 21.9.
God is not ashamed to be called their God, nor Christ ashamed to call them
Brethren. Yea, he dignifies them with the style of his Spouse, the Bride, the
Lambs Wife; and all this upon the account of that admirable, and inconceivable
Union which is between Christ and them, that spiritual, real, operative,
enriching, total, intimous, and indissoluble Union, by virtue whereof, 1 Cor.
6.17.15.19.
they are in Christ, and Christ in them; as to their more divine part, their
Soul's, one spirit with the Lord; and even as to their terrene and corruptive
part, their Bodies, Members of Christ, and Temples for the Holy Ghost to dwell
in; yea, says my Text, their very dust is United to Christ: They sleep in
Jesus.

Such Honor have all his Saints.
How should the sense of it engage them to Honor Christ, Third Use.
who has put so great honor upon them! (yea to honor themselves whom Christ
has so highly honored? to stand upon their advancement, and not to profane
themselves by any thing that is common, or unclean, or upon the least account
unsuitable to their glorious Union with Jesus Christ; but to possess their
Vessels in Sanctification and Honor, 1 These. 4.4. as under an holy awe of that
tremendous Sentence;

If any man defile the Temple of God, 1 Cor. 3.17.
him will God destroy. Surely the thought of so near and intimate an Union with
the Son of God, should make sin become an impossibility; Upon all the
Adulterous solicitations of the Flesh, World, or Satan, to make holy Joseph's
quick reply; How can I do this great Wickedness, and sin against my Union with
Jesus Christ?

Fourthly; Fourth Use.
And oh that such as have for many years together, Exhortation to such as are
yet out of Christ.
sitten under the Ministry of the Gospel of Christ, and to this day are
altogether strangers to this blessed Union with Christ, would now, with all
seriousness and holy contention, apply themselves to know it, and to know it
experimentally; that they would (with holy Paul) account all things loss and
dung for the excellency of the knowledge of Jesus Christ, Phil. 3.8, 9, even
this, that they may be found in him, to know him with interest, to know him in
this mysterious and beatifical Union, Christ in them, and they in Christ; This
only is the saving knowledge of Jesus Christ, to be able to make out our
Conjunction with him upon Scripture-evidence. Alas! this is the undoing Mistake
of thousands, that are called Christians; they know somewhat of the History of
Christ; they have some notions of a Christ in their heads, but this is the
precipice, upon which they ruin themselves, They think to be saved by a Christ
without them, they hang upon the outside of the Ark, they live upon bare
notions, The Son of God took our nature upon him; died for sins; rose again,
James 1.21. (...).
and is gone up into Heaven, and sits at God's right hand: and therefore
conclude they shall be saved: Oh but what a paralogism and fallacy do they put
upon their own Souls! They put more into the Conclusion, then there is in the
Premises, while they leave out this great, and indispensible medium of Union,
and Conjunction with Jesus Christ! without which a Christ, and no Christ, is
all one.

Men and Women generally take Faith to be nothing else, but a loose conjectural
application of Christ and his Merits to themselves, not considering that the
great saving Office of Faith, is, To unite the Soul to Jesus Christ, Ephesians. 3.17.
It is true, there is no Condemnation; but it is, only to them that are in
Christ Jesus, Rom 8.1.

Christ is the hope of Salvation; it is true; I, but it is not simply Christ in
the Womb of the Virgin, not simply Christ on the Cross, not Christ in the
Grave, no, not (alone) Christ on the Throne; but says the Apostle, Christ in
you, the hope of Glory, Colos. 1.27. It were an easy thing to be saved, if a
Christ without us were all; and I know no reason why reprobate men and Devils
might not get to Heaven on such terms: No, but as there is no other name under
Heaven, Acts 4.12.
given amongst men, whereby we must be saved, but the Name of Jesus Christ, i.
e. his merit and influence: So, there is no other medium, whereby that merit
and influence can be effectually applied to the Soul, but only this spiritual,
real, operative, enriching, intimous, total, and inseparable Union with Jesus
Christ.

Christ must be in us by his Spirit, and we must be in Christ by Faith, or else
our persons and our hope (as to the present state) are both reprobate, 2 Cor.
13.15. -- Of him are ye in Christ Jesus, who of God is made Wisdom,
Righteousness, Sanctification and Redemption. 1 Cor. 3.22, 23.
All is yours, if you be Christ's, as Christ is God's. Appear before God's
Tribunal in the great day, Math. 7.21, 22, 23. Luke 13.26.27.
without this Union, and plead what you will, your answer will be, I never knew
you; depart from me, etc.

Believe this, Oh all you carnal Christ-less Christians, and tremble, and swim
no longer down the stream of Security, lest it empty you forth into the Lake of
Perdition: but work out your Salvation with Fear and Trembling, and give all
diligence to make this conjunction with Christ, sure to your own Souls; Colos.
3.3, 4.
that, when He shall appear, you may also appear with him in Glory.

Remember, All your true and solid comfort and rejoicing in life, in death, and
at the day of Judgment, is all bound up in your Union with Jesus Christ: Christ
in you the hope of Glory.

Fifthly and Lastly, Fourth and last Use. Consolation.

The Doctrine of this glorious Union with Christ, is not more for the honor of
the living, than for the comfort of the dying Saints, and of their surviving
mourners; And for their sakes it is here specially calculated by the Holy
Ghost; behold this Union is not dissolved by death it self; though it dissolve
the Union between Body and Soul, it cannot dissolv^ the Union which is between
Christ and his Members. Hence you find even death it self filling up the
Apostle's Triumph; What can separate? neither life, nor death, etc. Not life,
for Christ (by virtue of this Union) is their life; Not death, for as terrible
as it is, let death do its worst, it cannot dissolve this blessed Union.
Neither life nor death can separate, etc.

Why do ye tremble at the thoughts of death, O ye Saints of God! and why do you
indeed, (what the Jews supposed Mary did, John 11.31.
) go (so often) to the Sepulcher to weep there? behold, your beloved Lazarus, is
not dead, but sleeps; yea, that which is of an infinitely higher
consideration, he sleeps in Jesus. Did he live in Christ? behold he died in
Christ also; Did he dye in Christ? behold he sleeps in Christ; Christ is nearly
related to the Saints dust; their ashes are not laid up in the Grave, so much,
as in Christ; yea, though (after death,) they should pass through never so many
changes and revolutions, and should be scattered at length into all quarters
and corners of the world, Dormire in Christo, est conjunctionem retinere in
morte, quam habemus cum Christo. Calv. in loc.
he that calls the Stars by their own names, knows every dust of their precious
bodies; keeps them in his hand; and is as really united to them, as to his own
humane nature in Heaven.

This may be as Jonathan's honey upon the top of the rod; taste of it oh ye
mourners of hope, and your eyes will be enlightened: look not on your precious
Relations, so much as they lie rotting in the Grave, or resolved into dust, as
upon their dust as it is laid up in a sacred Vrn, in the hand and bosom as it
were of Jesus Christ; for which, he himself will be responsible, and bring it
forth safely and entirely in the morning of the Resurrection; there shall not
be so much as a dust wanting; for so it follows, Them which sleep in Jesus,
will God bring with him: which is a wider breach.

The sixth Word of Comfort. Sixth word of Comfort. God will bring his Sleeping
Saints with him.

God will come, and when he comes, He will bring them with him, which sleep in
Jesus.

God will, or God shall,] etc.

Some understand it of God the Father, others of God the Son; I know not why
they should be separated; they that say God the Father, include God the Son, i.
e. God the Father shall bring them with him, in Christ of by Christ, referring
[he shall bring] unto the former clause in Jesus. The Verb (...). So Erasmus
and Tertul.


Or, by Jesus; so reading it, God shall bring them by Jesus.

And, they who understand here God the Son, exclude not God the Father. And
verily, the order of working, which is between the three glorious Persons in
Trinity, will not allow us to seclude either in this place; For, as all the
external works of the Trinity are common, Opera Trinitatis ad extra, sunt
indivisa.
and undivided, so Divines observe this method or order in their working.

The Father works all things of himself, in the Son, by the Holy Ghost. The
Son works from the Father, by the Holy Ghost. The Holy Ghost works from the
Father, and from the Son by himself. The Original of the action is ascribed to
the Father. The Wisdom and manner of working, to the Son; The Efficacy of the
operation to the Holy Ghost.

All external operation, begins in the Father, is continued in the Son, and
terminated in the Holy Ghost. This is a mystery rather to be adored, Psalm.
139.6.
than curiously to be pried into; such knowledge is too wonderful for us; it is
high, we cannot attain unto it.

But, as to the words of the Text, God will bring them with him, I conceive
they relate more properly and peculiarly to the Son, (...)
Jesus Christ the Lord. For so it follows, The Lord himself shall descend, etc.
And when he comes, he will bring them with him, that sleep in him. The
propriety of the work is ascribed to Jesus Christ, God-man, the Mediator
between God and man; he shall bring them with him, when he descends from
Heaven,

And that in a fourfold respect, 1. Their Spirit or Souls, from Heaven; 2.
Their Bodies, from the Grave, 3. Body and Soul united, he shall take up to
himself into the Clouds. 4. And then carry all his Saints back with him into
Heaven.


First, when the Lord shall descend, he will bring the spirits of just men made
perfect, with him from Heaven. The Souls of all his glorified Saints (whose
bodies to this moment have slept in the Grave) shall follow Christ out of the
gates of the New Jerusalem, to attend that glorious solemnity: so it is
prophesied, Behold, Jude v. 14.
the Lord comes with ten thousands of his Saints. When Christ comes to judge
the world, there shall not be a Saint left in Heaven says Chrysostom. (...).
Heaven shall as it were be left empty to attend the King of Glory going forth
out of his Royal Palace, to finish the work of the great and last Judgment of
the world; he shall come attended with all his Saints, they shall fill up his
Train.

Secondly, As Christ will bring their Souls with him from Heaven, so he will
bring their bodies from the Grave. It is noted how that in the Transfiguration,
the body of Moses which was hid in the Valley of Moab, appeared in the Mount of
Tabor, which assures us that the bodies of the Saints, wherever they be
lodged, are not lost, but laid up, to be raised to glory; the same numerical
body that was laid down in dust.
Christ at his coming to Judgment, will first go to the Graves of the Saints,
and cry to them aloud in some such language as once he did to their Souls in
the days of their unregeneracy (when dead in sins and trespasses,) in the
Gospel-call, Awake thou that sleep, and stand up from the dead, and I will
give thee Life.

Or, as sometimes in the days of his flesh, he did to Lazarus, John 11.41.
when he had lien four days rotting in the Grave, Veniet aliquando Christus cum
potestate et majestate carnem illam quaerere, and illud corpus cadaverosum
configurare corpors claritatis suae. Bern.
(a lively Emblem and Type of the general Resurrection) Lazarus come forth: and
they that are dead shall come forth. It was the tenor of his own prediction,
while yet in the world, The hour is coming, in the which all, that are in the
Graves, shall hear the voice of the Son of man, and shall come forth, etc.

I shall not stay here to inquire into the nature and properties of the Saints
bodies, when Christ shall raise them up out of their Graves: that inquiry will
be more proper and seasonable in some of the following clauses of this context.

Concerning the manner of it (for the help of our Infant-understandings)
briefly, The manner of the Resurrection.
we may conceive it after this method.

First, The holy Angels of God shall be sent abroad, to gather together the
scattered dust of the Saints, though separated one from the other at never so
great a distance into all the quarters and extremities of the earth, Math.
24.31.
and shall bring them together, Math. 24.31. The incineration, and dissipation
of their dust shall have a Recollection in the Resurrection.
not so much as one dust wanting (for he that numbers the Stars, does number
also the dust and ashes of his Redeemed): as not an hair of their heads, so not
a dust of their resolved flesh shall perish.

Thus gathered together, Christ by his mighty power shall unite dust to dust,
every dust in its own proper place, and form it up into the same numerical body
it was, when it was dissolved and laid down in the Grave.

And thus made up into a beautiful Structure, (more beautiful than ever it was
in its first Creation, as I shall show hereafter); Christ will put each Soul
into its own body again, and unite them together into the same sweet conjugal
society and fellowship they possessed before their separation; this friendly
espoused Pair, shall now be solemnly Married together, before God, and Men, and
Angels, never to suffer Divorce any more, and they shall become one entire
person, a totum compositum, as they were in the days of their first contract.

And this excellent person will Christ animate, and quicken with the influences
of that blessed Union with himself, which during all this long interval of
their sleeping in the Grave, was not dissolved, but hidden only, and suspended.

Now shall the Saints know, and feel the meaning of that word which Christ
spoke to Martha, I am the Resurrection, and the Life. Martha in the verse
immediately before, had professed her Faith of a Resurrection. -- I know that
my Brother shall rise again, in the Resurrection at the last day: Presently
Christ replieth, Jo. 11.25.
I am the Resurrection and the Life: discovering to her the Fountain and Cause
of that Resurrection; namely, that Life and Virtue shall then go forth from
himself to animate and quicken all his Members, and shall cause them to stand
upon their feet again, as the Children of the Resurrection.

Thirdly; Soul and body thus United, Christ God-man, shall bring with him unto
the place where the great Assizes of the quick and dead shall be solemnly kept,
which the 17th. v. tells us will be in the Air (of which more distinctly when
we come to that verse.) Thither Christ will bring with him all his Elect (whose
bodies to that moment have slept in him,) Christ will carry the risen Saints
with him to the Judgment.
) when he has awakened them;

And that upon a Twosold Account.
First; For the greater Honor of that Day.
For the greater solemnity of that last and tremendous Judgment. The Saints
shall be brought out of their Graves, to attend the Judge for his greater State
and Grandeur, to strike the greater Terror into the hearts of Reprobate men
and Angels, who then shall be brought forth in Chains to the Tribunal of
Christ, to see, and suffer the severity and impartiality of that last Trial.

The Glory of a King, consists in the multitude of his Nobles and Royal
Attendants.

The Judge of Assize is brought in with the Posse Comitatus, the power and
gallantry of the Country, for the striking of the greater terror and aw into
the hearts of offenders.

Angels and Saints shall be Christ's Lifeguard, as it were; Christi
Satellitium.
or as his Troops and Legions which shall conduct him in State and Triumph to
the Judgment Seat.

Secondly, when Christ shall have raised his sleeping Saints out of their beds
of dust, he shall bring them with him from the Grave to the place of Judgment,
That they may accompany him, and be with him throughout the whole carriage, and
conduct of the last judicial process, to hear and applaud his righteous
proceedings. This is that which the Apostle calls, The Saints judging of the
World, and judging of Angels; yea, 1 Cor. 6.2, 3.
it seems that is not all; our Savior tells his Apostles, that in that day,
Math. 19.28. (...) N^mpe ut Christi, vere and prop^e Judicis, Ass^ss^res. Bern.
in ^oe.
they shall sit on twelve Thrones, judging the twelve Tribes, etc. judging or
condemning, how? certainly not as bare Spectators only, but as Assessors, to
sit with Him on the Bench to justify and consent to the judgment of Christ,
the great and Supreme Judge, giving in their full and free suffrages to the
final sentence, which he shall pass upon the Reprobate world of Jews and
Gentiles, of Men and Devils: probably in some such language as we hear from the
Saints upon the downfall of Antichrist; Great and mavelous are thy works,
Lord God Almighty; And by that Doctrine they shall be judged also in the
general judgment, Math. 13.18. Jo. 12.48. Heb. 117. (...), He condemned the
world partly, as the building of the Ark was a visible prediction of the Flood;
partly, as it was a witness and conviction of their infidelity.
just, and true are thy ways, thou King of Saints: for thy judgments are made
manifest.

Here, the Apostles and Ministers of the Gospel judged the Wicked of the world
by their Doctrine, and both Ministers and others of Gods faithful Servants
judged them by their Holy lives, and patient bearing of the Cross; as it is
said of Noah, that by his Faith in believing the warning, and obeying the
Command of God, in preparing the Ark, he judged, or condemned the unbelieving
World; The holiness of the Saints is a tacit reproach and conviction upon the
Consciences of Wicked men, whereby they condemn them before hand; yea whereby
wicked men become (...) Self-condemned.

But now the Preachers of the Gospel, with the rest of the Saints, shall Judge
the world judicially, and (probably) by an audible Vote to, and with the
Judgment of Jesus Christ; Rev. 16.5
Thou art Righteous, O Lord, which art, and wast, and shall be, because thou
have judged thus; This honor shall all the Saints have at that Day: Thus
Christ shall bring the raised Saints with him to the place of Judgment.

But Fourthly; God shall bring them with him, i. e. (that last and solemn
Judgment being finished) Christ shall carry all his Saints back with him, from
the place of Judgment, the nether Heavens, into the upper, the supreme
Heavens, where the Throne of God is, and the seat of glorified Angels and
Saints; All the Saints of God shall follow the Judge in a Triumphant manner,
into the streets of the New Jerusalem, the gates whereof shall be set wide open
to receive them; An abundant entrance shall be administered unto them into the
everlasting Kingdom of the Lord and Saivour Jesus Christ, where they shall be
welcomed home with loud Acclamations of joy; Heaven will ring again with
Triumphant shoutings. Thus also God shall bring them with him, that sleep in
Jesus; he will bring them into the Glory of his Father: but of this I shall
have occasion to speak more largely hereafter.

This is another Word of Comfort, and there is great need of it, Comfort to
living Saints First, To the Saints yet living.

First; In reference to the Saints of God yet living. You are now scorned and
persecuted, the ungodly world does now judge you, and condemn you: the Psalmist
observed it in his time; Psalm. 94.6.
they gather themselves together against the Souls of the Righteous, and
condemn the Innocent blood. Innocence is no security against cruelty and
oppression; yea, it seems, no wine so sweet to wicked men as Innocent blood;
Jam. 5.6.
ye have condemned and killed the just: and yet, that open violence may not
want a pretense of Justice, they act in the form of a legal process, before
they kill, they do condemn; but alas! those Fig Leaves will not cover their
nakedness. It is the just, (...).
whom they do unjustly Condenm and Murder; so it was in David's time, and so it
was in St. James his time, One says, I should suspect him to be no Abel, who
has not a Cain to persecute him, ver. 7, 8.
and so it is now; the Reprobate world holds on its course to this day; and so
it will be to the end of the World. God's Righteous Abels must expect no better
justice at the Tribunals of these unrighteous Cains.

But be patient, my Brethren, till the Coming of the Lord, and stablish your
hearts, for that coming of the Lord draws nigh; and then the Scene shall be
altered; you shall have the Law as it were (then) in your own hands; your turn
shall be to sit upon the Bench, and your Enemies shall stand at the Bar; They
Judge and Condemn you now, but there is a day coming, when you shall Judge and
condemn them; and they indeed Unrighteously, but you shall Condemn them
Righteously, because your Judgment shall be according to the Judgment of that
Righteous Judge of Heaven and Earth, the Searcher of the hearts; who will judge
men by those two impartial Books, the Book of his own Remembrance, and the Book
of their Consciences. Yea, you shall judge them for their Unrighteous judging
of you: So it was Prophesied of old.

Behold, the Lord comes with ten thousands of his Saints to Execute Judgment
upon all, and to convince all that are ungodly among them, of all their ungodly
deeds which they have ungodly committed, and of all their hard speeches which
ungodly sinners have spoken against him; not in his person only, but in his
Members also: Loq^untur lapides.
all their ungodly deeds, and all their hard speeches, wherewith they have
unjustly judged the Saints of God, shall be judged over again. And this honor
shall all the Saints have, they shall judge their Judges, and not be guilty.
Psalm. 49.14.
The Righteous shall have the Dominion over them in the morning.

Surely, this is an advancement which the poor oppressed people of God could
never have expected, were they not assured of it from the mouth of him that
shall be the Judge at that day: Let this stay, and stablish your hearts.

Secondly; Secondly. In reference to the Saints departed.
It is a word of comfort in reference to the Saints departed, our precious
Relations; the sense of whose loss and absence we are not able to bear, while
we think of them as smothered, and extinguished in their own ashes, silent in
the land of forgetfulness, in whose sweet converse, we were wont to solace our
selves with much delight, their souls having left the habitation of their
bodies, and their bodies resolved into dust, and that dust (possibly) mixed with
the dust of wicked men, or of the brute Creatures, it may be, dispersed into
the remotest part of the world. Ah these be some of the heart-dividing
thoughts, wherewith we do afflict our Souls! But give check to your passions,
Oh ye mourners of hope, and make use of the Cordials which your Heavenly
Physician has prescribed to keep you from fainting. Remember, that although
their bodies are in the Grave, their Souls are with the Spirits of just men
made perfect, beholding the face of their Father, which is in Heaven, from
whence Jesus Christ, Godman, when he shall come in the glory of his Father,
attended with all his mighty Angels, will bring them with him.

And then shall he go to their Graves, and as he formerly said unto them, Come
my people, enter into thy Chambers, shut the doors about thee, go to bed in the
Grave, and take thy rest; so now he will awaken them out of their sleep with a
sweet voice, Awake, and sing you that dwell in the dust, Arise, shine, for thy
light is come, the glory of the Lord is risen upon thee, etc. yea, he will kiss
them awake, with the kisses of his mouth; and then as a Father, and a Priest,
will give the Soul in Marriage to the Body again, and unite them one to
another, and both to Himself in an indissoluble bond.

Oh Christians! think with your selves what a joyful meeting that will be; when
two such ancient Friends, that have been parted so long, shall meet, and
embrace, and kiss one another, never to suffer any more Divorce, or fear of
Divorce, to Eternity! How will the Soul bless God, when it shall receive its
own body again, it is true Yoak-fellow and Fellow Laborer, which labored with
it much in the Lord, and which was wont to be its Oratory, and Temple, wherein
the Soul performed all its Sacra, its holy devotions, in season and out of
season?

And how will the Body rejoice to see the Soul again, to whom it was espoused,
which was the guide of its youth, that (in its capacity) which Christ is to the
Soul, it is King, Priest, and Prophet, and by virtue of whose conjunction with
it, the very body, as poor and mean as it was in its original extraction, was
preferred and admitted into Fellowship, and Communion with the Son of God; and
(upon that account) not forgotten all the while it slept in the land of
forgetfulness, and thought not of it self: I say, Solace your selves with the
praevision of that Triumph and Exultation that will fill this blessed
new-Married couple! especially, when they shall receive one another so much
more excellent than themselves at their last parting; that the body shall seem
to be Transessentiated into a Soul, and the Soul transformed into an Angel of
Light; Rejoice, O Christian Soul, to think how these two morning Stars will
sing for joy, in this their new and for ever blessed Conjunction.

Thirdly; Thence follow them (in your Contemplations) following the Judge to the
place, where the Thrones shall be erected for judgment, and there placed on
Thrones, not as Spectators only, but as joynt-Commissioners. Where, the Saint
of a day, shall judge the Sinner of an hundred years old; yea, they shall judge
the Old Serpent himself, and all his infernal Angels; And as that Sentence
leaves them, so shall they remain to all Eternity.

Fourthly, and in the last place; Christians, think not so much on your
precious Relations, as lying in the Grave, their Beauty turned into Rottenness
and deformity; think not of them as (possibly) by a premature death (as you may
think) snatched from an earthly Inheritance before their time: but think on them
as coheirs with Jesus Christ, riding now in Triumph with him, and with the
whole general Assembly, and Church of the First born, whose names are written
in Heaven, to take possession of their Inheritance with the Saints in Light.
Thus behold them, not, as they are in the night of the shadow of death, but as
they shall be in the morning of the Resurrection, when God will bring them with
him; and, I had almost said, Mourn if you can.

So much for the Sixth word of Comfort.

MOUNT PISGAH: OR, THE SECOND PART OF THIS Model of Consolatory Arguments, OVER
THE Death of our Godly Relations.
I Have opened unto you the first part of this Apostolical Model of divine
Comforts over the Death of our Godly Friends and hopeful Relations, which
contained in it six words of Consolation, sc.

1. That they are not said so properly to be dead, as to sleep; They are but
fallen asleep. 2. That their condition is a condition full of hope; they are
not in an hopeless state, as others are. 3. Jesus Christ, the Captain of our
Salvation, went before them, and showed them the way, Jesus Died. 4. He died
indeed, but he remained not long in the state of the Dead, He rose again. And
that
First; By his own power, as a Conqueror. Secondly; By Office, as our Sponsor,
or Surety, our Jesus. Thirdly; As a second Adam, or public person, the head
and Representative of all his spiritual Seed. This also is in his name Jesus;
Jesus rose.
5. The Saints Union with Christ, so intimous and so inseparable, that it
cease not in the very Grave. They sleep in Jesus. 6. They shall be brought
back again at the Coming of the Lord, God shall bring them with him: these are
contained in the 13th and 14th. verses of this Chapter.
I come now to the Second Part of this Divine Model, Second Part.
which is contained in the three following Verses, viz. the 15, 16, 17.
together with the improvement of the whole context in the 18th. verse, which
is, mutual comfort and support, Comfort one another with these words.

Now this later part contains in it four of these ten words of Comfort, held
out in this Model. 1. The first is, an obviating and removal of a
discouragement and temptation which might possibly be upon the spirits of dying
Saints, namely, lest the condition of the Saints which shall be found alive at
the last day, should be happier, or (at least) sooner happy, than the Saints
which are fallen asleep long before; and the removal of this discouragement,
makes a seventh Word of Comfort in this Model. 2. A second word is, The coming
of Christ, his last appearance; the Lord himself shall descend, etc. and this
is the eighth word contained in this Model. 3. The third is, The joyful and
triumphant Meeting which all the Saints of God shall then have with one
another, and with Christ their Head and Husband, ver. 17. And this is the
nineth Consolatory Argument, in the order of the context. 4. The last word of
Comfort is, That blessed co-habitation and Communion which the Saints shall
enjoy with Jesus Christ for ever: then shall we ever be with the Lord, verse.
17. And this is the tenth and last Consolatory Argument, contained in this
Model. I shall figure them (in my opening of them) as they stand in the order
of the whole Model, and make up the number of Ten words of Comfort contained
therein.
Seaventhly therefore, Seventh word of Comfort.
the next word of Comfort in this Model, is, The obviating or removing an
objection or discouragement, which (probably) might possess the Spirits of
God's dying-Saints: and that is, lest the Saints which shall be found alive at
the last day, might (possibly) be happier, or (at least) sooner happy, than the
Saints which are fallen asleep before that day.
Now for the rolling of this stumbling block and stone-of-offence out of the
way, The Apostle does these three things: 1. The method of the last Judgment.
He sets down the order and method of the procedure of that great and solemn
Transaction at Christ's coming, verse. 15, 16. 2. He quoteth infallible Authority
for what he says, The (...)
he tells us he speaks not a presumption of his own head, but that which he had
received of the Lord; This we say unto you by the word of the Lord. 3. The
(...).
He gives us the ground and reason of this comfortable assertion, and that is
the coming of Christ in person, For the Lord himself shall descend from Heaven,
etc. verse. 16.


First; 1. Branch of the word of Comfort. The order and method of Christ's
procedure.
The Apostle acquaints Believers with the order and method of that great and
solemn Transaction at Christ his coming. And this he does, Two ways 1.
Negatively. 2. Affirmatively.


First; Neg.
Negatively. He peremptorily denies that the living Saints at Christ's coming
in glory, shall have any the least advantage (above the sleeping Saints) by
their being found alive at that day; We which are alive and remain, shall not
prevent them which are asleep. living Saints shall not prevent the dead Saints
in any privilege of the Resurrection; or of the appearance of the Lord Jesus.
It might probly be a temptation upon the Thessalonians (or other Christians):
1. Either that the Saints only which should be found alive at the last day,
should have the happiness of seeing the Lord Jesus coming in his Glory, with
all his mighty Angels (to judge the world) and they only should enjoy the
privilege of his Glorious appearance; that all the Saints that died before that
day, even from the beginning of the world, were a lost generation, that should
never come forth again to the light, or to behold the glory of that day, or to
enjoy the blessed fruits and consequences of it. 2. Or (at least) that they
should be the first in that happiness to see his Glory, and have the first
share in the felicities and triumph of that day, or ever the sleeping Saints
should be awakened or get out of their beds of dust.


The Apostle does therefore, (I say) peremptorily and positively remove this
scruple and fear out of the minds of Christians; he assures us that it is an
utter mistake, it is neither so, nor so; he tells us that all Believers who had
died from the first Adam, downward until the coming of the second Adam, shall
have as good a share (caeteris paribus) in the privileges and glory of that
day, as they who stand upon their feet, and are found inter vivos, at Christ's
coming.

Secondly, and as soon; the living shall not prevent the dead in any one of the
beatitudes and honors of the Resurrection of Jesus Christ. They shall neither
go forth to meet this glorious Bridegroom one moment sooner than their Brethren
that are in their Graves; nor shall they see him coming in his Glory, one
moment sooner; nor consequently, be owned by Christ, or received by him, or
taken up to him, or be placed upon Thrones with him, or receive their
absolution and justification from him, or their glorification with him, one
moment before their fellow-Saints that are yet in their dormitories.

And truly, this is a comfortable word, even in the negative part of it.
Believers may lie down to sleep in their beds of dust, not only with the
Psalmist's even-Song.

I will both lay me down in peace and rest, Psalm. 4.8.
for thou Lord only wilt make we dwell in safety: but with the Lord Jesus his
Triumph. Therefore my heart is glad, and my glory rejoices, Psalm. 16.9, 10.
my flesh also shall rest in hope, for thou will not leave my Soul in Hell,
etc. Christ will not forget his dead in the Grave; the living Saints at his
coming, shall not be made happy without them, nor one moment sooner happy in
any of the Beatitudes of Christ his coming at the end of the world: This
comfort, I say, the very negative part of the Apostles answer to the Objection,
does import.
But then, How much stronger Consolation does the affirtive part afford? which,
although it lie in the close of the next verse, yet it being the main branch of
the Apostle's account, whereby he satisfies the doubt of the dying Servants of
God, (ut supra) we must of necessity speak of it here also with the Negative;
at least so far as it referrs to the Apostle's scope, reserving the
consideration of what special and peculiar Import the words carry in them, to
their own place.

We are therefore to take notice that the affirmative part of the Apostles
satisfaction to the Saints doubt, or objection, lies in these words, The dead
in Christ shall rise first.

He does exactly state the method of Christ's procedure at the last Judgment,
Affirmatively. verse. 16.
viz. That the first business which shall be then transacted, shall be the
awakening and raising all the Saints of God out of their Graves, which from
Adam, until that moment, have slept in the dust: The dead in Christ shall rise
first; nothing shall be done, till that be done. The very first work Christ
will do at his Coming, will be, to send forth his Angels with a great sound of
a Trumpet, first to awaken the Elect out of their sleep; Math. 24.31.
[Awake you that sleep in the dust;] and then to gather them from the four
winds, from the one end of Heaven to the other; and when they shall have put on
their Wedding garments, to conduct them in State and Triumph to meet with their
Royal Bridegroom now comn forth (more than half way) to meet them, and to
consummate the Marriage which was long since Contracted in the day of their
Espousals.

It were easy to enlarge here, but, in a word, the sum of this Affirmative
account is this, That the Saints who sleep in the Grave at Christ's coming,
shall be so far from being made less happy, or later happy in the coming of
Christ, than the Saints who then shall be found alive, that they shall be first
remembered; the first care Christ will take when he comes in the Clouds, shall
be not about the living, Primitiae Resurrectionis.
but the dead Saints, The dead in Christ shall rise first. They shall be the
first Fruits of the Resurrection. They that have slept so long in their beds of
dust, Ab illis ordo Resurrectionis incipiet.
shall be first awakened, before any thing be done about them that never slept;
They that were uncloathed, and saw corruption in the Grave, must first have
their bodies clothed upon with incorruption; and then the surviving-Saints (at
Christ's coming) shall be joined to them, that have for so many years and ages
slept in Jesus. The dead in Christ shall rise first, and both be presented
together before the Judge.

It were too little to say, alleviate the bieterness of death, our own, or our
godly Relations; surely it may greatly augment our joy; They and we shall be so
far from being losers, by laying down our earthly Tabernacles in the dust,
(before we see Christ coming in his Glory,) that it shall be our advantage. If
there be any privilege, any joy, any glory, any triumph at that day, it shall
be theirs who sleep in Jesus; and theirs, as soon as their surviving-Brethrens.
The first dawnings of the Sun of Righteousness (coming in his Majesty) shall
shine upon their faces; the first fruits of that Jubilee, shall be reserved for
a recompense of their long sleep in the Grave, they shall begin the health in
this cup of Salvation; the primacy of all that blessed solemnity, belongs to
the departed Saints. The dead in Christ shall rise first.

Oh Christians, Comfort one another with this word. And the rather, because
this is not an uncertain conjecture which the Apostle lays down here, but an
assertion of infallible certainty, which he had from the divine Oracle, Second
branch of this Comfort, The Authority quoted.
the Word of the Lord; which brings me to the second branch in this seventh
word of Comfort, and that is,

The Authority which the Apostle brings for this Doctrine, sc. the Word of God;
This I say unto you by the word of the Lord. He quotes divine Authority for
what he delivers. It being a Doctrine of so much encouragement and
satisfaction unto dying Saints; Praefatur, nihil se prefer vel suum, vel
humanum, Calv.
a Doctrine above humane capacity, and (it seems) not commonly understood by
the Churches and Saints of God at that time; he does not pass it in his own
name, or upon his own Authority, When he speaks as one that has obtained mercy
to be saithful, then it is 1 Cor. 7.12. I speak, not the Lord, i.e. not by
express dictate of the Spirit, but by way of Faith, Christivice, as agreeable
to the word: but when he speaks as an Apostle, insallibly inspired, then it is,
not I, but the Lord: and so it is here.
but tells us from whence he had it, q.d. What I deliver now unto you, I speak
not of my self, sed ex ore Domini, from the mouth of him that is the truth it
self, the mouth of Jesus Christ; This we say unto you in the word of the Lord.

Qu. But where or when had the Apostle this Doctrine from Jesus Christ?

Ans. Others are of opinion he had it, by immediate Revelation; but as to the
time they differ.

Some conjecture, 1 Cor. 12.2.4.
the Apostle had this mystery revealed to him, at what time he was rapt up to
the third Heaven, and there heard unspeakable words, amongst which one was this
comfortable Doctrine, that the living Saints shall not prevent the dead Saints
in any glorious privilege of the Resurrection, which was an Arcanum or Mystery
not formerly made known to the Church.

But this is but a conjecture which carries with it little probability: The
Apostle telling us (in the same place) that the words he heard in that
Extatical Vision were Unspeakable words, (...)
i. e. things which were either not lawful to be uttered, or not possible to be
uttered; ineffable words: had this Mystery been that Revelation, or any part
of it; the Apostle had (in reporting it to the world) either exceeded his
commission, or done impossibilities!

Others therefore conceive that this was a mystery revealed to none but to the
Apostle himself; and that not unto him until he wrote this Epistle, and so
(...) by the word of Lord signifies only, the Apostle his delivering this by
divine Authority, from divine inspiration, and quasi eo ipso loquente Bern. and
Christi mandato. Grot.

Others there are that (waving both these Conjectures,) are apt to think this
mystery (so called, because it was not commonly understood in the Church,) to
be none other than the Doctrine which our Lord himself delivered by word of
month, in the days of his flesh, concerning the Resurrection: for which,

Some would make us beholding to Tradition: but others more rationally, suppose
the Apostle to entitle this Doctrine to the Lord; not as if any where delivered
in terminis, in so many express letters and syllables, but as a divine Truth,
deduceable from the general doctrine which the Lord Jesus did deliver in his
Sermons and discourses, touching the raising of the dead.

And to this judgment I do much incline, as the more safe and warrantable;
Christ's own words being a much more solid foundation to build an Article of
Faith upon, than either Tradition or Revelations.

Witness the Holy Ghost, in the mouth of the Apostle St. Peter. 2 Pet. 1.19.
We have also a more sure word of Prophecy; more sure then what? Why, more
sure than the Voice which the Disciples heard from Heaven, when they were with
Christ in the Mount, ver. 18. An infallible Oracle, attested by infallible
Witnesses; and yet behold the written Word is a surer bottom for our Faith to
stand upon, in taking up divine doctrine than that, because, though the voice
from Heaven was in it self, (...) infallible; yet the holy Scriptures being the
standing Psalm. 19.7. God's Amen.
Testimony and Expositor of Gods mind to the world; it is a more authentic
Touchstone to try Truth by, then a Voice from Heaven, which may be
Counterfeited by Satan and Satanical Imposture.

We shall reckon then this mystery delivered here by holy Paul, as the Doctrine
which Christ himself Preached unto the world, and testified by the Evangelists
and other Secretaries of the Holy Ghost: until Revelation be more clearly
revealed unto us in this point.

Amongst the passages of our Lords Doctrine, recorded by the Evangelists
concerning the Resurrection, from which this particular mystery may be
collected; we may with safety and modesty select these.

Then shall appear the sign of the Son of man, Math. 24.30.
and they shall see him coming in the Clouds of Heaven, with power and great
glory. And he shall send forth his Angels with a great sound of a Trumpet, When
they shall rise from the dead, Mark. 12.25,
they neither marry, nor are given in marriage. And again, touching the Dead,
that they rise, have ye not read in the book of Moses, etc?
Behold (by the way) Jesus Christ, that he might give testimony to Moses,
quotes the testimony of Moses for the Doctrine of the Resurrection.)

But yet further; take another testimony or prediction of his own.

The hour is coming, Jo. 5.28,
in the which all that are in the Graves, shall hear the voice of the Son of
man,

And shall come forth, etc.

To these Scriptures, and the like, it is most probably conjectured our Apostle
does refer, when he does here quote the Authority of our Lord for the Doctrine
here delivered; For although it does not run verbatim, word for word with any
of the recited Texts; yet these things are evident,

First; That in these Scriptures our Blessed Savior does positively and
expressly assert the doctrine of the Resurrection at the last day; The dead must
rise. Secondly; That the main care which Christ will take at his coming, will
be, To gather unto himself all his Elect which have been upon the earth, from
the Creation, until that blessed hour; Math. 24.31.
He shall send forth his Angels, and they shall gather his Elect, etc. not one
of them shall be wanting. Thirdly; Christ comprehends all these his Elect,
whether quick or dead, under one and the same notion; namely, the dead, and
those that are in the Graves; not the least mention made, or notice taken, of
them that shall survive and be found alive at his coming, whence two things are
clearly deducible, First; That the Resurrection, which the Saints that sleep in
Jesus, shall be made partakers of, shall put them into as full a capacity of
the glory of Christ's coming, as if they had remained alive in the body until
that blessed hour. Yea, Secondly; That the Saints then surviving, can upon no
other account become capable of that glory, than as they fall under the notion
of the dead. Christ takes notice (in the prediction of his coming) of no other
but the dead, for whom that glory is reserved. Whence

Some are of opinion, that the surviving Saints must dye in a literal sense,
and a real separation must pass upon them, between their bodies and their
souls; Mira celeritate.
of which opinion Austin himself was, though he conceived it would be
transacted in a wonderful swift and speedy way.

But others conceive, that the Saints whom Christ his coming shall find in the
body, (...).
shall suffer only some thing analogical to death; and to this opinion our
faith must needs subscribe, the Holy Ghost bearing witness to it, in the mouth
of the Apostle in the 15th. Chapter to the Corenthians, 1 Cor. 15.51.
We shall not all sleep, i. e. all shall not dye, in a literal sense: (...).
what then? but we shall all dye, or be changed, i. e. they that dye not, must
be changed; All must either dye, or be changed; (...).
they that do not sleep, must suffer a mutation that shall bear some proportion
to death, corruption of their nature must be abolished; for flesh and blood
cannot inherit the Kingdom of God, neither does corruption inherit
incorruption. The body as it is corruptible, much less, as it is sinful, is not
capable of glory; there must a refining change pass upon it; they must put off
their Rags of mortality, before they put on the Robes of Glory; and this must
be done.

Partly, that the Statute of Heaven may not be broken, Heb. 9.27. (...) decreed.
wherein it is appointed for all men once to dye. It was a Statute Law, past in
the Parliament of Heaven, Genesis 2.17. In the day that thou eatest, thou shall
surely dye; Heb. in dying thou shall dye. Christ himself, as man, submitted
himself to this Statute, and so must all the Sons and Daughters of Adam; they
must dye, either literally, or analogically; Death makes a change in some, and
this change is a death in others: a death to mortality, and a death to
corruption.

Partly, that hereby they may also be made partakers of the Resurrection. Our
Savior's prediction of the Resurrection, comprehends all the Saints of God;
and the living Saints, at that day, can by no other means be counted the
Children of the Resurrection, than as they are begotten again, as it were by
this mysterious and ineffable change; Math. 19.28.
whence (possibly) it is called the Regeneration; because all the Elect of God
shall then begin to live their new, perfect life, all over, in their bodies and
Souls; both the quick and the dead.

From these Premises, we draw this Conclusion, etc. That our Apostle here, does
not start any new doctrine of his own, or (as 1 Cor. 7.12.
somewhere he does) deliver his own judgment as an holy knowing man, and not as
one infallibly inspired from above; but he does expound Christ unto us, and
gives us the sense of His words, who was both the Truth and the Resurrection.

So that, the doctrine here laid down, as it is a word of exceeding comfort to
dying Saints, and to their surviving Relations; Non primi extitimus
Resurrectionis test^s. (...).
so here is a consideration which may add great weight to it, and make it so
much the stronger consolation, in as much as it has the stamp and sanction of
Christ's own Authority, Christ himself has made assidavit to it; we have the
word of him that cannot lie, the Apostle being (in this) but Christ's
Interpreter.

From hence, (by the way) we are informed of these two things, Use of Inform.
worth our notice.

First; There is no sure and infallible foundation for our faith to stand upon,
but the word of God. Thither therefore the Holy Ghost sends us, Isa. 8.20.
To the Law and to the Testimony, if they speak not according to this word, it
is because there is no light in them. The Apostle himself would not aver such a
solemn truth as this is, but from the mouth of Christ himself. Uncertain
Revelations, dubitable Traditions, Authority of the Church, and all humane
Testimony whatsoever, is too weak a foundation to build our Faith upon in any
Article of Religion. Search the Scriptures, for in them ye hope, to have
Eternal Life, Jo. 5.39.

Secondly; We gather hence, that Scripture-Inference, Scripture; that is to
say, That which may be inferred from Scripture, by natural and necessary
consequence, is to be received as the Scripture it self. The word of God
rightly interpreted, is the word of God. Thus our Lord himself, Luke 12.27.
proves the Resurrection out of the old Testament, by inference and deduition
from the words which God spoke to Moses [I am the God of Abraham, the God of
Isaac, and the God of Jacob,] he thence inferrs, [God being not the God of the
dead, but of the living.] that Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob, are alive in their
better part, sc. their Souls, and shall live again in their inferior part, sc.
their bodies.

So the holy Apostle here infers this comfortable truth, that the dead
Saints shall lose nothing by their not being found alive at Christ's coming;
from Christ's own doctrine of the Resurrection in general: And doubts not to
honor it with this Title,

The Word of the Lord: This I say unto you, by the Word of the Lord.

Let the Ministers of the Gospel take heed how they Preach any doctrine,
opinion, or practice, 1 Caution to Ministers:
which cannot either in terminis, or at least by just and necessary
consequence, be justified to be the word of God, lest they incur the brand
and censure of false Prophets, Jer. 29.9.

And let Christians take heed how they reject any doctrine which is so
evidenced, 2 Caution to private Christians.
lest they be found to reject the Word of the Lord, Jer. 8.9.

I have done with the second branch of the seventh word of Comfort, sc. the
Authority quoted for it, save only that there is one scruple yet to be removed,
and that is;

Quest. Why the Apostle in delivering this truth, does use this phrase, we
which are alive, and remain unto the coming of the Lord, and not rather they
which are alive? for, Did the Apostle indeed think that he himself should live
to see Christ coming in glory to judge the quick and the dead?

Ans. Certainly, No; for 1. Grotius aliter opinatur: quem vide in loc. arque
etiam, Bez.
The event shows, that that had been a mistaken presumption in him; that day is
not yet come, and the Apostle is long since fallen asleep. 2. We hear him
Prophesying of his own dissolution, and that as a thing hard by, 2 Timothy 4.6.
(...).
I am now ready to be offered, and the time of my departure is at hand? Gr. it
is instant upon me: See, the Apostle was far from flattering himself with any
such conceit of being one of them that should live and remain unto the coming
of the Lord.


What means the expression then?

Ans. The holy Apostle divides all the Elect of God into two ranks, sc.

1. Such as are fallen asleep from the fall of the first Adam to the coming of
the second, or 2. Such as should survive and remain unto that day; not making
himself of the number of either the one or of the other, but one of the whole
number of Gods Elect, some of whom should sleep, some should live till Christ's
last coming: and when he says, we that are alive and remain, it signifies no
more, but this in general, such of us as are then alive, shall not prevent such
of us as are then asleep; this is all he intends in this expression.
Beza and others spy out a mystery in this manner of speech; Vult omnes
suspensos tenere, ne sibi tempus aliquod promittant.
that (for ought that was revealed of that day) Christ might come while some of
that generation were superstites, living upon the face of the earth.

If that doctrine be in the Text, use of it, Lanet ultimus dies, ut expectetu^
singulis, ut fideles, emnibus horis parati essent.
Math. 24.36. of that day and hour knows no man, no, not the Angels of
Heaven, but the Father; there is the doctrine, and then the use is, verse 42.

Watch therefore, for ye know not the hour when the Lord does come: Therefore
indeed is the last day concealed from us, that we may watch every day.

And therefore Christians, look about you, what have you been doing so many
years together under the ministry of the Gospel? are your accounts yet ready?
are your evidences cleared? is your pardon sealed? your interest in Christ
secured? your calling and Eleclion made sure? have ye wrought out your
salvation with fear and trembling? Luke 12 35, 36.


Are your lights burning? and your loins girded? and you your selves like unto
men that wait for the coming of the Lord, that when he comes and knocks, you
may open to him immediately? up, and (for the Lords sake, yea, for your own
sakes) make haste; this may be the day, the hour when the Son of man may come.

Woe unto that man, to whom the coming of the Lord will be a surprise. Therefore
I say again, watch; what you do, do quickly.

I come now to the third branch of this seventh word of Comfort, sc. Third
branch of the seventh word of Comfort.


The ground and reason of this comfortable truth, which lies in the first
clause of the next verse; For, verse 16.
the Lord himself shall descend, etc.

The words are of a twofold consideration, sc. Absolute, And Relative.


The absolute and positive, holds forth a main Article of our Faith, sc.
Christ's last coming to judgment in person. The Lord himself shall descend from
Heaven.

The Relative; and so they are a confirmation of this comfortable truth; They
which are alive, and remain unto the coming of the Lord, shall not prevent them
which are asleep, and why so? For, the Lord himself shall descend, etc.

In their absolute sense, the words are, (as I say) a main Article of our
Faith, concerning Christ's coming to judgment in person, and therefore may
justly challenge their room, to make up one entire and distinct word of Comfort
in this divine context.

And so I will first consider them; and then, in their relative tendency, sc.
as they are a ground or reason of the former Comfort.

In the order of this second part, they are the second; but in the method of
the whole Context, (...).
they are The Eighth word of Comfort. Eighth word of Comfort. (...)
The Lord himself shall Descend.


Here the Apostle describes unto us the last coming of Christ to judgment. In
which description, we have three considerable particulars, sc. 1. (...).
The Person that shall come; The Lord himself. 2. (...).
The certainty of his coming. He shall come. 3. (...).
The manner of his coming. With a shout. I begin with the first of these.


The Person that shall come: 1. The Person (...).


The Lord himself, i. e. Jesus Christ; God-Man, the Mediator between God and
Man: He that came at first to purchase and redeem the Elect of God; the same
person will now come to raise them out of their Graves, to gather them
together, and to bring them with him unto Glory. He will not send a
Deputy-Angel about the solemn work of that day; but will descend Himself in
Person to finish that last and grand trust of his Mediatory-Office.

And that upon a twofold account. 1. R. Why Christ will come personally, sc.
because the Judgment must be visible.

1. The Lord himself will Descend in his own Person, Because the judgment must
be visible: and therefore the Judge must be so too: There is a dispute whether
Christ shall sit on a visble Throne; and it is very probable he shall: sure we
are from the Scripture, that he shall appear in the Clouds of Heaven, that He
may be heard and seen of all, Behold, Rev. 1.7.
he comes with Clouds, and every eye shall see him. Clouds are visible things:
and these Clouds shall not obscure him, but rather render him more conspicuous;
Every eye shall see him. He shall so come with Clouds, that they shall be a
Throne to exalt and lift him up to the view of all the world: therefore is the
posture noted as well as the Throne: Ye shall see the Son of man sitting on the
right hand of Power, Math. 26.64.
and coming in the Clouds of Heaven; Clouds shall be his Throne, and sitting
will be the posture; the posture of a Judge.

To judge the world is an act of supreme Authority; and therefore it must be
done by one of the three Persons.

Now the Father and the Spirit are invisible; therefore has the Father
appointed a day, Act. 17.31.
wherein he will judge the world by the man Christ Jesus. The Flesh of Christ
is a Veil to his Deity, by which God is made visible to an eye of Flesh: Christ
is God manifest in the Flesh: 1 Timothy 3.16. (...).
God conspicuous in the humane nature; and in that humane nature which he
assumed of the Virgin, will Jesus Christ appear in Judgment: that so every eye
may see him: the wicked to their terror, but the Godly to their unspeakable
joy, Isa. 66.5.

Secondly; 2. R. for the recompense of his abasement.
The Lord himself shall appear for a recompense to his abasement. It is
requisite that he that was judged by the world, should now come to judge the
world. He came at first humble, lowly, despised, sitting upon an Ass, spit
upon, Crucified: but he shall come again in power and great glory.

It is good sometimes to compare the two Comings of Christ together.

At first he came into the Flesh; In Car^^^.
he showed himself in the nature of man, to be judged.

But at his second coming, he shall come in the flesh. In Carne.
He shall come from Heaven, in the same humane nature which he carried up with
him into Heaven: there to be the Judge both of the quick and the dead.

His forerunner then was John the Baptist; the voice of one crying in the
Wilde^ness; At his second coming, his forerunner shall be an Arch-Ang^.

With the voice of an Archangel, and the Trump of God; as in the Text.

Then, his Companions were poor Fishermen: Now his Attendants shall be the
mighty Angels of Heaven. 2 These. 1.7.


Then, he came riding on an Ass, a Colt, the Foal of an Ass: Now, he shall come
riding on the Clouds: sitting on a Throne.

At his first coming, he appeared in the form of a Servant.

Now, he shall come as a Lord, in the glory of his Father.

Then, he came in the likeness of sinful Flesh: to suffer as a Sinner, for
Sinners. Now, he shall appear the second time, to them that look for him, Heb.
9. last.
without sin unto Salvation.

Then he drunk of the brook in the way: but now shall he lift up his head.

This, for the recompense of his humiliation.

Thirdly, Third Reas. to finish his Mediatory Office.
Our Lord Jesus Christ must come himself at the last day to perfect and finish
his Mediatory-Office.

At his first coming, his Mediatory-work was to pay a price to divine Justice,
1 Per. 1.19. So he is called (...) and (...).
and so to purchase us of his Father.

At his second coming, his Mediatory-work will be, to gather all his Redeemed
ones together, and to present them a glorious Church to his Father, not having
spot or wrinckle, or any such thing: but holy and without blemish: in some such
language as was long before Prophesied. Behold here am I, and the Children whom
thou have given me. Isa. 8.18.


And again (as when he was going out of the world, he gave his account to his
Father) of all whom thou have given me, Joh. 17.12.
I have lost none but the Son of perdition.

At his first coming, his Mediatory-work was to fight with the Devil, Act.
26.18. Colos. 1.13. Luke 11.21, 22. In this respect he is called (...). Romans
11.26.
and all the powers of darkness, and to rescue what he had bought of the
Father, out of the power of Satan, that strong man armed, who kept his goods in
peace.

At his second coming, his Mediatory-work will be to vanquish all those
Enemies, out of whose dominion he has freed his Elect; to bind them with
chains, to cast them into everlasting darkness, and to seal the bottomless pit
upon them for ever.

And when he has done this, the Lord Jesus shall deliver up the Kingdom to
his Father; His Office is not completed till this be done. God's Oath is past
upon it, and cannot be reverst, Isa. 45.23. etc. The Text is applied to Christ,
presently upon his Exaltation, to this very purpose, Phil. 2.20.

Well then, we have now found out the person of the Judge.

The Lord Himself, etc.

And for the

Use, it may serve.

1. For infinite terror to the Wicked. 2. For unspeakable Consolation to the
Godly.
First it serves for infinite terror to the Wicked. Him, Terror to the Wicked.
whom (of all the world) they counted their Enemy: (at least, if they did not
call him so, they used him so:) Oh what a dreadful sight will his Appearance be!

If Ahab cried out with so much discomposure of spirit, at the sudden
appearance of Elijah the Prophet of God, Have thou found me, Oh mine Enemy?
With what horror and affrightment, will Reprobate Gaitiff's cry out when they
shall be dragged from before the Tribunal of the Lord Jesus, the Lord of the
Prophets! Have thou found us, Oh our Enemy!

If Joseph's Brethren were so astonished at the presence of Joseph, when he said
unto them. I am Joseph whom you sold into Egypt! How will all the world of
ungodly men be confounded at the presence of the Lord, now coming in the glory
of his Father, to Judge them; when he shall say unto them, I am Jesus.

I am Jesus, whom ye sold, for less than ever Judas sold me, even for the price
of a base Lust.

I am Jesus, whom ye Crucified over and over again to your selves; and put me
to an open shame!

I am Jesus, whose Person you have slighted; whose Government you have spurned
at; crying in the Pride and Rebellion of your obstinate spirits, We will not
have this man Reign over us.

I am Jesus, whose Counsel you have rejected; whose Threatenings you have
laughed to scorn; whose Promises you have derided and set at naught.

I am Jesus, whose Blood you have trampled under your feet as an Unholy thing,
even doing despite to the Spirit of grace, etc.

I say, Now will the Reprobate world be confounded at the presence of their
Judge!

Behold in the days of his Flesh, when he appeared in the form of a Servant,
and was even led away as a Sheep to the Slaughter, and as a Lamb before the
Shearer, not opening his mouth (by way of murmur against his Father, or
reviling against his Enemies) yet how did that Lamb-like Word [I am He] fill
the hearts of those sturdy Soldiers, (who came to apprehend Him) with horror,
and strike them to the ground, like a blast of Thunder and Lightning?

Oh how will that word, when he shall come clothed with Majesty and terror,
with all the glorious Host of Heaven attending his Person; [I am he] fill
Reprobate Souls with astonishment and distraction, and even strike them
backward into Hell before their time! How will it cause them to woo the
Mountains and Rocks (now as hard and inexorable, as their hearts once were, in
the day of God's patience, crying out to them, (to the amazement of Heaven and
Earth) Mountains, Fall on us; Rev. 6.26, 27.
Rocks, cover us, and hide us from the face of Him that sits on the Throne,
and from the presence of the Lamb; for the great day of his Wrath is come, and
who shall be able to stand?

But all in vain! As the Lord Jesus once in the day of his grace, cried unto
them, and they would not answer, etc. So they shall now cry to Heaven and
Earth, to Rocks and Mountains, Prove. 1.24, 25, 26. Psalm. 50.22.
and they shall not answer; yea the Judge shall laugh at their Calamity, and
mock when their fear comes.

Oh consider this, ye that forget God, lest he tear you in pieces, and there be
none to deliver.

Second Use. Second Use of Comfort to the Saints; Christ Himself will be their
Judge.

But (on the contrary) unspeakable Consolation may this doctrine of Christ's
personal Appearance, speak to the Godly; the Sheep of Christ which have heard
his voice speaking to them in the Gospel of peace, and have obeyed it.

Behold, He that in the days of his flesh came to be their Redeemer; now in the
day of his power shall come to be their Judge. He that so often pleaded for
them to his Father, and for whom they so often pleaded and contended, with a
disobedient and gainsaying Generation;

(I say) He shall now be their Judge, and pass sentence upon them: their Friend,
their Brother, their Head, their Husband. What need they fear that Tribunal,
where not their Enemies, (who were wont fas^y to accuse and condemn them;) no,
not their prejudiced and imprudent Friends, who sometimes have rashly and
causelessly mis-judged them; much less the Accuser of the Brethren; Rev. 12.10.
who accused them before their God, day and night; none of these (I say) shall
sit in Judgment; But their dear Redeemer, who for their sake came down from
Heaven: that loved them so dearly, that he died for love of them, that he might
Redeem them, and wash them in his own Blood: He that Regenerated, Sanctified,
Justified, Preserved, and Perfected them: He to whom, both in Life and Death,
they were so nearly and inseparably United; and by virtue of which Conjunction,
they are now awakened, and set upon their feet again, in a most beautiful and
perfect state; I say where He, and none but He, who long since became their
Adocate, shall now (by the appointment of the Father) be their Judge; Oh what
matter of Joy and Triumph will this administer unto the Saints at that day! How
may they lift up their heads with joy, because their Redemption and Redeemer
shall then draw nigh. Second branch of Comfort in reference to the Saints
departed.


Again; The Doctrine of Christ his Personal Appearance at the last day affords
no less Consolation in reference to the Saints departed; and to this very end,
does the Holy Ghost mention it in this place, The Lord himself shall descend
from Heaven. The Relative consideration.
I told you the words have a Relative consideration in them: as they do imply
an account why the Saints which are alive at the coming of Christ, shall not
prevent them which are asleep: why? (it immediately follows): For the Lord
himself shall descend. The Saints of God need not doubt of this, either in
reference to themselves; or to their Relations, whom they have sent before them
to the Grave; The Lord that bought them, will see to Their Resurrection in the
first place: It was the will of him that sent him, that of all which he has
given him, Joh. 6.39.
he might lose nothing, but that he should raise it up again in the last day.
And Jesus Christ is so punctual to his trust, that He will not delegate it to
any of the Angels or Seraphims; but will come in Person to accomplish that
charge; that so not any one of his little ones may possibly be forgotten, (...).
nothing may be lost: neither Person nor Member, nor Dust: but that Christ may
present it entirely to his Father at his coming, in the same language he spoke
when he went out of the world;

Those that thou gave me, John 17.
I have kept, and none of them is lost. He bought them at too dear a rate, to
leave any one of them in the Grave; and therefore, to make all sure, He will
come in Person, and finish his work Himself: As sure as He ascended up into
Heaven after his own Resurrection, so surely shall he descend from Heaven to
perfect that Resurrection in his Saints; which brings me to the second
Particular.

The second particular in this Eighth word of Comfort, The second word of
Comfort. He shall (...)
is, The Certainty of his coming couched in the Verb here, He (...) shall
descend from Heaven. He shall: i.e. most certainly and infallibly.

And so all the Scriptures which mention the Coming of the Lord, speak of it in
the notion of a most unalterable Decree and Statute of Heaven; thus the Apostle
to the Athenians. God has appointed a day wherein he will judge the world in
righteousness, Act. 17.31.
by that man whom he has ordained, whereof he has given us assurance, etc.

See how many words here are heaped one upon another, to assure our Faith of
the infallible certainty of Christ's Coming.

First he has appointed a day; (...). Statuit diem.
There is the divine Appointment and Decree, past upon it in Gods Eternal
purpose and Counsel: It is a Statute enacted in Heaven, that there shall be a
future Judgment; a Statute more sure than ever the Laws of the Medes and
Persians; for Heaven and Earth may pass away, but Gods Decree shall stand, etc.
And then there is a certain Day appointed for it, a stated time by the same
Power; A day which can neither be adjourned nor accelerated. The time is fixed.
He has appointed a day, and it cannot be altered. And then the Work is
determined as well as the day: and that is judgment; wherein He will Judge: The
Judgment is not left Arbitrary or Contingent; but God is resolved on it; He will
Judge; not, peradventure, he may Judge, (...)
but as sure as He is God, he will Judge.

The Persons to be judged are also specified; (...).
not less than the whole world; He will Judge the world, not a single Person
shall escape that Judgment; 2 Cor. 5.10.
we must all appear before the Judgment Seat of Christ.

As the Persons to be Judged, (...).
so likewise the Person that is to Judge, is named, and designed to it already;
That man, that special, that peculiar man; the man Christ Jesus.

And to make all sure, he has his Commission already.

That man whom he has Ordained the Judge, (...). Joh. 6.27.
is Elected and commissioned under the broad Seal of Heaven, is passed.

And if all this be not enough, there is yet further Assurance and evidence
given of it already to the world; open and evident demonstration; if men will
not shut their eyes, (...). Fide, palam facta omnibus.
-- of which he has given assurance unto all men: what that assurance is, I
shall show anon. In the mean time see how the Holy Ghost uses all the words
and expressions which may create a firm assent to the doctrine of Christ's coming
to Judgment; that there may be no room for doubting left: Formid, Oppositi, as
the Schools calls it.
no hesitancy in the minds of men: And not here only, but in many other
Scriptures; 2 Cor. 5.10.
that, hinted even now, We must all appear before the Judgment Seat of Christ,
etc. Not we may (only) but we must; Christ must Judge, and we must (all) appear.
But; (not to multiply Scriptures,) take we a brief account of the Grounds. And:
Behold 1. Reason says, Reasons or Grounds of the certainty of Christ's coming.
He may Come. 2. Faith says, He must Come.


1. Reason says, He may Come.

The very Course of Providence shows it. The Godly are not the happiest in this
world; 1 Cor. 15.9.
If in this life only (says the holy Apostle) we had hope in Christ, we were of
all men most miscrable. Virtue has not a full reward, nor Vice sufficient
punishment in this life. Dives the Representative of the Voluptuous world,
flowed in ease and pleasure; while Lazarus, a godly man, afflicted with pain
and hunger, was glad to dine with his Dogs at the door. The Dogs were both his
Almoners and his Surgeons. Things must not go after this rate for ever.
Sooner or later, a man shall say, i. e. He that is no more than a man; that
has no better eye in his head, than the eye of Sense and Reason, shall be
convinced of this, and compelled to confess of a truth, There is a reward for
the Righteous: Verily, he is a God that judges the Earth.

Sin is now sometimes punished with In judicijs suis quae Deus in hoc mundo
exercet non est ista plena mensura justitiae quae erit in judicis ultimi Dici.
scil.

Non implent plenum postulatum legis and justitiae, neque super impios, neque
super pios. Streso in Act. 17.31.


exemplary Vengance, to show there is a Providence; that God is not an idle
Spectator in the world. And sometimes it is let alone to tell the world that
there is a Judgment to come: the full punishment of sin is not till then.

Thus Reason says, He may Come.

But now Faith goes further, and says, He must Come. He shall Come. The Lord
Himself shall descend from Heaven.

It is a truth not only which God can make good, but a truth which God cannot
but make good.

Witness. Christ must come. 1. His Purchase says so.


1. His Purchase; would Christ buy a people at so dear a rate, and then go away
and come no more at them? Nay.

2. Witness also his promise; And if I go, John. 14.3.2. His Promise.
I will come again; He will, especially considering the design of his leaving
them for a time, it was but to go and prepare a place for them, and he has
done it; the place is prepared; Mansions in his Fathers house are made ready
for them, ver. 2. Why now Christ being gone to this very end, and all things
prepared for their entertainment; if he should not come again, he should
certainly fail, not his promise only, but his project too; this cannot be: He
that never yet failed his own promise, Fidelis Deus in Omnibus, in extremo non
desieret.
nor his peoples expectations, will not now do it; No, I will come and receive
you. He that went from them, only to prepare the place for them, will certainly
come again to receive them into that place now it is prepared. He loves them so
well, that he will not; he cannot be without their company: I will come and
receive you, that where I am, there you may be also. Heb. 11.11.
Faithful is he that has promised who also will do it.

3. Witness, The Sacrament of his last Supper; 3. The Sacrament of his last
Supper. 1 Cor. 11.26.
which is nothing else but a pledge and seal to keep alive the memorial of his
second Coming. As often as ye eat of this bread, and drink of this cup, ye do
show the Lords death till he come. Now when the Lord Jesus Christ has engaged
the expectation of his people, by so solemn a Covenant; if he should fail their
expectation, this Grand Institution had been in vain. Nay surely, He never said
to the Seed of Jacob, Seck ye my face in vain:

He speaks Righteousness. Isa. 45.19.


4. And lastly; Witness his Resurrection; that, is, 4. His Resurrection.
the Assurance given in the Text, Act. 17.31. He will judge the world by that
man whom he has appointed. How may we be sure of that? why he has given the
world assurance of it; (...). Non quod omnibus fidem in Christum dederit: Sed
quod omnibus argumentum dederit. Streso in loc.
what assurance? in that he has raised Christ from the dead; He has given
assurance, Gr. he has offered Faith: the meaning is, God could not have
confirmed his purpose and promise of sending Christ to Judge the world at the
last day, by a more firm and solemn Argument, than by raising him from the
dead, after he had paid the debt, made satisfaction to divine Justice upon the
Cross.

Partly in as much as Jesus Christ was hereby openly declared to be the Son of
God with power. To judge the world is an act of divine Power and Authority; and
what fitter person in the Trinity is there to judge the world righteously, than
He that was unrighteously judged by the world; -- put to death in the Flesh,
but quickened in the Spirit? raised by his own divine power? Partly because
that after his Resurrection, God the Father took him up into Heaven, Vid.
Strev. in loc.
and placed him at his own right hand.
A certain evidence, that when the whole number of his Redeemed shall be
accomplished, he will send him the second time to take Vengeance in his own
Person, on the Shedders of his Blood, and the Oppugners of his Gospel. Else it
had been all one as if Christ had been left to lie still in the Grave.

Thus you see Christ his personal Coming at the last day, established upon its
fourfold Foundation.

1. Purchase. 2. His Promise. 3. His Supper. 4. His Resurrection. Now
therefore, O ye Saints of God, cast not away your Confidences, either in
respect of your selves, or of your sweet Relations which have outrun you to
the Sepulcher.

He that shall come, will come, and will not tarry.

In the mean time, let the just live by their Faith: keep up your Faith, and
your Faith will keep up your hearts from sinking; 2 Cor. 4.16.
for this Cause we faint not, etc.

I proceed to the third Circumstance. The manner of Christ his coming. In the
Description whereof we find a threefold Summons or Citation to all the world,
to make their appearance at this great Ecumenical Assize, 1 Summon^. A Shour.
sc. 1. A Shout. 2. The Voice of an Archangel. 3. (...) Hortatorius clamor.
The Trump of God.

The first solemn summons is a Shout: the Lord shall descend from Heaven with a
Shout. The word in the Greek signifies such a Shout as is to be heard amongst
Mariners and Seamen, when after a long and dangerous Voyage, they begin to
descry the Haven, crying with loud and united voices, a shore, a shore; as the
Poet describes the Italians, when they saw their Native Country; lifting up
their voices, and making the Heavens ring again with Italy, Italy! Italiam,
Laliam, laeto clamore salutani. Virg Aeneid. Irgenti Angelorum jubilee and
acclamatione, Atetius.
Or as Armies when they join battle, rend the air with their loud
Acclamations. In like manner shall the mighty Angels of God with united
clamor, proclaim the Advent of their Lord, crying aloud with a voice that
shall be heard from one end of the Heavens to another; the Earth and Sea, and
Hell it self, shall hear and tremble.

Behold the Lord comes, Jud. v. 14. Jud. v. 14. Math. 25.5.

Behold the Bridegroom comes, Math. 25. v. 6.
The second Summons is the Voice of the Archangel. Expositioric vice. Calv.
This clause some take to be Exegetical to the former; expounding that
hortatory clamor or shout mentioned before; q. d. with a shout, i. e. with the
voice of the Archangel. Arch-Angelus praeconts fungetur officio, and citet
vivos and mortues ad Christi tribunal.
Others conceive it, to be added by way of eminency; All the Angels shall shout
for joy; but the Voice of the Archangel shall be heard above all the rest. The
greatest Angel has the greatest voice; louder and shriller than all the other
Angels, as Captain General to them all.

The third Summons, is the Trump of God; Great Trees, Trees of God; High
Mountains, Mountains of God; A great fire, (...) fire of God. Job. 1.16.
it may signify a mighty Trump; after the manner of the Hebrew phrase, which
uses to call works and wonders of unusual proportion, works of God, and
wonders of God; so the Trump of God, i. e. a mighty Trump; a voice of more
dreadful horror than all that went before: But, whether it be to be understood
metaphorically or properly, is questioned amongst Expositors. Some understand
it only metaphorically, and in an Analogical sense, signifying no more than the
Virtue and Power of Christ's Voice and Proclamation; summoning both the living
and the dead to appear at his Tribunal.

But why we may not take it literally and in propriety of speech, I see no
reason, so for the voice of an audible Trump, which shall be louder than all
the former; And it may well be the same with that which the Apostle calls the
last Trump: this sounding last of all, 1 Cor. 15.52. (...). Math. 24.31. (...),
Sonora and vocalissima tuba. Bull. Numb. 10.1.9. In quo specimen quoddam editum
fuit hujus ultima populi Dei, congregationis, Id.
or continuing longer than the former; our Lord calls it, The great sound of a
Trumpet.

Thus are these three Summons distinct, and each of them louder and shriller
than the former. And it may allude to the manner of the calling together of the
Jews to their public worship; and that (possibly) typical to this; signifying
thus much to the world, that like as their Assemblies were summoned by the
sound of Trumpets; so the last and solemn day of judgment, that great general
Assembly of the Living and the Dead, shall be summoned together by the sound of
Trumpets from Heaven; the vastest and most universal Assembly that ever was
beheld by the eye of Creature.

But a clearer Type and Prophecy hereof seems to be that at the giving of the
Law, when Christ came down on Mount Sinai, to give the Law, it was in a very
glorious manner, sc. with Thunder and Lightnings, Numb. 19.16.
and a thick Cloud upon the Mount, with the voice of the Trumpet exceeding
loud, etc.

This did Typifie Unto us, Christ his second Coming at the end of the world to
require the Law; which surely ought to excel in glory. Let us compare these two
Comings together a little.

At his coming to give the Law, 2 Pet. 3.10. Deuteronomy. 33.2. Jud. v. 14. Dan. 7.10.
Exodus 19.19.
Mount Sinai was all in a flame; Now the whole world shall be on fire. Then
Christ came with ten thousands of his Saints, but Now, thousand thousands shall
Minister unto him, and ten thousand times thousands shall stand before him.
Then the voice of the Trumpet sounded long, and waxed louder and louder: In
like manner Now, there shall be first a shout of all the Angels of God with a
joint acclamation; Next the voice of the Archangel, which shall be louder and
shriller than they. And last of all the Trump of God, by way of eminency,
distinct from the two former, and louder and shriller than either; God then
spoke with a voice, the voice of a Lawgiver, commanding the Law; God spoke all
these words, saying, I am the Lord thy God, etc. Exodus 20.1.2.
Now God shall speak with the voice of a Judge, requiring an account of the Law:
viz. what men have done with that Law: whether they have obeyed or rebelled
against that holy Command, and he shall accordingly Judge them.
This now is the third Circumstance or considerable particular which the Holy
Ghost commends to our notice, in the Coming of Christ which is the Eighth word
of Comfort in this Model, sc. The manner of his coming. And this is to set
forth unto us the Glory and Majesty of Christ his coming to Judgment. These
forerunners of the coming of Christ, these various Heralds which shall
proclaim his Advent, scl.

1. The Hortatory clamor. 2. The voice of the Archangel. 3. And the Trump of
God.
These shall add much to the State and Solemnity of this great Judge his
approach.

When he came into the Flesh, his Herald was John the Baptist, a man of a mean
and contemptible presence, Math. 3.2.
a Preacher of Repentance, Repent for the Kingdom of God is at hand. Now his
forerunners and Heralds shall be, The mighty Angels of God.

Then he came in a still soft voice, Math. 3.3.
the voice of one crying in the Wilderness, Prepare ye the way of the Lord,
make his path straight. Now, he shall come with a loud and terrible voice.
Voice upon Voice, Trump upon Trump, Alarm upon Alarm; Each louder and more
dreadful than other, in comparison whereof, the lowdest Thunder which was eyer
heard from the Clouds of God, shall be but as the shooting off of a pistol, or
the blowing of a Rams Horn; A dreadful shout, which shall even shake the
Heavens and the Earth, Heb 12.26.
and Hell it self.

And it makes much for the terror and astonishment of the wicked; A Terror to
the wicked.
who in the pride of their hearts, would not lend an obedient ear, to the sweet
and gentle summons of the Word, saying Repent, Deuteronomy. 29.19.
and believe the Gospel; but blessed themselves in their hearts; saying, I shall
have peace, though I walk in the imaginations of my heart, and add Drunkenness
to Thirst.

Oh to all such, surely, this will be a tremendous blast, which shall not so
much raise as affright them out of their Graves, Some of the Jewish Doctors
have a Conceit that wicked men shall never rise again, which they ground upon
their own mistake of that Scripture, Isa. 26.14. But, though it cannot be
properly said they Rise, yet they shall be raised; not from Death to Life; but
from one Death to another; from the first Death to the second Death; from Death
to Judgment, and from Judgment to Execution, to torment.
with horror and amazement. Behold the Judge comes, Arise ye Dead and come to
Judgment. This will be the dreadful meaning of that Ministerial Excitation, in
the Consciences of the Reprobate world; Appear in Court, there to answer for
all the Contempt to the Calls and Counsels of Jesus Christ in his blessed
Gospel!

Oh what would Drunkards, and Swearers, and Adulterers give that they might
never be raised out of their Graves? or being raised, What would they give then
for a Rock or a Mountain to fall upon them that might hide them from the face
of him that sits on the Throne, and from the wrath of the Lamb? but all in
vain; Then, to hide will be impossible, and to appear will be intolerable.

But as glorious and acceptable is this description of Christ's coming to the
Saints, Comfort to the Saints.
for whose sake this clause is added, as a word of Comfort, even to them that
sleep in Jesus.

This threefold Alarm, Shout, and Voice, and Trump, shall be no more terror or
amazement to them than the roaring of Cannons, when Armies of Friends approach
a Beseig'd City for the relief of them that are within. These sounds and
ratlings, how terrible a sense soever they may impress upon the hearts and
Consciences of the wicked, will be to them that sleep in Jesus as the sweetest
melody that ever sounded in their ears, as the voice of Harpers harping with
their Harps, to awaken them out of their sweet sleep, with the sweetest Music
and Harmony that ever sounded in their ears; and these shall be their Heavenly
Ditties. Awake and sing, oh ye that dwell in the dust, etc. Or (as in the
Gospel-Call, a little varied.) Arise, shine, for thy light is come, and the
glory of the Lord is risen Upon thee; Isa. 60.1.2.
for behold darkness shall cover the Earth; even (everlasting) darkness, all
the wicked of the world: but the Lord shall rise upon thee, and his glory shall
be seen upon thee to all Eternity.

In a word, This terrible treble Summons shall have no other signification upon
the hearts of them that have believed and obeyed the Gospel, than that
midnight cry had upon the Wise Virgins; Behold the Bridegroom comes, Math.
25.6.
go ye forth to meet him.

Lift up your heads with joy, Luke 21.28.
for your Redemption draws nigh.

And therefore, Oh ye Saints and Servants of God, comfort one another with this
Word also; Concerning your gracious Relations which are gone to Rest,

The Lord Jesus Himself shall come to awaken them; And those Triumphant Summons
and Alarms which shall usher in his Coming; as they shall add to the Glory and
Majesty of their Lord, in whose bosom they have slept all this while, So they
shall, on the one side, bid War and Battle to the Reprobate world; and on the
other side, call together the Assemblies of the Saints, Psalm. 50.5.
who have made a Covenant with him by Sacrifice, and it shall be for their
Honor and Exaltation in that day of his Triumph.

The sum is this: Your Dear ones, whose immature departure you so much lament,
that are asleep in the dust, shall arise; Christ himself shall come for them,
Isa. 66.^.
and that in a most Triumphant manner, for their glory and their Enemies shame.

I have done with the Eighth Word of Comfort, The Coming of Christ; and come
now to the

Nineth Word of Comfort, sc. The blessed Consequences of his Coming, which are
three: 1. Three Consequencies of Christ's Coming.
The Resurrection of the Saints which are fallen asleep. The dead in Christ
shall rise first. 2. The Triumphant Ascent of both, (the living and sleeping
Saints together,) into the Clouds; We which are alive, shall be caught up
together with them into the Clouds. 3. The Blessed meeting of all the Saints
together with Jesus Christ, their Lord and Bridegroom; who comes from the Seeds
Beatorum, the third Heaven, to meet them above half way; even to the lowest
Region of the Air.


To meet the Lord in the Air.
The first Consequence is, the Resurrection of the Saints.
The dead in Christ shall rise first.
To which, notwithstanding I have already spoken under two distinct Notions
(lead thereunto by some of the former passages in the Context,) sc.

1. In reference to the Author of the Resurrection, Jesus Christ: Christ shall
bring them with him, v. 14. 2. In reference to the precedence of it (in that
transaction;) They that are alive, shall not prevent them which are asleep, i.
e. The dead in Christ shall rise first; as here, verse 16.
Yet notwithstanding; this being a main Circumstance in the Resurrection of the
Saints, worthy to be taken notice of, (before I proceed to the following
circumstances of Christ his coming,) I judge it very proper to speak a word or
two of it (also) in this place, The manner of Resurrection. 1. Cor. 15.35.
sc. 3. The manner of the Resurrection.

The Apostle supposes the Query, 1 Cor. 15.35. Some man will say, How are the
dead raised? i. e. with what body do they come? A Query neither frivolous nor
impertinent; and therefore himself (by the Spirit) thinks it worth the
resolution.

And the resolution of it, A twofold description of the Resurrection.
is twofold 1. In general. 2. In particular.


1. In general, He gives us to understand, 1. General the same bodier.
that the Saints shall rise, with the very same bodies they lay down with, in
the Graves; it is expressed under the metaphor of Seed; God gives it a body,
etc. and to every Seed his own body; his own body, not specifially only, but
numerically its own proper body, (...).
no ways alienated or transformed into another. And holy Job (even upon the
Dunghill) believed and Preached the very same Doctrine long before. Though
after my skin, Job. 19.26, 27.
Worms destroy this body [i. e. after Worms have dig'd through my skin to
consume my flesh;] yet in my flesh I shall see God, whom I shall see for my
self; and mine eye shall behold and not another, etc.

Observe how express and significative the words are, weigh them well; first,
This body; Job points as it were with his finger to his body, and cries This;
there is no more in the Text [body] is supplied to make up the sense; this,
Heb. Soth. So the Ancient Believers were wont, when they repeated the Article
of the Resurrection, to add Etiam hujus Carnis, as the Apostle this
Corruptible. 1 Cor. 19.5.8. Pointing to his own body as it were. Heb. 12.
to express the contemptibleness of his body, q. d. this Ulcerous and (already)
Worm-eaten Carcass; this putrified rotten flesh; this nothing, this, worse than
nothing: Yet this, as vile and putrid as it is, shall be raised up again at the
last day.

In my flesh I shall see God; I shall not see God with my Soul only; amongst
the Angels and Spirits of just men made perfect; but I shall see my Redeemer
God-Man in my flesh, in this body of flesh, wherewith I am now clothed.

And I shall see him for my self: i. e. not by a deputy or proxy, but in mine
own person, to my own infinite happiness and satisfaction.

And yet again, mine eyes shall behold him; a further declaration of his
individual seeing of Christ; from the Instrument or Organs; mine eyes, these
numerical eyes that are now in mine head: with these eyes, wherewith now I see
the Sun, the Heaven, the Earth, and all these objects of sense here below; with
these I shall have the viewing of my Glorious Redeemer.

And yet, to express it more Emphatically, he adds the Negative to the
Affirmative [not another] a phrase of speech which men use when they would be
sure to prevent all mistakes, with my own body, not a strange body; not
transformed or changed into any thing else than now it is; with mine own eyes,
not another, not a borrowed eye, not a new created eye placed in the room of
this, etc.

Thus Job in variety of words, does express the invariety, or same-ness of body
in the Resurrection, to the same sense with the Apostle, to every Seed, his own
body.

To this, verse of that Chapter, under the metaphor of Seed, he tells the
incredulous Fool (that cannot believe this Article of Faith, the Resurrection)
Thou sowest not that body which shall be. Not that body which shall be. It
seems then the body shall be another thing, from that which is now sown?

Ans. so it shall be; in respect of quality, though not of kind. There is
diversity in one and the self same body: as it is in the Metaphorical, so it
shall be with the natural; the Grain's sown mean and bare, but it springs up
after another manner, beautiful and green; yet the same Grain: Meliorata
substantia non numero multiplicata. Tert.
the body likewise is the same, when it rises as it was sown, for Substance,
Parts, Members, and Organs; but not the same for beauty and excellent
Properties.

The Infant shall rise a man of perfect Age; the Lame shall rise Sound; the
Blind shall rise Seeing; the Deaf shall Hearing; the Dunth shall be able to
Speak; the Resurrection shall take away all Defects and Excesses of Nature; the
Deformities of the Saints shall not be raised together with their bodies; yea,
Deformities shall be turned into Comelinesses and Beauties: and yet all these
Alterations, do no more change or destroy the Individuality of Person, than
Youth does make the Person numerically different from what it was in Infancy;
or Old Age, from what it was in Youth; or, as it was in the Persons of all
sorts, which Christ healed (in the day of his Flesh); they were the same
Individuals after Cure, as they were before; Cure makes not another Individual
man of a Cripple, nor Health of the Sick; so shall it be in the Resurrection;
the bodies of the Saints (for of them only I speak, not at all of the wicked)
shall be the same for substance and matter; but wonderfully changed for Form
and supernatural Endowments and Qualities: Second description in particular.
Which brings me to the particular description of the Resurrection, sc. in
respect of admirable and transcendent Properties; of which our Apostle has
instanced Four, sc.

Four Properties of the risen bodies of Saints. 1. Incorruption. Prope^ies of
the body in the Resurrection. 1 Cor. 15.42, 43, 44.
2. Glory. 3. Power. 4. Spirituality.


All these in opposition to the contrary Infirmities and Deformities of the
state of Mortality; Contraria ^uxta se p^sita ^^^g's ^lucescunt.
That so by Comparison, the (well-nigh) infinite disproportion of both Estates
may appear, and the Super-excellencies which the Resurrection puts upon the
Body, may shine forth more conspicuously.

First, it is sown in Corruption; it is raised in Incorruption. 1. Property
Incorruptible.
It is sown in Corruption. Behold, the body is Corruptible, whiles it lives;
a Nursery of such Seeds and Principles, as will inevitably destroy it self: a
Spittal of all manner of Diseases: but when it is dead, it is Corruption it
self: Infirmity resolved into Rottenness and Deformity; the fondest Relation
who (while living) laid it in the Bosom, cannot now endure it in the sight:
Give me a Burying place (said Abraham of his beloved Sarah) that I may Bury my
dead out of my sight: Genesis 23 4.
It is now the picture of all ghastly Loathsomness.

But Oh, how unlike it self, shall it be in the Resurrection!

It is raised in Incorruption: When Christ has fetched the body out of the
Grave, and set it upon its feet again, there shall not be the least smell or
savor of Mortality upon it; as there was no smell of the fire upon the Raiment
of the three Children, when they came out of the fiery Furnace. Dan. 3.27.
All the Principles of Corruption and Mortality shall be put off and lest,
together with the Grave-Cloaths, in the Sepulcher. The body (as some think)
shall give forth a sweet fragrant smell, like the Flowers of Paradise: it shall
be an Angelified body, Flesh Immortalized; subject to no more Corruption than
the Soul it self. There shall be no more Death, nor fear of Death; nor
possibility of Death for ever.

Secondly, It is sown in dishonor.] As soon as the Soul is enlarged from its
Imprisonment; the body is presently stripped naked of all its Robes and
honorable Attire, and wrapped up in a poor shroud of no other use than to hide
Deformity; and, as a mean contemptible thing, it is buried under ground: Yea,
sometimes, denied so much honor; it is exposed naked above ground, in the sight
of the Sun, without any other Funeral, than what it may have in the bowels of
the Fouls of the Heavens, Psalm. 79.1.
or the Ravenous Beasts of the Earth. But, be the Burial never so Ignoble; the
Resurrection of it shall be Glorious. Second Property, Gloricu^.


It is raised in Glory. We may truly say, Solomon in all his Glory was not
arrayed like one of these Children of the Resurrection; there shall be a glory
put upon the Body, which shall outshine the Sun in its brightest refulgency.
And that upon a double account.

1. By virtue of a Principle within. 2. The body shall be glorious in the
Resurrection. 1. By virtue of an Inward Principle.
By means of a Glorious Irradiation without.
1. By virtue of an Internal Principle: The Soul, which is the Candle of the
Lord, is here for a time put into a dark Lanthorn of the Body: But then the
glorified Soul being now returned (by the power of Christ) into its ancient
habitation; and become a Vessel replenished with Immortal and unmixed light,
will transmit such beams of glory into the refined body, that it shall shine
like an Angel of Light; the body of the poorest Lazar that ever lay on the
Dunghill, shall be clothed with such ravishing rays of Beauty, as will
transcend the most absolute Beauty that ever mortal eye beheld. 2 By virtue of
External Irradiation from Christ. 2 These. 2.10. Heb 1.3. (...).


Secondly, By virtue of an External Irradiation: It is said of Jesus Christ at
that day, He shall come to be glorified in his Saints, and admired in all them
that believe: As, Jesus Christ was the Brightness of his Fathers Glory; (it is
spoken of him, not as he was the second person in Trinity, God blessed for
ever; but as he was Verbum Incarnatum, The Word Incarnate;) all the beams of
Divine Majesty and Glory did shine forth in him, with such a refulgent
brightness, that, through his Flesh, the Godhead was as it were made visible; we
saw his Glory as the Glory of the only begotten of the Father, full of grace
and truth: So shall the Saints at his Coming (in their proportion) be, the
brightness of Christ his glory; the beams of that glory, which shall shine
forth from the glorified Person of their Redeemer, shall reflect such a
glittering Splendour upon the Saints in the Resurrection, that they shall be
glorious even to admiration: They shall be admired by the very Angels, by one
another, and even by themselves also: they shall wonder to behold this strange
Change wrought upon themselves; as a poor Captive-maid taken out of the
Dungeon, stripped of her nasty stinking rags, and clothed with Prince-like
Robes, adorned with rich and costly Jewels, to be Married to a King; would
stand filled with wonder and delight, to look round about upon her self, and
behold the beauty and luster of every part: So shall it be with the Saints in
the Resurrection. The reflexes of Christ's glory shall shine forth in them, even
to wonder and astonishment: Christ shall be glorified in his Saints, and in all
them which believe; Christ shall not be glorious in Himself only, but glorified
in all his Saints.

Thirdly, It is sown in weakness] weakness indeed! What more impotent than Man
while yet alive, Vanity it self, Psalm. 39.5. Yea, hear that Text out, and you
will say he is vanity indeed; for first it is every man, Kings as well as
Beggars; C^l Adam.
Giants as well as Pygmies; every man, take where ye will: And secondly, as it
is every man, so it is Every vanity, or, Col-Hebel Vniversa Vanitas.
altogether vanity: Every man is the Center of every vanity; he is not only
mixed vanity, partly something and partly nothing; some solidity and some froth;
but vanity throughout; vanity, and nothing else! And then (again) it is every
man in his Nitztzab.
best Estate; or, according to the Heb. Nitztzab.
Standing: Ye need not stay till he is down, when he is languishing (suppose)
in his sick bed: but, take him standing in his most erect posture, when he is
most himself, in his bravery; Heb. Chasde.
or, as it is Isa. 40.6. take him in his goodliness, Gallantry; in his freshest
colors and excellencies; and yet then, even then, he is vanity; every man is
every vanity: Ach. Vtique.
and, that you may not doubt of it, the Holy Ghost has set a double seal to
it; one in the front, Verily, and another in the heel of the Text, Selah;
Verily, every man in his best Estate is altogether Vanity, Selah; such a piece
of vanity that he is not able at his best to free himself of, or fence himself
against, the injuries of the most contemptible creature that ever God made;
Frogs, and Flies, and Lice, and Worms, have courage enough to encounter, and
strength enough to conquer the proudest, potentest Tyrant; as we see in
Pharaoh, Herod, etc.

Thus weak he is in his Strength: what is he in his Weakness? So feeble he is
when he stands: how feeble, when he is fallen, in sickness, in his old decrepit
age, his second Infancy? Read and ponder on that graphical description which
the Holy Ghost has drawn of him, Eccles. 12.
Eccles. 12. We will pick out but some of those lively Characters, ver. 3. The
Keepers of the House tremble; the Arms and Hands, the principal instruments in
repelling evil from the body; they tremble with Palsies and shakings.

The Strong men bow themselves] the legs and thighs which were wont to carry
the body upright, with strength and vigor; now faulter and shrink under their
weight, and buckle together for very debility; the ligaments of nature being
now untied.

The Grinders cease because they are few] the Teeth that were wont to grind
the Food, and prepare it for the Stomach, they cease from their function,
because but few, and having lost their ke^nness.

Those that look out at the Windows are darkened:] the eyes, those Spies and
Intelligencers of this little world, by reason of the dryness and ineptitude of
the Organs, defluxion of humors, etc. do fail in the execution of their office.

The Doors are shut in the street; All the Senses, which are the Doors by which
objects enter, are so weakened, that they are unusefull and of very little
service.

They rise up at the voice of the Bird:] Old men through difficulty and want of
sleep, rise at the crowing of the Cock, or the chirping of a Sparrow; the least
noise disturbs their sleep, See the more full and accurate exposition of this
description of Old Age, in the English Annot. upon Eccles. by the Reverend and
Learned Dr. Reynolds.
verse 5. They are afraid of that which is high:] they go slowly and
timorously, lest they should stumble at every stone, or the least unevenness in
the way.

The Grasshopper shall be a burden:] the lightest hop of the least creature, is
burdensome to Old Age.

Desire fails] all the sensual appetitions of Youth are now undesired and
unsavory.

Behold here is weakness to perfection; And yet all-this-while there is Life;
the Soul yet imbalms the body, and keeps it from putrefying.

But Man returns to his long Home] This same dry Seed is sown, and it is sown
in weakness indeed; not only meat for Worms; but it turns into Worms and
Vermin; and hasteneth into its first feeble principle of dust, to which it was
sentenced by Divine Justice: Dust thou art, Genesis 3.19.
and to dust thou shall return.

But now, behold this feeble thing shall be raised in power: 3. Property
Powerful.
The body even of the weakest Infant, shall be invested with an Angelical
power; A Monument whereof, the formidable Host of Sennacherib King of Assyria
has erected for all posterity: wherein, 2 King. 19.35.
one Angel went out and smote one hundred fourscore and five thousand, who
overnight, like so many Goliahs, defied the Armies of the Living God; but in
the morning, lay upon the ground so many blasted life-less Corpses; and all by
the Ministry of one Angel. Such Vessels of strength and Activity shall the
bodies of the Saints be in the Resurrection; they shall be endued with such
power (says one) that they shall be able to remove the Globe of the Earth with
their foot, as if it were but a foot- ball: they shall be clothed with a kind
of Omnipotence; Gideon, Sampson, Jephtah, David, and all his famous Worthies,
are but as suoking Babes to the Children of the Resurrection: He that is weak
among them shall be as David, and he that is as David shall be as the Angel of
God. Again;

It is sown a natural body, according to the Greek, word for word, an (...).
Abnimal body: i. e. such a body as is animated, sustained and acted by the
Soul; The holy natural: 1. Because acted by a natural Soul.
yet in so low a way, that it is subject to Corruption, and is no sooner
deserted by the Soul, but it resolves into dust, (ut supra) or Natural, i. e.
such a body as stands in need of natural helps, of meat, drink, rest, sleep, 2.
Because it stands in need of natural props. 3. Because endued only with natural
affections, etc. (...). Fourth Property, Spiritual.
to shore up the feeble Tabernacle of dust for a while: and all will not do;
but down it will come Roof and Walls, and Props and All. Or again Natural, i.
e. such as has natural motions, operations, and affections; such as are proper
only to the fallen Nature of man; feeble, slow, limited, and temporary.

But now behold, in opposition to all these acceptations, it is raised a
spiritual body; not in regard of the substance of it, as if it were turned into
a Spirit; but

1. Because animated and acted by the Soul now in its glorified capacity, made
perfect with all heavenly qualifications, and so Spiritualized in all its
faculties and operations, Heb. 12.23. The Spirits of just men, made perfect.
that it is called no more by the name of a Soul, but of a Spirit; To the
conduct and motions whereof, the body NOW shall yield absolute and immutable
obedience and conformity. Here, the Soul depends (as it were) upon the body:
Anima sequitur temperamentum Corporis.
because, though the body be acted by the Soul, yet the Soul acts according to
the temperament of the body, and the disposition of the Organs.

The difference (if we take notice of it) between men and men in respect of
Wisdom, and judgment, and other natural excellencies, Omnes animae sunt
ejusdem perfectionis.
arises not from any disparity that is between their Souls; for all Souls are
of a Size: the Soul of a Fool is as perfect as the Soul of a Wise man. But the
difference arises from the Crasis and Complexion of the body, which many times
puts Yokes and Manacles upon the Soul; so that (at the best) it is but as a
close Prison, or dark Lant-horn, which obstructs and restrains the more noble
and liberal operations of the Soul; and penn's in those beams of light, which
(if within more transparent Walls) would send forth a greater luster to
enlighten the world.

But now in the Resurrection, it shall not be so: the body then shall depend
wholly upon the Soul, and be acted properly and indistarbedly by the Soul. Here
the Soul seems to be flesh it self, because acted by the flesh, Every way
subject to the motions and desires of the Soul. Spiritui subdita.
and is often subservient to the flesh: but then the very body shall seem to be a
Spirit; because acted by the Spirit, and shall be universally and uniformly
serviceable to the Spirit: The Soul shall immediately be acted by God, and the
body shall immediately be acted by the Soul; thus it shall be a Spiritual body.

Secondly, It is raised a spiritual body; because it shall subsist as a Spirit;
it shall stand in no need of those gross material Aliments, of meat, and drink,
and sleep; by which it is now underpropt; but it shall be sustained merely by
virtue of its union with the Soul; as the Soul by virtue of its union with
Jesus Christ; this is to be a spiritual body, when the body shall subsist as a
Spirit, or as an Angel does subsist.

Thirdly, Spiritual; because the motions, operations, Care Angelica, Angelified
flesh, Tert. de Res.
and affections of the body, shall then be all Spiritual: it shall be in the
Resurrection of so pure and refined a Complexion, that it shall be diaphanous
and transparent; and move up and down with the agility and celerity of a Spirit.

Zanchius resembles it to the motion of birds in the Air, Zanch. De Operibus
Dei.
that the body being hatched (as it were) in the Resurrection, shall be able to
mount up into the Heavens, and as lightly fly through the skies, as if it had
wings. David shall then need to wish no more for the wings of a Dove, but be
able to contend with fouls of the swiftest flight. Augustine has an higher
streyn, and says, that, Miraceleritate
The body shall move from place to place with what celerity it lists: and
(after him) Luther expresses it by the swiftness of a Thought, as
instantaneous as the Lightning, which in the twinkling of an eye passes from
one end of Heaven to another.

Likewise the operations of the body shall then be all spiritual operations: It
shall then be abased no more to any of the servile drudgeries of this present
state: it shall work no more, toil no more, sin no more; the Offices of the
body shall be as far above its present functions, as the work of a King
transcends the employment of a Swine-herd or Scullion: they shall for ever be
freed from all those uses which do imply a state of infirmity, and shall be
taken up wholly in Heavenly and Angelical Services: sc. to stand before the
Throne of God, and of the Lamb, and to praise him for ever and ever.

And lastly; the body shall then be Spiritual, because it shall be endued with
Spiritual Affections; it shall not be liable to weariness, sickness, pain, or
external injuries, no more than a Spirit is. It shall not indeed be an Aerial
and Spiritual body, as the Socinians and others do (inconsequentially) infer
from this and other Scriptures; but it shall be no more capable of a stroke or
wound, or any other violence, than the Air or Sun, or the Heavens themselves.
It shall be a true, real body, but no more vulnerable or penetrable, than if it
were a Spectrum; an imaginary body, a mere Apparition. It is true, Flesh and
blood cannot inherit the Kingdom of God: but the meaning is not, that in the
Resurrection, the bodies of the Saints shall cease to be flesh and blood, Ver.
50, 51.
but that they shall be divested of all the defects and infirmities of flesh
and blood. This is the mystery of it, The Fire of the last day; the only
Purgatory.
We shall be changed. The fire of the last Judgment (that only Purgatory of the
Saints, that we dull Protestants know) shall not consume the bodies of the
Saints, but their corruption only; it shall not destroy the substances, but
refine their qualities, as the Goldsmith makes a new Vessel of old Plate; not
by altering the metal, but by changing the form and fashion. The furnace of
the Resurrection shall purge out all the slime, and dross, and filth, and
imperfection out of the bodies of the Saints, and refine them into a body that
shall exceed the Celestial bodies, of the Sun, Moon, and Stars, in clarity and
purity.

This is that Affection and Property which the Schools call Impassibility; No
more capable of a blow or wound, than the Air or Heavens, or the Sun it self.
they shall be put into a blessed incapacity or irreceptiveness of any (even
the least) injury or prejudice incident to the humane nature, in this state of
mortality. They shall be no more liable to suffering, than the glorified Angels
in Heaven, or the Spirits of just men made perfect.

Behold, these be now the beatifical properties wherewith the very bodies of
the Saints shall be arrayed and beautified in the Resurrection!

Of Corruptible, Ignominous, Weak, Natural,


It shall be made Incorruptible. Glorious. Powerful. Spiritual.


A Change which we are not in a capacity to understand, till we shall possess
it.

And all these admirable Properties the blessed Apostle has cast up into one
Word, a word of a most incomprehensible signification, the Summa totalis; the
vast comprehensive estimate of all the rest, sc.

Our vile bodies shall be fashioned like to [Christ] his Glorious body. Phil.
3.21
This short comprehensive description of the glory of the Resurrection, is
expressed (also) by way of Opposition to its Contrary; that the excellency of the
Resurrection might be more illustrious, being compared with the meanness and
obscurity of the present state; and either of them is absolved in one word.

The meaness of the present state of the body: It is a Vile Body.
The glory of the future; It shall be conformed to Christ's Glorious Body.
The body now is a vile body, Gr. (...).
Our body of this vileness: A word of so full a signification, that in the
whole Dictionary of Language, there cannot be found a term more proper, (...).
to express the meaness and ignominy of the present state; Some derive it from
a Greek word, which signifies to bury; expressing such a corrupt and fordid
thing, as if with Lazarus it had layn four days stinking in the Grave: Joh.
11.39.
a Carcass that stincks above ground; how much more when it is buried indeed?

Others derive it from a word that signifies to stamp and tread under-foot:
(...), calcari. See Mr. Calamies Sermon Preached at Dr. Boltons Funeral.
implying the body (in it self) to be of so fordid and base an Extraction
(since the Fall) as is fit for nothing, but to be cast out upon the dunghill,
and trampled under the feet of man and beasts; whether alive or dead, it is a
vile thing, (set aside only its divine workmanship) Vileness it self.

Why-but now, the Resurrection shall make amends for all; Then this vile body
shall be fashioned, (...).
like unto Christ his glorious body; like, i. e. of a like form and fashion to
Christ's body; that must needs be a ravishing beauty indeed: for, mark ye, it is
not like to Christ his body, in his state of Humiliation, which yet was full of
beauty, though the blind world could not see it: Isa. 53. Joh. 1.14. The divine
beauty beaming it self through the very body of Christ, and adding luster unto
it. Exodus 34.30.
they whose eyes were opened saw and admired; we beh^ld his glory, as the glory
of the only begotten of the Father, full of Grace and Truth. But in the
Resurrection, it is said, Our vile bodies shall be fashioned like to his
Glorious body; surely that must needs excel in glory.

Behold, if such were the brightness of Moses his face, at the giving of the
Law, that the Israelites were not able to bear it; They were afraid (says the
Text) to come nigh him: If St. Stephens Countenance did shine as the face of an
Angel, when he stood holding up his hand at the bar of his Unrighteous Judges,
in the posture of a Malefactor! what think we is the luster and brightness
which shines forth from the glorified body of the Lord Jesus, 1 Timothy 6.15, 16.
who is the blessed and only Potentate, the King of Kings, and Lord of Lords,
who only has immortality, Math. 17.3.
dwelling in the light which no man can approach unto; whom no man has seen,
nor can see? Behold, in his transfiguration, Heb. 11.3. In Regia Caelorum sedet
Jesus ad dextram Patris. Tert. de Resurr. Carnis,
his Face did shine as the Sun, and his Raiment was white as Snow! What
ravishing beams of light and glory do Moses, and Elias, and Peter, now see
sparkling from his glorified Person exalted to the right hand of the Majesty on
high, i. e. on the highest Throne of the highest Majesty in the Court of
Heaven: Illud corpus cadaverosum configurabit corpori claritaris su^. Aug.

Ver^or ne temerarium sit, omne quod de illa proferiur el^qui^m. August. de
civit. Dei. Lib. 22. Cap. 21.


Surely the glorified body of Christ does as far surpass the Sun in brightness,
as the Sun surpasses a clod of Earth; and yet to this Exemplar of glory, must
the bodies of the Saints be conformed in the Resurrection! Surely, glorious
things are spoken of the Resurrection: So great, so glorious, that, had not the
Spirit of God spoken them before, it had been daring presumption, to have
reported or believed it.

Qu. But some may say, How can these things be? or, How is it possible, that
such rotten stinking Carcasses should be capable of such a glorious
Metamorphosis?

Ans. It may well non-pluss our poor dark Infant-understandings; For eye has
not seen, nor ear heard, 1 Cor. 2.9.
nor has it entered into the heart of man, what glory God has prepared for the
very bodies of his Saints! But, because it is wonderful in our eyes, Shall it
be wonderful in the eyes of the Lord of Hosts?

With men indeed this is impossible; but with God all things are possible. [O
LORD GOD, thou know:] Ezekiel. 27.3.
was the answer which the Prophet of old returned to that non-plussing
question, concerning the Resurrection of the dry bones of the house of Israel
(a Type of this last and general Resurrection) He referred it (as being a
mystery transcending his understanding) to Divine Wisdom and Omnipotence, to
resolve.

And upon the same bottom does our Apostle here fix this Mystery and our Faith,
sc. It is, according to the working of his mighty Power, whereby he is able to
subdue, even all things to Himself. In his own Resurrection, the Lord Jesus as
Mediator, gave us a signal specimen of his power; Colos. 2.15.
when he spoiled Principalities and Powers, and made a show of them openly: He
subdued the Devil, Hell, and the Grave, to himself; got them under his feet,
and led Captivity Captive; by virtue of which Conquest, he became the
Resurrection and the Life: and therefore is able to exert the same power and
influence in raising his Members, and in conforming them to their Head, which
he put forth in his own Resurrection; it is a work of no greater difficulty:
(...). The bodies of the Saints shall be raised; tanta facilitate, quanta
faelicitate, with as much ease as happiness. Aug.
If it were, He is able to subdue even all things; (it is a note of
similitude.) All things are alike to Omnipotence; the greatest are as the
least. Our Impossibles are all one to him, as our facilities: nothing can stand
in his way, which he cannot subdue and conquer to Himself: i. e. at his own
pleasure, to his own glorious purposes and designs: And therefore, even this
admirable and stupendous Transformation shall be effected upon those poor
deformed Carcasses of his Saints, which sense and reason gave for lost; Faith
says, it shall be done, our vile bodies shall be transfigured into the likeness
of his own Glorious body; How? according, or suitably, to the mighty working,
whereby he is able to subdue even all things unto himself: God can do what he
will, and that is enough.

And thus I have opened the first Consequence of Christ his Last Coming, sc.
The Resurrection of the Saints, as (formerly,) in respect of the 1. Author; The
Lord Jesus. 2. The Precedence of it; they that are alive, shall not prevent
them which are asleep; they shall rise first: So also (now) 3. In respect of
the manner of it; the bodies of the Saints shall be invested with four glorious
qualities. 1. Incorruptible. 2. Glorious. 3. Powerful. 4. Spiritual.



By all which it shall be conformed to the Glorious Body of our Lord Jesus.

It may be of Use 1. For Counsel. 2. For Comfort; and but a word of either.


First; It may serve by way of Counsel; 1. Use. Of Counsel.
and that unto all (indefinitly). You that would secure unto your selves an
interest in the glory which shall be put upon the Saints bodies in the
Resurrection; labor to experience this beatifical transfiguration, first in
your Souls, on this side of the Grave. Labor to get your vile spirits to be
made like to his glorious Spirit. Put ye on the Lord Jesus Christ; put Him on,
by an holy and universal Imitation.

Labor to be meek, as He was meek. Holy, as He was Holy. Pure, as He was Pure.
Merciful, as He was Merciful. Heavenly, as He was Heavenly.
And, Joh. 4.34.
Let it be your meat and drink to do the will of him that sent you, and to
finish his work.

* A. Christ was the brightness of his Father's glory, (...), Insculpta forma.
the express Image of his Person: So do ye study (in your finite capacity) to
be the brightness of Christ, his glory, the express Image of his Person: Oh
labor to get his Image and similitude to be deeply engraven upon your hearts;
and to scatter the beams of it in your Conversations, Philip. 2.15.
for the enlightening of a dark world.

Behold this shall be the evidence and first fruits of your future conformity
to Him in the Resurrection of the just. The ground and Reason is, because that
blessed Transfiguration which shall conform the Saints to Christ, their Head
and Husband in the Resurrection (and from thenceforth to all Eternity;) has
its beginning here in Regeneration, Ephesians. 4.23, 24.
or the New Birth, wherein they are renewed in the Spirit of their minds, B^ta
referts (...). unto (...) In the Regeneration, ye also shall sit upon twelve
^n^^nes.
and do put on (habitually) the New man, which after God is Created in
Righteousness and true holiness; Jesus Christ is formed in their hearts. And
upon this very account, is the Resurrection styled also, the Regeneration,
Math. 19.28. In the Regeneration ye also shall sit, i. e. in the Resurrection
ye also shall sit, etc. And it is therefore called the Regeneration; because
the Resurrection shall perfect in the Saints, what the Regeneration begun, sc.
Conformity to Christ their Head and Husband in Holiness. Yea at the
Resurrection, the Image of Jesus Christ shall be completed; as on their Souls,
so on their bodies also: because, that Image was begun upon their Souls on this
side the Grave in their New Birth; accordingly as they were predestined to
both in the purpose of God, Rom 8.29.
from all Eternity. The Resurrection to Grace here, and to Glory hereafter, is
but one and the same Regeneration. Whosoever therefore is a Stranger to this
Transformation of Spirit, in the Resurrection to Grace, shall never partake of
that Transfiguration of body in the Resurrection to Glory. The bodies of the
wicked shall be raked out of their Graves with all their defects and excesses;
all their mis-shapes and deformities, which they carried with them to their
Graves; in their perfect ugliness; which were the shame and curse of the fallen
nature; an abhorrency to God and Angels, etc. Yea to the very Devils
themselves, whom they shall have to be both their Companions and Executioners.
The Saints of God were the worlds derided, persecuted Non-Conformists here; but
themselves shall be Christ's and his Saints Non-Conformists hereafter, when
their Carcasses shall be cast out for a spectacle of shame and abhorrency unto
all flesh for ever. Isa. 66. ult.


Christians, as you love your Souls, and would bear the Image of the Son of God
in his Kingdom and glory: Study this Soul-Conformity, now, and make it your
business; Labor to feel this blessed change wrought in your hearts; and let
the world behold it in your lives: without which, all your Confidences
concerning that day, will prove but so many delusions, Romans 5.5.
to aggravate your shame and everlasting despair. Hear, oh hear, how the
Disciple of Love does argue, When He shall appear, we shall be like Him,
Glorious!

But why? 1 John 3.2. cum. c. 4.17.
Because, As He is, so are we in this world. He disputes from Conformity to
Christ in the Gospel-state, to Conformity to Him at this Appearance.

We shall, etc. because we are, etc. By such Argumentations, Christians,
Philip. 2.12. 1 Timothy 6.18, 19. 1 John 4.17.
Work out your Salvation with fear and trembling, that ye may have boldness in
the day of Judgment, etc.

Secondly; It may serve by way of Comfort; Second Use. Consolation.
and for that end it is written by the Comforter Himself in this model: for
Comfort, I say, in reference to our sweet Relations that sleep in Jesus; over
whom (not seldom) we spend our fruitless Tears, (take we heed lest sinful also)
while we compare their once lively, sweet, amiable Countenances, which sparkled
so much beauty and delight in our eyes; with their pale, ghastly Visages in the
Grave; where they say to Corruption, Job. 17.14.
thou art my Father; and to the Worm, thou art my Mother, and my Sister: We
look upon them, I say, not without a kind of trembling and horror; as if their
Ghosts appeared to us out of their Graves; or that we our selves were buried
with them alive in the same Coffin.

Ah Sirs, why stand ye not (with the men of Galilee,) Act. 1.11.
gazing up into Heaven? but, (with Peter) stooping down, and looking into the
Sepulcher? Behold I bring you glad tidings of great joy; The day is coming,
when that Corruptible shall put on Incorruption; and that Mortal shall put on
Immortality: when that poor dust, over which thou now mournest, that vile body,
shall put on its Angelical Robes, and shall more surpass it self in its
freshest and liveliest colors, while yet in the land of the living; than that
beautiful pile of flesh and blood did exceed it self, when it was resolved into
rottenness and dust.

Look not, then, oh ye Children of God, upon your Selves or your Relations, as
they lie in the Grave; but, contemplate them, as they shall be in the morning
of the Resurrection: Oh what a glorious change shall than behold! How unlike it
self, shall this poor vile body appear in the Resurrection?

It was sown in Corruption, it is raised in Incorruption; it is sown in
dishonor, it is raised in Glory; it is sown in weakness, it is raised in
power; it is sown a natural body, it is raised a spiritual body. In a word, It
was sown a vile body; It is now transfigured, in the Resurrection, into a most
eminent Conformity with Christ's Glorious body.

Be of good Comfort, Oh ye mourners of hope; here is a perfumed Hankerchief to
wipe off all tears from your eyes; You that sow in tears, shall reap in joy:
you that carry forth precious Seed weeping, shall come again rejoicing, and
bring your Sheaves with you.

The Resurrection shall make amends for all!

I have done with the first Consequent.

I come now to the second Consequent of Christ's Rising; Second Consequent.
Triumphant Ascension of the Saints.
sc.

The Saints Triumphant Ascension.

Verse 17. Then we which are alive and remain, shall be caught up together with
them in the Clouds, etc.

Here, we have a further instance of the Saints Conformity unto Christ in the
Resurrection. Christ himself when he was risen did Ascend; He was carried up
into Heaven: So shall it be with the Saints, when they are raised up out of
their beds of dust, they shall be caught up into the Clouds; they shall Ascend
to meet their Lord.

And this Ascension, according to the Analogy of Scripture, we may conceive,
shall be effected by a Threefold medium, 1. Medium. The power of Christ.
Scil. 1. The Power of Christ. 2. The Ministry of the Angels, 3. The
Spirituality of the Saints own bodies.


First, the Ascension of the Saints in the Clouds shall be effected by the
Power of Christ.

By the same power whereby he raised them out of their Graves, will he lift
them up unto Himself; yea this taking them up, is a branch of the Resurrection;
it is continuata Resurrectio, as Divines say, that Providence, is, continuata
Creatio, a Progressive Creation: So I may call this Rapture of the Saints into
the Air, It is nothing else but a Progressive Resurrection; the continuation
and perfection of the Resurrection; the proper work (also) of Him, who is the
Resurrection and the Life; It is the second part of the Resurrection, without
which the first would differ little from the state of the Dead. In vain should
the Saints be raised out of the dust, if being raised, Christ should leave them
at a distance from Him: and the Resurrection of the Saints themselves would
look too like the Resurrection of the Wicked, a Punishment rather than a Bl^ss;
Separation from Christ being half, (yea, the worst half) of Hell: though even
there the damned have a kind of Life. Surely, the Children of the Refurrection
might have too real occasion to weep Absoloms dissembling complaint to his
abused Father; Why am I come from Geshur, if I may not see the Kings face? Why
are we brought up out of the Grave, if we may not enjoy the Lamb's presence?

But the Amen, the faithful and true Witness, cannot be worse than his word; He
spoke it at his Departure (to his Disciples;) and he will make it good at his
Return;

I will come again and receive you to my self, that, Joh. 14.3.
where I am, there you may be also.

In order therefore to the accomplishment of this Promise, the first work the
Lord Jesus will do, at his Coming in his Kingdom, (after he has awakened his
Spouse out of her sleep) will be, to lift her up unto Himself, now, sitting
upon his triumphant Throne, to Judge both the Quick and Dead.

This is the first Receiving of them unto Himself, Christ his first receiving
of the Saints to Himself. Joh. 12.32.
his drawing of them up unto Him, according to his own phrase in the days of
his flesh; And I, if I be lifted up from the earth, will draw all men unto me:
(All men i. e. All my Redeemed ones,) which promise, although the Spirit
expounds it upon his being lifted up upon the Cross, verse 33. This he spoke,
signifying what death he should dye: Yet we may (not without warrant) extend it
also to his glorious Exaltation in the great Day of his Judging the World: this
being both the design and reward of his Passion; to the intent, that whom he
drew to Himself, by the merit of his Cross, he might also actually draw unto
Himself by the power of his Resurrection and Ascension. I will draw all men
unto me; or, I will attract unto me; As the Loadstone draws the metal unto
it self by its magnetic virtue; or as the Sun draws up the vapors of the
Earth by its attractive beams: so will the Lord Jesus Christ that Sun of
Righteousness, when his glory shall arise upon the world, with healing under
his wings; draw all his Saints unto Himself, by the sovereign attractive
influence of that mysterious Union between Himself and his Members.

This is the first and great Medium of the Saints Ascension; the Power of
Christ.

A second Medium is the Ministry of the Angels; Second Medium, the Ministry of
the Angels. Heb. 1. Ult.
for which, though we have not certainty of demonstration to compel belief; yet
we want not more than bare probability of argument to invite Assent.

For if it be in the Commission of the Angels to be Ministering Spirits, for
them who shall be Heirs of Salvation, we have no reason to imagine their
Commission should expire until the time, when the Saints shall be actually and
safely invested into their long-expected Inheritance. And therefore, if they
were the Saints Lifeguard in the state of their defilement and infirmity, to
bear them up in their hands, lest at any time they should dash their foot
against a stone; How much more ready and active, now, in the Saints
Virgin-state of Purity and Perfection, will the Angels be, to be their Convoy
to conduct them (in their Ascension) going now to meet the Lamb! Sure we are,
the Lord Jesus, though he be the Resurrection and the Life, yet is pleased to
make much use of the Ministry of the Angels about the Resurrection of the
Godly; They shall sound the first Trump, at the sounding whereof, the Dead do
rise.

They gather the Elect together, from the four Corners of the Earth, and sever
the Wicked from them; the Tares and all things that offend, and them which work
Iniquity, are by them bound up in bundles, and cast into the fire. All this is
the Angels Office; not because our Lord could not with equal facility do it
Himself? Why should we think the service of the Angels should cease, until the
whole Scene of the Resurrection be finished!

Yea to determine our dubious thoughts, we hear the Lord of the Harvest giving
charge to his Reapers (which are none but Angels) not only to reap the Wheat,
but to carry-in the Sheavs into his Barn; I will say to the Reapers, but gather
the Wheat into my Barn! Behold this is the Angels Office; their work is not
done, till the good Corn be Inn'd.

This, in the Metaphor of the Marriage of the Lamb, is nothing else but the
Angels attendance on the Saints, the Lambs Wife, while She is making ready,
Revel. 19.7, 8.
that when She is arrayed in fine Linen, clean and white, they may then take
her up in their winged Arms, and conduct her in state to the place, where her
Royal Bridegroom is staying for her.

Thirdly; Third Medium. The Spirituality of the Saints bodies.
The Spirituality and Power wherewith the bodies of the Saints are endowed in
the Resurrection, may well concur also to this Ascension.

By virtue of that mavelous Spirituality and Agility, wherewith the
Resurrection shall, (if I may so say) inform the Saints bodies; they shall be
able to mount upward (ut sup.) and move with admirable celerity up and down, to
and fro in the Air; as Swallows in a Sunshine day, dart themselves through the
sky; or as the Angels themselves, who with equal facility, Descend and Ascend,
with a motion as swift as their Wills.

In the Resurrection, indeed, the Saints were purely passive; as passive as
when their bodies were first formed out of the dust, and had the breath of Life
breathed into them.

But now, in their Ascension they shall be active and agil. Moved, indeed,
they shall be, by an extrinsick power; why else are they said to be caught up
into the Air? But yet not so, but that they may move themselves by an
intrinsic Principle: Else, 1 Cor. 15.42, 43, 44. God and Nature do nothing in
Vain.
those supernatural affections of their re-divine bodies, might seem to be
superfluous and insignificant. Sutably to this, it is storied of Elijah his
Ascension (a Prophecy and figure of this universal Translation of the Saints)
that although a Charet of fire parted Him and Elisha; yet He went up by a
whirlwind into Heaven: He was carried, and yet he went up; so the Saints, etc.

Thus I have showed the probability (at least) of a threefold Medium in the
Saints Ascension. 1. Christ's Power. 2. The Angels Ministry. Agility of the
Saints bodies.

But it may be Objected.

What means this Concurrence of Mediums? For, if any one of these be
sufficient, What use of them all?

For Answer, Ans. Twofold
I shall offer two things to your consideration.

First: This Concurrence of Mediums is no other than we meet with in the
Ascension of our Lord in his own Person. For,

First: Act. 1.9. (...).
Of the Lord Jesus Himself, after his Resurrection, it is said, He was taken
up, or lifted up; the phrase may import the Power of the Father, as (formerly)
in raising him up from the dead: So, now also, in lifting him up into Glory,
according to that, Act. 5.31. Him has God the Father exalted with his
right hand: Here is the power of the Father in the Sons Ascension. And then you
have the subserviency of second Causes added; first a Cloud is prepared, as a
Royal Charet to carry up this King of Glory to his Princely Pavilion, (...).
Luke 24.51. He was carried up into Heaven.
A Cloud received him out of their sight.

And then a Royal Guard of mighty Angels surround the Charet; if not for
support, yet for the greater state and solemnity of their Lords Ascension; He
was carried up into Heaven, Luke 24.51.

Yet notwithstanding all this, it is said of the Lord Jesus, He went up, Act.
1.10.
while the Disciples looked steadfastly toward Heaven: He went onward, or he
went upward; as implying that his motion was not only passive, but active; he
mounted up into Heaven by his own divine power, He Ascended. Behold here we
have a perfect Pattern of the Saints Ascension in all the Mediums of it; they
hold exact proportion with their Lord. The Father lifted up the Lord Jesus; the
Lord Jesus, He lifts up his Saints. A Cloud received Him; the Saints also are
caught up in the Clouds. Angels attend upon their Lord in his Ascension; nor do
they refuse their attendance on the Saints in their Ascension. Jesus Christ,
notwithstanding, Ascended by the Power of his own glorified Person: The Saints
likewise Ascend by virtue of those supernatural properties, wherewith their
bodies were adorned in the Resurrection.

I Answer, Secondly; Second Answ.
That in both Christ's and the Saints Ascension, this variety of Mediums is
neither superfluous, nor inconsistent; but signal instances of that sweet
harmonious subordination of Causes, which the only wise God has established in
his own Counsel, for the managing of his works and wonders of providence, viz.

Second Causes working together in their several Sphere and Orb.

The supreme cause, ordering, influencing, and actuating the second causes to
his own ends and designs.

And lastly, See a notable instance of this subordination. Hos 2.21, 22. Rev.
11, 12.
Particular Beings and Persons lest to act according to the mpressions of their
own individual natures, notwithstanding their subordination.

All these Mediums, we may observe once more, concurring in the Resurrection of
the Witnesses, mentioned in the Revelations; There, you have,

1. A great voice from Heaven calling them, Come up hither; There Is th Power of
Christ: It was a great voice, a voice of Power; a voice which did what it
commanded.

Second; The subserviency of the Clouds; the Witnesses rode upon a Cloud into
Heaven in Triumph.

Thirdly; And to show their motion was not violent, but free also, and
voluntary; it is said, they Ascended.

Fourthly; And there is yet one Circumstance more of special remark, and that
is, This was in the sight of their Enemies. Their Enemies beheld them; beheld
them with great fear, verse 11. (...).
Horror and Astonishment took hold of their Persecutors, Envying their
Advancement, and vexing themselves that they should have no more power to
Persecute the Witnesses, and (add to all this) confounded in the expectation of
their own succeeding judgment.

This one Scripture is a perfect prediction and model of the general
Resurrection of the Saints in the last day.

The Lord Jesus from his Throne shall call them up by a powerful voice: Come up
hither, Clouds shall be their Chariots, and Horses to carry them. And yet they
shall Ascend upwards by a supernatural principle, spontaneously, and of their
own proper motion.

While, in the mean time, the whole world of reprobate Men and Angel; shall be
left below upon the Earth, looking upward and gnashing their Teeth, to see such
a sudden and tremendous Turn of things: the Saints, whom they despised and
persecuted, snatched out of their reach, and ascending in so much pomp and
royalty to meet their glorious Redeemer; they themselves being left behind with
a certain looking for of Judgment and fiery Indignation, which shall devour the
adversaries. Then shall begin their weeping, and wailing, and gnashing of
Teeth, which shall never have an end.

For Use,

In the first place it may serve as a Cordial to the Saints of God; Use 1. A
Cordial.
whether in reference to their own dissolution, or the dissolution of their
precious Relations already fallen asleep.

Behold! the descent of the Saints of God into the Grave, is not with so much
weakness, ignominy, and abasement, as their Ascent after the Resurrection, to
meet their Lord in the Air, shall be with Power, Triumph, and Glory.

Christ shall draw them. Clouds shall carry them. Angels shall conduct them.
Yea, they shall mount up to Heaven, by virtue of those Christ-like impressions
stamped upon their glorified bodies in the Resurrection.

Each one of these were sufficient: All these must needs be exceeding Glorious!
yet, Such honor have all the Saints!
Secondly; There is Caution in it, as well as Comfort; Use 2. Caution.
And that is, Begin this Ascension betimes. Labor to experience this Heavenly
motion on this side of the Grave. Sursum corda, Lift up your heads Oh ye Gates,
and be ye lift up, Oh ye everlasting Doors: behold;

The Resurrection and Ascension in the future state of happiness, have their
spring and rise in the present state of holiness; they are link in, and joined
one to another, in the eternal counsel and purpose of God; with the very same
Connection wherewith Birth and Conception are lincked together; Harvest and
Seed-time. So that look what impossibility there is in nature, that there
should be a Birth, where was no Conception; or an Harvest, where no Semination;
the same impossibility there is, that such a person should share in the
Resurrection of Glory, that is a stranger to the Resurrection of Grace, the new
Birth; or that a Man or Woman should Ascend to meet Jesus Christ in the Clouds,
who in the state of Regeneration, labors not often to meet Christ in the Mount
of holy Meditation.

If therefore ye be risen with Christ, Colos. 3.1, 2.
seek those things which are above, where Christ sits at Gods right hand; set
your affections on things above.

Christ, after he arose from the dead, did often ascend to his Father, till, at
the end of 40 days, He went up to Heaven in the sight of his Disciples. Acts
1.9, 10.


Do ye also imitate your blessed Lord, in your frequent ascentions after him;
and thereby evidence to your selves, not only that you are already risen with
Christ in the Resurrection of Holiness; but that ye shall also arise with Him,
and Ascend to Him at his coming in his Glory.

Christians, let not that man think ever to be caught up to meet the Lord in
the Air, who is patient of being a stranger to Christ in the Spirit; without
God (in the world), Ephesians. 2.12.
and without hope; he burieth his hope of Ascending, where Christ is, who
burieth his heart and affections in the dunghill of worldly and sensual
fruitions. Oh labor to say with the Apostle, though our Commoration be on
Earth, our (...). or Traffic Burgesship.
Conversation is in Heaven, from whence we look for a Savior; Phil. 3.20.
though ye walk below, Aug. The Saints do uti mundo, but frui Deo. Carnal men
do uti Deo, and frui mundo. Corpore ambulamus in terra, cord habitamus in
coelo. Aug.
yet live above. Though ye use the world, yet labor to enjoy God, and to be
able to say with holy David, Whom have I in Heaven but thee, and there is none
upon Earth that I desire besides thee, Psalm. 73.26.

Though ye have your converse with men, let your Communion be with the Father
and with his Son Jesus Christ, 1 John 1.3.

Labor to say with Augustine, Our bodies are on Earth, our hearts in Heaven:
while the men of the world Earthlize Heavenly things, do you study how to
Heavenlize Earthly things; labor, (as he did) to eat and drink, and sleep
Eternal Life.

So may you, with an holy Confidence, go along with the Apostle, from whence we
look for the Lord Jesus. Christians can no further look for the Lord Jesus to
Descend from Heaven, then as they themselves (in the mean time) labor to be
often Ascending with him into Heaven. Heavenlymindedness, is the Saints
Evidence, and first fruits of their Heavenly-blessedness. I have done with the
second Consequent; I come to the third Consequent of Christ's Coming.

Thirdly: Third Consequent of Christ's Coming.
The Saints joyful meeting, and it is twofold 1. One with another. 2. With
Christ their Head.
The one is Implied, the other Expressed.
The Saints meeting one with another, (...)
is implied in this Adverbial particle, Vna Together, we shall be caught up
together with him, i. e. We, which shall be found alive upon the face of the
Earth at Christ's coming; together with them (which being fallen asleep before,
of elder or later time) Christ has now raised up out of their Graves; we and
they, shall All be caught up together, etc.

This I say presupposes their meeting together, antecedaneous to their
Ascension: how else can they co-Ascend, if not congregated before they Ascend?
And therefore, in order of nature, though the Saints meeting together should
have been spoken to before their Ascension; yet the series of the words not
well admitting this method, it will not be improper to consider it where it
meets us.

The Scripture takes notice of the Saints meeting one with another, as distinct
from their meeting with the Lord Jesus, Mat. 24.31. The Elect shall be gathered
together from the four winds, from one end of the Heavens to another. At what
distance soever (imaginable) they were dispersed and scattered, they shall all
meet together into one distinct body, or Assembly: And then co-ascend, to meet
their Lord. Some of the Schoolmen apply that passage of the Prophet, Isa.
10.34.
They shall Mount up with wings as Eagles, to this ascension of the Saints
after the Resurrection. Whether that be so or no; we may not incongruously
suppose, the Elect of God to be gathered together into some one Some suppose
the Valley of Jeh^shaphat.
vast capacious tract or region of ground on the right hand of the
Judgment Seat, from thence to take their flight together to meet the Judge in
the Air. We must understand the placing of the Sheep on the right hand, and the
Goats on the left hand, to be upon the ground (for the Wicked shall not Ascend
to meet Christ); and the Godly, when Ascended, shall be placed on Seats round
about the Throne, Mat. 25.33.


And of this Congregation of the Elect, the Scripture assigns a twofold
Cause.

1. CHRIST, the principal efficient Cause: The Son of man shall come in the
Clouds, and shall send his Angels, and shall gather the Elect from the four
winds, from the uttermost part of the Earth, to the uttermost part of Heaven.
He, not They; Christ, not the Angels; shall gather his Elect together: Christ
Autocratorically by his own Power and Authority, shall assemble all his Elect
that ever have been upon the face of the Earth into one general Assembly.

2. Yet does not this exclude the Ministry of the Angels; Christ may make use
of them in the separation of the Elect, from the Reprobate; and this is
expressly affirmed by our Lord Himself;

The Angels shall come forth, Mat. 13.49. Or from the midst of the Just.
and sever the Wicked from the Just. This same full and final separation of the
precious from the vile, the Sheep from the Goats, the Seed of the Woman from
the Seed of the Serpent, it belongs to the Angels Office; the Angels shall come
forth and sever; Christ does it Authoritatively, but the blessed Angels do it
Ministerially: Christ gives out the Commission; He shall send his Angels; but
they shall execute the Commission. Christ gives out the word; Gather my Saints
together unto me: But the Angels, those Ministering Spirits, they go forth and
gather.

3. There is yet another Cause mentioned; sc. the Instrumental or signal Cause,
and that, is the Alarm of a Trumpet: He shall send his Angels with a great
sound of a Trumpet.

It seems not improbable that the Congregation shall be called together by
sound of Trumpet: for though some (both Ancient and Modern) do understand all,
that is said concerning the Trumpet sounding, metaphorically; yet does the
phrase of Scripture favor their opinion more, who understand the speech of a
literal sounding the Trumpet: Schindler in his Lexicon.
and Schindler tells us, that the Jews thought this to be one end of the feast
of Trumpets, to put them in mind of the last day: in the which the dead shall
rise with the noise of a Trumpet; and be gathered together, not otherwise than
as when people do hear the sound of a Trumpet, they assemble themselves
together into some place. And why may we not think that as the Trump is used in
order to the Saints Resurrection; so also there may be use made of it, in order
to their gathering together, when they are raised? May not this be suggested
from Math. 24.31. though neither the Resurrection, nor the Congregating of them
together, are effected properly by this sound; it being not a Physical, but a
moral instrument only, or signal; It Is not the sound of the Angels, Joh. 5.28.
but the voice of Christ, which the dead hear and live. That voice being the
voice, not of a mere man, but of God-man, may well be allowed to have both
quickening and congregating power in it; Hence in some Churches it is sung,
Tuba, mirum spargens sonum,
Per Sepulchra regionum,
Coget omnes ante Thronum.
The Trump of God, diffusing sound
Through all the Graves now under ground;
Shall cause the Dead, Christ's Throne surround.


To this end it is observable in the Text;

1. That in the Original, it is not (as in other places) the sound of a Trumpet
only; but the Voice of a Trumpet; implying it to be a Vocal Trumpet: giving out
(not only) an audible, but (even) an Articulate Voice, speaking in a Language
which the Saints shall understand: (...). So, in 4 Copies, Bez.
and therefore some Greek Copies (as Beza observes) make the Voice, additional
to the Trump, sc. with the Trumpet and a Voice.

2. It is observable: It is not a Voice (only) but a great Voice; a Voice of
some unusual terribleness and power; a Voice (it seems) that can do what it
speaks; that when it says, Rise ye Dead, they Rise; and when it says Come,
they Come; it shall not only summon, but bring them together before the Throne
of Christ; and this probably is the very same with this in the Context, verse
16.

The Voice of the Archangel, and the Trump of God.

That Voice, which before raised the Dead, shall now bring them together, (by a
sweet compulsion,) into one Triumphant Assembly: The Church of the firstborn;
Heb. 12.23. Quomodo prim^genitus esse potuit nisi quoniam s^cundum divinitatem
ante emnem creaturam ex Deo p^^^e Sermo esset? Tert de Trin. Use.
not Children only, but Heirs, Heirs of God, and Coheirs with Christ; who
being the Firstborn of every Creature, has invested all the Children of
Promise, into the same prerogative of Primogeniture with himself; and are
therefore styled the Church of the firstborn.

But, as the Scripture would have us take notice of this Antecedent of the
Saints Ascension; so it does teach us also how to improve it to A threefold
Comfort.


1. In case of undue mixtures of Saints and Sinners, whether in
Church Assemblies, or in Civil-Societies.

How far either of them may be lawful, is not an Enquiry proper for this place;
sure I am, much, in both, is unavoidable. A total separation from impure
Society in either, may well be the object of our wishes, but it cannot be of
our hope: while we are in the world, we may separate from Church to Church, we
may remove from Country to Country, roll up and down from the one end of the
world unto another: But, the Apostle tells us, we must go one step further, if
we will avoid the society of Sinners; 1 Cor. 5.10.
then, must ye needs go out of the World.

Yea, But here is the Comfort, and it is the signal use our Lord makes of this
very Doctrine; The time is coming when a through separation shall be made; Under
that double parable of the Seed and the Net. Math. 13.


Ver. 26. In the one the Tares grow up with the Wheat.

Verse. 47. In the other, all kind of Fishes are gathered, good and bad;
Concerning the former, the Servants of the Householder were offended at it; it
grieved them at the heart to see the Weeds growing, yea (and it may be)
over-growing the good Corn, and so hindering the maturing of it. They make their
addresses to him for a present separation; verse 27.
and offer their faithful service for an utter radication of the Tares: verse
28. verse 29.
Will thou that we gather them up? Nay, says the Lord, a total extirpation of
the Tares, may do more hurt than ye are aware of. Better (it seems) it is, that
some Tares should remain, then the least grain of Wheat to perish: The
distinguishing-Time is at hand; In the time of Harvest I will give order to the
Reapers for a perfect separation.

All this our blessed Redeemer expounds (for the comfort and encouragement of
his offended Servants,) to be accomplished at the Resurrection; So shall it be
at the end of the world; the Son of man shall send forth his Angels, and they
shall gather out of his Kingdom all things that offend, and they that do
iniquity, As if he should say

Be of good cheer, The time is coming when impure mixtures will no more be a
temptation to the Saints of God, for ever. Saints and Sinners shall no more be
burdensome one to another. The Seed of the Serpent, shall no more be an offense
to the Seed of the Woman, nor e contra; but there shall be a perfect
separation. The Sheep shall be separated from the Goats; the Elect from the
Reprobate; there shall not be a Servant of the Lord amongst the Worshipers of
Baal; nor a Son of Beltal among the Sons of God: Sinners and none but Sinners,
Saints and none but Saints, shall make up these two distinct Congregations. Nay
so terrible will the glory which Christ will put upon his Saints be, upon the
faces of the Reprobates; and so great the horror of their own guilty
Consciences; that they shall now as much dread their Society, as once they
hated it, and choose rather to leap alive into the burning Lake, then to mix
themselves unto them; or so much as to put their head within that holy
Assembly. (...), in praestituto temp^re. Verse 30. (...).
This Christ assures to his Mourners shall be effected in the appointed time;
if not, in our time, yet in Gods time, in the time of Harvest. But what shall
we do in the mean time? why, says our Lord, Suffer them to grow together:
suffer them; not, by sinful toleration, (in Rulers); nor by sinful compliance
(in people): Expectardo non teme^e occupando.

If we cannot separate from Churches, yet separate from their Corruptions and
defilements. 2 Use.


but suffer them by patient expectation (in case of necessity), having no
fellowship with the unfruitful works of darkness, but rather reproving them. If
you cannot avoid the Workers, yet avoiding the Works of darkness: and then, in
your patience do you possess your Souls.

2. This Circumstance of the Saints separation from the Wicked, is improved for
comfort, (by our Lord Jesus Christ himself.)

In case of undue exclusion from Church Ordinances, of such as Christ would not
have excluded.

Our Lord Jesus has foretold, that the power of the keys should fall
(sometimes) into such hands, as would so diametrically pervert the use of them,
as that oft-times none should be excluded, but whom Christ would have admitted;
nor admitted, but such as Christ would have shut out.

They shall put You out of their Synagogues, 1 John 16.2. (...).
i. e. Excommunicate you: You, my Disciples; you, my Friends. Hard measure! I,
but here is comfort; the time is coming, wherein all the Elect shall be
Congregated into one universal Assembly, never to suffer exclusion or ejectment
any more to all Eternity. And then their unrighteous Excommunicators shall be
righteously Excommunicated; yea they shall be Excommunicated with the highest
sort of Excommunication, (higher than any Church of Christ ever used)
Excommunicated for ever; delivered unto Satan, not for the destruction of the
flesh only, but to be punished with everlasting destruction from the presence
of the Lord, 2 These. 1.9.10.
and from the glory of his Power; (when he shall come to be glorified in his
Saints): That Is a dreadful Excommunication indeed; the Anathema Maranatha in
the highest sense: quum Dominus venit: quia Domino quasi in manus citra veniae
spem dedentur.

Jude 14. Now; the Saints of God are glad to get into Corners by twoes and by
threes, (and, blessed be God, not without a promise) to seek the face of God;
so making the Harlot's Text, Prove. 17.17.
speak chaste language; Stolen waters are sweet, and bread eaten in secret, is
pleasant.

But in that glorious Morning of the Resurrection, they shall meet by millions
and myriads of millions; and there shall be none to disturb or offend them; yea
their Enemies shall look on and gnash their Teeth for anguish and vexation of
Spirit, to see them now got (for ever) out of their power.

3. 3 Use.
And lastly, for Comfort in case of the Saints separation one from another,
whether by the unrighteous hand of Violence, or the righteous hand of
Providence: Now; by means of Dispersions, Imprisonments, Exile, etc. the people
of God are like Arms and Legs torn out of the body, and lie bleeding in their
separations. Yea, God Himself is pleased to make sad breaches between them, and
their sweetest Relations, by Death; Under which they are many times like Rachel
(not without sin) weeping for her Children, and refuse to be Comforted, because
they are not; lifting up their voices and crying; Oh! my Father Abraham, and
Oh! my Son Isaac. O Absolon my Son, my Son Absolon, would God I had dyed for
thee. I will go down to the Grave to my Son, mourning, etc.

But here is Comfort; the time is coming when the Parent and Child, Husband and
Wife, Friend and Friend, with the whole Family of Heaven and Earth, from all
their dispersions, from the uttermost part of the Earth, to the uttermost part
of Heaven, shall meet together, and embrace one another; Everlasting Joy shall
be upon their Heads, and sorrow and mourning shall flee away.

In a word; how may all the Saints of God (in what state or condition so ever
for the present) solace themselves in the fore-contemplation of the Triumphant
gathering together of the Elect of God? What a joyful Sight will it be when all
the Saints and Servants of the most high God, which ever saw one another
faces, or heard of one another names; yea, and all they which never saw or
heard each of other: All of every Tongue, Nation, Kindred or Family of the
Earth; of what Age, Sex, Generation soever, from the day wherein God made time,
to the day wherein time shall be no more, shall meet together, and stand on
tip-toe, ready to take their flight, to meet their Lord and Bridegroom, coming
in the Clouds with his mighty Angels? Yea, what a glorious sight will it be to
see all The glorious Company of the Apostles, The goodly Fellowship of the
Prophets, The whole Army of Martyrs, with The holy Church throughout all the
World!


A Congregation of Kings and Priests in all their Royal Robes: Yea (as I may so
say) a Congregation or Constellation of Morning-Starrs, yea of so many Noonday
Suns, arising from the Earth, co-Ascending through the several Regions of the
Air, to meet the Sun of Righteousness, now descending from his own Orb of
Supreme Glory and Majesty in the highest Heavens, to Judge both the quick and
the dead?

Surely such an Assembly, eye never saw, ear never heard of, nor can it enter
into the heart of man, to conceive how immense, how august, how exceeding, it
will be in glory!

While, in the mean time, the Congregation of the Reprobate, the Malignant
Church that are left below upon the Earth on the left hand, shall stand
trembling, looking upwards, and gnashing their Teeth to see this sudden and
tremendous turn of things; the Saints whom they despised and persecuted before,
thus snatched out of their cursed power and fellowship, Ascending in so much
Pomp and Royalty to meet their glorious Redeemer! They themselves left behind
to curse themselves, and one another, for their Prejudices, Envy, and Rage,
which once they breathed out against Gods people: and shall be filled with
horror and astonishment, in the certain looking for of Judgment, and that siery
Inaignation which shall devour the Adversaries; and even now already, seizing
upon them.

For surely, this Sight shall be the beginning of their sorrows; but, of
everlasting joys and triumphs, to the followers of the Lamb, Who now comes in
glory to meet them, and to receive them to himself,

Which brings me to the second Meeting mentioned here in the Text, etc. The
Saints meeting with Christ their Head, The Saints meeting with Christ Jesus.
to meet the Lord in the Air. In this Meeting there be three things
considerable.

1. The Persons meeting. 2. The Place where they meet. 3. The ends of their
meeting.
1. The Persons meeting, Christ and his Saints. He Descends to meet them, and
they Ascend to meet him. Such is the Love and Condescension of the Lord Jesus
to his Saints, that he comes out of his Royal Pavilion more than half way to
meet them; and then sends his Charrets and Horsemen, a Guard of Angels to
carry them up in the Clouds, and to conduct them unto the place, where he
stays for them. There shall they be brought into his Royal presence, and like
a Royal Spouse, who has been long separated from her Bridegroom by distance of
place, they shall fall down before Him, and with Tears of joy shall wash his
feet, and wipe them dry with the Kisses of their Lips: while, at the same time,
Christ will take his Bride up into his Arms, and (with the Father of the
Prodigal) fall upon her neck, and kiss her; and, with all the unconceivable
expressions of Love and Joy, receive her to Himself, and bid her welcome into
his presence. Oh! what Soul can conceive what mutual Joy and Triumph there will
be between Jesus Christ and his Saints in this blessed Interview?

Oh how welcome will the Saints be to the Lord Jesus at that day? The Saints
under a threefold Relation.
when he shall look upon them under a threefold Relation! sc.

1. As the Father's Election: First. The Fathers Election. Joh 10.6. Ephesians: 1.18.
To see the whole number of names which were given unto him by the Father, from
all Eternity, as the fruit and reward of his Passion, now (at the last) all
gathered together, and given into his actual possession, as an inheritance for
ever.

2. To look upon them as the Purchase of his own Blood. 2. The Sons Purchase.
If it was a satisfaction to the Lord Jesus, when behold he was in the throws
and agonies of his Travel with them upon the Cross, to see his Seed, Isa. 53 11.
when they were but in the swaddling Clothes of their imperfect Regeneration,
according to their successive generations (wherein they were to be brought into
the Church); Oh what infinite satisfaction will it now be to the Lord Jesus, to
see the Travel of his Soul in their perfect and consummate estate, all the
mixtures of Corruption and Infirmity now deleted, and they come to a perfect
man, to the measure of the Stature of the fullness of Christ? to see them all
brought in; not a Soul wanting of all those whose names he bare upon his
breast, while he hung upon the Cross? that not one drop of Blood, not one
Prayer, not a Sigh or Groan, or Tear, that ever he spent for them, (in the days
of his Flesh) is lost or fruitless, as to any one Soul whom he purchased of the
Father? Joh. 17.12.
In the Pastoral charge of Christ, there was one Son of Perdition, but in his
Mediatory charge, not one Soul shall miscarry; but all shall be presented to
him safe and entire, at his appearance: And over them shall he glory, saying
(as it were) All these are mine, the Travel of my Soul, the Purchase of my
Blood, the Fruit of my Agonies; for these, I was born, and for these I was made
under the Law: For these I Bled, Joh. 1^.24.
and for these I made my self an Offering for sin: Father, I will that they
also whom thou have given me be with me, where I am, that they may behold my
Glory which thou have given me: Come near unto me, my Sons, and my Daughters,
that I may kiss you. Genesis 27.27.
See, the smell of my Redeemed is as the smell of a field which the Lord has
blessed.

A Woman when she is in Travel, has sorrow, because her hour is come; Joh.
16.21:
but as soon as she is delivered, she remembers no more the anguish, for joy
that a man-Child is born into the World: Surely, the joy of our Lord will so
much transcend the joy of all natural Mothers, by how much his agonies were
more bitter, the birth more precious, and his Soul more capacious of higher and
purer joys, than are to be sound in the poor narrow Creature!

3. When he shall look upon them as the charge and deposisitum of the Holy
Ghost. Whom the Father did Elect, the Son was to purchase; and whom the Son
purchased, the Spirit was to Sanctify: Who therefore is called the Holy Ghost,
not only because, as the third glorious Person in the blessed Trinity, he is
essentially holy in himself; but because by Office he is a Fountain of Holiness
to all the Elect. The Blood of Christ indeed is the Fountain of Merit; but the
Spirit of Christ the Fountain of operation and efficacy; gathering the Elect
out of the world, wherein they lay (in common with the rest of the lost Sons
and Daughters of Adam,) Gal. 5.22, 23.
planting their Souls with the habits of Grace, (which are therefore called the
Fruits of the Spirit) and then acting, supporting, preserving, and ripening
those habits into perfection.

The Father's Election, and the Son's Purchase, are both perfected by the
Sanctification of the Spirit.

The Father's Election; 2 These. 2.13.
so the Apostle tells his Thessalonians, God has from the beginning chosen you
to Salvation, through Sanctification of the Spirit.

The Son's purchase; Tit. 3.5.
He saved us by the washing of Regeneration, and the renewing of the Holy
Ghost. Oh how acceptable then must the Offering up of the Saints be to Jesus
Christ, because thus Sanctified by the Holy Ghost? And when Christ shall thus
present his Redeemed unto Himself a glorious Church, not having spot or
wrinkle, or any such thing, but Holy, and without blemish: How will he rejoice
over her, as the Bridegroom over his Bride? That day being, indeed, the
Marriage of the Lamb: (of which anon.) Rev. 19.7.


Thus will the Lord Jesus, the King of glory rejoice to meet the Saints. And
surely the Saints (according to their finite capacity,) will not less rejoice
and triumph to meet their Lord. Oh! to meet him now, whom their Soul loved;
whom in the days of their Pilgrimage (upon Earth) they often sought and could
not find; sought him in Prayer, Meditation, Conference, etc. but could not find
him; and when they could not find him, mourned for him, lamented after him;
bedewed their cheeks with Tears; asking solicitously of every one they met, Saw
ye not him, whom my Soul loves?

I say; To meet him, now on the Throne of his glory; of whom, could they have
had but a glimpse in a glass darkly, in the Evangelical Ordinances, Can. 6.12.
their Souls would have made them like the Chariots of Aminadab. To see him
whom (having not seen) they loved: and in whom, though they (then) saw him not,
yet believing, they rejoiced with joy unspeakable and full of glory! I say, now
to see him, and so to see him, as to have a full sight of his unveyled face,
shining more gloriously than ten thousand Suns at Noonday! Once more, So to
see him, as never to lose the sight of him to all Eternity: How will this
transport their Souls with unspeakable ecstasies of joy, which will cause them
to break forth into Triumphant Hymns, yea, and to call to their now- fellow
Angels, to help them with their Celestial Hallelujahs?

Behold, such (and infinitely more than tongue can express, or heart conceive)
will be the mutual joy and triumph between Christ and his Saints, at his
blessed appearance? Go forth in the mean time, Oh ye Daughters of Sion, and
behold King Solomon with the Crown, Cant. 3.11.
wherewith his Father will Crown him in the day of his Marriage, and in the day
of the gladness of his heart.

Gird up the loins of your minds, 1 Pet. 1.13.
be sober, and hope to the end for the grace that is brought to you at the
Revelation of Jesus Christ, Chapter 4.13.
that when his glory shall be revealed, you may be glad with exceeding joy.
Thus I have done with the first thing considerable in this meeting; The Persons
meeting, Christ and the Saints. I come to the second; The place of meeting, and
that is, In the Air.
We shall be caught up to meet the Lord in the Air; That is the place where
Christ stays for his Saints: There, they meet him; and there, this great
Ecumenical Assize will be held. The Judge shall sit upon the Throne, and all
the Saints shall be placed on bright Clouds, as on seats or Scaffolds round
about him; The Wicked remaining (below) upon the Earth, there to receive their
final doom and sentence; and from thence to be dragged away, by the Executioners
of divine Vengeance, Infernal Spirits; to the place of Execution (the
bottomless-Pit,) yet standing; and (to the greater aggravation of their horror)
looking on.

If it be demanded;

Qu. Why this Solemn Meeting must be in the Air.

Answ. It may suffice for answer, The Lord Jesus has made choice of this place.

It is the privilege of earthly Judges in their Circuits, to appoint the place
where they will keep their Assizes or Sessions, wherein if stat pro ratione
volunt as, their will is a sufficient reason; surely, it is not less the
prerogative of this great Judge of the quick and the dead, to appoint the place
where he will hold this last and tremendous Judgment. And we may well acquiesce
in the choice, not only because his will is the sovereign Law of the Creature,
but as his insinite Wisdom has judged it the place most convenient for the
design.

And yet (if it be lawful to make our Conjectures, where Scripture is silent)
we may humbly suppose this twofold Account of it.

1. The Capacity of the Place. 2. The Conspicuity of the Judgment.
1. The Capacity of the Place; Vast, For the Capacity of the Place?
and (as to us) insinite will be the numberless numbers of those that do meet
in this universal Assembly. Behold, the Lord will come with ten thousands of
his Saints; Jude 14.
Yea thousand thousands minister unto him, and ten thousand times ten thousand
stand before him; All the Saints that slept in Jesus from the Creation of man,
and all the Saints which are found alive upon the Earth at Christ's Coming, must
all appear before the Lord Josus. And besides these, the Judge comes with his
Royal Satellites, his Officers of State, Myriads and Legions of Angels; -- All
his holy Angels, Math. 25.31. There shall not be an Angel (as it were) left in
Heaven as it were. Jacob met two Hosts or Camps of Angels of God, in his
Travel, Genesis 32.12. Our Savior mentions more then 12 Legions, which as a
commanded party, Math. 26 53.
would have been (in an instant) sent out for his rescue, (if there had been
need). What an infinite Army of Angels must it needs be then, when all the
Angels come in Christ's Train? An innumerable company of Angels? Heb. 12.22.
And all these must not appear in confused heaps and multitudes, but in their
distinct ranks and order; and the Saints are to sit in Order, in their several
degrees round about the Throne.

Why now, the Place had need be of an huge extent and circumference, that will
suffice to receive and contain such variety of multitudes: So that even in this
respect, no place so fit for this August and solemn Convention, as the Air; for
its vast extensiveness and capacity. But

Secondly: Much more in respect of Conspicuity, that so, the Judge and Judgment,
with all the Assessors and Attendants, might be more eminently visible from
Heaven above, to the Earth beneath, that the whole process of this general
Assize may be heard and seen by all, good and bad; Elect and Reprobate; Heaven
and Hell. Heaven would be too high, the Earth would be too low; the smoke of
the bottomless pit would obscure this glorious vision: The Air, (where is no
interposition of Hills and Mountains,) and now, serened and brightned by the
confluence of so many glorious Suns, will render this last tremendous
Transaction, visible and audible to every Creature. Behold, he comes with
Clouds! Clouds, which will not obscure him, but bright Clouds, which, filled
with the beams of his glory, shall render him most visible and conspicuous:
Math. 24.30. Rev. 1.7.
So it is Prophesied, Every eye shall see him, etc. Thus it shall be, and this
will make for the exceeding Glory and Majesty of the Judge,

For thus it is (even) in humane Judicatories upon Earth, the Tribunal of the
Judge, and Bench of Assessors, is erected in open Court, and lifted up on high
in the sight of all the people, that all may see and hear the whole judicial
procedure of the Law, with the posse Comitatus attending in Arms for the
greater solemnity and honor of the Judge. Upon the same account has our Lord
made choice of the Air to keep his great Arsize in, there to erect his Royal
Throne, and to place seats of Judgment for all the Saints to sit upon, round
about him; all the holy Armies of Angels surrounding them. This will make
Christ very glorious in the eyes of all the Spectators. Hence it is said, He
shall come in the glory of his Father, and his own glory. The Father sends the
Son about this great Work of the last Judgment, with as much pomp and glory as
can be put upon him, for the recompencing of the ignominy and abasement of his
first coming in the flesh.

I come now to the ends of this Meeting; And the ends why the Saints ascend to
meet Christ in the Air, we may conceive to be such as these: 1. Their public
Reception and owning by Christ. 2. Their full and perfect Justification. 3. The
Consummation of their unptial Contract. 4. Their Consession, or Sitting
together with Christ in the Judgment. 5. Their complete and sinal Benediction,
or blessed Sentence. 6. Their solemn and triumphant Attondance on the Judge,
going to take possession of the Kingdom. These (or the like) ends of the Saints
meeting with the Lord in the Air, are not obscurely hinted to us in Scripture.


The first is, Their public reception and owning by Christ, (come, now, to
judge the world). The Elect Angels having gathered together the Elect Saints
(according to the Commission upon which they were sent forth, Go ye and gather
my Saints together unto me; those that have made a Covenant with me by
Sacrifice) and having carried them up into the Air, where the Judge stays for
them (for he will do nothing until they come): I say, their Angels shall now
present them before Him, in the rich and glorious attire of their (now)
perfected Resurrection; wherein, their (once) vile bodies, are now made like to
Christ his glorious body. With gladness and rejoicing shall they be brought
into the King's presence: and the first public Act which the King shall do,
is, solemnly to receive them, Come ye blessed of my Father, and embraceing them
in his arms, and kissing them (as it were, as Joseph once did his Brethren) in
the open view of Heaven and Earth, he will solemnly own them, and acknowledge
them; and that

First, in their Persons and Relation unto himself.

A Prerogative long-before promised, Mal. 3.17. Christ will own the Saints. 1.
In their persons.
They shall be mine when I make up my Jewels. That is the very work which
Christ is now come about; to make up his Jewels (to lay them up in their
Heavenly Cabinet.) And the first word he will speak, is, These are mine (he
appropriates them for his own) they be mine, my Jewels, my Gems, my S^gullah.
precious Treasure. As the Saints have not been ashamed of Christ before men;
so neither will Christ now be ashamed of them before his Father, Luk 9 Heb.
1.11. 2 In their Relations.
and all his mighty Angels: he will not be ashamed to call them Brethren; yea,
he will appropriate them as his Children; a Seed given him of his Father, as
the great reward of is Passion; saying, These be the Children which God has
given me; Ver. 13.
my Sons and my Daughters, who have served me: thus he owns them in their
Relations.

Secondly: 3. In their Du^ies and attendance
He will own and acknowledge all the holy duties, public and private, which
they have done in obedience to his Commands; their hearing, praying, fasting,
and afflicting their Souls for their own sins, and for other men's sins; their
fearing of God, and laying to heart the reproaches of Religion, and
Blasphemies, cast upon his Name; their mutual holy conferences, Mal. 3.16.
one with another, etc. All these were written in a book of Remembrance of old,
and laid up before him, that they might never be forgotten; and now the Book
shall be brought forth, and read in the Audience of the world, for their
greater honor, even the very secret duties which they have performed in their
Closets, when no eye saw them but God's; even they shall be proclaimed in the
Audience of this Universal Assembly at the last day; Mat 6.6.
Thy Father which saw in secret, will now reward thee openly, not a prayer, but
it was filed up; not a sigh, Psalm. 56.8.
nor groan, but it is booked; not a tear, but is botled; not an holy
ejaculation, but was upon Record, and shall be now publicly produced and
acknowledged: I know your Works and your Labor, and your Charity, and your
Service, Rev. 2.19.
and your last Works to be more then the first, etc.

Thirdly: 4. In their fidelity and perseverance. Rev. 2 13.
Jesus Christ at that day will own the fidelity of his Saints, their constancy
and perseverance in their holy Profession, and confess them before all the
world: I know your Works, and where you have dwelt, even where Satan's seat
was, and you have held fast my Name, Chap. 2.10.
and have not denied my Faith, even in those days wherein Antipas, (Cranmer,
Ridley, Latimer, etc.) were my faithful Martyrs; who were slain among you where
Satan dwells; behold! to you who have been faithful to the death, do I now
give a Crown of Life? To you who have overcome, do I grant to sit with me in my
Throne, Chap. 3.21.
as I also overcame, and am set down with my Father in his Throne. 5 In their
sufferings.


Fourthly: He will own and acknowledge the Saints, in their sufferings for his
sake. All the reproaches, hard speeches, L^quntur lapides.
incivilities, abuses, scandals, persecutions, which ever they sustained in
their names, persons, lively-hoods, and lives, upon Christ's and the Gospels
account, he will acknowledge; and bespeak them in some such language as this,
Isa. 66.7. Your Brethren which hated you, that cast you out for my names sake,
said, So mocking God, and deriding the Godly for their confidence in God. Luke
22.28, 29, 30. 6. In all the Offices of love done to him or his.
Let the Lord be glorified: but, now I appear to your joy, and they shall be
ashamed: Or, as he once encouraged his Disciples in the days of his flesh; You
are they which have continued with me in my temptations, and behold, I appoint
unto you a Kingdom, as my Father has appointed unto me; that you may eat and
drink at my Table, in my Kingdom, etc.

Fifthly and lastly: The Lord Jesus will own all the Services and Offices of
Love, done to Himself, or to any of his Members; Clothing, Feeding, Visiting
them when Sick, coming to them when in Prison; He will acknowledge all before
Heaven and Earth: yea, what they themselves have forgotten, never
thought-worthy of their own notice, much less of Christ's notice; Lord, when
saw we thee an hungered, and fed thee; or thirsty, and gave thee drink, etc?
Observe (by the way) the difference between Saints and Shadows! Hypocrites can
boast of what they never (truly) did, they can own what God will disown! We
have fasted, say they; nay, says God, In the day of your fast, ye find
pleasure! ye fast for strife and debate, and to smite with the fist of
wickedness, etc. We have, say they, afflicted our Soul; no such thing, says
God; Ye have bowed down the head like a bul-rush for a day; ye have spread
Sackcloth and Ashes under you: Is this a Fast? will you call this,
Soul-afflicting? if you will, I will not. I but now, on the contrary, as to
true, real Saints, God owneth what themselves dare not own; but though they
have forgotten, God is not unrighteous to forget their work and labor of love,
which they have showed toward his Name, Math. 2^.7.
in ministering to the Saints; but all shall be remembered, even from the
Alabasterbox of costly Spikenard, to the Cup of cold water given in the name of
a Disciple; and proclaimed in the Audience of that general Assembly; Math: 25
40.
For as much as you have done it to one of these little ones, ye have done it
unto me; yea, those very acts of Charity, which have been done so secretly,
that the left hand did not know what the right hand did, Math. 6.3.
shall be now published upon the housetop (the great house of Heaven and
Earth); they were not so closely done, but they shall as openly be rewarded;
the book of God's remembrance shall be brought forth and opened, and publicly
read, that all the good which any of the Saints of God ever did, may be
mentioned to their everlasting praise; and that with a double circumstance of
signal honor.

First, A twofold advantage of the Recital made of the Saints Graces.
That, in that large Recital which shall then be read, of the Saints lives,
there is not the least mention made of sin; they had (sure enough) the
remainders of their original corruption, (surviving their conversion) defiling
and molesting their most holy Services, which were as so many scourges in their
sides, and Thorns in their eyes, uncessantly tempting them, and exposing them
to temptation; forcing from them sad laments and outcries; Romans 7.24.
O Wretch that I am, who shall deliver me? They had (and not rarely) their
actual Surprises and Seductions, their Lapses and Relapses, which brought them
upon their knees with holy Job's Confession, Job. 7.20.
I have sinned, what shall I do unto thee, O thou Preserver of men? but none of
these things come up into remembrance against them in that day. As, here below,
God saw no Iniquity in Jacob, nor perverseness in Israel, to impute it to them:
so, in their appearance before the Judge; God remembers no iniquity against
the Saints, to charge it upon them, or to reproach them with it. In the petty
Sessions which Christ held with some of his Saints and Churches (here on
Earth), amongst their Commendations, there were some Exceptions; and some
faultinesses were charged upon them, an [Howbeit,] 2 Chronicles. 22.33. a
[Nevertheless] Chapter 33.17. as abatements of their excellencies. Nevertheless, I
have a few things against thee, Rev. 2. So in the Process against the Church of
Ephesus, verse 4. Nevertheless; a But against Pergamos, verse 14. Against
Thyatira, v. 20. a Notwithstanding, etc. But now in the judicial Process of
this last and Universal Assizes, there is not found in all those voluminous
Records (which shall be opened,) so much as one unsavory But to blemish the
fair Characters of the Saints: as if (even before they got into Heaven) they
had obtained that privilege, to be, just men made perfect! This is very
wonderful.

Had Reprobate men and Angels had the drawing up of the Report of the Saints
lives, Heb. 12.23. See the reason of it page, 134. sub fine
what a black Bill of Indictment would they have preferred against them? to be
sure, all the evil which they ever did in their whole lives, with all their
blackest aggravations, should have been raked up, and produced against them.
Yea, if the Saints themselves had been trusted with giving in the story of
their own lives, they would not have dealt much more kindly by themselves, than
the Seed of the Serpent would have done; to be sure, if there were any thing
worse than other, they would not have concealed it; vilifying the good, and
aggravating the bad, (as sometimes they were wont to do in their desertions,
even beyond truth and justice,) as if Satan had hired them to belly themselves:
I but now the Righteous Judge of Heaven and Earth, He is far from dealing so
with them: but, as if he himself had never known any evil by them; he brings in
Omnia been in his presentment, all fair and well, and so it is proclaimed in
that High Court of Justice.

This is no small Encouragement for the poor self-accusing Saints of God! Use.
Rev. 12.10.
Although the accuser of the Brethren and his seed do not cease to accuse them
before God, day and night; yea, and does often (taking advantage of their
natural distempers) even to force them to accuse themselves (not much more
Righteously then He himself does) yet will not the Righteous Judge accuse them.

But is it not Prophesied of the day of Judgment, Object. Eccles. 12.14.
that God shall bring every work into judgment, whether it be good, or whether
it be evil? How then is there no mention made of their sins?

That Scripture is to be understood Respective; Sol.
sc. with a just respect to the two great parties which are to be judged, good
and bad; godly and ungodly; that is to say, All the good of the good shall be
brought into the judgment of mercy; and all the evil of the wicked, into the
judgment of Condemnation; the godliness of the godly, that it may be graciously
rewarded, and the wickedness of the wicked, that it may be righteously punished:

Here, Caution.
I say, is encouragement for the Saints, howbeit not to sin; such a vile
Conclusion would ill become such Premises; and were sufficient evidence to
un-Saint any person, that should (deliberately) make such Inferences, as being
a Logic taught in the Devils School, not in Christ's; and exploded by all real
Saints, with the greatest abhorrency, Ab sit! God forbid, Romans 6.1. Comfort,
then, here is for the Saints, but such as will make them more Saints, 1 Jo.
3.3. Every one that has this hope in him, purifieth himself even as he is pure.

But Secondly; Secondly; The Crown of praise is put on the Saints Head.
Another Circumstance of honor in Christ's acknowledgment of the Graces in,
and Duties performed by, his Saints, is, that although their Graces were
nothing else but so many drops of Christ his own fullness, [Grace for Grace] and
their duties so many operations of his own Spirit in them; (...). Joh. 1.16.
(nothing their's but the very act of Believing, and the act of Repentance, and
the act of Love to Christ, and the act of Prayer, and sic in caeteris); yet
Christ is pleased to ascribe all the Praise, and all the Glory, both of their
Graces and Duties, unto the Saints (assuming nothing to himself, to whom the
whole was wholly due) as if not only the act it self, but the principle also,
from whence they acted, had been their own; This is truly wonderful! here is
the breadth and length, depth and height of the Love of Christ, Ephesians. 3.18, 19.
which passes knowledge. Christ then, will indeed, be glorified in his Saints,
and admired in all that believe: 2 These. 1.10.
Oh, how will such an Acknowledgment as this, made by the Judge himself, fill
the Elect Angels with Admiration; and the Reprobate with Envy, that not the
least guilt should be charged upon them, by whom they themselves knew so much,
having been so many eyewitnesses, (as I may say) the one, to their grief, as
Tutors; the other to their joy, as Tempters! Yea how will it fill the Saints
themselves with amazement, while they are secretly accusing themselves (with
Joseph's Brethren) we are utterly guilty concerning our Brother (our Lord and
elder Brother,) I say, to hear the Lord himself not charging them with the
least unkindness; yea representing them before God, men and Angels, even (as it
were) as immaculate as the Angels themselves, who kept their first Estate; yea
in all this, putting the Crown upon their head, Rev. 4 10.
which they cast down at his feet, saying, Not unto us, O Lord, not unto us,
but unto thy Name, give the Glory. Behold such honor have all the Saints?

And oh, Use of Cons^lation.
How will this infinitely compensate all the reproaches and scandals, which a
generation of malignant Cainites did cast upon the Saints of God (while they
sojourned with them in Mesech, and had their habitation in the Tents of Kedar)
speaking all manner of evil against them, (...) malam Verbum, Gr.
(lying falsely) for Christ's sake? How will it cut them to the very heart, to
hear the Judge himself speak so honorably of those very persons whom they
reviled with so much pride and contempt! Mich. 7.10.
shame shall now cover them which said, Where is the Lord your God? Their eyes
shall behold them, and now they shall be trodden down as the mire in the
streets! Math. 5.12. (...). Let them rejoice and skip for joy.
Oh let the Saints (even here) rejoice and be exceeding glad; because, for
their repreach they shall have praise; and for their shame, they shall have
double (sc. renown and glory) and for their confusion, they shall rejoice and
triumph in the approbation of their Judge and Redeemer, etc. yet behold, all
this is but the beginning of their Triumph!

I come now to a second end of the Saints meeting with Christ in the Air,
Second end. The Saints public justification, consisting --
and that is their

Full and final Justification;

And this consists of two parts 1. Their public Absolution. 2. The Judg's
Pronouncing of them to be Righteous.


First: Their public Absolution. Pardon of Sin is the privative part of
Justification; Imputation of Righteousness, is the positive part. Pardon or
Remission is the Sinner's Justification, sc. from sin, both from the guilt of
sin, and from the sentence or punishment due to sin. By him (sc. by Christ) all
that believe are justified from all things, Acts. 13 39.
from which they cannot be justified by the Law of Moses. This now must be one
branch of the solemn justification of the Saints at their meeting with the Lord
Jesus in the Air; as a Judge, he shall fully and finally, in open Court, Absolve
the Saints from all their sins, both guilt and punishment, from which there was
no Absolution ever to be expected by the Covenant of works. This truly was done
before, initially, at their first Conversion; then were their sins truly and
perfectly pardoned, though not (as some too presumptuously affirm) all past,
present, and to come, Romans 3.25.
(for sin to be pardoned before committed, is somewhat an uncouth doctrine) yet
all 1. As to sins already past: 2. All as to the state of Remission; Jus ad
rem, though not jus in re an aptitudi^al right, though not an actual. 1 Jo.
1.9. Chapter 2.1. Romans 8.16.
they had a perfect right to the pardon of all their sins past, present, and to
come, though not an equal investiture; Pardon was theirs, and Absolution
theirs, though it was to be applied to them from time to time, upon new acts of
Repentance in them; and new acts of Intercession in the Mediator; and so
likewise, by new acts of Application by the Spirit: thus the Saints were truly
pardoned at the first moment of their Regeneration, or new Birth, And

Secondly; Fully and perfectly their sins were forgiven at the moment of their
dissolution; at death, I say, not only their right and state of Absolution was
perfected, but all their sins were so fully and finally forgiven them, that at
the moment of their Souls going out from the body, there was not one sin,
Omissive or Commissive, nor any Aggravation or least Circumstance, left
standing in the book of God's Remembrance.

And this is the true Reason, 1 Jo. 1.7. The reason why the Judge makes no
mention of the Saints sins
why there is not (as I told you even now) the least mention made of sin, in
their trial at Christ's Tribunal, because they were all pardoned fully and
finally at the hour of their death; all scores were then crossed; so that now
when the books are opened and perused, there is not a sin to be found, but all
blotted out, and all Reckonings made even in the blood of Christ: There was a
punishment indeed due to sin, but that was forgiven, or taken off, Psalm. 32.1.
Ashre nesu^ p^shing, nesui from nasa, Hebr. eleva^e. Number 23.24. Ch^sui from
Chasah ^g^re. Lo Ja^ha sh^b Jehovah is gnavon.
(as the word signifies blessednesses to the man, whose transgression is
forgiven; i.e. the punishment of whose transgression is taken off.) There was a
stain or pollution in sin, but that is covered, covered so close, that it
cannot be seen, no not by God's all-seeing eye; he has not seen iniquity in
Jacob, etc. Likewise, there was a guilt in sin, but that is not imputed; and
that is the meaning of the former passage, he has not seen iniquity in Jacob,
i. e. not seen so as to impute it. I say, there was sin enough, and enough, for
which God might have sentenced all the Jacobs in the world to Condemnation; and
have cast all the Isreal's that ever were, into the bottomless pit; but it is
gone, it is forgiven; pardon makes such a clear riddance of sin, that it is as
if it had never been; Isa. 1 18.
the scarlet Sinner is as white as snow; snow newly fallen from the sky, which
was never fullied: the Crimson Sinner is as wool, wool which never received the
least tincture in the dye-fat: Here is (I say,) Ier. 50.20.
the reason why, when the iniquity of Israel is sought for, there is none; and
the sins of Judah, and they are not to be found, Ier. 31.34.
for I will pardon them, etc. Yea, not forgiven only, but forgotten; and should
they now be remembered? The Judge had long since cast their sins behind his back;
and he will not now (surely) set them before his face; Ier. 38.17.
he had cast them into the depths of the Seas (bottomless depths of everlasting
Oblivion) that they might be buoyed up no more for ever: yea, the Lord Jesus
nailed all their sins to his Cross, Colos. 2.14. Romans 4.15.
and buried them all in his Grave, yea, and crossed the debt-book with the red
lines of his own blood. If now he should call them to remembrance, to charge
the Saints with their sins; he should undo what he had done; he should cross
the great design of his Cross, Romans 4.25:
(upon the matter) deny himself to be risen again from the dead, and disown his
own hand and seal! Upon this foundation stands the absolute impossibility that
sin, the least sin, the least circumstance of sin, should be so much as once
mentioned by the Judge, in the process of that judicial trial, unless it be in a
way of Absolution, and so sin shall be mentioned indeed, The Saints Absolved of
Sin in the day of Judgment, in what sense? 1 In their own Conscience.
but in order to the magnifying of their Pardon and Absolution. Their sins may
then be said to be blotted out in a twofold respect.

First: Because the Saints shall then be fully and finally Absolved in their
own Consciences: It is true, there be some of the Saints even in this life, to
whose Consciences the Spirit of God does evidence and seal up Remission of sin;
who are not only safe but sure; and possess not only the blessedness of a
pardoned estate, but the comfort and assurance of that blessedness: all the
Saints; 2. Nor any, at all times; 3. Nor always in the same degree: as they
have their lucida intervalla, so they have also (and more frequently) their
dark times, their Eclipses as well as their Transfigurations; and no wonder,
since the Sun of Righteousness himself suffered an Eclipse upon the Cross so
dreadful, as forced the great Master of Astrology in Egypt to cry out, Either
the God of Nature suffers, Aut D^us naturae patitur, aut mit di machina
d^ssolvitu^.
or the whole frame of nature is dissolved: and caused the Lord Jesus Himself
(to the just astonishment of Heaven and Earth to cry out) My God, my God, why
have thou forsaken me? Is it any wonder then, if many of the poor Saints of God
with Paul and his Ship-wrack't Company, see neither Sun-light nor Starlight
for many days together; and no small tempest does often lie upon them, Act.
27.20.
so that all hope of being saved is taken away? yea, not a few precious
deserted Hemans are there, Psalm. 38.15.
who from their youth up are afflicted and ready to dye, and while they suffer
the terrors of God, are (even) distracted? yea, and (that which is more
tremendous) their Sun (as to any observation which Standers by could make,
(though very rarely) has set in a Cloud.

I but now, at this blessed day, the Judge of the Quick and the Dead, shall
Absolve the Saints of God, not only at the Tribunal of his own Justice, but at
the Tribunal of their Conscience; He will proclaim that Name in their Bosoms,
which he Proclaimed before Moses, The Lord, the Lord God, merciful and gracious,
long-suffering, abundant in Goodness and Truth; pardoning Iniquity,
Transgression, and Sin, etc. And He will speak so audibly, that every Saint
shall hear the voice; and so particularly, that every one shall know he
speaks to him; and shall all echo back again with joy and joint acclamation,
Who is a God like unto thee; Micah. 7.18.
pardoning Iniquity, etc? Nor shall any reflection, either upon sin or sorrow,
ever damp that joy any more: Though the Saints cannot plead Not-guilty in
regard of fact, yet they shall be acquit by the Sentence of Christ, Not, that
they never sinned; but that they are before the Judge as if they had never
sinned; Not in His Account only, but even in their own Consciences; and that
will fully and finally resolve the Question, which all the Ministers in the
world (while they lived on Earth) could never resolve, with all the Absolutions
which ever they applied to their doubting Souls; though it were even Clave non
errante, from the testimony of the Word; This Proclamation shall do it, and
leave no room for doubting or misgiving thoughts, for ever.

Secondly, 2ly. The Saints absolved in open Court.
The Saints are then said to receive their full and final Absolution; because
then their Absolution shall be Proclaimed in open Court; the Judge in Person,
shall pronounce their Absolution in the Audience of God, and all the Elect
Angels, and of the whole world of Men and Devils; what Christ in the days of
his flesh said to one poor trembling Penitent, he will now say to all, Sons and
Daughters, be of good cheer, your sins are forgiven you; This will be good
Cheer indeed; These, be the times of refreshment from the presence of the Lord,
when the sins of the Saints shall be blotted out; Acts 13.19.
blotted they were before out of God's book; but now they shall be blotted out
in the sight of all the world; so that now indeed, Who shall lay any thing to
the charge of Gods Elect? since Heaven and Earth, yea, and Hell it self must be
witnesses to the Crossing of the book, and to the Cancelling of the Bond;
wherein they stood obliged to Divine Justice! Oh what inexpressible,
inconceivable refreshment will this be to the Saints of God? even the
perfecting of all their former refreshments? The sense of their pardon
pronounced by the Spirit, to some of their Consciences within, was wont to be
exceeding sweet; yea any Scriptural hopes of purdoning mercy, though
apprehended by a weak and trembling hand of Faith, were a reviving to their
drooping Spirits; What must needs then the highest plerophory, ratified by the
most solemn Proclamation of the great Judge, (before the upper and nether
world, as well as to Conscience,) be, but life from the dead? Surely it will be
even Heaven, before the Saints come to Heaven! Nor shall any reflection either
upon sin or sorrow, ever damp that joy any more; nor shall Willow-boughs mix
with the Palms of the Saints Triumph in that blessed Jubilee; but everlasting
joy shall be upon their Heads, and sorrow and sighing shall flee away.

The Second Branch of the Saints Justification, is, that the Judge will
pronounce them perfectly Righteous. This may seem superfluous, as supposed to
be included in the sentence of Absolution: Not to be a Sinner, seems to imply
a Saint; To be pardoned all sin, and all the degrees of sin, and all kinds of
sin, omissive as well as commissive; all defects of perfection, all want of
conformity to, as well as transgression of the Law of God, this seems to be
perfection.

Answ. It does seem so, and (truly) it does but seem so; for Pardon relates to
what is past only; Romans 3.25.
Remission of sins that are past; it is but privativum quid, a freedom from
Guilt, and a freedom from Punishment; it does not suppose any real and positive
Righteousness, which may set a man rectus in curia, perfect before the Tribunal
of Gods Justice.

Obj. If it be objected; There is not a third State, or a third Person, viz.
one that is not Guilty, and yet not Righteous; a man must be one of these,
either Guilty or Righteous; if he be not Guilty, he is Righteous; if Righteous,
he is not Guilty?

Answ. The objection admits of a fair and easy solution, namely this; The Law
is satisfied by suffering the Penalty in men's precepts, but not in God's;
wherein not only Penalties are threatened, but Blessings are promised. Down de
Justif.
It holds true in matters of criminal Justice, where a person is tried upon
Indictment of a Crime, suppose Theft, or Murder, or Sacrilege, or the like;
there, upon Examination, to be found Not Guilty, is to be Righteous, Legally
Righteous; there being no other Righteousness looked after in that Trial, but,
Whether Guil^y of the Fact, or not Guilty: But in matters of remunerative
justice, where the Law propounds a reward to such and such qualifications,
there a not-Guilty will not suffice. Ex. gr. If a Scholar in the University be
a Candidate for an office there, or a Fellowship in a College, where the
Statutes do require such and such qualifications there: upon Examination, to be
found not-Guilty of Murder, of Sacriledg, or any other Crime; this will not
capacitate the Candidate for the preferment; this is the case in hand, The
Saints are now Candidates for Heaven and Glory, Absolution or Pardon is not
sufficient to capacitate them for this glory; yea though it be supposed the
pardon be extensive to all (not the transgressions only of the Law, but) the
very omissions and defects too, yea to the least nonconformity, unto the Law
in its utmost perfection, it suffices not; because a pardon is not the
qualification which the Law requires; but a positive perfection, Fac hoc, etc.
Do this, and Live.

Whether God, by absolute Prerogative, cannot dispense with this qualification,
and pardon the want of it, I will not dispute; but, Whether God can in Justice
dispense with his own Law, and with that Condition of Righteousness and Life
established in the first Covenant, is the main Enquiry, (of which anon.)

It is true, there is not a third State, a State which is neither a state of
Guilt, nor a state of Righteousness; neither is there a third person: there is
not a person to be found which is neither Guilty nor Righteous; but though
there be not a third State, or a third Person, yet there is tertius Conceptus,
a third Conception or notion in the understanding; though there be not a person
which is neither Guilty nor Righteous, yet to be not-Guilty, They differ as to
the praedicate, though they be not separate as to the subject.
and to be Righteous are two different capacities, considerable in one and the
same person; it is one thing for a man to be considered merely as not Guilty
(or purely as an absolved person,) another thing to be considered, as a
Righteous person, invested with all those excellent qualifications, which may
capacitate him for the privilege annexed to the condition.

Ex. gr. As it is between Sin and Holiness; He that is not sinful, is holy;
there is not a person to be found who is not sinful, and yet not holy: the
notions are different, though the subject be one and the same:

So it is between not-Guilty and Righteous; there is not a person, who is
neither, not-Guilty, and yet not-Righteous; for although the considerations be
unseparable, yet they are not identical: Not-Guilty is not the same notion with
Righteous; that is purely privative, this positive: though they are ever
United, yet they are not to be Confounded.

Again, as in point of Eternal punishment; He that is punished with the pain of
Loss, Paena damni. Paena sensus
is punished also with the pain of Sense; yet is not the pain of Loss, the same
with the pain of Sense: He that is deprived of Gods presence, and the joys of
Heaven, does suffer the torments of Hell with the Devil and his Angels for
ever; the punishments are distinct, though they be inseparable: So it is
between the two capacities, relating to these two places, Hell and Heaven.

The Person under the notion of not-Guilty, is an absolved person, and
acquitted from Hell and eternal damnation: And, as under the notion of
Righteous, he is capacitated for Heaven and life everlasting: Not-Guilty
relates to freedom from Hell: Righteousness, relates to Heaven, as the proper
qualification thereof: Do this and Live; though, where the one is, there is the
other, yet the one is not formally the other.

And according to these two capacities and places, there are two great Works,
which the Redeemer did undertake for the Redeemed: The one to make satisfaction
for sin to divine justice by his Blood, i. e. by his Death.

The other to yield most absolute Conformity to the Law of God, both in Nature
and Life.

By the one, we may conceive the Redeemed freed from Hell and everlasting
burnings; by the other, we may conceive them qualified for Heaven and
everlasting Glory.

Yet, not so precisely, neither the one or the other, but that both may be
produced by both: Active and Passive obedience may have a joint influence upon
both; his Active to save from Hell; and his Passive to bring to Heaven: As a
man that pays a debt, and purchases an Inheritance, either of them to the
value of five hundred pounds (at the same time) with a Jewel worth a thousand,
one half whereof relates to the debt, the other to the Purchase; yet so, as it
is hard to distinguish which is done by which; there is a distinct
consideration in it, yet so, as that both concur to both: so in the case in
hand. As the Active and Passive obedience in Christ, suppose not two Redeemers,
but one and the same Person under both these distinct engagements; so
Absolution, and positive real Righteousness infer not a distinction of persons,
but diversity only of considerations in one and the same person.

But further; That a positive Righteousness is requisite to the justification
of a Sinner, as well as Absolution from guilt and punishment, may appear upon a
fourfold account, viz.

Of 1. The Justice of God. 2. The Perfection of the Law. 3. The Necessity of
the Sinner. 4. The Excellency of the Redeemer.


First, the Justice of God: 1. Account. The justice of God.
this is for the glory of Gods Justice, to justify man in such a way, as
wherein he may also justify himself: This the holy Apostle counts highly
worthy our best observation; That he might be just, Romans 3.26.
and the justifier of him that believes in Jesus: God would show himself a
Righteous God in justifying of Unrighteous men: and this he declares in both
the parts of Justification.

Sc. Pardon. Accounting Righteous.


First: In Pardon, God shows himself just. looks backward, Righteousness
forward; Pardon relates to a state past already, Righteousness to a state
future, the State of a Sinner for the time to come. Now in both these, God's
design is to declare himself a just God: in Remission he declares himself a
just God: by pardoning upon the account of satisfaction (by the justice of God
we are to understand the infinite severity of God in punishing sin in a way
agreeable to the nature of his justice) and this God eminently declares,
Pardoning Sin in God, is not an Act of mercy only, but of Justice.
as in the Eternal Damnation of the Reprobates in their own persons; so even in
pardoning the sins of the Elect, while he does not pardon them, Justitia nemine
intelligatur summa illa Dei in vindicandis peccaris s^ veritas justissimae
ipsius na urae co^veniens. Bez. in loc.
but upon the account of a valuable consideration, namely (as in the beginning
of the verse) of that propitiation, or propitiatory Sacrifice, which Christ
has made to divine justice by his Blood, apprehended by Faith. Whether God
could not have pardoned sin by absolute Prerogative, is an enquiry of an
extrinsick consideration to this place; since the Text informs us, God was
resolved to Consult his own Honor, as well as the Creatures Happiness, in this
great Act of jurisdiction, (...). Placam^ntum. Beza.
namely, Pardoning of Sin: and purposed in Himself (as highest reason
requires) to pity Sinners so far as He might not be Cruel to Himself, and to
show Mercy to them, in such a way, as he might not wrong his own glorious
Attributes, and cast no blemish upon his Law and Government.

Should God indeed, without any further Consideration, have merely Pardoned, it
might have had the shadow of a Reflection, sc.

1. Upon his Wisdom; as if he had made a Law, either so Strict as could not
have been kept, or so inconsiderable, that, being broken, it was not worth the
Vindication; Or 2. Upon his All Sufficiency; as if he wanted Power to have
Chastised the breach of his Holy and Just, and Good Law, with Condign
punishment; Or 3. Above all, His Veracity and Justice; who having presentenced
the breach of his Law with Death, (Death surely, answerable to the nature of
his Righteous and Eternal Law), The Law being now notoriously Violated; He
should account it a a matter of indifferency, whether He executed the threatened
Sentence, yea or no, etc.
Oh how had this been to have prostituted the honor of His Government, to be
trampled under foot by bold and presumptuous Sinners?

Nay, but God Pardoning Sin, upon no inferior account, than the Propitiatory
Sacrifice, which his own Blessed Son, made to Divine Justice, by his Death;
has born Witness to his High and Glorious Attributes, Wisdom, Power, and
Justice, etc.

And has left such a dreadful Monument of severity in the world, as may for
ever affright lapsed Sinners from daring God, and destroying themselves. Thus
God is just in not putting up the wrong done to his most glorious Attributes by
Sin; without either the death of the Sinner, according to the Letter; or the
death of the Surety, according to the Equity of the Threatening.

2dly. As God declares himself a just God by pardoning upon the account of
satisfaction; so he declares his Justice also in accompting the Sinner
Righteous upon the consideration of a positive Righteousness. For the better
clearing of which point, I shall briefly speak of the second account, viz.

Secondly; The perfection of the Law: And for better understanding of this, I
shall lay down these following propositions.

1. Prop. The first is this; The Law which at first God wrote in man's heart,
and afterward in two Tables of Stone, was a Law of a most holy, and absolute
perfection. It must needs be so; for if God in his own nature, and ends be most
Holy; his Law also must be so too, it being the very Image of Gods Nature, and
Will: So that the Law was a perfect mirror, wherein the perfections of the
Divine Nature were made visible and conspicuous.

2. Prop. This most perfect Law was given by God for two great Ends, sc. 1. To
be a rule, and pattern of Eternal Life, and happiness. 2. To be a condition of
Eternal Life, and happiness.
Do this, and Live; It was not only a Command, but a Covenant, with a promise
of Eternal happiness, upon perfect and perpetual obedience.

3. Prop. These two ends being of perpetual necessity, the Law it self must
needs be so too, such an excellent piece of beauty and perfection God never
made for an Almanac, to continue but for a year, yea, a day rather, or moment
of man's Integrity. It is hard to conceive that God should intend to null this
Law; (this had been for God to have let go his hold of man) and to set up
another in the room of it, considering the end he aimed at; as soon as he had
made it A Law of an higher perfection, Hoe solum omnipotenter non potuit.
God could not make, and A Law of an inferior perfection would not serve the
turn, either Gods's or man's.


4. Prop. Although God permitted man to lose the perfection of his nature, he
never did intend to lose or dispense with the perfection of his own Law. Heaven
and Earth may pass away; but one jot, or tittle of the Law must not pass away:
The Righteousness of God's Law, like that of his Nature, is immutable and
everlasting.

Man being fallen, and so, (by the abuse of his own free will) having rendered
himself altogether unable to fulfill this holy and perfect Law, God sent his
only begotten Son into the world, not to introduce another Law, or another
Righteousness, but another medium to fulfill and establish the former, Romans
3.31. There was no need of a new Law, but of a new Nature to keep and fulfill
that which was already in being.

That Law was abundantly able to justify, but the laps't Nature of man was not
able to keep it; what defect there was, lay in the humane Nature, not in the
divine Law. The Law was weak, Romans 8.3.
but how? through the flesh: If fallen man could have fulfilled the Law, the
Law, as considered in its self, and its first institution could have justified
him: Christ therefore, when he comes into the world, destroys not that which
was perfect, but repairs, Mat. 9.27.
and perfects that which was weak; and that he did, by taking the humane nature
into the same Personality with the divine Nature, by a supernatural Conteption
in the Womb of the Virgin. Gal. 4 4.


6. Prop. Jesus Christ, as Mediator, thus born of a Woman, was under the Law:
He that made the Law, as God, was made under the Law, as God-Man; whereby both
the Obligations of the Law fell upon him, Paenal. Praeceptive.


The Paenal Obligation, (For in the lapsed Estate, there we begin) to undergo
the Curse; and so to satisfy Divine Justice: The Praeceptive Obligation, to
fulfill all Righteousness, Math. 3.13. This Obligation, he fulfilled by Doing;
That, he sustained by Dying.

7. Prop. This double Obligation could not have befallen the Lord Jesus Christ
upon any natural account of his own, but upon his Mediatory account only; as he
voluntarily became the Surety of this new and better Covenant: Heb. 7 22. (...).
So that the fruit and benefit of Christ's voluntary subjection to the Law,
redoundeth not at all to Himself, but unto the persons which were given him of
the Father, Joh. 17. whose Sponsor he became; for their sakes he underwent the
Paenal Obligation of the Law, that it might do them no harm; he being made a
Curse for us: Gal. 3.13.
and for their sakes he fulfilled the Praeceptive Obligation of the Law, Do
this, that so the Law might do them good. This the Evangelical Apostle clearly
asserts; Romans 10.4.
Christ is the end of the Law for Righteousness to every one that believes.
Weigh the Text.

Christ is the end of the Law: the end; (...).
not finis destructivus, to destroy the Law: such he had been indeed, had he
come to have brought in any other Law in the room of this holy and perfect Law;
Mat. 5.17.
but, says he, I came not to destroy. What end then? (...) Christus Finis
legis. i. e. eompleti^ legis. Rem^g.
why Finis perfectivus, the perfection and accomplishment of the Law; not to
destroy, but to fulfill, sc. the end of the Law for Righteousness: i. e. to the
end, that by Christ his active Obedience, God might have his perfect Law,
perfectly kept; that so there might be a Righteousness extant in the Humane
Nature, every way adaequate to the perfection of the Law: And who must wear
this Garment of Righteousness, when Christ has finished it? surely the
Believer, who wanted a Righteousness of his own; for so it follows, for
Righteousness to every one that believes, that is, that every poor naked
Sinner believing in Jesus Christ, might have a Righteousness, wherein being
found, he might appear at Gods Tribunal, but his nakedness not appear; but as
Jacob in the Garment of his Elder Brother Esau, so the Believer in the Garment
of his Elder Brother, Jesus, might inherit the Blessing, even the great
Blessing of Justification. This leads me to an 8th. Proposition, and that is

8. Prop. Faith, which is commonly called the condition of the new Covenant, is
not in its self a new Righteousness, but as it were an instrument, or hand to
apprehend and apply the Righteousness of the first Covenant; as fulfilled by
the great Sponsor, Romans 8 3. Perfectionem habet Legis, qui in Christum credit.
and Surety on the believer's behalf; That the Righteousness of the Law might
be fulfilled in us, sc. in our Nature, to our justification: Christ is the end
of the Law for Righteousness to every one that believes.

9. As imitation of Adam only made us not Sinners; so imitation of Christ only
makes us not Righteous, but imputation. Down. of Justifit.
Prop. This Mediatory Righteousness of Christ (for his Personal and essential
Righteousness falls not at all under this consideration) can no way become the
Believer's, but, as the first Adam's obedience became his Posteritie's (who
never had the least actual share in his transgression) sc. By an act of
Imputation, from God as a Judge. The Lord Jesus having fulfilled the Law as a
second Adam, God the Father imputes it to the believing Sinner; as if he had
done it in his own person. I say not, God the Father does account the Sinner to
have done it, but he does impute it to the believing Sinner, as if he had done
it, unto all saving intents and purposes. Thus Abraham, the Father of the
faithful, was justified; his Faith was imputed to him for Righteousness; his
Faith, i. e. objective the Righteousness which his Faith apprehended, sc.
Christ his fulfilling of the Law, as the Surety of the New Covenant. And so are
all the Children of Abraham's Faith justified also; unto whom it shall be
imputed also, if we believe on Him, that raised up Jesus from the dead, Who was
delivered for our sins, and was raised again for our justification.

10. h. and last Prop. The believing sinner appearing at the Tribunal of the
great God, and pleading his Righteousness, thereupon stands rectus in curia,
and is pronounced Righteous in the Court of divine Justice. Thus the Sinner is
brought in (as it were in a way of judicial Process) Isa. 45.24. holding up his
hand at the Judgment Seat, the Judge on the Bench bespeaking him thus.

Sinner thou stand Indicted for breaking the holy and just, and good Law of
thy Maker, Romans 3 9. (...) It is verbum forense: Sign. Legally proved.
and hereof art proved Guilty: Sinner, what have thou to say for thy self, etc?

To this the Sinner, upon his bended knee, Confesses Guilty; but with-all,
humbly craves leave to plead for himself full satisfaction made by his Surety:
It is Christ that died, Romans 8.34.

And whereas it is further objected by the Judge: I but, Sinner, the Law
requires an exact and perfect Righteousness in thy personal fulfilling of the
Law! Sinner, Where is thy Righteousness?

The believing Sinner humbly replyeth, My Righteousness is upon the Bench; in
the Lord have I Righteousness. Christ my Surety has fulfilled the Law on my
behalf, to that I appeal, and by that I will be tried: This done, the Plea is
accepted as good in Law; The Sinner is pronounced Righteous; and goes away
glorying and rejoicing! Righteous, Righteous! In the Lord shall all the Seed of
Israel be justified, and shall glory.

If this be not the Righteousness, whereby a poor Sinner is justified, (sc. the
Righteousness of the Law fulfilled by a Mediator on behalf of Gods Elect) I
would gladly enquire What is become of the [Do this] in that first Covenant? Is
it indeed abolished? Then has Christ destroyed the Law: destroyed it I say,
not fulfilled it, at least in one great and main design of it.

Secondly; If so; I would fain be satisfied, what succeeds in the room of the
Fac hoc, to supply the office of a justifying Righteousness? what can?

First; Not, surely, Inherent Righteousness, that being quidimperfectum, and an
imperfect Cause can never produce a perfect Effect; which some observing, have
had no other (...) left them, Bell. de justif. li. 2. ca. 7. S 3.
but, in down right language, to affirm Habitual Righteousness to be perfect;
whom we shall leave to the confutation of fire in the last day.

Secondly; Ephesians. 2.12.
Nor can it be Adoption. The terminus a quo in Adoption is a state of
alienation from God. The verminus a quo in Justification is a [guilty
Malefactor] as to Absolution; and of [want of Righteousness] as to the
Condition of the Covenant.

Thirdly; Much less can faith, in its own nature considered, supply this
office; For, if faith; then either as it is an [Habit], or as it is an [Act]:
not, verily, as an Habit; for so it falls within the List of Graces, and is a
branch of Sanctification. Nor, as it is an Act: For so it is a Work, and would
confound the two Covenants.

We assert indeed with the current of Scripture, Justification by faith; but,
in the sense of the reformed Churches, sc. Not by virtue of any intrinsic merit
in faith; but by virtue of the extrinsic object, which faith lays hold on;
namely, Christ the great Sponsor of the New Covenant; fulfilling the
Righteousness of the Law for Believers.

Fourthly (lastly:) And least of all can Remission of sin supply the office of
the Fac hoc: Take it in the utmost extent, and latitude, that may be, sc. as
including Commissions, Omissions, Defects or imperfections even to the least
want of Conformity to the Law, either in 1. Life, or 2. Nature.


Pardon can no more make a man Righteous, Anth. Burgess. do justificat. The Law
is not fulfilled by the passive Righteousness of Christ only and therefore,
pardon alone cannot justify.
then it can make a man Learned: Remission not being the qualification, which
the Eternal Law of God calls for.

Object. To which if it be Objected: No more is imputed Righteousness. The
Righteousness which the Law requires upon pain of Damnation, is a perfect
obedience, and Conformity to the whole Law of God, performed by every Son and
Daughter of Adam in his own person.

To this Objection I offer these particulars following by way of Answer.

1. Imputed Righteousness is the same materially with that which the Law
requires; It is Obedience to the Law of God exactly, and punctually performed
to the very outmost iota and tittle thereof, without the least abatement.
Christ has paid the uttermost farthing; He is the fulfilling of the Law, for
Righteousness, ut supra.

2. Christ's fulfilling, or accomplishing of the Law was performed in, and by,
the humane Nature: For, verily, to this purpose, Heb. 2.16: Romans 9.8.14. It is
not always necessary the debt be paid by the Principal: if it be done by the
Surety, it is all one, as if the Principal had paid it himself: Romans 8.3.
Especially if the Creditor gave his consent.
the Lord Jesus took not upon him the Nature of Angels, but the Seed of
Abraham. Because the Children of Promise (undertaken for) were partakers of
flesh and blood; He also took part of the same, to the intent, the Law might be
fulfilled in the same Nature, to which it was at first given,

3. It was expressly done in their names, and on their behalf; that the
Righteousness of the Law might be fulfilled in us, as if our Lord had said;
This I suffer, and this I do to the use, and in the stead of my Covenant Seed,
that they may have a Righteousness which they may truly call their own.

4. All was done, not without full consent of all parties; for,

1. As to the Lawgiver, it was his own free gratuitous motion, I will send my
Son: God seeing how the case stood with poor lapsed man, took up a resolution
to save some, whatsoever it should cost him; Well, (said he) I will send my Son!

2. God the Father no sooner made the motion, Heb. 10.7.9:
but the Son echoeth unto it, Lo I come: Yea observe, how quick he is, then
said I]: The word was no sooner out of God's mouth, but it laid a Law of sweet
Compulsion upon Christ's heart, his bowels yern'd within him, and then said he,
Lo I come to do thy Will: by the which Will we are Sanctified, i. e. either the
Will of the Father appointing the Son to his Mediatory Office; or the Will of
the Son, accepting it so readily; or by both, we are Sanctified, freed from the
evil of sin, and accounted Righteous, and holy before God. And though, (as we
may so say) the Lord Jesus ensnared himself by the words of his mouth, yet he
never repented to this day, nor ever sought to be released from this
Suretiship, but rejoices in it, as if he were the gainer, Psalm. 16.7. I will
bless the Lord who has given me Counsel, He gives thanks to his Father for
employing him in this Work.

Hereunto if it be objected that the Lord Jesus, Repent of his Suretyship; and
in a deep passion prayed to his Father to be released from his Passion;

Father, Math. 26.
if it be possible, let this Cup pass from me, [and that three times over,]
ver. 39.42.44.

We Answer, sc.

1. There is Vox Naturae; the Voice of Nature; Let this Cup pass from me. 2.
There is Vox Officii, the voice of his Mediatory Office; Nevertheless, Not as I
will, but as thou will.
The first Voice [let this Cup pass,] intimates the Velleity of the Inferionr
part of his Soul, the Sensitive part, proceeding from a natural abhorrency of
death, as he was a Creature.

The later Voice, [Nevertheless, not as I will, but as thou wilt] expresses
the full and free Consent of his Will, complying with the Will of his Father,
in that grand everlasting Design, of bringing many Sons unto Glory, by

Making the Captain of their Salvation, perfect, Heb. 2.10.
through sufferings.

It was an Argument of the truth of Christ His humane Nature, that he naturally
dreaded a Dissolution. Omne appetit Conservationem sui.
He owed it to Himself as a Creature to desire the Conservation of his Being;
and He could not become unnatural to himself, Phil. 2.8.
For no man ever yet hated his own flesh, etc.

But being a Son, he learned submission; and became obedient to the death, even
the death of the Cross, that Shameful, Cruel, Cursed death of the Cross; The
suffering whereof he owed to that solemn Astipulation which from everlasting
passed between his Father and Himself; 1 John 5.8. As to Christ's humane Nature,
the Cup was Calix ameritudinis.
the third Person in the Blessed Trinity, the Holy Ghost being Witness.

And therefore, though the Cup was the bitterest Cup that ever was given man to
drink, as wherein there was not Death only, but Wrath, and Curse; yet seeing
there was no other way lest of satisfying the Justice of his Father, Nor did
Bridegroom go with more chearsulness to be Married to his Bride, then our Lord
Jesus went to his Cross, Luke 12.50. Ratione officij it was Calix Salxtis.
and of saving Sinners, most willingly He took the Cup, and (having given
Thanks (as it were) in those words, The Cup which my Father has given me,
shall I not drink it?) He drank it; It was Bitter indeed, but he found it
sweetened with three Ingredients, 1. It was but a Cup, not a Sea. 2. It was his
Father that mingled it, not the Devil. 3. It was a Gift, not a Curse: as to
himself; The Cup which my Father gives me.


He drank it, I say, and drank it up every drop; leaving nothing behind for his
Redeemed, but large draughts of Love and Salvation; in the Sacramental Cup of
his own Institution, saying, This Cup is the New Testament in my Blood, 1 Cor.
11.25. Math. 26.8.
for the remission of sins: This do ye in remembrance of me.

Thus (my B.) look upon Christ as a Mediator, (in which capacity only, he
Covenanted with the Father, for the Salvation of mankind;) and there was not
so much as a shadow of any receding from, or repenting of, what he had
undertaken.

3. As for the Elect, whose Salvation lay at stake, there was no doubt to be
made of their free consent to the Contract. For though they were not originally
consulted, a part ante, yet, as soon as in their several ages, and
successions, they come to be acquainted with the compact, between the Father
and the Son; and begin to understand how deeply they are concerned in it; they
do not only give in their own affirmative vote, but, falling down on their
faces, they break out into joyful acclamations, Romans 7.24.
and sing We thank God for Jesus Christ our Lord; and again, Thanks be to God,
who has given us the Victory through our Lord Jesus Christ. 1. Cor. 15 57.


4. Lastly; The whole Astipulation between the Father, and the Son, was
solemnly Transacted in open Court, in the presence of a public Notary, the
Holy Ghost; Who being a third Person in the Glorious Trinity, of the same
divine essence, and of equal power and glory, makes up a third legal Witness
with the Father, So the King writes, Test Meipso. 1 Jo. 5.7.
and the Son, They being (after the manner of Kings) their own Witnesses also.
For there be three that bear record in Heaven, the Father, the Word, and the
Holy Ghost, and these three are one.

Behold what can be desired more, to make commutations of parties, in public
contracts, authentic in Courts of Justice, than Consent of all parties, the
Allowance of the Judge, and Public Record?

And if this self-same commutation of Penance must be allowed of by those who
are for justification by way of satisfaction only, Bellar. de justific. li. 2.
ca. 7. Sec. 4. Staple^on, etc. Their own argument will serve to prove the
necessity of imputation of Christ's active obedience to the Law for
justification, because, Nothing, say they, can satisfy for sin (which is an
infinite wrong to God) but that only which is infinite in value. By the same
reason, Nothing can give us right and title to Eternal Life, (which is an
infinite reward) but that which is of infinite worth.
why should it seem incongruous in this other branch of justification, sc. by
imputed Righteousness? Surely, God would have the Active as well as the Passive
obedience, as near the same, required by the Law, as might be, that he might
dispense with as little of the Law as was possible.

It only admits one Objection more, and that is, Law again into Office, and to
put the crown of Justification upon the head of works; against the universal
suffrage of the holy Scriptures, both of the Old and New Testament.

To which I reply: destroys the Law with the Antinomian; nor establishes it,
as a Covenant of works with the Papists. But, As the great Office of the Lord
Jesus Christ was, to reconcile all things, Colos. 1.20.
whether they be things in Earth, or things in Heaven, Ex. gr.

God's Justice, and God's Mercy, God, and Man, Jew, and Gentile, Man and
Himself:
So herein, has our blessed Lord, and Mediator, magnified his infinite Wisdom
and Power in reconciling the Law and the Gospel in this great mystery of
Justification; wherein the material cause of our Justification is still the
Righteousness of the Law; so that the Law has no cause to complain, Christ
has done it any wrong.

And the other Causes are supplied by the Gospel, Ex. gr.

The efficient cause, Christ his fulfilling the Law, Romans 10.4.

The formal Cause, God's Imputation, Romans 10.4.

The Instrumental Cause (so our Divines phrase it), Faith.

And the moving Final Cause, the exaltation of free Grace. Romans 1.20:
Accordingly we find the Righteousness of Justification to take its various
denominations; that is to say,

In respect of the Material Cause, it is called the Righteousness of the Law.
In respect of the Efficient Cause, the Righteousness of Christ, Romans 5.17. 1
Cor. 1.30. In respect of the Formal Cause, the Righteousness of God, the
imputing it, Romans 3.22. Phil. 3.9. In respect of the Instrumental Cause, the
Righteousness of Faith, Phil. 3.9. And in respect of the moving and Final
Cause, we are said to be justified freely by Grace, Romans 3.24. Tit. 3.7.
In a word: The Law, as it was a Covenant of works, required exact and perfect
obedience in men's proper persons; this was legal Justification: In the New
Covenant, God is contented to accept this Righteousness in the hand of a
Surety; this is Evangelical Justification.

Thus has our blessed Lord reconciled The Law, also. The and also. The Gospel.
also.


I have done with the Second Account. I come now to a Third Account.

The Necessity of a Sinner. 3d. Account. The necessity of a Sinner.
The state and condition of a Sinner does necessarily require a Righteousness
should be imputed to him for his Justification, and that to a twofold End.

1. The Settling of solid Peace in his Conscience. 2. The Securing of his
Appearance in the day of Judgment.
1. A positive Righteousness is necessary for the settling of solid Peace in the
Conscience of the Sinner. The Peace and Comfort of a poor sensible Sinner, can
never stand firm and stable, but upon the basis of a positive Righteousness.

This is one of the great Arguments, whereby the great Apostle in his Christian
Ca^chism (so some of the Fathers were wont to call the Epistle to the Romans)
does invincibly prove Justification by Faith, chap. 5.1. The argument lies
thus.

That way of Justification, which tends most effectually to settle Peace in the
Conscience of a poor Convinced Sinner, that must needs be God's way of
Justification:

But Justification by Faith is the most effectual medium to this end. Ergo.

The first Proposition: is founded upon that blessed Truth, which the Holy
Ghost witnesses, Heb. 6.18, 19. the willingness of God, that the Heirs of
Promise may have strong Consolation; the result thereof is this, that whatever
medium is aptest to beget strong Confidence and Assurance in their hearts, God
is graciously pleased to make use of it, for their abundant satisfaction.

The second Proposition, namely, that, Justification by Faith (in the sense
before explained) is the aptest medium to establish solid peace in the bosom of
a poor sensible Sin^^r, may appear by comparing Works and Faith together. Send
a poor Sinner to his own Righteousness, which is of the Law, sc. his own good
works, Holmess, Fasting, Prayer, or the best Service that ever he did for God,
they can afford him little ground of Confidence; alas, hinc illae lachry^ae,
hence his fears, and doubts, and diffidence do arise; His Prayers need Pardon,
his Tears need washing, Job. 10.
his very Righteousness will Condemn him; here is no place for the sole of his
foot to stand upon^ If thou, Lord, should mark iniquity, O Lord, Psalm. 30.3.
who shall stand? Gal. 2.19.
This was that which scared Paul from coming to the Law for Justification. Why,
says he, I through the Law, am dead to the Law, q. d. That I seek not to the
Law for Justification and Life; The Law may thank it self; I come to the Law
for Justification, and it convinces me of sin: I plead my innocence, that I am
not so great a Sinner as others are; I plead my Righteousness, my duties, and
good meanings, and good desires; and it tells me, They are all too leight; the
best of my duties will not save me, but the least of my sins will damn me. It
tells me, mine own Righteousnesses do, Job. 9.20.21.
as filthy rags, defile me; and my duties themselves do witness against me: I
plead Repentance, and it laughs me to scorn; It tells me, my Repentance needs
Pardon, and my Tears need washing: Besides, if they were never so good, What
cares it for my Repentance? It looks for my Obedience, perfect, and
personal, which, because I have not, it tells me, I am Cursed, and pronounces
Sentence; and when it has so done, it has no mercy at all for me, though I
seek it carefully with Tears. What can I expect from so severe a Judge? I Will
come no more at that Tribunal: Behold, I appeal to the Gospel; there Repentance
will pass, and Tears will find pity; there imperfect obedience (so sincere)
will find acceptance, (though not to Justification.) There, there is a better
Righteousness provided for me; an exact perfect Righteousness; as perfect, as
that of the Law; for it is (indeed) the very Righteousness of the Law; though
not performed by me, yet by my Surety for me, The Lord my Righteousness. I,
here is a foundation for the feet of my Faith to stand upon; here, I can have
pardon of all my debts, though the Law will not abate me one farthing; here be
long white Robes, though I never spun a thread of them with my own fingers. To
this Tribunal will I come, and here will I wait for my Justification; If I
Perish, I Perish.

Yea here, presumption to stand on; here is a Bed for Security to sleep in;
here is a doctrine to send men merrily to Hell; while they break the Law, to
tell them, There is one that has fulfilled it for them; while they sin, Christ
has Righteousness enough to justify them: Surely this is a doctrine; that
makes God not only the Justifier of Sinners, but the Justifier of sin too: So
disputed the Free Will men of those times against the Apostles; and so the
Free Will men of our times against us: but, for Answer.

1. negation. Absit. (q. d.) God forbid any one should be so impudent to force
such a scandalous Conclusion upon such immaculate Premises.

2. He shows the reason of it; and the reason is taken from the New Covenant,
wherein God has inseparably joined the merit of Christ's Cross, and the power
of Christ's Cross together; in so much, that whosoever has a share in the merit
of the Cross for Justification; has also an interest in the power of his
Cross, for Mortification: He instanceth in himself, Verse 20. I am Crucified
with Christ, q. d. While, (through grace) I appeal to the merit of Christ's
death, for my Justification; I can also (through grace) evidence my appeal to
be Scriptural, by the power of the Cross, whereby the World is Crucified to me,
and I to the World. Gal. 6.14.


And as it is with me, so it is with all truly justified persons; for they that
are Christ's, have Crucified the flesh with the Lusts and Affections thereof.
They have Crucified them, Gal. 5.24.
and they do Crucify them: they are upon the Cross, and with their Lord and
Redeemer refuse to come down, till they can say with him, It is finished;
therefore let the scandal of the Cross, and of Justification cease for ever.
The Sinner's necessity to such a justification in the day of Judgment. Phil.
3.6.

Inveniri in Christo, tacitam habet relationem ad Dei judicium; in ijs nullam
invenit condemnationem, quia justitia, qualem esse requirit, i. e. perfecta ac
cumulata exornatos nos invenit; nempe justitia Christi per sidem nebis
imputa^a. Bern. in loc.




Secondly; The other indispensable necessity the Sinner has of such a
Righteousness to his Justification, is, For the securing of his Appearance in
the day of Judgment.

The great Apostle, who had as fair a show for a legal Justification, as any
other in the world, protests he dares not think of appearing without this
positive Righteousness in the last and dreadful Judgment; But, oh that I may be
found in him, not having mine own Righteousness, which is of the Law: In Him,
in Christ, not in my self: in his Mediatory Righteousness, not in mine own
Personal Righteousnesses; away with them, they are but filthy Rags, rotten
Clouts, dogsmeat in comparison of Christ's Robes: Give me the Righteousness
which is of God by Faith; of Gods Ordination, and of Faith's Application: That,
that [the Righteousness of the Law fulfilled by Christ in my behalf]! and then
the Law cannot say, black is mine eye; I fear it not: In that, if I appear not,
I am undone for ever. Behold, here is the Sinner's necessity of such a
Justification, Peace of Conscience, and Boldness in the day of Judgment.


I come to the fourth Account. The Excellency of the Redeemer: This way of
justifying believing Sinners, does infinitely become the excellency of our
glorious Redeemer, set forth, Heb. 7.26. Such an high Priest became us (says
the Apostle) who is holy, harmless, undefiled, separate from Sinners, made
higher than the Heavens.

Holy] By Gods special and immediate Unction, (...).
and Consecration of him to his office. (...).


Harmeless,] He did no sin, neither was there guile found in his mouth, 1 Pet.
2.22. He that would expiate the guilt of others, must have none of his own; so
expounded, Verse 27.

Vndefiled] Immaculate in respect of his humane Nature, (...).
as well as of the divine, without the lest stain or spot of a sinful Nature in
him: to the same end also he must be

Separate from Sinners] conceived and born, (...).
not after the Law of other the Sons and Daughters of Adam; for, that which is
born of flesh, is flesh.

Made higher than the Heavens,] (...).
i. e. of an higher Perfection than all created Powers in Heavenly Places,
whether Angels or Principalities, etc.

Such an High Priest became us: An High Priest of an inferior perfection would
not have done our business for us.

And as, such an High Priest became us, so, truly such a way of justifying
believing Sinners, became him; namely, it was becoming a person of such a
transcendent worth and excellency, to justify his Redeemed in the most ample
and glorious way; etc. by working out for them, and then investing them with, a
Righteousness, adaequate to the Law of God; a Righteousness, that should be
every way commensurate to the miserable estate of fallen Man, and to the holy
design of the glorious God. It was a becoming thing, that the second Adam might
restore as good a Righteousness, as the first Adam lost; that this should
justify as sully, as the other did condemn. Romans 5. from verse 15. to the last.
This is the very design of that famous Parallel instituted by the Apostle
between the two Adams, namely, to signify an equality, not of number in the
persons receiving: but of efficacy in the persons deriving, and communicating
what was their own, to either of their Seeds: The first Adam to his natural
Seed, and the second Adam to his Spiritual Seed; to the end that Men and Angels
might take notice, that Jesus Christ the second Adam, was not less Powerful to
save, than the first Adam was to destroy: To which purpose it is of great use
to observe how exact the Apostle is, in setting the specialties of either Adams
Legacy one over against the other, the wound and the cure, the damage and the
reparation.

Observe the Parallel.

The first Adam Propagates his Offense. Guilt. Death. verse. 15. Condemnation.
Bondage, Slavery. Sin. ver. 19.
The second Adam obtains Forgiveness for many offenses. A gift of Righteousness,
17. Life, verse. 18. Justification, ibid. Reigning in Life. Righteousness.

Every way the Salve is as Sovereign, as the Wound was Mortal; the Cure as
Vital, as the Sickness deadly; yea the Apostle winds up with a (...) on the
second Adams part, and an (...). Behold, Absolution for Condemnation,
Righteousness for Sin, Reigning for Slavery, Life for Death; and (...) eternal
Life into the bargain.

Thus it became our High Priest to justify his Redeemed! The great Apostle
cannot pass it by, without special notice; He is able to save to the uttermost,
such as come to God through him; To the uttermost of what? To the uttermost
Obligation of the Law, preceptive as well as penal; to bring in perfect
Righteousness as well as perfect Innocence: To the uttermost demand of divine
Justice; perfect Conformity to divine Will, as well as perfect Satisfaction to
divine Justice: Perfection as well as Pardon.
To the uttermost Indigency and necessity of the lost Creature; Qualification
as well as Absolution: To the uttermost of our High Priest's perfection, in
whom dwelt all the fullness of the Godhead bodily.

Oh, for such an one to have saved a cheap way, to drive the Purchase to as low
a price as might be, by pardoning their sin, and making reparation to divine
Justice; to satisfy for the wrong, which man had done to the Creator, and his
Law; This, only, (with Reverence may we speak it) had not become so August a
Redeemer as the Son of God was. But, to set him upon his Legs again, to make
him as good a man as he was in his Created perfection (one way, or other) such
as all the Attributes of God should acquiesce in, to put him into a capacity of
demanding Eternal life, not by gift only, but by merit (through a Redeemer) yet
so still, as it is the Redeemers merit, not Man's; not that Christ has merited,
that we might merit (as the Papists would vainly varnish that proud doctrine of
merit): no; all was done by Him, and is Ours only by Imputation.

Such an High Priest became us; And such a glorious way of saving Sinners
became him; who was made higher than the Heavens, i. e. than all created
perfections whatsoever, Angels, Cherubins, or Seraphims, or what ever Order
else may be possibly conceived.

This is the Righteousness, Non est metuendum ne nimis divites simus in Christo.
wherewith our Redeemer saves us, and we need not sear to wrap up our selves
in this fine Linen, to put on these Robes; we need not fear to be made too
rich by Christ, who, when he was Rich, became Poor, that we through his Poverty
might be made Rich. 2 Cor. 8, 9.


And this Righteousness indeed, was made over to the Saints of God by
Imputation at the very first moment of their Conversion. In this they lived; In
this they died, as Standard-Bearers wrapped up and buried in their Colors: And
in this they shall arise, and appear at that glorious Appearing of the great
God, and our Savior Jesus Christ, who will then, and thus, be glorified in all
them that believe, to the Admiration of all the Elect Angels, the extreme
horror of the Reprobate, and the infinite joy and ravishment of the Saints; who
shall then sing, Isa. 61.10. I will greatly rejoice in the Lord, my Soul shall
be joyful in my God: for he has Clouthed me with the Garments of Salvation, he
has covered me with the Robe of Righteousness; as a Bridegroom decketh himself
with Ornaments, and as a Bride adorneth her self with her Jewels.

Oh how glorious will Christ be in his Saints, when they shall all wear one and
the same sparkling Livery with Christ? and this shall be his Name, Jehovah
Tzed-kenu, Jer. 23.6.
The Lord our Righteousness.

Thus I have done with the Second End. I should now immediately come unto the
Third, save that before we wholly dismiss this point, we cannot but take a
little notice of the insolency of the Papists, in Reproaching and Blaspheming
this blessed doctrine of Justification by imputed Righteousness: at which,
though they scoff, and laugh at with so much scorn and derision, that the Earth
is not able to bear their words, calling it Spectrum cerebri Lutherani,
Staplet. Putativa, and imaginaria justitia, Bellarm. Amentissima insania,
Andrad. Yet it seems to stand firm, and unshaken upon these impregnable
Arguments.

1. That way whereby the guilt of the first Adam is made ours, that way the
Righteousness of the second Adam is made ours also, Romans 5.12. cum. 15. 2. That
way whereby the Redeemer is made a Sinner; that way the Redeemed are made
Righteous, 2 Cor. 5. Vlt. 3. That way, wherein Abraham was justified, are all
Believers justified also, Romans 4. The Father and the Children have all the same
Righteousness, and it is Communicated to them the same way. Vt sup. 4. The
fulfilling of the Law, communicatur eo modo, quo communicari potest id quod
transit; nimirum, per Imputationem, as Bellarm. himself confesses in point of
satisfaction. 5. The Scripture is clear, and express for those two branches, as
of absolute necessity to Justification, scil. Pardon, Righteousness, distinct
from one another, and yet unseparable: by reason whereof, when but one of them
is mentioned, both of them are to be understood.
6. If satisfaction be imputed, Righteousness must be imputed also, both being
the peculiar and proper Office of the Mediator; neither of them falling within
the capacity of the Creature, standing at the Bar of Divine Justice.
The third end of the Saints meeting with Christ in the Air, ^ Psalm. 116. 3d.
End. Consummation of the Saints Nuptials.
is, The solemn Consummation of the Saints Nuptials, with Christ their
Bridegroom. They were Contracted here on Earth, when Christ and the Saints
gained one another's consent; Jesus Christ did then solemnly Espouse the Saints
to himself, Hos. 2.19, 20.
I betrothed thee unto me for ever, yea, I betrothed thee unto me in
Righteousness, and in Judgment, and in loving kindness, and in Mercies, I even
betrothed thee unto me in faithfulness. Indeed the Church in her self, when
Christ came to make Love to her, was a very unlovely Creature, whose emblem
therefore is a poor wretched Infant in the Blood of its Nativity. Ezekiel. 16.4.6.
But Jesus Christ did first Love her with a Love of Pity, Ezekiel. 16.6. I saw
thee polluted in thine own Blood: I saw thee, that is, I cast an Eye of Pity
upon thee, my bowels yearned toward thee: And then, as Love-less as she was,
that he might have a Legal right to her, Ephesians 5.25.
he Purchased her of his Father; He Purchased her at a dear rate, for, He gave
himself for her: first, He gave himself for her, and then He gave himself to
her. They were wont to buy their Wives of the Father of the Damosel; but never
did Husband buy a Wife at such a Rate, as the Lord Jesus did the Church.
Shechem bid fairly for Dinah, Genesis 34.12.
Jacobs Daughter, Ask me never so much dowry and gift, and I will give
according as ye shall say unto me. Jacob served seven years for Rachel, (as it
fell out) twice over, etc. yea, but the Lord Jesus gave himself for his Church;
his own blood, Act. 20.2^ Thirdly: That he might love her with a love of
Complacency, he does sanctify her, Ephesians. 5.27.
and cleanse her, by the washing of water by the word. As he does purchase the
Church with his blood; so he does purify the Church by his Spirit, compared to
water for the cleansing virtue thereof, in the Ministry of the word; as
Ahashuerus had the Virgins first purified and perfumed, into his bed. Fourthly,
He woeth her by the Ministers of the Gospel; who love their Lord and poor Souls
so well, that they will take no denial at her hand: as Eleazer Isack's Steward,
Genesis 24.33.
would not eat before he had sped for Rebeccah to Wife for his Master's Son: 2
Cor. 11.2.
And when they have gained her consent, then they present her as a chaste Virgin
unto Christ. Fifthly; Christ and his Church, mutual interview, like one another
so well, that they mutually engage and contract themselves one to another,
Cant. 2.16.
they do mutually give away themselves; one for, and one to another: My Beloved
is mine, and I am His. Sixthly; nourish her and cherish her, until she be of
age, fit for his Marriage Bed. Seventhly; for her, and meets her by the way (as
Isaac met Rebeccah) sc. in the Air, as here in the Context. Lastly;
Consummation of the Marriage.
Then and there he Consummates the Marriage before God and Angels, and Men and
Devils; he does take her to himself as his Royal Queen, saying, Come my Love,
my Dove, my Undefiled one; He embraces her, and kisseth her with a Marriage
kiss, and takes her to Wife. The Marriage knot is knit; Heaven and Earth are
witnesses to it, thousand thousands, yea ten thousand times ten thousand, even
a great multitude, whose voice is as many waters, and as the voice of mighty
thunderings.

This was the Wedding, unto which John was invited, Rev. 21.9.
Come hither, I will show thee the Bride, the Lamb's Wife. He that had the
Bride, was the Bridegroom, the Lord Jesus, King of Kings, etc. but John, the
Friend of the Bridegroom, Jo. 3 29.
stood and rejoiced greatly to hear the Bridegrooms Voice; then (indeed) was
his joy fulfilled. At the Consummation of this Marriage, what inconceivable
Triumph and Rejoicing will there be? the loud Music of Heaven shall sound, the
voice of mighty thundrings, all the Angels, Cherubims, Seraphims, with all the
Blessed Quoire of Celestial Spirits, who attend this glorious King of Saints,
shall praise God with the still Music of their Hallelujahs; yea, all the
Saints of God, whether Patriarchs or Prophets, and Apostles, all the Martyrs
and Confessors of Jesus Christ, with the whole number of the Redeemed, who are
both Guests and Bride in this glorious solemnity; will make the Arches of
Heaven to Echo, when they shall be joyful in glory, and the high praises of
God shall be in their mouths, Rev. 19.7.
singing one to another, Let us rejoice and be glad, for the Marriage of the
Lamb is come, and his Wife has made her self ready. The Gates of Hell, and the
very foundations of the Kingdom of darkness, shall tremble and be confounded at
the report of this Triumphant Jubil^e.

This Nupt^ll solemnity finished, Fourth end of Saints meeting Christ, To sit
as Assessors with him. Psalm. 45.9.
the next and fourth act in that solemn meeting will be, that the Bridegroom
will take the Queen his Bride, and set her upon his Throne, at his right hand,
(as King Agrippa did Bernice, Act. 25.27.) as a Confessor with himself in the
following part of the Judgment, which He, as Judge, shall pass upon the
Reprobate world of men and Devils; who have all this while stood trembling
below upon the Earth, beholding (to their infinite shame and horror) all this
glory put upon the Saints; and fearfully looking for their own Judgment, and
that fiery indignation which shall devour the Adversaries; which now succeeds;
For the Elect Angels who are appointed to be the Satellites, or Posse
comitatus, to attend the Judge, shall now drag that miserable company of
Jale-birds (those reprobate Caitifs of infernal Spirits, The judgment of the
wicked.
and wicked Men) before the Tribunal of the great Judge; there they shall pass
under a most impartial, exact, and severe Trial; Mal. 3.16.
the books shall be opened, the book of Gods Remembrance, and the book of their
own Consciences; and out of them they shall be judged for all the evils, which
ever they committed from the time they first had a being in the world. The
Reprobate Angels shall then be judged for their first Apostasy; Ad solomen
calamitatis suae non desinunt perditi perdere, Min. Fell. Oct.
and for all their malice and revenge, which since that cursed defection, they
ever acted against God, and against his Saints; yea and against the precious
Souls of Men, which (they being damned themselves) ceased not to draw into the
same Condemnation, The Angels which kept not their first Estate, or
principality, (Jude 6.) but left their own habitation, he has reserved in
chams under darkness, unto the judgment of the great Day. With these chains
rattling at their heels, shall they be dragged to the bar of divine Judgment; and
there, having received their dreadful Sentence, they shall be hanged up in
those There be two Chains, viz. God's W^ath and their own Guth.
chains, in the midst of unquenchable flames to all Eternity: but first they
shall have a just and a fair Trial. And as the Reprobate Angels, so the
Reprobate world of ungodly men and women, shall be judged for all the
wickedness done in the body. For the sin of their Natures, Ephesians. 2.3.
for they were by Nature Children of Wrath: And for their actual sins, for as
they were Children of Wrath, so also they were Children of disobedience; they
shall be judged for their Atheism, whether secret, by which, as Fools, Psalm.
14.1.
they have said in their hearts (only), There is no God; or open, whereby as
proud Blasphemers, they have set their mouth against the Heavens, Psalm. 73 9.
saying, How does God know? and Is there knowledge in the most High? who through
the pride of their Countenance, Psalm. 10 4, 13.
would not seek after God, yea contemning God, said concerning all this
wickedness, and that to God's Face, Tush, thou will not require it: But that
Judgment shall fully convince the Atheist; and he, that would not believe a
God, shall know him by the judgments which he executes. Then shall the
Idolater, whether Ethnic or Romish, or of what other impression soever; the
Blasphemer of God's Name, whether by prodigious Oaths, or by lighter taking his
Name in vain; the Prophaner of the Sabbath, which violateth that holy day of
God by work or sport, either by sinning or idling out that holy time; either by
writing against the Sabbath, or by living down the Sabbath; the disobedient to
Fathers or Mothers Natural or Political
the Murderer, the Adulterer, the Thief, the false Accuser, the Covetous whom
God hates; all these, I say, in what degree of wickedness soever, even to
every idle word, Romans 2.16. Math. 12.36.
and every vile, yea vain thought, which (with David, Psalm. 119.113.) they have
not hated, shall be judged (I say) out of those books: The Gospel-Sinner shall
then be brought to the Bar, to answer for his unbelief, impenitency, his
rejecting of Christ's Yoke, his despising the tenders and offers of free grace;
his ignorance of, and disobedience to, 2 These. 1.8.
the Gospel, shall then be judged; the Lord Jesus is (now) revealed from
Heaven, with his mighty Angels, in flaming fire to take Vengeance of them that
know not God, and obey not the Gospel of our Lord Jesus Christ. All the
Persecutions, whether by the mouth of the Sword, Imprisonment, Banishment,
Martyrdom, etc. or by (the sword of the mouth) revilings, scandals, false
accusations, cruel mockings of proud Sinners, now, they shall be all charged
upon the world of ungodly men, whether out of the Church, Jude 15.
or in the Church; Behold the Lord comes with ten thousands of his Saints, to
execute judgment upon all, and to convince all that are ungodly, of all their
ungodly deeds which they have ungodlily committed, and of all their hard
speeches, which ungodly men have spoken against Him, whether his Person or
Members; every sin, with all the Circumstances and Aggravations; yea Omissions
shall then be reckoned to them that thought themselves safe, because they were
not gross and scandalous Sinners, Math. 25.42, 43. men shall be judged for
their nots; yea, for defects and coming short in the manner of duties, as well
as the matter, Mal. Romans 2.12.
1.14. Formality and Perfunctoriness, and Hypocrisy shall then come into open
view. In a word, all the world of ungodly men (that have sinned, and not
repented of their Sin) shall be judged at Christ's Tribunal, and every man,
according to the Light and Law, under which he has lived; As many as have
Sinned without Law, shall Perish without Law. Heathens shall be judged by the
light of Nature; and as many as have Sinned Bez. (...). cum lege. Verse 16.
in the Law, shall be judged by the Law; And they that have Sinned under the
Gospel, shall be judged by Jesus Christ according to the Gospel. Yea, they that
sin against the Gospel, shall be judged by the light of Nature, by the Law of
Moses, and by the Gospel too, as having not only sinned against Moses's Ink,
but against Christ his Blood: And all these Trials will be severe; but
especially the Trial in the Gospel Court: So that whereas Sinners flatter
themselves with thoughts, That Trial by the Gospel, will be the easiest Trial,
as if the Gospel were all Mercy; the Trial of the Gospel will be found to be
the most severe, and above all others intolerable: It was indeed a Gospel of
Mercy, and a Gospel of Peace in the tenders and invitations and expostulations,
and woings and beseechings that were used; the Tears of the Ministers, and the
blood of a Crucified Redeemer, while once the long- suffering of God, waited in
the day of Grace: but all these are now past and gone, having been rejected,
despised, and laughed to scorn by wretched proud Sinners, who with the bloody
Jews, preferred a Barabbas before a Jesus; a base Lust before a precious
Savior; now is the time of Recompense come, the day of Vengance from the
presence of the Lord is come, and the Sinner shall know it. The terror of
which day will further appear in these following Particulars.

First; There will be no denying of any matter, In the day of Judgment there
will be 1. No denying of sin.
small or great, that shall be charged upon those guilty Malefactors. By the
mouth of those two Witnesses, the book of Gods Remembrance, and the book of
Conscience, shall every branch of the Indictment be established; the one of
these books was kept before the Face of the Lord continually, so that the great
Accuser himself, nor any of his malignant Agents, could get in thither to alter
or add to any thing upon Record in that sacred Register, unless per-adventure
he could find a time when God was a-sleep; And the other book, the book of
Conscience was in the Sinners own keeping, and who could break in there to
interline it? Indeed the Sinner writ down many sins there with the juice of a
Lemon, but the Fire of the day of Judgment will make it legible; he writ them
with the point of an Onion: but God writ them with a pen of Iron, and with the
point of a Diamond; deep and durable Characters, that should never be raced out
of the Conscience of a Sinner. Now these two Books will agree so exactly (like
two Tallies) one with another, that it will be impossible for the Sinner to
deny any particular, but he will be (...) Self-condemned.

Secondly; As there will be no denying, 2. No Extenuation.
so there will be no room for extenuation; this was one of the Sinner's hiding
places, while in the Land of the Living. Sinners have their buts, Eccle. 5.6.
I^ was an Error, per exteruationum, It was but a mistak^.
now; It was but thus and thus, it was but a little one, etc. Great sins, were
but small sins; and small sins, were no sins. Now, the Sinner will have no such
Sanctuary to fly unto; the Account will now be inverted, Those that were no
sins before, will be sins now; small sins will be great sins, and great sins
will be infinite; the last Judgment will give sin its just proportion: that
which the Law could never do, though it were given on purpose, the Fire of the
day of Judgment will effectually do; make sin appear exceeding sinful: The
Popish distinction of mortal and venial sin, will vanish before that fire into
smoke, while Penitent reforming Sinners will find all their sins Venial in the
blood of Christ; secure, impenitent Sinners will find every sin mortal and
damning in its own merit and nature; the Carnal Protestant will then find (to
his cost) there is no such thing as a small sin, because then he will be
convinced there is no small God, against whom sin is committed; no small Law,
whereof sin is the violation; no small Christ, whom sin has Crucified; no
small Heaven, which sin has forfeited; no little Hell which sin has merited;
and by its merit has (justly) now plunged him into for ever.

Thirdly; 3 No translating of sin.
there will be no translating of sin upon others, as here below there was; the
Thief enticed me, the Drunkard seduced me; Genesis 3.13.
the Harlot deceived me; the Serpent beguiled me; yea, what bold Sinners are
not afraid to speak, will not then be heard amongst the Malefactors at Christ's
Bar; God tempted me, Jam. 1.13.
or God decreed it; no, these and all other palliations and colors, wherewith
men do wash the face of sin, will melt before the fire of the day of Judgment;
God will say to the Sinner, Jer. 2.17.
Have thou not procured these things to thy self? yea, Sinners shall then own
their own guilt and confess that their destruction is of themselves: (...).
P^ut de se^a Number. vindict.
their heart shall cry out, as Apollodore dreamt his heart cried to him in a
Cauldron of boiling Lead, O Apollodore, I am the Cause of this Vengeance, how
have I hated Instruction, and my heart despised Reproof; and have not obeyed
the voice of my Teachers, nor inclined mine Ear to them that instructed me!

Fourthly; There will lie no appeal from this Tribunal: 4. No appealing.
once, there lay an appeal from Moses to Christ, from the Law to the Gospel;
but proud Sinners scorned it, or securely presumed, they had made the appeal by
a loose, verbal Application of Jesus Christ; whilst yet they stuck in
themselves and their own foolish presumptions, their serving of God, their good
works, and their good meanings, and their good desires; and, why should not
they be saved as well as others? but now if they should appeal, their appeal's
with themselves, will be cast out as Reprobate Silver; this is now the supreme
and last Judicatory; from hence is no appeal, once doomed here, the sentence is
irreversible for ever.

Fifthly; 5. No Pardon.
Neither is there any Pardon to be expected at this Judgment Seat. Pardons were
tendered in the Gospel upon gracious terms, but ungracious Sinners would have
none of them, or would have them upon their own terms, Sin and Pardon too;
their Pardons were nothing, unless they might have dispensations, also, such as
the Pope sells often times; but Christ's Pardons, sc. Pardon and Repentance,
Pardon of sin and forsaking of sin, Pardon of sin and Hatred of sin, Act. 5.31.
Prove. 28.13. Jude 23. Heb. 12.14.
Pardon and Holiness, would not be accepted, and now the time of Pardons is
out; the day of Grace is expired; no cries nor entreaties will prevail with the
Judge; no, though the Sinner would fall upon his knees, and weep as many Seas of
Tears, as once the Ministers wept Tears of Compassion over them; or as Christ
himself shed drops of blood upon the Cross; Christ was once upon his knees, in
the Person of his Ministers, bese^ching them to be reconciled. 2 Cor. 5.19, 20.
Though the Sinner was first in the Transgression, yet God was first in the
Reconciliation; and followed the Sinner (as it were) on his knees, entreating
him to accept of Mercy, as if God had stood in as much need of the Sinner, as
the Sinner did of Mercy; but nothing would prevail, a deaf ear was still turned
to Christ's importunity, and now Repentance is hid from the eyes of the Judge,
as once Repentance was hid from the eyes of the Sinner; the things of their
peace are everlastingly hid, because they knew them not in that the day of
their Vision: As Sinners obdurated their heart against Christ's voice, so
Christ will harden his heart against the Sinner's cry, Prove. 1.24.

Sixthly; There shall be no mitigation of the punishment; not a farthing abated
of the whole debt, 6. No mitigation.
Math. 5.26. there was once Mercy without Judgment, before the Sinner; now
there shall be Judgment without Mercy; now Sinners shall know that God is not
mocked, that the Lamb of God is also the Lion of the Tribe of Juda; His voice
was once, Fury is not in me; Isa. 27.4.
now the voice will be, Meckness is not in me, mercy is not in me; now must the
Sinner expect nothing but the utmost severity of divine justice, who once
despised the yearnings of Christ's bowels, the lowest condescentions of divine
Grace; the Sinner in his day, knew no moderation in sin, the Judge now in his
day, will know no mitigation of Judgment; there will be a Sea of wrath, without
a drop of Mercy.

Seventhly; Not a word of any good that ever the wicked did, 7. No mention of
any good that ever Sinners did.
shall now be mentioned to their honor or advantage: as none of the sins which
ever the Saints committed, were mentioned to their shame in their Process; so
none of the good that ungodly Sinners have done, shall be once named, unless it
be by way of aggravation of their sins; for indeed they managed the good they
did at such a rate, Splendida peccata, Aug.
as even their duties differed not from their sin. As under the Law, the
Sacrifice of the Wicked was abomination to the Lord; killing Oxen, but Murder;
Prove. 15.8. Isa. 66.3.
Sacrificing Lambs, but cutting off Dogs necks; Oblations, as Swines blood;
Incense, as Idolatry, so under the Gospel, their Prayers were but so many
takings of God's Name in vain; and hearing the Word, mocking of God; Fasting,
but holding down the head like a bull-rush, Isa. 58.5. receiving the Lords
Supper, Christ-murder, etc. All their Services were but so many sins, and the
aggravations of sin; so many provocations of God; as all done from a Carnal
principle, by a Carnal rule, to Carnal ends; nevertheless the Scripture tells
us, these woeful wretches will be ready (there) to plead for themselves their
duties and services which they have done for Christ (as vile as they are) as
they did in the days of their flesh, Isa. 58.3. We have fasted (they said) we
have afflicted our Souls, etc; so now also in the day of Judgment; False
Apostles, and scandalous Ministers will then be so bold as to plead their
Preaching in Christ's Name, (and that, possibly, not without success); Lord, we
have Prophesied in thy Name, and in thy Name cast out Devils; (peradventure
even to the work of Conversion) Judas might cast out the Devil, and yet himself
be a Devil, John 6.70. he might convert others, and yet be unconverted himself;
they will plead their doing of miracles, healing the sick, and raising the
dead, Mat. 7.25.
making the Blind to see, and the Deaf to hear, and the Lame to go, and in
Christ's Name done many mighty works! Lkewise, loose Christians and formal
Professors, will then also plead for themselves, their hearing Sermons, and
receiving Sacraments, Luke 13.26.
etc. take it in their own Language, We have eaten and drunk in thy presence,
and thou have taught in our Streets, their external familiarities with Christ
in the Assemblies of the Saints, their common gifts and graces; any thing then
that has but the likeness of grace upon it, Christ shall hear of it: Rev. 2.18
23.
But all in vain, The Judge, whose eyes are a flame of fire to search the hearts
and the reins, will reprobate their persons and performances with an [I know
you not] Luke 13.25. and again, with greater Emphasis, I tell you, I know you
not, verse 27. yea, once more with a more dreadful note of abhorrency, I never
knew you, Mat. 7.23. I never approved of you, nor of any of your Services which
ever you performed from the first to the last, but my Soul hated both you and
them.

Eighthly; There will be No begging further time of the Judge; no adjourning the
Trial to another Assize-day: That Court knows no Reprieve; the Sinner's Trial,
and Sentence, 8. No begging of Day.
and Execution go all together; the day of Patience was out in the other
world, I gave her space to Repent, and she Repented not, and now the Judge
swears in his wrath, that Sinners shall never enter into his rest.

Ninthly; No days-man tointercede with the Judge: 9. No Intercessor. Prove. 1.28:
God will not; he will laugh at their Calamity, and mock when their fear
comes; Oh dreadful Calamity, which God will stand and laugh at; Angels will
not; Job. 5.^.
and to which of the Saints will those miserable Caitifs turn themselves? they
are upon Thrones round about the Judge, but quite to other purposes than to
become Advocates to those guilty Malefactors, as will anon appear.

For, Tenthly; Therefore, the Judge shall proceed to the last Acts of Judgment,
Two Acts of Judgment. 1. The Judge will pronounce them guilty.
which are Two, first to Pronounce them guilty of all the Treasons and
Misdemeanors which those wretches have been Indicted of. The Judge indeed (to
vindicate the justice and equity of the Court) will demand of the Convict
Sinner, Whether he has any thing to say for himself, why he should not receive
Judgment to Dye, and Sentence to be Executed according to Law? but now
Conscience shall speak impartially between the Judge and the Sinner, justifying
the Judge, and Condemning the Sinner; who having before hand received in himself
the Sentence of Death, shall now be (...) without-excuse, Romans 2.20.
not able to make the least apology or defense on his own behalf, but shall
confess before that formidable Assembly; Lord, though thou judge me to
everlasting flames, yet thou do me no wrong, but art justified in what thou
speak, Psalm. 51.4.
and clear when thou judge; and alas! What a miserable thing is this, that
all the time that the Sinner and his Conscience dwelt together under one Roof,
and Conscience would fain have spoken out; the vile wretch should stop the
mouth of his own Conscience, and never suffer it faithfully to do its office,
till now, when it will do him no good, and tend to no other end but to justify
God, and to aggravate his own Condemnation! Oh that Sinners would seriously
consider this, and lay it to heart in time, and hearken to the secret whispers
of Conscience before it be too late; 1 Jo. 3.21.
and deal kindly with Conscience now, that Conscience may deal kindly with them
in that day, when one good word from Conscience, will be worth a thousand
worlds. Oh if the Sinner would have done that once willingly which now he does
whether he will or no, if he would have judged himself in the day of the
Gospel; it might have prevented this fatal Judgment now, he should not have
been judged of the Lord: 1 Cor. 11.31.
Oh if the Judge would now speak such a word to the Convicted multitude of
Reprobate Cast-aways, as once he did to wretched Sinners! Behold I make you
this Offer, that, if yet before I proceed to Sentence, you will unfeignedly
judge your selves, I will not judge you, neither shall the Sentence of
Condemnation pass upon you: Oh, what an uprore of joy would there be among
those miserable Catiffs? how would they down on their knees, and judge
themselves worthy of a thousand Hells, and be content to suffer a thousand
years Torment, to expiate their guilt! but though they would do this, and (if
it were possible) ten thousand times more, no such word shall ever be spoken to
them by the Judge; their time of Sinning is past, and their time of being judged
is come; and, though they do now really judge themselves, yet the Judge will
proceed to judge them also. The Sinner having thus justified the Judge, the Judge
shall now Condemn the Sinner out of his own mouth; and solemnly setting himself
down in the Judgment Seat, shall openly in the Court proclaim the Sinner
guilty; guilty of the whole Indictment preferred against him; And then proceed
to pronounce Sentence in some such words as these; Sinner, thou have been
Indicted, Arraigned, and Convicted of High Treason, against the Supreme Majesty
of Heaven, in the breach of his holy Law, and in contempt of his blessed
Gospel, trampling the Son of God under foot, Heb 10 29. Chap 6.6.
and Crucifying him over and over again, and putting him to an open shame, etc:
Hear now therefore thy sentence, Thou art Accursed for ever; the Wrath of God
abides upon thee, thou shall not see light; Mat. 25.41.
Go thou Cursed into everlasting burnings, prepared for the Devil and his
Angels: and what shall be said to one, shall be said to all, Depart from me ye
Cursed, into everlasting fire, where the Worm never dies, and the fire is not
quenched; into utter darkness, where is weeping, and wailing, and gnashing of
Teeth, there to be tormented with the Devil and his Angels for ever. Now during
all this tremendous transaction, the Saints shall sit in judicature as
Assessors, or Justices of the Peace with Christ upon the Bench, seeing and
hearing all that is done by the Judge, voting with him, approving and applauding
him in his judicial proceedings, crying out with loud acclamations, Thou art
Righteous, O Lord, which art, and wast, and shall be, because thou have judged
thus: and other Saints shall echo to them saying, Even so Lord God Almighty,
true and Righteous are thy Judgments! Thus the Saints shall judge the world,
Rev. 16.57. 1 Cor. 6 2.
yea, they shall judge the Angels, the Reprobate Angels; but of this I have
spoken more largely in the former part of this Treatise.

I come now to the Fifth end of the Saints meeting with Christ, sc. To receive
their complete and final Benediction. Come ye blessed of my Father, receive the
Kingdom prepared for you from the foundation of the world; A blessed Sentence
indeed, every word in it is Heaven before the Saints come to Heaven.

Come] my Love, my Dove, my undefiled One, stand at no longer distance, come
and follow me, whither I go: I will that where I am, there you may be also.

Ye Blessed] Blessed with all spiritual blessings in heavenly places. Your
Enemies on Earth accounted you the filth of the world, 1 Cor. 4.13.
and the offscouring of all things; Satan has desired to have you, that you
might be accursed with him for ever: but ye are blessed, and shall be blessed
for ever.

Blessed of my Father] Blessed in the eternal electing love of the Father:
Blessed in the Son's purchase; you have washed your garments white in the blood
of the Lamb: Blessed by the Laver of Regeneration, Tit. 3.5.
and renewing of the Holy Ghost.

Inherit] Ye are Children, Heirs, Heirs of God; joynt-heirs with Christ; behold
I have adopted you to be follow-heirs with my self, and the Father has made
you meet to be partakers of the Inheritance of the Saints in Light; Oh come now
and take possession of your Inheritance, behold it is not less than a

Kingdom] for it is your Fathers good pleasure to give you the Kingdom; Luke
12.32.
the Kingdom of Heaven, the Kingdom of Glory; behold it is

Prepared] In the Father's decree, God has laid it out for you before the
foundation of the world was laid; and it is prepared by my purchase, and by my
taking possession of it long since in your Name: Jo. 14.2.
I went before to prepare a place for you.

For you] whom I also prepared for it, and for every one of you personally,
every one of you shall receive an entire Kingdom to your selves, and you shall
live and reign with me for ever and ever: As Heaven has been kept for you, so
you have been kept for it, by the power of God, through Faith to Salvation, 1
Pet. 1.5. Oh come now and take possession! Behold! This is the Saints full and
final Benediction.

I should have spoke to this before I spoke of the Sentence passed upon the
Reprobate; for in our Lord's method it does precede, Mat. 25.34. compared with
ver. 41. yet because Execution of the Sentence begins with the wicked, and ends
with the godly, as ver. 46. to the end, that the Saints, may behold with their
eyes the Sentence Executed, and seeing they may (as God himself does) laugh at
them, saying, Psalm. 52.7.
Lo these are the men that made not God their strength, but trusted in the
abund^nce of their riches, and strengthened themselves in their wickedness. I
have (I say) therefore chosen to speak of the Sentence of blessedness, which
the Judge shall pass upon the Saints, in this place, that from thence I might
pass immediately to the happy Execution thereof upon them (nothing intervening
as to the persons of Saints) which is the

Sixth and last end of the Saints meeting with Christ in the Air, sc. Their
solemn and triumphant Attendance on the Judge, The Sixth and last end of the
Saints meeting with Christ, is Their taking possession.
to take possession of the Kingdom. This last judicial process being thus
solemnly finished, Sentence on both sides pronounced by the Judge, the Reprobate
already dragged away by the Executioners of divine Vengeance, to the place of
Execution, (where they shall be tormented with the Devil and his Angels for
ever and ever; immediately the Bench will rise, the Court shall be broken up,
that great Occumenical assembly shall be dissolved, and forthwith the Judge
shall ascend his Majestic Chariot, waiting ready for him; and all the Saints
shall follow him in their Wedding-garments, glittering as the Sun in his
Meridian glory, upon their several Chairs of State) all the holy Angels of God
attending round about them; with their Ensigns of glory flying, Trumpets
sounding, Angels singing, the Saints themselve shouting all the Regions of the
Air resounding with their Celestial harmony, the like whereunto never entered
the Ear of man, from the day wherein God laid the foundations of the Heaven and
Earth, to this happy moment. In this triumphant posture shall they march, till
they come to the walls of New Jerusalem, where the Gates of pearl (to whom it
shall be proclaimed, Lift up your heads oh ye Gates, and be ye lifted up ye
everlasting Doors, and the King of glory shall enter in) shall stand wide open
to receive them, An entrance shall be administered unto them abundantly into the
everlasting Kingdom of our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ; through the Streets
whereof, which are of pure gold, as it were transparent glass, they shall ride
in Triumph till they come to the Throne of his Majesty, where the Ancient of
days sits, Dan. 7.9.13.
whose garment is as white a^ Snow, and the hair of his head like pure wool;
his Throne is like the fiery flames, and his wheels as burning fire, etc. Then
shall the Son of God come to Him, and taking his new Bride in his hand, shall
present her to his Father, and bespeak him in some such language as this; Rev.
7.16. Chap. 5.9. Chap. 12.11.
These are they which come out of great Tribulation, who have washed their
Robes white in my blood; These are they which have kept the word of my
patience; these are they that overcame by my blood, and by the word of their
Testimony. John 17.6. Verse 12.
Thou gave them me out of the world, thine they were, and thou gave them
me; and they have kept thy word; while I was with them in the world, I kept
them in thy Name; those that thou gave me, I have kept, and none of them is
lost but the Son of Perdition, that the Scriptures might be fulfilled; I have
given them thy word, and the world has hated them because they were not of the
world, even as I was not of the world. O Righteous Father, for these I opened
my mouth, and for these I opened my sides and my heart; for those was I mocked
and scourged, and blindfolded, and buffetted, and Crucified; for these I wept,
and sweatt, and bled, and died. Father, I will that they whom thou have given
me, may be with me where I am, that they may behold my glory which thou have
given me, for thou have loved me before the Foundation of the world, etc.

Then shall the Father rise from his Throne, and say unto them, Come near unto
me my Sons and my Daughters, that I may kiss you: See, the smell of my Children
is like the smell of a field, which the Lord has blessed. Then shall he call
for Crowns to put upon their heads, and bracelets upon their Arms; Rings upon
their fingers, palms of Victory, and Scepters of Royalty into their hands, and
appoint them their several Thrones, the Mansions which their Lord went before
to prepare for them; upon which they shall be placed, that they may sit and
live, and reign with Christ their Heavenly Bridegroom for ever and ever;
everlasting joy shall be upon their heads, all Tears shall be wiped from their
eyes, and sorrow and mourning shall fice away. And so shall they ever be

MOUNT PISGAH: OR, THE THIRD PART OF THIS Model of Consolatory Arguments, OVER
THE Death of our Godly Relations.
I Come to the tenth and last word of comfort, The Saints blessed cohabitation
and fellowship with the Lord; so shall we beever with the Lord. This consequent
of Christ's coming is the perfection and crown of all the rest, cohabitation,
and fellowship with the Lord, together with the extent and duration of it, Ever.

Now cohabitation contains four glorious Privileges, viz. 1. Presence. 2.
Vision. 3. Fruition. 4. Conformity.


1. 1 Privilege.
The first Privilege, which cohabition implies, is presence; The Saints after
their triumphant reception by Christ into his glory, shall ever be where he is.
The Scriptures abound with expressions of this nature: appearing in Gods
presence, Psalm. 42.2 Col. 3.4 Luke 21.^^ Psalm 15.1 Rev. 3.21. and 1.5, 6 John
17.24 and 14.3.
standing before him, abiding in his tabernacle, dwelling in his holy hill;
yea, dwelling in him, and he in us; sitting upon his throne, and following of
him wherever he goes: (if at least that Scripture be to be underderstood of
Heaven) a glorious privilege certainly; for it is the purchase of Christ's
blood, the fruit of his prayer, and one of the great ends of his coming in
person at the end of the world, that his Saints may be where he is; dwell in
his family, be as near him, as ^ationally they can desire, 1 Kings 10.8
even stand before him, and enjoy ^^terrupted cohabitation and fellowship with
him. If the Queen of Sheba accounted it the happiness of Solomon's Servants,
that they might stand continually before him, and hear his wisdom; how much
rather may we proclaim them happy, thrice happy, whose feet may stand within
the gates of the new Jerusalem, for behold, a greater than Solomon is here,
even he, Psalm 16.11
of whom the Psalmist sings, In thy presence is fullness of joy, and at thy
right hand are pleasures for evermore.

A second Privilege is Vision: 2 Privilege, Vision.
The Saints shall not only be where Christ is (...) but they shall enjoy the
beatifical viston, they shall see and beh'ld that, which the seeing and
beholding of will make them blessed for ever.

Now there are six beatifical Objects in Heaven.

1. The seat and mansions of blessed Souls. 2. The glorified Saints. 3. The
elect Angels. 4. The glorified body of the Lord Jesus. 5. God in the Divine
essence. 6. All things in God.
The first vision which the Saints shall see, 1 Vision, the seat of the
blessed. John 14.2 2 C^. (...) Luke ^^.4; 2 Cor. 12.4. and Rev. 2.7.
is that which is called, Seeds beatorum, the seat or babitation of blessed
souls, the mansions of glory, which our Lord has purchased for his redeemed,
and which he went before to prepare for them; the third Heavens; the Palace of
the great King. A glorius place certainly, for therefore it is called Paradise,
to set forth the beauty and pleasantness of the situation; that as the
Paradise wherein God put man in his innocence, was the beauty and delight of
the whole nether world, so Heaven the place which God has prepared for man
(restored to perfection) is the beauty and glory of all the upper Regions, the
top and perfection of the whole Creation. Behold, the outside of this stately
Palace is very glorious, beautified and adorned with all those bright and
glittering Luminaries, the Sun, Moon and Stars; what think you is the inside?
Consult that description which the Spirit of God has made of it in the
Revelations, Chap. 21.18, 19, 20, 21.
the wall of jasper, the City of pure gold, the foundations of the wall of the
City garnished with all manner of precious stones, the twelve gates of twelve
pearls, every several gate of one entire pearl, the street of the City of pure
gold, as it were transparent glass; and you will surely say, Heaven is a
glorious place; and yet behold, this description of it is levelled to the low
and childish capacity of our weak and fleshly senses, as we judge of things in
this imperfect state of mortality: what think you then, will the glory of the
new Jerusalem appear, when glorified sense shall be ^levated and raised up to a
perfection suitable to its object? Surely, Heaven will as much exceed the
description of it in glory, as the bodies of the Saints in the Resurrection,
shall exceed in beauty these vile bodies of ours, when they are resolved into
dust and rottenness: What shall I need say more? Heaven is a place as beautiful
and glorious as the wisdom and power of God could devise to make it, that it
might be the Royal Palace of his own Residence: That august and magnificent
fabric which the proud Babylonian Tyrant stood tracking and boasting over, Dan
4.30.
Is not this great Babylon that I have built, for the house of the Kingdom, by
the might of my power, and for the honor of my Majesty, was but a prison or
hovel in comparison of this building of God, 1 Cor. 5.1.
that house not made with hands, eternal in the heavens; and those words are
proper only for the mouth of God; Is not this the new Jerusalem which I have
built for the house of the Kingdom? and for the glory of my Majesty? What David
spoke of the Temple, that little type of Heaven, in decimo sexto: The house
that is for the Lord must be exceeding magnifical of fame and of glory, etc.
must be infinitely more august and magnificent in the antitype; this the
glorified Saints shall behold, and it will, beyond conception, be mavelous in
their eyes.

Secondly, a Vision, the glorified Saints.
They shall see the glorified Saints, in their souls as well as in their
bodies, all the elect of God that ever were in the world, In their souls as
well (...) in their bodies.
from Adam until the second coming of Jesus Christ; and it will be a glorious
sight, to see the King, and all his Peers and Nobles in their Parliament Robes,
with Crowns and Embellishments of honor, fitting in their state and order, is
a ^ight which every one covets and crowds to see: What will it be to see the
King of Saints, with all the Redeemed ones of God, in their Robes, washed white
in the blood of the Lamb, and Crowns of gold upon their heads, and palms of
victory and triumph in their hands? a Parliament all of Kings and Priests,
every one of them shining forth as the Sun, Mat. 13.63
in the Kingdom of their heavenly Father? The Sun when it breaks forth out of a
cloud, and displayes its refulgent beams in full luster and brightness, what a
glorious Creature is it? and with what a beauty does it guild and adorn the
world? Oh my soul! what a sight will that be when I shall see an Heaven full of
Suns, scattering their rays of glory through all those celestial Regions?
There is another Scripture which makes the glory of this Vision yet more
splendid and radiant, every one of the glorified bodies of the Saints shall be
made conform to Christ's own glorious body; Phil. 3.21
the glory of the Father shines forth in the Son, and the glory of the Son
shall shine forth in the Saints, He in his Fathers glory (is even in his humane
nature) and they in his. Surely the Luminaries of the first magnitude in the
visible heavens, the Sun and Moon will be turned into darkness before the glory
of this Vision; they shall shine as so many Christ's in the Kingdom of their
Father, that will be a glorious Vision indeed! Not to speak any thing of the
several degrees and orbs of Saints; orbs of several degrees of Grace, and orbs
of several degrees of offices and services in the Church, Patriarchs, Prophets,
Apostles, Martyrs, Confessors, etc. of which the Apostle gives us not an
obscure hint, 1 Cor. 15.41.
[ As one star differs from another in glory, so also is the resurrection of
the dead; q. d. as the Luminaries of these visible heavens, are of a different
magnitude and brightness, each above the other in their orbs and spears, so
also is the Kingdom of glory;] there be different forms of Saints, one
excelling another in brightness and glory; I say, to pass by this in silence,
which yet certainly has somewhat in it for the heightning of the beauty of
this vision, (as we see in the Luminaries of this inferior world, their
different orbs and magnitudes, contribute not a little to the beauty and
ornament of these visible heavens): We may add this before we go off, viz. That
the communion and converse with the Saints in heaven will be as sweet to the
taste as the vision of them will be glittering to the eye; there will be heaven
in both: Behold! their fellowship and converse here was so sweet, that David
could say, All my delight is in the Saints that are in the earth, Psalm 16.3.
and in the excellent ones: David could take no pleasure in the company of any
in the world, but only in Gods holy Ones, who were beautified with his Image.
Oh what will their communion and fellowship (think you) be in heaven, when they
shall be totally divested of all their sinful corruptions, their ignorance,
their pride, their passion, their peevishniss, their tenaciousness, their
impurity, their envy, their impatience, their c^nsoriousness, their
unseriousness, their infincerity, and their unsavouriness, whereby they are apt
to offend and hurt one another? Yea, when they shall have put off their natural
infirmities as well as their sinful, their impertinencies, their mistakes,
their weaknesses, their indispositions, their hunger and thirst, their
drowsiness, their vanity, their mutability, whereby they are not more unlike to
other men than to themselves (sometimes) their diversions and reservedness,
etc. whereby they are less able to do one another good? What will their
converse be, when they shall put off all their defects and all their
imperfections? When there shall be no dissent amongst them, much less
dissension, but when they shall all speak the same thing, and there shall be no
division, but they shall be perfectly joined together in the same mind, and in
the same judgment, which the Apostle commends so passionately, even to the
Saints on this side Heaven, 1 Cor. 1.10. When there shall be such a perfect
harmony amongst the Saints, as if there were but one soul to act that whole
Assembly of the firstborn? When there will be nothing in them to converse with
but pure grace, grace without mixture, grace and nothing else but grace? Yea,
not pure grace only, but perfect grace; when every grace shall be in its
perfect state, and have its perfect works; when every grace shall act to the
highest degree, yea, when there will be ^o use of those inferior graces which
are but for the way, as patience, repentance, simpathy, pity, fear, hope, yea,
none of the highest of all the graces has faith it self; now abides faith,
hope, -- now is in this imperfect state, faith it self belongs unto the
imperfect state, but when that which is perfect is come, then that which is
imperfect shall be done away, when sight is come, then faith shall cease, and
the Saints shall converse one with another only in their superior graces;
their marriage-graces, their glorious graces, that are proper to their adult
state, love, joy, delight in God, mutual complacency, zeal, obedience, praising
God, thankfulness, when they shall love God as much as they would love him,
yea, as much as God would be beloved, and obey God as much as God would be
obeyed, and praise God as much as God would be praised, etc. Oh, when the
Saints are cast into such an heavenly mold, yea, and we our selves are capable
of such pure converse, (for here in this imperfect state, the Saints of God are
not always in the same frame one with another, or with themselves, when one
Saint is up, the other is down, like an Instrument out of tune, jarring and
disharmonious, when one is alive, the other dead, when this is hot, the other
is cold, when one is ready to give, the other is not fit to receive the
communications of grace.) But oh, when now I say all the Instruments of Glory
are alike strung, and equally tuned (in their several capacities) what sweet
ravishing harmony, what heavenly music will they make? Oh might we but see
such a Saint on earth as one of these are, how would every one be ready to kiss
his lips, yea, to kiss his very feet, and hardly forbear even to worship him,
Acts 10.25. Rev. 22.9
as Cornelius would have worshipped Peter? or as John, the Angel? Oh then, when
the whole Assembly of Saints shall be all such, how will they fill one another
with unspeakable joy? How might this vision (as it were) be an heaven alone! If
Paul expressed so much satisfaction, to be filled with his precious Converts
company at Rome, what satisfaction will it be when the Romans shall be filled
with Paul's company, and all other the Saints of God, they and he, now, made
perfect in glory?

Finally, It will be no small security to the mutual love and complacency of
the Saints, that in Heaven they shall be set beyond all possibility of being
mistaken in one another condition. Here below, how easily and how often are we
deceived? Behold, a Judas amongst the Disciples, whom none of them could
discover, but only their Lord that (...), Have I not chosen you twelve, and one
of you is a Devil? John 6.70. Oh dreadful, a Judas follower of Christ, and yet
a devil! a Disciple and yet a devil! a Preacher and yet a devil! fast and pray
and yet a devil! do miracles and yet a devil! cast out devils and yet a Devil!
yea, once more Judas who, (for some time) carried it so fair, that when their
Lord prophesied of one of their company that should be guilty of so horrid a
treason as to betray his Lord, they every man began to suspect rather than
Judus, and cried, Lord, is it I? Is it I; Lord, etc, Oh dreadful mistake! And
such mistakes (when discovered) oh what a shame! what condolency! what grief!
what perplexity of spirit do they occasion amongst Gods upright ones!

But now are the Saints in Heaven delivered from all danger and fear of such
charitable errors. There shall be no Hypocrite in Heaven, upon whom the Saints
can lose their love: Hypocrites shall be all locked up in one infernal dungeon
together, that they may never deceive any more, Matthew. 24.21. What an access of
joy will this be to the Communion of Saints in glory.

Quest. Whether or no in this blessed Vision the Saints shall see one another
with a distinguishing sight, i. e. see them so as to know them under such
relations and respects as once they stood in one to another in this imperfect
state? Whether Abraham shall know Isaak as (once) his son, and Isaak know
Abraham as (sometime) his father? Whether the Husband shall know his Wife, and
the Wife her Husband, as (once) such that have drawn together in the same
conjugal yoke? Whether Kindred shall know their gracious Kindred, and friend his
friend? Whether the godly Minister shall know his gracious People that were of
his particular flock, and the flock know him as once standing in that
ministerial relation to them? Et sic in caet.

This, I say, is a Question which seems neither difficult nor fruitless to be
resolved. Probability (without doubt) falls upon the Affirmative, and that
whether we consult Reason or Scripture.

Reason says, It is very likely we shall know them, revelation (as some
conceive) is disputed; some think that we shall remember what relation we have
had one to another by circumstances and emergent occasions, by comparing notes
as it were; but that discursive, syllogistical way, of coming into the
knowledge one of another, seems to be too mean and slow for the heavenly state;
and the reason is, because the senses of the body, and the faculties of the
soul shall be elevated and refined to a kind of Angelical perfection, for we
shall be like the Angels. Luke 20.36 (...).
What although many Ages and Generations have passed over the Saints in their
state of separation of the soul from the body, and one from another, wherein
all the species and figures of sensible objects may seem to be totally
obliterated or abolished? Why may not those vestigia, those impressions of
sensible things, which are granted to remain in the understanding, be thought
sufficient to reduce the species of those sensible objects themselves, whereby
the Saints did once converse each with other, into the memory again, by the
sole help of that supernatural vigor and activity which the state of Glory
superinduceth upon the faculties of the soul and corporeal senses? Behold here
in this dark region, what quick and admirable recoveries of things past, There
shall no knowledge be wanting which now we have, but only that which implies
imperfection; And what imperfection can this imply? To know one another as well
in the glorified estate, as we did in the state of mortality, and better. The
good of this blessed state consists in the knowledge one of another, communion
one with another, and mutual content in that knowledge and communion. Baxtor.
do the senses of the body and faculties of the soul make sometimes? The eye
can distinguish its wonted object after many years separation; the memory can
presently recall the face, and voice, and gestures of an intimate friend, after
sleep, which is deaths image, yea, after twenty years absence, or more: At the
Resurrection, the soul (I make no question) will know its own body at the first
sight; proportionably, in the state of glory must the mutual knowledge and
remembrance of old relations, be more quick, vive and (if I may so say)
intuitive, according to the admirable and glorious capacity which they shall
then be invested with; make but a just allowance for the vast disproportion
between the regenerate state on earth, and the glorified state in heaven, and
you may rationally conclude the affirmative.

And if we consult Scripture, Scripture.
it votes no less for the Affirmative than Reason does: Did Adam know Eve in
innocence? Mat. 17.4.
Did Peter, and James, and John know Moses and Elias at our Lords
transfiguration, whom they had never seen? Tertul. contra Marcion.
No, not so much as in a picture: (as Tetullian observes; the Jews being great
enemies to the use of pictures:) And shall not the Saints know one another at
the first view, whom they knew and mutually conversed with, while they were
here on earth? Surely the knowledge of the beatifical vision shall excel, not
only the knowledge of Peter and John, 1 Cor. 13.12
but even the knowledge of Adam in innocence, as far as the state of glory
excels the state of grace? Did Peter and John know Elias on the Mount (whom
they had not seen) and shall not Peter know John, and John Peter, whom they had
mutually seen?

Again, the Scripture tells us, that Dives in hell knew Abraham and Lazarus in
heaven; Luke 16.23
shall the reprobate have better eyes in hell than the elect of God have in
Heaven? Shall Dives know Lazarus, and shall not Lazarus know Paul and Peter,
etc?

And yet again, the Scripture tells us, the poor Saints on earth shall know
their rich benefactors when they come to heaven, how else can they receive them
(in what sense soever) into everlasting habitations! shall the Saints know one
another upon the account of a temporal alms, and shall they not know one
another upon the account of spiritual offices performed one for another. Lo
here is probability if not demonstration for the stating of the Question! the
fruit of it (certainly) is as sweet, as the truth it self is probable; a mighty
spur it is to holy and heavenly converse here on earth, to converse with one
another in grace, so that we may promote our mutual converse in glory --
Ministers so to preach, so to live, Parents and Governors so to educate and
govern their children and families, as that they may mutually rejoice one in
another, and for another in heaven -- It cannot but add much to their
blessedness and joy in heaven, and be matter of praise and glory to God to all
eternity, especially over such, as to whom God has made us instrumental,
either to their conversion or to their edification; whiles in this vale of
tears, here we mourned and wept bitterly, when we kissed their pale lips and
cold cheeks, when we follow the corpse to the grave and laid them down in their
cold beds of dust; but there will be joy and glory with infinite compensation,
when we shall see and say, The more unthankful are they, that having received
so infinite a mercy from God, by their ministry would never in their live^ open
their mouths to acknowledge it to their ministers for their encouragement.
oh here is my spiritual father who begot me to Christ, under whose Ministry I
drew my first spiritual breath; how sweet are such acknowledgments here?
Certainly they are the richest rewards of Gods despised and persecuted Servants
and Ambassadors here on earth; oh what will it be in heaven! when grace shall
be seen what it is, when grace shall have put on its royal apparel? Oh what a
joy to Parents (by nature or by trust) to see the dear Child, that got into
heaven, as it were, before its time! and the Child to embrace the Parent, oh
this is my Father, my Mother, my Grandfather, my Grandmother, that traveled
with me the second time, till they saw Christ form in my heart, oh blessed be
God that ever I saw their faces on earth, and now shall see them for ever in
heaven! and so for friends, oh this was my soul-friend, this was a brother,
that a kinsman, who loved me with a spiritual love, an heavenly love, that
loved me into Christ, to heaven, to this glory I now possess! Christians, if
these things be not so, Aug. Ep. 6.
then Augustine mistook his Cordial which he wrote to the Lady Italica after her
Husbands death, telling her, That she should know him amongst the glorified
Saints, yea, know him, and love him batter than ever she did in this life; yea,
a greater than Augustine was mistaken else, even the great Apostle, who himself
had been caught up to the third Heavens, and saw what was done there, even he
was mistaken, when, 1 These. 2.19, 20
by an Apostolical Spirit, he dignifieth his Thessalonians with those glorious
titles, his hope, his joy, the crown of rejoicing, his glory and joy, and that
in the presence of the Lord Jesus Christ at his coming; Could they be all this
to the Apostle in the resurrection, and he not know them, and be able to
distinguish them from all other Saints of God, that shall stand on Christ's
right hand at that day? It cannot be: What although all such relations do cease
in Heaven, must the remembrance of such relations cease also? Or, what if the
glorified state make such an alteration in the Saints bodies, that they are not
the same for color, gesture, and some other accidental circumstances, (as when
we knew them in the valley of tears) shall there be no line^^^ent or property
of individuation remaining, whereby the quick, acute eye of glorified sense may
possibly discern who they were? There want not instances in our experience, of
some, who from their childhood even unto full age, have been absent from their
friends, whom yet many years after, upon a deliberate interview, their
relations have called to perfect memory again: and if such a thing be possible
in the imperfect state here, why should it seem a thing incredible, that the
glorified eye and intellect should revive a distinct remembrance of their
gracious relations, even out of the imperfect bints and notions of their former
knowledge? If the resurrection do show nothing of the old individual
distinction of persons, it may seem to be rather another Creation than a
Resurrection, and may shake a main Article of our Christian Faith.

But as clearer evidence than all this, I demand further, How did Adam know Eve
upon the first sight? (even before God spoke a word who she was, or whence she
came;) And did he own her as bone of his bone, and flesh of his flesh? Will ye
say it was by divine instinct and revelation? Grant then but so much in this
case and it shall suffice; especially the rather, because this solution of the
difficulty will take in the case of elect infants dying before their form and
figure can well be discerned (possibly stilborn) surely a distinct knowledge
who they are when glorified, will be no small joy to the elect parents, to
consider that free grace made them the happy vessels to help to people Heaven
with such Inhabitants: We may not presume to speak definitively in cases not
clearly stated by the holy Scriptures, but this we may with safety and modesty
conclude, that if such a mutual knowledge of godly relations in heaven, may
contribute any glory to God, and any addition to the joy of the Saints, the
absolute perfection of the glorified estate, will not permit any doubt about
this matter; surely if our natural affections of love, and delight, and joy be
not extinguished in heaven, but perfected, it cannot but add to the elect
Mothers joy, to see her elect Infant now adult in glory; and so for other
nearest relations, will it not be some accent to their hallelujahs to say, This
was my precious y^ak-fellow, this my holy parent, this my gracious brother,
kinsman, friend, with whom I had sweet communion on earth in holy duties? We
went to the House of God as friends, etc. Especially when it may be added, whom
God made Instrumental to the pulling me out of the infernal lake, (where the
Devil and his Angels are tormented for ever) and for the bringing of me into
this place of rest and glory? Thanks be to God for ever and ever,

Object. If it be objected, Does not this distinct knowledge of our elect
relation, infer a distinct knowledge also of the Saints reprobate relations in
hell? And may not that be a Vision of as much terror as the other of rejoicing?

Answ. I answer: No: And that upon a twofold ground.

First, It stands with the analogy of faith, to believe that all those
affections which imply defect or imperfection shall be totally abolished in
Heaven, as inconsistent with the glorified estate, Rev. 7.14 21.4
God shall wipe all tears from their eyes.

Secondly, We answer, that there shall be such a perfect conformity of will,
between God and the Saints, that there will be no dissent (in the least.) It
shall not be then, as it is now, to the no little imbittering of their present
estate, (first by sin, and then by grief for sin) but what pleases God shall
abundantly please them. This the Saints pray for here, but there shall they be
fully possessed of it; here it is their duty, but there it shall be their
reward; the Saints in glory would have nothing otherwise than God would have
it; so that now, to the full and perpetual silencing of this Objection, I
answer; That the glory of God shall so perfectly swallow up all private
personal considerations, that (I am confident) it is no breach of charity to
say, that the believing Husband shall rejoice in the damnation of the
unbelieving Wife, the holy Parent in the damnation of the stubborn and ungodly
Child, Et sic in caet. Gods Will is the Law, and his Glory the triumph of the
Heavenly Inhabitants.

Oh let Parents, and Ministers, and Governors, and Tutors, and Yoke-fellows,
Brethren, Friends, etc. be but as good now as Dives was in hell, I mean, let
them be but in as good carnest here as he was there, that their Relations may
never come into that place of torment; and if they do wilfully cast themselves
headlong into that irrecoverable Gulf, it will be no grief of heart to them
when they come to Heaven: But even as God himself (they being then swallowed up
in God) they will even laugh at their calamity, and mock when they see their
condemnation.

This shall suffice to have spoken of the second Vision in Glory.

A third Vision, which the Saints shall have in Heaven, is, that of the elect
Angels, Gregor. do Valent. in Thom. Aquin, gives many reasons of that multitude
of Angels asserted by Tho. Aquin. and ads, Certum est in hac multitudins
Angelorum, nt mero differentium jus esse Hierarchlas, quarum quaelibet
contineat tres ordines, and ita in universum esse novem ordines Angelorum;
ne^pe Seraphin, Cherubin, Thronos in primo: Domination^s, Virtutes, Potestates
in secunda. Principatus, Archangelos, and Angelos in tertio.

Gregor. tom. 1. pa. 10^6, and 1027. Certum est (says he) and de fide, in his
ipsis ordinibus, alios Angelos esse afficio and dignitate superiores, alios
inferiores.

The Platonists assert as many Angels as there are Species or sensible
Creatures. Aristotle makes as many Angels as Orbs. R. Moses affirms all the
powers and operations of superior and inferior things to he so many Angels.
Tho. Aquinas confidently asserts the number of the Angels, incomparably to
e^ceed the number of material Substances Maniminus Arrianus says, there are
ninety nine times more than the number of men in the world.


they shall see those glorious ministering Spirits, those flames of fire, the
Angels of God, by what names or titles soever they are dignified or
distinguished in their Hierarchical orders (if there be any which because it is
a dispute of greater fancy than Scripture evidence, and has filled the world
with more empty speculation than substantial knowledge, I shall wholly wave it.
Heaven will be the place only, where we shall exactly know their nature,
number, order, distictions (if any) and not so only, but have sweet and
heavenly converse and communion with them.

About the way and manner of the Saints knowing and conversing with the Angels,
is a query of some difference amongst the Learned. Some are of opinion, that
the Angels shall assume aerial bodies to entertain the eyes of the Saints
withal, and to bring them into a nearer capacity of conversing with them. Some
e contra, conceive that the bodily eyes of the glorified Saints, shall be
spiritualized, and angelified, that they shall be able to see the very essence
of the Angels, as not being so remote from materiality as the Divine Essence.
Others tell us of a vehiculum, Caro Angelificata Text. d^ Resur.
or a visible glory, (as the rays about the Sun) wherein the Angels do move,
and whereby they are discerned and distinguished from one another. But all
these are but so many uncertain Comments of men's brains. As for that Opinion
which makes them knowable only by their operations, The Sadduces.
vigor and activity, it is too narrow, for so they are known unto us, even in
this life. The immediate and continual converse which the Saints shall have
with them in Heaven, does necessarily infer an higher way and manner of knowing
them. The seeing of them by the glorified eye of the understanding, is the
clearest and surest way we can pitch upon, on this side the place of their
constant Residency: So, they know one another, and so, they know the Saints,
and so, for the Saints to see, and know them, is not inconsistent with the
analogy of Scripture and Reason. In what way and manner this mutual converse,
and communion, betwixt the Saints and Angels in glory, shall be managed, is not
determinable by us poor mortals, until this mortal shall put on immortality;
how they communicate their minds and thoughts one to another is yet dark to us.

Concerning the Angels converse amongst themselves, the Schools speak very
rationally, when they say, it is by the opening of their wills one to another;
when ever they would communicate their minds, and notions, and meanings one to
another, it is done; when they would be understood by one another, they are
understood. And the same way they converse with one another, it is most
probable, they converse with the Saints, and the Saints with them; the Saints
may more rationally be conceived to communicate their thoughts to the Angels,
by opening their minds than by opening their mouths; partly because the Angels
have no corporeal organs to receive what the Saints express by their corporeal
instruments of speech, and partly because the superior part of the Saints,
their glorified souls being of so spiritual and cognate a nature to the Angels,
that way of communication which is most agreeable to divine Spirits, we may
well conceive to be common to those heavenly Inhabitants. Whatever the way or
manner be, this we may be sure of, sc. that the communion and converse with the
Angels in Heaven, will be no small augmentation of their happiness, and of
their joy; if we consider their Angelical perfections, especially those two of
Knowledge and Zeal, therefore called in Scripture, flaming fire, flames for
brighiness of illumination; and fire for the ardency of their love and zeal.

Oh what rare notions and experiences will the Angels be able to communicate to
the Saints in Heaven, having ministered about the Throne of God from the
foundation of the world, and been sent forth continually to manage the great
affairs of the world, but especially of the Churches! The Apostle tells us,
they are beholden to the Ephesians. 3.10.
Lectures read in the Assemblies of the Saints, for some insight into the
mystery of Christ in the Gospel. Oh how ready and able will they be to pay
their debts (with an abundant interest) out of the immense volumes of
knowledge, which they have treasured up! The Communications of their love,
their holiness, their zeal, their heavenliness, etc. what united flames will
they make when they be joined in communion, and converse with the graces and
perfections of the Saints?

Object. If it be objected, Is there not enough in God to fill the Saints, to
the vastest capacity? What need then of Starlight when the Sun shines? Yea, may
not the Saints conversing with Angels and one another, be thought to be a
diversion from the supreme object of light and love?

Sol. To this I answer, No; and the reason is, because all the perfections and
excellencies which are in the Creature, are as so many beams and emanations,
leading the eye of the beholder to the Sun it self, the body and fountain from
which they do spring; August. says, we shall see God in his Saints, and their
glorious actings, as well, and as manifestly, as now we see men's bodies, in the
vital actions of their bodies. De Civit. Dei, l. 22. c. 29.
or as learned and holy men's Commentaries and Expositions are to the holy
Scripture, which do neither detract from, nor add to that immense volume of
truth, but serve only to illustrate it, and to render it more intelligible to
the dark and imperfect understanding of the Creature: Surely such an infinite
full Text as God is, will stand in need of some marginal notes, as it were, To
see God in his Saints, and the Saints in God, this will be no diminution of the
bentifical Vision.

All the excellencie^ in the Creature, are but drops from God the Fountain.

(...).

The glorious Angels and Saints are always sunning themselves in the presence
of ^od, and will keep company together to all Eternity.

A fourth Object.

The glorified body of the Son of God.


to help the Reader; as Christ is said, in the days of his flesh, to be the
Exegesis, or Interpreter, of the Father unto us, John 1.18. So may the Angels
be to the Saints in Heaven; and such is all the glory of Heaven: yea, so is the
humane nature of Christ himself, now in glory, the great Expositor of the
Divine Essence, a Mirror or Glass, wherein we come to see God more clearly and
fully. Which brings me to.

A fourth Object of the beatifical Vision, and that is, Christ himself, or the
glorified humane nature of the Lord Jesus; Christ in his humane nature exalted
to the right hand of his Father (the highest seat in glory) far above all
principality and power, Ephesians. 1.21
and might and dominion, and every name that is named, not only in this world,
but in that which is to come. This is the highest beatifical object in Heaven
(next to the divine Essence) the sight of Christ as man; it was the great
design, which the Lord Jesus had in redeeming them with his blood; ^^^n 17.24
Father, I will that they whom thou host given me, be with me where I am, that
they may behold my glory, which thou have given me. And s^rely this will be a
glorious sight indeed; behold, of the glory of Christ in his transfiguration,
it is said, That his face did shine as the Sun, and his raiment was white as
the light: If the glory of his transfiguration was so excellent, what will the
glory be of his exaltation? If the glory of his foot-stoul was so excellent,
how will the glory of his throne excel in glory? If he appeared so bright upon
an carthly Mountain, how transplendent will he appear upon Mount Sion, the
Mountain of God, that heavenly Mountain? If such were his luster in his state
of humiliation, before passion, what beams of Majesty will shine from his face,
in his state of glorification, when he is to receive the reward of his passion?
Behold, there appeared then, with him, only Moses and Elias; what will his
glory be, when all the Patriarchs and Prophets, all the Apostles and Martyrs,
the whole Society of the Saints, with the whole host of the mighty Angels, that
begirt his Throne, with their hallelujahs and joyful acclamations. Mark 9.6.
That vision of Christ on earth did fill Peter and the Disciples with wonder
and astonishment, even to an ecstasy; so that the Text tells us, He knew not
what he said. Oh with what joy and ravishment shall the sight of Christ in
glory fill the glorified Saints, when their faculties shall be so raised, that
they shall understand what they see, and profess what they unstand! Surely
Peter and all his fellow Saints will then say, (and know what they say) Lord,
it is good for us to be here!

What a beautiful, beatifying Object this will be, Considerations evidencing
the glory of Christ's humane nature. 1 Considerat. The reward of his Passion.
we may guess (for more we cannot) by these three Considerations.

The first Consideration is this, The glory of the humane nature of Jesus
Christ in Heaven, is the reward of his Passion here on earth. In respect of the
divine nature, and as Jesus Christ was the second Person in Trinity, the glory
which the Lord Jesus now possesses at his Fathers right hand, was the glory
which he had with the Father from before the foundation of the world: John 17.24
but as to the assumption of the humane nature, it was glory given him by the
Father. Christ had a twofold right to the Kingnom of glory, sc. natural and
constitutive; natural, as he was the only begotten Son of God, and so of the
same nature and essence with the Father from all eternity, and so whatever
power and glory was essentially the Fathers, was essentially the Sons also. But
then besides that, Heb. 1.2. (...). tuit.
Jesus Christ had also a constitutive right, or, a right by donation, as he was
appointed and made heir of all things; now this constitutive glory (as I say)
was the fruit and, reward of his sufferings, Phil. 2.7, 8, 9
Because he humbled himself, and became obedient to death, even the death of
the Cross, Therefore has God highly exalted him, and given him a name above
all names, etc. Because and Therefore; the exaltation of his humane nature was
the merit and compensation of his humiliation and abasement. Now then, if we
would make an estimate of the glory of Christ now at his Fathers right hand, we
cannot find out a more proper medium, than to make a serious and (if it were
possible) a through search and enquiry into his abasement and humiliation. And
certainly if there had been nothing else in it, but his incarnation, or the
assumption of our flesh, it had been an infinite abasement to the Son of God;
so deep an abasement, as it had been blasphemy for men or Angels to have sought
for, or so much as to have thought of. Such a wish in the standing Angels (Oh
that God would give his own essential, eternaly begotten Son, to take the
humane nature upon him, and therein to recover lost man) would have been a
presumption (without doubt) which, no less than the first ambition of the
Apostate Angels (probably conceived only in thought) might have justly merited
their ejection also out of Heaven.

Oh for the second Person in the glorious Trinity, to take upon him the nature
of man (and that too, when it was at the worst) when it was fallen and stripped
of all its original beauty and excellency, was more than for all the Angels of
light to have been degraded (if I may so say) into so many Chimney-sweepers, or
Kennel-rakers, or to have been condemned, to have been made hewers of wood, and
drawers of wtaer, for the service of the reprobate world, had it been to have
stood for ever! This, this is the great stupendous mystery, which may fill the
understanding of men and Angels with wonder and delight to all eternity, Tim.
3.16.
God manifested in the flesh, the Son of God incarnate. Justly then may it
swallow up our thoughts with horror and astonishment, to descend step by step
to the bottom of the Lord Christ, his mediatory humiliation and abasement,
(...); Ex omni Scipsum ad nihilum redegit, exhausit. Tertul. lib. 5. adversus
Ma^cion v. 8 (...), he debased, or vilified himself.
to find him emptying of himself, as it were, to the last drop of his glory,
meekly submitting himself to all the affronts and insolences of a reprobate
world, all the temptations and harassing of infernal Spirits, and at length to
death it self, even the death of the cross, that shameful, cruel, cursed death
of the cross; that death which was proper only to accursed slaves; and therein
drinking up the bitterest cup that ever was put into the hand of a sinner, the
cup of his Fathers wrath, the venom whereof filled his soul with unconceivable
anguish, and made him cry out, to the astonishment of Heaven and Earth, My God,
my God, why bast thou forsaken me?

In a word, if you would come to the bottom of our Lords abasement, you must
dig to the very bottom of hell it self, (if there be a bottom there) for though
Christ did not suffer poenas inferni, he did suffer poenas infirnales, hellish
pains, though not the pains of hell. Why now, then if you would make any
discovery of that glory, wherewith the humane nature of our blessed Lord is
invested, at the right hand of God, you must skrew up your thoughts, to a glory
every way adequate and commensurate to his inanition and abasement, for less
than that (not only the love, but) the justice of his Father could not
proportion to him. It were good sometimes in our thoughts to compare the
abasement of Christ and his exaltation together, to set them, as it were, in
columes one over against another. He was born in a Stable, but now he reigns in
his Royal Palace; then he had a Manger for his Cradle, but now he sets in a
Chair of state; then Oxen and Asses were his Companions, now thousands of
Saints, and ten thousand thousands of Angels minister round about his Throne;
then (in contempt) they called him the Carpenters Son, now he obtains by
inheritance a more excellent name than the Angels; for to which of the Angels
said he at any time, Thou art my Son, this day have I begotten thee? Then he
was led away into the wilderness to be tempted of the devil, now it is
proclaimed before him, let all the Angels of God worship him; then he had not a
place to lay his head on, now he is exalted to be the heir of all things; in
his state of humiliation, he endured the contradiction of sinners, in his state
of exaltation, he is adored and admired of Saints and Angels; then he had no
form or comeliness, when we saw him, there was no beauty that we should desire
him, now the beauty of his countenance shall send forth such glorious beams,
that shall dazzle the eyes of all the celestial Inhabitants round about him;
once he was the shame of the world, now the glory of heaven, the delight of his
Father, the joy of all the Saints and Angels; once he was the object of the
Reprobates scorn, and the Devils malice, now they shall be the objects of his
most righteous vengeance; he shall speak unto them in his wrath, and vex them
in his sore displeasure; Crucifiges will then be turned into Hallelujahs, he
that was called the Deceiver shall now be adored as the Amen of the Father, the
faithful and true witness; a man of sorrows then, but now the mirror of glory,
Prince of peace; then accounted a servant of servants, now he shall be called
the Lord of Lords, King of Kings,; then they put upon him a mock-robe, (a
fools-coat) but now he shall be clothed with a royal garment down to the foot,
girt about the paps with a golden girdle; the feeble reed shall now be turned
into a massy Scepter of gold; his Cross of wood into a Throne of glory, and
the Crown of Thorns into a Crown of Stars. In the day of his abasement he was
the football of his enemies, kicked up and down the world by every profane
fool, but now in the day of his exaltation, his enemies shall be made his
footstool; yea, Thrones and principalities being made subject unto him: Surely
the very prints of his hands and feet, and the holes that were bored in his
sides, shall be so many signal marks and trophies of victory, and Thomas (...)
set now above all doubting) may sing in triumph, My Lord and my God, And
lastly, the Lord Jesus himself, instead of his desertion (the lowest step of
all his abasement) shall solace himself for ever in the vision and fruition of
his Father and of the blessed Spirit, and instead of my God, my God, why have
thou forsaken me? shall be that triumph, I and my Father are one; thou Father
in me, and I in thee.

These be some crevices, through which we may have a glimpse of the glory of
our Lords (once) crucified body; the full discovery of it you will never be
able to make, until you come eye to eye, to see and enjoy it in the Kingdom of
Heaven, witness a second Consideration.

A second consideration evidencing what a glorious beatifying object the
glorified humanity of our Lord Jesus will be in Heaven, is, 2. Consider.
The personal and hypostatical union which the humane nature has with the
divine nature of the Son of God, Col. 2.9
the sulness of the Godhead dwells in Christ bodily, i. e. in his body: the
fullness of the divine essence dwells in the humane nature, and is (as it were)
transparent through his flesh; and this makes it to be the most beatifying
vision, next to the vision of God himself; and indeed is (in a very high
degree) the vision of the essence, because the glorious properties and
excellencies of the Godhead are, as it were, radiant and refulgent in the flesh
of our Redeemer, therefore he is called, Heb 1.3. (...).
The brightness of his Fathers glory, the brightness or refulgency of God the
Fathers glory, not only in reference to his divine essence, the second-Person
in Trinity, but as he is Verbum incarnatum, the Word incarnate, as he is
God-man, because all the beams of divine Majesty do shine forth with a most
resplendent brightness in his flesh; (...); augasma is that which has
brightness and glory in it self, such is the divine nature and essence, it is
the fountain and body of glory, from whence all brightness and splendor does
beam and issue; but apaugasma is that which receives that brightness into it
self, as a glass or mirror receives into it the beams of the Sun; such a
mirror is the flesh of Christ to the divine essence, wherein all the glorious
beams of divine wisdom, holiness, mercy, goodness and truth, etc. do shine
forth. This is the mystery Saint Paul admireth, 1 Timothy 3.16 (...). John 1.14
God was manifested in the flesh, or, God made visible in a body of flesh;
Jesus Christ was nothing else (as it were) but visible Deity; and so he was
even while he was on earth; The Word was made flesh, and dwelt amongst us, and
we beheld his glory as the glory of the only begotten of the Father: The flesh
of Christ was but, as it were, a veil, through which men might look upon the
Sun of Righteousness, which open and naked would have been too vehement and
strong for mortal eyes; we saw his glory; there did beam forth (at times) such
rays of glory through the body of Jesus Christ, that whoever had not wilfully
shut his eyes, might have discovered him to be more than man, and been
constrained with the Centurion, to cry out, Surely this was the Son of God; we
saw it, says the Apostle of himself and the rest that were Christ's witnesses.
Now if by virtue of the personal union of the two Natures in Christ, so much of
God was conspicuous in the flesh of Christ while he was on earth, how much more
abundantly do the emanations of divine glory dart themselves forth through the
humane nature, now it is exalted to the right hand of the Father in Heaven! And
that upon a twofold account,

1. Partly because there the body of our Lord Jesus Christ is a glorified body;
the very body of Christ is made more spiritual and shining than the Angelical
nature; I had almost said, the very flesh of Christ transubstantiated into the
divine nature, it is so diaphanous and transparent, that it is nothing else, as
it were, but a vail, through which the Saints may look upon the face of God
more steadily; surely that sight of Christ will be God manifest in the flesh
indeed, the invisible God made visible in the humane nature; that will be a
most beatifical Object!

2. And partly because the organ or faculty in the Saints shall be glorified
also, the eye of sense in them shall be raised to a wonderful degree of
quickness and activity, able to receive in this glorious object clearly and
fully. Here the world saw no beauty in Christ, not because Christ wanted
beauty, but because they wanted eyes, yea, the godly themselves, their eyes
were held, that they could not perfectly discern his glory; but oh now, when
the object shall be perfected, and the organ perfected to receive it, what a
blissful vision will the very Man Christ Jesus be in glory?

Go forth then oh ye Daughters of Sion, Cant. 3.11
behold your heavenly Solomon, with the Crown wherewith his Father crowned him
in the day of his solemn Nuptials, (when he was married to his heavenly Bride)
in the day of the gladness of his heart; prevent, oh my Soul, that beatifical
vision, by spiritual and fixed meditation, get into Heaven before thy time; and
so much the rather, not only because of the eminency of the Object, but because
of

Thirdly, The Saints interest in this Object, 3 Consider.
Christ in glory and Christ ours; as much of the eternal brightness of the
infinite God (as is possibly visible to an eye of glorified sense) will be seen
in the humane nature of Christ, (that will be glorious) and as much of that
glory made ours, as the Creature can be capable of; this will be joyful, to see
all this glory that is put upon the Person of the Lord Jesus Christ, and to see
it with propriety, to see it mine! And how mine? Why mine by purchase, he that
is the object of this Vision, was the purchaser of it; he bought it for me;
yea, he purchased both it and me by his blood; it for me, and me for it; the
sight of his glorified body was the fruit of his crucified body; as once he
gave his crucified body to my faith, so now he gives his glorified body to my
sight, to be my portion and my bliss for ever! Oh blessed vision, wherein
indeed purchaser, and purchase, and purchased do all meet together, to suffer
no more separation for ever! This sure will make the Saints sing their
Hallelujahs, Rev. 1.5, 6
To him that loved us, and washed us from our sins in his own blood, and has
made us Kings and Priests unto God and his Father, to him be glory and dominion
for ever and ever, Amen.

I come now to the fifth Object in the beatifical Vision, which is the Divine
Essence: 5th Object The Divine Essence.
This is denied by some, and well it may, if the assertion were so to be
understood, that the essence of God is to be discerned by the bodily eye,
though in its glorified capacity; for where ever the excellency be which God
will put upon the glorified bodies of the Saints in Heaven, yet still they
retain the nature of corporeal beings, and Gods essence is so infinitely pure
and spiritual, that the Angelical nature compared with it would seem to be but
quid materiale, of a material and corporeal constitution; so that now to affirm
God to be visible to an organical eye (though glorified) would seem to imply
one of these two things, scil. that 1. Either the Divine essence has matter
and corporiety in it. 2. Or that the glorified sense were made altogether
immaterial and spiritual, either of which is repugnant to the analogy of faith.
Vorstius himself was aware of this, and therefore, though at first he seemed to
affirm, that the glorified eye being made (as all the rest of the body shall
be) spiritual, might see God, though a Spirit, yet afterward he so explained
himself, as only to assert, that from the divine essence there did flow a
certain light, which light (and not the essence it self immediately) is the
object of the glorified eye its sight. But, that God may be seen by the eye
(i.e. understood) of the glorified understanding, cannot be denied by any that
believe Scripture, or duly consider wherein the happiness of the glorified
Saints must needs consist. But how or in what manner he shall be seen, is that,
which by this dim light, which now we see by, is wholly undeterminable. The
Schoolmen are wont to say that the blessed shall see God, essentially, or by
his essence, immediately, intuitively, comprehensively; not indeed
comprehensively as God sees and knows himself, but yet comprehensively in
contradistinction to apprehensively. Yet some of them say, that the Vision of
God is not comprehensive, but apprehensive only, all make it intuitive,
quidditative, immediate, and some of our own Divines follow them in this
Tenent; I shall give my thoughts of it in a few Conclusions.


There be some Arguments against this immediate intuitive Vision, that either
cannot, 1 Conclusion.
or (at least) have not been answered to satisfaction. I will form but one only
Argument, in which I will suppose nothing but what is granted by all, which is
this, that the understanding of the blessed is not infinite, thus, That which
is infintte, cannot by a finite understanding be known so as it is in it self.
But the Divine essence is infinite. Therefore, it cannot be known as it is in
it self by a finite understanding.


The Major is grounded on a thing infinite, which is such as it cannot be
passed over, so as to come to the end of it. Answers to this Argument I have
met with many, but such as are either apparently impertinent, or else do
plainly yield the cause; of this there will be little doubt, by any that shall
read over the Discourse of Gishertus Voetius de visione Dei per essentiam; for
in that Discourse, the Answers to this Argument are out of various Authors,
recited and replied unto, and that to satisfaction.

A second Conclusion I lay down is this, 2 Conclusion
This immediate intuitive Vision is not therefore to be denied, because there
are some Arguments against it which we know not how to answer, for there are
Arguments for it, which carry in them great probability, and will difficultly
be solved, and the state of bliss is such, as eye has not seen, nor ear heard,
nor did ever yet enter into the heart of man.

Thirdly, 3 Conclusion
Therefore, Scripture is to be searched, and if the phrases thereof do hold out
such a vision, we may warrantably receive it; if not, it must be rejected, or
at least be left as a Problem to be disputed rather in the Schools, than to be
handled in Pulpits.

A fourth Conclusion is this, 4 Conclusion
The expressions of Scripture do not necessarily infer an intuitive immediate
vision of the divine essence; This can be proved only by examination of the
particular places that are brought by the assertors of this Vision. They are
either of the old or of the new Testament.

In the old. The Lords answer to Moses is much insisted on; Thou can not see
my face; for there shall no man see my face and live. All that these words
intimate, will be, must be granted, and it is no more than this, That such a
full sight of Gods glory as Moses desired, is not to be expected till the dust
of mortality be blown out of our eyes; the eyes of our mind now can no more
endure to see the face of God, than the eyes of an Owl can behold the Sun in
its noonday glory; this although it were a gross mistake of the Jews, to infer
natural death presently to befall any person, that should have a sight of God,
under any visible representation, yet it might well give occasion to Augustine
to make that quick reply, Lord, if I may not see thy face and live, let me dye
to see thy face. But how an Argument should from thence be formed, to conclude
an immediate, intuitive vision of God in glory, I cannot easily conceive; more
color there is in the Apostles phrase, Now we see through a glass darkly, but
then face to face; 1 Cor. 13.12
now I know in part, but then shall I know, even as also I am known. These
truly are wonderful expressions, and such as afford unto us the greatest
security, that all privative imperfection shall be done away, and that we shall
have as full a sight of God, as our natures are capable of, we shall have as
full a knowledge of the Divinity as we can rationally wish for, such as shall
leave no room for complaint, much less for envy. Greater things then this I
find not are said of the Theology, of the blessed Angels, their happiness is
but this, They are ever beholding the face of God: Mat. 8.10
But let a Syllogism be thence formed.

They who shall be admitted to see God face to face, shall see him immediately,
intuitively, quidditatively. But glorified Saints shall see God face to face.
Therefore, They shall see him immediately, etc.
I will deny the Major, and do despair of ever seeing it proved from this Text;
the phrase of seeing God face to face, does not necessarily import such a
vision, for then should Jacob, Moses, etc. on this side glory have seen God
comprehensively, immediately, intuitively, quidditatively; which I presume none
will affirm, nor is there any circumstance in the tex or context, that should
determine it so to signify in Saint Paul's speech.

Object. It is said, We shall know as we are known!

Answ. It is true: But similitudes do not always quadrate, run upon all four,
God knows us so far as we are knowable; Do we know God so to? It is
impossible God should not know us, but is it impossible we should not know God?
Could he not hide himself from us if he pleased? We do not know God in every
respect as he knows us, therefore it does not follow from this phrase, that we
should know him quidditatively, immediately, intuitively, because he knows us
so, unless there be some other Scripture remaining, on which such a kind of
knowledge may be built, and other there is not, unless it be that of Saint
John, John 3.2
We shall see him as he is. These words I confess come nearer the terms of the
Schools, than any other I could ever observe in Sacred Writ; yet neither can
these (without violence) be extended to the seeing of the Divine essence
essentially; my reason is, because the object here promised, is not the Divine
nature or being, but the Lord Jesus Christ, the Mediator; and that according to
the nature which he assumed in the fullness of time, and in which he shall at
last appear to judge the world: when he so appears, we shall be like him, for
we shall see him as he is, i. e. in the brightness and fullness of his state of
exaltation; here we saw him but in his state of humiliation, then we shall see
him in his state of exaltation; As he is set on the right hand of the Throne of
the Majesty in the Heavens.

Object. But it will be objected, What profit is there then of the beatifical
Vision? Or, What advantage have they who see God in Heaven, above the Saints
who see him in the Evangelical vision?

Answ. I answer, Much every way. Concerning which, not to say any thing that
exceeds sobriety, and yet to say somewhat that may help our understandings, I
would ascend to the highest pitch of what my weak, narrow apprehension can
reach unto of this blessed Vision, by these several steps and gradations.

First, First Step. We shall see more of God, than either we or any of the
Worthies of God ever saw.
We shall know more of God than ever we understood of him in this life, either
by faith, or by the highest revelation that ever God made of himself to our
Souls; more than ever the best of the Saints discovered by faith or divine
manifestation; yea, we shall know more of God than ever the most holy of the
Patriarchs, the most illuminate Prophet, the most seraphick Evangelist, the
most inspired Secretaries and Amanuenses of the Holy Ghost (a secretioribus) on
this side Heaven did ever know; yea, what Abraham, (the friend of God) Jacob,
who at one time had God in his arms, Genesis 13.24 ver. ^0
and at another time had his Peniel, the facial vision of God, Moses (the
savourite of Heaven, Exodus 33.11
to whom God is said to talk as a man speaks to his friend, and to know face
to face) Elijah, Deuteronomy. 34.10 James 5.17
(who wore as it were the keys of Heaven at his girdle, and could open and shut
them as he pleased, and at length ascended thither in a fiery Chariot) Daniel
(who had the visions of God) John the Evangelist (whose Patmos was turned into
a Paradise, Dan. 10.6, 7, 8
where he had and writ the Revelations of Jesus Christ) and finally holy Paul,
(who was wrapped up into the third Heaven, (...). 2 Cor. 12.4^.
and heard things inessable) what these (I say) or any of these knew of the
most high God, was but as the Primier learning of Children, to the vast
readings of the greatest Masters of learning, in comparison of that of God
which shall be known to blessed Souls; the least of Gods elect Infants, going
from their Mothers womb to the grave, shall know more of God the first moment
it enters into glory, than the profoundest Divine in the Church of God, could
by study, or revelation, ever attain to in this world; this is much.

Secondly, Second Step.
The glorified Saints shall know more of God and the divine nature, than Adam
did in Paradise; he was prevailed upon by the Tempter, to affect a greater and
higher degree of knowledge than he had, above what the Creator saw fit to
bestow, more than belonged to his nature and state; he would have known as God
knows; that is, to full satisfaction and complacency.

Thirdly, Third Step.
The glorified Saints know God affirmatively. The greatest part of our
knowledge of God in this life is either By 1. Them cognoscitur per mo dum
Negation^. Eminentiae. Causationis.

Denying, or 2. Comparing, or Ascending 3. By way of Causation.


First, By denying, we come to know God in this life, by removing all
imperfections, and defects, and limitations, by taking away all things which
are inconsistent with a Deity: conceive a spiritual being, and pare off
whatsoever is imperfect or defective, and that which remains is God; we can go
in our conceptions, or descriptions of God, very little farther. Or,

Secondly, We come to know (or rather to ghess) what God is by comparing God
with the Creature; take in all that is amiable, or formidable in the Creature;
go over all imaginable perfections and excellencies in the Creatues, Men,
Heavens, Sun, Moon, Stars, Angels, and ascribe them all to God, and there you
lay a foundation of knowing God, but infinitely short and narrow of what he is;
therefore we must ascend.

For when we have gone through all the ranks and gradations of perfections in
the subordinations of created beings, when we have searched out the utmost
excellency of each classis, we may say, this is in God, and more; whether Man
or Angels go higher and higher till we come to the top of Jacobs Ladder, still
all this is in God and infinitely more. The Creature must be winnowed from all
imperfection, and the finest of them must be taken to give some weak
resemblance of a Deity.

Thirdly, Per modum Causationis; Whatever is in the effect is more perfectly in
the cause. God is Causa fontana, a fountain. essence of all the perfections
which sparkle in the Creature.
we know God by the Creature, as the cause by the effect; as the fountain of
all power, goodness and perfection; whatever is lovely and illustrious, we must
needs say, this is in God, and infinitely more; God is stronger than the
mightiest Man or Angel, wiser than the wisest, holier than the holiest Saint or
Angel, he being the fountain and cause of all perfection. This, I say, is all
we can reach to, in spelling out God, for be it said, we must add infinite to
all these perfections, and that is God, this is also by denying; for what is
infinite, but without bounds and limits? That is to say, God is strong without
weakness, wise without ignorance, holy without impurity, etc. If we would
conceive these excellencies, (which seem to us to be affirmative) we are glad
to be beholding to negation: As for example, if I would know what is Gods
eternity, the negative must help me, it is his being without beginning and
without end: What his holiness? I cannot tell affirmatively, but must answer my
self, it is to be without the least sin, defilement, or shadow of impurity,
etc. In all this there is little to satisfy the covetous inquiry implanted in
the Soul, Quid sit? What is holiness? And what wisdom?

But now in Heaven our knowledge of God shall be affirmative, we shall be able
to apprehend God, though not to the utmost extent of his esse, yet without
being beholding merely to his non esse; we shall be able to say as well what
God is, as what God is not; and when we have said what he is, we shall not need
to expound our meaning by what he is not.

Fourthly, Fourth Step. (...): Mat. 22.30
We shall know God as much as the Angels in Heaven do. They behold the face of
God, Matthew. 18.10. Glorified Saints are with the Angels, Rev. 4.8. and are said
to be like Angels, and equal to the Angels, (...), as Angels, Angels incarnate.
And what inconsistency is there to the analogy of faith, to conceive that the
Saints shall enjoy as full a prospect of God in Heaven, as the Angels
themselves do? 5. Gradation.
for though their bodies be united to their souls, yet shall not their bodies
be any hindrance to their souls vision of God, since the soul depends not now
upon any corporeal organ of the body, inward or outward sense, and, i. e. the
body, shall be refined (by the power of Christ in the resurrection) to such a
spiritual alloy, that it is it self even of an Angelical nature.

Fifthly, The Saints shall know God up to the height of that Principle which
God impressed upon the Soul in the Creation; For God intending to make a Creature
perfectly happy, implanted in its nature Concupivit anima mea. Psalm. 48.2 This
Candle of the Lord does aspire, (and that without sin) to be a Sun; it being
the just and modest desire of the end which God himself created it; not that it
would be the Sun, butunited to the Sun: and now that inno^ent ambition shall be
satisfied. Sixth Step. 1 Cor. 13.
a disposition covetous and capable of knowing God (wherein only the summum
bonum of the soul consists) now if God should not satisfy this holy
concupiscence in the soul, and fill its capacity to the utmost, he should fail,
not the desire of the Creature only, but his own project; the soul will not be
contented with such an imperfect knowledge of God as it has here.

Sixthly, They shall know him properly. Junius tells us, it is the Judgment of
all Protestants; and Willet upon Exodus expounds that notion by
[apprehensively] (though not comprehensively) that is, we shall understand
clearly, certainly and fully what God is: Clearly] in opposition to dark
created mediums; we shall see God by his own light, Psalm. 36.9. Certainly] in
opposition to ghess, opinion and imperfect knowledge: And fully] not objective
in reference to God, but subjective in reference to our selves; the faculty
shall be full of God as it can hold, nor all alike but according to the
capacity of every vessels heat, degrees of happiness do spring from that lumen
gloriae, being variously shed among these blessed Souls.
as a vessel in the Sea, that is full of the Sea, though it contains not all
the Sea in it.

Seventhly, The Saints shall know God fruitionally, Seventh Step.
that is, they shall know him so as to possess God, and to be possessed of God.
The soul does, as it were, enter into God, and God into the soul; the joy of
the Lord enters into the soul here, there the soul enters into the Lords joy.

Eighthly, It shall be a transforming knowledge, Eighth Step.
we shall be like him, for we shall see him as he is: But these two latter, my
method propounded leads me to speak too distinctly by themselves: Of these
therefore in their own place.

In a word, The Saints shall know God to perfection, though not to infinitude,
they shall see him so as to repose themselves in him with full complacency and
delight, so that they shall say, they have enough. In this life some of the
Saints, at sometimes, have had such manifestations of God, as have made them
weep as bitterly (as ever any under desertion) crying out, Lord withdraw thy
glory, else the vessel will split, and I shall dishonor God. And it may justly
be our wonder, how it should be otherwise to the Saints in the other world, a
wonder that a created, finite faculty should be able to bear the weight of
glory, which fills the infinite Object, and not be destroyed by the immensity
of it; especially since we read of the very Angels themselves, Omne vehemons
sensibilo destruit sensum.
who in a vision of somewhat an inferior nature to that facial vision in
glory, for the exceeding brightness of it, are said to veil their faces and
their feet; their faces, as having their eyes dazeld with the exceeding
brightness of his glorious appearance; and their feet, as abashed in the
apprehension of their own meanness and imperfection, in comparison of Gods
incomparable and incomprehensible perfections.

But as to this difficulty.

First, Our most learned English Annotator upon that place tells us, that those
expressions signify rather the intenseness of the Angels reverence and fear,
in their approaches to the Supreme Majesty, than their incapacity to take in
what of his glory he is pleased to manifest; The Angels being said always to
behold the face of God, Matthew. 18.10. For, says he, this is certain, that the
nearer the Creature makes his approaches to God, and in the more glorious
manner he is pleased to manifest himself, the more apprehensive the Creature
is, of its own meanness, baseness, vileness and nothingness, in regard of Gods
infinite greatness.

Secondly, We are taught from the Scriptures, that Divine manifestations in
Heaven, though they beget greatest veneration, yet they cause pleasure, not
pain, and do rather nourish and perfect the faculty, than any ways hurt or
oppress it; the vessel shall be made capacious enough to hold any liquor which
the thice blessed Trinity shall see meet to put into it.

To this end we may take notice from Scripture it self, that the glorified
understanding shall be adorned with a six-fold perfection, scil.

1. Spirituality. 2. Clarity. 3. Capacity. 4. Sanctity. 5. Strength. 6.
Fixedness.
The first perfection of the understanding shall be spirituality; 3. Perfection
Spirituality,
it shall be spiritualized; spiritual it is now; as spiritual is opposed to
corporeal, though not as spiritual is opposed to natural. The Soul is now
forced to be a Caterer for a body of flesh, to provide things that are
necessary for the sustentation of the animal life; it busieth it self to
satisfy the appetites of hunger and thirst, etc. if it can redeem a few hours
for actions more proper and peculiar to it, it is so clogged, so pressed down
with the bodies infirmities, as that it soon drops down to the earth, and is
drawn aside, to attend the impertinencies of this present life. But when it
shall be joined to an animate a spiritual body, and it self, in its glorified
capacity, then it shall be wholly taken up with objects spiritual and heavenly,
and made, as it were, connatural to them, elevated by the light of glory, to
the vision of God. This lumen gloriae is not so much for the discovery of the
object, as for the help and advancing of a created faculty, which would else be
much oppressed with the weight of glory, it is not so much the raising and
screwing of nature higher, but it is the adding of a new disposition, that may
close with the divine object, so that though there be still an infinite
disproportion between God and the Creature in esse naturali, yet there is a
just proportion in esse intelligibili.

Secondly, 2. Perfection Clarity.
By virtue of this supernatural influx of the divine object, the faculty shall
be brightned and cleared. There is now upon this mirror of the understanding,
many labes and stains, whereby the vessel is defiled, the breath of the world
and the steam of corruptions from within, do so fully this crystal glass, that
it cannot receive into it the beams of light, which shine upon it; the more
impurity the dimmer the vision; Blessed are the pure in heart, Mat. 5.8
for they shall see God. Why now in glory all these maculae and spots shall be
perfectly wiped off, and the vessel shall be made a clear burning glass, to
receive and contain the glorious rays of divine excellency, which do immit
themselves into it. Hence this vision of God is called by Divines, a clear,
distinct, and perfect sight of God; not as if the blessed did see all whatever
is in the divine essence, but as opposed to our present dim, glassy vision; 1
Cor. 1^.
so that it perfectly takes in what the divine will is pleased to reveal,
without any the least obstruction or diminution.

Thirdly, 3. Perfection Capacity.
The faculty in glory shall be widened and extended to a vast capacity; now the
understanding is large, there is no bounding or limitting of it, it is higher
than the Heavens, and deeper than the Sea, and wider than the World; it is said
of Solomon, in respect of his understanding, 1 Kings 4.25.
that he had wisdom and understanding exceeding much, and largeness of heart,
even as the sand that is upon the Seashore; but all that was specially in
order to the mysteries of nature, as it follows there in his character from
verse 30, to 34. But in glory the understanding shall be widened to a vaster
capacity, scil. to take in not the little things of the Creature only, Magnalia
Dei.
but the infinite God; I do not say infinitely but apprehensively, though not
comprehensively, for then the vessel must be as large as the object, yea,
larger, since the thing containing must be somewhat bigger than the thing
contained, but the understanding shall apprehend God clearly, certainly and
fully; the object it self shall extend the faculty, and make it capacious for
it self. It is worth our notice to compare those two expressions of the
beatifical vision, the one Matthew. 18.10. where it is said, The Angels do always
behold the face of God; the other, where the Angels and Saints (the number of
whom is said to be, Rev 5.11
ten thousand times ten thousands, and thousands of thousands) are described
surrounding Gods Throne, they are round about the Throne; compare them
together; They always behold the face of God, and yet are round about; and it
hints us this blessed notion, God has no back parts in Heaven, God to the
blessed Inhabitants there is all face, and they are always beholding it; how
should not so transplendent an object confound the spiritual organ, with the
immense splendour and glory thereof, but that the object it self does sustain
and nourish the faculty.

A fourth Perfection is Sanctity, 4. Perfection Sanctity. Heb. 12.23
the understanding shall be made perfect in holiness: In the state of
separation, The spirits of just men are made perfect, and surely the soul
loses nothing of its sanctity, by being united to the body in glory. Now of
all divine qualities, none does more capacitate the Soul for the vision of God,
than holiness, witness that holiness is called the divine nature. 1 Pet. 1.4
Holiness assimilateth unto God, and the perfection and delight of vision is
founded in conformity; it is so in the Evangelical vision, Blessed are the pure
in heart, for they shall see God, according to the purity of the heart is the
vision of God. What a glorious vision of God will that be, which the perfection
of holiness shall advance the soul unto, when the glorious object shall both-
enlarge and purify the faculty.

The fifth Perfection is Strength. 5. Perfection Strength.
The vision of God does fortify the understanding. In nature, the more
vehement and intense the object, the more it hurts and cr^sheth the sense; the
vision of God, though but under a veil, C^^e vehement sensibile destruit
sensum. Dan. 10.7, 8 Rev. 1.17. (...) Lumen gloriae superaddita perfectio, qua
intellectus confortatur ad videndum Deum. Tho. Aquin.
did undo the Prophet Isaiah. Holy Daniel's vision (though but a vision) did
dispirit him, and left him without strength. Saint John his vision, though but
the darker side of the beatifical sight of God, stays him outright for a
time, I fell at his feet as dead. The souls of the blessed in Heaven, are set
beyond all fear of such a surprise of glory, while God fills their faculty, he
does also sustain and perfect it, by means whereof the faculty shall never be
weary of its object, but still behold it with fresh vigor and delight: So it
follows.

A sixth and last Perfection is Fixednese. 6. Perfection. Fixedness.
In the state of grace the mind is exceeding slippery, like that of little
Children, whom you cannot six, we lie upon spiritual objects, as upon a bank of
ice, where we slide, and slide, and never leave sliding, till we be in the
dirt, and this comes to pass by reason of those mixtures of impurity which are
in these natural minds of ours; the objects are pure and simple, James 1.21
(...).
but the faculty is woefully clogged with superfluity of naughtiness, hence the
lubricity and floating that is in the understanding, like the Sea it self, but
now in glory all that mixture is abolished, so that there is nothing remaining
to divert or distract the faculty, yea, the object it self (still) shall unite
the faculty to it self, though not so as to make it its self, yet so as to make
it like its self, to make it capable of its self in all the (communicable)
dimensions of the divine nature, In a word, the faculty shall be made perfectly
suitable to the object, not only in the properties, but in the very nature of
it, whereby it shall be enabled to know it, and understand it to perfection; Oh
blessed and blessed-making vision!

Glorious things are spoken of thee, oh thou vision of God! Truly beatifical
for ever! Eye truly has not seen, etc. Before we leave this Vision, let us
make some use of it.

And the Use may be twofold: 1. Study holiness. 2. Labor to see God before
you come to Heaven.


First, Study holiness, there be two Visions of God mentioned in Scripture,
First, The Vision of God in Grace. Secondly, The Vision of God in Glory. The
Evangelical Vision. The Angelical Vision.
The Vision of God in Ordinances. The Vision of God Without Above
Ordinances.


In the Vision of Grace, the Evangelical vision, the Saints see Gods back
parts, but in the Vision of Glory, the Angelical vision, they see God face to
face; in the Evangelical vision they see God darkly, and know him in part, but
in the Angelical vision they know him, even as they are known by him; the
Saints shall have a full prospect of God in Heaven.

But of both these Visions, holiness is the indispensable qualification,
without holiness there is no admission into Heaven. Rev. 21.27
There shall in no wise enter into it any thing that defiles. And when entered,
without holiness there is no vision, for without holiness no man can see the
Lord: Heb. 12.14
And holiness does dispose the Soul for this blessed Vision three ways; First,
By removing the distance between God and the Creature. Secondly, By
assimilating the Soul to God. Thirdly, By causing mutual delight and
complacency between them.


First, Holiness disposes the Soul for the seeing of God, by taking away that
distance which is between God and the Soul. Sin is that (...), that great Gulf,
In this respect sin is Hell.
which separates between God and the Creature; and surely sin sets a vaster
distance between the holy God and a sinner, than there is between Heaven and
Hell, yea, than there is between God and the Devil; that is, between God as a
Creator, and the Devil as he is a creature.

Until this distance be removed, there is no possible access for the Soul to
God; this partition wall is broken down when holiness is set up; and according
to the degree of purity, is the degree of vision, as the Soul passes from one
degree of holiness to another, so it passes from one state and degree of
vision to another; 2 Cor, 3.
We all beholding as in a glass, etc. The purer the glass, the brighter the
vision.

Secondly, Holiness disposes for the vision of God by approximation and
assimilating the Soul to God. Holiness is the very Image of God, the divine
nature, not in a fanatic sense, not the divine being. Indeed holiness in God
is the divine essence, but holiness in the Creature is but a gracious quality,
whereby the Creature resembles God, 1 Pet. 1.15
and is made pure as he is pure, holy as he is holy. This advances the Soul to
a nearer vicinity to God, whereby it is put into a passive capacity of seeing
God; passive, I say, for the formal visive power of seeing God, is from the
object more than the subject of it, scil. so far as God is pleased to beam in
his glory into the faculty, and enableth it to bear it; Lumen confortans, Schol.
holiness only gives the Soul a sutableness to receive in those divine
irradiations.

Thirdly, Holiness causes mutual delight and complacency between God and the
Soul; all liking is founded in likeness; conformity is the fountain of
complacency; so that until holiness be formed in the Soul, neither can God
delight in the Soul, nor the Soul in God verily without this mutual
complacency, the vision of God would be penal to the Creature, rather than
beatifical, not much better than that vision which the damned themselves may be
conceived to have of God in hell, whose vision of God makes full one half of
hell at least; Oh quam miserum est Deum videre and perire?
they see God and despair; this is the Worm that never dies: they only see
what they have lost.

Christians, as ye love Gods face, look to your boliness; God loves holiness
more than he loves the Creature, says Arminius; and I say so too, if we
understand it of the holiness that dwells in God, for that is his essential
holiness, Exodus 15 11
God himself, so loving holiness, he loves himself; Gods holiness is his
glory, glorious in holiness; he accounts it the most radiant Jewel in his Crown
Royal, the very varnish and beauty of all his glorious Attributes; for the love
he bears to which, he loves to see the very image and likeness of it in the
Creature; but he loved the Creature so well (in his (...)) that he did elect
the person unto the qualification, though not for the qualification; God chose
the elect, Ephesians. 1.4
not because he foresaw they would be holy, but that they might be holy;
holiness was not the cause, but the end of their election. Oh love that (dear
Souls) which God loves so much, and loves to see in his Saints, who are
therefore called Saints from their holiness. There is nothing can make you so
beautiful in Gods eye as holiness, because in your holiness he sees the
reflection of his own beauty; Ezekiel. 16.14 Taliter pigmentatae Dei habebitis
Amorem: Tert.
Thou wast comely through the comeliness which I put upon thee; God cannot
choose but love his own likeness where ever he sees it; oh love the Lord all ye
his Saints, and give thanks at the remembrance of his holiness, Psalm. 30.4. Let
your hearts leap within you as often as you think what an holy God you have; who
if he can but see true holiness in your faces, will admit you to see that
holiness which is in his face for ever. Love holiness, I say, but be sure it be
such an holiness as God loves; there is an holiness in the world, which is but
a thing like holiness, but is not so; moral righteousness, an harmless
innocence, a sober retiredness from sensual excesses, a pretty ingenuity, a
readiness to do offices of love, a negative Religion, concerning which you may
better tell, what it is not, than what it is; yea, there is a thing called
holiness in the world, that has not so much as the appearance or shadow of
holiness, freedom from grossest impieties, and that but partial too; not to
swear at the highest rate, to be soberly drunk, and privately unclean, Apud vos
optimi censentur quos comparatio pessimorum sic facit. Arnob.
not to be overmuch wicked, etc. in a word (as Arnobius speaks of the Gentiles)
not to be so bad as the worst, is a kind of being good; even this (Sirs) will
pass in the world for holiness: And lastly, there is a superstitious holiness,
which to the Evangelical holiness is no better than what the Ivy is to the Oak,
and has eaten out the very heart of it; a Brat which (as Gurnats Christians
Complete Armor, p. 2.
one says) the Devil has put to nurse to the Romish Church, which has taken
a great deal of pains to bring it up for him; and it has brought in no small
revenue, as to her self, of worldly riches and treasure, so to Him of Souls;
for such holiness is the very road to Hell the followers of Antichrist fill up
the greatest part of it But hear our Lord plainly telling you, Except your
righteousness exceed the best of these, ye cannot enter, etc. Oh Christians,
get you a copy of grace out of the Scripture-Records (those Court-Rolls of
Heaven) which may be seen and allowed by God, and Angels, and Saints, if ever
you desire to see Gods face: Holiness of a peculiar strain, Titus 2.14.
Perfecting holiness in the fear of God, 2 Cor. 7.1. Holiness to the Lord, not
an holiness that may approve it self to men only (that is easily done) (but
unto God. Unblameable holiness in Gods fight, Colos. 1.22. His holiness, Heb.
12.10. That is, An holiness which has God for its pattern, and 1 Pet. 1.15,
16. An holiness which has God for its motive, 1 Pet. 1.15, 16. Be ye holy as
God is holy; be ye holy because God is holy.


In a word, study an holiness that knows no limits, but what it shall have in
Heaven; an holiness without any stint, still pressing after further degrees of
conformity unto Jesus Christ; unless your holiness be of this impression, you
can never hope to see Gods face, and if your hope be a true Scripture hope,
your holiness will be a right Scripture-holiness; 1 John 3.3 S^ diaeeru fot
est, periisti.
He that has this hope in him purifieth himself as he is pure: Where ever you
stick you perish: Labor for such an holiness as will give you admittance not
into the Church only, but into Heaven, without which no man shall see God; no
men of what classis or form soever they be, whether such as have no holiness
and care for none, all profane persons; Shall eyes full of adultery ever see
God? the holy God? Shall eyes full of anger and revenge see God! the meek,
merciful God? Et sic in caet. All such as deride holiness, or despise holiness,
or persecute holiness, such as have neither name nor thing, yea, that perfectly
hate both, shall they enjoy God? The Apostle sends them this word expressly,
There is no room for them in Heaven. And indeed, what should such do there?
There is nothing in Heaven but what is holy, holy Angels, and holy Saints, and
above all a thrice holy Trinity, Father, Rev. 4.8.
Son and Holy Ghost; Holy, Holy, Holy, the Lord God Almighty, the beauty of
whose face is holiness, alas! there is nothing for them to see or hear, but
what is an abomination to their souls! Holy words, yea, the very word
(Holiness) they now stop their ears at it, it is vinegar to their teeth, they
make faces at it; holy Ordinances, they cannot bear them; the impurer the
Ordinance is, the better they like it; An Holy God, they say of him, Isai. 30.11
Cause the holy One of Israel to depart from before us; preach as much as you
will of the merciful One of Israel, and of the bountiful One of Israel, etc.
but tell us not so much of the holy One of Israel. Molest us no more with
messages of holiness, and the severities thereof; yea, See learned Gataker in
loc.
they say not only so of God, but they say as much to God to his very face,
They say to the Almighty, depart from us, we desire not the knowledge of thy
ways; they say so by interpretation, if not in words at length; he that can
expound actions as well as language, tells us, they say so; yea, they are not
ashamed of the very language, it is a piece of their gallantry to profess to
them that reprove them, or but (meekly) admonish them, I say, to answer with
scorn enough, We are none of your Saints; Proud scorner, what art thou then? An
unclean swine, yea, an unclean spirit, incarnate Devil, a profane Hellitean, as
one faith, for thy speech betrayeth thee? What need farther proof? Ex ore suo,
etc. Put such an herd of Swine into Heaven, and verily they would need no other
damnation: But God made Heaven for better purposes, than to be an Hell for the
haters of holiness: Tophet is prepared of old for them, Isai. 30.33.
and thither they must be packt away, with the reprobate Angels; down they
came, when they had laid aside their holiness, and shall such maligners of
holiness, and holy ones, ever come there? Let them not fear, the company of
Saints shall never molest them; they would have none of their society on earth,
and they shall have none of their society in heaven. Possibly, with their elder
brother Dives, they may have a prospect of Heaven, where they may see Luk^ 16.23
Lazarus in Abraham's bosom; and (with others of the reprobate family) they may
see Abraham, Luke 13.28
Isaac, and Jacob, and all the Prophets in the Kingdom of God, Oh quam miserum
est Deum videre and perire? Et ante praeteritur conspectum perire?
but that vision will be so far from beatifical, as that it will be the
aggravation of their damnation; for as it follows verse 28.

They themselves shall be thrust out, (...), cast out, with as much contempt
and violence, as ever they themselves cast the Saints out of their Societies.
Certainly, that vision, will be weeping, and wailing, and gnashing of teeth.
These haters of holiness would have none of God, Psalm. 81.11. They said to the
holy One of Israel, Depart from us. When it was too late.
And now God will have none of them, I know you not whence ye are; they bad the
first word, but will have the last, They said, depart from us.
Depart from me all ye workers of iniquity; not a man of them shall stand in
Gods presence, but be cast out for ever into utter darkness. Then shall the
back slider in heart be (indeed) filled with his own ways. Mal. 25.41
They banished God and his Saints out of their company; and now they themselves
shall be punished from the presence of the Lord, (and his Saints) and from the
glory of his power, 2 These. 1.9.

Second Use, Labor to see God on this side glory, to begin your vision on
Earth, which shall never cease in Heaven. Indeed the vision in Grace and the
vision in Glory are one and the same vision; the object is the same, God; and
the faculty is the same, the eye of the Soul: they differ only in two
circumstances.

First, In the Medium. Here we see in glasses, the Works of God, Psalm. 19.1, 2.
the Creatures are a glass, the Heavens declare the glory of God, Praesentemque
refert quaelibet herba Deum.
and the providence of God are a glass, Day unto day utters speech, and
night unto night shows knowledge: Every days experience, and every nights
experience, is a glass wherein much of God is to be seen; and the Gospel is a
glass, wherein we all, as in a mirror, 2 Cor. 3.18
behold the glory of the Lord: And lastly, the glass of Ordinances, Preaching,
and Prayer, and Sacraments, all these be glasses; and meditation is a glass;
faith is another way of vision; by faith Moses saw him who is invisible; all
these, I say, Heb. 11.27
are glasses wherein we may see God. But alas! The glass takes away from the
object and darkens our vision, as painted glass in the Church windows, they let
in some light, but keep out more; but in Heaven we shall see without glasses,
face to face, the Lamb shall be the light in that Temple.

Secondly, These visions differ in their degree of light and clearness, here we
see in part, this is but a partial vision, that in glory is extensive, a
full-eyed vision, as one calls it, a most ample, perfect vision; we shall know
as we are known, the understanding here is dark, dim and narrow, there clear
and vastly capacious.

Now that which this word of Exhortation calls you to is, to exercise your
selves much in the vision of God here, and to that end I would have you 1. Make
much of your glasses: But 2. Take heed of resting in, and being satisfied with
your glasses.


First, Make much of your glasses; Be thankful for them: How many Churches of
Jesus Christ have their glasses taken away or broken? Robbed and spoiled of all
their precious things, and have not so much as a glass left, wherein they might
have some glimpses of divine light conveyed into their understanding? Oh
Christians, before it be so with you, make use of your mediums; While you have
the light, walk in the light, etc. Bless God that the Sun is not totally gone
down upon your Prophets, Mich. 3, 6
nor the day dark over them; God has done that for you (in as much wonder, and
more mercy) that once he did for Joshua, caused your Sun to stand still in your
Gibeon, etc. Oh bless God for it! Make his praise glorious.

And secondly, Make good use of your mediums, attend Reading, and Hearing, and
Prayer, and Sacraments while you have them; take heed of that dangerous notion,
of being above Ordinances, it is a Precipice upon which many have stumbled into
darkness: Oh that it may not prove utter darkness, the blackness of darkness
for ever!

There is a living above Ordinances which has a good sense in it: that is,

First, When God has taken away Ordinances, or permitted men to take them
away, then to live above them, i. e. to be able to live immediately upon God,
as knowing, that though God has tied us to means, he has not tied himself to
means; he that converts and saves by Ordinances, can do his work without them;
the means can do nothing without God, but God can do what he will without the
means; so to live by faith is exceeding precious.

Secondly, In the use of Ordinances, to look above Ordinances, to look up to
God, whose Ordinances they are, as only able to make his own Institutions
effectual to the accomplishing of his own ends; thus to use Ordinances, and to
trust God, is excellent; but for a people while they have Ordinances to slight
them, and neglect them, and talk of living above Ordinances, this is
intolerable pride and folly, yea, it is a mocking of God, to be wiser than
God, and instead of living above Ordinances, to live without God. Oh learn to
make much of the Ordinances, lest that angry question come and sweep away all,
Wherefore is there a price in the hand of a fool to get wisdom, Prove. 17.16
seeing he has no heart to it?

A second thing I would call you to is, while you use Ordinances, to take heed
of resting in, and of resting contented with Ordinances; an Ordinance of God,
without the God of the Ordinance, what an empty glass is it? There is a vision
of Ordinances, and there is a vision in Ordinances; oh take not up with that
without this; pray for such a spirit as he had, whose voice it is, Psalm. 63.1.
My soul thirsts for thee, my flesh longs for thee: David was now in the
wilderness, banished from the Tabernacle and Ark, Altars, (those legal
Ordinances of the Sanctuary) I but it is not the bare Ordinances that will
serve his turn, but God in the Ordinances, thee, thee, my soul thirsts for
thee, my flesh longs for thee.

Oh Christians, let the same mind be in you which was in holy David, make God
the object of your vision, in your Evangelical attendances; God commands it,
Seek ye my face, Psalm. 27.8. Seek the Lord, and seek his strength, and seek his
face evermore, Psalm. 105.4. Oh let your hearts echo with David's, Thy face,
Lord, will I seek, or (as it may be read) Let my face, Lord, seek thy face:
What he means by the face of God, and so by (thee, thee) in the 63. Psalm, he
expounds himself, ver. 2. That I may see thy power and thy glory in the
Sanctuary, namely, the powerful and glorious manifestations of God in his
Ordinances, the manifestation of all his divine attributes and excellencies,
that which God offered unto Moses, Exodus 33.23. and which our Lord promises to
all his loving and obedient Disciples; John 14.21
He that loves me shall be loved of my Father, and I will love him, and will
manifest my self unto him; yea, Father and Son, ver. 23. we will come, and make
our abode with him: This is the (...), the height and altitude of our Gospel
vision, as God told Moses, thou shall see my back-parts; the face of God, the
vision of God, his essence, (whatever it is) that is reserved for an higher
form, the vision in glory; yea, I must tell you the clear manifestation of any
divine truth in the brightness of it upon the understanding, and in the
sweetness of it upon the heart, is this Evangelical vision, as well as those
higher manifestations of the Father, and the Son, and the Holy Spirit in divine
ravishments: I say, when it pleases God, by the Spirit, to beam in
Gospel Truth from the very face of Christ, not into the head only, but into the
heart, with such a glorious light, 2 Cor. 4.6 1 Peter 2.9
that it seems to be the same in the Soul as it is in Jesus, the very glory of
God, so that the Soul stands wondering at the light, when in his light we see
light, divine truth, by a divine irradiation, not by borrowed mediums and
natural representations only by its own native brightness and luster.

This, this, Christians, is Gospel vision, which as it does necessarily tend
to, so it will infallibly expire into the beatifical, facial vision in glory.
How rare are those Christians, that do experience this vision of God in the
Ordinance, yea, how rare are they that do thus breath, and pant, and cry out
for the living God with this holy Psalmist? Hence darkness, hence deadness,
hence formality, a powerless profession has woefully spread it self upon the
face of Christianity, yea, upon the very reformed parts of it. Let Christians
stir up themselves, and let their souls press hard after God, when they come to
Ordinances, or else this very thing will be worse to them than all the evil
that befell them from their youth until now, it may provoke God to withdraw
even the Evangelical vision from them here, and, without great repentance, to
deny them admission to the beatifical vision hereafter: They that will not seek
Gods face in Grace, shall not see Gods face in Glory.

The sixth and last object of the beatifical vision is, Sixth Object of the
blessed vision, All things in God.
All things in God. God is the universal Library of all truth, whether divine
or natural; yea, all truth (qua truth) is divine, and does emanate from the God
of truth, in whom it is, there to be read as in its original, and lies open
for all the whole University of those heavenly Academicks to peruse. Yet we
must remember, that the divine essence is an arbitrary and voluntary glass,
manifesting all mysteries not by necessity, but according to the freedom of his
own will; there the Saints may read to the full the Mystery of the blessed
Trinity, how three in one, and one in three, Father, Son and Holy Ghost, God
blessed for ever! That thrice glorious and (till we come to Heaven) not to be
fathomed Mystery, the wonder and adoration of the believing world, that immense
ocean, over which so many daring Spirits having essayed to fly, have fallen in
and been drowned: that burning light, unto which so many presuming to approach
too near, have scorcht their wings, and lost both their eyes and themselves
together: that sacred Ark, into which too many presumptuous Bethshemites, (...).
having dared, over boldly, to look, have been smitten: What is essence? And
what is person? And how they differ? How the Father begets, and the Son is
begotten, and how the Holy Ghost proceeds from both: how they are
distinguished, by their order, their personal properties, and manner of working
upon the Creature: how the Father works from himself, the Son works from
the Father, and the Holy Ghost works both from the Father and the Son: How
there should be alius and alius, and not aliud and aliud, etc. These will be
Lectures which shall be read in the Trinity it self in glory, and that in a
most clear and intelligible notion.

then shall the Saints be able to understand the mystery of the incarnation of
the second Person, the Son of God, that Mystery of Godliness (of Godliness, 1 Timothy 3.16
because it transforms sinners into Saints; and mystery, because it contains
so many deep and mysterious wonders in it. The blessed, blessed-making Mystery
of the Incarnation, of the Son of God, our Lord Jesus Christ, scil. Why the
second Person in Trinity, rather than the first or third should be incarnate?
Why he should take the nature of man rather than the nature of Angels, and that
when it was at the worst? how he could take the nature of sinful man, and yet
not take the sinfulness of his nature? the Hypostatical union between the
divine and humane natures in the Lord Jesus, in one person; how there should be
there aliud and aliud, and yet not alius and alius? That mysterious union,
between the Lord Christ the Head, and all Believers the true Members of his
body, what it is, and how they are made one with Christ, as the Father and the
Son are one; this precious Mystery (I say) shall then be made manifest, Jehn
14.20. at that day you shall know, both what it is, and how it is, that I am in
the Father, and you in me, and I in you, etc. then, and not till then. How he
that is every where, filling Heaven and Earth with his presence, should yet be
included in the narrow limits of a Virgins womb? How he that made the Law,
should be made under the Law? How the Ancient of days should become an Infant
of moments? How he that was begot before all time, should be born in the
fullness of time? Ephesians. 3.10
How a Virgin, and yet a Mother! These and a thousand difficulties more,
wherein does meet that (...), multiform, multivarious wisdom of God, (...). 1
Pet. 1.12 Ephesians. 3.10
as lines in a center, where into the very Angels desire to peep, and for some
imperfect discoveries, whereof they are glad to be beholding to the Lectures
read in the Churches, by their Hoc v^rd nostra altior no titis praedicatur quam
Anclorum, tan (...) intelligit Petrus ea nobu promitti, quorum complementum
videre cupiunt. Call. in loc.

(...), alludit ad propuiatorii formam. etc. Jam tum indicante figura, fore ut
in Christo cujus typur erat arca, omnes sapientiae, and intelligentiae
insiderent thesauri, per Evangelii praedication^m patesaciendi; avid^ ipsis
Angel^ beat^ totum hoc mysterium cognoscare, cujus etiam exhibitionem, jam inde
ab ip^is Christi noscentu incunabilu ecclesiae enarr^rant. Beza in loc.


earthly Angels, the Ministers of the Gospel; these, I say, shall be clearly
read and understood in that original wisdom wherein they were first conceived.

That profound and dark Mystery of Election and Reprobation, why God should
choose one and leave another? Why God should love Jacob and hate Esau? Why the
one should become (...), and the other (...)? Why first the Jews should be a
Church, and the Gentiles (Aliens) should afterward be adopted into the
Covenant, and the Jews broken off and cast out? That God should break open the
heart of a rebellious sinner by efficacious Grace, and deny sufficient aid to
one that has improved his present strength far better? With all other the
dark, profound Mysteries of Gods Decrees, shall then be made glasses. And
lastly, That mystery of wickedness and abominations, and why God has suffered
him so long to reign, and to usurp so great a part of Christ's purchased and
promised possessions, with all his witchcrafts and sorceries, whereby he has
deceived the Nations, they shall all be discovered and brought to light, to his
eternal shame and confusion? That God should shine out only upon some few spots
of ground with the light of the Gospel, and shut up the rest in palpable
darkness,

The Creation of the World, shall then be more clearly understood in the cause,
than now it is in the effect, how all things were made out of the first matter,
and that out of nothing. Rev. 13 10 14.12
Those hard mysteries of providence which do now try and exercise the faith and
patience of the Saints, scil. Why they that are best should speed worst? That
there be just men, unto whom it happens according to the work of the wicked;
and again, That there be wicked men, Eccl 8.14
unto whom it happens according to the work of the righteous; In so much,
that now we call the proud happy, Mal. 3.15.
and they that work wickedness are set up, yea, they that tempt God are even
delivered? Why the worse cause should many times have the better success? Why
God should suffer his dearest Children to be abused and insulted over, when
wickedness in the mean while triu^mphs securely? Why wickedness should be set
up in high places, and innocence should be trod under foot? Somewhat of these
Riddles the Word does now interpret unto the Saints (blessed be God) to command
their silence and submission to God, but then shall they return and discern
between the righteous and the wicked, between him that serves God, and him
that serves him not: all this will be then seen in God to infinite
satisfaction.

The grand Article of the Faith, The Resurrection of the dead (being, then,
already past) shall be fully understood, how the body after thousands of years
(in some) through unutterable varieties of mutations and vast dispersions into
all the quarters and corners of the world, should be revolved back again, bone
to bone, and skin to skin, and every dust to its own dust, it shall clearly be
expounded in the mirror of the divine understanding, Acts 26.8 The Saints
themselves are both Instances and Expositions of that Text.
and exemplified in (the counter-part thereof) the bodies of the Saints; then
it shall no longer be thought a thing incredible, that God should raise the
dead. All the hard places of Scripture, that vex the profoundest Divines, and
make the Believer sigh out his How can I understand, except some man should
guide me? shall then be expounded in the Original text of eternal verity, Acts
8.31
without looking into any other Commentary, and oh what joy will that be, to
understand the whole Bible without study? 2 Peter 3.17 There shall be in the
glorified understanding at the Schools say, Cognitio clara and lucid clara and
fixa contemplatio omnium naturaliter scibilium, even above its primitive
capacity. The Soul shall be indeed at its full (...).
Then the meanest understanding shall be able to confute all the depths and
fallacies of Jesuitical seducers, whereby they have darkened the Truth, and led
away the willingly ignorant into their pernicious errors, and doctrines of
Devils.

In a word, All the Arcana of Nature and all the Mysteries of Philosophy
(properly so called) with all occult things under the Sun, and the highest
speculations of this nether Orb, in the painful and knotty disquisition
whereof the greatest Masters of secular learning have tired themselves almost
to distraction, and upon the gaining of some little supposed satisfaction,
wherein they have so much gloried, and insulted over other men, shall now be
made easy and familiar to the Saints, the very A B C of Heaven, and only worth
a cast of their eyes, either as such knowledge came from God, or as it leads
them unto God again.

For the use of this last branch of the heavenly vision: moderate and restrain
that inordinate curiosity in our natures, to be looking into dark and hidden
mysteries. There is a concupiscence in the understanding, lusting after
forbidden knowledge, as there is in the will after forbidden fruit; we inherit
both from our first Father and Mother; they affected a knowledge above the
capacity of their natures; they would know as God knows, universally,
intuitively, and at once; but by such an ambition of knowing more than they
ought, they forfeited what they had, which was sufficient to have made them
happy; and while they aspired to be as God which made them, they became like
the beasts that perish. It was the presumption of the Bethshemites, they would
be prying into the Ark, though they died for it; and there is a pride and
wantonness in our nature, 1 Samuel 6.19
which sets us a prying into Arcana Coeli, the hidden and secret councels of
God. Adam's Children are yet sick of his disease, they would fain be as wise as
God, and know all things: But, the secret things belong unto the Lord our God;
but those things which are revealed belong unto us, and to our children for
ever, that we may do them. And in these revealed things there is matter enough
to exercise our studies, had we Methusalem's lease of life sealed to us. In the
revealed things of God, there is so much yet unrevealed, and therefore left
unrevealed, that we might search and dig into them, Prove. 2, 3, 4. with the
addition of a promise to encourage industry, Then shall we know, Hosea 6.3 Ars
longa, vita brevis. M^aeima pars little quae scimus, est minima pars eorum qua
nescimus.
if we follow on to know the Lord; so much I say, that when we have traveled
many years in the disquisition and search thereof, we may fit down and
complain, our lives are too short for our work, and truly confess, that the
greatest part of what we know, is nothing to what we are ignorant of. Oh that
upon those studies Christians would lay out their time and spirits! proving
what is that goood, and acceptable, and perfect will of God. And therefore
study to know it, that they may do it, for to such is the promise, John 7.17
If any man will do his will, he shall know of the doctrine whether it be of
God: Oh this is excellent, when Christians study to know that they may do, and
not that they may know only; and so doing they shall know, and so knowing they
shall do; this will keep open the passage between the head and the heart, That
the man of God may be perfect, 2 Timothy 3.17
thoroughly furnished unto all good works. But in the time according to the
Apostle his Caution, Romans 12.3. It is our duty to be wise to sobriety, and it
is our sobriety not to be wise where God would have us to be ignorant; (...).
Of that hour knows no man, no not the Angels of heaven; behold the very
Angels of God, who for their knowledge are called Angels of light, Mark 12.32
are yet in this point (of the last day) contented to be in the dark, and the
Evangelist has an addition of a higher consideration, neither the Son, but the
Father, whether the sense be that the humane nature of Christ is absolutely
ignorant of that day, or knows it only by revelation from the divine nature,
the document is the same, viz. on this side glory to be contented to know no
more than God has revealed; where Scripture is silent, there to be willing to
be ignorant. And for our encouragement and satisfaction keep this consideration
alive, upon your hearts, we shall not always be ignorant; secret things shall
not always be secret, the time is coming when Mysteries shall be Revelations,
when we shall be able to read that in the original, which we cannot now so much
as spell out in the translation; nor in any measure understand with the help of
all our Commentaries. It was that which much comforted that precious Saint and
Martyr, Mr. C^lamy, etc.
Mr. Christopher Love, while he was prisoner in the Tower; The day before he
died, diverse of his learned, godly Brethren, came to take their last farewell
of him, (as being never to see him more, until they saw him ascending to and
with their common Lord and Redeemer) they fell into a discourse of the joys of
Heaven (a discourse suitable to that solemn parting) and in that discourse
meeting with some difficulty, which the Scripture had not determined, and so
being silenced, that holy man, with a smiling countenance, and looking upward
to Heaven, brake forth into these words (or others like them) Well (said he) to
morrow by this time I shall fully understand this mystery, and it will be no
difficulty unto me.

It is indeed a most satisfying contemplation, that the time is coming when we
shall be ignorant of nothing, but know all things to be known, the knowing
whereof may any way make us happy; in Heaven we shall know as much of all the
mysteries of Grace and Nature as we would know; Etiam curiositas satiabitur,
Anselm. John 14.20
Curiosity it self shall be satisfied, we shall know whatsoever it is we desire
to know; with this our Lord satisfies his Disciples, concerning those two
great mysterious unions, the essential union, union between the Father and the
Son, that I am in my Father, and the mystical union that is between him and all
believers, you in me, and I in you, q. d. although now ye are ignorant of these
high, transcendent mysteries, yet let this stay and comfort your hearts, when I
shall come again in glory, to take you unto my self (that where I am there you
may be also) then these shall be no mysteries unto you, but so many evidential
Revelations; At that day ye shall know, then, and not till then.

And so it may abundantly satisfy the insatiable desires of inquisitous
spirits, into the deep mysteries both of Creation and Redemption, That when
Christ shall appear, we shall also appear with him in glory; and then shall the
veil be taken away, and they shall see God, and all things in Gods face which
their souls desire to see, the soul shall be filled and inebriated with variety
of all desirable knowledge, that may any way tend to its perfection. This may
satisfy; save that it may set their souls a longing for that day, and cause
them to cry out with the Bride, Even so come Lord Jesus, come quickly.

The third Privilege contained in Cohabitation is Fruition.
A third Privilege employed in the Saints being with the Lord, 3. Privilege
Fruition.
is Fruition; Vision, in Glory, is accompanied with fruition; and this is that
which makes it truly beatifical: whatever glorified Saints see, they do enjoy,
else this Vision would not differ much from Report; nor that state of glory,
from an Heaven in a well-drawn Launskip. The very Reprobate (it seems) have a
prospect of Heaven, Luke 13.28
but to their torment, they themselves being thrust out.

Now Fruition consists of a ten-fold Ingredient or Property.

Viz. 1. Propriety. 2. Possession. 3. Intimacy. 4. Suitableness 5. Satiety, or
fullness. 6. Freshness. 7. Present. 8. Fixedness. 9. Reflection. 10. Complacency.


The first Ingredient into Fruition is Propriety; 1. Ingredient Propriety.
Whatsoever the Saints see in Heaven is their own; God says to Abraham, Genesis
13.14
now in the heavenly Canaan, what he once said to him of the earthly, Lift up
thine eyes, and look from the place where thou art Northward, Southward,
Eastward and Westward; for all the land which thou see (...) thee do I give
it; whatever is within that vast circumference of Heaven it is Abraham's, and
all his spiritual seeds for ever. Now David may tune his Michtam a key higher;
and instead of, Gilead is mine, Psalm. 60.7, 8
and Manasseh is mine, Ephraim and Judah, etc. he may now sing, God is mine,
and Christ is mine, and the Spirit is mine; all the elect Angels are mine, and
all the whole Congregation of the firstborn mine, all the glory of Heaven is
mine. And so may the best of the Saints in heaven triumph, all is mine, and
what pleasures, or riches, or honors, or glory, or joys, are in the presence
of God, they are all mine. (...), John 1.13
They did sing so while yet in the valley of tears; or they might have sung so;
Faith gave them a title, their Jus adrem, a right to Heaven, but the blessed
vision gives them now real interest, Jus in re, right in Heaven; and they need
not now fear to call it theirs; they might have said, my God, my Christ, and my
Comforter here below, but one thing was to be done first; sound Scripture
evidence was to be cleared out, and sealed up to their souls, but some or other
defect therein (did not seldom) check their confidence, and damp their joy for
a time. But now in glory Propriety is beyond all dispute; their evidences were
seen and allowed at their first admission into Heaven, and now mine, mine, is
their song and triumph to all eternity, and God is not ashamed to be called
their God; truly he was not ashamed to be called so, even when they had but too
much cause to be ashamed of themselves, and gave God too much cause to be
ashamed of them. But now God is so far from being ashamed of owning them, that
he rejoices in them, and glories over them.

This people I have formed for my self, Isai. 43.21
they shall show forth my praise: And again,

Fear not, for I have redeemed thee, verse 1
I have called thee by thy name, thou art mine.

Yea, I have loved thee with an everlasting love, Jer. 31.3
therefore with loving kindness have I drawn thee.

The Lord Jesus Christ is not ashamed to call them brethren; to own them for
Subjects, Friends, Rev. 15.3 chap. 14.1
Coheirs with himself in glory, his Bride. And they claim their Propriety in
him as such. The King of Saints, chap. 1.6 verse 5, 9
with their Fathers name written in their foreheads; they follow the Lamb
whithersoever he goes, chap. 21.9 Mat. 18.10
owning themselves as his beloved, his redeemed, Kings and Priests unto God and
his Father; yea, as the Lambs Wife. They have a propriety in all the elect
Angels of God: they be still their Angels, as ready to do them brotherly
offices as ever, and take more complacency in their company and in them than
ever, by how much more purified and Angelified they are, then when they lay
among the pots of the earth, now made like themselves, fellow Angels (as it
were) as well as fellow Saints.

They have propriety in one another, although they may know some of the Saints
under the notion of natural relations; yet do these all cease there, as now
being retired into the first and chief root and Springhead of divine Relation;
Children of one heavenly Father, in whose House they are all together,
embracing and courting one another in purest communion and communications of
love; each Saint not more himself than his fellow Saints.

In a word; the place where the Saints are met together (never to part) it is
their own, not a strange Country (where they see one another as Strangers and
Pilgrims do sometimes visit and comfort one another) Heaven is not a borrowed
Palace (where they are admitted by courtesy) to celebrate a Festival for a few
days or years, but the Saints in Heaven are at home now, 2 Cor. 5.2
in their own house and Kingdom.

Their own 1. By Inheritance, Col. 1.13. An Inheritance prepared for them, from
before the world had any foundation, but what it had in Gods Decree, Matthew.
25.24. 2. By purchase: Therefore is Heaven called the Purchased possession,
Ephesians. 1.14. Their dear Lord and Bridegroom purchased them and their
Inheritance together with his own blood, 1 Pet. 1.19.


He bought the Inheritance for them, and them for the Inheritance at the same
price.

This is the first thing employed in Fruition, Propriety; without which the
vision were no way beatifical; for how can that make me happy, which I have no
title to or interest in? Toll meum, toll Deum.
Take away mine and ye take away Heaven; yea, take away mine and ye take away
God: good is no farther good (to me) than as it is mine; and as I may
warrantably claim my right to it, and interest in it.

A second Property of Fruition is, Possession; 2. Ingredient Possession.
the Saints have not only propriety in Heaven, but Possession of Heaven; when
their dearest and sweetest Lord left the world, and ascended to his Father,
they took possession of Heaven in him, as in their great Representative and
Head, Joh. 14.2. But when they ascended to him, now they take possession of it
in their own persons. They had livery and seasin given them by the Father, upon
the consummation of their marriage with his dear Son Jesus Christ, their Royal
Bridegroom. And it was done in the presence of the eternal Spirit, the public
Notary of Heaven, 1 John 5.8. All the holy Angels standing by as so many
Witnesses; so that God himself could not make Heaven surer to them than he has
made it.

While the Saints were upon earth, Heaven was theirs, but it was only in
reversion, and they counted themselves blessed in that, Matthew. 5.3. But now
reversion is turned into possession; the Saints hold nothing in Heaven by
reversion, that title cease there: All the Beatitudes in Heaven are present
possession; God, and Christ, and the Holy Ghost, Angels, and Saints, and all
the glory of the upper world, are so many possessions; the Saints are possessed
of God, and possessed of Christ, and possessed of the Holy Ghost, and possessed of
glory: as on the contrary, the damned in hell are possessed of the Devil, they
are possessed of hell, and of utter darkness, and of the worm that shall never
dye, etc. Oh dreadful possession!

Hope was once their tenure: Titus 1.2 Romans 5.1
In hope of eternal life, which God that cannot lie, etc. And they rejoiced in
it; Ye rejoice in the hope of the glory of God, and they blessed God for it:
Blessed be the God and Father of our Lord Jesus, which has begotten us again
unto a lively hope, etc. of which hope faith was the substance and basis, Heb.
11.1. and even this hope was very precious unto them a little heaven upon
earth, save that now and then some clouds of fear and doubts did interpose
between heaven and their dim eye, and so eclipsed their vision.

But faith and hope did set them down at the gate of heaven, and then, with
Moses, died in the mount; and took leave of them for ever.

And if faith was so precious to them then, what is sight now? If hope made
their hearts (not seldom) leap for joy, how does possession now fill them with
joy unspeakable and glorious, (...), above all hyperbolye of expression!

Object. If any should be so critical as to object, In heaven the Saints live
in the hope and faith of the continuance of heaven!

We make use of the Apostles Maxim for Answer.

Hope seen is not hope: Romans 8.24
All the glory of heaven is seen, and all is present, there is no futurity in
heaven: heaven i^ but one point of eternity; 1 Cor 13. last
the Saints have all beatitudes, and all at once in God; now abides indeed
faith and hope, but then possession. Mat. 18.1
They shall sit down with Abraham, Isaac and Jacob in the Kingdom of Heaven.
The Kingdom of Heaven is theirs, and they shall sit by it. All the precious
privileges of the Gospel, which cost Christ so dear, are now perfected into
full possession. Adoption is now perfect; now they are the Sons of God, and
they know what it is to be the Sons of God: Justification is now complete:
Sanctification is now at perfect age: In a word, all their hopes are now their
inheritance. This is fruition!

A third Ingredient, of which Fruition does consist, 3. Property Intimacy.
is Intimacy: Propriety and Possession are not sufficient to constitute
fruition: Mutual converse will not serve the turn, without intimate communion:
Communion not with one another persons only, but with one another spirits;
this is fruition, when friends are possessed of one another heart, and one
another spirits. In Heaven there is not mutual cohabitation only, but mutual
inhabitation. 1 John 4.16.
This is the great beatitude of heaven, even vital vision, with all the
beatifying objects thereof; mutual in dwelling, and mutual in being. God dwells
in the Saints, and the Saints dwell in God: It was so here, God is Love: He
that dwells in love, dwells in God, and God in him. The Saints love to God is
now made perfect (without a figure) and as their love is, so is their mutual in
being, perfect; I in them, John 17.23
and they in me, that they may be made perfect in one: Perfect, according to
the supreme Exemplar, verse 21
As thou Father art in me, and I in thee, that they also may he one in us: This
also had its imitation on earth, it has now its consummation in heaven; the
Saints can be no nearer God than they are: ( Essential union is the sole
prerogative of the glorious Trinity:) They dwell also, in Christ; I in them,
and they in me: Eternity is their wedding day, Heaven their bride-chamber,
their bed of love is the heart of Christ, and it is always green, always
fresh, and always flourishing with interchangeable loves.

There the Saints see the place where they were conceived from all eternity,
and read the very original thoughts wherewith their Redeemer and Bridegroom
loved them, when as yet they were not formed in their Mothers belly; and their
Epithalamium, or Nuptial song is, I am my Beloveds, and my Beloved is mine;
Cant. 2.1^
they began this Song in the day of their espousals, and continue it in their
everlasting wedding day, which they celebrate in mutual embraces and
festivities, joying in one another, and glorying in one another, delighting
themselves in mutual appropriations and appreciations, mutually contemplating
and commending one another beauties and perfections. Behold thou art fair, my
Love, behold thou art fair, and there is no spot in thee.

The Angels and Saints in light, behold they dwell not with one another only,
but in one another; they inhabit, as it were, in one another hearts.

That primative Congregation, Acts 4. was a lively type of this Royal
Congregation of the firstborn, Acts 2.1 (...). Crederes unam ani^am in omnibus
^esse divisam. Chap. 4.32
They are all with one accord in one place; so these, one place holds them all,
and one soul animateth and acts them all. The whole multitude of Saints in
heaven are, (...), all of one heart and of one soul: Neither said any of them,
that ought of the things which he possesses are their own, but the joy of one
is the joy of all, (I cannot say the sorrow of one is the sorrow of all, for
this is their prerogative which was not on earth, there is no sorrow in
heaven:) The Saints and Angels mutually open their hearts one to another, and
communicate their notions, and mysteries, and loves, and desires one to
another, as having as much share in; and right to one another as to themselves.

Neither are those celestial Inhabitants e're a whit the more remote from God,
when they thus go into one another, There is no diversion in Heaven from the
summum bonuo^.
for (where ever it is) they meet with God, he fills Saints and Angels, not
only as he does the world, with the fullness of his being and power, but with
the fullness of his glorious and beatifying presence; they are still in God, and
God in them.

In a word, whatever beatitude there is in heaven, the Saints and Angels are in
it: hence it is said, they enter into joy: here below joy entered into them, but
there they enter into joy: Heaven is all inside, yea, God himself is the inside
of heaven: This is fruition indeed.

A fourth Ingredient into Fruition is, Fullness: A fourth In gredi^^ Falne^.
There is in Heaven good, and there is enough of it: Fullness to satisfaction:
They shall be abundantly satisfied with the fatness of thy house, Psalm. ^8.
and thou shall make them drink of the river of thy pleasures: The joys of
heaven are compared to a Feast, Venachal g^ada necha.
consisting of all imaginable rarities both of meats and drinks, fatness
expressing the delicacy of food, and the River of Eden (for so the word
signifies) of the River of thy Eden; the ravishing sweetness of their drink,
infinitely beyond all that is fancied by the Poets, of the Nectar and Ambrosia
of the Gods (which indeed was but an imperfect notion of the joys of Heaven,
filched out of some fragments of Scripture by those blind Naturalists.) But of
such deliciousness does this marriage Supper consist of, and there is plenty of
them, plenty even to satiety, they shall be satisfied with the fatness, and
inebriated with those wines upon the lees well refined: The Master of the feast
will say to his Guest;, then in the feast, what he said here below in the
figure.

Eat O friends, drink, yea, drink abundatlny, Cant. 5.1. Heb. Or be drunken
with love.
my beloved.

And it must needs be so; for every one of the glorified Inhabitants do enjoy
an whole God, even the whole glorious and thrice blessed Trinity; an whole
Christ in his glorified humane nature; every one does enjoy an whole Heaven,
with all the felicities of it, as much as if Heaven had been made but for one
individual person. For although the Church of the firstborn in heaven consists
of ten thousand times ten thousands, and thousands of thousands, yet has no
one the less for what others do enjoy.

As in Nature, every beholder has an whole Sun, and the whole Heavens to
himself, with all their splendor and influence, as much as if there were but
one man in the world.

In terrestrials (indeed) it is not so; there what one man has, another has
not, and where many share, every single man's portion is the less: whence it is
that Meum and Tuum fills all the world with quarrels and confusions:

But there is no such thing in heaven: the multitude of heirs do not divide or
lessen the Inheritance: the Reason is, because there are no particles in
Essentials; every one has all, and none the less for what another enjoys.

Yea, the more, because the joy of one is the joy of all; every heir of Glory
enjoys not only what himself has, but what his Coheir has too; so that
upon the point each Saint enjoys as many heavens as there be Angels and Saints
in heaven: A blessed Mystery of Multiplication.

With thee is the fountain of life: Psalm. 36.9.
how can they choose but be full, who are always at the fountainhead? Yea, are
always drencht and immerst in the immence Ocean of Beatitudes, God himself,
the Latitude of all Being, Truth, and Good.

God is infinitely full of himself, and infinitely happy in his own happiness,
and infinitely satisfied in his own happiness.

And this is the augment of the Saints joy, that they are not able to contain
that infinite Object of Glory: apprehend it they may, comprehend it they
cannot: And this the blessed Angels and Saints rejoice in, that God only
dwells in himself, and they in him, and are as full of God, as a finite
Creature can be of an infinite Creator, brim-full, and running over: yet so, as
that in all this reduncancy not one drop shall be spilt, or run wast for all
the overflowings of sweetness and glory do run back again into the fountain, in
streams, or (rather) in the flames of love and admiration; they take in by
fruition, and give out again by praise and admiration.

And thus of all other the unconceiveable Beatitudes of glory, there shall be
satiety without nauseating, so that they shall say they have enough, without
envying others, or wishing more for themselves. Now they may have some fits of
joy, but then they shall have their fill; even the external senses of the
glorified body shall now contain more glory, 2 Cor. 4.17
than the spiritual senses of their Souls were capable of in this imperfect
state. (...), a pressing or oppressing weight.
The Saints shall have as much glory as they are able to stand under; hence we
read of a weight of glory, a weight that would utterly sink and crush them into
nothing, were there not an Arm of Omnipotence to sustain them, and to make them
bear it, as their Crown, not as a burden, with ease and delight.

Suitableness is another Ingredient into Fruition, 5 Ingredient Suitableness.
without which both the former, scil. both Intimacy and Fullness would be a
burden, and not a bliss; suffering rather than fruition. In the choice of our
inferior felicities in this life, whether things or persons, we have more
respect to the suitableness of them, than to their preciousness: the just
content of the married estate consists not in the rareness of beauty, or
largeness of portion or possessions, no, not (always) in the eminency of
grace, but in the suitableness of disposition; and so our experience will tell
us of all other states and conditions in the world; and this is the great
infelicity of this present world, that it affords it not such an absolute
parity between the person and the possession (from the King upon the Throne, to
the Hermit in the Cave) as that a Person should be found that can say (unless
it be upon the account of gracious submission to the divine will) I would not
wish my condition other than it is.

This is only Heavens prerogative: All the Beatitudes of that upper world, both
in their nature and degree, shall be most agreeable to the constitution of the
Saints; in their nature, they being suitable to the nature of the Saints, to the
heavenly Principles of purity and holiness communicated to them from the divine
nature; both the objects and subjects of glory are of one and the same
constitution. This must needs breed unconceiveable delight.

And as suitable are all the Joys of Heaven in their degrees and proportions
to the heavenly capacities: The Objects of glory.
neither too much, nor too little, nor too heavy for the Saints to bear, nor
too light, neither too vehement, nor overflat.

The weight of that prepared glory shall not be heavier than those blessed
Souls shall be well able to sustain with exceeding pleasure, neither shall it
be so light, that they shall be able to say, I could bear more.

The light of glory shall not hurt the organ, by an over-vehement brightness;
neither yet shall there be the least dimness in it, to abate the delight of the
acutest sense.

The language of the new Jerusalem, Isai. 33.19. Gal. 4.26.
shall be one and the same throughout all the streets thereof; not a speech
deeper than the meanest Saint can perceive, nor a barbarous tongue that they
cannot understand shall be heard there, but the Mother-language, intelligible
and Isacile to be understood and spoken, by the meanest Inhabitant, shall be
the language of the upper Canaan, that all may hear, and all may understand, to
their unspeakable satisfaction.

The music of Heaven shall be sweetest melody to every ear, and though it
consists of the rarest strains, and most delicate airs, that ever ear heard,
yet it shall not transcend the skill of the lowest capacity, but the meanest
Chorister in the heavenly Temple shall bear his part with the most Seraphick
Angel, in the higher or lower praises of the most high God in most perfect
Symphony.

The infinite variety of most luscious delicacies, wherewith the Table shall be
spread, where Abraham and all his spiritual Seed shall be feasted, shall
consist of rellishes suitable to the palate of every Guest there; what is
fancied of the Manna of the nether heavens, shall be fully verified of the
Manna of the third heaven; it shall give that taste to every palate, which every
palate likes best, yea, all the Saints shall be but of one and the same guest,
the delight of one is the delight of all.

In a word, all the Objects of glory do hit the faculty with a most perfect and
commensural proportion: there is nothing in heaven to offend or greive the
least in the Kingdom of God, yea, which is not of the most absolute complacency.

Earth is a place of mixture and composition, somewhat suitable, and somewhat
unsuitable; some pleasure, some vexation: Hell and Heaven are the extremes:
Hell is a place of unmixed torment, nothing there but what is renitency to the
will of the damned; nothing present but what the Reprobate would not; nothing
absent but what he wishes for.

Heaven is a place of unmixed joy; Nullum bonum abesset hominis quod recta
voluntas op^ar^ possit. Aug. De Ci. vit. Dei.
nothing wanting of all that blessed Souls can rationally desire; nothing
absent, the absence whereof can possibly give any check to their fullest
delight.

And though possibly there may be several orbs of glory, (for as one Star
differs from another in glory, so also is the Resurrection of the dead) yet
shall not the inferior orb envy the superior, nor think it self too low;
there shall be no such voices heard from the mouth of any the meanest
Inhabitant, Oh were I but in such a superior orb I should be happy, such a
Mansion would please me better: This would destroy fruition, and make heaven
cease to be heaven: but no such whisper is to be heard, no such thought in that
holy Mountain; because, the glory of one is the glory of all, and every Saint
is as happy in another fullness, as in its own; yea, it enjoys its own and
the others glory too; the narrowest capacity is widened by the others fullness;
the joy of one is the joy of all.

In a word, the Saints shall live in love, and have all in him who is all, not
so much as wishing their fellow Saints less, or themselves more, nor any thing
in that whole world of felicities otherwise than it is. This is fruition.

Oh that all that have this bope in them would study to begin this life here
below!

The next property of this fruition is Fixedness: 6. Fixedness.
There be of those things in the world which men call felicities, which (if
they be not mistaken in their nature) to be sure they will find floating and
unfixed. There is scarce a comfort which we possess in this moveable world,
that we can find the same at the years end, or at the months end, which we
fancy them to be at the beginning: all our most beautiful objects, how quickly
they change color, and our very options grow stale upon our hands, In the
morning it flourishes and grows up, in the evening it is cut down and
withers, 1 Pet. 1.4.
Psalm. 90 6. But blessed be the God and Father of our Lord Jesus Christ, which
according to his abundant mercy has begotten us to an inheritance, (...),
Isidore. Semper vivens.
uncorruptible, and undefiled, and that fades not away; the heavenly
inheritance is compared to that precious stone that cannot be soiled; (as one
of the Ancients writes) and to a choice flower that never withers, but is
always green. (...), 1 Cor. 7.31. 1 John 2.18. (...), a mathematical figure.
Rev. 4.8. Mat. 18.10. Worldly pleasures engratiate themselves by intermission:
Voluptates commendst rarior usus. Whereas heavenly pleasures heighten and
advance themselves by fixed and constant emanations.


The world is compared to a Stage, where the Scean is quickly changed, and
another face of things does suddenly appear; but Heaven is a place of fixed and
immutable beatitudes: Heaven is still of one fashion, their work the same, they
rest not day and night, saying, Holy, holy, holy, Lord God Almighty, which was,
and is, and is to come.

And their joy the same; They do always behold the face of their heavenly
Father. They are in God, like God, Yesterday, and to day, and the same for
ever; with whom is no variableness, neither shadow of turning. The Saints in
Heaven are so far from mutation, that there is no shadow of it. Here on earth
our choicest delights meet with changes; created beings show their face a
while, then hide it again; their color goes and comes, they are always in
motu and fluxu. Godly acquaintance is sweet, but the farewell is bitter; we
call at the door, and sip of the cup, but we cannot stay by it. The best of our
time is but a seventh part of it, and how woefully full of diversions! Such is
our heaven on earth; but our heaven in glory, or our glory in heaven, is not
so, God is the only unchangeable object of the Soul; there the Soul stays, and
sucks, and drinks immeasurably, and yet there is not a drop less in the object.

A seventh property is Reflextion. 7. Property, Reflection.
Reflection is one of the choicest Ingredients into Fruition: to enjoy Heaven in
all the beatitudes thereof, and to know I do enjoy it, this is the beatitude of
all beatitudes. Direct Acts and Privileges of Grace, scil. to believe, to love
Christ, to be united to him, to have communion with him, to be clothed with
his Righteousness, to be acted by his Spirit, etc. these may make a Christian
safe, but (alone) they cannot make him sure: these may constitute a Christian
happy, but not give him the comfort of his happiness: and how many precious
Saints of God are there in this vale of tears, whose all consists in these bare
naked direct acts; the newborn Babe, Vivit and est vitae nescius ipso suae.
often like the natural Babes in the womb, has spiritual life in him, but he
knows it not? how many gracious Souls believe, but know not they do believe?
Yea, cannot believe, they do believe? They think they have no grace, because
they have so much corruption; they think they have no grace, because they have
not so much grace as they would have; they love Christ, but know not they love
Christ: they covet so much love to Christ, that they seem to themselves to have
none at all; they are united to Christ, and have communion with him, but can
apprehend neither this nor the other. Et sic in caeteris.

And this is that which makes their lives so uncomfortable to them for the
present, Psalm. 42.9.
and causes them to go mourning all the day long; yea, sometimes with Mary,
they talk with Christ, and Christ with them, but their eyes are held, they know
him not. Christ and the Soul speak like strangers one to another, John 20.15.
Woman, says Christ: Sir, says the Soul: Until Christ be pleased to speak in
a more familiar dialect, better understood by the poor Believer, (Mary) and
then the ravished Soul turns it self unto him, ver. 16.
and springing into his arms, cries out, (Rabboni) My Master, my Lord and my
God.

It fares with many a poor believer here in the wilderness of desertion, Genesis
21.16.17.18: Isai. 12.3.
as it did with Hagar in hers, they sit down to dye, for want of water, when
there is a well before them; yea, ver. 19.
many a well of living water (the precious promises) out of which wells of
salvation they might with joy draw water, and drink and forget their sorrows;
but alas they see them not, until God open their eyes, and then they can go and
fill their bottles, and drink, and cause others to drink also. This is often the
state of the way! Oh but now, in the Country, the land of fruition, there the
Saints have their reflext Acts as well as their direct Acts; they see, and they
know they see; they love, and they know they love; yea, they are beloved, and
they know they are beloved: They are bathing themselves in the Rivers of
pleasures, and they know where they are, and what they do: All tears are wiped
from their eyes, and they know who wiped them off with the kisses of his mouth.
They are safe, yea, and they are sure; they are blessed, and they know they are
blessed. The Spouse is now got into the Throne, the bosom of her Beloved, the
King of Glory, and there she sings (and she sins not in it as the Harlot did)
Here I sit as a Queen, Rev. 18.7.
and am no widow, and shall see sorrow no more for ever.

In a word, all the acts of love, and joy, and delight in Heaven, are acts of
highest assurance, without the least mixture of doubt and uncertainty. There is
no fear in this love, because love being now perfected, has cast out fear. And
now the Saints come to see the reason of their love to God to be Gods love to
them, and the reason of Gods love to them to be God himself; and in this the
Soul sweetly acquiesceth triumphing for ever; I am my Beloveds, and my Beloved
is mine; for he has loved me with an everlasting love; therefore with loving
kindness will he draw me, and I shall remain in his love for ever.

Eighth, Freshness. 8. Properly, Freshness.
The Joys of the glorified Saints are always fresh from the Springhead, that
makes them so sweet and luscious: what we receive by the mediation of
Creature-Conduits, loses much of its native delicacy. Heaven is an Inheritance
incorruptible, 1 Pet. 1 4. (...). Drusius. The name of a flower called
Amarantus.
and that fades not away: It is incorruptible, not (...) only that cannot dye,
but (...), not obnoxious to corruption, it is made all of materials that cannot
corrupt; and as it is in incorruptible, so it is (...) also, still fresh and
green.

Adam and Eve were created in the prime ripeness and bravery of the humane
nature, in perfection of beauty and strength, and such shall all the Saints be
restored, of what age and state of body soever they lay down in the grave; the
Children of the Resurrection shall rise (in the morning) in the most sparkling
gallantry of youth, and in that posture shall be for ever. Like as the Angels
are pictured to us, in the adult and perfect beauty of youth, not (indeed) of
infancy, that would import immaturity; nor yet of old age, that would intimate
a declining state; but (I say) of youth, to show they still retain the vive
impressions of their first Creation.

The most delicate of all our sublunary delights, of which we are (at first) so
fond, that we cannot spare them a moment out of our eye, but are always
courting of them, and solacing our selves in their fruition, do quickly grow
stale and flat upon our hands.

What is storied of Tython, a beautiful active young man, holds full analogy
with all our Creature-felicities; Aurora (for the elegancy of his person and
industry) begged him of Jupiter to be her Husband; withal praying, that he
might never dye; both which Jupiter granted; but she, through her womanish
inadvertency, forgetting to pray that he might not grow old as well as not dye,
in his old age he grew impotent and burdensome to himself, and to Aurora too;
so that repenting of her choice, Jupiter out of pity turned him into a
Grasshopper.

Such are all our worldly beatitudes, we would fain espouse them to our selves,
and write eternity upon them; but how brave and sprightly soever they appear in
our first appetitions of them, they quickly grow old and fastidious, and
signify no more than so many impotent Grasshoppers.

But now there is no such thing in Heaven; there is eternity but no old age;
the joys of heaven are always young.

The flowers of Paradise, of which the Saints Posie is made, do neither wither
nor change color, the drops of their morning dew standing thick upon them
(like orient Pearls) preserve them in their perpetual verdure and
odoriferousness.

God himself the fountain and spring of all those glorious beings, is not a
moment older than he was from all eternity; and therefore all their fresh
springs being in God, their roots feed their branches with continual and
unchangeable moisture and influence.

God, who is an Object of infinite fullness, does always feast the glorified
Saints and Angels with fresh visions of delight and wonder.

Yea, God himself, the fountain and springhead of all those glorious
Beatitudes, does wash their roots perpetually with fresh moisture and
influence: though God be but one and the same ineffable essence, yet he being
an Object of such infinite fullness, it cannot be conceived, but he must needs
feast the eye of the glorified Angels and Saints with fresh discoveries of
delight and wonder to all eternity; so that they can never be cloyed or
furfeited with the same beatifical vision.

All the joys of Heaven are present; 9. Property, Present.
there is nothing in the beatifical vision antecedaneous or future: but as God
himself is but one pure Act or Being, always the same, from eternity to
eternity, so are all the felicities of Heaven.

There are no fragments in glory: There is nothing in glory which shall be, and
is not; nor any thing in fruition which shall ever cease or change.

Glory borrows that immense title of the God of Glory, (what the Jews say of
the ten Commandments) is, Rev. 1.4. (...).
and was, and is to come; a name that is not to be divided or taken asunder,
but must be spoken all together in one word.

So Is, as that it was, so was as that it shall be, so shall be as that it is:
Eternity is a single Point, such are all the blessednesses of the Saints, were,
and are, and shall be: so Past, as to come, and so to come as present, this is
a mystery, and it is mavelous in our eyes.

Out of these nine Ingredients or Properties there arises a tenth, the very
top of all, scil. Delight and Complacency; 10 Property. Complacency.
and this makes Heaven to be Heaven indeed, the joy of the Lord, even the same
joy which God himself possesses; the same for kind, though not for degree.

Propriety, Possession, Intimacy, Suitableness, Satiety, Reflection,
Immutability, they all meet in God essentially, making up an infinite delight
and complacency in the Saints and Angels, they are perfectly, though bounded
and limited according to the capacity of the Creature, We cannot conceive it
until it receive us.
making up a delight and joy, which (on this side Heaven) passes all
understanding; of which the Psalmist sings,

In thy presence is fullness of joy, Psalm. 16.11.
and at thy right hand are pleasures for evermore.

Behold faith in the glorious Redeemer does (at times) raise the Soul of the
poor Believer to a mavelous high pitch of joy and ravishment, 1 Pet. 1.8.
Whom having not seen ye love, in whom, though ye now see him not, yet
believing ye rejoice, with joy unspeakable and full of glory.

The expression is very full, faith brings the Soul in love with an unseen
Christ, and fills the heart with joy; not ordinary joy, such as men do easily
express upon all occasions, but unspeakable, the heart conceives such joy that
the tongue cannot utter, (...), ineffabilis. (...).
yea, it is not to be uttered by the tongue of men or Angels; it cannot be
spoken, it is ineffable, and that is not all, it follows, it is glorious, and
our translation gives it an addition very emphatical, Of the Saints j^y and
delight in heaven, see incomparable Mr. Baxter's Saints everlasting rest, p. 41
part. 1. And else where abundantly.
full of glory; and yet that reaches not the top of this joy, for the Greek
signifies not glorious only, but Glorified: faith fills the heart with
glorified joy, a joy that rivals (as it were) the joy of the glorified Saints,
a joy which sets the Soul for the present above it self, and puts it into
Heaven before its time. Oh Christians, if faith, (which must not enter in
within the veil) can transport the Soul into such extatical raptures, what can
vision and fruition do? Oh the mountings of mind, the ravishing joys of heart,
the solace of soul, which glorified Saints possess in the beatifical vision!

The Soul shall live in joy, and be filled with delight in the mirror of all
delights; love and joy shall run in a circle, and mutually empty themselves
into one another, love shall dissolve into joy, and joy shall resolve into
love, a River, an Ocean of unmixed Complacency, wherein the Soul shall bathe it
self for ever

The Saints are so pleased with their own beatitudes, that as they cannot spare
any joy they have, so they know not what their souls can wish for more. This is
pure complacency, there are none above them that they need envy, none beneath
them capable of their pity. Oh blessed state!

The fourth and last Privilege contained in cohabitation, is Conformity.
Even in the Evangelical state below, Conformity is the fruit of vision, vision
produces Assimilation.

We all with open face beholding as in a glass the glory of the Lord, 2 Cor.
3.18.
are changed into the same image from glory to glory, even as by the Spirit of
the Lord. Surely the heavenly vision will beget so much more full and perfect
conformity, by how much the mirror is more vital and energetical: The Apostle
reaches forth, this blessed truth and the reason of it together, as a known
Doctrine.

Beloved, now we are the Sons of God, 1 John 3 2.
that were dignity enough for a poor sinner (one would think) I but that is not
all; it is well, and it shall be better. God has laid out much upon us; but
how much glory he has laid up for us we cannot conceive; it does not yet
appear what we shall be! This only we know, that when he shall appear we shall
be like him! That Is infinite honor indeed! But how does he prove it? Why, he
proves our conformity from our vision, we shall be like him, for we shall see
him: Him, ver. 3. God in Christ; the Godhead in the glorified humane nature of
Jesus Christ, even while he was here in the days of his flesh; the flesh of
Christ was a, veil, 1 Timothy 3.1^.
through which the deity of Christ did appear, (...), God was conspicuous in
the humane nature; John 1.14.
the invisible God was, as it were, made visible in a body of flesh: We beheld
his glory (says the Evangelist) if it were so upon earth, how much more will
it be verified in heaven? The glorified body of our Lord will be as transparent
glass, through which the glorious beams of Divinity will display themselves to
the eye of the blessed beholders: And in the beholding whereof there will go
forth a transforming virtue which will change them into the same Image; if it
were so, I say, in the Gospel vision, how much more will it be so in the
beatifical? The Soul by enjoying God comes nearer to the pleasure of God
himself.
The sight of God has a conforming power in it to assimilate the beholder into
the likeness of God, he converts all into its own nature; God as he is a
consuming fire to the wicked, so he is a purifying refining fire to the Saints,
by purifying out their dross to make them partakers of his holiness, Heb.
12.10. It was the design of their correction in this world, and the perfecting
of that conformity is the ultimate and supreme design of the facial vision: we
shall be like him, for we shall see him; we shall be as he is, when we shall
see him as he is: we shall be like him:

Like him in Our Souls. Our Bodies.


Like him in our Souls; like him in all the faculties of our Souls: The Saints
like God in their understanding.
our understandings shall be like the divine understanding; we shall know all
things, past, present, and to come; we shall know all things as God knows them,
for we shall know all things, and see all things in God, ut supra.

Then Adam (for the promise of a Redeemer being first preached to him, Genesis 3.15.
and that by God himself, gives us more than a probable ground to believe that
he is in heaven) Adam, I say, shall have his ambition satisfied in a better
sense than he intended, o^ the Tempter suggested, of being like unto God
knowing good and evil; Genesis 3.5.
now he knows universal good, to be filled and satisfied with it; and evil in
all the distinctions of it as it is now (through the infinite grace of a
Redeemer) the Tempters portion and not his own.

The will is made like unto Gods will, not a fountain indeed, but a large
vessel full of goodness and holiness; the Saints shall be holy as God is holy,
pure as God is pure, perfect as he is perfect; they were so on earth, truly;
now in Heaven they are so, perfectly; the will shall be as holy as it would be,
as holy as the holy God would have it be, so holy that there will be mutual joy
and delight, between God and the Saints, in the contemplation of their
holiness, the Saints shall rejoice in the holiness of God, that they have such
an holy God, it was their duty in the state of Grace, Psalm. 30.4. Sing unto the
Lord, oh ye Saints of his, give thanks at the remembrance of his holiness: They
rest not, and yet they are not w^^^y Romans 4.8.
It is their work and wages, their labor and their rest now, in the state of
glory: They rest not day nor night saying, Holy, holy, holy, Lord God Almighty,
etc. See how the Saints are ravished with the contemplation of Gods holiness,
they double and treble the mention of this glorious attribute, they cry, Holy,
holy, holy, for once Almighty, etc.

And it seems God (if I may so say) is as much taken with the beauty of their
holiness; they have their denomination from their holiness, Saints, in English,
Holy ones, such as God accounts to be his Inheritance, yea, the glory of it;
they were so while they were below; Ephesians. 1.18.
The riches of the glory of his inheritance in the Saints: What is it above,
where their holiness is consummate, where the Saints are now presented by
Christ, a glorious Church, even (like their God) glorious in holiness, (...).
not having spot or wrinkle, neither sin, nor shadow of sin, neither spot nor
appearance of a spot, but holy and without blemish, immaculate holiness! there
is not so much as a stained thought, not an inordinate motion, in the whole
Region of Heaven to defile that upper world; this God delights in, because in
the holiness of the Saints he sees the reflection of his own face, God pleases
himself to see, how like himself he could make a Creature! such was the design
in the first Creation; Let us make man in our own image, after our likeness,
Genesis 1.26.
(it was the counsel of the thrice blessed Trinity:) and now though once it
suffered a miscarriage, it is perfected with advantage by the second Adam. They
will what God wills, and nill what God nilleth.
An Argument that it was not a miscarriage of improvidence, but of ordination:
In a word, in Heaven there is but one will between God and the Saints, and that
will is Gods.

Moreover, In their affections, Love, Hatred, Joy. His exaltation to the right
hand of his Father. Isai. 62.5.
the Saints are like God in their affections. They love what God loves, and
hate what God hates, their joy is Gods joy; they rejoice in God and in his
glory, they rejoice in Jesus Christ their Bridegroom, and he rejoices in them;
As the Bridegroom rejoices over the Bride, so shall thy God rejoice over thee;
that was but the word spoken to the Church at her Espousals, what must the joy
be (think we) upon her wedding day.

All the affections which either were inordinate, or suitable only to the
imperfect state, as envy, malice, fear, hope, desire, etc. they are all
abolished, as either inconsistent with or useless to the heavenly state; and
therein consists no small part of their conformity to God, as being capable of
nothing which denotes infirmity or imperfection.

The Saints are like God in their memories, they shall have holy memories;
their memories shall be like the Ark of the Covenant, which was overlaid with
gold, wherein (according to the Apostles Inventory) were The golden Pot that
had Manna.
And Aaron's Rod that budded.
And the Tables of the Covenant,


The Ark of the Memory now overlaid with glory, likewise shall contain the
Manna that Angelical food of Word, Sacraments, Promises, Ordinances,
Providence, Experiences, wherewith God was wont to feed the Soul, while in the
wilderness of the world.

Aaron's Rod that budded, Gods fatherly Rod of correction, which though for the
present seemed not joyous but grievous, yet afterward it yielded the peaceable
fruits of Righteousness, Heb. 12.11.
in them that were exercised thereby.

And the Tables of the Covenant: The two Covenants, which God made with man;
the one of Works, the witness of Gods holiness and perfection; the other of
Grace, the witness of Gods goodness and commiseration.

The Covenant of Works, the standing evidence of man's guiltiness. The Covenant
of Grace, the standing evidence of Gods righteousness. The Covenant of works
the lasting monument of man's impotency and changeableness. The Covenant of
Grace the everlasting monument of Gods omnipotence and immutability.
These, with all the particulars included in either, are the chief things which
shall fill the memory, and the remembrance of them, comparing the type with the
antitype (if I may so say, things past with things present) will fill the Soul
with admiration and delight.

If any thing of evil do occur, whether of sin, affliction,
as soon as ever it enters within that glorious firmament, it loses the nature
of evil, and is naturalized into matter of rejoicing and thankfulness.

In a word, the entire Image of God, Ephesians. 5.1. It was their duty in the state
of grace, it shall be their infinite dignity in the state of glory.
which was imprinted upon the Soul in the first Creation, and reprinted upon it
(though in an imperfect character) in the new Creation, shall now be perfected
to the life in the Regeneration, the Saints shall be as like God as ever they
can look, as like God as ever Children were like their Father; so that there
will be nothing but looking and liking the one upon the other.

Prevent that holy gaze now, oh ye children of the most high God, be often
taken up in the beholding and contemplation of the face of your heavenly
Father; behold, will it not Quicken you to duty? Comfort you in your droopings?
Cause you to overlook the contempt of the world with an holy pride? And even be
the dawnings of glory upon your faces, whereby some line and lineaments of
beauty shall be added daily to that blessed draught begun already against that
day!


Once more before we go off from this pleasing contemplation, add we,

The very bodies of the Saints shall share in this blessed conformity as well
as the soul: It had its degree in the first Paradise, man had a kind of
resemblance to God in the very make of his body, The bodies of the Saints. Os
homini sublims d^dit, caelumque tueri jussit, etc.
beautiful; upright, active, no such visible picture of God, in Heaven or
Earth, as man was, not Sun, Moon, or Stars, not Earth, and Sea, or the visible
Heavens themselves have so much of their Maker in them as the body of man; his
very corporeal senses had much of God in them, they were Vestigia Dei, though
not Imago, one might easily have known who was their Father.

But now in glory, says the Apostle,

Our vile body shall be fashioned like unto his glorious body. Phil. 3.21.


The glorified body of Christ, next to the divine essence, (to which it is
hypostatically united) shall be the glory and the wonder of Heaven, and our
body, says the Apostle, shall be like his, conformable unto his glorious body.

What a mirror of glory will the Saints be in their souls conformed to the
divine nature, and their body conformed to the glory of the humane nature of
Jesus Christ, the Lord of glory! Oh wonderful astonishing transfiguration!

Well said the Apostle, It does not yet appear what we shall be; surely eye
has not seen, nor ear heard, neither can it enter into the heart of man, etc.

This will be an infinite compensation to the Saints of God, for all their holy
endeavors of being like to God, that as obedient Children they have been
followers of their heavenly Father, Ephesians. 5.1.
and for all the reproaches and abasements they sustained from a reprobate
world because of those endeavors.

The earth was not able to bear the hard speeches, wherewith the enemies of God
have reproached the footsteps of Gods anointed ones, laboring to insist in the
steps of their heavenly Father, willing to be Nonconformists to the will and
lusts of men, and striving to be conformable to the will and pattern of their
holy King and Law giver the Lord Jesus the King of Saints: Now I say, it shall
be no shame nor grief of heart unto them, when they shall reap the fruit of
their weak and imperfect conformity on earth, in the most full and perfect
consummation of that conformity in heaven; when behold whatsoever is glorious
and wonderful in the person of their glorious Redeemer, or in the thrice
glorious and blessed Trinity, the very print and Character of it shall be
stamped upon the glorified Saints (in their created capacities) causing them to
appear not only (...), as so many Angels, but even to resemble God himself, and
to shine as so many Christ's in the Kingdom of their heavenly Father; and they
that laughed them to scorn shall see it, and their faces being filled with
shame, their consciences with horror, and their hearts with envy; they shall
now revile and curse themselves, howling out, Wisd. 5.4.
We fools accounted their lives madness, etc.

Oh how much better are the reproaches of Christ, than all the grandieur and
applause in the world! Be of good cheer, all ye Servants of God, the time is
coming when you shall not repent of your conformity to God and Christ in
holiness, but shall ever sing, I thank the Lord who gave me counsel, and taught
me to choose the better part, which shall never be taken away from me.

I come now to the Complement and perfection of this last fruit and consequent
of Christ his coming (the Saints cohabitation and fellowship with the Lord)
namely, The extent and duration of it in this particle ever.

We shall ever be with the Lord. The extent and duration ever.
Ever, a little word, but of immense signification! a Child may speak it, It
was a witty reply of a Grandchild of Doctor Reynolds (now Bishop of Norwich) He
asking the Child, How long Eternity is? The Child answered, If you will tell me
how long half eternity is, I will tell you how long whole eternity is.
but neither Man nor Angel can understand it. Oh who can take the demensions of
eternity? Yea, who can tell me how long half eternity is? Behold I show you a
Mystery, half eternity is eternity; yea, every part and particle of eternity is
eternity; for eternity is not made up of hours, or days, or years, or
lustrums; or jubiles, or ages, or millions of Ages, the whole space between the
creation of the world and the dissolution of it, would not make a day in
eternity; yea, so many years as there be days in that space would not fill up
an hour in eternity. Eternity is one entire Circle, beginning and ending in it
self. This present world, which is measured out by such divisions and
distinctions of times, is therefore mortal, and will have end, 2 Cor. 4.18.

If eternity did consist of finite times (though never so large and vast) it
would not be eternity, but a longer tract of time only; that which is made up
of finite is finite. Eternity is but one immense indivisible point, wherein
there is neither first nor last, Deus est octus simplicissimus ex quo omnia
s^nt and in ^uem omnio redeu^.
beginning nor ending, succession or alteration, but is like God himself, one
and the same for ever.

From hence we infer this Doctrine.

The blessedness of the Saints in Heaven is everlasting. Their presence with
God is ever. Their vision is ever. Their fruition is ever. Their conformity to
God is ever. We shall ever be with the Lord.
Quest. But why? What good have the Saints done to merit such an ever of bliss.

Answ. Nay Christians, if we go that way to work, we shall be sure to fall
short of this ever. An Heaven proportionable to the Saints merit is not to be
found, unless it be amongst their Antipodes in the Regions of darkness (if
there be an heaven there:) The wages of sin is death, but the gift of God is
eternal life through Jesus Christ our Lord. Romans 6. ult.


Hell is the wages of sin, pure and proper merit; but Heaven is a free
gratuitous gift, a gift in regard of us, though merit in regard of Christ.
Eternal life is the gift of God, through Jesus Christ our Lord.

So that if it be demanded, Why Heaven must be for ever?

The first and only account of merit is the blood of Jesus Christ; the Saints
were once a lost generation, Reasons why the Saints reward in glory must be for
ever. 1. Christ's merit.
that had sold themselves and their inheritance too, and had not wherewithal
to redeem either.

But they had a near Kinsman (even their elder Brother by the Mothers side) to
whom the right of redemption did belong, who being a mighty man of wealth, the
Heir of all things, undertook to be their Goel, and (out of his own proper
substance) to redeem both them and their inheritance; them to be his own
inheritance, Ephesians. 1.10. and Heaven to be theirs, 1 Pet. 1.4. And therefore
had Heaven been but a moment short of eternity, the Redeemer had over-bought
it, for he laid out the infinite treasures of his blood upon the purchase, the
blood of God: Acts 20.28.
had not Heaven been infinite also, as in value, so likewise in duration, it
had not stood with the justice of God, or his love to his Son, to have taken so
dear for it.

It is this ever in the Text, which makes Heaven to be but an even bargain;
were there a period of time (though after the revolution of never so many Ages)
wherein the purchase were to expire, Price, and Inheritance, and Heirs, were
all lost for ever.

Behold this is the first Reason.

A second account may be in respect of the elect themselves. 2. Reason. Saints
have immortal Souls.
The Saints have immortal souls, souls that have an ever stamped upon them; an
ever, a part post, an enduring ever, though not (a part ante) a beginning
ever, or rather an ever without beginning; of such an ever the Saints were
incapable: God himself (with holy reverence be it spoken) could not have
bestowed such an ever upon the Creatures, for then he must have made them so
many Gods; and this God could not do, and that because he is omnipotent; there
is but one supreme, but one omnipotent; but now an ever, a part post, an
enduring ever, God by divine Covenant conferred upon their souls, and will
invest their bodies also with at the Resurrection, that so eternal Beings might
be capable of eternal Rewards, the wicked of torments, the godly of bliss, both
eternal; If there were not this ever upon the beatitudes, as well as upon the
persons of the Saints, they would be extremely losers by it, and outlive their
own happiness.

Thirdly, 3. Reason. Saints Graces are eternal.
Such a cessation of the joys of Heaven would be as inconsistent with the
Saints Graces, as it is with their beings; God has beautified their immortal
souls with immortal graces, 1 Cor. 13. ult.
their love abides for ever, their zeal is eternal, their holiness eternal, and
all their qualifications for glory are eternal, and can their glory it self be
mortal? It were in vain to contend for perseverance in Grace, should we admit
falling away from Glory. Poor Saints indeed, if neither grace here, nor glory
hereafter could secure their happiness! Were grace (indeed) amissable in this
life, and glory in the future, the foundation of the Lord were not sure, and
the Saints of all men most miserable! Such a cessation is totally inconsistent
with the Orthodox faith, as well as with the wisdom of God; who certainly if he
had furnished the Saints with immortal principles and qualifications for an
heaven which would or might determine, had taken far more care upon the Mediums
than upon the End: And oversight incompatible with a wise man, much more with
the only wise God.

But the main pillars upon which this blessed Article of our faith (everlasting
life) is built, The Attributes of God the main pillars of Heavens eternity. 1.
The Wisdom of God.
are the glorious Attributes of God: I shall therefore pursue the discovery of
this delightful contemplation unto the Springhead.

First then, The Wisdom of God is the head corner stone, upon which we build
the belief of this Doctrine, Heavens eternity.

Not to recur to any thing already spoken, I shall only take the hint of the
Psalmists Question, Psalm. 89.47. Wherefore have thou made all men in vain? For
the better understanding whereof, we are to take notice, that the rise of the
Question is a passionate complaint of the Prophet, concerning the brevity and
misery of the present life, in Job's phrase (Heb.) Short of days and full of
trouble: In the former part of the verse, Lord, remember how short my time is.

And in this latter part of the verse he does, as it were, expostulate the case
with God, why God would have it so? Wherefore have thou made all men in vain?

In which words, although he seem to ask God the question, yet he gives
himself the answer, and the answer is negative, q. d. No: God made not men in
vain: It is not possible that the Wisdom of God should make such an excellent
Creature as man (the masterpiece of the whole nether world) to no purpose: It
cannot be, that God should bring in such a Creature only to take a turn or two
in the world, and then to disappear, never to be heard of any more! What then?
Why thence he does rationally infer, that certainly in man's creation God had a
design upon him, in order to a future estate: And what was that? But what the
wise man discovers to us, Prove. 16, 4.
The Lord has made all things for himself, i. e. for his own glory; scil. The
wicked for the day of evil, to the manifestation of his justice, and the godly
for the day of redemption, to the exaltation of his free grace; in both which
(however the wicked may seem in this world to go unpunished, and the godly
unrewarded yet) God will have time enough to make reparations to his justice in
another world; hell and heaven will make amends for all.

But now after all this, should there be a period wherein the flames of hell
should be extinguished, or the joys of heaven annihilated, if after the first
creation suffered a miscarriage, the second also should prove an abortion, if
man should outlive his heavenly Paradise as he did the earthly (though his
lease should be made for never so many lives) this would but aggravate the
vanity of his creation, and we must needs approve of Solomon's choice,
Wherefore I praised the dead more than the living, Eccles. 4.2, 3.
yea, better is he than both they which has not yet been: Surely such an
improvidence is totally inconsistent with that immense understanding, whose
most just tile is, The only wise God.

This then is the first account of this ever here in my Text, Gods wisdom.

Another Attribute upon which this beatifical Truth stands is, 2. Attribute,
The Truth of God.
The veracity and truth of God: the future estate both of the reprobate and of
the elect, is every where in Scripture held out to us with a note of eternity.

That of the reprobate: Eternal judgment, Heb. 6. everlasting sire, Mat. 18.8.
and 25.41. Eternal fire, Jude 7. unquenchable fire, Matthew. 3.12 Luke 3.17. fire
that is not to be quenched, ver. 44. fire that never shall be quenched; ver.
43. after never so many years and ages of continuance, it is still wrath to
come, everlasting darkness, Jude 6. It seems though there be fire enough in
hell, there is no light in that fire, even those flames are darkness, and that
darkness everlasting; fire for heat, but not for light; whatever is afflictive,
within hell nothing that is refreshive, that is dreadful. The worm that shall
never dye. Everlasting destruction, 2 These. 1.9.
And as that of the reprobate is, so This of the elect is expressed under the
like notions, not a moment short of eternity: the Father of Glory, who best
knew what he had begotten, baptizeth it with that name. Eternal glory, 2 Timothy
2.10. 1 Pet. 5.10. Everlasting life, fourteen times so called in the new
Testament, and once in the old, Dan. 12.2. Eternal life, thirty times so called
by the Evangelists and Apostles. Everlasting Kingdom, 2 Pet. 1.11. Enduring
substance, Heb. 10.34. An incorruptible Crown, 1 Cor. 9.25. Pleasures for
evermore, Psalm. 16. ult. A Kingdom that (...), Not fluctuating or floating up
and down, as all sublunary Kingdom and glory.
cannot be moved, Heb. 12.18: An eternal weight of Glory, 2 Cor. 4.17.
Heaven is a weight of glory; both the Hebrew and Chaldee words signify both
weight and glory, Heaven is made all of massy glory; glory that would be too
heavy even for the shoulders of glorified Saints, were not underneath them the
everlasting arms.


But as God puts forth omnipotence to cause the damned to subsist under their
(otherwise) intolerable pains, for the glory of divine justice; so in Heaven
he is pleased to exert the arm of his almighty power, to sustain the Saints
under their unconceiveable weight of glory, for the more illustrious
manifestation of his everlasting love.

But this is not all; as there is a weight of glory to make heaven as big as
the Saints can (joyfully) bear, so that weight must also be eternal, that so
the glory may not be too short for them, but every way commensurate to all the
dimensions of their souls,

This, this is the witness and testimony which God himself has given to the
Saints inheritance in light, and to show the infallibility of this testimony,
the Apostle gives that glorious character of God, Titus 1.2.
God that cannot lie; and that in the very same Scripture wherein he makes this
glorious promise -- Eternal life, which God that cannot lie has promised
before the world began. Observe it, as if the Apostle by the Spirit did foresee
what atheism might object, or weakness of faith might call in question, viz.
the eternity of heaven: How can that be? Oh yes, says the Apostle, it must
needs be so, God who cannot lie has called it eternal life: cannot -- he says
not will not, but cannot lie; whereas it might be objected, why the least Child
in the world can lie, I but says the Apostle, God cannot lie, Hoc solum
omnipotens om nipotenter non potest. Aug.
it is against his essence; It is omnipotence in God that he cannot lie, as
Augustine speaks, if he could lie he were not almighty: whoever calls the
eternity of the Saints rest in question, at the same time calls in question
Gods omnipotence as well as his truth, his being as well as his bounty.

If heaven were but a moment shorter than the measure which the Scripture
gives us, the Apostle had ascribed to God a mistaken title (God that cannot
lie) upon such a testimony as this from the mouth of God, how securely may the
Saints lie down in their beds of dust, in confidence of enjoying an eternal
rest, after the Resurrection?

A third Attribute which mightily contributes assurance to the faith of heavens
eternity, A third Attri^ute is Immutability.
is Gods Immutability. The unchangeableness of his counsel and purpose will set
the ever of the Saints vision and fruition of God, beyond all dispute and
hesitation. It was the very design and purpose of God upon the Saints in their
regeneration and renewing by the Holy Ghost, which he shed upon them abundantly
through Jesus Christ our Savior, that being justified by his grace, they
should be made heirs of eternal life. Did God manifest his eternal purpose to
the world, of eternal life, and make such solemn provision for the carrying on
that purpose upon the heirs of promise, by interesting the third Person in the
glorious Trinity, the Holy Ghost, in it, and after all this can Heaven become
but a peradventure and the Saints everlasting communion with God, prove a
Scepticisin or ungrounded opinion only? Nay, Tit. 3.8.
(says the Apostle) in the very next verse, This is a faithful saying, i. e. a
man may venture his soul upon it, and these things I will that thou affirm
constantly, i. e. (...).
assert as a matter of greatest assurance, of which there is no doubt, scil.
this grand principle, The eternity of the Saints blessedness, that we should be
made heirs of eternal life, and that to this end, that believers may be careful
to maintain good works: leave Christians at an uncertainty of an everlasting
reward, and farewell good works; men will act arbitrarily where they work
doubtfully. Nay, but tell them, The foundation of the Lord stands sure, his
counsels and purposes are unchangeable, with him is no variableness, Jam. 1.17.
neither shadow of turning; fix their faith upon this bottom, that Gods purpose
of eternal life is as immutable as God himself, this will set them on work to
purpose in the use of all such means as tend to so glorious an end. Did God
from eternity purpose salvation to the elect, to eternity? A soul set beyond
all suspicion of the accomplishment of this blessed promise, will be careful to
maintain good works: so the Apostle follows it home, 1 Cor. 15. ult. Therefore
my beloved brethren, be ye steadfast, unmovable, always abounding in the work
of the Lord, for as much as ye know that your labor is not in vain in the
Lord: faithful is he that has called you, who also will do it: Heaven will
make amends for all.

Fourthly, 4th. Ground, Gods morcy.
Such a supposed cessation of Heavens glory is totally inconsistent with the
mercy and goodness of God: that man of God, holy David, begins his Psalm of
thanksgiving (in this lower Quire of Saints) with this strain, Oh give thanks
unto the Lord, Psalm. 136.1.
for he is good, for his mercy endures for ever: And having begun in that
strain, he can sing no other tune all the Psalm over, it is (as it were) the
burden of the Song, For his mercy endures for ever: And shall we imagine he is
now turning his Hallelujahs to a lower key in that celestial Quire, to Him that
sits upon the Throne, and to the Lamb!

No, Quicquid in Deo Deuteronomy. Romans 9.23.
mercy in God is not a moral or mortal virtue, but an essential Attribute, God
himself eternal. Mercy in God has been from eternity, and shall be to
eternity; it can no more out live its objects, the vessels of merey prepared
unto glory, than it can cease to be mercy. God is the Father of mercies, and
mercy can never go childless; God must exercise the infiniteness of his mercy
extensive to all eternity, as well as intensive above all dimensions.

Fifthly; 5. Attribute, Omnipotence.
The omnipotence of God does gratify his mercy in this design, for while mercy
pours in this strong liquor of the Lords joy immeasurably into the vessels of
glory, omnipotence does support and strengthen those vessels that they split
not with their own fullness; it were not else imaginable how created vessels
should hold uncreated glory and if the vess^l should run out, or fail, the I
quor would be lost.

Sixthly, 6. Attribute, Eternity.
God is eternal, and therefore Heaven must be eternal also. In Heaven there are
no second causes, which are obnoxious to contingency or alteration? all causes
there are resolved into the first being and sovereign cause, where they remain
fixed and immutable, as that immense Being himself, and because he lives
eternally, they shall so live also. The eternity of Gods being lays the
foundation of the eternity of the Saints glory.

Rev. 21.23.
The Lord God Almighty, and the Lamb, are the Temple of it, the Sun that
shines there by day, and the Moon by night, are no part of the first Creation,
which is to Mat. 5.18.
pass away, but the glory of God does lighten it, and the Lamb is the light
thereof; there shall not be so much as a post of the old fabric in this new
building, to infirm or endanger it: God alone is the Roof and Foundation of
Heaven, the very Center and Circumference is God; all the Arches and Pillars of
Heaven are made of the Tree of life, in which no worm can breed which may
corrode or consume the Saints mansions; no moth is there to fret and eat out
the long white robes where with the Saints are adorned; nor Th^ef to break into
the Palace of the great King, to steal away their crown from them? There is
malice enough indeed in that (...), the Angel of the bottomless pit, and all
his cursed Goal-birds, to act such hellish villainies, not upon the Saints only,
but upon God himself, even to pull him out of his Throne if they could; but
thanks be to God, they are made fast enough in the lowest Dungeon, where they
are staked down by a perpetual Decree, and reserved in ^bains of darkness for
ever, so that the Saints need not fear that Antichristian brood shall ever
break loose to cast in one Granado, or Fire-ball, into the walls of the new
Jerusalem, or to break open the gates thereof to disturb their peace.

In a word, the Manna of those upper heavens, which is the Angelical food the
Saints live on, is not subject to breed worms, which may corrupt their
constitution: behold! the worm is only in the nether place of darkness; and
yet neither can that eat out any part of the subject on which it feeds! Oh
how sweet would that worm be to the Reprobates, if but once in a thousand years
it might eat out but a piece of them, till they were utterly consumed! but woe
and alas! the worm knows only how to augment, but not how to shorten the
torments of the damned; but as it is a never dying worm it self, so is the
miserable subject also upon which it feeds; there is fire in hell, but it is
such only as does nourish its fuel, not diminish it: Whence should this be, But
because the breath of the Lord like a stream of brimstone does kindle it? Isai.
30. ult.


And if the justice of God gives eternity both to the torment of hell, and the
tormented also to sustain it, how much easier and sweeter is it to conceive;
the shine of Gods face is both the eternity of the blessed in glory, and of
their bliss aso.

It is true indeed, of the nether heavens it is said, they shall perish --
yea, all of them shall wax old as does a garment, as a vesture shall thou
change them, and they shall be changed; but has he any where said so of the
upper heavens too, the seat of the blessed souls, the mansion house of the
great King? Surely no: Yea (to use those words in an accommodated sense at
least) says God, Isa. 66.22.
The new heavens and the new earth shall remain before me. However, even in
contemplating the consummation of these nether heavens, the Psalmist has a
(savoury) But, which will save all harmless, But thou art the same, and thy
years shall not fail.

Behold, God is the heaven of his Saints, what can put a period to this heaven.

A seventh Attribute is Love: 7. Attribute, the Love of God.
Which way should the glory of the Saints come to be extinguished, or so much
as eclipsed? If such a thing could be, it must arise from a cessation of divine
love, which cannot be supposed: Will God grow weary of their company? Behold!
he made them (when he brought them into that state of glory) as perfect as he
would have them be (I had well nigh said) as perfect as he could make them,
that they might be a meet Bride for his firstborn, his only begotten Son; and
now behold, he that hated putting away in the fantastical Jew (unless it were
in case of adultery) will he give the Lambs Wife a Bill of divorce, and put her
out of doors in whom (since her first reception) there was never sound the
least distoyalty, no not in thought, but remains without spot, or wrinkle, or
any such thing, as immaculate as the elect Angels? or must they also fare no
better than the Angels that kept not their first estate? Must all be cast out
for ever, and heaven stand now as an house to be let, without a Tenant? Jam.
1.17.
Were not this more than a shadow of turning? Of the Lord and Head of the
Saints in the days of his flesh it was said, having loved his own, he loved
them to the end: And is his love less now in heaven than it was on earth? Is
Christ's love to his Church, now she is his wife, less sincere and intense, than
when she was but his Spouse? Did Christ love more ardently at a distance, than
now in their mutual embraces? These are prodigious blasphemies, Jer. 31.3.
not once to be admitted into our thoughts: Nay, says God, The Lord has
appeared of old unto me, saying, yea, I have loved thee with an everlasting
love, therefore with loving kindness have I drawn thee.

An eighth Attribute is Justice. 8. Attribute, The justice of God.
The cessation of heaven and hell would utterly destroy divine justice, and
make that cease also for ever. Take away those two tremendous patterns of
Reward and Punishments, heaven and hell, by which the Saints (here below) do
justify God, and vindicate the truth of the Christian Religion against all
other Religions in the world, and you cut the very sinews of Religion, and make
Laws of God vain and insignificant; you starve the hope of the godly, and
extinguish the fear of the wicked.

Ninthly, A cessation of the joys of Heaven, and of the torments of Hell, would
turn Heaven into nothing else but the carnal dream of a Turkish Paradise, and
Hell into the ridiculous fancy of a Popish Purgatory. If ever we be happy, we
must be assured of the perpetuity of our state, or else the whole vision will
be but as a pleasing dream, wherein we may fancy our selves to be happy, but
are indeed miserable in ignorance and mistake.

Fear of loss will not only lessen the joy of heaven, but turn joy it self into
anguish; yea, the damned in hell might seem to have the better of the Saints in
glory, by how much hope of deliverance out of present misery is better than the
expectation of the loss of present fruitions.

Surely the love of God never prepared such bitter sweets for his children:
neither could I have been induced to have spent so much time in fortifying so
grand an Article of our Faith against supposed violence of atheistical spirits,
had it not been by occasion hereof to discover the beauty and strength of those
pillars, by which this dearbought truth is supported.

To conclude, It was not (possibly) without a type that the first Sabbath is
mentioned without an evening, and the new Jerusalem had no night, Genesis 2.2.
Rev. 21.25.
both were prophetic to the eternal Sabbatisme of Heaven; my Text assures all
the Saints of an everlasting fruition of God; Ever with the Lord.

There was an ever in the will of the Saints to holiness, Hell is wrath to
come, and Heaven the Saints remaining rest.
and God who takes the will for the deed, does put an ^ver to their future
reward; that hell may be the everlasting witness of divine justice, and heaven
the perpetual monument of divine grace.

Christians, this is the measuring Reed of the new Jerusalem, the Cube of the
heavenly Temple, the breadth, and length, and height whereof, none but he that
can lay his right hand on the one end of Eternity, and his left hand on the
other end, has given unto us; the computation whereof infinitely exceeds our
Arithmetic, yea, the Arithmetic of all the Angels in heaven.

Those comparisons of the running out of an hourglass by a single sand once in
the revolution of a thousand years, (by which computation there would be scarce
six sands lessened in the glass since the Creation of the world to this day)
or, a little birds carrying away a mountain of sand by one small dust once in a
twelve-mouth; the emptying of the Sea by a drop once in an age, and whatever of
the like nature, these are but like the span of an Infant to measure the circle
of the heavens, so many empty ciphers without a figure to calculate eternity
by, though they may seem Hyperbolies to our childish capacities; oh who can
describe eternity! It is an Ocean without a bottom, it cannot be fathomed, a
Sea that can never be sailed over from shore to shore.

Ever is that which cannot be measured but by it self; ever is that out of
which take never so many ages, and worlds of time, there is not a moment less
to come, ever is still to begin, never to end; eternity is still entire, a
spring which fills as fast as it emties; a vast circle, which begins where it
ends, and ends where it begins.

And now Christians, is this the duration of Heaven? Is this, nothing less than
this, the measuring line of the Saints cohabitation with God.

Their Presence with God Their Vision and of God Their Fruition of God Their
Communion with God Their Conformity to God
What? ever with the Lord?

Oh the purchase of Christ! Oh the gift of God! Oh the love of the Spirit!
How unscarchable (...) his counsels, and his thoughts past finding out! Thanks
be to God for his unspeakable gift!

And here I might fix a full point to mine own and the Readers labor; but
because I find our Apostle closing his words of comfort with a word of counsel,
Wherefore comfort one another, etc. give me leave to follow my Guide, and
before we dismiss this beatifica? contemplation, let us enquire a little
further what blessed improvement may be made of it, even on this side of
Eternity!

And the first Use we may make of it may be that which the Psalmist makes the
title of the 32. Psalm, (as of some others) Maschil, a Psalm to give
instruction. Let this (I say) be a word or Doctrine to teach: And what does it
teach? Even the very sum in the total sum, which David's Psalm there teaches,
namely, who is the truly blessed man, and wherein real blessedness does
consist? Holy David saw the sons of men every where dis-spiriting themselves in
the vehement prosecutions of blessedness, every man would be happy, but the
mischief is, men seek blessedness where it is not to be found; every one knocks
at the wrong door; and therefore he labors to call them off from their
mistaken purfuits in some such language, Oh ye sons of men, how long will ye
love vanity, and seek after leasing? wherefore do ye spend your money for that
which is not bread, and your labor for that which saetisfieth not? Come
hither, and hearken, and I will show you the thing which you are seeking and
hunting after, but in vain; behold! I will show you who is indeed the blessed
man, namely, the pardoned man -- blessednesses to the man whose transgression
is forgiven, Alad solum (...) ^dest, (...) pro^^^ (...), so (...). (...) offic.
whose sin is covered, blessednesses to the man to whom the Lord imputes not
iniquity; q.d. other men may seem blessed; to have what one would, and do what
one lists, this may be accounted a ^are felicity amongst sensual men, who
live no higher than the brate beasts of the earth, merely by sight and sense;
but when all is done, the pardoned man is the blessed man, yea, he is blessed,
and blessed, and blessed again, double and treble blessednesses are his portion for
ever.

In like manner we may conceive our holy Apostle calling after sinners, and
even beseeching them not to loose themselves and their precious souls in the
pursuit of a lie; They that observe lying vanities forsake their own mercies:
Jonah 2.8
Here therefore he discovers to them, who are blessed, and what it is that will
make them happy for ever, only with this difference.

David's Maschil in the Psalm describes initial blessedness; the holy Apostle
here describes perfect and consummate blessedness. David describes the
blessedness of the way: Paul sets forth to us the blessedness of the Country
and state whither the Saints are traveling: David speaks of the blessedness
which lies in order and tendency to blessedness; Saint Paul of ultimate and
supreme blessedness, the summum bonum, the chief and most transcendent good
which either the Creature is capable of, or God can confer on it, even
immediate vision and fruition of himself to all eternity. Ever with the Lord.
Adam by that first candle which God lighted in his first creation, clearly saw
in what his summum bonum did confist, and for a moment enjoyed it; but the
Angel, who keep not his first estate, envying his happiness, Ad solamen
calomitat is suae, incipit perditus pordere.
well remembering the method of his own apostasy, tempts him by the same medium
of pride to cast himself down from the pinnacle of happiness, whereon he stood,
whereby himself fell down from heaven; and the temptation unhappily took, for
while Adam was ambitious to be a sun, he miserably put out his candle, and so
lost his way and himself too, since which time none of his unhappy posterity
could ever (by the help of that snuff which remained) find their way again to
true happiness.

How miserably did the great Sophi^s of the world, the Philosophers, (...).
Romans 21. In their ratiocinations.
those Secretaries of Nature, the reputed Masters of Knowledge and Learning,
cum ratione insanire! and in the Apostles language, Grow vain in their
imaginations, and their foolish heart was darkened! How did they weary
themselves with the blind Sodomites to grope out the door which opens to
happiness, but lost themselves instead of finding the truth?

Varro the learned of the Romans makes report of no less than two hundred
and eighty Opinions (in his time) concerning man's chiefest good, Aul. Gol.
each differing from the other, and all from the truth, as Basilis is reported
to have asserted one hundred sixty five Heavens.

To this very day we see all the sons and daughters of Adam seeking for
happiness, but few or none finding what they seek for, all agree in the notion,
but they differ in the object. People generally go for happiness to the worlds
Trinity. Scil. The lust of the flesh, 1 John 2.16. Scil. The lust of the eyes,
1 John 2.16. Scil. The pride of life, 1 John 2.16.
But alas! Nihil dat, quod non bob^^.
these have it not to give; men would fain squeeze that out of the world which
God never put into it. As an evidence whereof it is highly observable, that the
wisdom of God (who best knows the worth of things) has not (in that Scripture,
1 John 2.16.) dignified these elements of the world, with those innocent titles
of their primitive institution, pleasures, riches, honors, but calls them by
the odious names, which the first apostasy, and the habitual degeneracy of
nature has justly imposed, the lust of the flesh instead of pleasures, the
lust of the eyes instead of riches, and the pride of life instead of honors;
in which respect the Apostle denies them their original from the Father, and
sends them to fetch their pedigree from a lower extraction, nim. from the
world, ver. 16.

And behold! if these objects, which contain in them the utmost latitude of all
worldly excellency (and that in their puris naturalibus) were never ordained by
the great and wise Creator, for any higher service than of the inferior part
of man, the sensitive part (wherein he differs little from the beasts that
porish) now, when by the malice of the Devil, and the corruption of man's heart,
they are debauched and poisoned into so many snares and temptations, how
totally (I say) incapable are they become, of being an adequate blessedness for
immortal souls.

Such of the sons and daughters of Adam, as have had the candle of the Lord
(which was put out by the fall) lighted anew by the Sun of Righteousness, are
mightily enabled by the irradiation of the Holy Ghost, to discern the airiness
and emptiness of all sublunary and elementary happiness, and to make choice of
more solid, supercelestial excellencies for their summum bonum, to sing with
the sweet singer of Israel.

In thy presence is fullness of joy, Psalm. 16.^^.
and at thy right hand there are pleasunes for evermore. Moses in the Old
Testament, and Paul in the New, stand as two pillars of fire, to light men the
way to true blessedness.

Moses was courted by all the honors, pleasures and treasures of Egypt, to
espouse them as his ultimate and supreme beatitudes, but he shakes them off all
(as once Paul the Viper into the fire) not less full of poison than that
venomous beast was. Acts 28.^4.


First, Pride of life, the honor and grandeur of Phara^h's Court came to do
him homage; every one in the Kings Court (for there he was brought up) bowed
the knee, and saluted Moses by the Prince-like title of the Son of Pharaoh's
Daughter, which signified no less than Heir apparent to the Crown of Egypt,
Pharach having then no other Child but that only Daughter, nor she, but Moses,
whom she had adopted to be her Son from the Cradle of Bull rushes; yet all this
glory did Moses, when he came to years (able to make his own choice) refuse, by
faith seeing what an hollow insignificant advancement this was; i^ was not the
Egyptian Monarchy which could make Moses happy, especially in the terms he must
take it, namely, to turn Egyptian, and forsake the society of Gods people; no,
said Moses, I Will have none of it; to suffer with Gods people here, and to reign
with God hereafter, is a felicity infinitely to be preferred before all the
Empires in the world.

This temptation failing, next succeeded, in the second place, Pleasure, called
by the Apostle the lust of the flesh, with her face painted, her locks curled,
breasts naked, and impudently sollicits Moses his embraces. All the beauties of
the Kings Court, delicious fare, ravishing music, beautiful gardens, stately
walks, fruitful orchards, pools of water, princely sports and pastimes; in a
word, all the delights of the sons of men, the sensual fruitions of an Egyptian
Paradise; if these can make Moses happy, they are at his service, he may be
where he will, and do what he please: oh dangerous temptation! Did it not take?
What Is the reason? Why, faith here also stepped in to Moses his rescue; Moses by
his piercing eye of faith did quickly discern a double blemish in the face of
pleasure, though it was never so artificially painted: i. e.

First, They were but the pleasures of sin, fit for nothing but to defile the
soul, and to render it unmeet for communion with God, wherein consists the
highest felicity of the humane or of the Angelical nature: sensitive pleasures
have more of dregs, intellectual more of the quintessence; the pleasure of the
Be is more refined than the pleasure of a Swine.

2. Again, another fault he finds in pleasures is, their brevity; as they were
the pleasures of sin, (...).
so they were but for a season; as impure as they were they had no duration,
they perish in the using, so soon does the pleasure of an Epicure wither, he
eats, and drinks, and dies before his morsel or his draught be swallowed. The
pleasure of taste is but in fine polati, just when it is going off.
Anacreon in the midst of his cups was choked with the husk or kernel of a
grape, so did Epicurus himself dye with a cup of wine at his mouth; and this
was the end of their summum bonum; the sweetest pleasures are the shortest.
Moses his Spirit was to august to be filled with a little poisoned air. But.

3. This offer also thus despised, the Mammon of Egypt presents its self to
Moses; (money may tempt him that is not taken with beauty:) What say you Moses,
all the treasures of Egypt attend your Highness, ready to make you one of the
richest Monarchs in the world, for so at that time Egypt was for Jewels, Gold,
Silver, precious Stones, all the peculiar treasure of Kings, the most
opulentous of all Kingdoms round about, the very Magazine of the world, Moses
need never to fear being poor any more: Is not this enough to make a man happy?
No, not a Moses: Insatiabilu divitiarum gurges. Tacit. Germana ista bestia non
curat pecunia^.
a covetous Mammonist might have taken it down with a grateful swallow; such an
one as Felix was, that infatiable gulf of riches, as the Historian calls him --
but Moses (as the Papists once said of Luther) could not be caught with money:
The reproach of Christ was a mountain of infinitely more valuable, invaluable
treasure, esteeming the reproach of Christ, i. e. Christ in the promise, or the
reproach of the Church, which is Christ mystical, 1 Cor. 12.12. Oh, says
Moses, let me be counted worthy to suffer reproach for Christ and his peoples
sake, and I desire no more riches in the world: How so? Moses faith did clearly
out-bid all the proffers of Egypt, he looks within the vail, Heb. 11.26.
fixing his eye upon the recompense of neward, and there he discovered such
honors, pleasures, treasures as eye never saw, 1 Cor. 2.9.
ear never heard, nor can enter into the heart of man, in comparison whereof,
all the preferments, delights and riches of Egypt were but as so many gilded
erowns, painted banquets, insignificant ciphers, ten thousand of which in the
summa totalis, make just nothing.

Thus Moses turns his back upon the world and all her glittering elements,
Valde protestot^ son monon ito setiori a Deo.
protesting as it were (as it is said of Luther) that God should not turn him
off with these things, he had weighed them in the balance of faith, and found
them too light to make a summum bonum of, there wanted something within. (...).


Such an account does the Apostle Paul, that Evangelical Moses, bring in
concerning the whole visible world, when it was as it were set forth to sale in
all its splendor and gallantry, to what Merchants would bid for it, Paul would
offer nothing, but passes by in an holy scorn, and will not so much as cast an
eye upon it; Oculo irrotorto. 1. Cor. 4.13.


We look not at the things which are seen, but at the things which are not
seen. How much does the judgment of Saints differ from the judgment of the men
of the world, the (...), things which fall under sight and sense were Paul's
nothings, but they are the men of the worlds only solid substances and
realities, e contra, the (...), invisible things of eternity, they were in the
holy Apostle his estimation, the only entities and real beings, but in the
judgment of the men of the world, they are the only chimera's and shadows,
which have no more being than what they have in the fancy: so far were the
things of the world from being able to make up an happiness for a rational
Creature, that the Apostle accounts them not worth a look, unless it be of
contempt and derision, which account that ye may know did not proceed from
pride and singularity, but from a well-informed judgment, he gives us the
ground or reason of it, scil. the perishing nature of things visible, they are
(...), but for the present moment, as Moses (even now) sum'd them up, for a
season, (and how short a season no man can tell.) Psalm. 14.1.
Well has holy David called the Atheist a fool, The fool has said in his
heart there is no God. And why says he so? Because he cannot see God: a fool
indeed! If God could be seen, he were not God, whatever falls under sight and
sense to be sure is subject to mutation: Is this a fit thing to make a
beatitude of? No, upon this very account the wise man calls off our eyes and
hearts from all sublunary fruitions, as most insufficient to make up a felicity
for a Creature, which God has ennobled with a rational faculty, will thou set
thine eyes upon that which is not? Mark, Prove. 23.9.
the most proper title which the wisdom of God can give these seen things is, a
nonentity, the world in all its ruff and bravery is nothing else but a
spectrum, an apparation, a mere non ens, a great, goodly, gilded nothing, and
why so, but upon the account of their lubricity and fickleness, there is no
more staying of them, than of the running stream, or wind, or bird in the air,
for riches verily make themselves wings; riches, i.e. whatever it is which men
make their confidence, they make themselves wings; a metaphor from a bird in
the nest, it is hatched naked, yet feathers out of the very nature of the bird,
if no hand take it out of the nest, yet in short time it will take wings and
fly away; just so it is with riches (of what species soever) if the plunderer
or oppressors, the thief, fire, inundations, etc. give them no wings, they
will quickly give themselves wings, and take their slight toward heaven from
whence they came.

And are these the things which are proper to make up to a man a standing,
holding selicity?

No, says the Apostle, the things which are not seen are eternal. God, and
Christ, and the Holy Ghost, and Angels, and the Spirits of just men made
perfect, and Heaven, and Glory, etc. these are the only beatifying objects, as
being only of a pure, spiritual, fixed, immutable nature, the things that are
not seen are eternal, and upon that account only able to constitute an adequte
blessedness for an immense and an immortal soul, an intellectual being.

Corporeal delights like so many sparks may make a crack and vanish; Sapientl
nihil est magnum cui nota est aeternitotu magnitudo. Luth.
nothing can seem great and excellent to him that knows the infinite vastness
of eternity. Ever with the Lord, here is a summum bonum for an heaven-born soul:
this Moses kept his eye upon, and therefore all terrestrial felicities were but
as sounding brass, and a tinckling cymbal, much noise, but no harmony, he saw
him that is invisible, an elegant contradiction, q. d. he saw him that could
not be seen, he saw him by an eye of faith, whom he could not see by an eye of
sense, and so did Saint Paul, and so did all his fellow Apostles and Saints, We
look on the things which are not seen, i. e. we look on them, and them, and
them alone as our ultimate, unmixt and supreme good. Men and women, who have
none but eyes of flesh, such as beasts have, may choose their good as beasts do
by sight and sense, but man that is in honor and understands not, is like the
beasts that perish, Psalm. 49.12.

Man that understands not what a bubble, what a shadow, Ratio humans tantum in
praesenti sta^ haeret, nihil aliud audit, sentit, intelligit, vider, cogitat.
Luth. in Isai. 54.7.
what a dream all sublunary glory is; man that understands not what
immarcessible Crowns of glory are prepared for them that love God, this man
shall be like the beasts that perish, he shall have the burial of an ass,
though he has swayed a Scepter, he shall fall like a brute into the ditch and
dye there; though he has flourished like a green Bay Tree, rottenness shall be
upon his root, and his blossom shall go up into smoke.

Be wise now therefore O ye Kings, and be instructed O ye people of the earth,
spend not your strength in vain, and your labor for that which satisfies not,
strive not to force that out of the Creature, which God never put in; you may
as well extract fire out of the Ocean, mollify rocks into syrup, wash the
Ethiopian white, as squeeze happiness out of mortality.

Behold! vast sums are required to make up a summum bonum, scil.

Goodness, Fullness, Sutableness and Immutability. Find me such a Creature under
the Moon, Psalm. 47.4. Lam. 3.24.
and do with it what you please: but says the Church, Lord, thou shall choose
our inheritance for us; yea, the Lord is my portion, says my soul. It is
impossible to churn happiness out of a Chest of gold, it will never come, you
can never make immarsible crowns of fading flowers.

Or, I will tell you when pleasures, profits, honors, will make you blessed,
when you can sow your fields with Grace, and fill your barns with sheaves of
Saffron, when the Lord Jesus is your wine, the Word of God your bread, the
bosom of Christ your bed of love, the honor of Christ your trade, the graces
of the Spirit your gold, then and not till then, you may write happiness upon
these things. These are the pleasures which are for evermore, this is the
enduring substance, these the Crowns that wither not, here you may find that
which your soul seeks for; here is the mine, here is the vein, here the
spring of happiness, Ever with the Lord.

Loose not, I beseech you, eternal glory for a flash of impure joy, sell not an
eternal inheritance cheaper than ever Esau sold his birth right, for one
draught of swill out of the swine-trough of sensual pleasures,

The Devil offers you the glory of the world, God offers eternal glory; put not
a scorn upon Gods offers, nor a cheat upon your own souls: the Devils offers
are not only inconsiderable, but fraudulent, he offers that which is none of
his own to give [the world] or if it were, it would be insinitely too short of
the price he will have for it, your precious and immortal souls; What shall a
man give in exchange for his soul? And suppose thou should repent of thy
bargain, the Devil will not repent of his, nor will he sell as he buyeth;
should thou say to him, here Devil, take the world and give me my soul again,
I repent, he would but laugh at thee, and say as the Priests said to Judas,

See thou to that, what is that to me? thou had what thou agreed'st for, I
have done thee no wrong. The sinners feast is soon served in, but the
Messengers of divine Justice are preparing the reckoning, and then are ready to
take away: And how sad will the catastrophe of that pleasure be, when the sting
of the shot must survive in Conscience of the sinner to all eternity? Glorified
Saints are entertained upon freecost, no affeighting thoughts need discompose
them so as to break any one draught of those pleasures wherewith their cup runs
over, or to hinder the pleasing swallow of those delicate morsels wherewith
their table is full fraught, no army of evils or of devils can break in upon
them, to make them forsake their Nuptial feast; sensitive pleasure is
contracted to the narrow point of a (...), for the sense has no delight but by
the enjoyment of the present object, and indeed so is glorified pleasure too,
but with this difference, that Heavens (...) is eternity it self, They shall
ever be with the Lord.

Oh what a prodigious forfeiture of reason is this, for the momentany
satisfaction of a sordid lust, to loose eternal cohabitation with God, this
transcendent beatitude, ever with the Lord! Yea, to plunge ones self into that
opposite gulf of misery, never with the Lord, but to be punished with
everlasting destruction from the presence of the Lord, 2. These. 1.9.
and from the glory of his power.

The life from God, the life with God, the life of God can never expire.
Christians, here is your summum bonum, choose it, and your souls shall live.
Use the second. It may serve in the next place, 2. It shows how much we are
concerned to secure our interest in this blessed state.
but also to awaken the sleepy Conscience. Is this heaven? Is this the summum
bonum of immortal souls? Then oh how much is every one of us concerned to
secure our interest in this glory? What a folly is it for men to take such
indefatigable puns to make sure an earthly inheritance, to run from Lawyer to
Lawyer to attend eary in the morning, and late at night, to give see upon fee,
to spend half a patrimony or an estate to secure the rest, and as if heaven and
the beatifical vision were the only trivial, worthless thing, a mere accident
that might adesse or abesse sine subjecti interitu, be present or absent
without the least prejudice (at all) to a man's happiness, I say, to take up
that upon trust, and to leave this ever with the Lord, upon a peradventure? Oh
unspeakable folly and madness!

Oh that the sons of the earth should thus shame the heirs of heaven, Hab. 2.6.
that an earthly inheritance should be more valu^d by sense than the heavenly
is by faith, more care taken to be sure of dirt and dung, thick clay, than of
that which is infinitely more valuable than c^ral or pearls, whose price is
above rubies, 1 Pet. 1.18, 19
as bought not with silver and gold, but with the precious blood of Jesus
Christ, as of a Lamb without blemish and without spot.

Were this error the fruit only of incapacity, as it is in little Infants,
that cannot judge what belongs to their present or future good, verily it were
a thousand pities, an infelicity upon the humane nature to be lamented with
tears of blood; but that rational Creatures, furnished with such noble
faculties, for such divine and heavenly purposes, should through a mere brutish
sensuality be so willingly content to remain at such uncertainties, is the most
dreadful prodigy that can possibly enter into the heart of man!

That adult persons grown up to maturity should despise their birthrights, and
desperately neglect to look into their writings, which relate to such an
immortal estate, argues not only the woeful degeneracy of the humane nature, how
rife and pregnant the seeds both of ignorance and atheism are therein, but even
a judicial blast upon their understandings, as if the God of Heaven had given
them up to the God of the world, 2 These 1.9.
to blind the eyes of them which believe not, lest the light of the glorious
Gospel of Christ, who is the Image of God, should shine unto them.

Oh that men would consider seriously, what avail will it be at death and
judgment, to have had assurance of many large earthly possessions while they
lived, and then to have neither scrip nor scrol (as we say) to show for heaven
(that blessed inheritance of the Saints in light) when they come to dye! to be
able to say now, my house and my land, and my silver, and my crown, and my
kindom, but not then, my Lord and my God, my heaven and my inheritance! I have
bestowed all my time and strength to assure my earthly possessions, but now I
can keep these no longer, and can call nothing mine own but the dungeon of
darkness, there to be staked down to easeless and endless torments, or at best
to cry out with that heathen Emperor, Animula, Adrianus Imp.
blandula, vagula, quo vadis nescio, I know not whither thou art going, O my
precious darling, my never dying soul!

Confident and presumptuous supposals may quiet and satisfy the sleepy and
slothful Conscience in fair weather, but in the hour of temptation, Mat. 7.27.
when the rain shall descend, and the floods come, and the winds blow, then
these foolish confidences will fall, because they were built upon the sand, and
great will be the fall thereof.

Then when in hell the miserable soul, made now as sensible as formerly it was
secure, shall from thence lift up its eyes, and see Abraham, and Isaac, and
Jacob, and all the Prophets in the Kingdom of God, and it self thrust out, what
furious and fiery reflections will then rend and vex the Conscience, and the
sinner cry out with horror, O damned wretch that I am, I might have had pardon
and glory as well as others, I had as many means and motives, I had as much
need as they, it was as much my concern as any others, but I trifled and took
up all upon trust, and would not give diligence to the full assurance of hope
to the end, oh now a thousand worlds, if I had them, for a may be, which once I
had; oh for one of those days of grace which I then sinned away, and idled out
in the pursuit of vanity, for one of those tenders and offers of salvation,
which then pursued me, and I would not hearken, but thought I might have had
heaven time enough when I had done with the world; but now I see how miserably
I have mocked God, and deceived my self, the day of grace is now gone, and the
time of peace is at its full stop and period, and instead of ever with the
Lord, here I must lie and boil and broil in these flames with the Devil and
reprobate spirits for ever.

Oh that sinners would therefore in this their day be wise, As I In^ew a
profane wretch in Kent, who lived in all kind of wickedness and debauchery
against the most passionate and compassionate cautions and expostulations of
his godly Minister, and would not hearken to him; when he came to dye, he sent
for his Minister, who coming and asking him why he had sent for him, replied,
only this, Oh Sir, my time is done, and my mork a not begun! and so died.
and know the things which belong unto their peace, before they be hid from
their eyes.

Consider as Motives. Motives to labor for Assurance. 1. It may be attained.


First, Heaven way be made sure; assurance may be attained.

1. God commands it: Phil. 2.12. 2 Pet. 1.10. Heb. 6.11.
Work out your salvation with fear and trembling: Give all diligence to make
your calling and election sure: We desire that every one of you do show the
same diligence to the full assurance of hope. And God does not command
impossibility; the Law indeed did, but he gives more grace; Jam. 4.6.
God in the Gospel gives what he commands: To which end

2. It is observable, that what is a precept in one place, is a promise in
another, that if the command find work, the promise may find strength: Hence,
His Commandments are not grievous, 1 John 5.3. Phil. 4.13.
and I can do all things through Christ that strengthens me.

So run the promises, Mat. 7.7. Augustine desired no more of God, but d^ Domini
quod jubes, and jube quod vis.
Ask and it shall be given you, seek and ye shall find, knock and it shall be
opened unto you: A multiplied use of Gospel means, will bring in a multiplied
increase of Gospel grace and strength.

3. Many of the Saints of God have attained assurance of their salvation: holy
Paul, in the name of himself and his fellow Saints, 2 Cor. 5.1.
could say, We know -- we have an house not made with hands, eternal in the
heavens; not we hope only, but we know: So the Disc^ple of love, 1 John 3.14.
We know we have passed from death to life, and God has given us eternal life,
Chap. 5.11.
not only will give, but has given, as sure as if we were there already: and
thus in many Scriptures more.

Now this is certain, what has been may be, what some of the Saints have
attained, and not only by special prerogative, others may attain also, provided
they be not slothful, Heb. 6.11. curn. 12.
but followers of them, who through faith and patience inherit the promises.
Thus heaven may be made sure.

But on the other side, The world nor any part of it can be made sure.
earth cannot.

1. It is not all the ensuring Offices in the world, nor all the Law or Lawyers
in Westminster Hall, that can make an undefeazable entail to secure an
inheritance upon the third or second generation; not only in respect of the
brevity and uncertainty of man's life, the great mutability in the Creature, the
wiles and frauds of men who are cunning to deceive, but even in regard of the
methods and intricacies of the Law it self; 1 Timothy 6.17. (...).
hence the Apostle calls all sublunary possessions uncertain riches, to which
he opposes the living God: God only is immortal, not mutable; all the things
in the world which men make their riches, are uncertain, heaven only by a true
Copernicisme is fixed, the earth moveable and unstable.

2. And God would have it so. God has on purpose filled the whole Creation
with emptiness and vanity, that the heart of man might not be ensnared and
beguiled with it; for says God, Prove. 23.^.
will thou set thine eyes upon that which is not? How not?

Not that which it appears to be, a mere non-ens, a nothing.

Not that which the heart of man promises to it self from it, happiness and
satisfaction, nothing less --

Not fixed and durable, for riches verily make themselves wings, and fly away,
as an Eagle toward heaven, (Supra.)
from whence they came: God gave them, and when he calls them they take wings
and are gone in a moment, they cannot be secured; as good secure the bird upon
the wing, as go about to secure the world, in any of the elements thereof.

3. God would have us sit loose from the Creature; here God would have us
contented to be at uncertainties, Matthew. 6. ver. 25.

Take no thought for your life. 34. Take no thought for to morrow.
In the concerns of the present life, God would have us live at an holy kind of
adventure, and leave all to providence, i. e. as to the issues and events of
things.

But oh how are men turned Gods antipodes! What cannot be made sure, and God
would not have to be sure, that vain man would make sure, and that which may be
made sure, which God commands us to make sure, and what the Saints have made
sure, this and this only, he takes upon trust, and leaves it upon: Why nots and
peradventures. Thus man stands (as one says) upon his head, and shakes his
heels against heaven. It is a Lamentation, and shall be for a Lamentation,

A second Consideration may be this: Motive 2.
To get assurance of heaven, is a work never unseasonable, but never more
seasonable than in times of danger and uncertainty, when all sublunary things
are in a doubtful and wavering condition; in such a juncture of time, he that
can secure heaven by making his calling and election sure, he is like the
Philosophers good man, (...).
apiece, cast him which way you will, he always falls upon a square, he
is built upon a Rock and cannot be shaken, or though he be moved, he cannot be
removed, but stands like a pillar in the Temple of God, even like those pillars
in Solomon's Temple, Jachin and Boaz, stability and strength.

This is the most important business incumbent on us, and it being about an
Inheritance which is fixed and sure; it is both our duty and our wisdom to be
so too; uncertainty in things of uncertainty is no solecisme, but to be
uncertain in things of greatest assurance and permanency is an intolerable
shame: Heaven secured, our work is done, a man may sit down and sing a requiem
to his own soul (in an holy security, Rora hora, brevis mora, O sidurasset!
saying) Soul, thou have goods laid up for many years, for years of eternity,
eat, drink, and be merry, and not fear the rebuke of O thou fool!

The joy of the Lord enters into the soul, before the soul enters into the
Lords joy, the Inheritance safe, a man may well be merry, for he can never be
miserable.

He that is sure of Heaven knows also, that whatever he has, more or less in
this life, he has it as, The fruit of Gods everlasting- electing love. The
purchase of Christ's blood. With Gods love, as well as with Gods leave. By
promise as well as by providence. As part of his child's portion, in earnest of
what is to come.


He knows that whatever befalls him on this side heaven, Honor or dishonor,
Good report or bad report, Health or sickness, Prosperity or adversity, Peace
or persecution, Life or death;
All shall work together for good, his best, his spiritual, his eternal good,
Romans 8.28.

Who but a mad man would leave such an estate upon uncertainties? The world may
call him (if they will) a wise man, but a greater fool goes not about the
streets with a whisk and a batible.

And truly without this, a man cannot rationally take any delight in these
inferior enjoyments, this will be a care at the bottom, yea, it is well now,
but what it will be hereafter to all eternity, I know not.

Consider in the third place: Motive 3.
The more wisdom any have attained to, the greater has been their care and
diligence to secure to themselves an interest in this future blessedness.
Witness holy David and Paul, Porphyry says of Photin^^, that he was (...):
whose indifferency about the present, and contention about the future estate,
was such, as if they had forgotten they were in the body; Whom have I in heaven
but thee? and there is none upon earth that I desire besides thee; so sings
David, Psalm 73.25. And, I forget the things that are behind, and press toward
the mark for the prize of the high calling of God in Christ Jesus; so
professes holy Paul, Phil. 3.13, 14. Oh happy security! they were careless of
the world, that they might secure themselves of heaven!

Fourthly and lastly consider, Motive 4.
That disappointment is the most afflicting evil, that a rational Creature is
capable of: And there be three Aggravations which render it intolerable.

First, The more precious the concernment, the more grievous the
disappointment, to be disappointed of a common preferment is very vexatious,
what is it then to be disappointed of a Crown, a Kingdom. Secondly, The higher
the confidence of speeding, the deeper the anxiety of disappointment: to come
to the Church door in expectation of a rich and honorable match, and when
hands come to be joined, then to be rejected, this is enough to distract.
Thirdly, The less hope of recovery, the fadder and more killing is the
disappointment; to be cast in a Suit of Law for an Inheritance which is
incapable of a second trial, is enough to put a man besides himself.
Behold (oh precious souls) disappointment at the day of Judgment, falls under
the terror of this threefold aggravation, and that in the most dreadful notion
that tongue can express, or heart conceive.

1. Here disappointment is in a matter of no less value than a Crown, a
Kingdom. A Crown of Righteousness, 2 Timothy 4.8. Life, Rev. 2.10. Glory, 1 Pet.
5.4.
A Kingdom of God, Luke 13.28, 29. Heaven, Matthew. 5.3. Our Lord and Savior
Jesus Christ, 2. Pet. 1.11.

Oh how dreadful will that disappointment be, especially with that addition,
Everlasting kingdom? 2. This will be the disappointment of highest confidences
and presumption. None are so confident of beaven, as those who have nothing to
show for their right to it: most Christians (promiscuously so caled) think
themselves as sure of heaven as if they were there already: and oh when these
shall come and knock at the door with their bold Lord, Lord, Mat. 7.21, 22, 23.
cum Luke 13.16, 27.
open to us, crying loud, and pleading hard, what they have done, how they have
preached, and prayed, and received Sacraments, and (possibly) converted others,
expecting now to have the door opened, and ready to set foot over the threshold
of heaven, and shall then be thrust back with that terrible blast, I never knew
you, depart from me; Oh what shame and confusion will this disappointment fill
their faces and consciences with for ever! Surely this will be the very
emphasis of damnation, to have been within a step of salvation and yet miss! 3.
And all this without the least hope of speeding or speaking to Christ any more
for ever about the matter of salvation. Now therefore fear, and tremble, and
pray that this may not be the portion of your cup from the hand of the Lord.

Another Consideration may be, This will make you Motive 5.
fruitful in the work of Grace. Christians that make their calling and election
sure, will and cannot but be fruitful in good works, for by these you must
maintain your assurance, as being the fruits and evidences of your salvation.

A third improvement of this point.
Is this the glory and happiness of the future estate in heaven? Let it then
excite in us an holy ambition to be often looking into this glory, to
anticipate it by our frequent contemplations; the sweeter the vision, the more
taking it should be with men of ascending and ambitious spirits: Can
earthworms take such complacential contentment from beholding a bag of gold,
or a field of corn, or a sumptuous fabric, and please themselves in a peculiar
manner with the reflection of their interest, Psalm. 108.8.
this is mine, that appertains to me; as David sings, Gilead is mine, and
Manasseh is mine, Ephraim also is the strength of my head: And shall not Saints
turn their song to an higher key, and be joyful in glory, singing upon their
beds?

God is mine, and Christ is mine, and the Holy Ghost is mine, Angels are mine,
and Saints are mine, all the glory of Heaven is mine, this (for ever with the
Lord) is mine?

I knew a rich Mammonist near the place where I was born, In Kent.
that would once a day take all his bage of silver and gold out of his trunks,
and laying them in several heaps (for he was exceeding rich) upon a large
table, would go to the utmost end of the room, and there having glutted his
eyes with so delightful an object for a good while, would (all on a sudden)
take his run to the table, and with stretched out arms, gathering all into one
vast heap (as a man overcome and distracted with joy) cry out, All is mine, Why
may not the Children of the Kingdom rejoice in hope of the glory of God? and
collecting those treasures of glory into several heaps, and embracing them with
the arms of faith, Filius ante diem, patrios inquirit in annos.
cry out in an holy ecstasy, All is mine, all is mine! Shall the adult heir of
a fair Lordship, or principality, be often enquiring into his patrimony, search
into his writings, and even grow great with the thoughts and contemplations of
what he is born to? And shall not the Heirs of the Inheritance of the Saints in
light, much rather delight themselves with the fore contemplation of their
incorruptible, 1 Pet. 1.4.
undefiled inheritance that fades not away, reserved in heaven for them?

Object. Yes, so we would, if we were sure it were ours?

Sol. And is that the cause of your apathy and flatness of spirits to these
heavenly fruitions? Truly, this very uncertainty should even startle and
affright us into an earnest contention to make heaven sure; so infinite a
weight of glory, and we not ascertained of our interest upon some good
Scripture-evidence, is enough to make us to forget to eat our meat, enough to
break our sleep, and to keep our eyes waking all the night long, and to make us
take little comfort in the present comforts we possess.

Quest. You will surely ask then, Evidences of Heaven.
What are the Evidences?

Answ. 1. Why, Evidence 1.
truly this one thing would amount to an evidence (and not the least evidence)
viz. Active endeavor to assure our selves of a share in this Inheritance of
the Saints; this would argue an high appretiation of this estate in the
practical judgment, as most incomparably and absolutely eligible; this is the
very language of an heaven-born-soul, What have I to count upon but my treasure
which is in heaven? What business have I on earth comparable to this, to ensure
my portion in heaven? for this cause I was born, and for this end I came into
the world; the whole earth, in comparison of heaven, is but a dunghill, Cabul,
1 Kings 9.13.
(as Hiram called the Cities which Solomon gave him) dirty or displeasing.

This will argue a child-like spirit, Children mind their inheritance; absent
Children long to be at home at their Fathers house, they are often there in
their thoughts and wishes: so the Saints, We groan within our selves, desiring
to be clothed upon with our house which is from heaven -- and, knowing that
while we are at home in the body, we are absent from the Lord.

Secondly, Evidence ^.
Especially if the holiness of heaven do kindle those desires in us more than
the happiness, when a poor foul can truly say, I should not account it an
heaven, were it not that it is a land of holiness, a land flowing with milk and
honey of pure and immaculate joys, that there the beauty of holiness shines
forth with unconceivable luster and glory, and there (says the soul) I shall
be in some degree like my God, glorious in holiness; this is not only an
evidence of heaven, but heaven it self.

Thirdly, Evidence 3.
Again, an universal hatred of sin is a good token that heaven is designed for
thee; for hatred of sin is the negative part of holiness, and heaven is a place
provided by God on purpose, that there the Saints may be as holy as they will
without disturbance or reproach: fear not to think much and often of heaven; if
sin be an offense to thee, if sin be an hell on earth to thee, heaven is
designed for thee to be thy Paradise: Learned men conceive the sin of the
apostate Angels went no further than the first ambitious thought.
fear not to be often solacing thy self in the contemplation of that place
where sin never entered, or if it did, it was cast out as soon as ever it was
conceived.

Indeed it is but a fancy men have taken up, that they love happiness, while
they continue to love sin; a chaste love of heaven can never consist with the
love of impure lusts.

Sin is the Devils image, holiness is Gods; he loves not the beauty of holiness
that would have the Devil advanced thither; If men would not have it so, why
else do they give sin such free entertainment in their own bosoms, and will by
no means give it a bill of divorce?

Fourthly, Evidence 4.
A superlative love to him that has purchased this state for us, and us for
it, is an infallible evidence of our right to it, and interest in it, that is,
the Lord Jesus Christ; and a strong motive upon which gracious souls are so
often in heaven by their contemplations, is, that thereby an eye of faith they
may behold, not the purchase only, but the purchaser, whom having not seen we
love, and whom loving, we would fain see; and this is the glory of every one
that is so affected; so it is expressly said, 1 Cor. 2.9.
The good things prepared for them that love him. Do thou love the Lord
Jesus? Ascend often in the Chariot of love, that thou may see his face, and
in his face the glory and beauty of heaven. Surely such as love not Christ, and
yet think they love heaven, are miserably mistaken, they know neither Heaven
nor Christ, and may well cry out, Isa. 44.20.
Is there not a lie in my right hand?

Well Christians, you that would gladly have your portion in this glory, shut
your eyes downward, I may invert the Angels Question to the men of Galilee, and
say, Acts 1.11.
Why stand ye paring upon the ^arth? Yea, why crawl ye with your bellies upon
the ground, as if you had inherited the Serpents curse as well as your own?
Sursum corda, lift up your hearts, let your souls often withdraw and bid the
body farewell for a time, that you may with Paul be wrapped up to the third
heaven, and then see things which may even ravish your souls out of your
bodies, -- seek the things above, set your affections on things above, where
Christ sits at the right hand of God. Pregustation by faith is a kind of
prepossession, an entrance beforehand into the glorious joys of our Lord and
Master, an ascent into the Mount of transfiguration, when the soul may truly
say, Master, it is good for us to be here, and the oftener ye come, the more
welcome Christ will make you; they that know the divine relishes of such
contemplation, would not exchange them for the most delicious fruitions of the
whole inferior creation. Oh strive to antidate glory, and to get into heaven
before your time!

Yet give me leave to add one Caution, I do not say, every one that has a
right to heaven, has an assurance of heaven, or else no right or warrant to
meditate on heaven: but this I say,

1. Though every Christian has not assurance, every one may, if not by way of
special prerogative and extraordinary revelation, yet in a way of holy duty,
the mediums whereby Christians attain to assurance, being common to all.

2. Though all attain not to the same degree of assurance, the plerophory of
Gods love, yet all may attain to such a degree of Scripture-hope, good hope
through Grace, 2 Thessalonians. 2.16. as may quiet their hearts, and cause them to go
on their way rejoicing, looking for the mercy of our Lord Jesus Christ unto
eternal life, Jude 16.

3. I say not, it is the duty of all to have assurance in what degree soever,
but it is the duty of all to labor for assurance in the highest degree; not to
labor for assurance, argues a defect of love to God; true love can rest in
nothing short of assurance; and even this may sustain the soul till assurance
comes.

4. Therefore I say, let not thy want of assurance be the fruit of thy sloth,
do not continue without assurance, for want of holy industry in the pursuit of
it, for want of giving all diligence (as the text says) to make thy calling
and election sure; and thy want of assurance need not discourage thee from
taking a full and frequent prospect of heavens glory; let God bear witness to
thy Conscience, that assurance is thy design, and that you are not voluntarily
and habitually wanting to God and your selves, as to the pursuit of that
design, in a concurrent use of all those mediums which God has sanctified for
the attainment thereof and you may with as much boldness and considence get
within the vail, and there take a full prospect of the upper Canaan Northward,
Southward, Eastward, Westward, in all the dimensions of it, as God once spoke
to Abraham, Genesis 13.14. concerning the ^^ather Canaan, and with the same
promise, All the land, all the glory which thou seen, to thee will I give it
for ever -- I say, with as much boldness, as if thou had got the plerophory
of faith, and were already sealed with the Spirit of promise to the day of
redemption; and who knows, but in the same Chariot wherein Love ascends into
Heaven, Assurance may come down from heaven, and or ever thou art aware, thy
soul may make thee like the Chariots of Amminadib!

Quest. But what are those mediums, in the concurrent use whereof assurance of
an interest in the heavenly inheritance may be had?

Answ. The Question being but occasional, (...), I shall with much brevity but
hint, only at some special Helps.

1. Take heed of determining before inquiry. 1. Means.


2. Study well your evidences; 2. Help. Take heed of false evidence.
and verily this is an evidence to be sollicitous about your evidences. Take
heed that neither your evidences be false evidences, nor you make a false
application of the true; that you neither take exclusive evidences for
inclusive, i. e. Jam. 1.22.
such as are only to shut out bold presumers, (as bare doing of duties,
hearing, praying, etc.) for such as do necessarily conclude a state of grace,
counterfeit, graces for the fruits of the Spirit of God.

3. Earnestly beg the Spirit of God: 3. Help. Be^ the Spirit.
His Office is twofold as to assurance.

1. Mediate, To clear your evidences: The Office of the Spirit twofold. 1.
Mediate.
This he does two ways 1. By helping the soul to know and believe the evidence
as it lies in the word; such as these, He that believes shall be saved, Romans
10.9. They that through the Spirit do mortify the deeds of the body shall
live, Romans 8.13. Hereby we know we are passed from death to life, because we
love the brethren, 1 John 3.14, 18. cum 19. Hereby we know that we dwell in
him, and he in us, because he has given of his Spirit, 1 John 4.13.



The heirs of glory are only such as God has made meet for the Inheritance,
Col. 1.12.

He that has the Son has life, 1 John 5.12. We groan to be clothed upon,
that mortality might beswallowed up of life, 2 Cor. 5.4. These and many other
are the Graces and Qualifications, to which God has infallibly annexed heaven
and glory. And to these evidences, the Holy Ghost helps the Soul to set his
seal, as to the infallible testimony of God, that they are true, John 3.33.
2. The Spirit clears the evidence by the Candle of the Lord, enabling the Soul
to read it evidently written in the heart by his own finger: the Spirit
enlightens the understanding to see that these graces in the Soul are real and
genuine. The believer dan say. I believe. I through the Spirit do mortify the
deeds of the body. I keep under my body, and bring it into subjection, 1 Cor.
9. ult. I love the brethren, and the more of God I see in them, the more my
heart cleaves to them. I have the Son, as a fountain of light and life dwelling
in me. I am in some measure made meet (I hope) to be partaker of the
inheritance, etc.

Now from the premises, the Spirit enables the believer comfortably to issue
this blessed conclusion, Therefore I shall be saved; Therefore I am a partaker
of the inheritance of the Saints in light.

Behold! this is the first office of the Spirit! Oh pray for it Christians;
that in judging of your evidences, neither on one hand you may be deceived with
shadows instead of substances, (...). Jam. 1.22.
Bristol-stones instead of Diamonds (as hypocrites deceive themselves and
perish for ever) nor on the other hand, still lie trembling under a causeless
suspicion that all is but coun^erfeit when there is no just ground for it, and
so (for the present) loose your comfort; be sure not to trust your own spirit
in so infinite a concern, and if at first you cannot so readily make this
practical Syllogism, wait and pray for the Spirit which is of God, That you
may know the things that are freely given to you of God! Cry with David, Search
me, O God, 2 Cor. 2.12.
and know my heart, etc. Psalm. 139.23, 24. It is good to be afraid to deceive
our selves.

The second Office of the Spirit is that which some Divines call immediate, 2.
Office, Immediate.
and it is a bright irradiation of the Holy Ghost beaming out upon the soul,
not only giving i^ a clear distinct discerning of its own graces ( that we
referred to in the former Office) but immediately witnessing to the soul its
adoption by Jesus Christ, and right and title to the Kingdom of God, wherein
God speaks to the soul in some such like language as that: I am thy salvation,
Psalm 35.3. Making the soul to hear joy and gladness, Psalm 51.8. I have loved
thee with an everlasting love, Jer. 31.3. I have blotted out as a thick cloud
thy transgressions, and as a cloud thy sins, Isai. 44.22. I have redeemed thee
-- like that in the Gospel, Thy sins be forgiven thee, Matthew. 9.2,


Now this act is usually called immediate, i. e. without the mediation of signs
and evidences (as in the former Office) not but that there are signs and
evidences in the person testified, but that the Spirit makes no use of them in
the act of testification; there are gracious qualifications in the soul,
sufficient to distinguish and justify it from all the false witness of the
lying Spirit (upon all seasonable occasions) but the Spirit of God does not
refer to any of these qualifications in this act, but immediately darts in
light and comfort, which fill the soul which joy unspeakable and full of glory:
This act of the Spirit is sometimes called in Scripture, 1. (...).
The Seal of the Spirit, Ephesians. 1.13. The office of a Seal being like that of
an Oath, (...), Heb. 6.16. an end of all strife, to put the matter beyond doubt
or disputation: So a Believer sealed is set beyond all fear or danger, and God,
as it were, leaves himself no possibility of receding or going back from his
word and promise, Heb. 6.18. 2. (...).
This act is called an earnest, 2 Cor. 5.5. Who also has given us the earnest
of his Spirit: Now the office of an earnest is not only to assure, but to give
possession; an earnest is part of the purchase or bargain: so is this act of
the Spirit an act, whereby the soul is not only assured of, but put into
possession of the heavenly inheritance, it is as it were part of it, the joy of
the Lord enters into the soul, before the soul enters into the joy of the Lord,
assurance is nothing else but antidated glory, heaven on this side heaven.


This is (my B.) the second Office of the Spirit, which, I well know, some
eminently learned and godly Divines deny, acknowledging no other act of the
Spirit in assurance but the former: But I resolved at the entrance of this
work, not to dispute, but thetically to assert my own opinion and judgment in
any point that admits of debate.

In this case therefore I know and believe there is enough in the former Office
of the Spirit, to carry a believer to heaven, yet this second Office can be no
useless redundancy, or over plus; a Believer will need all the assurance that
is to be had, and therefore if God be so bountiful to give both, let a Believer
pray and wait for the promise of the Spirit in both these Offices, mediate, and
immediate; if he speed, it will be a labor well bestowed, if he speed not, it
will be a labor well lost.

I have done with this third Help or Means to attain assurance, I come to the
fourth, and shall more briefly dispatch them that remain. A fourth Help to get
assurance is this, 4. Help. Be very tender of the Spirit.
Make much of the Spirit; surely it concerns us highly to be very tender of the
Spirit, for if both kinds of assurance be the fruit of the Spirit, we had need
to hear (as it were) founding in our ears, Grieve not the holy Spirit of God,
Ephesians, 4.30.
whereby ye are sealed to the day of redemption; whereby ye are sealed, i. e.
whose office it is to seal up believers. Grieve him not.

Malicious sins despise the Holy Ghost, Heb. 10.29. Wilful sins vex the Spirit,
Isai. 63 10. Obstinate going on in sin, resists the Holy Ghost, Acts 7.51.
Immersing our selves in pleasures and profits of this present world, does
quench the Spirit, 1 Thessalonians. 5.19. But the least sins (convinced of) grieve the
Spirit. He is an holy Spirit, and therefore sin must needs grieve him, sin, qua
sin, being a pure contrariety to his holy nature. Enemies do despise, and vex,
and resist, and quench, but friends are properly said to grieve; and such are
the persons to whom the Apostle directs his exhortation, friends, believers;
unkindnesses do most properly grieve a friend.
Oh all you that desire assurance, take heed of Unkindness, take heed of
small sins, appearances of sin, take heed of neglecting your communion with God
in holy duties; take heed of bitterness, wrath, anger; be ye kind one toward
another, Res delicato est Spiritia sanctin.
tender hearted, etc. (for so it exegetically follows the Text) q. d. by all
these the Spirit is grieved. It is a tender thing, and you may quickly grieve
it: and if you grieve your Comforter, who shall comfort you? And if you grieve
the holy Spirit, who shall sanctify you? And if you grieve the sealing Spirit,
who shall seal you to the day of redemption? Never look for assurance as long
as you are not afraid of grieving the Spirit, which is the earnest of the
inheritance. Carnal men's question is, May I do this and not be damned? But a
godly man's question is, Can I do this and not grieve the Spirit of God? Will
not Jesus Christ take this unkindly?

5. 5. Means. Take heed of blotting that evidence.
Take heed of any thing that may darken your evidences, or damp your comforts:
a small drop of ink or dirt falling upon an Evidence, may make it illegible, or
darken it: people make nothing of small sins, but small sins do not the least
hurt to the soul; if it were no more than this, small sins will raise up a
jealousy between God and the soul; great sins will destroy peace, little sins
will disturb it; the least hair casts its shadow; and a barley corn laid upon
the light of the eye, will hinder the sight of the Sun as well as a mountain:
abstain from all appearance of evil, if you desire God should be a God of peace
to you, 1 Thessalonians. 5.22. cum 23. Abstain from all appearance of evil, and the God
of peace sanctify you.

Make much of the least intimations of love and favor from God, in prayer,
hearing, or reading, meditation, 6. Means. Make much of the least hint of
Divine love.
at Christ's Table, or any other of your holy converses with God; the least beam
or ray of Gods face upon thy soul, let it be as life from the dead; do as
Benhadad's servants, 1 Kings 20.33. did to the King of Israel, Diligently
observe whether any thing will come from him, any smile from Christ's face, any
wink of his eye, any sweet breath, any whisper of peace from his lips, such
(possibly) Son be of good cheer, thy sins be forgiven thee, or the like, and
hastily catch at it, thy Son Lord! I am most unworthy to be called so, not
worthy to be an hired servant; but Lord, since thou please to deign me so
infinite an honor, Luke 1.33.
Behold the servant of the Lord, and be it unto me according to thy word; come
in thou blessed Lord, and take possession of my soul, and rule in me according
to all the desire of thine heart.

Object. But how shall I know whether such a whisper of peace may be (indeed)
the voice of God, or a delusion of Saan?

Answ. For answer briefly.

1. Such breathings of God upon the soul do usually carry their own evidence
with them; if God say, I am thy salvation, the irradiation carries a
satisfying light with it; the Sun needs no other luminary to comment upon its
own light but its own; nor the Spirit of God any other manifestation of its own
presence but it self.

2. We say, though it want no other manifestation, it has other; the effects
(as Christ said of his miracles, John 5.36.) and impressions of such whispers
and breathings upon the soul, will witness of them whence they come; Springs
will rise as high as they fall, that which comes from heaven will carry up the
soul to heaven. Do therefore such hints and intimations of love and favor
endear God to thy soul, cause that to say, as Psalm. 103.1. and 116.1? Do they
make Evangelical Ordinances (public and private) more sweet and delightful to
thee? To say, as Psalm. 43.4. I will go to God my exceeding joy? Do they make
thee more active and vigorous for God, and for the promoting of the interests
of Christ's Kingdom in thy place and station? Fear not, thy God, and the God of
thy Fathers, has given thee treasure in thy sack.

That is the answer which in my poor ministry I have used to give to all those
who have repaired to me for satisfaction, whether their peace and comfort be
good? Does your comfort make you more humble, more active for God, more holy?
Peace be unto you, your comfort is heavenborn comfort, and you may christen it
Gad, for behold a troop comes.

Oh be very thankful for the least of such messengers of peace to thy soul, and
write down such divine testimonies in thy book, Habemii dabitur. Mat. 25.29.
with the year, and day of the month, that it may never be forgotten; be
thankful for what thou have, and thou may comfortably expect more.

Be much in duties of mortification: 7. Help.
lie often in sackcloath and ashes before the Lord; exercise thy self in
frequent acts of Self denial; little do thou know how soon God may put a new
song into thy mouth, -- Lord, thou have turned for me my mourning, Psalm. 30.11.
thou have put off my sackcloth, and have girded me with gladness, to the end
my glory may sing praise unto thee and not be silent, etc.

Be careful to mortify corruptions, and to crucify the flesh with the
affections and lusts. Gal. 5.24.
A mortified Christian is the fittest vessel to contain the precious liquor of
assurance: Mortification first purifieth, and then dilates the heart, and makes
it capacious to divine consolations. I keep under my body and bring into
subjection, 2 Cor. 9. ult. 2 Cor. 5.1.
was his voice that could say, We know that if our earthly house of this
tabernacle were dissolved we have a building of God, etc. He fills the hungry
with good things.

Set others to pray for thee: Yet not every one, 8. Help.
who (it may be) can pray: Assurance is not an errand to send every common
Christian to the Throne of Grace about: Special Favorites are employed to
Princes for special Favors: thou can not pray thy self, nor set any of the
household of Faith at work for an higher Boon than for Assurance: Oh get some
special Favorite (under the great Mediator) some Noah, some Job, some Daniel,
etc. Men or Women of great acquaintance and much communion with God, Christians
of large experience and eminent holiness, to such God usually denies nothing:
And (Heb.) The secret of the Lord is with them that fear him, Psalm. 25.14.
his Covenant to make them know it. Speaks to others, as men and women
ordinarily bespeak prayers, Pray pray for me, and the like, and (truly for the
most part) it passes for a common, if not a vain Complement, and there is an
end of it; speak to some (not Heathen) and they will laugh at thee, they know
not what thou say; speak to others, and they will forget thee: He that makes
not assurance his own concernment, how can he make it thine? Speak to serious,
solid, brokenhearted Christians, who know what assurance is, and what it is
worth, earnestly beg of them, If there be any consolation in Christ, if any
comfort of love, if any fellowship of the Spirit, if any bowels and mercies?
That they would plead hard for that (in the interest of our Lord Jesus) if God
would remember your poor thirsty soul for one draught of this wine of this
consolation, Assurance, and they cannot, yea, they dare not forget thee: They
know whose prayers have prevailed for themselves in the like petitions, and
they dare not but pay their debts.

But whilst thou set others to pray for thee, Caution, forget not to pray
for thy self.
forget not to pray for thy self: If thou set others to pray for thee, and
prayest not thy self, thou art an Hypocrite, and God will account thee as one
that mockest, and thou will get a curse, and not a blessing; wherefore pray,
pray constantly, and pray instantly, Vehementia and constantia in istu
petitionibus requiritur, etc.
knock hard at the gate of heaven for this grand mercy, and if God open not the
first, or second, or twentieth, or the hundredth time, yet, with Peter, continue
knocking; let God know, as it were, that thou art resolved to take no denial to
thy Petition for assurance. This was the greatness of the poor woman of Canaans
Faith, Mat. 15.27.
she would not be denied.

Be constant and conscientious in your attendance upon Christ's Table; 9. Help.
behold it is the sealing Ordinance, his Banqueting House, his
Presence Chamber, his Marriage Feast, his Bed of love, where he does use to
give out to his Spouse his Loves, Cant. 6.12. (...).

Behold, the Spirits run in the blood, and the sealing Spirit of Christ is not
seldom conveyed in the precious streams of Christ's blood, in that mysterious
Ordinance.

The holy Supper was the pledge of his dying Love, a Seal of his last coming to
receive home his Spouse to himself: This Cup is the New Testament in my blood;
1 Cor. 11.25, 26.
this do ye, as est as ye drink it, in remembrance of me. As often as ye eat,
etc. Christ would have his Spouse perpetuate the remembrance of his dying love,
(...). 2 Pet. 3.12.
that thereby they might look for a hastening of his coming.

Oh let not thy place be empty at such a glorious festivity, who can tell
whether the Lord may come in the very hour of this solemn Ordinance, which he
has appointed to be the very sanction and pledge of his glorious and
triumphant coming, Sam. 20.27.
and say concerning thee, Where is the son of Jesse to day? Oh at such a time
for the Bridegroom to find thee absent, how unkindly may he take it? Who that
he might be sure not to miss thy company at this Love-feast has said, As often
as ye eat, etc.

Lastly, Wait. This is blessedness in assurance, 10. Help.
next to the beatifical vision it self, and there wants not blessedness in
waiting for it, while short spirited Christians can find no sweetness but in a
pleroph^ry: gracious souls can taste blessedness in waiting for it, Lam. 3.26.

The Saints in Scripture have been not only a praying generation, but a waiting
generation; the old Testament Believers waited for the Promise of the Messiah:
Luke 2.25.
It is said of good old Simeon, He waited for the consolation of Israel: And
the Primitive believers in the new Testament (after Christ's Ascension) were
commanded by our Lord, to wait for the Promise of the Father, Acts 1.4.
which (said he) ye have heard of me; namely, the Promise of the Holy Ghost,
which should fill their hearts with assurance, and seal them up to the day of
Redemption.

Indeed there is Patience in Faith as well as Power, it knows as well how to
stay the Lords leisure as to wrestle with him for the blessing. Indeed it is a
rare temper to be importunate with God and Christ, willing to stay Gods
leisure; but it is most excellent, and there is nothing lost by it.

Holy David gives us his own experience, Psalm. 40.1. I waited patiently for the
Lord, and he inclined unto me, and heard my cry: Go you and do likewise. Pray
and wait, wait, and wait patiently; and if the Lord answer not as soon as your
souls could wish, know this, that you do not so much wait for God, as God for
you; Isai. 30 18.
The Lord waits to be gracious; God does but wait the fittest season of mercy;
and therefore blessed are they that wait for him.

And let me tell you this for your unspeakable encouragement, that if assurance
come not till your dying hour, nor then neither to your own or others sense and
observation, yet vigorous and persevering endeavors shall wear the same Crown
with assurance in heaven; not want of assurance, but the neglect of it, is the
sin which God takes unkindly.

It was the last words wherewith holy Jacob went triumphing out of the world, I
have waited for thy salvation, Genesis 49.18.
O Lord.

And thus I have done with the second Use of this Ever.

I come to a third

Ever with the Lord. Use 3. 1 Cor. 15 ult.

It may serve as a spur to diligence and activity in the ways of God. It is
the very use the Apostle makes of this blessed Doctrine: Therefore, my
brethren, be ye steadfast, unmovable, always abounding in the work of the
Lord, for as much as ye know your labor is not in vain in the Lord. Not in
vain? a (...), more is to be understood than is expressed, the meaning is, your
reward shall be great and glorious: What is that? this motive has relation to
the glorious resurrection treated on in the whole foregoing Chapter, q. d. on
the other side of the resurrection, God has prepared an eternity of glory for
you, and therefore bestir your selves in good earnest; do somewhat for God on
this side the grave, that may (if possible) bear some proportion with your
future expectation; Whatever thy hand finds to do, do it with all thy might:
Labor hard, here is eternal rest after thy labors. Rev. 14.13.
Blessed are the dead that dye in the Lord, for they rest from their labors,
Thou have but a moment to work in, but an eternity to rest in; be industrious
now, and anon thou shall be glorious. Enter now into thy Lords Vineyard, and
soon thou shall enter into thy Lords Joy. Take pains here, there remains a
rest, an eternal rest, not an eternity of being only, but an eternity of
well-being; Ever be with the Lord.

Ply the Oar of duty, Christians, a blessed Haven is at hand, you look for more
than others, what do you do more than others? Never did servants expect such a
recompense of reward: The gift of God is eternal life. Romans 6. ult.
Oh let the fear of missing this glory urge you to the greater diligence; let
it stir you up to the most severe and intensive acts of holiness and obedience:
Phil. 2.12.
Work out your expected salvation with fear and trembling; he that runs for a
great prize, fears he should fall short; Let us fear, Heb. 4.1.
lest a promise being left us of entering into his rest, any of us should seem
to fall short; you cannot merit it by your diligence, but your may forfeit it
by your sloth: Oh work, and work out your salvation: Hope calls up a Saint to
duty; he is said therefore to be saved by hope: Christ in the soul, and hope of
glory, Romans 8. 1 John 3.8.
cannot be an idle and sluggish principle: He that has this hope purifieth
himself, even as he is pure: There are no bounds to his holy endeavors after
conformity to Christ; his hope to live with Christ in heaven puts him upon
utmost essays to live the life of Christ here on this side heaven.

Momentany enjoyments are strong inducements to worldlings to greatest pains
and labors; and will not the everlasting fruition of God make you steadfast,
unmovable, and always abounding in the Lords work? 1 Cor. 9.52.
They run (says Paul) for a corruptible crown, but we for an incorruptible: Oh
how should we run? They rise early to build an house, that in one hour may be
consumed to ashes; what pains should we take to get an interest in that house
which is eternal with God in the heavens! They toil, and moil, and sweat to
heap up riches for an unknown possessor, and shall not we labor for that
better portion, that cannot be taken from us. Heb. 3.2.
Moses was faithful and active in the house of him that appointed him, Chap.
11.26.
and this did in a great measure excite him, he had respect to the recompense
of reward, and shall we fear to over-do our work, who have a clearer prospect
of heaven than Moses had? His face was veiled, we see with open face. There Is
no inducement to take pains comparable to this, ever with the Lord: 2 Cor.
3.13, 18.
Ever in the Presence Chamber of the greatest Monarch in the world; may, ever
upon the Throne, giving laws to Kingdoms, ever increasing treasures of gold,
and silver, and precious stones; ever bathing in the full streams of sublunary
pleasures, is no ways comparable to one moments enjoyment of the presence of
the Lord in heaven. Let that man's money perish with him, said that noble
Marquess Galeacius Caracciolus, who esteems all the gold in the world worth
one days society with Jesus Christ and his holy Spirit, etc.

I have often thought with my self, that if heaven were capable of grief, those
very rivers of pleasures would swell with the tears of glorified souls, to
think that they have served God no more, served him no better, did no more for
that God, who has prepared such an heaven full of glory for such an
unprofitable servant, as I have been: Oh how coldly did I pray for this
inestimable blessedness? How unaffectedly did I hear the report of this great
salvation? And what little pains did I take for this exceeding and eternal
weight of glory, which exceeds all hyperboly? While slightest expressions are
too big for my diligence? What! all this joy, and so little pains to obtain it?
All this glory, and so little zeal for the glory of God! So great an harvest,
and so little seed sown! So great a reward, and so little service! Surely there
would be a day of humiliation kept in heaven (and it might well take up half
eternity) to bewail the Saints remissness in the work of the Lord, were heaven
capable of it, or did not the reflection of glorified souls upon the former
iniquities of their holy things issue only unto the admiration of the riches of
that grace, which has brought them to glory.

But though heaven will not admit of grief, thy present estate will: mourn
therefore, that thou have been so dead and so dull in the service of God, who
has set before thee no less a reward, than the enjoying of himself to all
eternity; and let the sense thereof quicken thy dead heart to work after
another rate for the little remnant of mortality yet behind: Say not, yet there
is two much sand left in the glass for God and eternity: say rather, Oh that,
(were it not to keep me so much the longer from my Fathers presence) oh that
every hour yet behind were a day, every day a month, every month a year, every
year a life! it were all too little for that hope which is laid up for me in
heaven! Oh had I an hundred pair of hands, they were too little to employ in my
heavenly Fathers work! an hundred pair of feet they would not carry me fast
enough in the way of his Commandments! an hundred pair of eyes were not enough
to behold God in every Creature round about me! Col. 1.13,
a thousand tongues were not sufficient to trumpet forth his praises, who has
made me meet to be a partaker of the inheritance of the Saints in light! Oh,
Ephesians. 5.16.
what shall I do? If I cannot love God more, serve him better, bring him more
glory, than hitherto I have done, I am undone, I am undone. Oh redeem.

Christians, the eternal Jubilee is at hand, the trumpet is ready to sound, and
the glorious eternal liberty of the Saints and Servants of God ready to be
proclaimed; up and be doing now, as ye would be found, when Christ shall come
with his mighty Angels, and his reward with him, that you may hear the blessed
Euge, Well done good and faithful servant, enter into the joy of the Lord.

In the fourth place: This may serve as a preservative to the people of God to
keep them from fainting and falling away in time of sufferings, and persecution
for righteousness sake; after a moments sufferings they shall have eternity of
rest, they shall ever be with the Lord, and thenceforth there shall be no more
sufferings nor sorrow: all tears shall be wiped from their eyes, and
everlasting joy shall be upon their heads, once housed in heaven, and they are
safe for ever: Persecutors, to be sure, will not follow them thither, but they
shall be looked up in hell for ever, bound in chains of everlasting darkness
for their fury against the people of God, suffering the vengeance of eternal
fire.

Ever with the Lord; here is a short fight, but an eternal triumph, a short
race, but an immarcessable crown of glory; a short storm, but an eternal
harbor, who would not almost be covetous and ambitious of suffering upon such
gainful terms? One day with the Lord will more than pay for all the Saints
sufferings, how much more this ever with the Lord? There is no proportion
between a Christian his Cross and his Crown, Romans 8.18.
if the Apostle have brought us in a true account, I reckon that the sufferings
of this present time are not worthy to be compared with the glory which shall
be revealed in us. Compare a Molehill with a Mountain, a Glowworm with a Sun
beam, a drop with the Ocean: and more disproportionable are a Saints sufferings
unto his glory; here he lets drop a few tears, there he swims in a river of
pleasures for evermore. To convince us of the odds, the Apostle puts both into
scales, and the scales into the hand even of Reason it self, see (says he) how
infinitely the reward praeponderates the sufferings: 2 Cor. 4.17. (...).
Affliction light, Glory heavy; a weight of glory, yea, an exceeding weight,
yea, a far more exceeding weight, hyperbole upon hyperbole. Affliction but for
a moment, Glory eternity, let sense and reason give sentence; what equality or
proportion! an heavy burden may be born a moment, how much easilier a light one
especially if ye add this consideration, that after that little little moment
past, burden shall never be laid upon the back any more for ever! We are apt to
think, that our sufferings are not only heavy, but intolerable, the only
unparalled affliction in the world, never sorrow like our sorrow! but they
will appear as they are poor and inconsiderable, when we come to heaven; then
our Mountains will appear Mole-hills: How will a prison look then? when for a
few days confinement we shall have the glorious liberty of the Sons of God in
the highest heavens days without end! How will then the reproach of Christ
appear to be greater riches than the treasures of Egypt, when for a little
shame and ignominy thou shall shine as the Sun in the Firmament, for ever? How
will thy former poverty for Christ look then, 1 Pet. 1.5.
when thou shall be possessed of the inheritance of the Saints in light;
Incorruptible, undefiled, that fades not away, reserved in heaven for thee?
Nay, if thou shall loose thy life for Christ, it shall seem but a poor stake,
when thou shall be crowned with all the beatitudes of life eternal.

Oh labor for such thoughts of sufferings now, as thou will have then, and
this will carry thee through fire and water for Christ's sake, and, with the
Daughter of Sion, cause thee to shake thy head at them. Though sufferings
offend thee now, and are very grievous to the fleshy part, yet it will be no
grief of heart to thee then, when thou come to put on thy Robe, and thy
Crown, and to sit down with Christ on his Throne. If there could be grief in
heaven about sufferings, it would grieve a Saint, that he had suffered no more
for Christ, or suffered with no more patience, courage, and holy insulting over
the persecutors, 40. Martyrs in Basil.
now led by his sufferings into so much glory. Pore not then upon thy
sufferings, but look up to the Crown that is prepared to be set upon thy head
after thy sufferings; behold Martyrdom it self shall be but as Elijah's Chariot
to carry thee up to heaven in triumph: If we suffer with him, we shall also
reign with him; if we wear his Crown of thorns, we shall wear his Crown of
glory; if we dye with him, we shall also rise with him, and reign with him for
ever. Think much of the Kingdom to expel base fears in sufferings. This is the
glorious recompense which Christ sets before his Church, Luke 12.32.
to encourage her in the midst of her persecutions; Fear not, little flock, it
is your Fathers pleasure to give you the Kingdom. If a Kingdom (yea, the
Kingdom of Heaven) be able to make you amends for your sufferings, you shall
not be losers by them, well you may be losers for Christ, but, to be sure, you
shall not be losers by Christ. Our Lord Christ himself did set the joy of this
Kingdom before himself in his temptations and sufferings, Heb. 12.2.
and the Apostle (therein) set Christ as an example before us, Looking unto
Jesus, the author and finisher of our faith, who for the joy which was set
before him, endured the cross, and despised the shame, etc.

Surely the joy of our Lord may well make the servant willing to endure, and
able to despise the greatest sufferings, to laugh at reproaches, and to sing in
prisons, to be like the Leviathan, Job 41.27.
He esteems iron as straw, and brass as rotten wood, the arrows cannot make
him flee, sling-stones are turned with him into stubble, darts are counted as
stubble, he laughs at the shaking of the spear, etc. Heaven in our eye will
make us thus heroic in our persecutions, Romans 5.3.
We glory not only in God, but we glory in tribulation: Hold out then faith and
patience, but one style more, said Doctor Tailor. when he went to the Stake,
and I am at my Fathers house; Oh this word, at my Fathers house, at home, Ever
with the Lord, this made the holy man to leap over the style, as if he had been
a young man going to be married to his Bride.

Ever with the Lord: sovereign cordial against the fear of death; man having an
immortal soul, naturally desires and breaths after eternity; but man in his
corrupt estate, being ignorant and mindless of a blessed eternity with God, is
not willing to dye, to leave the shore of this life, and to venture upon the
unknown immense Ocean of eternity, therefore the ungodly man's soul is said to
be taken from him, Luke 12.20. Thou fool, this night shall thy soul be required
of thee. Sinners do not willingly part with their souls, they are torn out of
their bodies by violent hands, none but a Paul (who is ballasted with the hope
of everlasting cohabitation with the Lord) can desire (...) to loose from the
shore, to hoise up sail, and make for the heavenly Canaan. And well may he,
that has made a rich (though stormy) voyage to the Indies, set sail for his
own native Country, where he may sit down in peace, and enrich himself with the
gain of his adventure.

Come hither then, oh you trembling souls, who through the fear of death have
all your lives time been subject to bondage, come hither, I say, and set your
feet upon the neck of this King of terrors, and fear not to make that
triumphant challenge of the Apostle, Oh death! 1 Cor. 15.55.
where is thy sting? O grave! where is thy victory? Death is swallowed up in
victory, and (being conquered) serves to that high and honorable end, scil. to
be the Saints Usher of State to bring them into the presence of the King of
glory, to behold his face, and to hear his wisdom, from thenceforth for ever to
be with the Lord: Death serves the Saints now for no use, but to kill
mortality, and to extinguish corruption; This corruptible must put on
incorruption, ver. 33.
and this mortal must put on immortality, i. e. We shall ever be with the Lord
a in perfect incorruptible state of glory; and this must be effected by means
of death: Oh, what were ten thousand deaths, ushering in the Soul into so much
glory!

The glimmering presence of God with a believer here below may conquer the fear
of death, Psalm. 23.3.
Though I walk in the valley of the shadow of death, I will fear no evil, for
thou art with me; How much more may the hope of a full fruition of God in glory
deliver the Saints from the bondage of fear.

Ever with the Lord: This puts Lillies and Roses into the ghastly face of
Death, and makes the King of terrors to outshine Solomon in all his glory:
Ever with the Lord, this makes death not only tolerable, but amiable,
desirable; For we know, 2 Cor. 5.1.
that if the earthly house of this tabernacle were dissolved, we have a
building of God, an house not made with hands, eternal in the heavens, and for
this we groan carnestly, desiring to be clothed upon with our house, ver. 2.
which is from heaven.

For in this we groan, i. e. in this tabernacle (for this is earthly) earnestly
desiring to be clothed upon with our house, which is from heaven; the reason
is, because that house is eternal in the heaven: A Saint looks out of the
windows of this earthly Tabernacle, and cries out (as the Mother of Sisera)
Why stay the wheels of his Chariot thus long? When shall I be carried to those
eternal Mansions, where I shall ever be with my Lord and Bridegroom?

Is any thing sweeter than life? Yes, death to a believer: That of Solomon
holds best in this case, the day of death is better than the day of birth: It
is transcendently so to a Child of God, who is conveyed by death into his
Fathers presence, where he shall dwell for ever: The passage is dark, Psalm.
16.1.
but it shall be quick and speedy; Thou will show me the path of life; the path
of life lies through the grave, but Christ has gone it already, and will take
the believer by the hand, and lead him through it into the Presence Chamber of
the King of glory, where he shall hear the Bridegrooms voice, and his joy shall
be fulfilled; then tremble thou not believer at the approach of death, but go
forth and meet him with this friendly salutation, Come in thou blessed of the
Lord; Art thou come to fetch me to my Father? Welcome death! thou art my best
friend next to Jesus Christ: Death is only my passage into a blessed eternity.
Death is Joseph's Chariot, not to carry the Saints down into Egypt, but up into
Canaan, and how quickly does he carry a believer thither? It is but winking,
and he is at home; as soon as the eye of the body is closed here, the eye of
the soul is open there (O blessed vision!) to behold at once all the glories of
eternity! Say then (with Jacob) Jesus, my Lord and Redeemer, is yet alive, and
seated on the Throne at the right hand of the Majesty on high, there
proclaiming in the cars of all his trembling followers, Rev. 1.18.
I am he that lives, and was dead: and behold, I live for evermore. Amen, and
have the keys of hell and death. Fear not, O thou believer, to say with Jacob,
I will go and see him, not before I dye, but I will dye, that I may go and see
him: Death is but the flames that must singe asunder the cords of thy
mortality; the hand that shall open the Cage, that thy soul may get loose, and
take her flight for the Mountain of Spices, the glorious immortality and
liberty of the Sons of God.

Be of good cheer, Believers thou shall dye but once, and then ever be with the
Lord, with whom is the fountain of life; life bubbling up unto all eternity:
The damned are always dying, repeating death every moment, their flames only
serve them to read over the black lines of death, which have neither Full-point
or Comma: But death enters not into the borders of the heavenly Canaan; they
say, there is no Spider in Ireland, it is certain, there is no putrid matter in
heaven to breed the vermin of mortality; in heaven only death cannot live, when
thou dyest, thou shall rise again, and dye no more, but death shall dye, and
shall rise no more; thy grave shall be the eternal grave of death: It is
appointed for all men once to dye, and for believers to dye but once. Do but
clear up thine interest in the death of Christ, and thou may bid farewell to
the fear of death for ever, for the worst thing that death can do to thee, is
thee best thing that can be done for thee, even to guide thy poor straying soul
home to thy Fathers house, and so shall thou ever be with the Lord. Wherefore
comfort one another with these words.

Lastly, It may teach us how to prize Christ, what a man sees, why does he yet
hope for? Whether there be prophesies, they shall fail, whether there be
tongues, they shall cease, whether there be knowledge, it shall vanish away,
but charity never fails, but as long as God lives it lives, for God is love,
and they that love dwell in God, and God in them.

I have finished, I cannot say perfected, the main work intended, seil. the
opening of the ten words, or Arguments of Comfort here laid down in this model
or platform by the Holy Ghost, as so many sovereign Cordials to revive
disconsolate and fainting Christians over the death of their hopeful Relations,
with the several improvements which each word (by it self) may afford unto us.

But before I do, Manum de tabula tollere, dismiss this discourse, I do observe
diverse useful Corollaries and Instructions lie couched in the general
improvement of these words, Comforting one another, which will serve as so many
branches of information, which (without guilt) I cannot omit, and they are ten.

1. Several branches of Information arising from this general exhortation,
Comfort one another. 1. Branch of Information.
Sorrow not as men without hope, but comfort one another.] Obs. There is a
sorrow for departed friends, which God condemns not. We are forbid an hopeless
sorrow, v. 13. but simply to mourn for the loss of our gracious Relations we
are no where forbidden. He that has wrapped up natural affections in our bowels,
does not prohibit the due and moderate exercise of them. Those (...), persons
without natural affections are in the black Roll amongst the most ulcerous and
excrescent part of mankind: To be without natural affections is to do violence
against Nature her self, and to violate the law of humanity. Covenant breakers
without natural affection] are monsters, not men. Christ himself, who knew no
sin, yet being acquainted with all our griefs, even had this kind of sorrow for
the dead, John 11.35. Jesus wept, and his tears do here instruct us in our
duty. Holy Paul blots his Epistle to the Ephesians with his tears for
Epaphroditus, Lest (says he) I should have sorrow upon sorrow; he was
sorrowful for his sickness, had he dyed there would have been another flood of
tears, sorrow upon sorrow. Where mention is made of the death of public
persons, there public lamentations for them is mentioned also: The Spirit of
God does no where reprove those tears, but rather puts a value upon them as so
many pearls. As in the mourning for Jacob, Genesis 50.11. for Josias, 2 Chronicles.
35.24. for Samuel, 1 Samuel 25.1. for Stephen, Acts 8.2. Its reckoned amongst
Gods thunderbolts, Psalm, 78.64.
Their widows made no lamentation. The removal of Gods peace from a people, and
prohibition to mourn for their dead, are twin-judgments, or one the birth of
another: Enter not into the house of mourning, neither go to lament, nor bemoan
them, for I have taken away my peace from this people. Tears are like wine, you
may pour them out, but take heed of excess; Be not drunk with tears, wherein is
excess: you may weep, but as those that weep not; you may mourn, but not as
others, which have no hope: 1 Cor. 7.30.
these affections are natural, but this hope will baptize and regenerate them.

Secondly, Hence we learn, 2. Branch of Information.
There is another work or duty incumbent on Christians, under the loss of
gracious Relations, Then only to mourn for them, namely, to enquire, yea, 1
King. 20.33
(with Benhadad's servants) diligently to observe what words of comfort do fall
from the lips of Scripture, and hastily to catch at them: q. d. Comfort another
with these words: yea, Lord! with these words do thou comfort thy servant!

We are usually either senseless under, or swallowed up with great losses;
either our bowels, are made of iron, or they melt like wax, and we faint away:
Vehement sorrow is like raging fire, that turns every thing into its own
nature. It Is thy work therefore to study recruits, as well as to pore upon thy
losses, to ballast thy soul with divine comforts: If I go not away the
Comforter cannot come: John 16.7.
Many times the best of our earthly enjoyments stand between us and our
heavenly consolations: But if I go away I will send him unto you. It is good to
resolve with our selves, be my loss in this world never so great, it is capable
of a reparation. For certainly, if the loss of Christ in his bodily presence
were to be repaired, there is nothing under the whole heaven, the loss whereof
we can sustain, but may much easilier be made up with advantage, to be sure the
presence of the Comforter is able to do it with an infinite overplus. It is thy
wisdom therefore to balance thy soul with divine comforts; as afflictions
abound, run to thy Cordial, these words, that thy consolations may abound also:
if the affliction scale be heavier than the consolation scale, thou will
certainly sink in thy spirit, and then thy burden will break thy back: Prove.
18.14.
The spirit of a man is able to sustein his infirmity. Thou may mourn, but
that is not all thou have to do, 2 Cor. 4, 14.
it concerns thee to get a cordial to keep thy heart from fainting: For this
cause we faint not. Mark, the Apostle had (always) his Cordial about him, so
do thou, be equally just to thy self, as to thy deceased friends. Thou owe
them a debt of tears, have thou paid it? Now be just to thy self, thou owe a
care to thy soul, that thou sin not, to thy spirit, that it sink not; must thou
needs dye, because thy Husband, thy Child, thy Friend is dead? Look after
divine consolation, let it not be a small thing to thee, neither say thou (by
interpretation) nay, if God will have this comfort from me, let him take all.
Take heed of weeping thy self blind, as to the consolations of God, as Hagar
did, there was a well spring of water close by her, but she had cried out her
eyes, and could not see it, Genesis 21.16. until God opened her eyes, verse 19.
There is too much of the pride and sullenness of the Babylonish Favorite in
us, who when he had made a large and boasting recital of his Court favors,
could throw away all in a pet for want of a complement, Yet all this avails
me nothing, Hest. 5.12, 13.
so long as I see Mordieai the Jew sitting at the Kings gate.

In all things pray and give thanks, Phil. 4.6. Oh labor for the quick eye of
faith, which can spy out a little mercy in a great deal of affliction, and can
fit down and give thanks: A Christian is never in such an affliction, but he
has as much cause to praise God, as he has to pray unto him, Lum. 3.2.
yea, many mercies for one affliction; that it is not so bad, but it might be
worse, to be sure it is not hell^ 2. That when ever he takes away one comfort
he leaves more: 3. Psalm. 30.5.
That heaviness may continue for a night, but joy in the morning. 4. And in the
mean time he has a God to go unto, Oh love the Lord all ye his Saints, Psalm.
31.23.

3. 3. Branch of Information.
Observe further the goodness and condescentions of God, who has laid in
comfort before hand against a time of sorrow and mourning: Cordials ready
prepared to keep the hearts of his people from fainting in the hour of
temptation, like a good Surgeon, he has in his Chest a Salve for every
Wound, a Cordial for every Qualm; there is not a fear in Gods peoples hearts,
but there is a fear not in Gods Book to antidote it withal, and yea here in
this model of divine comfort, you have ten fear nots for one fear; ten words of
comfort for one grief, conceived for the loss of a dear Relation, These words,
2 Cor. 1.5.
that if our sorrow should abound, our consolations may much more abound by
Christ.

God deals in this case with his people, just as he dealt with our first
Parents, providing a plaster beforehand to clap on the wound of conviction of
sin, in the promise of the seed of the woman, that should break the Serpents
head. Genesis 3.15.
Lest the wound should take cold, fester, and (by delay) prove incurable, all
the Promises in Scripture, they are but so many Receipts written down
beforehand in the Book of the great Physician of souls for the use of all Gods
Family, the Saints of God from the beginning of the world; there are given unto
us exceeding great and precious promises, i. e. concerning exceeding great and
precious things, 1 Pet. 1.4.
and they are all yea and Amen in Jesus Christ, verity and infallibility.
Thither, therefore, let all Gods Patients go, and search, and read, and take
whatever Receipt suiteth best with their Malady, and they shall (rightly
applied) find present ease, and infallible cure, in the constant and believing
use thereof: For whatsoever was written aforetime, was written for our
learning, that we through patience and comfort of the Scriptures might have
hope, Romans 15.4.

Gods compassions over his mourners are great, and therefore his consolations
are not small. Though God would have his people deeply humbled and tried to the
quick, yet he would not have their spirits sink under the temptation; and
therefore, when he observes them to begin to faint, he cease contending with
them, and begins his comforting work for the iniquity of his covetousness, Isa.
57.18.
I smote him, and was wrath, but when God saw that would do no good, he tries
another course, I will restore comforts to him. Just as when a Parent is
correcting a Child, and the Child cries, and swoons, presently away goes the
rod, and the strong-water-bottle is snatched up, and applied to the mouth of the
Child; so compassionately deals God with his fainting Children.

It is a wonderful expression which God uses toward Ephraim, Jer. 31.20. My
bowels are troubled for him. Ephraim says, I smote upon my thigh, and
presently God smites upon his heart, and cries out, My bowels are troubled for
him, I will have mercy upon him: O ineffable sympathy! answerable whereunto,
God has a cup of consolation prepared in his hand, which he puts to their
mouths, and bids drink, yea, drink abundantly of it, till they forget their
sorrows, even that overflowing cup, Fullness of joy and pleasures for ever at
his right hand. Ever with the Lord. Psalm. 103.13.
Surely as a father pitieth his children, so the Lord pitieth them that fear
him; and such compassions would he have to fill the bowels of all his
Evangelical Messengers: Isa. 40.1, 2.
Comfort ye, comfort ye my people, says their God, speak ye comfortably to
Jerusalem, etc. Thus does God fill up his Title brim-full, and running over,
The Father of mercies, 2 Cor. 1.3.
and the God of all comfort.

In the fourth place, 4. Branch of Information.
here you may see the absolute and indispensable necessity of faith, without
which, all the choicest consolations, and richest cordials the Word can afford,
are but so much water of life in a dead man's mouth, or as Elisha's Staff upon
the face of the dead Child, ^ King. 4.
which causes neither voice nor motion: Heb. 10.38.
The just shall live by faith; an unbelieving man is but a dead man; for as
faith is the first principle of spiritual life, so it is the constant medium,
whereby the spiritual fuel and restoratives of that life are brought in, and
made vital to the soul, The life I now live in the flesh, I live it by the
faith of the Son of God. Christ's flesh is meat indeed, and his blood is drink
indeed, but it is to faith only, it is not meat indeed, if there be not faith
indeed; He that comes to me shall never hunger: What Is that? He that believes
on me shall never thirst. The Word of God is the power of God to salvation,
Romans 1.16.
but it is to them only who believe. God has provided a cup of consolation for
his fainting people in their swooning fits, but it is the hand of faith that
must take it, and the mouth of faith only that can drink it. The unbeliever is
an unhappy man, nothing can do him good; Heb. 4.2.
The word does not profit, not being mixed with faith. The body and blood of
Christ proves poison instead of divine nutriment, because it is not received by
faith: This is the will of him that sent me (says our Lord) that he that
believes on me may have everlasting life: Divine Cordials so magisterial, that
they are able (as it were) to put life into a dead man: give them to an
unbeliever, they signify no more than water in the shoes: Oh get faith,
Saints, act your faith, or else ye are undone. Great notions are but small
comforts to a natural man, and the reason is, because they are above him:
nothing can act above its principle, you can never comfort a Swine with
arguments of reason; no more can ye comfort a carnal heart with heavenly
consolations; the reason is, Quiequid recipitur, recipitur ad modum recipientu.
because both are above the constitutive principles of either: Divine notions
may serve a man (without faith) to discourse by, but they will never serve him
to live by; reason may discourse upon them, but faith must live upon them: The
life I now live I live by the faith, etc. Therefore does the Apostle there put
the cup of consolation into the hand of faith, ver. 14. If we believe, that
Jesus died, and rose again, etc. There is an inexhaustible fullness of comfort
in Christ, and in the Promises, but not one drop to be drawn forth without
faith. The breasts of Scripture-consolation are full, they even drop again; but
it is the mouth of faith that must suck them out: the still-born Child may as
well-draw the Mothers dug, as a faithless Christian make the teats of Scripture
to afford any drop of divine influence to his drooping soul; but to the
believer it is cried (at least by way of accommodation) Suck ye, Isa. 66.11, 12.
and be satisfied with the breasts of consolation, milk out, and be delighted
with the abundance of glory. A man may as well live and laugh without a soul,
as have true evangelical comfort without faith, which is the bond of union
between Christ and the Soul, and so being united to the fountain, 1 Pet. 1.18.
Believing ye rejoice with joy unspeakable, and glorious. This is that golden
pipe, through which all the golden oil of grace and comfort is derived into the
heart. Zech. 4.12.
The men of the world may have vast proportions of knowledge, both natural and
divine, but mere knowledge is light without heat, but faith warms the heart, as
they said one to another, Did not our hearts burn within us, when he spoke unto
us? If I assent and consent to the glorious Doctrine of the Resurrection,
knowing, with Job, that my Redeemer lives, etc. I can (in that) triumph over
all occurrent evils, over the Grave it self, though it swallow up my dearest
Relations: If I believe not, I am like a thirsty man at a well without a
bucket, where I may sooner drown my self than quench my thirst. Oh get the
bucket of Faith, and then with joy may ye draw water out of these wells of
salvation, These words.

Hence we are informed, 5. Branch of Information.
that it is a special duty of Christians, to administer words of comfort to
their mourning friends, according to their various temptations and trials. It
is the very law of those consolations, wherewith the Holy Ghost does comfort us
in our afflictions, that we may be able to comfort them, which are in any
trouble, by the comfort wherewith we our selves are comforted of God: A lesson
(it seems) Job's friends had learned, and came to put in practice, when by
mutual consent they met together at Job's house, Job 2 11. this was their end,
though unhappily they mistook their work, by spicing their cup of consolation
with too many bitter ingredients, (whose error may it be our caution.) Thus
also we read in the Gospel of many friends, who came to comfort Marth^ and Mary
concerning their brother, supposed to be dead.

Christians, your eyes are not your own; we are commanded to rejoice with them
that rejoice, and to weep with those that weep in point of affection, we should
he like the primitive Christians, have all things in common; we should joy our
brethrens joys, mourn their sorrows, lament their sufferings, and endeavor
their comfort as our own, else we turn engrossers, yea, we become guilty of
Sacrilege in robbing one another of divine treasure; our comforts are not
given us for our selves only, but for the afflicted: Saints they have a common
right one to another graces, comforts and experiences, and Christ's word should
always sound in our ears, Strengthen thy brethren. How ornamental were those
Christians in the once famous Roman Church, of whom the Apostle presumes, I my
self also am persuaded of you, my brethren, Romans 15.14.
that ye also are full of goodness, filled with all knowledge, able also to
admonish one another: Oh that as many as do abound in abilities, would pray for
wisdom to parcel out those abilities into all the Christian Offices commended
to them by the Holy Ghost in their several seasons: To warn the unruly, comfort
the feeble-minded, support the weak, etc. Oh how beautiful are the feet of
those Christians, Tit. 3.1.
who are ready to every good work, as the hand in joint ready to turn every way
for the use and service of the body? A Christian should nevor be unfurnished of
a reproof for sinners, nor of a word of comfort for distressed Saints. Let none
have cause from thee in their sorrows to complain, as the blubbered Church in
the Lamentation, saying, There is none to comfort me. Oh that Christians would
study to show themselves good Scribes instructed to the Kingdom of God,
bringing out of their treasures things new and old! Be not of the Sect of the
stony-hearted Levite, that had not one drop of pity to pour into the wounded
Traveller, lest thy wounds another day (as so many mouths) plead for pity to
deaf ears: Have thou not thy self been comforted in thy troubles? John 14.18.
Has not Christ made good that great promise, I will not leave thee
comfortless, I will come unto thee? How often have the everlasting arms kept
thy soul from sinking! How frequently have the Messengers of Christ refresht
thy weary soul! And have thou forgot those arms of mercy, as not to help thy
brother with thy little finger! Has God conferred on thee such treasures of
comfort, and have thou not one mite to bestow upon thy disconsolate Brother.

It is their infirmity sometimes, that they are not in a capacity to close with
comfort when it is tendered unto them, but, with Rachel weeping for her
children, they refuse to be comforted for their children, or friends, because
they are not: but it is thy sin and guilt, if at any time they faint, because
thou drawest not forth thy soul unto them in a way of seasonable relief, if
they fall at thy door for want of bread.

It is angelical employment to comfort a weary soul; a great part of their
ministration is to comfort the elect in their temptations, as you may see by
comparing Matthew. 4.11. with Heb. 1.14. It is the work of the malignant Angels,
to grieve and add to the sorrow of the Saints; and the world may know by this
whose work they do, when they deride the tears, and bitter moan-makings of Gods
Isaacs, Genesis 21.9. Gal. 4.29.
upon which the Holy Ghost sets the black brand of persecution, he mocked,
says the Story, he persecuted, says the Interpretation. Well Christians, do
as much as ever you can of this Angelical work, of which there will be no need
in heaven, to give or take the great work enjoined here in my Text, Comfort one
another with these words; which does also hint unto us another instruction.
These words.

Gods words of comfort are the only words of comfort: 6. Branch of Information.
God is the God of consolation, 2 Cor. 1.3. The Father of mercies, and the God
of all comfort: God is the caus^ ^ontan^ of comfort.
all comfort does emanate from God as water out of the fountain; nothing can be
in the stream, but what was first in the fountain; he is the Father of mercies;
there are no mercies pure and legitimate but what are of his begetting, which
can call God Father; no waters are pure, and vital, but those that are fetched
out of the fountain: And therefore those Pronouns are very sweet, and carry the
greatest emphasis with them, Thy comforts delight my soul, Psalm. 94.10. My
peace I leave with you, John 14.27. A soul thoroughly awakened will never take
its rest again, or be comforted, until God speak a word of comfort from his own
mouth: Make me to hear joy and gladness, Psalm. 51.8.
that the bones which thou have broken may rejoice. It was not all the honors
and pleasures of David's Dominions, it was not all the victories and spoils of
his enemies, yea, it was not all his prayers and tears (though every night he
made his couch swim with them, Psalm. 6.) that could whisper a syllable of
comfort to his sin-scorched conscience, until God himself spoke them with his
own hand, (that is the specially of comfort, which the Apostle begs for his
Thessalonians) Now the God of peace himself, 2 Thessalonians. 3.16. Chap. 2.16,
give you peace: Now our Lord Jesus Christ himself, and God even our Father, i.
e. himself comfort you. That is right peace which God himself gives, and that
is true comfort which Christ himself speaks: Therefore prays the holy man,
Make me to hear joy and gladness, q. d. Lord speak so loud, that I may hear the
voice, and speak so distinctly, that I may know whose voice it is; that I may
know it is thou thy self that speak to my Soul, that I may say, It is the
voice of my Beloved, etc.

Christians, I know God may, and does oftentimes convey his comforts by the
lips of his faithful Messengers, and Servants, Isai 40.1.
Comfort ye, comfort ye my people, says your God, speak ye comfortably to
Jerusalem, etc. speak to her heart (as the Hebrew phraseth it) I say the
Prophets were but Gods mouth to deliver the message, and so are the Ministers
of the Gospel, and other of his Saints; but be sure the comforts which you
administer be Gods comforts, see that ye can say with the Apostle in another
case, 1 Cor. 11.13.
That, which I have received of the Lord, deliver I unto you. Be sure what you
dispense from God be these words, be sure your words of comfort be none but
such as Christ himself would speak were he upon the place: Do not my words do
good, Mic. 17. Jer. ^3 28.
says the Lord? Yes, they be Gods words only that can comfort fainting souls:
But what is the chasse to the wheat, says the Lord?

It is true, the Devil and the World have their counterfeit Cordials, their
gilded Pills and Plasters, which, like Quacksalvers, make quick Cures, but
they never heal to the bottom; they may for a time stupifie the sense, but they
do not mortify sensuality, ease the smart, but not cleanse the wound. Saul,
when the evil Spirit was upon him, calls for a Fiddle, and when God has
forsaken him, he goes to the Witch, as if, because God would not answer him,
the Devil should: Most people have learned a way of their own, some to drink
down their sorrow, and sleep out the sense of those breaches, which God has
made upon their Relations, or in a crowd of worldly business can lose their
sorrows, yea, many carnal Professors there are, when they have disturbed their
peace, and wounded their Consciences, can make a shift to lick themselves whole
with their duties, a few Pater-nosters, Church-absolution, a morsel of
Sacramental bread, and a drop of the Sacramental cup will make them as well as
ever, though that which stilleth conscience never kills corruptions, what a
world of souls does Satan gain by such cures, Eating and drinking damnation to
themselves, 1 Cor. 11.30.

In this affliction of the loss of dear Relations, the World, when she comes to
visit the surviving Mourners, wants not her Cordials, but oh what pitiful
puddle water, instead of water of life, does she administer! We must be
contented (say they) there is no remedy, God will have it so, we cannot help
it; and however their friends have lived, in-grace-a-God they are well, we must
live by the living, and not by the dead; and with such dirty rags, as these,
they bind up one another dreadful stinking wounds; or peradventure others
there be, that with the stout shoulder of fortune may bear their wounds without
complaining; some Porters can carry greater loads than others can; or else (on
the other hand) some corky spirits ye have, whom much lead will not make sink
in the waters of affliction.

But alas all these are but lying vanities, and will stand men in least stead
when they stand in most need of comfort. Oh that men had faith to believe, that
all these are Physicians of no value! Christ's words are the only words of
comfort, Then shall we be ever with the Lord. So our Lord again, Let not your
heart be troubled, John 14.1, 2.
ye believe in God, believe also in me, in my Fathers house are many mansions:
With thee is the fountain of life, Psalm. 36.9.
and in thy light we shall see light, These, these indeed, are Apples of gold,
which, when they meet with Pictures of silver, Prove. 25.11.
hearts truly capable of such consolation, are very beautiful, Comfort one
another with these words.

Hence be we instructed, 7. Branch of Information.
If it be the duty of Christians to administer words of comfort to Mourners,
then it is also the duty of Mourners to open their ears and hearts to receive
those words; if those Apples of Gold meet not with pictures of silver, they are
lost and cast away. If God should send an Angel, or any Messenger of peace to
comfort you in your trouble, what a sin would it be to make him go away
ashamed, with an Who has believed our report? Or, Lord, I have delivered thy
message, and all thy precious Cordials were of no value. I know there be few or
none of Gods Mourners, that dare do this in terminis, in express language; but
what and if a deaf ear, and a dejected countenance, and a dead heart;
unchearful conversation alter all the words of comfort, which God sends thee by
his Messengers, be so^ with God, by interpretation? May not this provoke God to
afflict thee more, and to increase thy sorrows, until the pride of thy heart be
abated? May I not say unto thee, as Joab to David, when he grew sullen upon the
death of Absalom, Thou have shamed the face of Gods Messengers, ^ S^m. 19.5.
and have declared, that the consolations of God are small in thine eyes? Now
therefore arise, and thankfully embrace their message of peace, or else it may
be worse unto thee, than all the evil, that befell thee from thy youth; until
now. Surely it is as great an indignity to slight Gods comforts, as it is to
scorn Gods counsels: this spurns against Gods Authority, that tramples upon his
compassion; this man does resist the Spirit, that man does grieve the Spirit,
and if thou grieve away the Comforter, who shall comfort thee at length? If
David took the affront which Hanun put on his Messengers sent to comfort him
over his Fathers death, so heinously, that he armeth Joab, and all his men of
war against him, to avenge the indignity, how justly may God send forth Armies
of afflictions against thee, for thy sullen refusal of his tender hearted
consolations?

Surely there is more pride in such refusals, than Christians are easily
convinced of; for is it not by interpretation to say, my loss is not to be
repaired, my wound is incurable, there is no balm in Gilead that can heal thy
hurt! Is it not, as if thou should say, there was but one intolerable thing
in the world, and God must needs send that upon thee! Dear Christian, be afraid
by thy frowardness of running the hazard of such an interpretation: That
Question of Eliphaz to Job, J^b 15.11.
Are the consolations of God small with thee? implies greater unkindness in
refusing divine comfort, than Mourners are willing to believe. God could not do
thee wrong in taking away thy amiable Relation from thee (it was but calling
for his loan again, which he lent thee) and yet does he send to comfort thee.
Oh how thy head, and worship, and say, Behold the servant of the Lord, be it
unto me according to thy Word.

Poor disconsolate soul, know thou that every crumb of comfort, which falls
from Christ's mouth, is more precious than a Ruby; and who art thou, that thou
should refuse Cordials from Heaven made of the blood of Christ? Jewels taken
out of Gods own Cabinet. Away, away, Christian, with Rachels peevishness, and
Jonas his passion, which serve for nothing, but to turn sorrow into sin. I do
well to be angry does ill become meekness of Christ's Spouse, say rather, I will
bear the indignation of the Lord, Mic. 7.9.
because I have sinned against him. What if God has given thee a bitter
potion, he comes now to comfort thee, he offers thee a sovereign Cordial, Oh
spill it not upon the ground, as a vile thing, nor say in thy passion, Let God
keep his Cordials to himself, and so, as it were, take revenge on God for
afflicting thee: Oh lay thine hand upon thy mouth, yea, put thy mouth in the
dust, that it may not cause thy flesh to sin.

Thou art a man, or woman of sorrows, it were thy wisdom, as well as thy duty,
to look out for some spiritual Cordials, and not to reject soul refreshment
when it is offered; say not to thy comforters, with the Prophet Isaiah, Look
away from me, Isai. 22.4.
I will weep bitterly, labor not to comfort me, and thy case will not bear it:
He was weeping the Churches tears, thou art poring over a private personal
trial, consider in so doing, thou art but preparing new causes of sorrow for
thine own soul, and when thou have done sorrowing for thy loss, thou will begin
anew to sorrow for thy sin in so sorrowing. Hark soul, Ever be with the Lord.
Is not there a word, that may wipe away all tears from thine eyes, even on this
side heaven!

In the next place, 8. Branch of Information.
hence we gather this sad truth, scil. That there is not a word of comfort
belonging to wicked men when they die, nor while they live in sin. Comfort one
another; none other but one another; not the ungodly; they and their parasites
may flatter themselves and one another; but there is not one word of comfort
belonging to them: of all those Rivers of pleasures that are at Gods right hand
not one drop for a Dives. Of all those treasures of glory not one mite for an
Esau. Indeed pity belongs to wicked men, and reproof belongs to them, Reprove
them rather, Ephesians. 5.11. and counsel belongs to them, Let the wicked forsake
his wickedness: and expostulation belongs to them, Why will ye die? etc. And
prayer belongs to them, Father forgive them, etc. But comfort does not belong
to them. Consolation is none of their portion in the state wherein they are. As
there is no peace to the wicked, so consequently no comfort for them. Indeed a
wicked man has his portion, but it is a dreadful one, Psalm. 11.6. Upon the
wicked shall the Lord rain snares, fire and brimstone (alluding to the
destruction of Sodom) this shall be the portion of their cup; these fiery
ingredients shall be put into their cup, after the delicious draughts of sinful
pleasures: this was Dives his case, Luke 16.23, 24, etc. after his delicate
fare, the Devils snap dragon, draughts of flaming fire was his portion for
ever; and this is all the comfort that is to be administered to them, Isai.
3.11. Say thou to the wicked it shall be ill with him; They shall be cast into
utter darkness with the Devil and his Angels for ever, etc. These are their
words of comfort; they are ministers of hell, who have any better words of
comfort for wicked men (while wicked:) for the Devil would have them dance
about the snare till their foot be taken in his gin. They that can cry peace,
peace, when there is no peace, are the Devils Factors, who bring him in the
greatest revenues to his Kingdom.

But alas! how shall a wicked man be comforted? His death is not a sleep, but
death indeed; Rev. 6.8.
death armed with all its horrors; death with its sting, which is sin, death
with hell at the heels of it, death with the wrath of God, and death with the
loss of eternal life.

Indeed a wicked man shall rise again, but it is that he may have the more
solemn trial, and more tremendous sentence from the Judge, in the face of
heaven and earth, and who can comfort him, that does truly represent his
condition to him?

How much then are we concerned to labor to be such as may have comforters in
our own death, 9. Branch of Information.
and leave matter of comfort to our surviving friends? It is a duty incumbent
on us, to make our death as comfortable to our selves, and our godly friends as
may be: And how is that done? but in a word to get an interest in Christ,
Scripture evidence of that interest, and the Seal of the Spirit to those
evidences.

The death of some persons is exceeding dreadful, not only to themselves, but
to standers by; this is the (supposed) reason of that lamentable ingemination
of David, Oh my Son Absalom, my Son, my Son Absalom, q. d. Absalom dyed in his
rebellion, I fear he is fallen into a worse hand than Joabs: Oh that my death
might have prevented so dreadful a miscarriage; Oh Absalom! would God I had
dyed for thee!

But alas, my brethren, it is not freedom from such parricidious villainies, no,
nor all the moral innocence in the world, nor civil righteousness in the (...),
the altitude of it, that can fill a dying Saint with joy, or the surviving
godly Mourners with comfort: whatever blaze unregenerate persons make in the
world, they go out like a stinking snuff, but a Saint leaves a persume behind
him, he embalms his own death, he leaves every one of his weeping friends a
Legacy of hope concerning his eternal state; he sets up a luster in the House
of mourning, brighter than those were with which Great men's Hearses are
watched, and in an instant turns it into a House of rejoicing; he is entered
into glory, and has left behind him the prints of his feet to guide us
thither, and being dead yet speaks to us, as Christ to Mary Magdalene, Why
weepest thou? The wicked is driven away in his wickedness, but the righteous
has hope in his death, Prove. 14.32: Study therefore, I say, an interest in
Christ, that while you are ravished with the joys of Heaven, you may leave
comfort on Earth for your godly Relations.

Carnal friends are satisfied with a negative holiness for themselves, or for
their Relations that dye before them; to be better than the worst is evidence
enough to them of a blessed state; or whatever their life has been, put but
in, a little dead repentance into the premises, they will put heaven into the
conclusion; Oh, say they, he is happy, he is in heaven sure enough.

But Christians, whose eyes have been opened to look into the horror of the
bottomless pit, out of which free grace has redeemed the Saints, the purity of
the Gospel rule, and the glory that shall be revealed at the appearance of the
Lord Jesus, they cannot take up with such miserable comforts as men usually dye
with. And it must needs be an addition to the torments of hell, to leave godly
Relations mourning under the dreadful apprehensions of a Relation miscarrying
to all eternity. And to be regardless of our friends anxiety of spirit even in
this respect, is somewhat less charity than they have in hell. Dives in hell
was sollicitous to prevent his brethrens coming thither.

Graceless Relations dying, with the marks of their unregeneracy upon them, do
even scorch the hearts of their gracious surviving friends, with the sense of
those flames which they suffer. So it will be to them while they are yet in the
body, Woodcock his Sermon of Heaven, p. 657.
though at the Resurrection (as one says) it shall be no more allay to their
joy, than if they saw so many fishes caught in a net.

Impartially therefore and accurately examine your own estates, make your
Consciences faithfully to answer this Question.

Can I give my self or friends comfort in this present state, should I dye this
very moment?

If Conscience, assisted with Scripture light, say no, this is a lost estate,
this is a damnable condition I am now in, oh poor wretch! how highly does it
concern thee this very hour to look about thee? for thou know not how near
thou art to the last point and period of thine appointed time. Vide Morning
Exercise Giles in the Fields, 1659.
It is a vain thing for thee to comfort thy self without some Scripture grounds
of interest in Christ, who is the resurrection and the life. Paul sends
Tychichus to comfort the Colossians, but he must know their state first, Colos.
4.8. That he may know their state, and comfort their heart.

We have a generation that comfort others, without knowing their spiritual
estate; which is to clap on a plaster without searching the wound; a way to
lead men to hell hoodwinkt; the spiritual estate must be known before comfort
can be well applied. Examine therefore, and suffer others to examine and search
how it is with your souls in relation to Christ and Grace, what knowledge, what
repentance, what faith, what mortification, what contempt of the world, what
love to Christ, what thoughts of the world to come?

If these things be in you and abound, then comfort your hearts; For so an
entrance shall be ministered unto you abundantly, into the everlasting Kingdom
of our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ. In the tenth and last place: 10. Branch
of Information.
Hence we are informed how much it concerns every man and woman, that would
comfortably observe this blessed Command, of administering comfort to himself,
or others who are in tribulation; I say, how much it concerns them to search
the Scriptures: O study the Scriptures, that Magazine and Storehouse of all
divine comfort! especially, in the reading of Scriptures, to make a Collection
of the Promises, which are the nests and boxes of Christ's Cordials and
Antidotes against the fainting Fits to which Believers themselves are subjects
there are the soul-refreshing waterbrooks, the wells of salvation, ever
sending forth streams of consolation, to make glad the City of God Here is
Christ's Wine celler, and Banqueting House, Cant. 2.4.
to which he does invite his disconsolate Spouse, and where he does revive her
fainting soul, according to her longing desire: Stay me with apples, and
comfort me with flaggons, for I am sick of love.

What though the Scripture and the Promises do abound with consolation, if we
be ignorant and unacquainted with the variety, nature and use of these heavenly
Ingredients? they signify no more to us, than for a man to be in an
Apothecaries shop, fraught with the richest Drugs, but he knows not the boxes
where they are laid, nor the virtue of them; he and his friends may dye in a
Fit, and miscarry in the midst of all those Preservatives; or if he venture on
them, he may (peradventure) take poison instead of Cordials. Wherefore study
the Promises, and in studying of them, be careful to refer them to their
distinct heads: Make your selves Catalogues of Promises, that refer to several
soul distresses and exigencies; and do as Apothecaries, Collect the Promises of
Scripture into distinct heads.
write their titles over their Heads: Promises for pardon; Promises for power
against corruption; Promises for comfort; prison Promises; sickbed Promises;
Promises relating to the loss of gracious Relations, etc. I say, be careful
skilfully to sort your Promises, that you may know whither to go, when you
repair to the Scriptures, and may not administer mistaken Ingredients,
Corasives instead of Cordials, as Job's friends did; nor Cordials instead of
Corasives, as the generality of ignorant Christians do.

2. Study the great art of officing the Promises; labor to know to which of
the Offices of Christ every Promise does relate; which to his Kingly Office, as
the Promises of grace, and increase of grace, and power against temptation, the
conquering of death, and the fear of death: which, belong to his Prophetical
office, as promises of knowing God, and Christ, and the Spirit, promises of
being taught of God; inward, powerful, experimental knowledge: what Promises
belong to his Sacerdotal office, as promises of reconciliation to God, peace
with God, acceptance of person, and performances, peace of Conscience, joy in
the Holy Ghost, comfort in the loss of sweetest Relations: and this will be of
great use to enable you in prayer to plead the Promises, and to put them in
suit in the proper office; a great honor to Christ, and a mighty help and
encouragement to faith.

3, Pray for the Spirit, whose Office is to make good the Promises to the
Children of Promise, and upon that very account called, (...), the Comforter,
The Promises are never comfort, until the Spirit apply them to the Conscience,
and then they are Cordials indeed, whether to our selves or others; then they
are full of life and power, and can with one taste comfort more than all the
Arguments of Philosophy in the world.

And verily, Christians, as all the Cordials in Scripture are no Cordials,
until they are applied to the Conscience by a powerful hand, and breathed into
the soul, by the warm vital animation of the Spirit of God to know it; your
selves are Physicians of no value, in this great work of comforting one
another, until ye learn to join the words of prayer with the words of comfort;
until by prayer you call in the presence and power of the Comforter, who only
is able to make these words to be so many real consolations. Amen.

Soli Deo Gloria.
FINIS.
A TABLE Of the principal things contained in this TREATISE. The first Figure
notes the Part, The second the Page.
A
A Basement of Christ, 3.20 Christ his abasement and exaltation compared
together, 3.21
Absolution, the Saints shall be absolved in the last day from all guilt and
punishment, 2.134 And in what sense, 2.136 Not sufficient to capacitate the
Saints for glory. 2.139
Accusation: the Saints shall not be accused by Christ, 2.131 Adam most
probably saved, 3.78 Affections, the Saints shall be like God in their
affections, 3.80 They may be moderately exercised, 3.144
Air, the place where Christ will stay to meet his Saints, and why, 1. Because
of the capacity of the place, 2.125 2. Because of the conspicuity of the
judgment, 2.126
Angels instruments of the Saints ascension diverse ways, 2.106 They separate
the sheep from the goats ministerially, 2.114. They shall present the elect
before Christ in the air, 2.127 They shall drag the wicked to the Tribunal to
receive their sentence, 2.164 The reprobate Angels shall be judged for their
first Apostasy, and for all their malice against the Saints ever since. 2.164
How Saints shall hereafter converse with them, 3.15 How they converse among
themselves, 3.16 How they will be interpreters of God to the Saints in Heaven,
3.18 Communion with them in heaven will be a great increase of our happiness,
3.16 They will communicate excellent notions to the Saints in heaven, 3.17
Antinomians notion about Christ his being in us. 1.29 Apology, the sinner
shall not make any Apology for himself at the great Assize, 2.172 Apostles, how
they shall judge the twelve tribes, 1.49 Appeal, there will be no appeal from
the great Tribunal, 2.169 An appeal from Moses to Christ, 2.169 Arrians in
denying the deity of Christ discover a double ignorance, 1.25 Ascension of the
Saints one consequent of Christ his Resurrection; It will be effected, 1. By
the power of Christ, 2.104 2. By the ministry of the Angels, 2.106 3. By the
spirituality of the Saints own bodies, 2.107 It is a continued resurrection.
2.104. How the Saints ascension holds due proportion with their Lord, 2.108 The
Saints shall meet together before their ascension, 2.112
Assessor, the Saints shall be assessors with Christ at the judgment, 2.164
Assurance, some Saints have it, but not all. 2.136 Motives to it, 3.111 It has
been obtained, 3.112 A work never unseasonable, and most seasonable in times of
danger, 3.114 It will make Christians fruitful, 3.117 To endeavor after it an
evidence of heaven, 3.119 It brings diverse privileges, 3.114 Whether every one
that has a right to heaven has an assurance of it, Neg. 3.121 What are the
mediums to attain assurance, 3.123 A twofold Office of the Spirit in attaining
assurance, 3.123 It is much hindered by our unkindness to Christ, 3.128
Atheists, and diverse other sorts of sinners, will be convinced at the day of
judgment, 2.165 Attributes of God a foundation of the Saints eternity, 3.87
B
Believers, how said to be in Christ, and Christ how said to be in believers,
1.22 They are Kings, Prophets and Priests, 1.31 They are the sons of God, 1.31
They are united to the whole divine nature in the Diety, and to each Person of
the Trinity, 1.35
Blessedness, the blessedness of the Saints in heaven is everlasting, 3.84 The
reasons of it, 1. Christ's merit, 3.85 2. The Saints immortal souls, 3.86 3. The
Saints graces eternal, Ib. 4. The attributes of God, 3.87 1. His wisdom, ibid.
2. His veracity and truth, 3.88 3. His immutability, 3.91 4. His mercy, 3.92 5.
His omnipotency, ibid. 6. His eternity, ibid. 7. His love, 3.96 8. His justice,
3, 92


Blood, the blood of Christ is the fountain of merit, but the spirit of Christ
the fountain of efficacy, 1.122 Body, the body shall be incorruptible, 2.89 It
shall be glorious, 2.90 1. By virtue of a Principle within, 2.90 2. By virtue
of an external irradiation, ibid.
It will depend wholly on the soul at the resurrection, 2.95 It is a vile body,
2.97 The bodies of the saints shall be like unto God, 3.82
Book, the book of Gods remembrance, and the book of conscience will agree
exactly together, 2, 267
C
Children of believers when they dye are not to be looked upon as a lost
generation, 1.8 Christ accounts not himself full without his members, 1.17 His
resurrection why called his youth, 1.16 He rose as a public head, on which
account 1. The saints are said to be risen already, 1.14 2. They are assured
they shall arise, 1.15 He arose by his own strength, 1.12 He is risen as our
first fruits, 1.19 How he is said to be in a believer, and a believer said to
be in Christ, 1.22 How he is the hope of salvation, 1.43 His own words more
authentic than tradition or revelation, 2.63 Whether he shall sit on a visible
throne, 2.70 He will appear in the same humane nature he assumed of the Virgin,
and why, 2.71 He will appear personally for three reasons, 2.70 His first and
second coming compared, 2.71 His being Judge great terror to the wicked, 2.73
Great comfort to the godly, 2.75 Two reasons of the certainty of his coming, 1.
Reason says he may come, 2.78 2. Faith says he must come, ibid. Witness 1.
His purchase, ibid. 2. His promise, 2.79 3. Sacrament of the Supper, ibid. 4.
His Resurrection. ibid.

The manner of his coming it will be by a threefold summons 1 A shout, 2.80 2 A
voice of Archangel, 2.81 3 The Trump of God, ibid.
His coming to give the Law, and his coming to judgment compared, 2.82
Separation from him the worst part of hell. 2.105 His blood the fountain of
merit, but his spirit the fountain of efficacy, 1.122 The benefit of his
subjecting of himself to the Law, redoundeth not unto himself but to the
saints, 2.145 He solemnly espoused the saints to himself, 2.162 He had a
twofold right to the Kingdom of glory, 1 Natural, 3.19. 2 Constitutive, ib.
A superlative love to him an evidence of heaven, 3.120
Christians must reject no doctrine warranted by the word, 2.67 Church, it is
Christ's outward, not inward fullness, 1.17 Comfort for them that are unjustly
excluded, 2.117
Closet, closet duties shall be remembered at the last day, 2.128 Cohabitation
with Christ contains four privileges, 1 Presence, 3.2. 2 Vision, ibid. 3
Fruition, 3.50 4 Confomity, 3.77
Commendation, Saints shall be praised and commended at the last day, for their
graces, though wrought in them, etc. 2.132 Comfort, we should administer
comfort to mourning friends, 3.150 All comfort is in God, 3.153 Ministers must
see that the comforts they administer be Gods comforts, 3.154 Much pride in
refusing comfort, 3.157 It is as great an indignity to God, to slight his
comforts as to scorn his counsels, 3.156 No comfort belongs to wicked men when
they die, 3.158 We should labor for comfort in our own death, and leave matter
of comfort to our surviving friends, 3.160 Words of prayer to be joined with
words of comfort, 3.165
Compassion, compassions of God are great, and therefore so are his
consolations, 3.148 Confidence, many confident of heaven, that have least right
to it, 3.117 Conformity of the saints to Christ in the resurrection has its
beginning in regeneration, 2.101 Study soul-conformity to Christ, 2.102 It is
the fountain of complacency, 3.42
Conscience, the book of conscience and the book of Gods remembrance will agree
exactly together, 2.172 Whispers of conscience to be hearkened unto, 2.172
Conversion, in conversion how sins past, present, and to come, are pardoned,
and how not, 2.134 Righteousness imputed to the saints the first moment of
their conversion, 2.160
Converse, knowledge of one another in heaven a great motive to converse one
with another on earth, 3.11 Covenant, a comparison between the covenant of
works and the covenant of grace, 3.81 Creature, we should sit loose from it,
3.113 Cross, the merit of Christ's cross is for justification, and the power of
his cross for mortification, 2.156 Cup, the cup that Christ drank was bitter,
but it was sweetened with three ingredients, 1 But a cup, not a sea, 2.151 2 His
Fathers cup, not the Devils, ibid. 3 A gift, not a curse, ibid.

D
Dead, how to behold dead friends, 2.103 Relations that die only fallen asleep,
1.2
Death, our Relations not alone in it, 1.9 Our wages, 1.10 Every person subject
to it, 2.65 At the hour of death the Saints are fully pardoned, 2, 134 Not
terrible to a child of God, 3.140
Death of some persons dreadful to themselves, and to standers by, 3.160 It is
but a sleep, 1.2 Resembled to it in two respects, 1.3 Not a total privation of
the habit, 1.4 The godly infinite gainers by it, 1.6
Degree, different degrees of the Saints glory, 3.5 Delusion, how are the
whispers of God distinguished from the delusions of Satan, 3.129 Denial, there
will be no denying of sin at the great day, 2.167 Desertion, Saints under
desertion often belly themselves, 2.131 Devised, the world have counterfeit
cordials, 3.154 Disappointment, a most afflicting evil, and admits of three
aggravations, 3.115 Divine essence, we shall not have an intuitive vision of
it, 3.27 How far we shall have a vision of it, 3.30
Do this and live, not a commandment only, but a covenant, 2.144 Draw all men
to me, how to be understood, 2.105 Duties, all the Saints duties performed,
public or private, shall be owned at the last day, 2.128 Duty of Christians to
imitate Christ universally, 2.101
E
Earth, the place where the wicked will receive their sentence, 2.124 It cannot
be made sure, 3.112
Election, and purchase both perfected by the sanctification of the Spirit,
2.123 Holiness not the cause of election, but the end of it, 3.43
Elect, the future estate of the elect and reprobate set forth by eternity,
3.89 Endeavor after assurance, an evidence heaven, 3.119 Enjoyments, worldly
enjoyments not what we fancy them, 3.70 Eternity, a description of it, 3.84, 97
Souls not eternal a part ante, and why, 3.86 The future estate both of the
elect, and reprobate, set forth by eternity, 3.88
Eternity of God, is an assurance of heaven being eternal, 3.92 Evidences of
heaven, 3.119 A good evidence to be sollicitous about evidences, 3.123
Exaltation, Christ his exaltation and abasement compared together, 3.21
Examination we should examine our selves, and suffer others to examine us,
3.162 Excuse, no excuse for sin at the great day, 2.167, 172 Eye, Gods essence
cannot be seen by the bodily eye, though glorified, but by the eye of the
understanding, 3.23
F
Faith, the great saving office of it is to unite the soul to Jesus Christ.
1.43 It is an hand to apply the righteousness of the first covenant, as
fulfilled by our Surety, 2.146 Many do believe, and yet do not believe, that
they do believe, 3.71
Fear, there is never a fear in a Christian, but there is a fear not in the
Scripture as an Antidote, 3.147 Fidelity, the faithfulness of the Saints will
be owned at the last day, 2.128 Fruition, whatever the Saints see they enjoy in
heaven, 3.58 It consists of a tenfold Ingredient, 1 Propriety, 3.58 2
Possession, 3.61 3 Intimacy, 3.63 4 Fullness, 3.65 5 Suitableness, 3.67 6
Fixedness, 3.70 7 Reflection, 3.71 8 Freshness, 3.73 9 Present, 3.75 10
Complacency, ibid.


G
Glory, different degrees of the Saints glory, 3.5. The glory of God will
swallow up all private and personal considerations, 3.14
God, he can do what he will. 2.100 His essence cannot be seen by the glorified
corporeal eye, but by the eye of the understanding, 3.26
Godly, Christ his being Judge great comfort to them, 2.75 Good, the good of
the Saints will be mentioned, not their evil, at the great day, 2.130 None of
the good that ever the wicked did shall be mentioned to their honor, 2.170
Gospel and Law reconciled in the mystery of justification. 2.153 Trial by the
Gospel will be the most severe of any, 2.166
Grace in the Saints is under a covenant, 1.39 A comparison between the
covenant of grace, and the covenant of works, 3.81
Graves, the wicked raked out of them in their ugliness, 2.102 They are beds,
wherein the bodies of the Saints are laid to rest, 1.4
Guilty, to be not guilty, and to be righteous, are two different capacities,
2.139
H
Happiness, looking more after holiness than happiness, is an evidence of
heaven, 3.120 Heaven, it belongs to the Saints, 1 By inheritance, 3.60 2 By
purchase, ibid. In heaven none have the less for what others do enjoy, but
every one an whole God, 3.65 It is a place of unmixed joy, 3.69 It may be made
sure, 3.111 To look after an interest in heaven is an argument of wisdom, 3.115
Evidences of it, 3.119
Heavenly -- mindedness the evidence of (...) heavenly blessedness, 2.112 Hell,
separation from Christ the worst part of it, 2.105 It is a place of unmixed
sorrow, 3.69
Holy Ghost, why so called, 2.122 Holiness, by the Spirit of holiness, Romans
1.4. what meant, 1.12 It does best capacitate the soul for the Vision of God,
3.39, 41 In the Saints it is the divine nature, not the divine being, 3.42 God
loves it more than the creature; how it is true? and how in Arminius his sense
not true, 3.42 It is not the cause, but the end of election, 3.43 What holiness
that must be that can capacitate us to see Gods face, 3.44 Looking more after
holiness than happiness an evidence of heaven, 3.120
Humane nature of Christ the highest beatifical object in heaven next to the
divine Essence, 3.18 The glorifying of Christ's humane nature is the reward of
his passion, 3.19
Hypocrite, no hypocrite in heaven, 3.8
I
Image, that the Image of God suffered a miscarriage, was not of improvidence,
but of ordination, 3.80 Imitation, it is the duty of Christians to imitate
Christ universally, 2.101 Immutability, the immutability of God gives
assurance of the eternity of heaven, 3.91 Imputation, of righteousness is the
positive part of justisication, 2.133 Imputed righteousness is the same
materially that the Law requires, 2.149
Indictment, the sinners indictment and plea, 2.147 Innocence is no security
against oppression and cruelty, 1.51 Intercessor, there is no Intercessor at
the great assize, 2.171 Interest, to look after an interest in heaven an
argument of wisdom, 3.115 Justice of God an assurance of the eternity of
heaven, 3.95 Judge, Christ must be the Judge of great terror to the wicked,
2.73 Of great comfort to the godly, 2.75
Judgment-day, whether the Saints, that are then alive, must die literally, or
analogically only, 2.65 Why concealed, 2.68 Whether Christ will sit upon a
visible throne, 2.70 Christ will appear in the same humane nature, which he
assumed of the Virgin, and why? 2.71 Christ will appear personally for three
reasons, 1 The judgment must be personal, 2.70 2 A recompense to his abasement,
2.71 3 To perfect his mediatory office, 2.72

Justification, the Saints shall be fully and finally justified at the last
day, which consists 1 In their public absolution, 2.133 2 In the Judge his
pronouncing them perfectly righteous, 2.138 God* justifies a sinner in that
way wherein he may justify himself, 2.141 It is not by any intrinsic merit in
faith, but extrinsick object, that faith lays hold on, 2.148 It is variously
denominated according to its causes, 2.153 Legal and evangelical what it is,
2.154 Law and Gospel reconciled in the mystery of justification, 2.153

K
Kindness, all kindnesses done to Christ or his members will be owned at the
day of judgment, 2.129 Knowledge, whether the Saints shall know one another
with a distinguishing knowledge in heaven? affirm. 3.8 Knowledge of one another
in heaven a great motive to converse one with another on earth, 3.11 Whether
the knowledge of our elect relations in heaven, do not infer a distinct
knowledge of our relations in hell, and whether that may not be terrible, Neg.
3.13 How many ways we shall have knowledge of God set forth by several steps,
3.31

L
Law, pardon is not the qualification that the Law requires but perfection,
2.139 That which God at first wrote in man's heart, and afterward in two tables
of stone was a law of a most holy and absolute perfection, 2.143 The law the
image of Gods nature and will, 2.143 It was given to be 1 A rule and pattern of
an holy life, 2.144 2 A condition of eternal life, ibid. It is of perpetual
necessity, 2.144 It is not to be dispensed withal, 2.144 Christ did not bring
in another law, but another medium to fulfill the former, 2.144 Christ as
Mediator was born under the law, 2.145 Christ his fulfilling the law was
performed in and by the humane nature, 2.149
Law and Gospel reconciled in the great mystery of justification, 2.153
Likeness, we shall be like God in 1 Our understanding, 3.78 2 Our will, 3.80 3
Our affections, 3.80 4 Our memories, 5 the whole image. 1 The soul, 3.81 2 the
body 3.82

Loss, fear of loosing of heaven would make it worse than hell, 3.96 Love of
God a great assurance of the eternity of heaven, 3.94 A superlative love to
Christ an evidence of heaven, 3.120

M
Marriage of the Lamb consummated at the last day, and the solemnity of it,
2.162 Marriage, its happiness consists in suitableness, 3.67 Maityrdom like
Elijah 's Chariot, 3.139 Means, God not tied to them, 3.48 Memory, the Saints
shall be like God in their memories, 3.80 Of the Saints shall be like the ark
of the covenant, 3.80
Mercy, the mercy of God an assurance of heavens eternity, 3.92 Ministers must
preach nothing but what is warranted by the word, 2.67 They may preach with
success, and yet be cast out, 2.171 They must see that the comforts they
administer be Gods comforts, 3.154
Miscarriage of the image of God in Adam, not of improvidence, but ordination,
3.80 Mistake, no mistake of one another condition in heaven, 3.7 Mixture of
Saints and sinners will be here, 2.116 Mortification, exercise the duties of
it, 3, 130 Motives to assurance, 3.111 Mourners are to open their ears and
hearts to words of comfort, 3.156 Mystery, diverse mysteries mentioned, namely,
1 Of the Trinity. 2 Of the Incarnation. 3 Of Election, and Reprobation. 4 Of
the Creation of the World. 5 Of the Resurrection. 6 Of all the Arcana Naturae,
3.51 We must not pry too much into them, 3.55

N
Nature, the fulfilling of the Law was performed in and by the humane nature,
2.149 Negatives cannot fill a dying man with comfort, 3.160
O
Omnipotence, all things are alike to it, 2.100 It supports the Saints under
their happiness, as well as the wicked under their misery, 3.90, 92 It is
omnipotence in God that he cannot sin, 3 90
Ordinances, a dangerous notion of being above them, 3.48 In what sense it is
good to live above them, ibid. Not to rest in, or contented with them, 3.49

P
Pardon, pardon of sin is the privative part of justification, 2.133 How sins
past, present and to come, are pardoned in conversion, and how not, 2.134
Sin fully pardoned at death, ibid. It makes sin as if it had never been, 2.135
It is not sufficient to capacitate the Saints for glory, 2.139 It looks
backward, Righteousness forward, 2.142 It is not the qualification which the
Law requires, but perfection, 2 139 If God should only pardon, and not
justify, it would seem to reflect upon, 1 Gods Wisdom, 2 142 2 Gods
^ll-sufficiency, ibid. 3 Gods Veracity and Justice, ibid.
It makes not a man righteous, 2.148 No pardon at the Judgment Seat, 2.169
Perseverance stands not in the nature of grace, 1.39 It stands not in the
liberty or rectitude of the will, though regenerate, 1.39 It stands upon, 1
Divine compact, 140 2 Union with Christ, ibid.

Pleasure, sensitive pleasures have only their (...), 3 108 Pra^se, Saints
shall be praised for their graces at the last day, though wrought in them, etc.
2.132 Prayer, get the faithful to pray for thee, and pray for thy self, 3.131
Words of prayer are to be joined with words of comfort, 3.165
Presence, the Saints shall ever be in the presence of Christ, 3.2 Precepts in
one place, are promises in another, 3.112 Pride, there is much of pride in
refusing comfort, 3.157 Promises ought to be studied, 3.163 Learn to which of
Christ's Offices each promise relates, 3.164 Promises in one place are precepts
in another, 3.112 Refer them to their distinct heads, 3.163 They then bring
comfort, when they are applied by the Spirit, 3.164.
Propriety, to enjoy heaven, and to know I do enjoy it, is the happiness of
happiness, 3.71. Punishment shall not be mitigated at the judgment, 2.170
Purchase and election are both perfected by the sanctification of the Spirit,
2.123
R
Recompense, Christ his speaking honorably of the Saints in the last day will
abundantly recompense the reproaches they have here, 2.133 Reconciliation, God
is first in reconciliation, though sinners first in the transgression, 2.169
Redeemer, he undertook two great works for the redeemed, 1. One to make
satisfaction for sin. 2. The other to yield absolute conformity to the Law of
God, 2.140
Regeneration, Conformity of the Saints to Christ in the Resurrection has its
beginning in it, 2.101, 111 Relations, ours not alone in their death, 1.9 When
dead they are not lost but sown, 1.19 Though they cease in heaven, yet the
remembrance of them cease not, 3.12
Remembrance, the book of Gods remembrance, and book of conscience will agree
exactly, 2.167 Reproach, Reproaches for Christ better than all the applause of
the world, 3.83. Reprobate, the future estate of the reprobate set forth by
eternity, 3.89 Resurrection, three things interest a believer in the triumph of
Christ's resurrection, 1 Power, 1.12 2 Office, 1.13 3 Right, 1. ibid. Christ
arose by his own strength, 1.12 As a public head, 1.13 On which account, 1 The
Saints are said to be risen already, 1.14 2 They are assured they shall arise,
1.15

Resurrection of Christ why called his youth, 1.16 An inseparable connection
between the resurrection of Christ, and of the Saints, 1 Of merit, 1.15 2 Of
power and influence, 1.16 3 Of design, 1.17 4 Of union, ibid.
Christ is risen as our first fruits, 1.19
Resurrection of the Saints stands upon a surer foundation than our faith, 1.20
How Christ shall bring the Saints with him at the resurrection, 1 Their souls
from heaven, 1.47 2 Their bodies from the grave, and how, 1.47 3 Body and soul
he shall take up into the clouds, and why, 1.48 49 4 He shall carry them back
with him into heaven, 1.50
It shall put believers that are dead into as good a capacity as those that are
alive, 2.64 Saints, that shall then be found alive, will be no otherwise
capable of it, than under the notion of the dead, 2.65 The manner of it, 2.86
The admirable properties of it, 1 Incorruptible, 2.89 2 Glorious, 2.90 3
Powerful, 2.93 4 Spiritual, 2.94
Saints shall rise with the same bodies they lie down with, 2.87 The body will
depend wholly upon the soul, 2.95 Our bodies at the resurrection shall he moved
by an extrinsic power, but shall move themselves by an intrinsic principle,
2.107 Why called the Regeneration, 2.101 Three consequents of the resurrection,
1 The resurrection of the Saints that are dead, 2.86 2 The Saints triumphant
ascension, 2.104 3 The Saints joyful meeting, 1 One with another, 2.112 2 All
with Christ, where 1 The persons meeting, 2.120 2 The place where, 2.124 3 The
ends of their meeting, 2.126


Christ will welcome the Saints at the resurrection under a threefold relation,
1 As the Fathers election, 2.121 2 As the purchase of his blood, ibid. 3 As the
depositum of the Holy Ghost, 2.122

Reward is an encouragement to good works, e contra, 3.91 Riches have wings,
3.105 Righteous, to be righteous, and not guilty, are two different capacities.
2.139 Righteousness, a positive righteousness is required to the justification
of a sinner, as well as absolution from guilt and punishment, which appears on
the account, 1 Of the justice of God, 2.141 2. Of the perfection of the Law,
2.143 3 Of the necessity of the sinner, 2.154 4 Of the excellency of the
Redeemen, 2.157 It looks forward: pardon backward, 2.142
Righteousness imputed to the Saints the first moment of their conversion,
2.160 The mediatory righteousness of Christ comes to be a believers, as the
first Adam 's disobedience came to be his posterities, viz. by imputation,
2.146 Imputed righteousness the same materially which the Law requires, 2.149

T
Sacrament, attend often upon the Sacrament of the Lords Supper, 3.132 Saints,
the dignity of them, 1.41. They that are alive at Christ his coming shall have
no advantage above those that are dead, 2.58 They that are dead shall be first
remembered at the resurrection, 2.60 Those that are alive will be no otherwise
capable of the resurrection than under the notion of the dead, 2.65 They shall
be solemnly espoused to Christ, 2.162 They shall be assessors with him at the
judgment, 2.164
Scripture inference is Scripture, 2.67 It concerns us to search the
Scriptures, 3.163 In reading Scripture make a collection of the Promises, 3.163.
Secret, whatever kindness was showed to God in secret shall be openly
rewarded, 2.130 Self-denial, exercise it, 3.130 Separation, a perfect
separation from the society of sinners at the last day, 2.117 Sin, why
sometimes punished here, sometimes not, 2.78 The Saints sins not remembered at
the last day, 2.130 And why, 2.134 This is no encouragement to sin, 2.131 It is
fully pardoned at death, 2.134 They will appear as they are at the day of
judgment, 2.168 A vain thing to call any sin small, 2.168 The smallest is
dangerous, 3.128 It sets us at a great distance from heaven, 3.41 An universal
hatred of it an evidence of heaven, 3.120 It is the Devils image, 3.120 Sinner,
the condition of a sinner does necessarily require an imputed righteousness, 1
To settle solid peace in the conscience, 2.154 2 To secure his appearance in
the day of judgment, 2.157

Sinners are mixed with Saints here, and contra, 2.116 They will dread the
society of the godly at the last day, as much, as formerly they hated it, 2.117
They were first in transgression, but God first in reconciliation, 2.169
Sleep, Death but a sleep, 1.2 Death resembled to sleep in two respects, 1.3
Socinians deceived in saying, we shall not have real, but aerial bodies at the
resurrection, 2.96 Sorrow, there is a sorrow for departed friends, which God
condemns not, 3.144 Souls, all of one size, 2.94 Not everlasting a part ante,
and why, 3.86
Spirit, the Spirit of Christ the fountain of efficacy, but the blood of Christ
the fountain of merit, 2.122 Spirit of God has a twofold office about
attaining assurance, 3.123 Be tender of it, 3.127 None but friends can properly
be said to grieve the Spirit, 3.128
Sufferings of the Saints will be owned at the resurrection, 2.129
T
Tears of the Saints are bottled, 2.128 Terror, it will be horrible terror to
the wicked, to see the Saints sit in judgment with Christ, 2.164 Time, no
farther time will be granted at the great Assize, 2.171 Transgression, Sinners
were first in transgression, but God first in reconciliation, 2.169 Translate,
no translating of sin upon others at the great day, 2.168 Tribunal, there will
be no appeal from the great Tribunal, 2.169 Trinity, the external works of it
are undivided, 1.46 The order of their work, 1.46
Trumpet, one end of the Feast of Trumpets might be to put them in mind of the
last day, 2.114 Last Trump will not be only audible, but articulate, 2.115

V
Vision, six things shall be the object of the Saints Vision, 1 The seat of
blessed souls, 3.3 2 The glorified Saints, 3.4 3 The elect Angels, 3.15 4 The
glorified body of Christ, 3.26 5 God in the divine Essence, 3.18 6 All things
in God, 3.42 Of glorified Saints will be wonderful glorious, 3.4 We shall not
have an intuitive Vision of the divine Essence, 3.27 How far we shall have a
Vision of the divine Essence, 3.30 Of God in Scriture is twofold, 1 In Grace,
3.40 2 In Glory, ibid.
How these agree, and how they differ, 3.46
Unbelief the spring of all our misery, 1.21 Understanding, the glorified
understanding shall have a sixfold perfection, 1 Spirituality, 3.36 2 Clarity,
3.37 3 Capacity, 3.38 4. Sanctity, ibid. 5 Strength, 3.39 6 Fixedness, ibid.
Our understandings will be like unto God in heaven, 3.78
Union between Christ and believers how expressed in scriture, 1.22 Opened in
7. distinguishing properties, 1 Spiritual, 1.23 2 Real, 1.25 3 Operative, 1.29
4 Enriching, 1.30 5 Intimous, 1.33 6 Total, 1.35 7 Indissoluble, ib.
It is of Gods 1 Praeordination, 1.36 2 Efficiency, ibid. 3 Support, ibid. No
in and out in it, 1.37 Death dissolveth it no^^ ibid.

Unkindnesses to Christ great hindrances of assurance, 3.128
W
Waiting, It is good for us to wait for God, 3 133 Wicked, great terror to such
that Christ shall be Judge, 2.73 They shall be dragged by Angels before the
Tribunal, to receive their sentence, 2.164 No good that ever they did shall, be
mentioned to their honor, 2.170
Wicked men how to be suffered, 2.117 All they do is abomination, 2.170
Will, our wills will be like unto God in heaven, 3.79 Witnesses, their enemies
confounded at their ascension, 2.102 Word of Christ more authentic than
tradition or revelation, 2.63 The only foundation for our faith, 2.66
Works, a comparison between the Covenant of Works, and the Covenant of Grace,
3.81 Works, reward encouragement to good works, 3.91 World compared to a stage,
3.70 World and the Devil have counterfeit Cordials, 3.154 Worldly enjoyments
not what we fancy them, 3.70 Worldly felicities quickly grow old, 3.74
Y
Young, the joys of heaven always young, 3.74 Youth, the Saints shall rise in
youth, and perfect strength and beauty 3.73
ERRATA.
Part I. II.
PAge 49 marg. for (...) read (...), f (...) r (...), p. 52 line 52 f. the r.
these, f. the r. you, p. 53 l. 11 f. (...) r. own, l. 9 f. tranessentied r.
transossentiated, p. 56 l. 15 ^. third r. three, p. 62. l. 6. f. others r.
some, p. 70 l. 27 f. twofold r. threefold, p. 77 marg. f. (...) r. (...), p. 82
marg. f. (...) r. (...), p. 125 l. 21 dele as it were, p. 126 l. 19 f. or r.
of, p. 143 l. 9 add more. p. 144 l. 3 f. eternal life and happiness r. on holy
life here, l. 6 add hereafter, p. 146 l. 15 f. but r. and, l. 31 f. obedience
r. disobedience, p. 161 l. 11 dele ^^.

Part III.
Page 5 line 4 dele is, p. 6 l. 28. for has r. as, p. 8 l. 5 add himself, p. 9
marg. (...) r. (...), p. 11 l. 27 f. form r. formed, p. 18 marg. f. (...) r.
(...), p. 21 l. 18 f. infirn^tes r. infernales, p. 34 marg. dele heat, p. 39
marg. f. (...) r. (...), p. 46 marg. f. praeteritur r. judicis, l. 17 add God
after but, p. 48. from thence correct the pages till 65. p. 51 l. 1 for ^manate
r. emanare, p. 53 l. 11 f. glasses r. visions, p. 57 l. 25 add our, l. 28 f.
they r. roe, p. 59 l. 4 f. best r. lest, p. 61 l. 16 f. ascended r. ascend, p.
62 l. 9 (...) r. (...), p. 65 l. 15 dele of, p. 66 l. 20 f. happiness r.
fullness, p. 69 l. 1 f. guest r. gust, p. 84 l. 26 f. finites r. finite, p. 89
marg. (...) r. (...), p. 95 l. 33 f. ninthly r. fifthly, p. 98 l. 15 f. sum r.
same. p. 102 l. 6 f. in r. on, l. 21 f. be r. take, p. 103 l. 19 f. opulentous
r. opulent, p. 104 l. 3 f. Crowns r. counters, l. 15 add see, p. 105 l. 22 add
grow, p. 107 l. 13 f. sheaves of Saffron, r. fruits of righteousness, b. 108 l.
11 add the, p. 112 marg. f. domini r. domine, p. 115 l. 17 f. care r. core, p.
118 marg. dele quere, p. 130 l. 1 f. that r. th^e, p. 143 l. 17 f. thee r. the,
p. 153 l. 9 f. emanate r. ^manare, p. 155 l. 20 f. fortune r. fortitude, p. 157
l. 8 f. by r. my, p. 158 l. 10 f. and r. man, l. 12. f. trial r. sorrere, p.
160 l. 2 f. comforters r. comfort, l. 7 those evidences, r. that evidence.

These Books, with several others, are Printed for, and are to be sold by
Dorman Newman at the Chirurgions-Arms in Little-Britain, near the Hospital-gate.
Folio.
A Description of the four parts of the World, taken from the Works of Monsieur
Sanson Geographer to the French King, and other eminent Traveller^ and Authors.
To which is added, the Commodities, Coins, Weights and Measures of the chief
places of traffic in the world: Illustrated with variety of useful and
delightful Maps and Figures. By Richard Blome, Gent. Memoires of the Lives,
Actions, Sufferings and Deaths of those excellent Personages that suffered for
Allegiance to their Sovereign in our late intestine Wars, from the year 1637.
to 1666. with the Life and Martyrdom of King Charles the first. By David Lloyd.
The Exact Politician, or Complete Statesman, briefly and methodically resolved
into such principles, whereby Gentlemen may be qualified for the management of
any public trust, and thereby rendered useful for the Commonwelfare. By Leonard
Willan Esquire. The Jesuits Morals, collected by a Dr. of the College of Sorbon
in Paris. Written in French, and exactly translated into English, A Relation,
in form of a Journal, of the Voyage and Residence of King Charles the Second in
Holland. The History of the Cardinals of the Roman Church, from the times of
their first creation to the election of the present Pope Clem. 9. with a full
account of his Conclave. A History of Ireland. By Edmund Spencer Esquire.
Quarto.
The Christian-mans Calling, or a Treatise of making Religion ones business,
wherein the Christian is directed to perform it in all religious duties,
natural actions, particular vocations, family directions, and in his own
recreations, in all relations, in all conditions, in his dealings with all men,
in the choice of his company, both of evil and good, in solitude, on a week
day, from morning to night, in visiting the sick on a dying bed. By George
Swinnock. Mr. Caryl's Exposition on the Book of Job. Gospel Remission, or a
Treatise, showing that true blessedness consists in the pardon of sin. By
Jerem. Buroughs. An Exposition on the Song of Solomon. By James Durham, late
Minister in Glascow. The Real Christian, or a Treatise of Effectual Calling,
wherein the work of God, in drawing the soul to Christ, being opened according
to the holy Scriptures, some things required by our late Divines, as necessary
to a right preparation for Christ, and true closing with Christ, which have
caused, and do still cause much trouble to some serious Christians, and are,
with due respects to those worthy men, brought to the balance of the
Sanctuary, there weighed, and accordingly judged. To which is added, a few
words concerning Socinianisme. By Giles Firmin, sometime Minister at Shalford
in Essex. The virtue and value of Baptism. By Zach. Crofton. The Quakers
Spiritual Court proclaimed, being an exact narrative of a new High Court of
Justice at the Peel in St. John street, also sundry errors and corruptions
among the Quakers, which were never till now made known to the world: By
Nathaniel Smith, who was conversant among them fourteen years. A Discourse upon
Prodigious Abstinence, occasioned by the twelve months fasting of Martha
Tailor, the famed Darbyshire Damosel, proving that without any miracle the
texture of humane bodies may be so altered, that life may be long continued
without the supplies of meat and drink. By John Reynolds.
Octavoes and Twelves.
Vindicta Bietatis, or a Vindication of Godliness, from the imputation of folly
and fancy, with several Directions for the attaining and maintaining of a godly
life. By R. Allen. Heaven on Earth, or the best Friend in the worst times: To
which is added, a Sermon preached at the Funeral of Tho. Mosely Apothecary. By
James Garreway. Justification only upon a satisfaction. By Rob. Firgirson. The
Christians great Interest, or the trial of a saving Interest in Christ, with
the way how to attain to it. By Will. Guthry, late Minister in Scotland. The
virtue, vigor and efficacy of the Promises displayed in their strength and
glory. By Tho. Henderson. The History of Moderation, or the Life, Death and
Resurrection of Moderation: together with her Nativity, Country, Pedigree,
Kindred, Character, Friends, and also her Enemies. A Guide to the true
Religion, or a Discourse directing to make a wise choice of that Religion men
venture their salvation upon. By J. Clapham. An Exposition on the Hebrews. By
David Dickson. Rebukes for Sin by Gods burning anger, by the burning of London,
by the burning of the World, and by the burning the wicked in hell fire: To
which is added, a discourse of Heart-fixedness. By Tho. Doolittle. Four select
Sermons upon several Texts of Scripture, wherein the will worship and idolatry
of the Church of Rome is laid open and confuted. By Will. Fenner. The Life of
Doctor James Usher, late Archbishop of Armagh, and Primate of Ireland. Spare
Minutes, or resolved Meditations, or premeditated Resolutions. By Arthur
Warwick. A most comfortable and Christian Dialogue between the Lord and the
Soul. By Will. Cowper Bishop of Galloway. The Cannons and Constitutions of the
Quakers, agreed upon at their general Assembly at their new Theater in
Gracechurch-street. A Synopsis of Quakerism, or a Collection of the fundamental
errors of the Quakers. By Tho. Danson. Blood for Blood, being a true Narrative
of that late horrid Muther committed by Mary Cook upon her Child. By Nath.
Partridge. With a Sermon on the same occasion. By J. Sharp.

