A KING AND HIS SUBJECTS Unhappily fallen out, AND Happily reconciled.

Being the Substance of a SERMON, With very little alteration Fitted for the
Present Time. PREACHED In the Sermon-House belonging to the Cathedral of
Christ-Church CANTERBURY. Jan. 15. 1643. Upon Hos. 3. 4, 5.

By Meric. Casaubon, D. D. and one of the then Prebends of the said Church.

London, Printed in the Year, 1660.

HOSEA 3. 4, 5. For the Children of Israel, shall abide many days without a
King, and without a Prince, and without a Sacrifice, and without an Image, and
without an Ephod, and without a Teraphim.

Afterward shall the Children of Israel return, and seek the Lord their God,
and David their King; and shall fear the Lord, and his goodness, in the latter
days.


I Shall make no other division of the words, then such as I find made to my
hand, and any body that hears, may anticipate: In the first Verse, a Sad
Desolation (or Subversion both of Church and State) threatened: in the second, a
blessed Restitution or Restoration of both promised. For the Children of
Israel, etc. a sad Desolation. Afterward shall the Children of Israel return,
etc. a blessed and glorious Restitution. The Words, immediately were spoken of,
and to the Children of Israel: that is the Ten Tribes of Israel, separated from
the two Tribes, the Tribe of Judah and Benjamin: which adhered unto the
posterity of David. The Children of Israel? a glorious title for such Rebels,
and Idolators, who at one time had shaken off the yoke, both of their God and
of their King. But Titles and Things, do not always agree: we know that by the
experience of all ages. So we may call them Catholics, who damn all men that
are not of their Communion; not for any want of Charity either in their
judgments, or to their persons, that they can justly charge them with; but
because they think themselves bound to profess against; and their Conscience
will not give them leave to join with them in their errors. So may we call
them Saints: but I will forbear further censure: it is but upon the by; a touch
is enough.

Well, but how does it appear, that by that goodly title, or denomination;
those Rebellious Idolatrous Tribes are immediately spoken of, or to? First,
because most part of this Prophecy does belong unto them: Ephraim, often here
in most Chapters repeated: and that is as much as The Children of Israel: or
ten Tribes. But more especially, because those words of the Text (David their
King) manifestly allude, or relate, to that breach or division of David's
Kingdom under the reign of Roboam Salomons Son: when the ten Tribes fell off,
and constituted another Kingdom, under the Government of Jeroboam, the son of
Nebat, an Ephrathite of Zereda, Salomons servant. (1 Kings 11. 26.) These be
the chiefest reasons that are given by Interpreters. Though somewhat might be
objected, yet I am content it should be so; I will not contend about the Word,
immediately: so it be granted, that the substance of the Prophecy, does extend
to all Jews, in General. Some talk of the Gentiles too; but we need not
stretch it so far. But in very truth, it being very uncertain what became of
those ten Tribes after their Captivity: and whether any part of the Jews, in
Christ's time; or even at this day: we should be very much put to it, when we
come to the accomplishment of the Prophecy, here promised, in the latter
days: if we do not extend those words the house of Israel (as frequently in
the Scripture) to the Jews in general. To this purpose you may observe, that
in the first Chapter of this Prophecy, though the tenth verse mention only the
house of Israel; yet in the eleventh verse, wheer the same matter is
prosecuted, both the House of Judah, and the House of Israel are distinctly
named. Then shall the Children of Judah, and the Children of Israel be gathered
together, and appoint themselves one head, and they shall come out of the land,
for great shall be the day of Jezreel.

The next thing we will take into consideration, which will give more light to
the whole Prophecy, and main drift of it, is the Time, either of the
desolation threatened; or restitution promised. In the latter days; says my
Text, in the last words. It is the opinion of many, that this Desolation begun
from the captivity of each people, by the Assyrians; of the ten Tribes, under
Hosea (or Hoshea as some write it) the son of Ela, the last King of Israel* of
the two Tribes, under Zedekia: the last of Juda: and that their Restitution,
the beginning of it, is to be accounted from their return of the said
Captivity, by the ordinance and appointment of Cyrus, King of Persia, as is
more particularly related in Esrah and Nehemiah. It cannot be denied indeed,
that at the return of the Jews from the Babylonish Captivity, they were
restored to a government of their own, under some Princes, first; and then
Priests; enjoyed their first Fundamental Laws* And that at the same time, the
worship of God also was restored. But here is a great difficulty, a main
circumstance of the Text, or Prophecy wanting: a King, and that King, David by
name. Somewhat is said of Zerobabel: he was of the Royal Seed; that is
somewhat, but not enough to verify, the accomplishment of this glorious
promise of a King: of the best, and best beloved of Kings, King David. Yet I do
not deny, but that the words of this prophecy, might have some reference to
that return, and restoration also. It is the nature of prophesies sometimes,
to comprehend different times and events, some more immediately; some more
remotely: if they agree in some one, or two main circumstances, though they do
not in all, it may become a prophecy well enough.

All things well weighed and considerd, (not to trouble you with many doubts,
and variety of opinions) we must conclude, that both in regard of the
Desolation threatened, and the restitution promised; being taken together, as
they are here joined together: the most genuine, full and satisfactory sense
will be, to begin the threatened Desolation: (or subversion of State, both Civil
and Ecclesiastical) from the last great Calamities of the Jews by Vespasian the
Roman Emperor, when the City was taken and destroyed, the Temple burnt,
Millions of Jews perished: now full 1500. Years ago. So that the most
warrantable exposition (and which we shall pitch upon) of the words will be
this: The Children of Israel: that is, the Jews in general; according to the
ordinary Scripture phrase, not of the Old, but New Testament also, as Luke 1.
16. Acts 5. 21. and elsewhere. Shall abide many days: many days, God knows,
they have now continued a distinct people, from all other Nations, though
dispersed among, almost, all Nations of the World. Without a King, and without
a Prince: a thing not little to be wondered at, that being so many and so
potent, in some places, as they are reported to be; they should in so many Ages
of the World, get no King, no Prince, of their own, in any place. As they have
no King or Prince; so no Sacrifice, nor any of those other particulars,
mentioned here in the Text, which I forbear here to mention, until we have
better enquired into the true meaning of the words. Aftewards shall the
Children of Israel return and seek after the Lord their God, and David there
King: that is, they shall turn unto God, repent of their incredulity, and seek
after Christ the Messiah, styled in the Scripture, not the Son of David, only;
but also David, absolutely: as by Jeremie, and Ezechiel, in diverse places. Him,
whom when he came first, and sought unto them, they would not receive: in the
Latter days, that is, at the end of the World: They shall seek and become
Christians: as St. Paul also does assure us: For I would not Brethren, that you
should be ignorant of this mystery -- that blindness in part is happened unto
Israel, until the fullness of the Gentiles be come in. And so all Israel shall
be saved, Romans 11. 2, 5, 6. And shall fear the Lord and his goodness: that is,
they shall worship God for his goodness, according to that of the Psalmist,
There is mercy with thee, that thou may be feared, Ps. 130. 4. that is,
worshipped, because fear is a principal part, and first Original, as it were,
of Gods worship. That is the right sense; but I may not at this time insist
upon it.

So you have the most genuine and warrantable sense of the words. Before we
proceed to that use, in several Observations upon the words I aim at; we will
consider of some expositors, or rather opinions of expositors, upon the same
words: as also of some particular words of the Text, which have bred some
difficulty.

I told you it is the opinion of some Interpreters, that the promised
restitution of the Children of Israel: is to be reckned from their return out
of the Captivity of Babylon, and this to be the most literal interpretation of
the words. What might be objected, I told you likewise. This King David, so
eminently, so emphatically here promised, must certainly be some body else,
besides Zerobabel. Yet I will not deny, but that even in Zerobabel, this
prophecy might have some accomplishment: I find most interpreters of that
opinion, and that is enough to persuade me. Wherein (by the way (the infinite
wisdom of Almighty God, is much observable, so to forecast events from all
eternity, that the same words of his Prophets, might both fit the times and
occurrences of the Gospel, so long after: and yet fit the present occasions and
occurrences of those times, and events under the law.

Here I cannot but take notice of an objection, made, by Ribera the Jesuit (a
very learned Jesuit, as most of that order) against this literal
interpretation. For, says he, Jehojakim, K. of Juda, lived a long time during
the Captivity: Of whom we read: (2 Kings, last Chapter, last Verses:) that
Evilmerodach, King of Babylon, in the first Year of his reign, did lift up his
head out of prison, and spoke kindly to him, and set his throne above the
thrones of all other (Captive, or Tributary) Kings that were with him in
Babylon. And changed his prison Garments: and that he did eat bread continually
before him all the days of his life. What an objection is this? What shall we
make of it? I expected Ribera would have told us, that Evilmerodach had
restored unto Jehojakim King of Juda, his Royal power and Sovereignty: that he
had restored him to his subjects, and his subjects unto him: Then indeed he had
said somewhat. But because Jehojakim had a bare title, and an empty throne; yea
and an allowance for his daily expenses (for that also is expressed in the
Scripture) vouchsafed unto him, by him that had taken away all his power, and
authority: hence to infer, that therefore the Children of Israel, were not
without a King, during the Captivity; whether more strange, from such a one as
Ribera; or more ridiculous in it self, I know not. Yet let me say? Such an
objection might become well enough a Jesuit; that is, a perfect enemy to the
power and authority of Kings. I do not deny, but Evilmerodach, was great
enough, to make a true King. That honorable Senator of Rome, Pompeius Magnus
[when Rome was Mistress of the then known world, but little excepted:] made
many that were true Kings, and had the power and authority of Kings, where they
did reign, and where constituted by him. But a mere titular King, that has the
pomp and garb only, or ^ay, the allowance, but not the substance, that is the
power and Sovereignty; is a sad sight. Not a King according to the Scripture, I
am sure, whom we may call, the breath of our Nostrils: of whom we may say;
under the shadow of his wings shall we live among our enemies, Lament. 4. 20.
Such a King is none of those comely things that wise Solomon did admire. A Lion
which is strongest among beasts: that is the first: a King against whom there
is no rising up: is his concluding instance; the last in order, but the first,
and chiefest in his intention, as may be gathered by other examples of the same
nature. But we have done with this Jesuitical King; as we may call him: Not so
much because Ribera a Jesuit does make this objection; and not any but he,
that I know of: but because it is the proper Character of a Jesuit, to be an
enemy to the power and authority of Kings.

As to the sense of the words in general, I have said as much as needs: but
there is yet in the words, if more particularly examined, that wants clearing.
For the Children of Israel (says my Text.) Shall abide many days without a
Prince: and without a Sacrifice, and without an Image; and without an Ephod,
and without Teraphims. We made the meaning of the words in general to be, that
the Israelites during the time of their desolation, shall be without any
public worship of God; such worship as was established and commanded by the
law of God; the Leviticall and Ceremonial law: as particularly, Sacrifices,
and an Ephod: which was a sacred garment: sufficiently known, both, to them
that are not unacquainted with the law of Moses. But how come Images, here; and
Teraphims; that is, Idols: as particulars of Gods worship? Here Interpreters
are put to it. They say (the best shift they can make) the intention of the
words is this: That the Israelites shall be without any public exercise of
religion, or divine worship; whether true, set out by Sacrifices, and the
Ephod, ordained by the law: or false and idolatrous, set out by Images and
Teraphims: that is: Idols. Though this be said by many, (because they know not
what else to say:) yet it is strange, and somewhat unlikely to me, that the
Prophet should mix true, and false worship, in this manner: God, and Mammon:
light and darkness: in one verse without any need. And I doubt, whether it can
be made good by History, that the Israelites in general, who many times were
notorious Idolaters, in the Holy Land; continued always true worshippers in
the Land of Idolaters. I could say more, but I will contract my self, because I
reserve my self for somewhat else.

But what if this Idolatry be but a conceit of Interpreters, some
Interpreters: and upon better examination, prove no such matter? First, for the
word image, it is granted that the Original word matseba, may as well be
translated, an Altar, [and so indeed it is by the old Latin and Greek interp.]
or Pillar, intended for a sacred memorial: as Genesis 28. 18. Es. 19. 19. where
Altar and Pillar, seem to stand for one thing: both dedicated to the true God:
And is it not much more probable, that Sacrifices and an altar, should be
joined; then sacrifices and images? So here is no idolatry in these words.
There is more difficulty about the Teraphims: because we have not [as is
objected] a president in Scripture, where Teraphim is taken in good sense, for
any part of Gods service or any thing that was then lawful, and in use. If it
were granted: yet we do not want exemples in Scripture, of other words; which
are taken in some one place or other, in a different sense, from their usual
signification. I could instance in many such words, if I thought either time or
place seasonable. In some places, it is translated idol; as Genesis 31. in some
idolatry: as 1 Samuel 15. 23, In some images: as 1 Samuel 19. more then once. Where
best Interpreters by images understand an Ordinary Statue or man's picture: not
any thing that was unlawful, or idolatrous. And why not here also, Teraphim
being joined with other good words, in a good sense? But what use of pictures
or images in Gods service? Or to religious use? St. Jerome will tell us: both
for his antiquity and exquifite knowledge of the original Hebrew one that
deserves credit, as much as any. His words are, Teraphim, proprie (...), id est
figurae and simulacra, quae nos possumus in praesenti duntaxat loco, Cherubim,
and Seraphim, sive alia quae in templi ornamenta fieri jussasunt, dicere. That
is, Theraphim, properly certain images, shapes, or figures, by which in this
place, we may understand Cherubins and Seraphims, and other such things, that
were commanded to be made, for an ornament to the Temple. But to put all out of
doubt (and I wonder so many expositors should take no notice of it:) Let us
interpret Scripture by Scipture, which is generally acknowledged the best and
safest way. What is here more largely and fully set out, that is by more
particulars: 2 Chronicles. 15. 3. is thus comprised: but here, by the praeterit,
historically: in my Text, by the future, as a prophecy: of the same people,
but not of the same men. For the Children of Israel shall abide many days,
says my Text. there; Now for a long time Israel has been: what? without the
true God, and without a teaching Priest, and without a Law; their Desolation.
The Restitution follows, in the next verse. But when they in their troubles did
turn unto the Lord God of Israel, etc. The difference is great, as to the
matter of the words in the second verse; no Messiah, no King David here; but
only a restitution in general. But in the first verse, there is no question but
the same thing in effect was intended in both places; here more concisely, (as
I said before:) in my Text, more fully set out, to wit, that the Israelites had
been, in Chronicles: should be in the Prophet, without any public worship of
the true God.

So now the Text is clear, and the words acquitted of all superstition and
Idolatry. An easy mistake. Though in the true nature, or formalis ratio, of
true Religion and Idolatry; there is a vast difference: yet in outward
appearance, they may come so near sometimes, that a man had need much
circumspection, to give a right judgment. And indeed this is the method that
Gods word has prescribed unto us, in the trial of Idolatry, before we pass
any judgment. Deuteronomy. 13. 12, 13, 14. Then shall thou enquire, and make search:
and ask diligently: and behold if it be truth: and the thing certain: then
shall thou, etc. Then, and not till then. And why so much caution I pray? I
told you before; it is an easy matter to mistake; there is so much affinity
sometimes (externally) between true and false worship. The Jews once mistook
their brethren the Reubenites; and they had like to have made a foul work: much
innocent blood was like to have been shed, and a whole Tribe of the house of
Israel destroyed. Fierce Zelots would have had it so, you may be sure. But the
sober part carried it. They went according to Gods rule: they first inquired
diligently: and upon diligent inquisition, they pronounced them innocent, and
acknowledged them Brethren, whom but a little before, they were in a readiness
to destroy, as unworthy to live, as abominable idolaters. You have the story,
Josua, 22. The Jews themselves (in general) for doing no more then what they
were commanded by God, observing New Moons; and the like: (as by some very
learned is observed) were accounted Idolaters, worshippers of Sun and Moon, by
some other Nations that were really guilty of it.

I said before, that it is any easy mistake: but alas! That is not the worst. A
bare mistake where there is no other engagement; upon better information may
easily be redressed. But where interest and worldly ends oblige, if not to
believe (for belief is not so easily wrought) yet to criminate: information
will not avail. Say what you will, bring reason, bring authority: in despite
of truth, though never so manifest; in despite of all Conscience, an Altar or
sacred Pillar shall be a profane Image, and Teraphims must be, shall be found
Idols. It is expedient it should be so, reason must yield to profit, and
conscience to gain. O this imaginary idolatry! How really profitable and
advantageous has it proved in all ages to wordly Wise men? Yet St. Paul had
warned us long before; Romans 2. 22. Thou that abhorrest Idols, do thou commit
Sacrilege? A man might think, that he had prophesied this of the latter days.
Noe: long before his time, there were some known Atheists; despisers, by their
life, of all Deity and Religion; who nevertheless under color of piety, robbed
Churches, (Temples rather) and committed sacriledg, with all licentiousness. It
is hard to be judged, whether Idolatry (the most provoking sin, out of all
question, and most inconsistent with true Religion) have done more hurt in the
World; or a pretended zeal against idolatry. I am confident, that the
idolatrous worship of images (for there it begun, and continued a good while,
before it came to these Western parts) has been a main thing that brought the
curse, and judgments of God upon those famous Eastern Churches, where once
Christian Religion was in so great splendor and purity. And as certain it is,
that Arabs and Mahometans both prevailed at the first, not a little; and to
this day uphold themselves very much, in their abominable Apostasy from Christ,
by their pretended zeal against Images, and idolatry. Those miscreants, that
think it great idolatry, to see the image of a King stamped upon a piece of
money, which Christ saw and allowed of: think it no idolatry, to prefer
Mahomet, before Christ; a mere man, before the eternal Son of God; an
Impostor, a cheater of men; before the Savior, and Redeemer of Mankind.

And what think you of the Idolatry of Cathedralls, and other goodly Churches;
erected to the honor of Almighty God, and endowed, for the maintenance of
piety and learning; Of the Idolatry of a public Liturgy, whithout which was
never any Christian Church in any part of the World heard of, that ever I could
hear, till of late years: but to be short; what of the Idolatry of a Surplice;
Church-Musick, Bishops, and the like? Have not Men got, some brave Estates of
Lands, by this pretended Idolatry; some good benefices: nay some built
themselves stately houses with the very stones which they have bereaved God of?
Some write of one of the Popes of Rome, that he should applaud himself with his
Mates, and Cardinals, how much they had gained by this fabula Christi. They
indeed (if it be true) very blasphemously, calling that a fable, which we
believe, and know a truth, attested by God, with all possible evidences, and
demonstrations of sound reason. But much more reason have these men (as it is
likely, where they may freely) hug themselves, and make their brags, that they
have thrived so well, by this subtle device of pretended Idolatry. Be sure of
this, there shall never be want of Idolatry, whilst there is any thing to be
got, let but time and opportunity serve them: Tithes, Colleges, Libraries,
Hospitalls, Corporations: nay rather than fail, the very prayer of the Lord,
that holy prayer, (the use of it, I mean, according to Christ's institution)
shall be made Idolatry: their goods, if not their lives, shall be in danger
that have used it: It will be found such horrible Idolatry.

We have done with our first Observation, upon the supposed Idolatry of the
words: and all that we have more to do, is but to make some further use, by way
of Observation, upon the rest.

The second then, shall be this: that the name and title of a King, according
to the Scripture, is both honorable with God (there is no incongruity in the
words: God says He will honor them, that Honor him:) and is proposed, by the
Scriptures, as an object of joy and happiness among Men, in times of greatest
distress. No King: no Prince: in the threatened desolation: They shall return to
the Lord their God, and David their King; in the promised restitution. It may
be some body will say, this King: this David here promised, is no other then
the Messiah: or Christ himself: the Son of God, no Earthly mortal King. Let it
be granted. Is it not a great honor to Kings, and to their office, that Christ
the Messiah, the expectation of all People, the Redeemer of the World, is here
promised under the tipe, and person of a King? That he was really and
literally, of the Royal seed, and lineage, and did not despise the very name of
a King, King David? This observation might have been spared, had not the
impiety and impertinency of other Men, made it seasonable, and necessary. Do
not we know how much some Men have endeavored, to discredit that sacred Name
and function: to persuade Men, that a curse lay upon it, rather then a
blessing? O how have the Pulpits rung with, Tophet is prepared for the King:
and, He shall bind* their Kings in chains, and the like? Blessed Scripture, how
have thou been wrested and racked, by corrupt, illiterate teachers; to serve
their ungodly private ends? We will not argue the case, from broken loose
pieces of Scripture; as the manner of these Men is: there be clear proofs and
testimonies enough, both from matter of fact; and from positive doctrine; as of
the Old; so of the New Testament, to assert this sacred authority: but I will
content my self here with what I have said, by way of observation upon the Text.

The third, (or next) shall be: That a King may be at variance with his
subjects, and his subjects with him so, that it may proceed to a direct
separation: (nay, which is more (...) this may happen between a good King, and
good subjects for the generality: as in David's case, here named, when part of
his subjects were drawn from him, upon pretense of evil government by his Son
Absalom, and he forced to fly:) but proceed I say, to a direct separation, and
yet afterward reconciled, to the great joy and satisfaction, both of King and
people.

There is no Nation so wise, or so well governed, but is liable to discord and
division. (...), says our Savious. It must needs, that offenses come. Why?
Nothing is impossible to God. No: but consider the Nature of Man, in general;
and the nature of the world; this sublunary World, which we cannot expect with
reason that God will alter, till the time of its general alteration come: so
it is impossible, that there should not be offenses: and where Men are, stri^e
and contention at times should not arise. It is a high speculation, but which
has much of truth in it, that this World (this sublunary world, I mean still,)
does subsist by contraries, that is, by continual strivings: and those
Philosophers had some reason too, if rightly understood, that made (...), that
is strife and contention, one of the (...), or Original principles of the
world. Yea such is the nature of man, though he be most happy by peace, and in
peace: yet he becomes insensible of his happiness, he loatheth it, if he do not
want it sometimes, and recover himself to a right sense and judgment, by the
contrary effects, of strife and contention. This made a wise Heathen say, with
some admiration; Quae magna gaudia, nisi ex malis? That all great joys were
the products of great sufferings, or sorrows.

Well, a King and his Subjects may fall out, and be separated. David and his
Subjects, were our instance. So for this also, that they may be reconciled. The
history is known, in Absaloms case. David was happy, and his subjects happy,
that their division did hold no longer. Yet it is very possible that where the
breach has been longer, and the want of a King longer; if it once come to a
perfect and cordial reconciliation, if not the joy greater, yet the sense of it
may be longer. The Prophet intended a very great joy; as great as he could make
it, the greatest of the World: the long expected Messiah: and this joy he sets
out by the joy of a King and People, who after many days (so he says) many
days divorce, are again reunited. Behold how good and how pleasant it is
(says the Psalmist) for Brethren to dwell together in Unity. Unity indeed,
should always be our wish, and our aim: and they that are the causes of
division, deserve the curse both of God and man. It is not allwaies true, that
Amantium irae amoris redintegratio est. Sometimes a little sparkle does kindle
a great fire, not to be quenched until it has made an end of all. But where
God is so merciful, as after a long breach and gasping condition, to grant a
perfect Reunion and reconciliation: a man had need of the tongue of Angels, to
express the greatness of that joy, not here in earth and among men only; but, I
am confident, even in Heaven, in the presence of the Angels of God; and all the
host of Heaven. Hear I pray how pathetically the words of my Text do run:
Afterward (after that sad Desolation, or separation of many days,) shall the
Children of Israel return, and seek the Lord their God, and David their King:
and shall fear the Lord and his goodness in the latter days. And here offers
it self our last observation upon the words: viz. the method of this Return,
or Reconciliation. First, they seek the Lord their God: and after, their King.
There may be a return, or reconciliation for mere politic ends, on both
sides: It may be they find, they cannot subsist asunder; and that the
continuance of their division, will be the ruin of both. Such an occasion will
cause a return, if they be not infatuated to their own destruction. And God
does use sometimes such outward means and inducement to bring us to Himself,
and to work us by degrees to a perfect conversion, or reconciliation. However,
the truest and surest foundation is to begin with God, acording to the method
of my Text. It is God that makes men to be of one mind in a House, Ps. 68. 16.
according to some translations: in a house, much more in a Kingdom. I form the
light, and create darkness, I make peace, and create evil, So God of himself,
Esaias 45. 7. God then is first to be sought according to the right method, upon
a sure foundation. But what if Men will pretend to seek God, and to return unto
God: but resolve to go no further. It is very ordinary for worldly politic
Men, to put that cheat upon themselves, or rather, upon others; credulous,
ignorant People. They will afford us fasting and praying enough, in their
kind: and God shall be in their mouths, and Christ Jesus; nothing more. By
these fair pretenses, they drive on their designs, and thrive by the miseries
and sufferings of the public. To these men, or to them rather that are gulled
by them, I shall commend the advice of an interpreter of great fame: John
Calvin is the Man. Non frustra (says he) Hoseas in resipiscentia populi, etc.
in English, thus: It is not without great cause, that the Prophet in setting
out the repentance of the People, does also particularly remember (or, relate)
their return to David their King. For otherwise the People could not truly and
really seek God, except at the same time it did submit to the lawful
government; to which it was obliged, (or, subjected) not by Man, or by chance,
but by the appointment of God himself. The last words require a candide
interpretation, lest he should be thought to say, that ordinary Kings, that
have not such immediate calling as David had, are by chance, or by Men only:
which is so contrary to Scripture, and to sound doctrine, that the very Jesuits
would exclaim as much wronged, if laid to their charge: though many of them say
little less in effect, and act accordingly, as it is well known. But the
Counsel well understood, is very good: I need not to add any thing to it.

So we have done with the Text; the exposition of it, and such Observations, as
I apprehended not impertinent to it. These times, and the common talk of all
People, might seem to prompt some application. But this is lubricus locus, such
a subject wherein a man that will be meddling, may soon go beyond his bounds,
and sooner do hurt then good. Though Kings are by God, and we warranted, nay
obliged by Scripture, to preach subjection for conscience sake: to declare
against rebellion, in general: much more against all killing, or murdering of
Kings (O horrible!:) under pretense of law; yet since the power and
praerogative of particular Kings, is limited and constituted, by the
fundamental laws of every Kingdom, approved and confirmed by the assent and
consent of successive Kings: in this case, what a King may do lawfully, what he
may not, according to law: what opposition in case he attempt, or do any thing
against the fundamental law, may be made according to the same law: by whom,
and how far: these things, as they are out of our sphere, and scanning, as we
are preachers of the Gospel; so must it be high presumption, in any of our
profession, to pass judgments, or indeed, to intermeddle. So, if the business
of union, or reconciliation be in hand, after many days separation and
division: I know (...) what a loyal Israelite is bound to wish, what to pray,
in general; but many cautions, and considerations of State, may belong to such
a business, to bring it to a good and well grounded issue. They that can judge
what is most agreeable to the proper constitution, and fundamentalls of a Realm
(Lawyers and Sages of the land, as I take it.) They that know what the present
condition, inclination, ability, necessities of the people of the land is: what
may be done; what must be borne to prevent further evils, and effusion of
blood, (a Parliament as I take it:) I think it belongs unto them, and is their
proper work: Let them look to it, as they are accountable to God, and their
Country. If they (to whom it belongs) shall enact any thing, to which I cannot
yield obedience with a good conscience, that is without disobeying God: I may
resolve, with Gods assistance, to suffer, I may not to oppose. Yea though it
were in my power to do some what, and to disturb; yet my conscience tells me,
it is not lawful.

This is all the application I shall make: God give us all grace, to apply our
selves unto him, in simplicity and syncerity of heart* to depend of him in all
things: to seek his glory, and his favor above all things: to whom all honor,
glory, power, and majesty:

FINIS.

