HEAVEN OPENED, And the Pains of Purgatory AVOIDED, BY THE Very great
Indulgences Of the two most Illustrious Arch-Confraternities: The One Of our
Blessed Lady, called the ROSARY, And the Other Of the Seraphical Father St.
FRANCIS, called, The Cord of the Passion.

Printed in the Year, 1663.

TO THE RIGHT HONORABLE AND MOST REVEREND THE LORD Walter Mountague, Great
Almoner to the QUEEN Mother. And Abbot of St. Martin, and Nantheuil in France,
MY LORD,
THis little Treatise is due to your Lordship and to none else. For it
contains wonderful Privileges, and easy Obligations of Two, not only the
most Noble and Excellent, but likewise the most Profitable Arch-Confraternities
that have ever been in Gods Church, viz. The Arch-Confraternity of our Blessed
Lady, called the Rosary, and the Arch-Confraternity of our Seraphical Father
Saint Francis. Though the whole Church of Somersethouse, and the Riches and
Ornaments which raise its Splendour, publish to the World, the Queen Mothers
great Piety: Yet notwithstanding the Chapel of the holy Rosary is in some sort
Yours, by a special Grant from Her Majesty. It seems there was an Holy strife
between Her Royal Zeal, and Your excellent Fervor concerning the Decoration of
that most Sacred Place: And after so Virtuous a Contest, the Queens Humility
suffered it self to be overcome by Your Fervor, condescending that Your Pious
Devotion to our Blessed Lady, should cause You even in your absence, to adorn
and enrich that August Chapel at Your proper Cost. Now for us Capucins, since
we have the Honor to wear the holy Weed of St. Francis, to profess his Rule,
and to be his Children; and You, my Lord, as Her Majesty's Great Almoner, being
our Superior, You are likewise Superior of the Arch-Confraternity of our
Seraphical Father. This little Book therefore being in so many respects due to
You, it would be an act of Injustice to offer it to any other. To avoid which,
I here present it to Your Lordship, and with it, the hearty services, respects,
and submissions of all the Capucins, and particularly of

My LORD, Your most humble and obedient Servant, F. Cyprien, Capucin, Chaplain
to the Queen Mother.

THE PREFACE.
THe Queen Mothers Extraordinary Piety, having once more settled the Noble
Church of Somerset House, has also given way to the re-settling of the most
Illustrious Arch-Confraternity of our Blessed Lady, commonly called the Rosary;
in which, about Thirty years ago, She was at her own desire Enrolled; her
humility being such, that She vouchsafed to be called a Sister of the same. But
this is not sufficient; it is moreover requisite, that the wonderful
Privileges and easy Obligations of that holy Arch-confraternity should be
made known. I being resolved therefore to set them forth, happily met with a
Book concerning that matter, written and published by a Pious and Learned
Priest of the Order of St. Bennet, out of which I have collected what was
necessary for our purpose, and disposed it as follows.

HEAVEN OPENED, And the Pains of Purgatory AVOIDED, etc.
The Eminency and Holiness of our Blessed Lady.
THe Perfections, Attributes, Privileges, and Prerogatives of our Blessed Lady
are such, and so great, that it is impossible for any one in this world (I will
not say to express, but even) to comprehend them. Nevertheless, that we may
conceive something thereof, let us consider,

1. That She was Appointed, Designed, and Predestined by the Holy Trinity
from all Eternity, to be the Worthy Mother of the Word Incarnate.

2. That her Birth was not only praefigured, promised, and prophesied of, but
foretold also by an Angel appearing to her sterile Parents immediately before
her Conception.

3. That being born free from all sin, she led a life so full of Sanctity, so
singular in all Purity, so excellent in all Perfections, that she deserved
(says St. Augustine) through Her Creators Mercy, to be chosen the Mother of
Gods Son.

4. That she was a Mother, yet remaining a Virgin, even the Mother of God,
which is an Attribute alone, containing whatsoever is Great, Glorious, and
Excellent. St. Gregory Neocesariensis in his second Sermon of the Anuntiation,
says, That the sense of this only Word, Gods Mother, exceeds all other
Encomiums which Men or Angels can confer upon Her. Being Gods Mother, She is
United to a term of an Infinite perfection, and in a certain manner Elevated to
a Divine Order, says St. Thomas, par. 1. qu. 25. art. 6. ad. 4. Saint
Chrysostom in his Sermon of the Blessed Virgin, calls her the Miracle, and
the Miracle of Miracles. And Saint John Damascen, in his first Oration of the
Nativity of the Blessed Virgin, an Abyss of Miracles.

The Christians Devotion to our Blessed Lady.
THe Devotion of all faithful Christians toward the Holy Virgin Mary, is as
Ancient as our Faith and Christianity it self, She being Constituted our
Mother, by the bequest of her Blessed Son, when on the Cross he uttered these
words to St. John, and in his person, to all Christians: Son, behold thy
Mother; whereupon St. Bernard says, If Mary be thy Mother, O Christian, then
is Jesus thy Brother; then Christ's Father, is thy Father; then his Heaven, is
thy Inheritance; then Mary's Grace is thy Treasure, for Mothers usually lay up
treasures for their Children: then she is sensible of all thy sufferings,
solicitous to supply thy wants, and careful to provide for thy necessities, for
a Mother is tender over her Children; therefore, O Christian, make choice of
Mary for thy Mother.

I well know (says the ancient Father Theophylact) that thou, O most glorious
Queen Mother, art the great Protectrix of mankind; and who is he, that having
placed his confidence in thee, has remained confounded? Let us therefore to
her make our humble addresses in all our necessities, since she is so powerful
to assist us, so merciful to admit us, and so ready to relieve us.

O Beatissima (says S. Anselm, Arch-Bp. of Cant.) sicut omnis a te aversus and
a te de spectus necesse est ut intereat, ita omnis ad te conversus and a te
respectus impossible est ut pereat. As he, O most blessed Mary, must needs
perish, who turns his back to thee, and whom thou rejectest from thy favors,
so it is impossible, that he should perish, that is zealous of thy honor, and
whom thou vouchsafest to behold and countenance.

I hold (says Origin) as an assured verity; that the Virgin Mary will never
abandon that person that implores her assistance in the time of his necessity;
for she is full of goodness, full of mercy, and full of grace, and therefore
cannot refuse to compassionate him that calls upon her.

The Practice of the Rosary, is an excellent Devotion to our Blessed Lady.
IF we consider the holy Rosary Prerogatives, we shall find that it far exceeds
all other sorts of devotion of this nature. Though every zealous Christian may
so duly, diligently, and with such perseverance practice his devotions in his
own private Oratory, as to arrive at the perfection of virtue and the salvation
of his soul; yet these heights are not there obtained with that alacrity,
facility, security and abundance, as in conjunction with sacred
Confraternities, which are the Academies of Devotion, Schools of Sanctity, and
Buttresses of Religion, Piety and Perfection, where the fervor and good
example of his faithful associates, will warm his tepidity, excite his piety,
add continual fuel of courage and constancy to his resolutions, and make him
partaker of many Prayers, Merits, and spiritual Graces. Dum singuli orant pro
omnibus, omnes orant pro singulis. When as every single person pray for all, it
follows that all pray for every single person, says St. Ambrose. The
Brethren and Sisters of these Confraternities being any where received, are
every where privileged, and so made happy partakers of the spiritual
perfections of all those persons, who are registered either in Rome, in Paris,
or in any other part of the world.

To come now in particular to the Confraternity of the Rosary. Surely that
manner of Prayer cannot but be very pleasing to God, profitable to our selves,
and grateful to the Blessed Virgin, which directly tends to the advancement
of the Divine Honor, the promotion of our own Happiness, and the increase of
the Sacred Mothers glory. Now the exercises of the Rosary aim at these three
heroic ends. For

1. Since the Rosary consists of the two richest pieces of Christian Piety,
viz. the Pater noster and Ave Maria, together with the principal mysteries of
our Christian Faith, what Subject can be imagined more proper? What Object can
possibly be more powerful to raise our souls to the love, praise, and honor of
our Creator and Redeemer, then the due and daily consideration of those Divine
mysteries, which are, as it were the Sacred Tables, and lively Pictures,
representing continually to our memories their admirable benefits, excessive
love, and infinite liberality to mankind?

2. By what Prayers can we more confidently promise to our selves the obtaining
of our just desires, and consequently, the promoting of our Salvation, then by
the Pater noster, a prayer dictated by our Redeemers own Divine Mouth, enjoined
by his special command, to be frequently used of all faithful Christians, and
by him endued with so great efficacy and virtue?

3. By what Ladder of Praise can we more probably reach the glorious Virgin
Moihers perfections, then by the Ave-Mary, a Salutation framed in Heaven by the
holy Trinity it self, and from thence brought down to earth by it is Ambassador
the Angel Gabriel, in which, all the Greatness, Excellency, and Prerogatives of
Gods Mother, are so briefly, distinctly, and Divinely Couched?

The Author of the Rosary.
THe Author of the Rosary, in the particular method and manner wherein we now
recite it, and the beginner of this Sacred Confraternity was St. Dominick, as
appears by the Bull of Pius quintus in these words; The blessed St. Dominick,
directed (as is piously believed) by Gods Holy Spirit, when France and Italy
were miserably overspread with the Heresy of the Albigenses, lifting up his
eyes to Heaven, and beholding that Mountain, the Glorious Virgin Mary, Gods
holy Mother, invented and propagated, a very easy, plain, and pious method of
Prayer, etc.

The Name and manner of Recital of the Rosary.
THis Devotion has several Names, some having reference to the number of
Salutations therein contained, call it the Virgin Mary's Psalter, in imitation
of the Psalter of David, consisting of the same number of Psalms, viz. an
hundred and fifty. Or alluding to that musical Instrument, by the Ancient
Grecians called Organum, and by the later Psalterium, composed of an hundred
and fifty pipes, (the just number of these our Salutations) on which the Psalms
of David were usually sung to the Divine Praise and Honor.

Others call it by the now commonly received denomination of the Rosary, and
that most properly, for as a Rosary literally signifies a place beset with
odoriserous Roses; so this our Rosary, mystically betokens the sweet
fragrancy which replenisheth their Souls who devoutly praise the Divine
Majesty, and honor the Virgin Mary. The Rosary then is a certain peculiar
manner of offering up our prayers to the Divine Majesty, in honor of his holy
Mother, by the recital of one hundred and fifty Angelical Salutations, prefixed
to each ten of them the Lords Prayer, with a Meditation upon one of the
Mysteries of our Savior, or our blessed Lady.

These Mysteries are in all fifteen, whereof five are called Joyful, five
Sorrowful, and five Glorious. The Joyful are 1. The Annunciation of the Angel,
2. The Visitation of St. Elizabeth, 3. The Nativity of our Lord, 4. His
Presentation in the Temple, 5. His Disputing, being a Child, with the Doctors.
The five Sorrowful, are 1 Christ's Agony in the Garden, 2. His Whipping at the
Pillar, 3. His Crowning with Thorns, 4. His carrying of the Cross, 5. His
Crucifying and Death. The five glorious, are, 1. The Resurrection of our Lord,
2. His Assension, 3. The coming of the Holy Ghost, 4. The Assumption of our
blessed Lady, 5. Her Crowning above all Angels.

The Excellency of the Rosary.
ALL that can make any Association excellent is in this Confraternity,
Antiquity, Extent, Generality, easiness, Spiritual profit, large community of
Merits, vast treasures of Indulgencies, etc. Antiquity, of above four hundred
years. Extent, being spread over the whole habitable world, acknowledging no
other limits, then those which bound the Universal Catholic Church.
Generality, no person being excluded from it is participation. Easiness,
requiring no more knowledge, then the skill to recite the Pater and Ave, no
more expenses than the prise of a pair of Beads, no other place than where
every one lives, no other site of body, than that in which Devotion finds us,
whether it be standing, sitting, lying, walking or kneeling. Spiritual profit,
first in respect of the especial Patronage and Protection of the Blessed
Virgin; for though She is a careful Mother of all faithful Christians, yet
surely She is more tenderly solicitous for the domestics of Her Family, more
heedfully diligent for the advancement of Her devoted Servants, more seriously
studious for the good of Her dutiful Children. Secondly, in respect of the
community of Merits amongst the Members of this Sacred society; for it is a
point of our Faith, that the Merits of all the Saints, are common to all
faithful Christians; that there is a communication between the Church militant
upon Earth, and the Church suffering in Purgatory, and the Church Triumphant in
Heaven. But besides this general communication of spiritual goods and merits
among all faithful Christians, there is another bank in the bodies of
Confraternities, common to them alone who are of their particular Family and
Community, and from whence all the influences of Graces and Blessings which
Heaven imparts to this whole body, inflow into each one of its Members. Now,
what an immense profit is it to have a part in all the zealous Prayers,
Meditations, actual Charity, and exercises of Virtue and Piety, performed in a
whole Confraternity? all which, entering into common, and making one only
depositum, redound to each particular Members spiritual profit and advantage.
so that when any one of us offers up his Prayers to the Throne of Mercy, he
prays (as it were) by as many mouths as there are Brethren and Sisters in the
whole Confraternity; now, what an incredible force must this needs add to our
Petitions? How can a just demand, presented by so many pious Souls, sent up to
Heaven by so many humble hearts, pronounced by so many devout Tongues, suffer a
repulse? Besides, what an inestimable profit is it to have a share of Merits in
so many Divine Sacrifices of the Mass, celebrated through the whole world,
yearly, monthly, weekly, daily to Gods Glory, to his Mothers Honor, to his
Saints praises, to the solace of the living, to the succor of the dead? Another
profit of great importance, is a confidence, a comfort, and a kind of security
in the article of death. Death is commonly bitter for the cessation of all
pleasures, dangerous for the Devils temptations, dreadful for the severe
Judgment immediately ensuing: but to the Members of this sacred Confraternity
death is not so bitter, because long before expected, prevented, provided for,
the Devils temptations are not to them so dangerous, because the daily use of
their Spiritual weapons, renders the expert in these combats, able to foil
their adversaries, and experienced to defend themselves: The apprehension of
Gods Judgments is not to them so dreadful, because they continually think of
them, and accordingly order their life and actions, discharge their consciences
of sin, practice works of piety, and endeavor to acquire the Sacred Virgins
favor, in hope to have Her their Friend and Advocate, which is surely the best
way to die with safety and security. So the Devotion to our Blessed Lady in
this Confraternity, is a probable sign of being predestined to eternal
felicity: with the holy, you shall be holy, (says the Psalmist) and with the
elect, elected; but what better sign of holiness, what surer token of Election
can one have in this life, then to be associated with so many good souls,
aspiring zealously, and unanimously to piety, to perfection, to salvation?

Another Spiritual profit that all Christians ought to look after, consists in
the several, and very great Indulgences following.

Of the Indulgences conferred upon the Confraternity of the Rosary.
WE shall mention none but such as are expressly avouched by approved and
authentical Authors, and directly drawn out of the Popes Bulls and Indults,
omitting the multitude of less Indulgences which remit certain days, years, and
quarantines of enjoined penances, and set down the plenary Indulgences.

I. At their first Admittance.
UPon the day that any one is first received and Enroled into the Sacred
Confraternity of the Rosary, having confessed, and communicated, and recited a
third part of the Rosary, and prayed for the peace and tranquillity of the
Church, he gains a plenary Indulgence, and remission of all his sins.

Pius quintus in his Bull, consueverunt Romani pontifices, 27. of Sept. 1559.

II. At their own Choice.
ANy Member of the Rosary, has the liberty once in his life, and at the
Articles of his Death, to make use of any Ghostly Father, who is empowered to
confer upon him a plenary Indulgence.

Innocentius octavus, 15. October. 1484.

III. At the hour of Death.
IN the hour, Agony, and Article of Death.

1. Being confessed, and communicated a plenary Indulgence, Pius quintus
Consueverunt, 27. Sept. 1557.

2. Or saying (with mouth, or in heart) Jesus Maria, a plenary.

3. Or calling thrice (either by mouth or in heart) upon the Holy Name of
Jesus, a plenary. Pius quintus, Greg. 13. Clem. 8.

4. Or having a blessed Candle of the Confraternity in their hand, in honor of
the Blessed Virgin Mary, at the time of their departure, a plenary.

Adrianus Sextus, Illius qui Dominicum, call. Aprilis, 1523. Who is cited and
confirmed by Clement the seventh Ineffabilia 10. call. Aprilis, 1529.

To gain which indulgence, the third part of the Rosary must have been (at
least once recited in the Chapel of the Rosary, or in some place where the
reciter thereof might have a view of the Rosary Altar, as appears by the
collations of the words of the Popes grants, and by the ends for which they
grant this privilege, to wit, that the Rosarists may show more reverence and
respect to their Mothers Altar, and often visit it with more Devotion, all
which is to be understood, where these conveniences may be obtained; otherwise
they may perform these devotions, and obtain the like Indulgencies in any other
Church or Oratory according to the express dispensation of the said Popes.

IV. Every first Sunday within the Month.
1. HAving confessed and communicated a plenary. Greg. 13. Pastoris aeterni die
quinta Maii, 1581.

2. Or visiting the Altar of the Rosary a plenary, Greg. 13.

3. Or being present at the Procession of the Rosary a plenary. Greg. 13. Ad
augendam, 28. October. 1577. Paulus quintus Piorum hominum 15. April. 1608.

V. Upon the seven Feasts of our Blessed Lady, which are:
THe Purification, Annunciation, Visiration, Assumption, Nativity, Presentation
and Conception.

1. Being confessed and communicated, or being contrite with a will to confess
and communicate at fit time a plenary.

2. Or visiting the Altar of the Rosary a plenary.

3. Or being present at the Processions of the Rosary upon these days a
plenary. Pius quartus Dum praeclara meritorum, 1562.

VI. For saying or hearing the Mass of the Rosary.
1. THey who by virtue of their privileges shall say the Mass of the Rosary,
gain a plenary Indulgence.

2. Or shall cause it to be said a plenary.

3. Or hear it, gain all the Indulgences which are granted to them that recite
once the whole Rosary which is a plenary. Paulus tertius ultimo Augusti, 1537.
the said Mass of the Rosary thus begins, Salve radix sancta, etc. which grant
is confirmed by Sixtus quintus, Dum ineffabilia, 3. Jan. 1586.

VII. For saying the Rosary.
THey who shall recite the whole Rosary, gain toties quoties a plenary. Julius
2. and Leo 10. who granted a plenary to them who recited the Crown of our Lady,
consisting of sixty three Ave Mary's, with seven Pater noster's interposed;
which Paul the Third communicated and extended to all such as should recite the
whole Rosary toties quoties.

VIII. For the days in which the fifteen Mysteries of the Rosary are
celebrated.
THey who being truly penitent, confessed and communicated, shall devoutly
visit the Chapel of the Rosary upon the days in which the fifteen Mysteries
thereof are celebrated, gain a plenary Indulgence. Greg. 13. Pastoris aeterni,
5. Maii 1581.

IX. For praying for the Dead.
1. EVery time they recite the whole Rosary for the departed, they gain the
delivery of a soul out of Purgatory, Paulus 3.3. Junii 1542. granted this vivae
vocis oraculo, to the Rosarists of the Kingdom of Spain; which Pius quintus
Consueverunt, Greg. 13. Pastoris aeterni, and Sixtus quintus, Dum ineffabilia,
extend to all other Confraternities of the Rosary throughout the world.

2. As often as they shall say; cause to be said, or are present at the Mass of
the Rosary, celebrated for that intention, they free a Soul out of Purgatory.

3. All the Indulgences granted to the living, may be applied to the dead, by
communicating, saying Mass of the Rosary, reciting the Rosary, etc. for them,
Paulus 3.13. Aug. 1537. See John Carthagen. homilia 6. de Rosario.

X. For them who cannot be present.
SUch Brethren and Sisters of the Rosary, who by reason of sickness, journey,
imprisonment, persecution, service, distance, danger, or any other lawful
impediment, cannot be present at the processions aforesaid, nor visit the Altar
of the Rosary, may notwithstanding, gain all the indulgencies as if they were
present.

1. By confessing and communicating.

2. Or by saying the Rosary.

3. Or the seven penitential Psalms, before some Altar or devout Picture. Greg.
13. Ad augendam devotionem, 29. Aug. 1579. Idem in Bulla. Cupientes. 24.
December. 1583.

XI. Of the Stations of Rome.
ALl the Indulgences of the Stations of Rome, are granted to the Members of the
Rosary, by visiting upon these days five Altars; or one only if there be no
more, and reciting before each Altar five Paters and five Aves; or twenty-five
before that one Altar. Leo 10. Maii 22. 1518. which grant Clement the Seventh
recites and comfirms in his brief Etsi temporalium, 8. idus Maii 1534. and
Paulus 3. Rationi congruit, 3. November. 1534. and Pius 5. Inter desiderabilia,
28. Junii 1569.

XII.
ANd these are the chief part of that vast Treasure of Indulgences and
Privileges granted to the Arch-Confraternity of the sacred Rosary. The rest
being of less consequence, would we conceive, be as tedious to be read, as they
are indeed needless to be known by them who shall duly consider, that besides
the particular indulgences, which are determined to certain days times and
places, there are others which are general, unlimited, perpetual, and which we
shall briefly set before you as a close of this Catalogue of Indulgences.

I. Every day a Plenary.
THe first is, that they who are of the Rosary, in the state of Grace, and
having a general intention to pray for such ends as are required; which are the
three conditions absolutely necessary for the obtaining of any of these
Indulgences, may gain a plenary upon every day in the year, and consequently
every hour of their whole life, by performing any one of these things following:

1. Saying the Rosary.

2. Celebrating the Mass of the Rosary.

3. Causing it to be said.

4. Hearing it.

5. Visiting five Altars, or one if there be no more, and saying five Paters
and Aves before each Alttar, or 25. before the one.

The Consequence hereof is most clear.

1. Because a plenary is annexed to the due performance of these acts of Piety
toties quoties, how often soever they are done, without any restriction.

2. Because at Rome, in the Church of St. John Lateran, there may be gained a
plenary, if any one pleases, six times every day, and in each one of the seven
Churches of the Stations; all which, and all other City Indulgences are granted
to all the Brothers and Sisters of the Rosary, performing the Devotions
aforesaid, wheresoever dispersed throughout the whole world by Leo the Tenth,
22. Maii 1518. and by the succeeding chief Pastors.

II. Every day a Soul out of Purgatory.
THe second is, that they may every day, praying and being disposed as
aforesaid, obtain the deliverance of a soul out of Purgatory; which directly
follows from the former: First, since all the Indulgences granted to the living
may be applied to the dead. Secondly, since at Rome there is every day in one
part or other of the City, the delivery of a soul out of Purgatory.

The particular grants of all these before recited Indulgences, may be seen at
large in Peter Louvet, Aiphonsus Fernandez, Andreas Coppentanius, and other
Fathers of the Order of St. Dominick, who faithfully collected and published
them according to their Originals.

Misericordias Domini in aeternum cantabo.

Our grateful hearts, O our Eternal King!
Shall ever of your boundless mercies sing.
How these Indulgences are to be gained by the Members of the Rosary.
FIrst, these Indulgences are not indifferently obtained by all sorts of
persons, but by such only as have duly and diligently purified, prepared, and
disposed their souls to receive them by precedent penance, or have led their
lives in such innocence since their last Confession, as that they continue in
the state of Grace; or have made an act of contrition and detestation of their
mortal sins, with purpose of confessing them in fit time, and avoiding them for
the future.

Secondly, that they must obey such other particular commands as the Bulls of
Indulgences import; that is, they must punctually perform the enjoined actions
of Alms-deeds, Fastings, Prayers, Processions, Visitations of Altars, and all
other the works of Devotion and Piety there expressed.

Thirdly, that they must offer up their devotions for these generally
recommended ends and intentions in all the concessions of Indulgences.

1. For the increase of Gods honor and glory.

2. For the exaltation of the Catholic Church.

3. For the prosperity of the Sea Apostolic.

4. For the peace of Christian Princes.

5. For the reunion of Schismatics.

6. For the Conversion of Heretics.

7. For the Correction of Sinners.

8. For the Consolation of the afflicted, both living and departed.

The conditions of this Confraternity.
FIrst, all Christians of whatsoever calling and condition, may be received
into this Sacred Confraternity, without any obligation to pay any thing for
their entrance or admittance, Leo 10. Pastoris aeterni, 1520. pridie nonas
October.

Secondly, there is to be a particular book provided, wherein the names and
surnames of all such as are admitted, must be Registered.

Thirdly, whosoever is thus admitted in any one place, is made partaker of the
prayers and Merits of all them that are of this Confraternity throughout the
whole Universe.

Fourthly, not only the living, but also the faithful departed, to wit, the
Souls in Purgatory may be received, and enrolled in this Confraternity, and
made partakers of these spiritual benefits, if any of the living Brethren and
Sisters shall desire and procure it, performing for their deceased friends,
such pious duties and devotions as the Rules demand.

Fifthly, all the Brothers and Sisters, are obliged to recite every week the
entire Rosary, which they may, as themselves please, either perform together,
or divide into three parts for their greater ease and convenience.

Sixthly, In case of any lawful impediment, the Brothers and Sisters causing
the Rosary to be recited for them by another, satisfy their own obligation.

Seventhly, If through forgetfulness, multiplicity of employments, or
negligence, (and not out of contempt) they omit this weekly recital of the
Rosary, it is no sin, but only for that time a privation of such spiritual
benefits, whereof they should otherways have been partakers.

Eighthly, All the Rosarists should be present at the Mass and Procession,
which are usually performed in the head Chapel upon all the feast days of the
Sacred Virgin, and first Sundays of the month; this is enjoined by Pius
quartus, in his brief, cum praeclara.

Ninthly, Four Anniversaries are to be Celebrated every year at the Rosaries
Altar, for the Souls of their departed Brethren and Sisters, upon the morrows
of our blessed Ladies four princpal Festivities, which are Her Nativity,
Annunciation, Purification, Assumption; at which all the Rosarists should also
assist, that they may expect the same piety for their surviuing brethren as for
themselves after their own decease; when the days next following the four
Feasts, fall out to be either Sundays, or some other greater Solemnities, then
this Anniversary duties are remitted to the next day.

Tenthly, The great Feast of the Rosary, is not to be henceforth solemnized as
it was formerly upon the five and twenty day of March, but upon the first
Sunday of October, for an Eternal and grateful Rememoration of that most
remarkable and altogether miraculous Naval Victory, gained over the Turks, by a
handful of Christians, in the bay of Lepanto, in the gulf of Acaia, upon the
seventh day of October, which was then the first Sunday of that Month in the
year 1571. about the end of Pius quintus's Popedom, (who was the zealous
promotor of this holy War) in which, twenty of the enemies Galleys were
consumed with fire, as many more ingulphed by the Waves, one hundred and
fourscore taken, the great Bashaw, with twenty five thousand Turkish Soldiers
slain in the place, most of the residue brought away Captives, twenty thousand
Christians freed from their slavery, and the Catholic Cause asserted from most
eminent danger and calamity; the Pope Gregory 13. in his Bull Monet Apostolus,
attribute this great Victory to the Prayers of the devout Rosarists, who even
at that very time, were making their public processions in the several parts
of Christendom for this end, and imploring most earnestly the Divine
assistance, by the Intercession of this powerful Mother.

Eleventhly, The third Sunday of April, is also to be Solemnized by the devout
Rosarists, according to the grant of Pope Gregory 13. in his Bull, Cum sicut
accepimus, Jan. 3. 1579. The reason of the Institution of this Solemnity, was
an entire cessation of the raging pestilence in Padua, when the Inhabitants had
made a vow to erect a Chapel, which should be dedicated Virgini liberatrici,
after their deliverance.

Our Blessed Ladies Litanies, that are sung for their Majesty's the Queens,
Henrietta Maria, and Katherina, and for all other people, all the Saturdayes,
Sundays, and Holy Days, at the Chappel-Royal of Sommerset-house.
KYrie eleison, Christ eleison, Kyrie eleison, Christ audi nos, Christ
exaudi nos.
Pater de Caelis Deus, Miserere nobis.
Fili Redemptor mundi Deus, Miserere nobis.
Spiritus sancte Deus, Miserere nobis.
Sancta Trinitas unus Deus, Misere nobis.
Sancta Maria, Ora pro nobis.
Sancta Dei genetrix ora
Sancta Virgo Virginum ora
Matter Christi ora
Matter divinae gratiae ora
Matter purissima ora
Matter Castissima ora
Matter Inviolata ora
Matter Intemerata ora
Matter amabilis ora
Matter admirabilis ora
Matter Creatoris ora
Matter Salvatoris ora
Virgo Prudentissima ora
Virgo veneranda ora
Virgo Praedicanda ora
Virgo Potens ora
Virgo Clemens ora
Virgo fidelis ora
Speculum justitiae ora
Seeds sapientiae ora
Causa nostrae laetitiae ora
Vas spirituale ora
Vas honorabile ora
Vas insigne devotionis ora
Rosa Mystica ora
Turris Davidica ora
Turris eburnea ora
Domus aurea ora
Faederis area ora
Janua Caeli ora
Stella matutina ora
Salus infirmorum ora
Refugium peccatorum ora
Confolatrix afflictorum ora
Auxilium Christianorum ora
Regina Angelorum, ora
Regina Patriarcharum ora
Regina Prophetarum ora
Regina Apostolorum ora
Regina Martyrum ora
Regina Confessorum, ora
Regina Virginum ora
Regina Sanctorum omnium ora
Regina Sacratissima Rosarii, ora
Agnus Dei, qui tollis peccata mundi, parce nobis Domine.
Agnus Dei, qui tollis peccata mundi, exaudi nos Domine.
Agnus Dei, qui tollis peccata mundi, miserere nobis.
Antiphona. Sub tuum praesidium confugimus, Sancta Dei genetrix, nostras
deprecationes ne despicias in necessitatibus nostris: sed a periculis cunctis
libera nos semper Virgo gloriosa and benedicta.

Ora pro nobis sancta Dei genetrix.
Ut digni efficiamur promissionibus Christi.
Salvas fac ancillas tuas Reginas nostras Henericam Mariam and Katharinam.
Deus meus sperantes in te.
Mitte eis Domine auxilium de sancto.
Et de Sion tuere eas.
Domine exaudi orationem meam.
Et clamor meus ad te veniat.
Dominus vobiscum.
Et cum spiritu tuo.
Oremus.

COncede nos famulos tuos quaesumus Domine Deus perpetuamentis and corporis
sanitate gaudere, and gloriosa Beatae Mariae semper Virginis intercessione, a
praesenti liberari tistitia, and aeterna perfrui laetitia.

Ecclesiae tuae, quaesumus Domine, preces placatus admit; ut destructis
adversitatibus and erroribus universis, secura tibi serviat liberate.

Deus servientium tibi fortitudo Regnorum, propitiare precibus nostris, and
Serenissimas Reginas nostras Henricam Mariam, and Catharinam ab omni
adversitate deffende, ut salus servientium tibi famularum, pax tuorum possit
esse populorum. Per Christum Dominum nostrium. Amen.

Divinum auxilium maneat semper nobiscum. Amen.

The form of offering ones self to the Blessed Virgin Mary, to be admitted into
her Confraternity.
THrice sacred Virgin Mary, Mother of God! IN. N. though most unworthy to be
registered amongst your servants, yet moved (by that Goodness which the Angels
admire in you) to an ardent desire of honoring, loving, and serving you; do
here this day with all possible humility, sincerity, and devotion, (in the
presence of my Angel Guardian, and the whole Court of Heaven) make a choice of
you for my singular Lady, Advocate, and Mother; firmly purposing to honor,
love, and serve you, with all filial duty, diligence, and fidelity; and to
procure (as much as it shall lie in my power) that all others may do the same.

I therefore most heartily beseech you, (O merciful and compassionate Mother!)
by the precious Blood which your dearly beloved son, my Blessed Savior, shed
for me in his bitter passion; That you will be graciously pleased to receive
and admit me into the number of your devout Clients, as one dedicated to your
perpetual service.

Be you favorable to me (O Blessed Lady!) and obtain for me of your
All-powerful Son, that I may so behave my self in all my Thoughts, Words, and
Actions, as never more to think, speak, or act any thing displeasing to his
sacred Majesty.)

Grant furthermore (O my good and gracious Mother!) that I may never forget
you, nor forfeit this my now made promise of honoring, loving, and serving you
all the days of my life; that so I may never be forgotten, forsaken, nor
abandoned by you; but be always ways protected, aided, and assisted by you,
especially in the hour of my Death. Amen.

Then the Superior receives him or her into the Confraternity, by speaking
these words, and given them his Benediction, as follows.
BY the Authority, which is committed to me for this end, by the Superiors of
the holy Order of St. Dominick: I receive you into the Confraternity of the
Rosary of the most Blessed Virgin Mary: And do admit you to a participation of
all the spiritual Benefits, which (by the merits of Jesus Christ) the Brothers
and Sisters of the sacred Rosary do commonly enjoy.

In the Name of the Father, and of the Son, and of the holy Ghost, Amen.

Then laying the Bedes upon the Altar, he puts a stole about his neck, and
blesses them for the use of the newly received Brother or Sister: saying as
follows.

The Blessing of the Bedes of the Rosary.
Verse. Adjutorium nostrum in nomine Domini.

Resp. Qui fecit caelum and terram.

Psalm. Laudate Dominum in Sanctis ejus, laudate eum in firmamento virtutis ejus.

Laudate eum in virtutibus ejus: laudate eum secundum multitudinem magnitudinis
ejus.

Laudate eum in sono tubae; laudate eum in psalterio and cithara.

Laudate eum in tympano, and choro: laudate eum in chordis and organo.

Laudate eum in cymbalis been sonantibus; laudate eum in cymbalis jubilationis:
omnis spiritus laudet Dominum.

Gloria Patri and Filio, etc.

Verse. Dignare me laudare te virgo sacrata.

Resp. Da mihi virtutem contra hosts tuos.

Verse. Cum dederit dilectis suis somnum.

Resp. Ecce haereditas Domini filii merces fructus ventris.

Verse. Domine exaudi orationem meam

Resp. Et clamor meus ad te veniat.

Verse. Dominus vobiscum.

Resp. Et cum spiritu tuo.

Oremus.

OMmpotens and misericors Deus, qui propter eximiam Charitatem tuam qua
dilexisti nos, Filium tuum unigenitum Dominum nostrum Jesum Christum, pro
Redemptione nostra, de coelis in Terram descendere, and de Beatissimae Virginis
Mariae Dominae nostrae utero, Angelo nunciante, carnem suscipere, crucemque ac
mortem subire, and tertia die gloriosum a mortuis resurgere volusti, ut nos
eriperes de potestate Diaboli: Obsecramus immensam clementiam tuam, ut haec
signa Rosarii, in honorem and laudem ejusdem Genitricis Filii tui, ab Ecclesia
tua fideli dicata, Been dicas, and sanctifices, eisque tantam Sancti Spiritus
infundas virtutem; ut quicunque horum quodlibet secum portaverit, atque in domo
suo reverenter tenuerit, and in eis ad te secundum ejusdem sanctae
Confraternitatis Instituta, divina contemplanda mysteria devote oraverit;
salubri and perseveranti devotione abundet; sitque consors and particeps omnium
gratiarum, privilegiorum, and Indulgentiarum, quae eident Confraternitati per
sacram Sedem Apostolicam concessa sunt; and ab omni host visibili and
invisibili semper and ubique in hoc and in futuro saeculo liberetur; and in
exitu suo, ab ipsa Beatissima Virgin Maria Dei genetrice, tibi plenus bonis
operibus praesentari mereatur.

Per eundem Dominum nostrum Jesum Christum Filium tuum, qui tecum vivit and
regnat, in unitate Spiritus Sancti Deus. Per omnia saecula saeculorum, Amen.

Then he sprinkles the Bedes with holy water, saying:

In nomine Patris, and Filii, and Spiritus Sancti. Amen, and gives them to the
party.

The Blessing of the Wax Candles, for the Brothers and Sisters of the holy
Rasery, to hold in their hands, at the hour of Death.

Verse. Adjutorium nostrum in nomine Domini.

Resp. Qui fecit coelum and terram.

CANTICUM.

NVnc dimittis servum tuum Domine: secundum verbum tuum in pace.

Quia viderunt oculi mei: salutare tuum.

Quod parasti: ante faciem omnium populorum:

Lumen ad revelationem gentium; and gloriam plebis tuae Israel.

Gloria Patri and Filio, etc.

ANTIPHONA.

AVE Regina Coelorum,
Ave Domina Angelorum,
Salve Radix, Salve Porta,
Ex qua mundo lux est orta,
Gaude virgo gloriosa,
Super omnes speciosa,
Vale O valde decora,
Et pro nobis Chrisium exora.
Verse. Post partum virgo inviolata permansisti.

Resp. Dei Genitrix intercede pro nobis.

Verse. Domine exandi orationem meam.

Resp. Et clamer men's ad te veniat.

Verse. Dominus vebiscum.

Resp. Et cum spiritu tuo.

OREMUS.

DOmine Jesu Christ, lux vera, qui illuminas omnem hominem venientem in hunc
mundum! Effunde per intercessionem Virginis Mariae matris tuae, and per
quindecim eius Rosarii mysteria, Benedictionem tuam super hos caereos and
candelas, and sanctifica eas lumine tuae gratiae, and concede propitius ut
sicut haec luminaria igne visibili accensa, nocturnas depellunt tenebras; Ita
corda nostra invisibili igne, id est, Spiritus Sancti Splendore illusirata,
omnium vitiorum coecitate careant, ut puro mentis oculo cernere semper
possimus, quae tibi sunt placita, and nostrae saluti utilia: quatenus post
hujus saeculi caliginosa discrimina, ad lucem indeficientem pervenire mereamur.
Qui vivis and regnas Deus, in saecula saeculorum. Amen.

OREMUS.

DOmine Jesu Christ, splendour gloriae, and figura substantiae Patris, and
virginalis uteri frucius! Qui per temporalem Nativitatem tuam divinae
Filiationis imaginem per gratiam hominibus contulisti, illosque fratres vecare
dignatus es: Auge in nobis famulis tuis, (in Confraternitate virginis Matris
tuae gloriantibus) Spiritum gratiae quem dedisti, and has candelas quas in
honorem Nominis ejus suscipimus, ita Benedicere and sanctificare digneris, ut
quicunque eas in manibus accensas tenuerit, ab omnibus liberetur tentationibus,
and in hora mortis suae, remissionem omnium peceatorum percipiat; and demum ad
Te, qui verum lumen es, ipsa dirigente perveniat. Qui vivis and regnas in
saeculo saeculorum. Amen.

Then he sprinkles the Candles with holy Water, saying:

In nomine Patris, and Filii and Spiritus Sancii. Amen.

We have here added all that is lately published, concerning the recital of the
Rosary, in the Chapel Royal of St. James, that the devout Rosarists may find
in this Book all that is elsewhere.

The Method of saying the Rosary of our Blessed Lady, as it was ordered by Pope
Pius the V. of the holy Order of Preachers.
The Joyful Mysteries assigned for Mundays and Thursdays through the Year, and
Saturdayes in Advent, and after Epiphany till Lent.
The first Mystery.

The Meditation.

LEt us contemplate in this Mystery, how the Angel Gabriel saluted our Blessed
Lady with the title of Full of Grace, and declared unto her the Incarnation of
our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ.

Then say, Our Father, once.

Hail Mary, ten times.

Our Father, which art in Heaven. Hallowed be thy Name. Thy Kingdom come; thy
will be done in earth, as it is in Heaven. Give us this day our daily bread:
And forgive us our trespasses, as we forgive them that trespass against us.
lead us not into temptation: But deliver us from evil. Amen.

Hail Mary, full of Grace, our Lord is with thee. Blessed art thou among women;
and blessed is the fruit of thy womb Jesus. Holy Mary, Mother of God, pray for
us sinners, now and in the hour of our death. Amen.

The Prayer.

O Holy Mary, Queen of Virgins, by the most high Mystery of the Incarnation of
thy beloved Son, our Lord Jesus Christ, by which our salvation was so happily
begun, obtain for us by thy Intercession, light to know this so great benefit,
which he has bestowed upon us, vouchsafing in it, to make him our Brother, and
thee his own most beloved Mother, our Mother also. Amen.

The second Mystery.

The Meditation.

LEt us contemplate in this mystery, how the blessed Virgin Mary, understanding
from the Angel, that her Cousin St. Elizabeth had conceived, went with have
into the Mountains of Judaea to visit her, and remained with her three months.

The Prayer.

O Holy Virgin, most spotless mirror of Humility; by that exceeding Charity
which moved thee to visit thy holy Cousin St. Elizabeth; obtain for us by thy
Intercession, that our hearts may be so visited by thy most Holy Son, that free
from all sin, we may praise him, and give him thanks for ever, Amen.

The third Mystery.

The Meditation.

LEt us contemplate in this Mystery, how the B. Virgin Mary, when the time of
her delivery was come, brought forth our Redeemer Christ Jesus at midnight, and
laid him in a manger, because there was no room for him in the Inns of Bethlem.

The Prayer.

O Most pure Mother of God, by thy Virginal and most joyful delivery, by which
thou gave unto the world thy only Son, our Savior, we beseech thee obtain
for us by thy Intercession, grace to lead so pure and holy a life in this
world, that we may worthily sing without ceasing, both day and night, the
mercies of thy Son, and his benefits to us by thee. Amen.

The fourth Mystery.

The Meditation.

LEt us contemplate in this Mystery, how the most B. Virgin Mary, on the day of
her Purification, presented the child Jesus in the Temple, where Holy Simeon
giving thanks to God with great devotion, received him into his arms.

The Prayer.

O Holy Virgin, most admirable Mistress and pattern of obedience; who did
present in the Temple the Lord of the Temple, obtain for us by thy
Intercession, Grace of thy beloved Son, that with Holy Simeon and devout Anna,
we may praise and glorify him for ever. Amen.

The fifth Mystery.

The Meditation.

LEt us contemplate in this Mystery, how the blessed Virgin Mary having lost
without any fault of hers, her Beloved Son in Jerusalem, she sought him for the
space of three days, and at length found him the third day in the Temple, in
the midst of the Doctors disputing with them, being of the age of twelve years.

The Prayer.

MOst blessed Virgin, more then Martyr in thy suffering, and yet the comfort of
such as are afflicted; by that unspeakable joy wherewith thy soul was ravished
in finding thy beloved Son in the Temple, in the midst of the Doctors disputing
with them, obtain him for us, so to seek him, and so to find him in the Holy
Catholic Church, that we may never be separated from him. Amen.

Salve Regina.

HAil Holy Queen, Mother of Mercy, our life, our sweetness, and our hope, To
thee do we cry, poor banished sons of Eve. To thee do we send our sighs,
mourning and weeping in this valley of tears; turn then Most gracious Advocate,
thy eyes of mercy toward us, and after this our exile ended, show unto us the
blessed fruit of thy womb Jesus. O most Clement, most Pious, and most sweet
Virgin Mary.

Verse. Pray for us holy Mother of God.

Resp. That we may be made worthy of the promises of Christ.

Let us pray.

HEar, O merciful God, the Prayer of thy servants, that we who are met together
in the society of the B. Virgin, Mother of God, by her intercession may by thee
be delivered from the dangers that continually hang over us. Amen.

The dolorous or sorrowful Mysteries for Tuesdayes and Frydayes through the
year, and Sundays in Lent.
The first Mystery.

The Meditation.

LEt us contemplate in this Mystery, how our Lord Jesus was so afflicted for us
in the Garden of Gethsemany, that his Body was bathed in a bloody sweat, which
ran trickling down in great drops unto the ground.

Our Father Hail Mary as before.

The Prayer.

MOst holy Virgin, more then Martyr, by that ardent Prayer which thy beloved
Son poured forth unto his Father in the Garden, vouchsafe so to intercede for
us, that our passions reduced to the obedience of Reason, we may always, and
in all things, conform and subject our selves to the Will of God. Amen.

The second Mystery.

The Meditation.

LEt us contemplate in this Mystery, how our Lord Jesus Christ, was most
cruelly scourged in Pilate's house, the number of the stripes they gave him,
being above five thousand.

( As was revealed to St. Brigit.)

The Prayer.

O Mother of God, ever flowing fountain of patience, by those stripes thy only
and most Beloved Son vouchsafed to suffer for us, obtain of him for us grace
that we may know how to mortify our rebellious senses, and cut off all
occasions of sinning with that sword of grief and compassion, which pierced thy
most tender soul. Amen.

The third Mystery.

The Meditation.

LEt us contemplate in this Mystery, how those cruel Ministers of Satan
platted a Crown of sharp thorns, and most cruelly planted it on the most Sacred
Head of our Lord Jesus Christ.

The Prayer.

O Mother of our Eternal Prince and King of Glory, by those sharp thorns,
wherewith his most holy head was pierced, we beseech thee, that by thy
Intercession, we may be delivered here from all motions of Pride, and in the
day of Judgment from that confusion, which our sins deserve. Amen.

The fourth Mystery.

The Meditation.

LEt us contemplate in this Mystery, how our Lord Jesus Christ being sentenced
to die, bore with great patience the Cross, which was laid upon upon him for
his greater torment and ignominy.

The Prayer.

O Holy Virgin, Example of patience, by the most painful carrying of the Cross,
in which thy Son our Lord Jesus Christ bore the heavy weight of our sins,
obtain for us of him by thy intercession, courage and strength to follow his
steps, and bear our Cross after him unto the end of our life. Amen.

The fifth Mystery.

The Meditation.

LEt us contemplate in this Mystery, how our Lord Jesus Christ being come to
Mount Calvary, was stripped off his Cloths, and his hands and feet most cruelly
nailed to the Cross, in the presence of his most afflicted Mother.

The Prayer.

O Holy Mary, Mother of God, as the body of thy beloved Son was for us extended
on the Cross, so may our desires be daily more and more stretched out in his
Service, and our hearts wounded with compassion of his most bitter passion. And
thou O most B. Virgin, vouchsafe to negotiate for and with us, the work of our
salvation by thy powerful Intercession. Amen.

Hail holy Queen, etc. with the verse. and prayer as above.

The Glorious Mysteries, for Wednesdays and Saturdays through the year, and
Sundays after Faster until Advent.
LEt us contemplate in this Mystery, how our Lord Jesus Christ triumphing
gloriously over death, rose again the third day Immortal and Impassible.

Our Father, Hail Mary, as before.

The Prayer.

O Glorious Virgin Mary, by that unspeakable joy thou receivedst in the
Resurrection of thy only Son, we beseech thee obtain of him for us, that our
hearts may never go away after the false joys of this world but may be ever
and wholly employed in the pursuit of the only true and solid joys of heaven.
Amen.

The second Mystery.

The Meditation.

LEt us contemplate in this Mystery, how our Lord Jesus Christ, forty days
after his Resurrection, ascended into heaven, attended by Angels, in the sight
of his most Holy Mother, his Holy Apostles and Disciples, to the great
admiration of them all.

The Prayer.

O Mother of God, comfort the afflicted; as thy beloved Son, when he ascended
into heaven, lifted up his hands and blessed his Apostles; so vouchsafe, most
holy Mother, to lift up thy pure hands to him for us, that we may enjoy the
benefit of his Blessing and thine here on earth, and hereafter in heaven. Amen.

The third Mystery.

The Meditation.

LEt us contemplate in this Mystery, how our Lord Jesus Christ being seated on
the right hand of God, sent as he had promised, the Holy Ghost upon his
Apostles, who after he was ascended, returning to Jerusalem, continued in
prayer and supplication with the B. Virgin Mary, expecting the performance of
his promise.

The Prayer.

O Sacred Virgin, Tabernacle of the Holy Ghost, we beseech thee, obtain by thy
intercession, that this most sweet Comforter, whom thy beloved Son sent down
upon his Apostles, filling them thereby with spiritual joy, may teach us in
this world the true way of Salvation, and make us walk in the paths of virtue
and good works. Amen.

The fourth Mystery.

The Meditation.

LEt us contemplate in this Mystery, how the glorious Virgin twelve years
after the resurrection of her Son, passed out of this world unto him, and was
by him assumed into Heaven, accompanied by the Holy Angels.

The Prayer.

O Most Prudent Virgin, who entering the Heavenly Palace, did fill the Holy
Angels with joy, and men with hope; vouchsafe to intercede for us in the hour
of our death, that free from the illusions and temptations of the devil, we may
joyfully and securely pass out of this temporal state to enjoy the happiness of
Eternal Life. Amen.

The fifth Mystery.

The Meditation.

LEt us contemplate in this Mystery, how the glorious Virgin Mary, who was
with great Jubilee and exultation of the whole Court of Heaven, and particular
glory of all the Saints, crowned by her Son, with the brightest Diadem of Glory.

The Prayer.

O Glorious Queen of all the heavenly Citizens, we beseech thee accept this
Rosary, which as a Crown of Roses we offer at thy feet, and grant most glorious
Lady, that by thy Intercession our souls may be inflamed with so ardent a
desire of seeing Thee so gloriously crowned, that it may never dye in us, until
it shall be changed into the happy fruition of thy blessed sight. Amen.

Advertisement concerning the Arch-Confraternity of Saint Francis.

Honor is to be given to those, to whom it is due. Therefore let the Reader be
pleased to understand, that this Treatise is collected out of the great Manuel
of Father Angelus Francis, Professor of Divinity, of the Seraphical Order of
St. Francis, my dear and most honored Friend.

THE ARCH-CONFRATERNITY Of the Seraphical Father St. FRANCIS, Called The Cord
of the Passion.
The Original of this Arch-Confraternity.
AS in all things our holy Father St. Francis has born the figure and sign of
Christ crucified, thereby to reduce unto his memory the Passion of our Savior:
Even so he has done it in his exterior habit, as may be seen in the 3. Chap.
of his Life, written by St. Bonavent. where it is related, that he having heard
the words of our Savior, Mat. 10: to his Apostles going to preach; Do not
possess gold, or silver, nor money in your purses, nor a scrip for the way,
neither two coats, neither shoes, etc. he cried out with great joy, This is
that I desire, this I covet earnestly from the bowels of my heart. And
thereupon presently cast off his shoes from his feet, laid away his staff,
cast away his purse, and detesting money, was content with one thin coat or
tunick, made in the form of a Cross, which he girded with a Cord. Then St.
Dominick Founder of the holy Order of Preachers, who was a great friend, and
very familiar with St. Francis, one day after much spiritual discourse
concerning their holy Orders, he demanded of him the girdle which he did wear,
which after many humble denial he obtained, and ever after did wear with great
reverence under his habit, by whose example each one did prosecute it with
great devotion. And truly such was the Virtue and Holiness of the Partriark St.
Francis, that all the people did flock to him of all qualities, sex,
conditions, ages, men and women, Clergy and Layetie, married and single, noble
and poor, Citizens and Pesants, they did forsake the Towns, Husbands left their
Wives, the Wives their Husbands, and houses were depopulated through devotion
they did bear to the Saint, each one striving to get something that the holy
man had touched: One would say that these assemblies were like to that of the
Christians in the Acts of the Apostles, Chapter 19. who brought from St. Paul's body
napkins or handkerchiefs and laid upon the sick, and the diseases departed from
them, and the wicked spirits went out. The words in the Latin Text are sudaria
and semicinctia, which as the Reverend Father Cornelius a lapide says in his
learned Commentaries on this place, may very well signify small or sirait
girdles, or half girdles, which he proves out of Isidore, lib. 19. whereby we
may gather, that it is no new thing to take the girdles of Saints and holy men
out of devotion, neither is it done without profit, both spiritual and
temporal, as is to be seen in the life of our holy Father Saint Francis, where
amongst other Miracles, Saint Bonaventure recounts one of a certain man
religious and searing God, who having a Cord wherewith the Saint was girded,
when any were sick of diverse infirmities, he would go to them, and dipping the
Cord into the water, gave them to drink, and by such means many were cured.

The Dignity of this Confraternity of the Cord of the Passion.
THe same Reasons that prove the great excellency of the Rosary, prove also the
dignity of this Arch-Confraternity, for the same prayers, actions, confessions,
communions and processions belong to them both; but besides, there are many
noble things particular to this, as you may see here. The vessel of election
St. Paul, does freely confess himself, Ephesians. 3. the prisoner of Jesus Christ
for the Gentiles, and that for the hope of Israel he was compassed with a
chain, wherein as he teaches, Ephesians. 6. he was a Legate of the Gospel, which made
him exhort the Collossians, Chap. 4. to be mindful of his bonds; and Tim. 1.
not to be ashamed of his chains; wherefore the Sovereign Bishops have had great
reverence and honor to the chains which have pinched and bruised the members
of the Apostles and Martyrs. And St. Gregory, who was in the year 616. sent for
a great rarity, to the Princes and Kings of his time, part of the chains of the
holy Apostle, St. Peter and St. Paul, for he sent to the Empress Constantia
part of the chains that were fastened to St. Paul's neck and hands, whereby, as
he says, many Miracles were wrought. The like he did to Childebert King of
France, and to Richaredus King of the Visigoths. The ancient Christians did
with great reverence go to kiss the bonds and setters of the Martyrs: witness
Tertullian lib. 2. ad uxorem, and diverse others; but St. Chrysostom shall serve
for all, who in the 4. Chap. ad Ephesians. Sermon. 8. says, That there is nothing so
magnificent and excellent as to be prisoner for Jesus Christ, and as the chains
by the sacred hands which they have environed. It is greater renown to be bound
with manicles, and to be shackled for Jesus Christ, then to be an Apostle or
Doctor, or Evangelist. And further down, he says, If any one should give me in
possession the whole Heaven, and the choice of this chain, I had rather choose
that chain. Moreover, If I should fail to be with the Angels in Heaven, or with
Paul the prisoner, certainly I should choose to be in prison. If any one should
set me in the number and rank of the celestial powers, who are about and near
the heavenly Throne, or bind me with cords, I had rather be bound: there is
nothing more happy then the chains, etc. I cannot assure my self that St. Paul
was so happy in that, he was carried and rapt to the third Heaven, as that he
was cast into prison, etc. And a little after, O happy bonds! O happy hands
which this chain has adorned! Babilas Patriark of Antioch, as Suidas
affirms, desired that the iron of his hands and feet might be buried with his
body, saying, That one day they would serve him for an ornament.

But the bands and cords which have touched the holy and sacred flesh of Jesus
Christ, are much more precious and honorable; and therefore this Evangelical
Seraphin, this crucified Angel, Image, Imitator, and Standard Bearer of our
Savior, justly has raised up this part of the arms of the Passion, girding
his body with a rude and gross cord: for as with the heart we believe unto
justice, but with the mouth confession is made unto salvation, Romans 10. so by
this exterior sign, he would confess the affection and devotion he did bear
unto him embracing his bands, which he gave to all his children, and to all the
world, to wear in memory of his Passion; teaching that no man ought to blush,
or be ashamed to wear this Cord, since our Savior has worn such for our
sakes. So St. Anthony the Hermit did reverence St. Paul the Hermits weed, made
of the Palm Tree leaves, and did wear it on the principals and most solemn
Feasts. St. Jerome says; That he had rather choose it, then the Royal Purple,
not for any other respect then for that it was so holy a man's.

The faithful People were no less devout to our Seraphical Father; For happy
were those that could get any part of his Habit, or of any thing that he had,
which they kept with great faith and confidence; neither did their hope fail
them, as may be seen by many examples, especially of the Cord, as St.
Bonaventure affirms, in the miracle related above, he says, besides, that by
putting a piece of that Cord which St. Francis did wear, a woman in
childbearing, being in eminent peril, was safely delivered. Pope Gregory the
Ninth, and Pope Martin the Fourth, did not only wear the Cord privately, but
also died in the habit of St. Francis: The like, four other Popes have done
with the public profession of this rule, thereby adorning their triple Crowns
with a poor Cord, choosing to carry the heavy burden of their worthy charge,
being clad in a poor and contemptible manner. Many Catholic Kings of France,
Arragon and Sicil, the late Archduke and Arch-Dutchess, and not long since
Cardinal Infanta have chose to take this poor habit in their last passage and
to be buried therein. Cardinal de Treio in his Epistle before the work of Saint
Francis, says, That it does not unbeseem the Royal Purple to wear the Cord of
St. Francis. St. Lewis, King of France, the Queen Blaunch his Mother, St.
Elizabeth Queen of Hungaria, both Queens of England, both Queens of France now
living; the Queen of Portugal: Many other Kings and Queens, Princes, Dukes and
Dutchesses, and other of Inferior degree have girded themselves with it;
insomuch, that Cornelius Mutius says, That there is no Nation that does not
receive, and honor this Cord, glorying with Saint Paul in the Bands of our
Savior.

And truly, We have nothing so precious in our Christian Religion, as the holy
Passion of our Redeemer, whereof the wearing of the Cord is a continual
representation. The Pope Sixtus the 5th. says, That the Cord represents
diverse Mysteries, as Charity, which does, as it were, ties God to us, and draws
us to Him by Grace and Glory. Moreover, it puts us in mind of our Sins,
wherewith, as with Ropes, we are bound, and consequently stand in need of Gods
Mercy: But principally it represents the Passion of our Savior, whose Memory
ought always to remain in our hearts: But such is our frailty and tepidity,
that we quickly forget so great a benefit. And God has raised his servant St.
Francis, imprinting his sacred Stigmates on his Body, to renovate, by all means
possible, the aforesaid Passion in our minds. And to this end he has called
Fryers-Minors, that by Words and Deeds they might preach, teach, and represent
his Passion and Poverty. From whence we may gather the dignity of this
Confraternity. Other Confraternities are founded on the Intercessions and
Merits of Saints, in whose Honor they are erected; but this is erected and
Ordained in the memory and honor of the Passion of Jesus Christ, who is the
Holy of Holies, and whose Merits are Infinite: Whereby the Prophecy of King
David is verified for speaking in the person of Christ, he says, That the
Cords and Bands of his Death and Passion are finally to become glorious, Psalm.
15. Cords are fallen to me in godly places. Since so many Kings and Queens,
Princes and Princesses, Lords and Ladies do wear these little Cords in memory
of the Band wherewith Christ was bound in the time his Passion: So then the
Cord being worn in remembrance of the Passion, which is the cause of our
Redemption, Graces, Merits, and Spiritual Good, let us see here

How we ought to have the Passion of our Savior always in our memory.
THE Seraphical Father St. Francis, a little after his conversion, weeping and
lamenting very bitterly, said to a Gentleman that desired to know the reason
thereof: Jesus Christ is crucified for us, and no man thinks of it, no man is
mindful of it. Non proposuerunt Deum ante conspectum suum; No man sets
Christ Jesus in his Passion, before their eyes. Dion. Carth. makes the like
complaint, saying, Our Lord has ministered unto us copious matter of
consideration of his love, yet (alas) it does not touch our hearts, so that it
seems that we are more senseless than insensible creatures, and more obdurate
than hard stones: For when he suffered death on the Cross, the Earth did quake,
Darkness ascended, Rocks were rent, Monuments opened, and the Dead arose, as it
were suffering with him, and detesting the cruel injuries done unto him; But
we, (alas!) do little compassionate him. O great perversity? He has suffered
grievous things for us, and scarce any affection of compassion touches our
hearts: If we were his members, and he our head, we could not but grieve at his
pains: If there were any bowels of pity in us, and we should see a brute
beast to suffer such things, we should naturally be moved to condole him; And
it does not move us when we see our Lord and Master of his exceeding charity to
suffer so grievous pains for us. Quid commisisti says St. Augustine, ut sie
judicareris? O blessed Savior! what crime have thou committed, to be thus
judged? What sin have thou perpetrated? What offense have thou given? What is
the cause of thy death? What is the occasion of thy slaughter? O! says he, the
wicked sins, and the just is punished: the guilty offends, and the
innocent is chastised: the impious commits the offense, and the godly is
condemned: what the wicked deserves, the good suffers: what the servant
owes, the master pays: what man meriteth, God endures. O amiable death! O
desirable passion! O admirable profundity! The least that we can do, is to have
a continual memory of so great a benefit, of so great charity; and as the same
holy Father says, Sit nobis toto fixus in cord qui pro nobis fuit totus fixus
in cruce. Let him be wholly fixed and placed in our hearts, who was wholly
fixed and fastened on the Cross for us: and the Spouse in the Canticles says,
Chap. 8. Put me as a seal upon thy heart, as a seal upon thy arm: Let thy heart
be always occupied in the cogitation and memory of my Passion, and let thy
strength, virtue, and force, be sustained by the virtue of my sufferings. I do
always conserve the wounds of my body, that thou might keep the memory of
my Passion always in thy mind and soul: the holy Ghost by the mouth of the
Wiseman does also invite us thereto, Eccl. 29. Forget not the kindness of a
surety, for he has given his life for thee. Let us, as St. Bernardine says,
by mental consideration, gather together in a bundle all his derisions,
flagellations, thorns, nails, dolours, pains, exprobrations, mockings, buffets,
blows, spittings, confusions, and such like, to contemplate devoutly, behold
mentally, and taste sweetly; that we may say with the Spouse in the Canticles,
Chap. 1. A bundle of myrrh, my beloved (in his Passion) is to me, he shall
abide between my breasts: that is, between our understanding, contemplating his
passion, and our will or affection tasting it.

How pleasing this bundle was to the holy Father St. Francis, is manifest, in
that having had an apparition of our Savior Crucified, his Soul was so
penetrated by the force thereof, that thenceforth whenever it came to his
mind, he could scarce contain himself from tears and sighs. And S. Bonaventure
says of him, that Christ crucified did continually abide between the breasts
of his mind, as a bundle of myrrh, into whom, by the fire of excessive love, he
desired to be transformed. And in another place he says, That by a sevenfold
apparition of our Savior on the Cross, he was wholly transformed into the
Image of Christ crucified, by extatical love; and in the 13. Chapter of his
life, he, in a manner assigns the reason of that miracle (which Cardinal
Bellarmine calls the greatest and most singular miracle of all others, and as
it were a wonder of wonders) of his sacred stigmats, to have been the continual
meditation of Christ's Passion. Conformably thereunto, St. Bernardine says, He
was transformed with so great love and fervent ardour into Jesus Christ
crucified, that by a miracle, never heard of in any ages, the benignity of our
Savior has impressed in his flesh, the similitude of his most holy Passion
ordaining him his Standard Bearer, in a new rememoration of his Crucifying. And
therefore Saint Antonine, the glory of St. Dominicks Order, and Archbishop of
Florence, said, That because the memory of Christ's Passion seemed to be
extinguished in the minds of men, through coldness and tepidity, therefore our
Lord would exsuscitate and renew the memory thereof, by the manifest impression
of his wounds or stigmats in the body of Saint Francis: whereby the Clemency of
Almighty God (condescending to his lovers beyond all estimation) has given him
the banner of the Cross to be carried in his body; that he who was prevented
by a wonderful love of the Cross, might also become mavelous by the wonderful
honor of the Cross.

How profitable a thing is it to have always the Passion of our Savior in our
Minds.
THe Devout servant of Christ Saint Francis (col. 23. of his works) says: I
desire you that you have always before your eyes our Lords Passion, which will
roborate you, and animate you to suffer more valiantly for him. And the Prince
of the Apostles offers us no other coat of fence, no other Armor against all
incursions and wounds, but this, saying, 1 Pet. 4. Christ having suffered in
the flesh, be you also armed with the same cogitations. As if he should say,
Christ has suffered so great things for you, excogitate and consider what ye
ought to do, and suffer for him, rather for your selves, to fly vice, and
follow virtue, which he has commended unto us by his Passion. Saint Paul
teaches us the same, saying, Think diligently; seriously consider and ponder
him which sustained such contradiction; such, and so great opprobries,
mockings, contumelies, blows, stripes, torments, and death of sinners, and for
sinners, who did not only contradict him in words, but with deeds and stripes:
That you be not wearied, or loose your force, fainting in your minds, Heb. 12.
Let us therefore arm our selves with the memory of this sacred Passion, because
nothing is troublesome, nothing seems hard, nothing is accounted adverse to
him that remembers how, and what Christ suffered for him. There is no shield
more efficacious to resist temptations of the Devil, the Flesh, and the World,
than the cogitation of Christ crucified. And therefore holy Saint Bernard said
well, That such is the virtue and force of the Cross of Christ, that if it be
conserved faithfully in memory, no disordinate desires, no carnal delight, no
desire of sin can prevail, but forthwith at the remembrance thereof, all the
squadrons of sin will vanish. And in another place he says: There is nothing
so efficacious to heal the wounds of our conscience, and to purge our souls, as
the frequent meditation of the wounds of Christ. St. Augustine knew it by
experience, saying of himself, In omnibus non inveni tam efficax remedium quam
vulnera Christi, Manual. c. 32. I have not found in all things, so efficacious
a remedy, as Christ's Wounds. And in another place he says, Nihil tam
salutiferum nobis est, quam quotidie cogitare quanta pro nobis pertulit Deus.
There is nothing that conduces more to our salvation than daily to think what
great things Christ has suffered for us. Because the Sufferings or Passion of
our Savior, well considered, does reform all inordinate affections, extinguish
all flames of vice, and conserve the fire of Devotion in our breasts. Nothing
more forceable to obtain Mercy, than the memory of that which is the Abyss of
Mercy: so that Albertus Magnus had good reason to say, That there was nothing
more satisfactory for our sins, and to avoid Purgatory, than it. Yea, our
Savior revealed to St. Gertrude, that next to the Mass, and Communion, there
was nothing more Meritorious than this exercise. And S. Catherine of Bolognia
says, That by it we may gain victory in every Combat, and without it we shall
easily be vanquished: it is the cure of all wounds, most comfortable refuge in
all adversity: it is food that sustaineth and fortifieth the weak, spirits, it
is most sweet Manna, a ladder that elevateth our hearts to heaven; the harbor
of our souls, a fountain never dry, a most plentiful sea, and most secure
passage. Saint Lydwine, having been sick for the space of eight and thirty
years, had no other consolation than the meditation of Christ's Passion; for it
gives great force against all afflictions, and makes us to fight: for, as to
incite the Elephants to the battle, men show them blood; even so by the
representation and memory of the blood of Christ shed for us on the Cross, we
take courage to fight against the world, to vanquish our appetites and desires,
to forsake all vain honors, riches and pleasures: this is the armor that
Saint Paul, St. Augustine, St. Francis, and many other Saints, have used
against all temptations; this is a present remedy for all tribulations and
afflictions: It is impossible to relate the great good that our souls may reap
by this exercise: for as St. Bonaventure says, we cannot offer to God a more
acceptable sacrifice for the dead, nor bring greater joy to the Angels, nor
give a more excellent sign of recognisance to the holy Trinity, than to employ
our selves ordinarily in it: And in another place he says, That he that does
exercise himself attentively and devoutly in it, finds there abundantly all
things that are profitable and necessary for him, and needs not to seek any
thing out of Jesus crucified; and amongst all other exercises of a spiritual
life, none more profitable, none that carries the soul to a higher degree of
perfection, than the meditation of the life and death of our Redeemer; which
Christ himself has revealed to a holy Hermit, who earnestly desired Almighty
God to show him what service would be most grateful to his Divine Majesty; at
length he saw one naked, shaking with cold, bearing a great Cross, of whom he
asked what he was? who replied: I am Jesus Christ, thou have often demanded to
know what service is most pleasing unto me; assure thy self, that to help me to
bear my Cross, Wounds, and Passion, in thy heart, is most pleasing and
grateful unto me.

The several Hours of the Passion of our Savior, Whereby the Soul may be
always mindful of her Redemption.
AT 6. a clock in the Evening. Our most humble Redeemer, Jesus Christ, true God
and Man, on his knees, did wash the Feet of his Disciples: And shall not I cast
away all pride, and imitate the humility of my God, willingly exercising all
offices, how base and humble soever, for the profit of my neighbor?

At 7. Our most charitable Redeemer Jesus Christ, by an ineffable love toward
men, gave them his body and his blood for the nurture of their souls, ordaining
the blessed Sacrament of the Altar. What love shall I render to my Savior for
so great love? what desire, what reverence, what affection ought I to have
toward this venerable Sacrament?

At 8. Our most amiable Redeemer Jesus Christ, gave his last adieu to his
faithful, recommending unto them mutual Charity, demanding it of God his
Father. O my Soul! by charity to one another, we are known whether we be true
children of God.

At 9. Our most pious Redeemer Jesus Christ, coming to the Garden of Olivet,
surprised with a natural sadness of death, had recourse to prayer three times,
and resigned his will to God his Father, and did cast a bloody sweat from all
his body: let us presently run to God by prayer, when we are in any affliction
or danger, let us never stay in the creatures, but cast our selves into the
hands of our Creator.

At 10. Our most courageous Redeemer Jesus Christ, goes to meet his enemies,
voluntarily offering himself to death; and refuses not to kiss the Traitor
Judas And shall I, O my God, dare to betray thee by my sin, for some base
creature, or vain pleasure? it were better for me to embrace all the torments
of this life, yea, to die, and so to suffer with my Savior.

At 11. Our most mild Redeemer Jesus Christ, did suffer himself to be taken by
the wicked, and to be bound with rough Cords, and to be treated as a malefactor
and thief; and I, who, by my sins, am the cause of all this, will not suffer
any thing from my neighbor, without seeking revenge.

At 12. Our most sweet Redeemer Jesus Christ, Lamb of God, is outragiously
treated before Annas the high Priest; and he who is innocence it self, is
falsely accused before him, yet I, who am repleat with imperfections, and
offenses toward God and my neighbor, cannot endure that any should accuse me,
or that any one should reprehend me.

At 1. Our most clement Redeemer Jesus Christ, who is Goodness and Justice it
self, and the Sovereign Judge of all, is rudely led from Annas to Caiphas, a
most wicked and most unjust Judge. But I cannot endure with patience to be
judged or condemned of my superiors; of my equals, of my inferiors, be it
right or wrong.

At 2. Our most wise Redeemer Jesus Christ, did confess in the presence of the
high Priest, that he was the Son of God, although he received a blow from the
hand of a bloody butcher. Let us never leave to do good, or to serve God for
the hate of men.

At 3. Our most amiable Redeemer Jesus Christ, is denied by Saint Peter; but
when our Blessed Savior beheld him, he presently repented, and bitterly
deplored his sin. O Lord God, what man can presume that he will not offend
thee? let us bewail our sins with Saint Peter.

At 4. Our most meek Redeemer Jesus Christ, is blind-folded, spitted on,
beaten, mocked, blasphemed as a false Prophet. Consider my soul, that thou have
spitten upon the face of Jesus Christ, that thou have mocked and blasphemed
him, when thou have done it to any one of thy neighbors, who are his Brethren.

At 5. Our most Innocent Redeemer Jesus Christ, the Holy of Holies, in a full
Assembly and Counsel of the Jews, is condemned to death through envy. O how
this Passion of envy does make us oftentimes to judge evil of others better
than our selves.

At 6. Our most Gracious Redeemer Jesus Christ, is presented to Pilate, and
falsely accused: but not answering a word, he is found Innocent. O what silence
of my Savior so grievously accused, and I, sinner that I am, do nothing but
make excuses.

At 7. Our most Prudent Redeemer Jesus Christ, is sent from Pilate to Herod,
and being demanded of vain things, held his peace; whereby he was mocked,
esteemed as a fool, and as such is clothed in a white garment. O how much
ought we rather desire to be contemned of men, and not to condesend to their
evil will, than to displease God!

At 8. Our most Just Redeemer Jesus Christ, is sent from Herod to Pilate, and
Barrabas the murderer is preferred before him. And thou sinner, do thou not
do the same? do thou not prefer the Devil before God, when thou inclinest to
vice, and forsakest virtue?

At 9. Our most Dolorous Redeemer Jesus Christ, is most rudely despoyled, and
bound all naked to a pillar, most cruelly whipped, all torn with stripes, and
bruised with blows. Behold, O my soul, how they handle the Virginal flesh of
thy Savior, and how thou do flatter and pamper thine, which has so much
offended.

At 10. Our most Patient Redeemer Jesus Christ, revested with purple, crowned
with thorns, having a reed for a scepter, is shown to thee for a pattern of
patience and all virtue, if thou will be glorified by him. O how much ought I
to be ashamed, to be so delicate a member under a head crowned with thorns for
me.

At 11. Our most constant Redeemer Jesus Christ, condemned to death by Pilate,
carries his own Cross to Mount Calvary. Whosoever will follow him to Paradise,
he must carry the Cross (which are the afflictions of this life) after him
with patience.

At 12. Our most obedient Redeemer Jesus Christ, is stretched out, nailed and
elevated upon the Cross, between two thieves, for the salvation of the world.
Since our sins have been so punished in the person of our Redeemer. How shall
they be punished in sinners, if they do not amend.

At 1. Our most merciful Redeemer Jesus Christ, did pray for those that
crucified him, and promised Paradise to the good Thief. Let us also pardon
those that offend against us, if we will that God should pardon us.

At 2. Our most Devout Redeemer Jesus Christ, did give Saint John to his
Mother, for her Son; and his Mother to Saint John, for a Mother. O what
affection did Saint John bear to the Mother of God: O that my soul might burn
with the like devotion to the blessed Virgin.

At 3. Our most Perfect Redeemer Jesus Christ, did cry out, My God, my God, Why
have thou forsaken me? I thirst: All is consummated; and recommending his
Spirit to God the Father, he expired. Let the earth tremble, the dead arise,
the Sun be darkened, day become night; since the Creator and Savior of the
world is dead: but thou O my soul, awake from sin.

At 4. Our most victorious Redeemer Jesus Christ, being dead, his Soul
descended to Limbo, for to deliver the elect; in the mean time his body
transpierced with a lance, does shed forth blood and water. Enter O my Soul,
within the side of Jesus Christ, by a great considence in his mercy, give heart
for heart, love for love, to him that has done and given all for thee.

At 5. The precious body of our Redeemer Jesus Christ, being taken down from
the Cross, is put into the arms of the Virgin, his Mother, and afterward is
most honorably buried. Receive my Soul, receive him in thy memory, and retain
this sacred Passion of Jesus Christ in all thy thoughts, words, and works,
living in such sort, that thou may be worthy of the name of a Christian,
redeemed by the precious blood of the Son of God.

The Soul of Christ sanctify me, the body of Christ save me, the precious
blood of Jesus Christ inebriate me, the water of the side of Jesus Christ wash
me, the Passion of Jesus Christ comfort me: O good Jesus hear me: hide me in
thy holy wounds, suffer me not to be separated from thee; defend me from the
malign enemy, call me at the hour of my death, and command me to come to thee,
for to praise, bless, and glorify thee eternally, with thy Saints. Amen.

The Obligations and Rules of this Confraternity.
1. ALL those that are to be admitted into this Confraternity, are to be of
that age, that they may confess and communicate; which is gathered by the
express words of the Bull, in that it ordains, that at their entrance they are
to confess and communicate.

2. They shall endeavor daily, morning and evening, to make examine of their
conscience, and to say some prayers, according to each ones devotion; but
principally (for the gaining of the Indulgences) five Paters and Aves, adding
to the end of each one, the Gloria Patri, etc. saluring devoutly the five
Wounds of our Savior, whereto they must join one Pater and Ave for the Popes
Holiness; which, after the example of the Frier-Minors; if they be not hindered
by Infirmity, or otherwise, they may say with their arms stretched out, in
manner of a Cross, according as hereafter shall be declared.

3. The end of this Confraternity is virtue, Christian piety, and imitation of
our Savior in his Passion; and therefore the Brethren and Sisters thereof,
ought diligently to observe the Commandments of God, and his Church; and above
all things, not to give any scandal, but good example, in all things, and bear
always in their mind, Jesus Christ crucified.

4. All the Brethren and Sisters, are to confess and communicate once every
month, on all the Feasts in the year, principally on all the Feasts of our
Lord, of the Blessed Virgin, and of the Saints of the Order of the Friar
Minors; if they will communicate oftener, they may, so it be done with the
advice of their Ghostly Father.

5. They must show themselves very diligent in the service of God, in hearing
Sermons, Mass, and other exercises of Devotion.

6. They are to be present at the monthly Processions of the Confraternity,
which ordinarily are on the second Sundays of the Month; as also at the
Procession on our Lady of Angels day, which is the principal Feast of this
Confraternity. They shall do well to be present at all the Processions of the
Order.

7. When any of the Confraternity die, each one shall endeavor to be present
at the burial, and thereto pray for the soul departed! and they shall never
fail to assist the poor in such occasions, be they of the Confraternity or no.

8. They are to help the poor, and visit the sick, especially in hospitals, and
prisons, and never omit to accompany the Blessed Sacrament to them.

9. They are to pray for the Dead in all their exercises, for to that end the
Pope has granted that special favor and Grace of applying all the aforesaid
Indulgences for the Dead.

10. They are to bear great devotion and reverence to the Seraphical Father St.
Francis, whom they have chosen for their Patron, and who, no doubt, will
incessantly pray for them; and must endeavor to imitate him in his devotion to
our blessed Lady, but principally to the Passion of our Savior.

11. If any one at the time of their death desire to be more perfectly united
to the Order, they may request the habit of the Frier-Minors, which by reason
of this Cord they are capable of, as many Christians of all sorts, even Popes
themselves have done.

12. Let them know, that they are bound to none of these under sin, either
mortal, or venial; but each, according to the resolution he makes at the
entrance into this Confraternity, must endeavor to show their devotion in
their practices, that they may not be said to abuse the talent received, and so
loose the merit and reward they might obtain.

13. For the gaining of all Indulgences, granted to this Confraternity, it is
necessary that they be in state of Grace, and that they accomplish the works,
and other things enjoined for that end, with intention to gain the Indulgence.

A brief Declaration of the principal Indulgences of this Arch-Confraternity.
A Plenary Indulgence on the day of their entrance into this Confraternity.

Once in their lives, when they please, with a plenary Absolution.

Four times every year, at their pleasure, with a plenary Absolution also.

At the Article of Death, by invocating the Name of Jesus.

On all the Feasts of our Lord, to wit on Christmas day, New Years day, Twelf
day, Easter day, Ascension day, Whitsunday, Corpus Christi day, and the
Transfiguration: on all the Feasts of our Lady, Conception, Nativity,
Presentation, Annunciation, Purification, Assumption, and ad Nives. Also on the
Feast of our Lady of Angels, which is the principal feast of this Confraternity.

On all the Feasts of the Order of St. Francis, S. Bonaventure, S. Lewis, S.
Antonie, S. Bernardine, S. Didaeus, the 7 Martyrs, the 5 Martyrs, S. Clare, and
S. Elizabeth of Hungary.

On the Feasts of all the Apostles and Evangelists.

On all the Sundays of the year.

Also on S. Agnes, S. Joseph, S. Mary Magdalen, S. Anne, S. Laurence, S.
Augustine, S. Michael, S. Catherine, S. Nicolas, S. Stephen.

On the Feast of S. John Baptist, of the holy Cross, on Innocents day, on all
Saints, and all Souls day, with many other: in all which the Brethren may gain
a plenary Indulgence, provided that they confess and communicate.

For assisting at the monthly Procession, for saying the Crown of our Savior;
for saying the crown of our Lady, containing 72 Paters and Aves, with a Pater
and Ave for his Holiness.

For celebrating or hearing the Mass of the Conception, for saying the ten
Passional Psalms, or for saying the Gradual Psalms.

All which Indulgences, together with the Indulgences of the Stations of Rome,
Jerusalem, and Compostella, the Brethren of the Cord may gain, by saying five
Paters and Aves in the honor of the five Wounds of our Savior, adding one
Pater and Ave for his Holiness: There are many other which are too long to be
set down here.

The sick Brethren, and such as have any Impediment, that they cannot come to
the Church, (which is much to be noted for those in England) may gain the
aforesaid Indulgences, in any place where they are.

I have thought it convenient, to set down the particular Indulgences of the
City of Rome, which were printed in the time of Pope Gregory the XIII. and
afterward by one Hierom Francin, with the approbation of Pope Sixtus V. who
desired that they should be set forth in diverse languages, which has been done
in Latin, French, Spanish, Italian, and others; and lastly, in our Vulgar,
where the studious Reader may see them at full.

STATIONS OF ROME.
January.
1.Circumcision or our New Years day. 6. Epiphany. 13. The Octave of the
Epiphany. 14. The feast of the holy Name of JESUS. 16. Five first Martyrs
Fransciscans. 17. St. Anthony Abbot. 18. The Chair of S. Peter at Rome. 20. S.
Sebastian. 21. S. Agnes. 23. Conversion of S. Paul. 28. Agnes the second.
February.
2. Purification or Candlemas day. 5. 23. Franciscan Martyrs of Japonia. 15.
Translation of S. Antony of Padua. 19. S. Conrade of the Third Order. 22. S.
Peter's Chair at Antioch. 23. S. Margarite of Cortona, 3. Order. 24. S. Matthias
Apostle.
March.
6. S. Collet poor Clare. 7. S. Thomas of Aquin. 12. S. Gregory. 14.
Translation of S. Bonaventure. 19. S. Joseph. 20. S. Benedicts Eve and Day. 25.
Annunciation of our Lady.
April.
23. S. George. 25. S. Mark 29. S. Peter Martyr.
May.
1. S. Philip and James. 3. Invention of the holy Cross. 6. S. John and Portam
Latinam. 8. The Apparition of S. Michael. 13. S. Paschal. 18. Translation of S.
Bernardine. 19. S. Felix. 20. S. Bernardine. 23. Translation of S. Francis.
June.
13. Antony of Padua. 24. S. John Baptist. 29. S. Peter and Paul. 30.
Commemoration of S. Paul.
July.
1. The octave of S. John Baptist. 2. The Visitation of our Lady. 4. S.
Elizabeth of Portugal. 14. S. Bonaventure. 17. S. Alexius. 22. S. Mary
Magdalen. 25. S. James the Apostle. 26. S. Anne
August.
1. S. Petri ad vincula, and 8 days following. 2. Our Lady of Angels. Feast of
the 3. Cord. Invention of S. Steven. 4. S. Dominick. 5. Our Lady ad Nives. 6.
Transfiguration of our Lord. 10. S. Laurence, and through his whole octave. 12.
S. Clare. 15. Assumption of our Lady. 16. S. Roch. 19. S. Lewis Bishop. 22. The
Octave of the Assumption. 24. S. Bartholomew Apostle. 25. S. Lewis King. 28. S.
Augustine. 29. The beheading of S. John.
September.
4. S. Rose of Viterbia. 7. The Eve of the Nativity. 8. The Nativity of our
Lady. 9. S. Nicolas Tolentine. 14. The Exaltation of the holy Cross. 17. The
Stigmats of S. Francis. 21. S. Matthew. 27. S. Elzearo. 29. S. Michael. 30. S.
Hierom.
October.
2. Translation of S. Clare. 4. Our holy Father S. Francis, and all the Octave.
13. 7 Franciscane Martyrs. 18. S. Luke. 19 S. Peter Alcantara. 23. S. John
Capistran. 27. S. Juo. 28. SS. Simon and Jude.
November.
1. All Saints. 2. All Souls, and the whole Octave. 9. Dedication of our
Saviors Church 10. Translation of S. Lewis. 12. S. Didacus. 18. Dedication of
S. Peter's Church. 19. S. Elizabeth of Hungary. 21. Presentation of our Lady.
22. S. Cecily. 23. S. Clement. 28. S. James of Marchia. 30. S. Andrew Apostle.
December.
6. S. Nicholas. 7. S. Ambrose. 8. The Conception of our B. Lady. Patroness of
the Order. 21. S. Thomas Apostle. 24. Christmas Eve. 25. Christmas day. 26. S.
Stephens. 27. S. John. 28. Innocents day. 31. S. Silvester.
Of the moveable Feasts.
ON all the Sundays of Advent. On the three Ember days. On Septuagesima
Sunday. On Sexagesima Sunday. On quinquagesima Sunday. On Lent, from
Ashwednesday to Low Sunday inclusively. On all the Sundays of May. On the
Ascension day. On Whitson Eve. On Whitsonday, and all the Octave. On Corpus
Christi day. From the 8 of May unto the 1 day of August.
Note here, that there is no day in the Year, but there are some Indulgences to
be gained, which the Brethren of this Confraternity may gain, by saying the
five Paters and Aves, as aforesaid.

He that would see the validity of these Indulgences, and many good things, as
the Popes Bulls concerning this Arch-Confraternity, and the Office of our
Seraphical Father S. Francis, let him read the great Manual of the Pious and
Learned man, Father Angelus Francis.

The Benediction of the Cord.
Versus. Adjutorium nostrum in nomine Domini.
Resp. Qui fecit coelum and terram.
Versus. Sit nomen Domini benedictum.
Resp. Ex hoc nunc and usque in saeculum.
Versus. Domine exaudi orationem meam.
Resp. Et clamor meus ad te veniat.
Versus. Dominus vobiscum.
Resp. Et cum Spiritu tuo.
Oremus.

DOmine Jesu Christ Fili Dei vivi, qui funibus in Passione ligari voluisti,
and Beatum Petrum Apostolum tuum a vinculis absolutum illaesum abire fecisti,
te suppliciter deprecamur: ut hos funiculos quos ad imitationem almi Patris
nostri B. Francisci Confessoris atque signiferi tui, in cingula corporum suorum
creaturae elegerunt, and ut strictius tibi conjungantur atque firmius
famulentur far decreverunt, Benedicere and una cum famulis tuis qui eis
cingentur Sanctificare digneris, ut sumbos suos castitate praecinctos gerant,
sitque illis justitia cingulum lum borum eorum and fides cinctorium renum
eorum. Da eis, quaesumus Domine; Spiritum Sanctum tuum, qui eos in bono
proposito conservet, fide and operibus augeat, omnium virtutum incrementa
praebeat, dona sua concedat, and tandem ad aeternam gloriam conducat, in qua
vivis and regnas cum Deo Patre in unitate ejusdem Spiritus Sancti. Amen.

Oremus.

OMnipotens sempiterne Deus, qui ut servos vinctos absolveres, Filium tuum
unigenitum funibus ligari voluisti, Benedic quaesumus funculos istos ut famuli
tui qui eis veluti ligamine poenitentiali cingi ambiunt: vinculorum ejusdem
Filii tui Domini nostri memores existant; in statu devotionis salubriter
perseverent, and a peccatorum suorum funibus soluti, tuis cum effectu semper
obsequiis se ligatos esse cognoscant. Per eundum Christum Dominum nostrum. Amen.

Aspergendo chordas cum aqua benedieta dicas Benedictio Dei Patris and Filii
and Spiritus Sancti descendat super has chordas: Resp. Amen.

Cingendo ad singulos dicat, Accipe cingulum istud and Paratus vel [parata]
esto alligari and mori pro Domino Jesu Christo, qui praecingat lumbos mentis
tuae cingulo puritatis ut permaneat in te virtus continentiae and castitatis
and Deo semper in omnibus obedias.

Post aquam omnes sunt cincti dicat.

Oremus.

DEus qui Beato Petro Apostolo tuo praedixisti in senectute sua per alium se
fore cingendum, famulos tuos quos cingulis nostrae fraternitatis praecinximus,
tua quaesumus chorda salutari corda eorum Christiana praecinge disciplina; ut
tui opitulante gratia soluti and liberati a vitiis tuoque vincti servitio in
statu devotionis usque in finem jugiter perseverent. Qui vivis and regnas in
saeculorum. Amen.

Finalis Benedictio.

BEnedictio Sanctissimae Trinitatis, Patris, and Filii, and Spiritus Sancti
descendat super vos, ut sicut chordis corpora vesira circundatis, ita animas
fide, Jesu Christi and bonis operibus decoretis, quatenus suam gratiam in hoc
saeculo, and in futuro gloriam habeatis aeternam. Amen.

The Benediction of the Cord for one alone.
Versus. Adjutorium nostrum in nomine Domini.
Resp. Qui fecit coelum and terram.
Versus. Sit nomen Domini benedictum.
Resp. Ex hoc nunc and usque in saeculum.
Versus. Domine exaudi orationem meam.
Resp. Et clamor meus ad te veniat.
Versus. Dominus vobiscum.
Resp. Et cum spiritu tuo.
Oremus.

DOmine Jesu Christ Filii Dei vivi, qui funibus in passione ligari voluisti,
and beatum Petrum Apostolum tuum a vinculis absolutum illaesum abire fecisti,
te suppliciter deprecamur, ut hunc funiculum, quem ad imitationem almi Patris
nostri Beati Francisci Confessoris atque signiferi tui, in cingulum corporis
sui creatura elegit, and ut strictius tibi conjungatur atque firmius famuletur,
far decrevit benedicere, and una cum famulo tuo [qui vel [famula tua] quae]
ea cingetur, sanctificare digneris, ut lumbos suos castitate praecinctos,
gerat, sit que illi justitia cingulum lumborum ejus, and fides cinctorium renum
ejus. Da ei quaesumus Domine, Spiritum Sanctum tuum, qui eum vel [eam] in bono
proposito conservet, fide and operibus augeat, omnium virtutum incrementa
praebeat, dona sua concedat, and tandem ad aeternam gloriam conducat, in qua
vivis and regnas cum Deo Patre in unitate ejusdem Spiritus sancti. Amen.

Oremus.

OMnipotens sempiterne Deus, qui ut servos vinctos absolveres, Filium tuum
unigenitum funibus ligari voluisti, benedic quaesumus funiculum istum, ut
famulus tuus, qui vel famula tua, [quae] eo velut ligamine poenitentiali cingi
ambit, vinculorum ejusdem Filii tui Domini nostri Jesu Christi memor existat,
and in statu devotionis salubriter perseveret, a peccatorum suorum funibus
solutus, vel [soluta] tuis cum effectu semper obsequiis ligatum vel [ligatam]
se esse cognoscat. Per eundem Christum Dominum nostrum. Amen.

Here the Cord is to be sprinkled with Holy Water; and then the party that
receives it, is to be girded therewith: the Priest saying as follows.

ACcipe cingulum istud, and paratus vel [parata] esto alligari, and mori pro
Domino nostro Jesu Christo, qui praecingat lumbos mentis tuae cingulo
puritatis, ut permaneat in te virtus continentiae and eastitatis, and Deo
semper in omnibus obedias. Amen.

The Priest is to say this following prayer, upon the party that has received
the Cord.

Oremus.

DEus qui Beato Petro Apostolo tuo praedixisti in senectute sua per alium fore
cingendum, famulum tuum quem ve [famulam tuam] quam cingulo nostrae
fraternitatis praecinximus, tua quaesumus chorda salutari cor ejus Christiana
praecinge disciplina, ut tui opitulante gratia solut us, and liberatus, vel
[soluta and liberata] a vitiis, tuoque vinctus vel [vincta] servitio, in statu
devotionis usque in finem jugiter perseveret. Qui vivis and regnas in saecula
saeculorum. Amen.

Benediction is to be given to him or her that takes the Cord.

BEnedictio Sanctissimae Trinitatis, Patris, and Filii, and Spiritus sancti,
descendat super te, ut sicut chorda corpus tuum circumdas, ita animam fide Jesu
Christi, and bonis operibus decores, quatenus suam gratiam in hoc saeculo, and
in, futuro gloriam habeas aeternam. Amen.

Litanies of the Passion of our Savior.
O all ye that pass by the way, stay a while, and see, if there be any dolor
like to that of mine: They pierced my hands and feet, displaced and numbered all
my bones; from the sole of my feet, to the Crown of my head, there is no health
in me. Chap. 1. Hier. and Isa. and Psalm. 21.
LOrd, have mercy upon us.
Christ, have mercy upon us,
Lord, have mercy upon us.
Christ Jesu, hear us.
God the Father, which art in Heaven, have mercy upon us.
O Jesus Christ, Son of the Father, Redeemer of the world, and our gracious
God, have mercy upon us.
O holy Ghost, which art our God, have mercy upon us.
O holy Trinity, one only God, have mercy upon us.
Jesu, who did wash the feet of thy Apostles, have mercy upon us.
Jesu, who wast sold for thirty pence, have mercy upon us.
Jesu, who have given thy precious body and blood unto us, have mercy upon us.
Jesu, who prayedst three times in the Garden, have mercy upon us.
Jesu, who did sweat water and blood, have mercy upon us.
Jesu, who was kissed by Judas, have mercy upon us.
Jesu, who wast taken and bound by the wicked Jews, have mercy upon us.
Jesu, who wast presented to Annas and Caiphas, have mercy upon us.
Jesu, who wast buffetted by a vile servant, have mercy upon us.
Jesu, who wast falsely accused, have mercy upon us.
Jesu, who wast three times denied of thy servant Peter, have mercy upon us.
Jesu, who wast delivered up to Pilate, have mercy upon us.
Jesu, who wast examined by the Judge, have mercy upon us.
Jesu, who wast found most innocent, have mercy upon us.
Jesu, who wast led to Herod, have mercy upon us.
Jesu, who wast despised of Herod and his company, have mercy upon us.
Jesu, who wast clothed like a fool, in a white garment, have mercy upon us.
Jesu, who wast less esteemed than the murderer Barrabas, have mercy upon us.
Jesu, who wast bound naked to the pillar, have mercy upon us.
Jesu, who wast cruelly whipped with rods and scourges, have mercy upon us.
Jesu, who wast all over goared with wounds, have mercy upon us.
Jesu, whose precious blood was spilt upon the ground, have mercy upon us.
Jesu, whose sacred face was covered with spittings, have mercy upon us.
Jesu, who wast clothed with purple, and mocked by the Jews, have mercy upon
us.
Jesu, who wast crowned with thorns, have mercy upon us.
Jesu, who carriedst a Reed, instead of a Scepter, have mercy upon us.
Jesu, whose sacred eyes were blind-folded, have mercy upon us.
Jesu, whose face was stricken, have mercy upon us.
Jesu, who wast by Pilate shown to the people, have mercy upon us.
Jesu, against whom they cry out, Crucify him, Crucify him, have mercy upon
us.
Jesu, who, for us, was condemned to death, have mercy upon us.
Jesu, who wast falsely judged, have mercy upon us.
Jesu, who was delivered unto the hands of the common people, have mercy upon
us.
Jesus, who wast laden with the heavy Cross, have mercy upon us.
Jesu, who with the weight thereof wast pressed even to the ground, have mercy
upon us.
Jesu, who wast stripped upon Mount Calvary, have mercy upon us.
Jesu, who wast stretched out with cords upon the Cross, have mercy upon us.
Jesu, who wast nailed to the Cross, have mercy upon us.
Jesu, who wast lifted up together with the Cross, have mercy upon us.
Jesu, who wast accompanied with two thieves upon the Cross, have mercy upon us.
Jesu, who wast blasphemed by those that passed by, have mercy upon us.
Jesu, who prayedst for thine enemies, have mercy upon us.
Jesu, who gave heaven unto the Thief, have mercy upon us.
Jesu, who gave thy B. Mother into the custody of St. John, have mercy upon
us.
Jesu, who wast forsaken of thy Father, have mercy upon us.
Jesu, who did drink vinegar and gall, have mercy upon us.
Jesu, who said, All is consummated, have mercy upon us.
Jesu, who dying, bowedst down thy holy head, have mercy upon us.
Jesu, whose sacred side was pierced with a Lance, have mercy upon us.
Jesu, who did dest shed water and blood, from thy bleeding wound, have mercy
upon us.
Jesu, who wast taken from the Cross, have mercy upon us.
Jesu, who did lie dead in the lap of thy Mother, have mercy upon us.
Jesu, who have wrapped in a winding sheet, have mercy upon us.
Jesu, who wast laid in the Sepulcher, have mercy upon us.
Jesu, who by thy death has saved the world, have mercy upon us.
Jesu, who by thy precious blood have redeemed us, have mercy upon us.
Jesu, be propicious unto us.
Jesu, pardon us.
From all evil, both corporal and spiritual, sweet Jesus deliver us.
From thy anger and wrath, Sweet Jesu deliver us.
From sudden death, Sweet Jesu deliver us.
From Plague, War, and Famine, Sweet Jesu deliver us.
From all errors and Heresies, Sweet Jesu deliver us.
From the sleights and temptations of the Devil, Sweet Jesu deliver us.
From evil will, Sweet Jesu deliver us.
From all impatience, Sweet Jesu deliver us.
From all excess and riot, Sweet Jesu deliver us.
From eternal death, Sweet Jesu deliver us.
By thy prayers and agony, Sweet Jesu deliver us.
By thy bloody sweat, Sweet Jesu deliver us.
By thy captivity, Sweet Jesu deliver us.
By thy bands and cords, Sweet Jesu deliver us.
By thy buffets, spittings, and mockings. Sweet Jesu deliver us.
By thy whips and scourges, Sweet Jesus deliver us.
By thy Crown of thorns, Sweet Jesu deliver us.
By thy holy Cross, Sweet Jesu deliver us.
By the nails and hammers, Sweet Jesu deliver us.
By the sponge and spear, Sweet Jesu deliver us.
By thy five wounds, Sweet Jesu deliver us.
By thy precious blood, Sweet Jesu deliver us.
At the hour of death, Sweet Jesu deliver me.
We sinners, Do beseech thee to hear us.
That thou vouchsafe to bring us to true penance, We beseech thee to hear us.
That thou pardon us, We beseech thee to hear us.
That thou will be pleased to cleanse our souls with thy precious blood. We
beseech thee to hear us.
That thou will be pleased to defend and exalt thy holy Church. We beseech thee
to hear us.
That thou will vouchsafe to preserve our holy Father the Pope, and all the
Prelates of the holy Church. We beseech thee to hear us.
That thou will be pleased to maintain the Emperor, the Christian Kings and
Princes, in the zeal of the holy Catholic, Apostolic, and Roman faith, We
beseech thee to hear us.
That thou will vouchsafe to preserve thy people redeemed with thy precious
blood, from the infection of Heresy, We beseech thee to hear us.
That thou will be pleased to protect the Church from the fury of Turks, and
tyranny of Heretics. We beseech thee to hear us.
That thou will vouchsafe to give victory to the Catholic Army, We beseech
thee to hear us.
That thou will be pleased to confirm thy Christian People in peace, and union,
under the obedience of their temporal and spiritual Superiors, We beseech thee
to hear us.
That thou will vouchsafe to conserve the fruits of the earth, We beseech thee
to hear us.
That thou will be pleased to deliver the souls of our parents, and friends,
out of Purgatory, We beseech thee to hear us.
That thou will vouchsafe not to permit thy precious blood to be shed in vain,
we beseech thee to hear us.
That thou will be pleased to give unto us all that which is most fitting for
us, both for soul and body, we beseech thee to hear us.
O sweet Jesus, hear us.
Jesu, Lamb of God, who take away the sins of the word, Pardon us.
Jesu, hear us.
Verse. We adore and bless thee, O Jesu.
Resp. Who have redeemed the world, by the holy Cross.
A Prayer.

O Lord God, we humbly beseech thee to cast thine eye upon this thy family, for
which our Lord Jesus Christ has not feared to be delivered into the hands of
the wicked, and to suffer the torment of the Cross.

O most merciful Father, we give thee thanks, for that thou have not spared thy
only begotten, and well-beloved Son, our Savior Jesus Christ; but have
delivered him up to a shameful death, for our offenses, to the end that thereby
we might be freed from eternal death. Grant, O good God, that we may
acknowledge this benefit as we ought; and that by Faith, Hope and Charity we
may be made participant thereof. Through Jesus Christ thy Son. Amen.

O most bountiful Savior Jesus Christ who with so precious a Jewel, have so
superabundantly satisfied for our sins, we beseech thee, by virtue of thy holy
death and Passion, that thou will defend us from the snares of the Devil, and
allurements of sin. O thou who dyedst for mankind, and live and raignest
with God the Father, in unity of the holy Ghost for ever. Amen.

O blessed Jesus, who, for the redemption of the world, would patiently
suffer injuries, contempts, contumelies, pains, dolours, afflictions, loss of
thy precious blood, and a cruel death; We beseech thee, by virtue of all these
thy sufferings which thou have willingly endured for our sins, that thou will
deliver us from all the perils of this world, and pains of the world to come.
Amen.

Jaculatory Prayers of the Passion to be said at every hour.
1. MY good Jesus, in acknowledgement of what thou have done, and suffered for
me in this hour, I offer unto thee my heart and my soul. Be thou blessed of all
Creatures.

2. O blessed Savior, give me the Grace not to offend thee in this hour. And I
am sorry for having displeased thee hitherto.

3. Grant me grace, good Jesu, to endure in this hour, something for thy sake.

4. I offer unto thee, O my Savior, all that I shall do at this hour, in the
union of thy holy Passion.

5. Jesu, Savior of the world, be merciful unto me at the hour of my death.

LITANIAE PASSIONIS Latinae cantandae in Processione quae fit Dominica secunda
cujuslibet mensis.
HUmiliavit semetipsum Dominus noster Jesus Christus factus obediens usque ad
mortem, mortem autem Crucis, propter quod and Deus exaltavit illum, and dedit
illi nomen, quod est super omne nomen, ut in nomine Jesu omne genu-flectatur,
coelestium, terrestrium and infernorum, and omnis lingua confiteatur, quia
Dominus noster Jesus Christus in gloria est Dei Patris.

KYrie eleison.
Christ eleison.
Kyrie eleison.
Christ eleison.
Kyrie eleison. Christ eleison.
Kyrie eleison. Christ eleison.
Christ audi nos.
Christ exaudi nos.
Pater de coelis Deus, miserere.
Fili Redemptor mundi Deus, mis. nobis.
Spiritus sancte Deus, mis.
Sancta Trinitas unus Deus, mis.
Jesu Christ, qui diversis opprobriis illusus fuisti, mis.
Jesu Christ, qui Pilato traditus fuisti, mis.
Jesu Christ qui ad columnam ligatus, and usque ad sanguinem verberatus
fuisti, mis.
Jesu Christ, qui a militibus vest purpurea indutus fuisti, mis. nobis.
Jesu Christ, qui spinis durissimis coronatus fuisti, mis.
Jesu Christ, qui verbum durissimum, Toll, toll, crucifige, saepius
audivisti, mis.
Jesu Christ, qui dulcissimum lignum crucis fessus and oneratus sustinuisti,
misere nobis.
Jesu Christ, qui in cruce levatus, cum latronibus associatus fuisti, mis.
Jesu Christ, qui manibus and pedibus fixis in cruce, a praetereuntibus
blasphematus fuisti, mis.
Jesu Christ, qui speciosam faciem tuam, quasi leprosam habuisti, mis.
Jesu Christ, qui pro crucifixoribus orasti ad Patrem, and latronem in cruce
exaudisti, mis
Jesu Christ, qui Mariam matrem tuam dulcissimam Joanni commendasti, mis.
Jesu Christ, qui lancea perforatus fuisti, and proprio sanguine mundum
redemisti, mis.
Jesu Christ, qui in monumento sepultus fuisti, mis.
Jesu Christ, qui tertia die a mortuis resurrexisti, mis.
Jesu Christ, qui quadragesima die in. coelum ascendisti, mis.
Jesu Christ, qui seeds ad dexteram Patris, mis.
Jesu Christ, qui venturus es judicare vivos and mortuos, mis.
Agnus Dei qui tollis peccata mundi, parce nobis Domine,
Agnus Dei qui tollis peccata mundi, exaudi nos Domine.
Agnus Dei qui tollis peccata mundi, Miserere nobis.
Kyrie eleison. Christ eleison.
Kyrie eleison. Pater noster, etc.
Et ne nos inducas in tentationem:
Sed libera nos a malo.
Oremus.

DOmine Jesu Christ, qui pro salute humani generis quinque vulnera pati
voluisti, tribue qua sumus, ut ob reverentiam illorum vulnerum tuoorum absolvi
mereamur ab omnibus peccatis nostris, and da praesentem vitam bono fine
terminari, and a tuae dulcissimae visionis contemplatione nunquam sepaparari.

Oremus.

DEus qui manus tuas, and pedes tuos, and totum corpus tuum pro nobis
peccatoribus in ligno crucis posuisti, and coronam spineam a Judaeis in
despectum tui sacratissimi nominis super caput tuum impositam sustinuisti, and
quinque vulnera pro nobis peccatoribus in ligno crucis passus fuisti: da nobis
hodie and quotidie usum poenitentiae, abstinentiae, patientiae, humilitatis,
castitatis, lumen, sensum, intellectum, and puram conscientiam usque in finem.
Per te Jesu Christ Salvator mundi. Qui cum Patre and Spiritu sancto vivis and
regnas Deus. Per omnia saecula saeculorum. Amen.

We have here added the Profession of our Faith, which is often to be read to
confirm our selves in the belief of the holy Church, to exercise and increase
our Faith, and obtain the effect of our Prayers, the impetration thereof being
attributed to Faith.

A PROFESSION OF THE Catholic Faith, Set out according to the Decrees of the
holy Council of Trent.
IAB Do with a stead fast Faith, Believe and Profess, all and every Point
contained in the Symbol of the Faith that the holy Roman Church does use, (to
wit)

I do believe in one God, the Father Almighty, Maker of Heaven and Earth, of
all things both visible and invisible. And in one Lord Jesus Christ, the only
begotten Son of God, and born of the Father before all Worlds, God of God,
Light of Light, true God of true God, begotten, and not made, of the same
substance with the Father, by whom all things were made; who for us men, and
for our salvation, came down from Heaven, and was Incarnate by the Holy Ghost
of the Virgin Mary, and was made man; was crucisied also for us, under Pontius
Pilate, suffered, and was buried and rose again the third day, according to the
Scriptures, and ascended up to Heaven, sits at the right hand of the Father,
and he shall come again with Glory to judge the quick and the dead, of whose
Kingdom there shall be no end. And in the Holy Ghost our Lord and giver of
Life, who proceeds from the Father and the Son, who with the Father and the
Son together, is adored and conglorified, who spoke by the Prophets. And in one
holy Catholic and Apostolic Church. I profess one Baptism for the remission
of sins. And I expect the Resurrection of the dead, and the life of the world
to come. Amen.

I do steadfastly admit and embrace the Traditions of the Apostles and of the
Church, and all other Observations and Constitutions of the same Church.

I do also admit the holy Scriptures, according to that sense which our holy
Mother the Catholic Church has held and does hold, to whom it appertains to
judge of the true sense and interpretation of the holy Scriptures: neither will
I ever understand nor interpret the same otherwise then according to the
uniform consent of the Fathers.

I do also profess, that there be truly and properly seven Sacraments of the
new Law, instituted by Jesus Christ our Lord, and necessary for the salvation
of mankind (although all be not necessary for every one) to wit, Baptism,
Confirmation, Extreme Unction, Order, and Matrimony; and these Sacraments do
give Grace, and that of them, Baptism, Confirmation, and Order cannot be
reiterated without Sacrilege.

I do also receive and admit all the received and approved Ceremonies of the
Catholic Church in the solemn administration of all the aforesaid Sacraments.

I do receive and embrace all and every of the things which in the holy Council
of Trent have been defined and declared touching Original sin and Justification.

I do profess also, that in the Mass is offered up to God a true proper and
propitiatory Sacrifice for the living and dead; and that in the most holy
Sacrament of the Altar, there is truly, really, and substantially the body and
blood, together with the Soul and Divinity of our Lord Jesus Christ. And that
there is made a Conversion of the whole substance of the bread into the Body,
and of the whole substance of the wine into the Blood, which Conversion the
holy Church calls Transubstantiation.

I do also confess, that under either form only, is received Christ whole and
entire, and the true Sacrament.

I do constantly hold that there is Purgatory, and that the Souls which be
there detained, are helped by Prayers of the Faithful.

Also that the Saints, who reign together with Christ, are to be honored and
called upon, and that they offer up prayers to God for us, and that their
Relics are to be reverenced and honored.

I do most steadfastly affirm, that the Images of Christ, of the Mother of God,
always Virgin, and of all Saints, are to be had and retained, and that due
honor and reverence is to be given them.

I affirm that the authority of Indulgences was left by Christ in the Church,
and that the use of them is very behoofeful for Christian People.

I do acknowledge the holy Catholic and Apostolic Roman Church, to be the
Mother and Mistress of all Churches. And I do promise and swear true obedience
to the Bishop of Rome, who is the Successor of St. Peter, Prince of the
Apostles, and Vicar of Jesus Christ.

And all other things also defined and declared by the holy Canons and
Ecumenical Councils, and chiefly by the holy Council of Trent, I do
undoubtedly receive and profess. And also, all contrary things, and whatsoever
Heresies condemned and accursed by the Church I likewise do condemn, reject,
and accurse.

This true Catholic Faith, without which no man can be saved, now I willingly
and truly hold the same. A. B. do promise and swear to hold and confess most
constantly, by God his help, entire and uncorrupted even to the last end of my
life.

So God help me, and the holy Gospels of God, Amen.

Anglia chara Deo, Felix, and Sancta fuisti
Sis modo qualis eras, sic pia vota petunt.

FINIS.

