THE CASE BETWEEN Sir Jerome Alexander Knight, second Justice of His Majesty's
Court of Common Pleas in Ireland: And Sir William Ashton Knight, second Justice
of His Majesty's Court of Kings Bench in Ireland. CONCERNING PRECEDENCE.
THE CASE, as Sir William Ashton puts it, is, viz.

Sir William Ashton has a Letter from his Majesty to the Lords Justices Letter
dated 3. November. 1660.
of Ireland to pass Letters Patents under the great Seal, to make him second
Justice of the Kings Bench there. Dated the 3 Novem. 1660.

Sir Jerome Alexander has a like Letter to make him second Justice of the Court
of Common Pleas in Ireland. Dated 30 November. 1660.

Several Letters Pattents pass to each accordingly, both Dated, the 19 of
Letter dated 30. November. 1660.
January 1660.

Both Letters Pattents are presented to the Lord Chancellor, at the same time,
Both Letters Patents dated 30. Jan. 1660.
both being in place.

Sir Jerome Alexander demands Precedence, and to be first sworn, as Ancient to
Sir William Ashton in the Inns of Court in England, and an utter Barrester
before him.

Sir William Ashton demands Precedence, and to be first sworn, as he was made
second Justice of the Court of Kings Bench: as having a Precedence before the
Court of Common Pleas, and as his Letter from the King, was of a prior date.

The Lord Chancellor inquires of the Officers of the Courts then attending his
Lordship what the practice therein had formerly been, and being informed by
them Mr.* Patrick Tallant.
(one of whom was the most eminent Attorney in the Court of Common Pleas) that
the Precedence had always been given formerly to the second Justice of the
Kings Bench. Thereupon ordered Sir William Ashton to be first sworn with a
salvo Jure to Sir Jerome Alexander if any he had.

The first question is to whom the right of Precedence belonged at first: To
Sir Jerome Alexander, as ancient to Sir William Ashton in the Inns of Court; or
to Sir William Ashton, either in respect of being second Justice of the Kings
Bench; or as having his Majesty's Letter of a Prior date.

The second question is: whether Sir William Ashton being (de facto) first
sworn ought not to have the Precedence as Senior Judge, notwithstanding the
(Salvo Jure) to Sir Jerome Alexander.

WILLIAM ASHTON. The Argument for Precedence by Sir Jerome Alexander.


First, I shall agree it to be the Case in all things, but in this one thing
only, which is matter of Fact and rests in Proof.

And I do affirm, that it was not all the Officers of the Courts there present
that did affirm, that the Precedence had always been formerly given, to the
second See Mr. Tallants testimony under his hand, of the 20 of December. 1661. in
haec verba. When the Right Honorable the Lord Chancellor demanded of me who
should be first sworn, Sir Jer. Alexander, or Sir William Ashton, I repaired
down the stairs to enquire of those whom I conceived better to give an account
of that matter then myself. And meeting below the stairs with Coll. William
Knight; I put the question unto him. Who answered me, that the second Judge of
the Kings Bench was always sworn before the second Judge of the Common Pleas.
And thereupon I came up again, and informed his Lordship the same. Pa. Tallant.
Justice of the Kings Bench (nor is it so, but the contrary.) But my Lord
Chancellor directed Mr. Tallant (who is that Eminent officer of the Court of
Common Pleas, mentioned by Sir William Ashton in the draught of his Case) to
inquire how the practice had formerly been: And he meeting with one Colonel
Knight; inquired of him, who told him so; and upon that single discourse with
Colonel Knight, without any conference had with any other of the Officers
there present; and without any knowledge that he had thereof himself: Mr.
Tallant returns my Lord Chancellor that answer. And thereupon my Lord swears
Sir William Ashton first, with a Salvo Jure to me.

Now albeit this makes nothing for Sir William Ashton in the Case. When I shall
make the contrary to appear. Yet I cannot admit of it: because it is not the
truth.

And therefore if my Lord Chancellor shall not; upon hearing what we can say
for ourselves, be pleased to determine the difference, but shall think fit to
transmit it for England, I shall humbly desire those words may be left out, and
the Ease made no otherwise, then as it was: and that Mr. Tallant may be called
to declare his testimony to this relation in the Case.

But if in the Course of my Argument, I make the contrary to appear; all that
allegation of Sir William Ashtons, will be out of doors: and fall of itself
without any more ado.

So I shall proceed to argue the points of his Case. And shall begin to argue
his second point first, as most material.

For if the Salvo Jure to me, shall operate nothing, we are at an end. The
first point will never come in question.

For if Sir William Ashton being (de facto) first sworn, therefore ought to
have the Precedence as Senior Judge: Notwithstanding the Salvo Jure to me. Then
the controversy is at an end.

Therefore I shall endeavor in the first place to probe that this (Salvo Jure)
does seem to me my right of Precedence: Notwithstanding that (de facto) Sir
William Ashton was first sworn. As this Case is.

And howsoever Sir William Ashton have made this a question in the Case. Yet I
presume he is so much a Gentleman, and so conscientions of his ways, that if
he shall be satisfied; that the right of Precedence did belong to me to be
first sworn, as we stood unsworn; that he will not take advantage of his own
wrong, and keep that right from me, which he should so gain by a false
suggestion.

But I doubt not but to make it clearly to appear.

1 First that the Salvo Jure in the Case, have secured unto me, what right of
Precedence I had to be first sworn; (as we stood unsworn.)

2 Secondly That the right of Precedence to be first sworn did properly belong
to me; as we stood unsworn. Notwithstanding his being made second Judge of the
Kings Bench: And notwithstanding the Prior date of his letter. My Lord
Chancellor the proper Judge of this controversy.


And first I conceive that Sir William Ashton will not deny, but that my Lord
Chancellor is the proper. Judge of this controversy, and so have power of
doing right unto us both. This is so undeniable a truth, as it needs no other
proof, but aconstant usage and custom as through all England, so throughout all
Ireland; which is the Common Law. For those customs and usages, which are used
and accostomed: Per totam Angliam, and per totam Hiberniam, are the Common Laws
of England and Ireland.

Then the usual practice, and course in these Cases have been; That the Lords
The Judges Oath settled by the Stat. of 18. E. 3.
Chancellors of England and Ireland have constantly, and continually used to
swear the Judges to exercise their Offices; according to that Oath prescribed
by the Statute of 18. E. 3. Before they enter upon the execution of their
places,

So that, Albeit it be the Letters Pattents which makes him a Judge; yet
without this ceremony of first swearing him to be faithful to his trust, etc.
He cannot take upon him the execution of that Office.

The King is Fons Justitiae; and as Kitchen says, at first did justice to his
people in his own person. As Moses did; in the time of the old Law, until
Jethro The King is Fons Justitiae. Kitchen.
advised him, to depute Judges under him for lesser matters, to ease him ofso
great a burden.

Thus our Kings of England and Ireland of their Prerogative Royal, have the The
King have the sole nomination and appointment of his Judges
sole denomination, and appointment of their Judges. Whose Offices being
granted to them by Letters Pattents under the Great Seal: Yet the Lord
Chancellor delivers them to them, and not before they have taken the Oaths of
Judges as a Feoffment in Fee without livery and Seizin, takes no effect. So
this Oath is as a Livery and Seizin, to give them possession of their places. A
feoffment in fee without livery and seizin, takes no effect.


The Lord Chancellor may perform this office as he pleases; yet most regularly,
it is done in that Court, where the party is made a Judge: The Lord Chancellor
sitting there in person, and calling the party before him, and advertising him
of the Kings favor and pleasure; causes the Letters Pattents to be read, then
The manner how Judges ars ussually sworn.
gives him the Oath, then admonishes him concerning his trust; how he ought to
be faithful in that, and how to carry himself; then sets him in his seat, and
there leaves him.

My Lord Chancellor of England too, is the prime Agent in making of Sergeants
The Lord Chancellor of England a prime agent in making of Sergeants at Law.
at Law; out of which the Judges there are still chosen by the King, and there
he cannot be a Judge, that is not first a Sergeant. Fortescue. 120.

Fortescue some times Lord Chancellor of England, describes the manner of
calling of Serjants in those days.

The Lord chief Justice of the common Bench, by the council and assent of all
the rest of the Judges, have used to chose seven or eight of the discreetest
persons, that Fortescue de laudibus legum Angliae 117.
have most profited in the study of the Laws, to be called Sergeants,
presenting their names unto the Lord Chancellor in writing; who by virtue of
the Kings writ, which he issues, he charge every of the persons elect, to be
before the King, at a day by him assigned, to take upon him the state and
degree of a Sergeant, The manner of calling of Sergeants at Law.
under a penalty in the Writ mentioned; at which day the Lord Chancellor swears
them, etc and so invests them in their degrees of Sergeants. And afterward
they are presented at the Common Bench bar unto the Judges, in their Fortescue
supra. 120. Brook 1. par. R. 84
party colored robes. Where they are admitted to plead; and none but Sergeants.

Thus the Lord Chancellor has the sole power by ancient usage and custom;
which is the Law of the land investing every Sergeant, and every Judge in
taking The Lord Chancellors have the power of order in these cases.
their degrees and places. According to their Seniorities, as they are in their
degrees one before another.

Neither in any Country in the world, is there any special degree given in the
Laws of the same lands; but only in the Realm of England.

Then my Lord Chancellor having made this saving in the Case, to preserve
Fortescue 120.
my right of Precedence. I shall in the next place endeavor to prove that it
is No degrees given in the law of the same land but in England.
^ali^, and of force to preserve it to me.

A Saving, is the preserving of a right from being lost; by an act, which
otherwise would destroy it.

And therefore Savings, are most frequent in Acts of Parliament, to preserve
men's rights, that they be not lost; Which to pass without a Saving were A
Saving what it is.
otherwise extinguished.

Several kinds of rights. Cook. 1. Instit. 345.
Now there are several kinds of Right, As.

1 Jus, recuperandi. 2 Jus, intrandi. 3 Jus habendi. 4 Jus retinendi. 5 Jus
percipiendi. 6 Jus possedendi.
So that this wor^^ Right, is of a large extent, and in a (Saving) does include
Plow. Com. 487. b. 488. a.
every one of these Rights, And more.

And as it is said in that Case, that it stands with reason and justice; that
that Right shouldbe always preserved to him, to whom it does belong. And
therefore this word (Saving) says Plowden, extends to preserve unto a man,
everything that is his. It is a general word, and shall in the Saving be
extended to that thing which a man pretends right unto; or in which he has an
estate.

Thus in Fi^e^, the right of the Land includes, and passes the state of the
Land. Cooks Instit. 1. 345. esse jus. Stat. West. 2. 3. jus summum.
As and cognov^t tenementum Praed. esse (Jus ipsins B.)

And so in the Statute of West. 2. ca. 3. The Statute says defendere Jus suum;
which is Statum suum.

Then the Case of my Lord Dyer, concerning the Deanary of the Cathedral Dyer.
10. Eliz. 273.
Church of Wells, which was first surrendered, and afterward extinct by Act
Parliament (Saving) to all strangers, their rights, etc. and this adjudged a
preserving of all the rights of strangers, whatsoever, that had any estates
made them by the Deane or Chapter before.

Then in Pophams Reports, Pophams Rep. 16.
there is a Case to this effect, viz.

The Town of Gloucester made a County with a Saving, that the Justices etc. may
sit there.
That King R. 3. by his Letters Pattents, does grant to the Burgesses of
Gloucester, and unto their successors, that the Town of Gloucester shall be a County
of it self; several and distinct, from the County of Gloucester (Saving to the
King His Heirs and Successors; that the Justices of Assize and Gaol Delivery;
and Justices of the Peace of the said County, may at all times enter into the
said Town, and hold and keep the Assizes and Sessions there, for the said
county. And it was adjudged by all the Justices, that this was a good saving;
whereby the Judges of Assizes, and Justices of the Peace, might enter into the
Town, and keep the Assizes and Sessions there, for the County at large.

For as the King by his Letters Patents may make a County, and except this from
any County; so in the making of it, he may except, and save to himself, what
part of the jurisdiction and privilege thereof he pleases.

My own Cose in Lincolns Inn.

Lincolns Inn ad concilium ibid tent. 11. die Febr. An. R. Jac. etc. 20.


And I shall conclude this point with a case of mine own.

Upon reading a certificate that Jerome Alexander Gent. was admitted in the
society of Furnivals Inn, the first day of July, 1609. and during his abode,
demeaned himself well, and performed exercises of learuing; and being now a
fellow of this house, was at this Council called to the Bar. Albeit he was not
seven years complete of this society. Saving to all his Ancients their
Antiquity; and is to be published in Easter Term next. He first paying all
duties to the house and chapel. To. Air. C N. L.
Mr. Justice Brown, now one of the Judges of the common Bench in England, and my
self, being both admitted of the house of Lincolns Inn, upon one day, and at
one time; yet because I had been a student three or four years in Furnivals Inn
before; had the favor of the house to be called to the Bar one year before
him, so by taking of that degree; should have been his Ancient, and taken
Precedence before him. Albeit re vera, he were my Ancient in the house before.
But in the order of my call, there is a (Saving) to all my Ancients their
antiquity; and by this saving I lost my Precedence to him: and upon this only
reason; that the Barrester which presented him to the Bench, at the same time,
was ancient to the Barrester that presented me; and yet both presented together
at one instant of time.

This is directly in the point. So as that by a saving I once lost my
Precedence: so now I hope by a saving to preserve my right of Precedence; it
being my due, and just to have it.

Then as to Sir William Ashtons second question. Whether the right of
Precedence belonged at first to me, as ancient to Sir Willam in the Inns of
Court. Or to Sir William Ashton, either in being second Justice of the Kings
Bench; or as having his Majesty's Letter of a Prior date.

And I shall clearly prove that the right of Precedence, did clearly belong to
me at first.

1. Notwithstanding that Sit William Ashton was made second Justice of the
Kings Bench.

2 And notwithstanding that his Letter is of a Prior date.

The first question. The second in order to be debated,
Then first, We must look to the rock from whence we are hewn; to the Inns of
Court in England, and see what is usually* in such Cases done there; and then
consider what is to be done, and is usually done here in Ireland, in a Case of
this nature.

Of the Inns of Court, and Inns of Chancery in England*
Then in England, we know there are four Inns of Court, and eight Inns of
Chancery; two Inns of Chancery appropriate to every Inns of Court. Where that
all those that profess the Law (under the degrees of Sergeants; for they Four
Inns of Court, eight Inns of Chancery in England.
have two Inns belonging to themselves apart, where the Judges and Sergeants do
only lodge) but all, as well those in places Judicial as Ministerial, have their
breedings there at first.

And anciently, every one that intended the practice of the Law, was first
admitted of one of the Inns of Chancery; and began his studies there, where by
converse with Officers, Attourneys, and Clerks belonging to the Courts of Law,
they gained much knowledge and experience, in the practique part of the Law,
which made their studies much more easy, and made them much the better to
understand the Theory of it, in their books, and fitted them much the better
for the practice of it afterward.

Nor was it time lost to study there; not only for the reasons aforesaid. but
of great benefit and advantage also, For that every Inns of Court, having two
of the Inns of Chancery appropriate to it, they usually sent them Readers from
amongst themseves Barresters at Law to read the law to them, in those Inns;
before whom they performed exercises of learning, argued the readers case at
the bar in Every Judge was first a student of some one of the Inns of Court,
then a Barrester, then a Bencher, then a Reader, then a Sergeant at Law, then a
Judge.
in the house. And then every Inns of Court also sent two students, of the most
ancient, under the bar; for to argue likewise the readers case, there in the
said Inns of chancery. And in this way, anciently were all our famous Judges of
England bred; and whose judgments we now reverence. as Presidents for
imitation. And then, when after they came from thence to the Inns of court;
they had some of that time allowed them which they had spent in the Inns of
chancery, in their studies for promotion unto the Bar.

Then every Judge in England, was first a student in some one of the four Inns
of Court, and after seven years study, was by the Benchers, who are the
Governors Carys Case in Noys Rep. 107.
of those houses; called to the Bar, and admitted to practice as a councelor
at Law; then was a Bencher, then a Reader, then a Sergeant, then a Judge.

And in England, no man can be admitted for to practice as a Lawyer, before he
has been called to the Bar. For in Noy's Reports, in Carys case? it is there
delivered for Law, that by the course of the common Law, a man may not give The
Inns of Court no bodies politic.
council or advice, until he has been called to the bar; no, though he has
Letters pattents, enabling him to do so, as fully as if he had been called to
the Bar.

The study of the Law a noble study.
And though the Inns of court be no Bodies Politic, incorporate by letters
pattents to plead, and be impleaded by any name; yet by the common law of
England, which are the common customs of the land; they have gained such a The
study of the Law qualifies men for other employments both at home and abroad
though they make, it not their profession.
power to themselves, that within their several societies, they have the power
of an order and Government, to promote the noble study of the law, in the best
way they shall think fit.

And therefore the more noble; because almost all the Nobility and Gentry of
the land, for the most part have their education there; as it were an
University or school of all commendable qualities, requisite for Noblemen and
Gentlmen; where those that will not make it their profession, yet do exercise
themselves, in They have degrees given in (...). And in no other Country in the
world for the Laws of the land.
all kind of other studies, and pastimes, which are fit for Noblemen and
Genlemen to recreate themselves withal.

And therefore, for the endowment of virtue; Noblemen and Gentlemen will place
their children in those Inns of court; though they desire not to have them
practice the law, but for the better qualifying of them, for other employments,
both The Seniority goes according to the admittance both in the house and
abroad.
at home and abroad.

They have degrees given them also, as in the Universities; and not degrees
only, but also a state no less solemn, then theirs.

And as in the Universities, he that is first matriculated, and so received
into the fellowship of the University, has the Precedence of all that come
after him. So it is in the Inns of court. All students take their places
according to their admittances into those societies, whereof they are made
members: Which is done by the several Benchers of those houses, to whom they
are presented.

And as this admittance, and the receiving thereof, gives us Precedence in the
house, at all meetings and exercises within the house, so it does abroad. As at
all readings in the* Inns of chancery, whether two from every of the four
houses are sent to argue the Readers case: There every man takes his seniority,
according as he has been admitted, in any of the Inns of court without
distinction. The degree of the bar gives seniority to all that slip their time.


And when they take their Degree of the Bar, still they continue their
seniorities; unless it happens (as often it does) that some do slip their time,
and do not take their degree till afterward, and then he looses his antiquity
to all that have taken their degrees before him; for the Degrees gives the
seniority.

The same rule is holden as to calling to the Bench.
The same rule is holden, as concerning those that are called to the Bench. He
that is first called, has his seniority accordingly. The same rule is
concerning Sergeants at Law, when called. The manner showed herein before.
The same order is observed concerning the call of Sergeants, all are sworn
according to their Seniorities.

And as a Barrester at Law, cannot regularly be called, till he be seven years
standing a student: So no man can be made a Sergeant at Law, till he be sixteen
Fortescue 120.
years a student in some one of the said four Inns of Court, and a Barrester,
and has been a reader in the house whereof he has been a member.

To be a double reader how meant.
Some will have it, that he must be double Reader, before he be made Sergeant.
But that may be meant of reading in the Inns of Chancery, and then in the Inns
of court, as commonly all did heretofore that were made sergeants; and yet that
is no certain rule. For now sergeants are commonly called that have but read in
the Inns of court alone; some have been called that have not read at all, as
Sir Thomas Heatley, who was made puis^e, to all that call of sergeants, though
he were senior to many of them that were called with him, which 2 Par. Crook.
Rep. 671.
proves that reading in an Inns of court is necessary to precede the calling
and degree of a sergeant at law. Some call them sergeants of the Quoife. And
that proceeds from this: You may observe them to wear a white Quoif of silk; it
Fortescue de laudibus legum Angliae 120. and 121.
should be in token or sign, that all are thus graduate, which is the principal
and chief insignment of habit with which Sergeants at law, in their creation
are decked; and neither the Justice, nor yet the sergeant shall ever put off
the Quoife* no not in the Kings presence, though he be in talk with him.
Fortescue ibid. What a Judge is.


But a Judge is no degree in the Law, says Fortescue; but an office only, and
a room of authority, for to continue during the Kings pleasure. And in England
he cannot be a Judge, unless he be made aserjeant at Law first. Order and
precedence amongst the Judges.


And we shall find order and Precedence amongst them also: Both in England and
Ireland.

The Lord chief Justice of the Kings Bench, takes his place before the Lord
chief Justice of the Common Bench; and the Lord chief Justice of the Common
Bench, before the Lord chief Barron; and the Lord chief Barron before all the
puisne Judges of every the Courts of Law; and then the puisne Judges of all the
Courts, one before another, as they are sworn one before another. See 2 par.
Crooks R. 170 par. 24.


Judge Fosters case. Swearing first gives the Seniority.
Sir Thomas Foster Sergeant, was sworn a Justice of the common Bench. And Sir
Edward Heron being an antienter Sergeant then he, was sworn one of the Barrons
of the Exchequer; and because Sergeant Heron was sworn after See Crooks 2. Rep.
197.
the other, and though both in one day, yet he lost his antiquity to Foster,
for that reason only.

No Saving no Precedence.
But there was neither any demand of Precedence, nor any Saving in that Case,
as in this case of mine; for I did all things in order to preserve my right And
am therefore confident* I shall not loose it.

The next is, Sir George Crooks own case; who in Michaelmas Term 4. Sir George
Crooks own Case in his 1. Rep. 127.
Caroli. Being then a Judge in the Court of common Pleas, was removed into the
court of Kings Bench; and before his removal, Justice Yelverton, then a fellow
Judge with him in the same Court. And Sir Thomas Trevor and Vernon, being then
Barrons of the Exchequer, were his puisnes; who pretended, that by his removal,
and his taking the Oath de novo in the Kings Bench; he had lost his Precedence
to them, and therefore claimed the place of him. But it was ruled by all the
Judges for Sir George Crook: but upon this reason, that albeit he were new
sworn; yet he never ceased to be a Judge. And therefore his swearing de novo in
another Court, did not loose him his Precedence which he had before.

First, By all which it does appear, that all students of any of the Inns of
Court in England, have Precedence one before another, as they are admitted in
time one before another.

And secondly, That all Barresters, Benchers, and Sergeants at Law, have
Precedence one before another; as they are called to those degrees one before
another.

Thirdly, That an puisne Judges take their Seniorities, as they are sworn one
before another.

Fourthly, That all Barresters, Benchers, Sergeants and Judges, when more come
at one time to be sworn together, each is sworn according to his Seniority
which he has before others at the time of his swearing. His Majesty's Letter
of a prior date does give Sir William Ashton no right of Precedence before me
at all.


The next thing that is confiderable in this Case is, what his Majesty's Letter
of a prior date does opperate to give to Sir William Ashton precedence before
me.

His Majesty's Letter imports no more, but his Majesty's pleasure thereby
signified, and direction given to make him a Judge: So is only an act of
choice, and of no more effect, then if his Majesty should have declared his
pleasure, at several times in one day, to make several Judges of his several
Courts. This does confer nothing upon the person de facto; but is if a matter
in fieri, to be done, for notwithstanding that; they are not Judges, till they
are made so upon record, by his Majesty's Letters Pattents under his great
Seal, which is a record; and then the Lord Chancellors his swearing them to
perform that duty and office, with which the King have entrusted them; so the
Kings pleasure first signified, makes nothing at all for to make a man a Judge,
nor does it add any force or strength unto Sir William Ashtons demand. Crooks
2. par. R. 1.


For this purpose; the Case in Crooks second Reports, does put it to be so, and
is a stronger Case, then this of Sir William Ashtons.

Where eleven Sergeants were called by Writ, in the life time of Queen
Elizabeth, and before the return of the Writ, the Queen dies, and King James
succeeds; and afterward new Writs do issue, to call them in the reign of King
James, returnable at a day certain; and afterward other Writs issue of a later
The Letters gives nothing of Precedence, in respect of the date one before
another for the test of a Sergeants Writ one before another gives no right of
Precedence in taking the degree.
test. To call three more, viz. Snigg, Shurley, and Hutton, returnable at the
same time with the other eleven; all come to the Bar together to take their
Oaths, according to their Seniorities; notwithstanding the several testes of
their Writs one before another.

And Sir John Crook, whom I knew afterward a Judge in the Kings Bench, being
one of that call, who having formerly been Speaker in the house of Commons in
Parliament: And therefore had Precedence before all Counselors at the Bar; and
would therefore have been senior, of all that call of Sergeants, which was much
labored for him at Court; yet being puisne to five of them, was sworn after
them, according to his seniority.

Whereby it appears, that it was not the prior Test of the Writs, nor his
privilege of having been Speaker of the house of Commons, that gained any
thing of priority one before another. But their seniorities one before another,
as they stood unsworn; which settled them in their Precedence one before
another; as they stood in their degrees one before another. And this is a
stronger case then Sir William Ashtons: In as much as a Writ which is an
essential part of the call, is more toward the degree, then his Majesty's
pleasure barely signified by his Letters. Objection, that albeit it may be so
in England, yet not in Ireland.


But then it may be objected; that albeit this may be granted to be the order
and rule in England; yet it is not so in Ireland. For here are no Inns of
Court, here are no degrees taken of Barresters, Benchers and sergeants at Law;
Nor are the Judges here made from amongst that order of sergeants at Law; but
of such whom the King pleases to nominate, and appoint for that service. And
then Sir William Ashton being appointed first to be a Judge of the Kings Bench,
ought to take place of me; as declared after him to be a Judge in the Common
Bench. The same common Law that governs England also Ireland is governed by it.
King H. 2. 18.


That the Common Law of England is the same Common Law by which Ireland is also
governed: Introduced by King John in the twelfth year of his reign. Although
the conquest of Ireland, was made before, by King Henry the second, in the
eighteen year of his reign, who was father to King John. And placed many
Britains here; and granted the City of Dublin* to the men of Bristol, to
inhabit, and then returned into England; and afterward, in the twenty third
Cooks instit. 141. 7. R. 22. in Calvin's case, Ro^^. Parl. 11. H. 3. memb. 3.
year of his reign, by Parliament he constituted his son John (who was
afterward King of England) to be King of Ireland, and granted to him and his
heirs, the whole Kingdom. And in the twenty sixth year of his reign, he sent
King John into Ireland, with a great train of young gallants. He being then but
twelve years of age; who used the Irish with such disdain, and derision, that
the Irish took occasion thereat to revolt from him and his government, so that
he shortly after returned back into England, without doing any remarkable
thing. But notwithstanding his creation to be King; yet during the life of H.
2. and R. 1. He was styled in his several Charters, by the name of Dominus
Hiberniae, (and not King) until after the death of King R. 1. As apears by
several Charters by him, granted to the City of Dublin; in the first whereof
being without date. He is ^^^led, Johannes filius domini Regis Angliae, and
dominus Hiberniae. And in the second, bearing date at London* the 15. of May;
in the year of the reign of King* R. 1. He is styled Johannes dominus Hiberniae
comes Mortoniae. And in a third Charter granted to the City of Dublin, bearing
date at Upton the 7 of February in the 2. year of his reign. He is styled,
Johannes dei gratia Rex Angliae, dominus Hiberniae, dux Normandiae, and
Aquintaniae, comes Andegaviae.

Then afterward, in the twelfth year of his reign, he came again into Ireland,
and brought along with him many learned men in the Law, and other Officers and
Ministers of all sorts; and established the form of Civil Government, to be
according to the Laws of England.

So that he not only introduced the Law; but we may conceive, settled Judges
(which in the History goes by the names of learned men.) And ministerial
Officers The common law being the same, the same rules of making Judges and
officers in the courts of Law must be the same.
of all sorts, in the Courts of Law; such as are in England. Which forms of
Government, have ever since continued in this Kingdom to this day.

This being thus; it follows; that the same Rules and Orders of proceeding, in
making Judges and other Officers; and proceedings in the Courts of Law should
be the same, as well in Ireland, as in England.

And we see, and know by experience and common practice: That all the Courts of
Law; and the Officers, are the like in name and power: And all of them have,
and take the same Places, and Precedences, one before another; here, as there.
The ancient usages and customs of the land, is the common law of the land; as
it is said in Combs case, in Cooks. 9. R. That which is used, per totam
Angliam, is the common law. For the custom of the land, is the law of Combs
Case 9. R. 75. b.
the land. Therefore in my Lord Dyer, where it is sald, quod habetur talis What
the common law of England and Ireland is. 34. H. 8. Brooks Cases foll. 57. P.
225.
consuetudo interjuratores per totam Angliam, etc. This is said to be the
common law. And so all these customs and usages of making Barresters, Benchers,
Sergeants, and Judges; and their taking of their Precedencies one before
another, as is aforesaid. This Lex te^e, is the common law of the land. And is
a matter of civil right and order; neither against Justice, nor the Common
Wealth; 22. H. 6. 21. 34. H. 8. Dyer 54.
nor is it to the prejudice of any man, and therefore reasonable; and to
prevent disorder and confusion, and therefore necessary and convenient. And
then, Consuetudo, ex rationabili causa usitata. And so just.

And if we shall well weigh, and consult the statute of 33. H. 8. 3. here in
Ireland. Stat. 33. H. 8. 3.
We shall find that it was the judgment of that Parliament, that it should be
so, which is but a declaration of the common law before. For that statute
says. And provides thus. viz.

Provided always, and be it Enacted by Authority aforesaid, that no person, or
persons, that now is, or hereafter shall be within this Realm; except the Party,
The Proviso.
Planitiffe, or Demandant, Tenantor Defendant, shall be admitted, or allowed as
a pleader in any of the Kings four principal Courts, within this His gracious
Realm, in any case or matter whatsoever it be; or yet to make or exhibit, to
or in any of the said four Courts, any declaration or bills, plea in bar,
replication, or rejoinder; or to give evidence to any Jury, unless it be for
the Kings Majesty, or to argue any matter in law; or yet to do, or minister any
other thing or things, in any of the said four Courts, which customarily have
been used to be done, by one learned, or taken to be learned in the Kings laws;
but such person and persons, as has, or shall be at one time, or several
times, by the space of (...) years, complete at the least demurrant and re^^ant
in one of the Inns of court, within the Realm of England, studying, practicing,
and endeavoring themselves the best they can, to come to the true knowledge
and jvdgment of the said laws; upon pain of one hundred shillings to every
person, or persons offending contrary to the Proviso last before specified, or
any thing therein contained.

Now upon this statute I do observe.

First, That it was made in a time of Popery. When all Lawyers then were
Papists; and had liberty to plead in England and Ireland, And yet it was not
thought fit, that any man should practice the law, that had not studied to make
himself able for the exercise of the same profession. And therefore the statute
calls them, that should be thus admitted to plead, men learned in the laws; and
men cannot be learned in the laws, without studying the laws.

Secondly, Because they had no Inns of court in Ireland. Though by the
introduction of the common law into England, it is conceived they had the
liberty of erecting Inns of court, and Inns of chancery as in England; yet
wanting the means to do it; for to avoid barbarism and nescience, or ignorance
in the practice of the Law: They make this statute to compel those that should
profess the Law in Ireland, to run the course of their studies in the Inns of
Court, first in England; and therefore are in England to be called to the bar
before they plead. And this shows likewise that they are two distinct
Kingdoms, though governed by the like Laws. And that it was something doubtful
before this Law was made; whether a Barrester of England might practice here in
Ireland, without leave and license of the State.

Thirdly, That howsoever this blank -- for the years of their studies how many
they shall be; happens to be in this statute; yet certainly it cannot be
intended a lesser number of years then seven years; which are the number of
years that men usually study the Laws in England, before they be called to the
Bar; and then all Lawyers were Papists, and yet could not practice the Law as
a Councellor, without first being called to the Bar. And then again, the word
(completely) immediately following the blank, does insinuate the same thing:
According to the rules and orders of those Inns of Court, where they were to
complete their studies.

And it is but reasonable and just, that a man should spend so many years for
to acquire the understanding, and knowledge of so honorable a Science and
profession; when as an Apprentice to every trade, and Mechanical occupation, is
by the Law tied to serve seven years, before he can be made free to exercise
his trade or occupation.

And Laws are called, Libertates, quia liberos facit, because they make a man
Cokes 8 R. 129, 130. in case upon the s^at. of 5 Eliz. of Apprentices, cap. 4.
free too, though in another sense. And Sir Edward Cook, in the Case upon the
statute of 5. Eliz. Concerning Apprentices to be first bound to serve seven
years, and then first to be approved of by the Masters of those companies,
under which they serve, before they can be admitted to use their trades. He
highly commends Coke li. 6. 19.
this Law, saying; that as this course begets skill in the exercise of trades;
so it were prejudicial to the Kingdom, if such should be permitted to use
trades, in which they have no skill or understanding.

In respect of the dangers, which they themselves run also, and may incur
otherwise. For be that will take upon him to use a trade in which he has no
Fitz. Na. br. 9. imperitia est maxima mechanicorum poena and quoslibet quaerit
inqualibet art peritos. Coke 11. R. 54.
skill, the Law provides him a punishment. as in Fitz Herberts Natura Brev.
where an action of the Case was brought against a smith, for pricking of a
horse. For men ought to be skilful, before they undertake such faculties.

And Scientia, we say non habet inimicum praeter ignorantem: Ignorance, is the
greatest enemy to science. For these, are like blind men shooting at a Crow,
if they kill her, it is by chance: They are like ignes fatui, commonly leading
men out of the way; whiles they shine bright in their eyes. The proverb is true
in this also. Money makes this man. But as it is said of the Nightingale; he is
Vox and praeterea nihil; a sound and nothing else.

And it is against the rule of the common Law, for one tradesman to take up
another trade, in which he never served.

And it is observable also, that Barresters are called Apprentices to the Law;
Barresters at Law called Apprentices
because they serve as Apprentices seven years, before they attain the Bar.

And much rather it ought to be so, as the study of the Law is far more
difficult, then it can be for a man to learn a mechanical trade and occupation.
And how can a blind man judge of colors? It were a foolish presumption, if a
lapidary should undertake to state the value and luster of a Jewel that is
locked up, before he opens the Cabinet.

It is also necessary, that those that study the law, should be first called to
the bar, before they be admitted to plead, and make the law their profession;
as well ^or trying of their abilities, as that they take the Oaths of supremacy
and allegiance; as all Protestant Lawyers do, to witness their loyalty unto the
King, and his Government. For how can the King trust him, to practice the Law
under (...) (...) James (...) Knight, (...) second Baron of his Majesty's
him, in his Courts, to be conversant amongst his Records; to have that
opportunity by frequent discourse with his people, to seduce them from their
religion and obedience; I say; how can the King trust such men, that will not
acknowledge him to be the supreme Head and Governor of his Kingdoms, as well
in the Church, as in the state. And Piety is the greatest Policy, of all the
rest.

And there is another statute in Ireland, which if I understand it aright,
takes away that objection, or scruple of conscience rather; why they are so
nice to take the Oaths of Supremacy and Allegiance, as they are penned in the
statut which commands the taking of them: and which all Protestant Lawyers, I
say do take before they be admitted to the Bar.

It is the Statute of 28. of H. 8. ca. 13. here in Ireland; by which it is
enacted, and ordained; that all and every ecclestastical Judge, Ordinary,
Chancellor, commissary, Official, Vicar general, and other ecclesiastical
Officer and Minister, Stat. 28. H. 8. cap. 13. here in Ireland.
of what dignity, pre-eminence, or degree soever they shall be. And all and
every temporal Judge, Justice, Mayor, Bailiff, Sheriff, under Sheriff,
Escheator, Alderman, Jurate, Constable, Headburrough, Bursholder, and every lay
Officer and Minister, to be made, neated, elected, or admitted within this
land; of what estate, order, degree, or condition soever he shall be, from and
after the said first day of November. (mentioned in the said statute) shall
before he take upon him the execution of the said Office; make, take, and
receive a corporal Oath upon the Evangelists, before such person, or persons,
as have, or shall have authority to admit him, that ^e from thence forth, shall
utterly renounce, refuse, relinquish, and forsake, the Bishop of Rome, and his
Authority, power, and Jurisdiction; and that he shall never consent, or agree,
that the Bishop of Rome shall practice, exercise, or have any manner of
authority, jurisdiction or power within this land; but that he shall resist the
same; at all times, to the uttermost of his power. And from thenceforth he
shall accept, repute, and take, the Kings Majesty to be only supreme head in
earth, of the Church of England, and of Ireland; and that to his cunning, wit,
and uttermost of his power, and without fraud, guile, and other undue means; he
shall observe, keep, maintain, and defend the whole effects, and contents of
all, and singular Acts and statutes made, and to be made within this land, in
extirpation and extinguishment of the Bishop of Rome, and his authority; and
all other Acts and Statutes, made and to ^e made, in reformation and
corroboration of the Kings power, and supreme head in earth, of the Church of
England and of Ireland; and this he shall do against all manner of persons, of
what estate, dignity, degree, or condition they be, and in no wise do attempt,
nor to his power suffer to be done or attempted, directly or indirectly, any
thing or things, privily or apertly, to the let, hinderance, damage, or
derogation thereof; or of any part thereof, by any manner of means, or for any
manner of pretense. And in case any Oath be made, or has been made by him, or
any person or perpersons, in maintenance, defense, or favor of the Bishop of
Rome, or his Authority, or Jurisdiction or power, he repute the same as vain
and annihilate, so help him God and all Saints, and the holy Evangelists.
Cowels interpreter word office, and Minshaw upon the word office.


And the word Office, and Minister do certainly comprehend, and intend all
those Irish that now practice the Law. For the word officium, does signify the
function by virtue whereof a man has some employment, in the affairs of
another; as the King, or of any other common person: and therefore should take
this Oath; they at least, that are admitted to practice the Law. And this Act
of Parliament was made also in the time of Popery, and by all the Sages of this
Kingdom of Ireland, by the Lords Spiritual and Temporal, and Commons of the
land all Papists; whereby this question is clearly determined, that the King is
supreme head of the Church. And why should they more scruple to confess it now,
then they did then, when their own Popish Bishops and Clergy, Piers and Commons
asserted it. And Acts of Parliament are Established with such gravity,
sapience, and universal consent of all the Realm, and for the advancement of
the weal public, that they ought to be maintained and supported. For as
Fortescue Fortescue ai. cap. 18. Cok. 10. R. 138. case of Chester Wills, ad idem
says of the statutes of England, so may we of our Irish statutes; Quod
Hiberniae Statuta non principis voluntate, sed totius regni assensu conduntur,
quo populi laesuram illa efficere nequeant, vel non eorum commodum procurare;
prudentia enim et sapientia ipsa esse re^erta putandum est dum non unius, aut
centum solum consultorum virorum prudentia, sed plus quam Trecentorum electorum
hominum, qualem numero olim Senatus Romanorum regebatur edita ^^nt. And Acts of
Parliament made by King, Lords, and commons of Parliament, are as well of the
laws of Ireland; and therefore to be expounded by the Judges of the Laws of
Ireland; although the Acts concern ecclesiastical and spiritual jurisdiction.
That the Judges of Ireland, ^^ in England, do take place and precedencie one
before another as they are sworn one before another.


Then for a close of all; I shall make it to appear. That it has been the
constant usage and custom here in Ireland as in England. That the Judges of
Ireland as in England, do take their Precedencies one before another, as they
are first sworn Judges one before another; and according to the Course and
manner of England.

The case of tenures upon the commission of defective titles argued by all the
Judges of Ireland and printed 1637. By my Lord chief Justice of the Kings Bench
in Ireland that now is.
And for this. I shall cite you a printed Case in the point. The Case of
Tenures upon the commission of defective titles. Some of the Judges now, being
Judges then; and can witness it viva voce, if need be.

The Case was this.

King James by Commission under the great Seal, dated the second day of March
in the fourth year of his reign, did authorize certain Commissioners to grant
the Manor of Dale by Letters Pattents, under the great Seal of Ireland to A.
and his heirs; and there is no direction given in the said Commission, touching
the Tenure to be reserved.

To prove this by testimony.
There are Letters Pattents by color of the said Commission, passed unto A. and
his heirs to hold by Knights service, as of his Majesty's castle of Dublin.

See Baron Dungans Certificate; heretofore a Judge of the Kings Bench in
Ireland, which follows in hac verba.
The question was, whether the said Letters Pattents be void in the whole, or
only as to the tenure.

Which Case was argued by the council of the Lord Dillon, in the first place,
which was Mr. Nicholas Plunket, then by Sergeant Catlyn, for the King. And
after by John Pollexfen, for the Lord Dillon; and then by Osbaldeston Attorney
General for the King.

At the request of Sir Jerome Alexander Knight. second Justice of his Majesty's
Court of common Pleas. I do certify, That concerning the Precedence of the
Judges here in Ireland. I know that when Hugh Cressey Esquire. deceased, was second
Justice of his Majesty's Court of Kings Bench in Ireland; That Sir Samuel
Mayart Knight, deceased, being then second Justice of his Majesty's Court of
Common Pleas, took Precedence of him, as being the antienter Judge. And I have
often heard, and sometimes observed: that the second and third Judges of the
Courts of Justice here in Ireland, took their Precedence in order, as they were
first sworn Judges. And I do know that Sir James Barry Knight, then second
Baron of his Majesty's Court of Exchequer; and now Lord Baron of Santrey, and
Lord Chief Justice of his Majestices Court of chief place, took Precedence
before Sir William Ryves Knight, one of the Justices of the Kings Bench: Being
sworn second Baron of the Exchequer, before he was made one of the Justices of
the Kings Bench. And afterward when* Sir William Ryves dyed, and I became of
course second Justice of the Kings Bench; Baron William Hilton then puisne
Baron of his Majesty's Court of Exchequer, claymed Precedence before me, as
senior Judge; and at that time some of the Judges, inclined to his Precedence,
as he was a Senior Judge. All which I shall be ready to testify upon occasion.
And because it was a Case of great weight and importance, it was delivered
unto the Judges, and they were required by the Lord Deputy and Council, to
confer and consider of it, and to return unto them their resolution
concerning it; but they (upon private conference among themselves) did not
agree in opinion; and therefore it was thought necessary for public
satisfaction, that it should be argued solemnly by them all: And thereupon in
Trinity Term 1637. the Case was argued accordingly. And in that Book is set
down all the Judges names that argued it, and the order of their Precedence one
before another: and as in all Cases of Arguments by the Judges, the puisne
Judge begins first; and so it proceeds to the Lord Chief Justice of the Kings
Bench last, and so it was done in this Case.

Sir William Ryves, that was then puisne Judge of the Kings Bench. He began and
argued first. Then Sir James Barry now Lord of Santrey, and Lord chief Justice
of his Majesty's Court of Kings Bench; but then second Baron of his Majesty's
Court of Exchequer; and second Judge to Sir William Ryves; he argued next. Then
Hugh Cressey Esquire one of the Judges of the Court of chief place, in that place
which Sir William Ashton now enjoys: He argued next; and after him; upon
another day appointed for the Case: Sir Samuel Mayart one of the Judges of the
common Pleas, and then sitting in that place, which I now enjoy, Argued next,
then Sir Richard Bolton chief Baron argued next, then Sir Gerard Lowther, chief
Justice of the common Pleas; and then Sir George Shurley, chief Justice of the
Court of chief place.

By which the order of Precedence of the Judges in this Kingdom, one before
another; does appear to be the very same as in England, according as they are
first sworn Judges; and my Predecessor being Senior Judge to Sir Williams
Ashtons Predecessor had the place of him.

Upon all which matter I conclude.

First, That the right of Precedence belonged unto me at first, as we stood
unsworn; as ancient unto Sir William Ashton in the Inns of Court in England;
and that the same order is to be observed here in Ireland; in as much as by the
Stat. of 33. of H. 8. 3. here in Ireland: No man can give advice as a
Councellor at Law, that has not been first admitted of an Inns of Court in
England. And the common Law of England and Ireland, which establishes the Inns
of Court in England, being the same.

Secondly, That the Courts of law in England, nor in Ireland, give no
Precedence to the Judges at all.

Thirdly, That Sir William Ashtons Letter of a prior date to mine, gives him no
advantage or benefit at all, in the Case.

Fourthly, and lastly, That the saving to me of my right of Precedence, upon
the swearing of Sir William Ashton, in the first place bath saved to me my
right of Precedence. And therefore I ought to be established in it accordingly.

Thomas Dongan
Dated at my Chamber in the Inns this 3. day of January 1661. Jerome Alexander.


