'AGIO-IESIS. THE IMITATION Of the SAINTS. Opened in some Practical Meditations
Upon the death of Mrs. ANNE BROWN, late Wife of Mr. PETER BROWN of
Hammersmith. By Thomas Case, M. A. sometimes Student of Christ-Church, Oxon.
Minister of the Gospel.

Heb. 13.7. (...).

LONDON, Printed by A. M. 1666.

To his honored Friend, and Son in-law, Mr. Peter Brown of Hammersmith.
Grace, Mercy, and Peace.
SIR,
NOt to revive your sorrow for the loss of your precious Yoke Fellow, but to
moderate and regulate it, do these Meditations offer themselves to your view:
Physicians say, that if rheum be sweetened, it cannot hurt the lungs; sure I am,
if grief be sweetened and sanctified, it cannot hurt the heart; (...)2 Cor. 7.10
Worldly sorrow indeed may cause death, but godly sorrow tends to salvation;
that your sorrow may be such, let me commend the reading of these Papers to
you, and do you, (by holy prayer) commend them to God. Neither grief nor mirth,
(simply in themselves) are sinful and hurtful, but as the Object or degree
determines them.

Your Wife (I know) while she lived, Ezekiel. 24.16.
was the desire of your eyes; so pleasant an Object, that I cannot but presume
her very Picture now she is dead, will be a most acceptable Present; which
though not drawn by a curious Pensil, yet (I dare be bold to say) it is so like
her that whosoever knew her, will know whose Picture it is, at the first-sight;
I am sure the Painter has not flattered Her. It is a life-Picture (as Artists
call them) taken from her face, and not by Copy. A life-Picture indeed;
describing not the outward Effigies of her face but the inward Pourtraiture of
her mind, all fair and beautiful: I commend it to your self, and your Friends;
not to hang on your Walls, but to wear in your bosom. If the fight of it should
occasion your tears, I shall not repent, because by the sadness of the
Countenance the heart is made better, and sorrow will flow in the right
Channel, not the absence of her person, so much as the want of her graces. Give
me leave, by that interest she gave me in you, to enjoin you, both the serious,
and the frequent review of this piece; and if you join prayer with your
contemplation, it will make you insensibly to pass into her likeness; for which
end you will find this Inscription engraven round about her Effigies, Whose
faith follow.

This do, sincerely, vigorously, and perseveringly, and I dare assure you, your
loss will be your gain; which is and shall be the prayer of

Your affectionate Friend and Father in-Law, Tho. Case.

Reverend Sir,
'TWas extremely obliging that you honored me with the perusal of your
Hagiomimesis, (the occasion was sad, the improvement good) where the nature and
ground of the Imitation of Saints, is distinctly opened, and rarely Illustrated
by an excellent example; when that digitus ferro-luteus saw the fatal hour
approaching, he cried out, Dan. 2.42 Sueton in v. Ner.
ut se aliquis ad mortem capessendam exemplo juvaret, that some one would die
by him, that he might learn to die by the example; and this was like him, whose
name was vir sanguinum, a man of blood: But that brave person, that great Saint
your treatise refers to, has by the incomparable instance of her gracious
behavior, taught us all, how to die, and now to live too, which is the first
and hardest lesson. Been vixisse, magnum est; Jerome.
I judge the same Anointing which took her up to the Galleries of Love,
fashioning her insensibly into so curious a President, has disclosed to you
this secret, 2 King. 13 21.
of giving life by dead bones, preserving Religion from mortality, gathering
flowers from the Coffin, Embalming Examples, and finding out advantages in the
severest Providence. Good Sir let me once more desire you to publish your
Meditations on this subject, and the rather, because we have had the fire of
the last day, lately represented to us in a dreadful figure, happily you may
now at length provoke the present evil world to Aemulation, Surius in vit.
and save some. Jerome espoused the example of Hilarion. Who knows in what
methods God will please to discover himself to poor sinners? Will any say,
(they knew not Hammer-Smith) you dipped your Pen too much in love, when you
drew the fair Character of an endeared Child? Regard it not, aequo animo
audienda sunt imperitorum convitia, Sen. ep. 76.
and ad honesta vadenti contemnendus est iste contemptus. The Inhabitants of
the Earth are so much below the cloud of witnesses, Heb. 12.1. Mopcyed.
that being (...)Tender eyed, they cannet see the glory wrapped up in it; Let
the profane say in scorn to Elisha, go up, go up (meaning as Elias did) it is
enough for him to inherit his Masters spirit, 2 King. 2.23.
and to ha^^ the Ascendent in Divine Grace. Some years since the merciful
Providence of God gave me a Summers rest in the house of that admirable Person
(which I ever after found to be one of the hundred built upon the Land of
Promise) much was I there also in her last sickness, Mat. 19.29.
and still I observed Wisdom and Holiness, Gravity and Meekness, Isocr. He.
Lau. Number. 14.24.
tempered in her to an unparalled sweetness. (...). A blessed Pandora, a highly
favored Enthumia, In. Solin. Polyhist. c. 4.
one that had the Other spirit, the Even spirit, eodem vultus tenore, etiam
adversis interpellantibus perstitit, Pomp. Mel. 3. de orbis situ.
as was said of Socrates. The pure spirit came down upon her, rather tanquam
Columba, then instar ignis; hers was that Dove-like, Agnine spirit; pro eloquio
nutus erat, with what wonderful regard did she walk? Tota pulcra, all fair, and
ever fair, shining with holiness when descended from the Mount; her Manna
seemed to breed no Worm; Christ dwelt in her with a constant loveliness, and
was fairer in her, then in ten thousands! She did excel to a wonder in the
esteem of all that conversed with her. But now she (...) fallen, she is fallen,
and gone down to the Chambers of the Dead. A tutto vi e rimedio. fuor che alla
morte. Hasten therefore to us your Hagiomimesis, that the fall of the righteous
may be the Salvation of the world, Romans 11.11.
which is the hearts desire, and prayer of,

Dear SIR, Your Servant in our Lord, William Woodward.
October. 10. 1666.
THE IMITATION Of the SAINTS.
Heb. 6.12. But followers of them who through faith and patience, inherit the
promises.


THE Apostle having set before the believing Hebrews, a dreadful instance of
the sin, and danger of Apostasy, from verse the 4th to verse the 8th (for the
awakening of them out of their security, to a timely prevention of both) that
he might not occasion prejudice and offense in their bosoms, as if he had
judged them to be Apostates,

He does two things:

1. He sweetly insinuates a better opinion of them, verse 9.10. But beloved, we
are persuaded b^tter things of you, and the account of which p^^^^sion, he
gives you verse 10th for God is not unrighteous co forget your ^abour of love,
etc.

2. Yet. That they may not think themselves altogether unconcerned in this
caution, he admonishes them to take heed of sluggishness and security (on the
one side) which are the usual snare and precipice to Apostasy, That ye be not
slothful; And then he incites them to a vigorous diligence in their Christian
profession (on the other side) the way and means which God has sanctified for
the attaining of perseverance and assurance, Verse 11th. We desire that every
one of you do show the same diligence to the full assurance of hope unto the
end. The same, i. e. the same, mentioned verse 10th Your work and labor of
love: q. d. That which some of you have given abundant testimony of, I desire
every one of you may give also; lest there should be any that may possibly fall
short, and prove Apostate amongst you.

Or the same, i. e. which you your selves (speaking to the same individuals)
have given, that ye grow not remiss and negligent in your love and zeal; for
then if you that have been formerly diligent and active, shall cool, and grow
negligent, not only your former diligence will be a testimony against you; but
the abatement and decay of your love and zeal, may expose you to the sin and
danger of Apostasy.

Now both these he does, by propounding the Pattern of the Saints and Worthies
of God, to their pious Consideration and Imitation. Some of whom were yet
alive, whom he proposes as Presidents to the rest among them: Yea, he
proposes themselves to themselves; their former zeal, to prevent their future
luke-warmness.

Others here commended, were such of the Primitive Heroes, who had long before,
finished their course and obtained the Crown: Ego de patribus jam in coelis
agere hoc loco Apostolum non dubito, Bez. in loc.
As Abraham, mentioned in the verses following my Text; and others, of those
famous Lights of the World, employed in the word them (in the Text) Them who
through faith and patience inherit the promises. These also the Apostle does
commend as standing exemplars for the believing Hebrews, and (in them) for all
other Christians, professing the Name and faith of Jesus Christ, to follow.

Now, to be followers of the Saints, i^ nothing else but vigorously and
constantly to endeavor to Imitate them in their graces, and gracious
conversations: to use all diligence to be such as they were; and to do as they
did, in our times and places.

That you be followers of them, who through faith and patience, etc.

We may look upon the words under a twofold aspect.

1. Positive. 2. Relative.
1. Positive, as expressing, and pressing a Duty necessary, for all Christians
to practice, and that is a diligent imitation of the Saints.

2. Relative, as implying a Sovereign remedy, to prevent the sin and danger of
Apostasy.

Take them in their Positive aspect, and so they present us with this Doctrinal
Observation. It is the duty of Christians to be followers of the Saints of God,
who have been, or are, excellent in their Generations; Or,

The Graces of the Saints, whether alive or dead, they are Patterns set forth
for our Imitation

Take the words in their Relative aspect, and so they afford us this,

Observation, sc. That a diligent imitation of the Saints of God in their
graces and virtues, is a special Preservative and Antidote against Apostasy.

It is the first of these I intend to insist upon; the other will be of use, in
the prosecution of this.

Doct. It is the duty of Christians to be followers of the Saints of God.

The Noun (here, (...)1 Cor. 11.1 (...)Heb. 13.7. Called.(...).
as elsewhere) (...) followers, is derived from the same verb which is used,
chapter 13.7. (...). which signifies to work according to pattern; a metaphor
borrowed from Stageplayes, where the Actors study exactly, and to the life, to
express the gestures and dispositions of the persons whom they represent; or
else from Apes, who do naturally love to imitate the actions and gestures of
men. Thus the Apostle calls Christians to an exact and unfeigned imitation of
the Saints of God, whether departed and in Heaven, or yet surviving in the Land
of the living.

This holy Imitation is frequently commanded in Scripture, 1. Cor. 4.16. and
11. 1. Jam. 5.10. Heb. 13.7.

And for this, others are commended, as 1 These. 1.6. and 2.14. etc.

For the opening of the Doctrine, I shall show you,

1. Why? The Saints are to be imitated. 2. Wherein The Saints are to be
imitated. 3. How The Saints are to be imitated. 4. We shall improve it for our
use and practice.
1. Quest. Why? Now the Grounds and Reasons of the point, are such as these
following. 1 Ground. Gods end in giving such patzerns.


This was a principal end or design which God had in bestowing such choice and
gracious qualifications upon the Saints in the world, ^scil.) that they might
serve as patterns for the imitation of others, who either live with them, or
come after them. Hence they are called lights, Phil. 2.15, 16.

They be like the Pharo's, or fires upon the Seacoasts, to show passengers
their way in the dark night, that they may not suffer shipwreck. They are
looking-glasses, by which the Saints should dress themselves. God did not
bestow graces and excellencies upon them, merely for their own sakes, for the
adorning of their own souls, and to qualify them for their future Glory;
(though that was one gracious ^esign he had upon them, 2 Cor. 5 5. Col. ^.12.)
but that by their light, they m^^m show others the way, holding forth the word
of life; and by their heat they might warm others, and by their zeal provok
many, 2 Cor. 9.2. your zeal has provoked many. Therefore says our Lord, Mat.
5.51.
let your light shine, etc. No man lights a candle to put it under a bed, or
under a bus^el, but on a candlestick, that it may give light unto all that are
in the house. Therefore as the Saints themselves sin against Gods design (in
giving them such excellent shining graces) when they do withhold their light
and influence, by putting them under the bed of pleasure, or the bushel of
profit. So Standers-by, sin against the gracious ends and purposes of Gods love
in the graces of his Saints, when they do not fruitfully improve them for their
own imitation.

They take the grace of God in vain, in his Saints; and slight and neglect the
blessed helps which God has afforded them in their passage to heaven; they
regard not Gods love and care in setting up such lights in the world: whereas
they should admire God in his Saints, as David did in the workmanship of the
Creation, and cry out in that admiration, Psalm. 8.3, 4.
Lord, what is man that thou art so mindful of him! they should Praise and
glorify God, which gives such gifts and graces unto men. And by daily
comparing themselves with these Patterns, strive to correct their errors, and
to come up to further degrees of holiness and perfection.

2. To be sure this was one great Reason, 2 Ground. Gods desiceing siaung the
lives of the Saints to be Recorded.
why God took such order by the Penmen of the Holy Ghost, to have the lives and
Graces of the Saints, so exactly Regigistred in the Scriptures, and kept upon
public record; That they might be for Patterns and Presidents to future
Generations. So Octavius Augustus erected the Statues of the Roman Hero's,
triumphali effigy. That illorum veluti ad exemplar, and Ipse dum viveret, and
in sequentium aetatum principes exigerentur a Civibus. Romans 15.4. Romans 15.4.
Whatsoever things were written aforetime, were written for our learning, that
we through patience and comfort of the Scriptures, might have hope.

Even the sins and failings of the Saints are recorded in Scripture upon this
very account, 1 Cor. 106, 11. to be (...) Types and ensamples, not indeed for
our imitation, but for our caution: They be our Take-heeds, not our Patterns;
to the intent we should not lust after evil things, as they also lusted, v. 6.

But now their Gracious and Holy Gonversations, they are properly Registered for
our imitation; to the intent we should tread in their steps, (1 Cor. 4.17. For
this cause have I sent unto you Timotheus, etc. who shall bring you into
remembrance of my ways which be in Christ) and might be taught by Pattern, as
well as by Precept.

Thus Abraham stands in Scripture as a pattern for our faith and self-denial.
David for a pattern of our sincerity, a man after Gods own heart. Encch of our
walking with God, etc.

Why now, if we mind them not, and care not to imitate them, we sin against
the design of the Scripture, and bid God (as it were) keep his Copies to
himself, we need them not; or we desire not to f^llow them.

3. Reason. Patterns make any work more easy.
3. Reason. To be followers of the Saints is a marvelous help and furtherance in
our work. His work is half done that has a president before him; the precept
possibly may be dark and obscure; but precept exemplified into a pattern and
example, is plain and facile; he that runs may read.

Patterns are the commands of God made legible in the lives of the Saints:
Holiness made exemplary, by which we may see how the Saints believed, how the
Saints denied themselves, how they loved God, and how they contemned the world,
etc.

If you would know what such graces are, look upon the Saints, and they will
serve as so many Coments, and Interpreters to you. Besides, Presidents do put
(...) kind of life into men; the very bruit creatures are animated and quickened
by their fellow creatures, their companions in labors and travel.

4. Reason. To prevent mistake.
4. Reason, It is a notable means to prevent mistakes of our own estates, and to
undeceive us of false opinions of our selves.

We are very prone to think well of our selves, till we bring our selves and
our ways to the pattern and exemplar of the Saints and servants of God; then
we begin to say to our selves, Are we like the Saints in Scripture? or the
Saints living? Do I live as they lived? Do I deny my self as they did? Does my
zeal for God eat me up? Is my faith and patience like theirs, that have
inherited the Promises? Have I a Paul's spirit? Oh how unlike! what Dwarfs and
Pigmies are we in comparison of them! Surely, either these were more then
Saints, or we are none: by comparing, we come to see a wide and manifest
difference between them and us.

5 Ground. God is successively glorified in the world.
5. Reason. By imitating the Saints, God is successively glorified in the world.
Abraham glorified God in his Generation, and they that walk in the steps of
faithful Abraham, they glorify him successively in their Generations. Though
Abraham be gone, and the Saints be not; Imitation makes them live still;
Imitation is the multiplication of the Saints: As the Kings Picture is
multiplied by taking Copies, so that when the King is dead his Effigies will be
known in future Generations.

This is the Generation of them that seek thy face, O Jacob. The followers of
Jacob, are his Geceration: he begot them by his example and Imitation makes
them his Genuine Posterity: They stand up as wrestlers with God, as he was. And
thus B^lievers, the Children of Abraham his spiritual seed, his lively Pictures
and Effigies in the world. Et sic in caet.

6 Ground. Imitation is the way to prevent slothfulness.
6. Reason. Imitation is the way to cure us of sluggishness and torpor which is
in out natures; that ye be not slothful, but followers of them, etc. so in the
text.

The slothfulness here dissuaded, is directly contrary to the forementioned
diligence: And mention is therefore made of it to show us that for the more
prosperous flourishing of any Grace, the contrary sin is very carefully to be
shunned.

The Trophie of Miltiades awa^l^^^ed T^^^^ sto^les. Pl^^arch.
If we would be diligent, we must take heed of sloth; and if we would take heed
of the sluggishness, to which our corrupt natures are so marvellously propense,
we must eye the Saints, imitate them, follow them, and be slothful if you can.

Consider what pains the Saints have taken in their several Generations. Jacob
wrestled with the Angel till break of day; Christ prayed till he sweat again.
All he Saints in the Old and New Testament, ^hey did much, and endured much:
take the ^reat Apostle, it would even tire one of ^s to read the Catalogue of
his active and ^assive travells in the Gospel, 2 Cor. 11.^3. to the end. Oh
what have the Saints (...) one and suffered in their several ages! How may such
Presidents both shame and quicken us! Oh their labor of love, their work of
faith, their patience of hope! How steadfast! How unmovable! How abundant in
the work of the lord!

The keeping of such patterns still in ^ur eyes will marvellously quicken us,
to ^se all diligence in our Christian race^^ Did they run after the rate that
we do? Did they pray after the same rate that ^^ve pray? Did they please
themselves? O any sluggish heart! this pace will never ^ring thee to heaven.

7. Reason. Imitation will prevent Apostasy.
7. Reason. The close following of the ^aints will prevent Apostasy: Joash did
^ell all the days of Jehoiad^h.

Christians look about you, ye are in great ^anger of falling away from your
own ^tedfastness. Your temptations are many and great, and the danger is
dreadful.

Here in the Text, the sin, the punishment, who can expound them to us?

Well, if you will stand fast, eye your Pres^dents.

See what they did and suffered in their hour of temptation, rather then turn
back upon the profession of Religion. Remember what the Patriarchs, Prophets,
Apostles, Martyrs of Christ have suffered, and stand fast. Remember how they
lived! How they died! As the Apostle exhorted concerning Christ, Heb. 11.3^
Consider them, what they endured, lest ye faint in your minds. Their
perseveranc^ well said to heart, will be your Preservative.

8. Reason. By this means the loss of the Saints will be less felt.
8. Reason. Our following the Saints by holy imitation, will wake them be less
missed in the world, when they are taken away.

Elijah was less wanted because Elish^ was endued with his spirit. Moses
absence was recruited by Joshuas succession.

O do you stand in the gap, and fill up the breach of them that are gone, with
your gracious influences; and their absence will be the better born.

My seed shall serve him, said Christ upon the Cross, or going to it. Psa.
22.^^. q. d. Though I am going out of the ^orld, I shall leave a spiritual
Generati^^ behind me, that will carry on my Fa^^ers work in the world. It was
Christ his ^^mfort upon the Cross.

9. Reason. By imitation of others we become exemplary.
9. Reason. By imitating of the Saints, ^e out selve; shall have the honor of
be^^g exemplary unto others.

See how the one is inseperably annexed ^^to the other in that famous enc^mium
which the Apostle gives his Thessal^nians, These. 16 Ye became follo^^rs of us,
^^d of the Lord, verse 6. there he com^ends their piety; And what follows? Why
verse 7. So that ye became ensamples all that believe in Mac^donia, etc. ^ere
he celebrateth their H^nour.

It is our grace to imita^e others, it is ^^r glory to be patterns to others.
This is ^e Crown, the Apostle sets upon the ^^ads of his excellent
Thessalorians.

And it shall be your Crown also, if ^ith an holy ambition ye contend to be
^^llowers of them who excel in virtue; ^^r thereby you also will become
standing^ ^atterns and presidents for others imitation The Baptist followed the
Prophet and excelled them; of common Soldier^ you will become Captains and
Leaders (...) the Lords Army. By intensive and vig^rous imitation, you will
transform you selves into shining and glorious Lumin^ries, by whose light
others may see the way to Heaven.

10. Reas. Imitation is the way to the Kingdom.
10. Reason, This is the way to the Kingdom. This way all the Saints and
wo^thies of God went, and are now entre^ into glory: the footsteps of
Companion^ is suggested by Christ as an infallible conduct in her way. Cant.
1.8. Go you in the Path, tread in their steps and you shall enter also. This is
the encouragement which the text holds out.

Be ye followers of them who through faith and patience inherit the Promise^
(q. d.) Abraham, Isaac, Jacob and other of the Primitive Heroes, have by their
hol^ diligence and inconquerable industry in the ways of holiness, attained
assurance (...) Heaven while they lived, and possession (...) Heaven when they
died: They have finished their course, and received their robe^^ and their
Crowns; By faith and patience in well-doing, they inherit the promise.

Press hard after them, follow them close, and you shall be partakers of the
inheritance with the Saints in light: You shall also in the end of your days,
receive the end of your hope, even the Salvation of your Souls.

Thus our Lord encourages his Soldiers, Rev. 3. v. 21. To him that overcomes,
will I grant to sit with me in my Throne, as I overcame, and am set down with
my Father in his Throne.

Follow me in my Conflict and Conquest, and you shall share with me in my
Reward and Triumph. If we be dead with Christ, we shall aslo live with Christ;
if we suffer with him we shall also reign with him; 2 Timothy 2.11, 12.

This may suffice for the first Querie Why? the Reasons and Grounds of the
point.

2. Quest. Wherein the Saints are to be imitated?
I come now to the second Querie, Wherein? or in what things we are to imitate
the Saints?

To which I Answer, 1 Negatively. 2 Affirmatively. Answ. Negat. wherein Not.



1. Negatively, The Saints are not to be imitated in every thing. Ex. Gra.

1. Not in their sins.
1. The Saints are not to be imitated in their sins and infirmities. The best of
Gods servants have had their failings and infirmities, and they are held out in
Scripture to our observation; As

Abraham's diffidence, Genesis 12.11, 12, 13. chapter 20.2. Job's impatience, Job.
3.1, 2. Noah's transgressing by Wine, Genesis 9.21. Lot's incest, Genesis 19.33.35.
David's Murder and Adultery, 2 Samuel 11.15, 4. Elijahs Passion. Jam. 5.17.
Peter's denying his Lord, Mat. 27.70, 72, 74.

These and many other failings and falls of the Saints, are Recorded in the
Book of God: But they are,

1. For the support and comfort of lapsed Christians, that reflecting upon
their own surprises by temptation, they may not despond and despair, as if
their spot were not the spot of Gods Children.

2. For the caution and admonition of all surviving generations; to the intent
that we should not presume to sin as they sinned. 1 Cor. 10.6.

But to be sure they stand not in the holy Register, as Patterns and
encouragements to sin. They are our Take-heeds, not our Warrants; they tell us,
here is a Rock, avoid it; here is a Quick-sand, come not near it, lest you
suffer shipwreck. We are not to imitate the best in their worst.

2. Not in what they did by miraculous inspiration.
2. They are not be imitated in what they did by immediate and miraculous
assistance of the Holy Ghost.

As we are commanded to be followers of God as dear Children, but not in the
creating of the world; not in causing the Sun to rise, and the Rain to fall,
etc. that is, we must not attempt such an imitation of our heavenly Father, as
being above the Sphere of the creature, the Prerogative only of the great God.

Our Lord commands us to learn of him, but not in raising the dead; Mat.
11.29.
not in multiplying loaves, not in casting out Devils by a word, etc. these
being works which Christ did not in his Private, but in his Mediatory Capacity.

So also the Prophets, Apostles and other of the Saints of God, though they be
out Standards and Patterns, yet they are not to be followed in those actions
which they did by virtue of an extraordinary afflatus or inspiration of the
Holy Ghost; those actions being peculiar only to their extraordinary
commissions and functions, and not common to them as believers.

^. Not in that they ^id by ^pecial di^pensation.
3. Neither are they to be followed in those actions which they did by special
dispensation, or by way of probation and trial. Ex. Gra. We are not to rob,
spoil and take away the substance and estates of wicked men, (merely qua
wicked) because the Israelites robbed the Egyptians; unless we had immediate
Authority and command for it, from him, who is the absolute and Supreme Lord of
the Creature, Psa. 75.7
and may dispose of the whole Creation to whomsoever he please, as they had. We
may not offer up our Sons and Daughters in sacrifice to God, because God
tempted Abraham to offer up his Isaac, for trial of his obedience and
Self-denial.

Nor yet again may any man or woman take a Wife or Husband of Whoredom, as the
Prophet did, Hos. 1.2. (whether in vision only, or in reality we enquire not
here) uness we had the same special dispensation and allowance from the Supreme
Lawgiver.

Thus Negatively, We are not to follow the Saints.

2. Affirmatively, Therefore, we are to imitate the Saints in their graces
only, and in their holy Conversations in the world, and in whatever they did in
a way of obedience and conformity to the revealed will of God, the standing
rule of the word.

A more distinct and particular account whereof, I shall give, before I finish
this discourse.

3. 3 Qu. How we must imitate the Saints
Querie. How must we imitate the Saints of God? Answer. Here again our Negative
Rule meets us, (scil.) We are not to follow the Saints Universally; not all
over. And the reason is, because, all that is in the Saints, is not Sanctity.
All that is in the Godly, is not Godliness. Saints have their infirmities, and
in them they are not to be imitated.

The best of men, are but men at the best. Affirmatively, Therefore our
imitation of the Saints it must be but,

With limitation.
1. A limited Imitation. And that Limitation, one of the best of men (that were
but men) the great Apostle has given us in his own Person: 1 Cor. 11.1
Be ye followers of me, (How?) as I am of Christ. If we find holy Paul, not
following Christ, he does not require us to follow him. It was Jehosophat's
honor that he made choice of the first ways of David to walk in. Indeed we
have these intermediate Copies written for our learning: God therein
condescending to our infirmity, lest our tender eyes should be too much dazzled
in continual beholding the transcendent brightness of the Supreme light, 1 John 1.5. But God, and Christ, and the Spirit are the Supreme Original Standard
of our Conformity.

The Father. Mat. 5.48
Be you perfect as your Father, which is in heaven is perfect.

Jesus Christ. 1 Pet. 1.15
As he which has called you, is holy, so be ye holy in all manner of
Conversation.

The Holy Ghost. Romans 8.7.14
They that are after the Spirit, do mind the things of the Spirit. And again,
As many as are led by the Spirit are the Sons of God.

Next to these, the Saints and Angels in Heaven, are our lights of a second
magnitude; Petit.. 3d.
Thy will be done on Earth, as it is done in Heaven.

These are our exact and perfect Exemplars, in which there is no defect or
imperfection.

But all our Earthly Patterns (be they never so excellent) have their errors
and deficiencies; which may mislead us, if we follow them without due
limitation. And therefore all these inferi^ur Patterns, are to be reduced to
the Original Standard and Exemplar; and wherein they are found either erroneous
or defective, we are to correct and perfect them by the Original; we must by
faith eye the Pattern in the Mount: we may imitate our terrestrial Copies, but
we must not terminate in them. The Saints are good Leaders, but not infallible
useful Copies, but such as have need to be corrected by the Original.

Our imitation of them therefore, must be bounded by Scripture-limitation.

2. Uniform. Nemo agit unum nisi sapiens, caeterimultiformes sunt, Sen. Ep.
Phil. 4.8.
2. Our Imitation of the Saints must be exact and uniform: though we are not to
imitate the Saints in all their actions, yet we are to imitate them in all
their Graces, and gracious conversation. Whatsoever things are true, whats^ever
things are just. Whatsoever things are pure, whatsoever things are lovely,
whatsoever things are of good report, if there be any virtue, if there be any
praise in the Saints and Servants of God, these things we must think of; and in
these things we must labor to be like unto them. We must take heed of
Partiality, in our following the Saints; of preferring one before another, one
Saint before another; or one Grace in the Saints before another, unless it be
such Saints, and such Graces, as God himself has preferred by putting upon
them more abundant honor, some special remark of excellency; we must take heed
of picking and choosing, taking what we please, and rejecting what we list,
according to our own private fancies and interest: We must follow them in every
path, and in every step, wherein they have f^llowed the Captain of their
salvation: Whether in their doing-work, or in their suffering-work St. Paul's
charge to Timothy will not in this case be improper for us; I charge thee
before God, and the Lord Jesus Christ, 1 Timothy 5.21
and the elect Angels, that thou observe these things without preferring one
before another, doing nothing by Pa tiality. To this end,

3. Vigorous.
3. Our Imitation of the Saints must be a vigorous and industrious Imitation.
Truly to follow the Saints fully and exactly, is not a business of an easy and
ordinary dispatch, it will require a vigorous and industrious intention and
contention of our spirits, as a work that will take up all the faculties of our
souls, and parts of our bodies: Our Judgments to discern (according to the
word) what is to be chosen, and what to be eschewed in the Patterns we propound
to our selves: Our Unde^standings, to discover the beauty and amiableness of
the Graces and Holiness that is in the Saints. Our Memories, to keep always
before our eyes these excellent Presidents, lest at any time we let them slip;
we shall stand in need of such Looking-glasses continually, to see our faces
in; we shall want our Guides at every turning, to tell us the way, when we are
turning to the right hand, or to the left.

Our Wills and Affection, to love our Guides, to take delight and compl^cency
in beholding these beautiful pieces; if we see no beauty in the Saints, why we
should desire them, we shall never be zealous imitators of their Persons.

Our Consciences: we stand in need of the impartial Testimony of an awakened
conscience, to accuse or excuse us according to our fidelity or neglect in this
duty of so great concernment. Moreover it will cost us much prayer, medita^ion,
often reflection upon our selves, watchful observation, self-denial,
mortification, etc. Yea, much labor and pains even of the outward man much
fasting, striving, wrestling, and watchfulness, to carry on this great
important duty, of imitating the Saints. Surely a slothful, lazy professor,
will never make any earnings in so curious and laborious a work as this is.

That Is h ghly observable in the Text; That ye be not slothful, but followers
of them who through faith and patience, etc. Sloth, and Imitation of the Saint
are inconsistent.

It is a mattet of great labor and diligence to be a follower of Abraham,
Isaac, and Jacob, and all the rest of the Heroes ^od Worthies of God, in their
faith, and patience, and other Graces: A delicate short spirited professor
will never carry on this spiritual and blessed trade to any purpose; therefore
says the Apostle (he^e) We desire that every one of you do show the same
diligence, etc. All the strength and industry you have, will be little enough
to lay out in this arduous and excellent design.

Assure your selves, it will afford you no time for security, and the indulging
of the flesh.

It cost the Saints much holy contention, to write and leave these excellent
Copies to the succeeding world; and it will cost you no less industry to write
exactly after them. You must not think to make to your selves a religion of
your own, or (...) take up this imitation, and lay it down ^gain when you
please. Therefore,

4. Our Imitation must be constant.
4. Our Imitation of the Saints must be constant and persevering Imitation; so
in ^he verse before my text.

We desire every one of you, use the same ^^ligence to the end.

Where ever you cease this Imitation, ^ou disclaim your Patterns; and expose
^our selves to the sin and danger of Apo^tacy.

5. Our Imitation of the Saints must ^e a believing-Imitation. 5. Believing.
As we must imitate their Faith, so we must have faith ^o imitate them. Faith
to realize the pro^ise, and faith to believe Gods Faithful^ess and
All Sufficiency to make good his ^romise; so did Abraham, Romans 4.20.

Our Imitation of the Saints will meet with much opposition, many
discouragements from our flesh, contradiction from ^he world, and opposition
from the Devil: We must have faith to overcome them all, or else we shall
easily give out, and sit down with shame and loss.

Sixthly and lastly, 6. Patient
Our Imitation of the Saints, must be a patient Imitation. As we must Imitate
the Saints in their Patience, so there is great need of Patience to persevere
in this Imitation.

The Saints have in their several Generations met with much trouble, and
persecution in following Christ, and so shall you in following them.

You have need therefore of Patience, that when ye have done the will of God
you may receive the Promise. Here is the Faith and Patience of the Saints,
through which they inherit the Promise* Patience to suffer, and faith to
conquer their sufferrings: Faith to believe the recompense of Reward, and
Patience to wait till it come.

Go ye, and do likewise.

Thus much for the Doctrine; I come now to the Use.

Come now to the Use of the Point. Use 1.


And in the first place it may serve way of Information, to show us, That

All commendation of departed Saints not to be condemned. For surely is not
merely upon their own ac^ount, that their Persons are celebra^ed with such
remarks of honor, and their names perpetu ted to posterity by a ^ratefull
Commemoration. If it were, ^^ey are not to be envied their just Enco^iums:
Since God is pleased to set the ^rown of Glory upon their Graces in Heaven, we
have no cause to think it too ^reat an honor to set the Crown of Praise upon
their Graces here on Earth: Prove. ul ult.
Yea, ^e have the Divine allowance for it. Let their works praise them in the
Gates.

But it is upon an higher account that honorable mention, Two grounds upon
which commendation of the Saints is warrantable.
and Commemoration, is to be made of the Graces, and Excellencies of the Saints.

1. In as much as such Encomiums are rather the Commenda^ion of the Grace of
God in the Saints, then (...) the Saints themselves. And by this mean Christ is
glorified in his Saints, and adm^red of all them which believe. 2 These. 1.10
And therefore not unto the Saints, not to the Saint but to the God of the
Saints is all the glory to be ascribed.

2. Because by this means others are provoked to holiness.
2. Because this Commendation of the Saints is for the propagation of their
pie^^ and holiness to them that do survive, (...) shall be born in
after-generaions, that the may inherit the benefit of such excelle^^ Patterns,
to provoke them to an holy Im^tation.

And therefore to bury the Saints grace in the same grave of Oblivion with
their bodies, is to obscure the Stars, and to rob the world of the light and
influence of suc^ glorious Luminaries, which God hat^ set up in the firmament
of the Church (...) Yea, to Eclipse the Sun of Righteousness Himself, by whose
aspect they shone s^ bright to the world.

2. Things have made commendation dangerous.
There be two ways indeed, whereb^ the use of the Commendation of the Saints
departed, has become perniciou^ to the world.

1. Whilst some greedy Preachers (for filthy lucre-sake) have turned even me^
vices into virtues; boldly making Saints where God has made none. 1. When vice
passes for virtue.
Whilst not only every Bristol-stone must pass for a Diamond, and every
Glowworm be magnified to a Star;

But even Drunkards, Adulterers, and ^wearers, and the Covetous, (whom the Lord
abhors) their bodies must not be ^ut into the grave, before their souls have
^^en seated upon Thrones in glory.

How many thousands, this kind of Pulpit-flattery has ruined, may (not
uncharitably) be presumed. Since by this means the worst of men fear not to
live in ^he grossest sins whilst they can purchase ^he Priests Absolution at
so cheap a rate when they come to die, and their souls ^e sent to Heaven by
Letters of commendation from a Mercenary Clergie-man when ^hey are dead.

2. While commendation, has stolen into adoration
2. Another way whereby Commenda^ion of the dead has proved so fatal to poor
deceived souls, is,

Whilst Commending of the Saints has supestitiously Commenced into
sacrilegious worshipping of them, and Praying to them.

The Apotheosis in R^me Ethnic* and Canonization of Saints in Rome Catholic,
has sprung principally from this Fountain; ^eque aliande est (...) pleraque
Coceii, fun. orat. Maceo. v.
whilst in both, the fond oppinion, and overlavish Commendation, which the
present generation gave to their Worthies and Be efactors, have ensnared the
Ignorance of succeeeding generations, to judge them not unworthy of Divine
honor and ador^tion; while they thought that their translation into those
Celestial habitations, could not but improve their benignity and Power, for
the help of poor mortals here below, even to Infinitude, who were of such
Heroic Influence, whilst yet amongst the Sons of men. Hence the Original of
worshipping the dead, and praying to them. Save only, that the Pride, and
A^a^ice of the latter Pontificians, has prevailed with them to Canonize for
Saints, such as they knew to be the worst of men; and to create them little
D^ities, who by the justest Character which could be collected out of their
Doctrine and lives, are now amongst Reprobate Spirits, suffering the vengeance
of Eternal fire.

Surely, thus to commend the dead, is nothing less then to blaspheme God, and
to enrich the Devils Territories with Castawayes.

The true end of celebrating the Graces of the Saints is,

1. That God may have the Glory, (...)1 Pet. 2.9.
whilst the Saints show forth the praises, or virtues of him who has called
them out of darkness into his marvelous light.

2. That the world may have the benefit and advantage of their worthy Patterns
and Exemplars; ut sup.

Thanks be to God for such excellent helps in our way to heaven.

2. Use. Use Repr.
It may serve to Reprove diverse sorts of people.

1 Such as account the Saints the worst of men.
1. Such as account the Saints of God the most dangerous kind of men in the
world; not fit for humane society. Surely there is not such a reviled,
persecuted, defamed generation again under heaven; The very filth and
offscouring of all things, 1 Cor. 4.12 13.
the dregs, the sordes, the scraping of the shoes; (...)
the superfluous froth and scum, that is good for nothing but to be cast into
the fire: Yea the more holy, the worse. The Saints are looked upon as the
Troublers of Israel; the Pests of the places where they live, the Deformities
of humane society. Mal. 3.17. Rev. 3.1. and 1, 16.
Surely, these men are not of Gods mind, God accounts them as his Jewels, Phil.
2.15. Mat. 5.14
the Stars in his right hand, the Sons of God, the lights the world, to give
light to a dark world: Patterns and Exemplars, worthy to be held forth to the
observation and imitation, of the Sons of men; (as here)

In a word men think the Saints not worthy of the world, Act. 22.22 Heb. 11.38
2 Cor. 44.
when in the mean time, Gods thinks the world not worthy of them.

Oh how has the God of the world blinded the eyes of them that believe not!

2 Such as imitate the worst.
2. It may serve to reprove such as do not care whom they follow, or what
Patterns in the world they do imitate; none so vile, so debaucht, so profane,
so great a derider and persecutor of holiness, but is good enough to make a
Copy for them to write after; men do as they see the major part of men do, they
follow the multitude, as thinking it not good to be singular, and stricter then
their neighbors; though that be a rule upon which God has set a special brand
of infamy. Fellow not a multitude to do evil. Exodus 23.2.


Especially the great and learned men of the world; men are prone to look upon
them as infallible Guides, and do greedily follow their conduct. Have any of
the Rulers believed on him? Joh. 7.48.
Great men have followers of their vices, as well as of their Persons.

Alas, we should take our Patterns from Heaven; Thy will be done on Earth as it
is in Heaven; and the greatest of men do not care out of what filthy ditch,
Spiritus sunt insinceri vagi a coelesti vigori and virtute destituti etc. ad
Solamen calamitatis suae nil dedesinum perditi prodere, Min. Fell. 3. Them that
imitate the best, but in the worst.
or from what dunghill, they take up their examples; even from Hell it self
people are not afraid to fetch their Patterns; as proud as the Devil, as
malicious as the Devil, as blasphemous as the damned Reprobates themselves, as
hating of God and goodness as the Angels that kept not their first estate, as
greedy and industrious to drag others with them into perdition! This is a
lamentation and shall be for a lamentation.

3. It may reprove such, as (it may be) will imitate the Saints, but not in
their Sanctity, but in their sins: Lot in his Incest, Noah in his Drunkenness,
and David in his Adultery, and Peter in his denying his Master, etc. And when
they have done, can quote such instances for their Authority! Oh the wonderful
perverseness that is in our Apostate natures, that men should imitate the Saints
only in their deformities! Imitate Saints only, in that wherein they are not
Saints! Is there any such thing in nature!

Are there any amongst men that desire to be like others in their natural
defects and deformities, be they persons never so great? Do you observe any
that take delight to imitate men under distraction, or mad men? Did it ever
ease any that lay sick of the Gout, Stone, Strangurie, Dropsy, Fever, etc. to
tell them that many Noble, Rich, learned Persons have been tormented with the
like pains?

Surely, Object.
you will say, no wonder if not, since these are the blemishes, infelicities
and destruction of the humane nature.

And are not men's lusts and corruptions so too? Answer.
Even of the Saints themselves, save only by interposition of divine grace,
Hos. 14.4. Psalm. 23.3.
healing and restoring them! Yea, and of so much worse nature and effect, then
either intellectual or bodily distempers, by how much the soul is better then
the body, and Hell worse then Death; Romans 1.18
God himself testifying it from Heaven: And the Saints themselves, after they
have recovered their lapses, having confessed it before all the world, with
greatest self-abhorrency and abasement. Ps. 73.22.
So foolish was I, and ignorant, and like a beast before thee, cries David when
he came out of the Sanctuary; he is so incenst against his sin that he cannot
find a term vile enough to reproach himself withal!

And yet is sin the only imitable thing men can discover in the Saints? Prove.
1.22
How long ye simple ones will ye love simplicity, and Scorners delight in
scorning, and fools hate knowledge.

Lord, who has believed thy report? or to whom is the Arm of the Lord revealed?

4. Reproof.

4. That will follow the best but in the best.
But there is yet another sort of people, that justly merit the lash of reproof;
and they are such who though they dare not be so bad as to imitate the Saints
in their sins, yet love not to be so good, as to imitate the Saints in their
strictness, and holy severity in Religion. They think it enough to follow them
in their morality, and civil deportment, to be just and true in their dealings,
to be charitable to the poor, and to keep their Church (as they call it;) But
their holiness, their zeal, mortification and close walking with God; to be
always abounding in the work of the Lord: Here they leave them, as deeming
these, nothing else but the unnecessary strains of a fruitless preciseness,
and that which may expose them to the scandal and disgust of the world.

Oh the blindness and folly of the wisdom of the flesh! That wherein the Saints
are most like God, therein, only the unregenerate world cares lest to be like
unto them!

That which God accounts his Glory, (for that is his Name, Glorious in
holiness, and (therefore) fearful in praises) the reprobate world account their
abasement.

Oh ye Sons of men, how long will ye turn Gods glory into shame? how long will
ye love vanity and seek after leasing?

Surely, carnal men are Gods Antipodes, they stand upon their heads, and shake
their heels against Heaven! They glory in their shame, and are ashamed of
their glory; they vilify what they should admire, and admire what they should
vilify; they imitate whom, and what they should abhor, and abhor what they
should imitate! Ah how have the Sons of men lost not their conscience only, but
their judgment! How have they divested themselves not of Religion only, but of
Reason; and put off the Man, as well as the Saint! This is a lamentation, and
shall be for a lamentation! I come now to a more particular Application of this
Doctrine, to our selves of this family, together with other Relations and
Friends, more especially concerned in our sorrows.

Suffer I beseech you, a word of Exhortation. Use Exhor.


My dearly Beloved, God has made a fore breach upon us; He has smitten us,
and made us sick in smiting us. The Crown is fallen from our Head; The Ornament
of our Family is taken away: A Wife, a Moth r, a Friend, a Guide, the delight
of our eyes is gone, the blessing of all her Relations at home and Acquaintance
abroad! Woe unto us, for we have sinned!

And now dear Friends, what shall we do! Shall we give up our selves to sorrow?
shall we lie down and roar as men and women that have no hope?

This were to wrong our selves. Or shall we make it our work to forget Her, to
cast her out of our thoughts? and to bury her memory with her Ashes?

This were to wrong Her, who has deserved better at our hands.

Shall we then spend our thoughts and enquires where and how we may recruit our
selves with new Relations? and to make up our Lots with other Comforts? or let
out our hearts more greedily to them we have yet remaining?

This were infinitely to wrong God, and to pervert the designs and purposes of
his grace in this severe dispensation. Or shall we, lastly, satisfy our selves
with a few cold fruitless Commendations of the things which were excellent and
praiseworthy in Her?

This were but to mock our selves, and Her, and God also.

Behold, therefore I will yet show you a more excellent way, and it is that in
my Text, Be ye followers of her; study to imitate so excellent a Pattern, as
she has left us, for me thinks I hear her crying to us out of her grave, or
rather from Heaven, (where her triumphant soul is placed amongst the spirits of
just men made perfect) as sometimes Her Lord, and ours, bespake his Disciples.
Joh. 13.15. I have given you an example that you should do as I have done.

Now therefore, that I may not beat the air, nor spend time unprofitably
(only) in Generals; I shall propose Her to your view, in a twofold Capacity:
But with this preface, That here it must not be expected from me, that I should
either proclaim her extraction, which was generous, or describe the loveliness
of her person, though I maysay with modesty, Her soul did been habitare, 'twas
lodged in a beautiful habitation; her body which was an elegant piece of
natures artifice, did give (as well as receive) a grace to what ever she did or
spoke.

1. In her Relational Capacity. 2. In her Personal Capacity. Her Relational
Capacity.

In both which, you will find her worthy of your most exact and vigorous
imitation. Take her

1. In her Relational Capacity, 1. As a Child.
and there look upon her, first as a Child, and a most du ifull and obedient
Child she was, not only where the Relation was natural, but even where it was
but Legal and Adoptitious. She never disobeyed or neglected the Commands of her
Parents in the least, while she was under the charge of their education.

She was of a most teachable and tractable spirit; there was nothing of a
perverse or peevish disposition in her; her Will was bound up in the Will of
her Parents, and Governors, she had no will of her own.

She was a most exact observer of the fifth Commandment, in honoring her Father
and Mother, in Word, Gesture and Actions, there was never heard an unbecoming
coming word fall from her lips toward them, nor undecent carriage observed,
nor any thing that might be interpreted as the least defect of that honor
which was due unto them by the Law of God and Nature.

But her whole deportment, was fraught with as much sweet, reverential,
pleasing subjection to them, as their hearts could desire.

You that are Children, or under the just obligation of Children, see you be
followers of Her in this Child-like virtue: Keep this excellent Pattern of
filial obedience always before your eyes as a singular exemplification of the
fifth Commandment, expounded by the Apostle, Ephesians. 6.1.2 3.
Children obey your Parents in the Lord, for this is right.

Or if this Instance of obedience seems too inferior, take that Instance of an
higher authority. That of the Son of God Incarnate, of whom it is said, He went
down with his Parents, Luke 2.51.
and came to Nazareth, and was subject to them.

2. As a Wife.
2. Take her in the Conjugal Relation, and there you may behold Her a most
Chaste, Loyal, Loving, Tender, and (according to her audibly avowed engagement
at her Marriage in the public Assembly) An obedient Wife, as two loving
Husbands, have successively experienced and testified.

She studied to please and not to be pleased; Prove. 5.19
sweet as the loving Hind, and as the pleasant Ree. She never diss^nted from
them, but as the word did vvarrant her dissent; and then, (if possibly such a
then there was,) proposing, rather then opposing; persuading by
Scripture-rule, rather then contradicting by self-vvill.

Above all, she was tenderly affected to, and covetuously desirous of the
Spiritual good of her Conjugal Relations.

A true help she was, a Soul-Help unto them, Genesis 2.18.
answering fully to the Law of her Creation; themselves have successively
acknowledged, they have had cause to bless God for her, with the excellent
Woman in the Proverbs, chapter 31.12. She did them good, and not evil all her
days.

You that are Wives, be ye followers of such a Pattern; she was subject to her
own Husband, as the Church is subject to Christ. As she did imitate the Church
so do ye imitate her.

Wives be you obedient in all things; to your own Husbands in all things save
wherein in your obedience to them, may possibly be disobedience to God; and
therein, not opposing your wills, so much to theirs as Gods. That Is not
Rebellion against Rulers and Superiors, wherein not the will so much of the
Inferior, gives sin a Negative vote as the Conscience, and Conscience rightly
informed by the word of God.

Yoke-fellows, Love ye one another souls. Love one another to heaven, Let not
the flesh go away with all your time, and strength and affections; nor the
elder serve the younger. Live together as heirs of the grace of life, that your
prayers be not hindered. 1 Pet. 3.7.


3. Look upon her as a Mistress in her Family. 3. A Governess.
She was an excellent Governess, her government was o^ a Scripture
constitution. It was made up of sweetness and gravity; sweetness without levity
or remisness; gravity without bitterness and severity.

There was no severity in her discipline, save what was in the Pattern she
proposed to them, her own Conversation: Indeed she was severely good; her
government was made up of Entreaties, rather then Commands or Repro^f^. She
knew not how to be angry, unless it were against sin; and even that she expressed
rather in grief, then in passion.

Her great Care was, that her family might know God, and Jesus Christ, Joh.
17.3.
whom to know his life eternal.

She was of a Joshuah-like resolution. Jos. 24.13
As for me and my house, we will serve the Lord.

She thought it not enough to go to heaven alone, but labored to carry as many
as she could with her, especially them of her own Family.

To that end she was very exact and constant in Family Duties, Her exactness in
familyduties.
(sc.) Reading the Scripture, Prayer, Catechizing, as deeply sensible how
gainful God had made that Domestic duty to her own soul in the Family of her
education: I say, being conscious what good she had got by being diligently
instructed in the principles of Religion, she was conscientious in the
discharge of that duty toward those whom God had committed to her trust, not
only in a way of exercising their memories in a bare verbal repetition of
words, but (according to her faculty, which verily was not ordinary in her sex)
in a way of helping them to understand the sense and meaning; and by impressing
upon conscience what was imprinted in their memeries.

In the absence of her dear Husband, she constantly performed the duty of
prayer in her own person, save only when she could call in the assistance of
her own pious Pastor, or other faithful Ministers whom the present Providence
had cast into her neighborhood, all which her Christian obliging converse had
so marvellously endeared, that she had as many Chaplains, as if she had bin one
of the greatest Ladies in the Land.

A true Gospel-Sabbatarian she was; and thought it no Judaism to keep the
Christian Sabbath as an holy Rest, rather envying her body, that it should have
six days to her souls one, then sacrilegiously filching out of that precious
one, any parcells of time for the uses and purposes of the flesh; truth is, she
counted every moment of Sabbath-time, too good for any time but Sabbath-work,
unless it were where divine indulgence had made allowance for works of Mercy
and Necessity! In reference to both which (notvvithstanding) she well knevv
how to spiritualize even them also into Sabbath-exercises.

Further then these two, she durst not exact any of her servants labor: As
knovving,

1. That the Sabbath was the servants privilege, as well as her own. Thou
and thy servant, etc.

2. That her Servants souls were as precious to God, as her own, and cost Jesus
Christ as much blood to redeem.

Therefore she was careful that every one in her Family, should not only
attend the public Ordinances; but that they should improve the whole overplus
of Sabbath time, in the holy exercises of Religion. And as God had given her an
excellent faculty in taking Sermons, so she made it her work constantly to
repeat both the former and latter Sermon to her Family, which she did with
such a judicious accurateness, that the hearer could hardly miss in the
repetition, what he had heard from the Pulpit, at least not any head or
material enlargment of the Sermon.

The other void spaces of the day she commended to her Family as Gods and their
own time, for divine uses, calling upon them, to redeem it accordingly.

You that are Governors of Families, imitate this blessed Saint herein also.
The Sabbath is exceedingly fallen amongst us, not in our Public Assemblies and
streets only, but even within our private vvalls: The spirit of Ignatius dyed
with him.(...). Let every one that loves the Lord, sanctify the Lord's Day,
Ignat. ep ad Magn. How art thou fallen, Thou Morning-Starr? Thou Queen of
days; thou golden spot of the week! Thou Map of Heaven! Thou birthday of
immortality! How art thou fallen!

You that love the Lord Jesus, and his Resurrection, I charge you by all that
right and interest you claim in either, help to lift up the head of this
glorious day of Jehovah; for the love of God do not put away the Pillovv from
under the head of this dying day, as you would not be found guilty of the
blood of Christ and of his Resurrection; Christians, stir up your selves for
the recovery of the life and honor of this Holy Day.

4. As a Friend and Neighbor: 4. As a Friend.
She was of a most sweet and obliging converse. As many loved her as knew her;
as ambitious she was to do good offices to the poorest, as others are to those
that can requite them.

But that which was eminent in her converse, was her profitable improvement
of it; she was not one of those professors, that with the holy, could show her
self holy; and with the profane, could show her self profane; that could talk
religiously in one company, and vainly and frothily with others: She was not
one of them that could shape themselves into any form and garb of the present
Company; but she was gracious and uniform in every Company, which providence
cast her upon, spending the time in Christian and profitable Communication;
always either doing good or receiving good, (as opportunity served.) But if
the Company were such as admitted neither; her silence should argue her
dissent, and her withdrawment (as far as might consist with civility) should at
once ease them and her self of a burden.

Christians, Oh that every one would herein become her followers: Oh what a
deal of precious time is wasted in idle alk, and foolish jestings, which are
not convenient! how many precious hours are pent in vain and unprofitable
complehents? Yea in carnal mirth, foolish talk^g and jesting; which might be
improved to spiritual, soul-edifying conferences; as if Christians had
forgotten there were such a word in the Bible, Let your speech be always with
grace, seasoned with salt, Col. 4.6. or that other, Redeem the time, for the
days are evil, Ephesians. 5.1, 15, 16. The Lord make you wise to salvation.

I might easily enlarge in these her Relative excellencies, but I must hasten.

In the second place take a view of her in her Personal Capacity. And there we
shall find these six Graces, which were eminently in her, to the observation of
all that know her, sc.

Holiness, Meekness, Love, Sympathy with the afflicted people of God, Faith,
Patience.

1. Her Holiness. she was a Christian of a most unstained Holiness, she wore
the garment of her Christian profession without any visible spot. The common*
Holiness of the world would not serve he^turn. Modesty, Civility,
Moral-righteousness, an Inoffensive Conversation, these go far amongh the
commonsort of professors, and I wish many that would pa^^ for Saints did not
fall short of these Though it is a very sad thing, to fall she^^ of them that
fall short of Heaven; unsess your Righteousness exceed this Ri^hieousness, you
cannot enter, etc. Mat. 5.20
Blessed be God, the Righteousness of this precious servant of Christ was of
another make, a purity she contended after of a peculiar strain; zealous of
good works; an Holiness that contains all those excellencies which God sets
any store by; Tit. 2.14. 1 Pet. 2.9.
an Holiness conversant about the whole will of God, proving what is that good,
and acceptable, and perfect will of God. Romans 12.2


She made Religion her business, Her one only necessary thing: She pursued an
Holiness that comes up to its Pattern, the Pattern in the Mount: As he that
called you is Holy, 1 Pet. 1.14 15. Mat. 5.6.
so be you Holy in all manner of conversation, and again, Be ye perfect as your
Heavenly Father is perfect. She was in all things as becomes women professing
the Gospel, adorned with good works. 1 Timothy 2.10
And to this end with the Holy Apostle, She forgot the things that were behind,
and pressed toward the Mark, for the prize of the High-calling of God in Christ
Jesus. Let the same mind be in you (my beloved) that was in this handmaid of
Jesus Christ; and do ye follow her, as she followed the blessed Apostle.

A Second grace wherein she did excel, (and indeed excel) was the grace of
Meekness; Number. 12.3.
she was of a Moses-like spirit, meek to a Nonesuch.

She was rarely angry, never in her own Cause, and when in Gods, she expressed it
in grief, rather then in passion; sin could provoke her zeal, but not transport
her into any undecent excess. In her own concerns she had that absolute
dominion over her own spirit, that as she knew not how to give offense, so she
could not easily take any; or if any at any time were worth taking, it was
sooner forgot then acknowledged; she was of so serene a temper, that an angry
word was hardly ever heard from her lips; or an angry look ever seen in her
face. 1 Pet. 3.4.
Oh how aimable did the ornament of a meek and quiet spirit render her in the
eyes of God and Man!

She was a rich Cabinet of heavenly Jewels, but she knew it not; She was of as
mean esteem in her own eye^, as she was honorable in the eyes of all
beholders. Taliter pigmentatae Deum habebitis Amatorem. Tert. de cul. faem.


You that are of her Sex and Relation, Oh that you would strive to imitate her
in this grace also; beautified with this Complexion; God, and Angels, and men
cannot choose but be in love with you

3. The Grace of Love was transcendently in her.

1. Her Love to God, she loved him exceedingly whom she couldnot love
excessively.

2. Her Love to Jesus Christ, who had loved her so passionately that he died
for love of her, Rev. 1.6.
and washed her from her sins in his own blood. But because he loves Christ too
little, Minus to amat Domine qui aliquid amat quod nonpropter te amat. Aug.
Psa. 45.2. Cant. 3. Cant. 5.10
that loves him for any thing but for himself; This precious Christian loved
Him not only for what he did, but for what he was; His Person as well as his
Portion: She loved him for his Loveliness, as well as for his Love, she looked
upon Christ with the Spouses eyes, fairer then the Children of men, etc. The
chiefest of ten Thousand, The only precious one of her Soul.

Her love to Christ had marvelously consumed her love to the World: She was in
a great degree (with the Holy Apostle) Crucified to the world, and the world to
her.

God had given a competent portion of the world to her, but she (blessed be
God) made it not her portion. She gave but very little of her Love to the
world; but possessed the world as if she possessed it not: In this only she was
(holily) proud, that she thought her love too good for the world. Her love to
Christ had wonderfully waste and weakened Self-love. Self was a very small
concern to her. None had less interest in her self, then her self.

3. Her Love to the Public Assemblies, and Public Ordinances; Her word was
that of Holy David, Lord I have loved the habitation of thy House, Psa. 26.8.
and the place where thine honor dwells.

4. Love to the Saints: All her delight was in them that excel in virtue. A
vile person was contemned in her eyes, Psalm. 16.2.3, 15.4.
but she honored them that fear the Lord. She chose not her Company by their
greatness, but by their goodness; a poor Saint was a more welcome guest to her,
then a proud sinner; she loved Saints for their Sanctity; the more holy, the
more her heart was knit unto them.

5. Her love to the faithful Ministers of the Gospel was very eminent, the very
feet of them that bring good tidings, that publish p^ac^, that bring good
tidings of good, that publish salvation, were very beautiful in her eyes; their
Persons and Converse was honorable to her above many.

A fourth eminent, was Sympathy with the afflicted Churches and servants of
Jesus Christ. In all their afflictions she was afflicted; her bowels were
troubled for them: Yea, she was in pain, like a woman in travel; who was weak,
and she was not weak? who was afflicted, and she burnt not? she was read in
that Chapter of Remembrance (as one calls it) Heb. 13.3. She remembered them
that are in bonds, as bound with them; and them who suffer adversity, as her
self also in the made body.

Surely this fellow-feeling with the afflicted people of God, was not more her
duty then her Character; she was a Christian up of bowels.

It is verily thought, the Churches sickness, was her death. Queen Mary said
(upon her deathbed) that if they opened her, when she was dead, they would
find Calais written upon her heart. If this precious Creature had been opened
when she was dead, you might have found Sion written upon her heart. So true a
Mourner she was in Sion, and for Sion, that she even mourned her self to death.

Oh imitate her in this grace, all ye that love the Lord Jesus. Behold she whom
your Lord loves is sick, sick not of Love only but of persecution. There is
not that part of the true Church of Christ under heaven, upon which the hour of
temptation is not in an eminent manner. The sinners in Sion abound every where;
pray ye that the number of the mourners in Sion may abound more and more. And
ye that are the Lords Remembrancers, behold you have your Commission, keep not
silence and give him no rest till he establish, Isa. 62.6, 7.
and till he m ke Jerusalem a praise in the Earth: How willing is God to be
overcome, that bids his people wrestle? How desirous is God to grant, that
commands his supplicants to take no denial at his hands, nor suffer him as it
were to live a quiet day in Heaven, till he gives Rest to his Church upon
Earth! Improve your Commission, O ye Saints of God, cry a loud, spare not, beg
of Jesus Christ, that King of Saints, hat he would bow the heavens, and come
down, or ever his Sp use die, that he would take her up in his Arms, wipe off
dust from her face, tears from her eyes, and blood from her wounds.

Oh forget not Jerusalem, lest your Right Hand forget her cunning, plead hard
for her, lest your tongue cleave to the roof of your mouth: Ps. 137.5, 6.
Oh prefer Jerusalem above your chief joy.

5. She was a woman of great Faith, the life she lived in the flesh was a life
of Faith: In her natural life, in all the public calamities of the times, and
private afflictions upon her own person, as she was a woman of much sorrow; God
having exercised her with sharp trials and afflictions in the married estate;
Frequent Abortions, loss of Children, and (that which must needs follow) a
feeble distempered body, etc. I say in all these she lived by faith, and was
more then Conqueress through him that loved her: All her afflictions were but
the trials and triumph of her Faith.

Faith it was that which kept her Vessel so steady in the midst of all the
Waves and Billows which fell upon her in her passage, that in them all she was
observed by all the standers by, to be of an even tranquil spirit, not
transported with joy in her better times, nor dejected with sorrow in her
worse, but (that which was said to be Queen Elizabeth's Motto, was really her
temper and felicity, Semper Eadem, she was still the same.

In her spiritual life, she lived much by Faith; when she could not see, she
did believe, and when in darkness, and had no light, Isa. 50.10.
she could trust in the name of the Lord, and stay upon her God.

But in this did the excellency of her Faith consist, she durst not believe
without a promise, nor the promise without the qualification, in some good
degree. Faith without a promise she believed was not Faith, but Fancy; not
believing, but presuming: This she believed, and therefore never durst believe
further then she had a word for it: Hence she made the promises her daily study.

Hear this all you that take up your salvation upon trust, and swim down the
stream of security, not working out your salvation with fear and trembling; but
think it enough to hope well, and to believe you do believe, etc. and what will
ye do in the latter end? When your Faith will prove but fancy, and your hope
but as the Spiders Webb, wrought out of your own bowels, and blown away with
the least of temptation? Take heed, deceive not your selves with shadows
instead of substances: what good will it do you to go down to the Grave with a
lie in your Right Hand; one Grain of Faith well tried, is more worth then a
pound of Faith taken up upon trust.

The sixth and last Grace which I shall hint to you, (though herein I do both
her and you wrong) is her Patience. Truly, her life and her death was nothing
else but a Lecture of humility.

I told you before, that her life (from almost the first of her married estate)
was a life of suffering: Not truly, by reason of the least unsuitableness in
the Conjugal relation, nor merely in regard of Abortion, and loss of Children,
both which she bare with a gracious cheerfulness in submission to her Heavenly
Father; but also in respect of an infirm Constitution which she carried about
her; insomuch that when the time of her dissolution came, it appeared to her
learned Physicians, that her dying sickness was nothing else but a Complication
of her diseases now come to the birth, which had for near Twenty years before
bin breeding and ripening in her tender body; which though they did (not
seldom) make a visible impression upon nature; yet she did carry with so
ingenuous a dissimulation, that her nearest Relations could hardly discover any
habitual distemper prevailing upon her, but judged it only some accidental
error in nature, easily capable of correction by prudent observation.

But at length, those sparks which for many years lay smoking and kindling
within, brake out into a flame, and for near twenty weeks together by degrees,
prevailed upon the Walls of her feeble Tabernacle, the anguish whereof, though
(at times) it was beyond expression full of bitterness and torment; yet she
sustained it with such an invincible sweetness of patience, as did flatter her
friends into a delusive hope, that her sickness was not mortal, until the
dissolution of nature convinced them of their too easy dulity.

She had a peculiar patience of her own, Luke 21.19.
and that patience gave her the possession of her soul; so that in her sharpest
conflicts with pain and sickness, though (as an holy Minister said of himself)
she might (possibly) groan, yet she did not grumble; an impatient complaint was
never heard from her lips; but if asked, how is it? Her answer was the Holy
Martyrs word, mixed up of Patience and Faith; It is well, and it will be better.
It is well, there was her patience, and it will be better there was her Faith:
Through both which (as in the Text) She inherits the Promise.

Her Wisdom and Judgment
I might easily enlarge the Catalogue of her Virtues; she was of great wisdom
and judgment, not as a Woman only, in managing all her affairs with
Discretion, but (much more) as a Christian woman. She was not a light Skeptical
professor, nor one that took up her Religion upon trust or imitation: She knew
what she believed, and having weighed her principles in the balance of the
Sanctuary; Joh. 4.
and tried them by the touchstone of the holy Scriptures (which from her youth
she had known) she became rooted and grounded in the Faith, 2 Timothy 3.15
and stood unmovable and unshaken against all the blasts and storms of
seduction; Able not only to give an answer to every one that might (rationally)
ask her a reason of the hope that was in her with meekness and fear, 1 Pet.
3.15.
but as a good proficient in Christ's School, to make an Apology for the truths
she had learned from the Gospel of Jesus Christ.

Her Temperance and Sobriety.
In Temperance and Sobriety, she exceeded many, not only of the ordinary rate of
women, but even of such as (not without cause) have the repute of Religion.

In Apparel.
In her Habit, she affected nothing of the pride and curiosity of the present
generation. Accounting it more honor to beautify her Attire, then to owe any
beauty to it. Nor was she in love with any fashion, but that which the examples
of the most pious and modest of her rank commended to her.

She was of great temperance in her diet, Temperance-
she did as much disgust whatever might savor of delicacy and indulgence to the
flesh, as the delicate do what is mean and ordinary, eating and drinking at
such a rate, as one whom not Nature only had dieted, but Grace.

Provident she was without avarice; frugal, Providence.
not that she might get the more goods, but that she might do the more good;
accounting that het best riches, not which she laid up for her self, but that
which she laid out for God. Her Charity was very extensive, Charity.
not knowing any other limits, but want of opportunity; nor any other
partiality but the Household of Faith. Gal. 6.10.


Her Mercy refused not the lowest office, Mercy.
to the lowest object; her enquiry being not what the person was, but what was
the need? She thought it no robbery to impoverish her self, that she might make
others rich.

Heroic spirit.
She had a tender, and yet an Heroic Spirit; she feared nothing but sin, and
could bear any thing but Gods dishonor and the reproach of Religion. A Coward
she was, when Christ (possibly) might suffer by her; but courageous, when she
was called to suffer any thing for Christ.

Her whole deportment was made up of Sweetness and Gravity, Gravity.
which put such a Grace upon her, that she Commenced a Matron in Religion,
before her time; as if nature had over reckoned it self one age of her life at
least, and took the degree of old age, before she was forty.

Her sincerity.
Lastly, Her sincerity commended her to God and Man. She was fully as much as
she appeared to be; to God without hypocrisy; to Man without fraud; a true
Nathaniel, in whose spirit there was no guile.

These Virtues, as they were eminent in her, so they deserve a larger share in
her just Character; but it is time to give you some account of her Death; Her
Death.
of which though much might be spoken worthy observation, yet take the Epitome
of it in a few words. Three things she did upon her Deathbed.

The first thing she did, was to give a clear and full account of the work of
Grace wrought in her soul, both in the Methods and Progress of it.

The foundation whereof she acknowledged was laid in the Catechistical
principles of her Parental education; the rudiments of Religion, were by their
care and her diligence, so distinctly imprinted in her understanding, that they
became a good foundation, upon which the superstructure of more practical and
spiritual truths of the Gospel, were more prosperously and fruitfully raised.

After that by Precept and Pattern she had learned the necessity of secret
duties, instruction and experience soon taught her the insignificancy of them,
without regard to the manner, as well as to the matter.

From thenceforth she began seriously to study a Duty-frame of spirit, and to
eye the Pattern in the Mount. John 4.24.

After this, notwithstanding in the progress of the Ministry under which she
lived during the time of her single state) she found her self at a loss, the
Holy Ghost convincing her of a present absolute and indispensable need of Jesus
Christ in point of Righteousness. She well perceived her own Righteousness too
short a garment to cover her nakedness from the all-piercing eye of Divine
Justice. From thenceforth (with the Apostle) she accounted all things (even the
best of her own Righteousness) but loss and dung that she might win Christ, and
be found in him not having her own Righteousness which is of the Law, but that
which is through the Faith of Christ, the Righteousness which is of God by
Faith.

According to the Original Method asserted by our Lord, Joh. 16.9, 10, 11.
But the Conviction stayed not long there, but soon was improved by the same
spirit into a Conviction, and discovery of the beauty and excellencies that is
in Jesus Christ. A Christ she must have as a fountain of Holiness, as well as
of Happiness; for a Sovereign as well as for a Savior, for his Person, as well
as for his Portion: A Christ for Himself, as well as for Her self; she was sick
of Love.

But yet further, Interest would not serve her turn without evidence; Scripture
evidence. This she now made her business, she was very diligent to bring her
Hopes and Evidences to the Scripture, and to compare them and the word
together, by the light whereof as she discovered any fault or defect in them or
cause to be jealous of them; She repaired to the judicious faithful Ministers
of the Gospel, for the help of their judgment; especially that near and tender
Relation, whom she trusted (above any) with her spiritual concerns, whom she
acknowledged God had made of singular use and advantage to her in the doubts
and difficulties of this nature.

But above all, she constantly made her address to Him, whose Name and Office
is, The searcher of Hearts, and tryer of the Reins, with holy David's Petition;
Search me O God, and know my Heart; try me, Psa. 139.23, 24.
and know my Thoughts: And see if there be any way of wickedness in me, and
lead me in the way everlasting.

From evidence at length, she put in for assurance; in the serious and vigorous
pursuit whereof, death met her, as well in the midst of her work, as of her
days; unexpectedly indeed, but (blessed be God) not unpreparedly, and though
her sickness was not fraught with extraordinary joys and ravishments: Yet she
was sustained with a sweet peace and serenity of Spirit, which God did not
permit Satan to interrupt all her sickness long; and this was not the fruit of
a blind unsensible security, (as in most that cry up a Lamb-like death) for she
was able to give answer to any one that asked her reason of the hope that was
in her, with meekness and judgment. 1 Pet. 3.15.


It was the account she her self gave, why neither in her sickness nor health,
she had experienced any great raptures or extraordinary joys of the Spirit of
Adoption, as some do; for (said she) neither was I brought in with any
extraordinary terrors or tremblings of the spirit of bondage: Nevertheless it
pleased the Lord not to leave Himself, nor his poor Handmaid without witness;
not only in giving her a sweet serenity of spirit, insomuch that she suffered
no Eclipse of that Sun of Righteousness; (in all the time of her confinement
to her Chamber) who Himself (upon the Cross) suffered an Eclipse of the light
of his Fathers Countenance, at what time He cried out (to the astonishment of
Heaven and Earth) My God, my God, why have thou forsaken me? But much more, in
vouchsafing her some immediate irradiations of his face and favor, on the
evening before she died; at what time, a gracious intimate friend, sitting at a
little distance from her Bedside, forbearing to speak to her, knowing her to
be very much spent, and supposing her to be in a slumber; at length she opened
her eyes, (as if it had bin out of a sleep) and seeing her friend whom she
loved sitting by, she bespake her thus: Oh my dear friend! are you there? I
have had a full answer of all my prayers; God has not denied me any of the
requests of my soul, but has fully satisfied my desires. Has he so, (said
her friend?) Then I hope he has heard you, in that you feared; (meaning the
fear of death, To your God and my God, to your Father and my Father: These
Words she often used
which formerly had held her in some bondage, Heb. 2.14.) She replied, He has,
He has; I know whom I have believed, and I am now going to him, and I shall
see him (shortly) with these very eyes. You that have prayed to God for me, I
desire you would join with me in giving him praise for this gracious answer of
peace, vouchsafed me, poor me!

She added moreover, she did not desire prayer for the Continuance of life; but
that she might he resigned up to God in prayer, Ephesians. 1.6.
and might be accepted in the beloved. And resigned up she was in a solemn
manner; first, by several godly Ministers then present; and last of all by that
hand which by the power of the Holy Ghost had Midwived her into Christ in her
Regeneration; during all which time, her spirit accompanied that solemn
transaction, with strong and vigorous affections, to the extreme expense of her
natural spirits; and when all was finished, being asked, whether she had gone
along with the Petition which had bin lifted up to God for her? She answered,
Yes, I bless God I have, they were very sweet and precious: The Lord return
your kindness and love into your bosom a thousand fold.

Whereupon leaving her to try what rest she could take, being very much wasted
in her spirits; we had not bin long in our Beds ere we were called out in have
to take our last leave of her; but her precious soul, impatient of longer
distance from her Beloved, did upon [her] Lords day in the morning as early as
the light might serve to denominate it day, take its flight to the mountains of
spices, there to celebrate an eternal Sabbath in the bosom and embraces of her
Heavenly-Bridegroom.

A Second thing she did upon her Dying-Bed, was before the Lord Jesus Christ,
his Elect Angels, and those Christians which were about her, to make a full and
clear Profession of her Faith. Wherein, though she took the Creed (commonly
called Apostolical) for her Text: Yet she did not content her self to do it in
that steril verbal way, of a literal repetion, (as the mode of most ignorant
people is) but upon evey Article and Clause, as she went, enlarged her self in
so spiritual and savory a Paraphrase of her own, as did marvelloufly affect the
hearers, in so much that they afterward accused themselves of robbery against
their own souls, that they had not taken the pains to make that legible to
their eyes, which she had made audible to their ears.

Her third and last dying work was, to give Counsels and Instructions to her
surviving Relations that were about her; which were so full, serious and
suitable, that she seemed (as indeed she was) to be acted above her self, her
spiritual and Heavenly self, acting the weak Organ of her body, as long as
there was any passive capacity left in it.

In a word, she has left as many Mourners behind her, as knew her, whether
good or bad. The worst in the place where she lived, have given her this
Testimony, That if she be not gone to Heaven, never any went thither; which
puts us to find out a new exposition of our Lords Text, Woe unto you, Luke 6.20.
when all men shall speak well of you, etc. As for you Beloved, remember the
Text, and make it your work to be her followers, to imitate her in her Graces
and gracious Conversation, whose Faith follow, Heb. 13.7. It is time to
conclude. But though I have given you diverse Motives in the Grounds and Reasons
of the Doctrine; yet for your special provocation and encouragement, who are of
her Family and dear Relations, give me leave to add some special Incentives and
Considerations, to quicken you to a vigorous imitation of so excellent a
Pattern.

It were a fruitless sorrow to go to the Sepulcher (with Mary) to weep there:
Joh. 11.13
It is a more profitable work, to enquire how we may recruit our loss; how we
may expound Sampsons Riddle to get meat out of the Eater, and out of the
strong, sweetness; how to make a gain of our great affliction; and that is the
thing I would gladly press upon you in a fevv Motives and Considerations.

First, Without a serious imitation of her pious example, that which was our
mercy and privilege in the enjoying of her, will turn to our sin and the
aggravation of our loss. Heb. 11.7. (...).
It is said of Noah, He cocondemned the World, etc. How? his Preaching and his
Pattern, being not followed, should rise up in judgment against that Reproba^e
generation, Mat. 12, 21, 22.
and condemn them; so likewise our Lord tells the impenitent Jews that the Men
of Niniveh, and the Queen of the South should rise up in judgment with that
generation, and condemn them. (i.e.) The example of those poor Infidels not
prevailing with them, to move them to repentance, and timely and serious
diligence in the great concerments of salvation (having Christ himself, a
greater then Jonas or Solomon to be their Preacher) should in the day of
judgment rise up as a witness, and an aggravation of their obstinate
impenitency.

Dear Sirs, We have had the light of this most excellent pattern, shining
within our Walls for diverse years last past, (some of us more, some fewer)
give me leave to tell you, even weeping, (...) it leave no bettering influence
upon us. (...) will give in a judicial testimony against (...) in the great day.

She has bin a witness from God to us, if (by a practical improvement of what
we have seen divine and excellent in her) we receive not her testimony, she
will be a witness for God against us, when our Lord shall come to call us to an
account. And O how terrible will that be! What a dreadful addition to our
misery; when to the loss of such a blessing shall be added the Curse of our
non-improvement of it!

Friends, it had been better never to have been Mother to such a Child, never
to have been Husband to such a Wife, never to have been adopted to such a
Mother, or Servant to such a Mistress, never to have enjoyed fellowship with
such a friend; then, (when all is done) to have her come in as a witness
against us, in the great day of Judgment.

Oh to have bin possessed of such a mercy so many years, (as it were for no other
end then to render our sin the greater, and our condemnation the more
grievious! that the very remembrance of her should add to our torment, this
will be intolerable! Oh that the serious consideration of our danger, might
awaken us to a fruitful contention of being like her!

A Second Motive, 2. Motive. It will prevent a double sin. 1 Envy.
This will prevent a double sin.

The first is that whereby we are very apt to envy the praises of them which
are better then our selves.

The Scripture observes such a baseness in our degenerate natures, Jam. 4.5.
the spirit that dwells in us lusts to envy. It is usual in Scripture to
call the bent and strong inclination of the soul (either to good or evil)
(Spirit,) so it calls a worldly frame of heart the spirit of the world. 1 Cor.
2.12 Hos. 4.12. Isa. 19.14.
An whorish disposition the spirit of whoredom, frowardness of heart a
perverse spirit, etc.

So here, a malignant disposition toward others, a spirit lusting to envy;
carrying men strongly to fret, and envy at the graces or praises of our
brethren. We have it as soon as we come into the world, and it is an hard
matter to kill it wholly, before we die our selves; it is almost an epidemical
disease: We cannot bear the praises of them that outshine us.

And there is pride, and self-love at the bottom of it, whereby we are ready to
think, that those Eulogies and Commendations which are ascribed to others, are
due rather to our selves; the Laurel of praises would better become our
Temples. Hence Saint James, having mentioned envy, speaks in the verse
immediately following, of pride, as the root of that bitter fruit; God resists
the proud, etc. Hence the humble man's question is, Who am I? The proud man's
question is, Who am I not? Am not I as good as such a one? Wherein am I
inferior to such and such? Has the Lord indeed spoken only by Moses? Number.
12.2.
has he not spoken also by us? Thus Aaron and Mirian envyed Moses.

Jam. 4.5. Ad solamen calamitatis suae non desinit perditus perdere, Men. Fell.
Oct.
It is a sin as the Text that dwells in the Saints, but it reigns in the
wicked; the Devils proper sin: He is an envious spirit, envying God his glory,
and the Saints their felicity and honor; the Devil first envyed us the favor
of God, and ever since we have envyed one another.

Well, it is our disease: Yea, but an holy imitation of our betters, will help
us to mortify and cure it by an humble and conscientious reflection upon our
selves: Thus, I am ready to envy them which excel in grace, but am I as careful
to imitate them; their graces and excellencies will carry them to heaven, but
my envy may sink me to Hell, from whence it came; while I should imitate the
Saints in their graces, behold I imitate the Devil, in envying those graces! Ah
what will become of such a wretch as I am!

A second sin, 2 Sin. Flattery.
which Imitation of those that excel us, will (happily) prevent, is that
whereby we are prone to rest in a slight commendation of their persons. If we
give them a few good words; If we can but say, Oh such a Minister was an
excellent Preacher, he had a rare gift in prayer, a man of admirable parts, and
of singular piety, etc. Such a man was a man of great worth and incomparable
abilities! Such a woman was a woman of a meek spirit, one that had much
communion with God, an holy woman, of large bowels and compassions to the
afflicted Church and people of God, etc. I say, if we can but give them a good
Character, though we never contend after an holy imitation of their virtues, we
think we have done enough, and there is an end.

But my Beloved know we thus much.

First that Commendation without Imitation, is but an unprofitable Complement,
Jam. 2.16
just such another thing as (in the matter of Charity) is as Saint James his,
Be ye warmed, be ye filled, and give them neither fire nor food, etc. or like
an handful of flowers strewed upon the Graves of the dead, which makes the
Corpse smell never the sweeter.

Secondly, Yea Commendation without Im^tation, is but our Condemnation; we
condemn our selves of gross hypocrisy, while we commend them; for if we
believe that precious, which we commend, why do we not imitate them? If we do
not, why do we commend them? Thou Hypocrite why does thy tongue belie thy
heart? or thy life contradict thy tongue? Out of thine own mouth thou shall be
condemned.

For the curing therefore of this vanity, apply we our selves to a sincere and
industrious following of their gracious examples. If we did really believe that
conformity to them were our duty, and that such choice Patterns (whether of the
departed, or of the surviving Saints) were a talent for which we must be
responsable to our Lord, (as well as for the Word and Sacraments, and other
helps to salvation) that our non-improvement of our Patterns as well as of our
Precepts, will render us unprofitable servants; it would frighten us out of our
torpor and sluggishness, and make us tremble to satisfy our selves with a
frigid and fruitless commendation of their shining excellencies.

A Third Motive, By a faithful imitation of her virtues, 3. Motive. Imitation
makes the absent person, present.
we may still enjoy our lost Relation. Imitation (like Faith) brings the object
and the faculty together. The Limner draws not his Picture without the Person
or the Effigies before him: Imitation makes absent persons to dwell together;
by our imitation of our deceased Relation, we may preserve our converse with
her, and she being dead, will yet speak with us; and that in a more excellent
manner, then while she was yet in the body: We may have Communion with her
pure, spiritual, unmixt self; her self abstracted from what ever was carnal or
terene in her; a communion of an higher and more Angelical nature and
advantage, then that which the best of Saints are capable of in this lower
region; what Prelation the Apostle ascribes to the Communion, which the
Apostles and other Saints had with Christ after his Ascension, above that which
they attained, while he was with them on earth; namely, that whereas the
converse they had with him in the days of his flesh, was but after the flesh,
in a Civil, Natural, Humane way; such as poor, weak, ignorant, indigent
servants have with a rich, powerful, wise bountiful Lord; (they converst not
with him in his Divine or Mediatory capacity as he came into the world to save
sinners; nor improved the converse they had to heavenly uses:) But when he was
exalted to the Right Hand of the Majesty on High, they enjoyed Communion with
him in a spiritual and saving manner, befitting the Majesty of that State, to
which he was exalted: 1 John 1.3.
Truly our Fellowship is with the Father, and with his Son Jesus Christ; with
the Father by the Son, with the Son in the Father; misterious and beatifical

I say, in such a prelation (in an Evangelical proportion) stands that converse
and fellowship which we may enjoy with our deceased friend, now uncloathed and
stripped of what ever was Earthly, or savoured of corruption, by minding and
imitating what was of an heavenly and divine extraction in her. Yea such a
Communion we may have with her in our degree, (setting aside what is earthly
and carnal in our selves) as her self now enjoys, with the Spirits of just
men made perfect, with Grace, Heb. 12.23.
and nothing else but Grace.

And for this end (usualy) God does remove from us the Relations in which we
took the greatest delight and complacency, namely for the correcting of our
sensuality; and for the awakening of us, to a more spiritual and heavenly
improvement, either which we have with Saints on Earth, or which we may with
Saints departed, in their separate and heavenly slate. Upon this very account
our Lord tells his Disciples, Joh. 16.7.
It is expedient for you, that I go away; for if I go not away the comforter
will not come; but if I go I will send him unto you.

The removal of Christ his Corporal presence, made way for his presence in the
spirit; many times the sensual and Earthy part of our desirable Relations,
stands between that spiritual traffic we might have with them, and that
heavenly fruit, we might reap from them; in which case, God sees it expedient
to take them from us.

My Beloved, Is there such gain to be made by the loss of our gracious friends?
Is our spiritual life bound up in their premature death? Let us study to
experience

It was our folly, that we did put God to exercise us with so sharp a
Discipline; and that may keep us from murmuring; have we not procured this unto
our selves? Jer. 2.17.


But now not to profit by this Discipline, will be our sin, and the aggravation
of our sorrows. I have observed that there is in every affliction and mercy
that is before us, a blessing and a snare; a blessing in every affliction, and
a snare in every mercy; yea both ^n both: Now then it is worth our serious
^houghts, what a tremendous judgment it is, by our blindness and folly, to run
into the snare, and to lose the blessing; pray we for eyes to see the snare,
and for grace to avoid, and to discover the blessing to improve ^t. Lord God
(said Abraham) what wilt ^hou give me seeing I go Childless? God had denied him
one Blessing, Genesis 22.16.17.
and he beggs of God to make him amends for it, with something as good or
better. Do we likewise; say we to him, Lord God, thou have taken away my Wife,
my Child, my Mother, my gracious friend; what will thou give me, for her? Our
friends are a Loan, 1 Samuel 2.20. and 1.28. Vis ista non ingrata est Deo sed
vehementer a^^cepta. Calv. upon Jacobs wrestling.
whom when we cheerfully resign up to God, God accounts himself our Debtor, and
he gives us leave to plead the Debt, and not to let him go until he has paid
it; with such holy incivility God is well pleased; let us then come with
boldness to the Throne of Grace, and say, Lord thou have deprived me of my
sweet natural and evangelical society with my dear Relation; Lord compensate it
in a spiritual converse with, and an heavenly imitation of her graces, that I
may be like her in faith, in patience, in holiness, and in every other fruit of
the spirit, wherewith she was beautified: Let a double portion of her spirit
rest upon me, and the debt is paid.

A fourth Motive, 4 Motive, It is an Antidote against Sorrow.
A serious imitation of her Graces, will prove a Sovereign Antidote against
excessive sorrow for her loss.

It is a fruitless trouble to go to the Sepulcher to weep there with Mary and
can only serve (if alone) to add to our affliction; and surely while we do
aggravate our loss, we do also aggravate our sin, and do as it were summon God
to our Tribunal, and there accuse him of Injustice. While we weep with Rachel,
and refuse to be comforted, we do sullenly throw away the mercies we leave, and
say as it were, Nay if God will not let me enjoy this mercy, let him take all:
Thus we despise the mercies we enjoy. I will go down into the Grave to my Son
mourning, Genesis 37.35.
said old Jacob, when he thought, he had lost his Joseph: Sorrow makes him to
say he knows not what; go down into the grave! and what if he did? Could he
have embraced hi^ Joseph there? Is there any converse in the Grave? Or do the
dead comfort one another? Excess of sorrow obnubilates reason, and makes us
lose our selves after we have lost ^ur darlings. Oh how much better is it, ^o
take up their graces by an holy imitation; Elisha got more by taking up Elijahs
gar^ent, then he would have done if he had ^^ood still, crying, My Father, My
Father, etc. the Mantle of the Saints graces, will ^elp up to divide the waters
of affliction, that ^e may go through them, and not be drown^d with overmuch
sorrow; partly, by divert^^g the stream into another Channel, a right ^hannel;
a due comparing our selves with ^^ch Patterns, will discover to us wherein we
^^e defective; and so lead us to mourn after ^^godly manner, rather for the
want of their ^races, then for the loss of their society; to ^eep out such
complaints, Ah how unlike (...) I to my dear Wife, Child, Sister, Friend! ^ow
do I fall short of her meekness and hu^ility; of her seriousness in Religion;
of ^er close walking with God; of her cha^ity, ^ith, patience, etc. Oh wretch
that I am! ^ow shall I come to be like unto her? Why ^ow, this is a sorrow,
that will bear its own ^arges, and better our hearts! Such tears ^ll serve to
wash off our spots and blemishes! ^essed are they, who (thus) mourn.

And partly, our continual eying of the^^ excellencies, will present us with
fresh evide^ces of their glory in heavenly places. Th^^ will serve (from time
to time) as a perfume^ Handkercheif to wipe off tears from our eye Well, why
should I weep? She is happy, (...) loss is her gain; while I am mourning (...)
Earth, she is triumphing in Heaven; while am weeping amongst sinners, she is
singi^^ Hallelujahs in the Celestial Quire of Sai^^ and Angels; while I lament
her absence, (...) (having now experienced the Change) wo^^^ not want one hour
of the Communion with^^ innumerable company of Angels, the general ^^sembly of
the first born which are written (...) heaven; Heb. 12.22 23, 24.
and with God the Judge of all, (...) with the spirits of just men made
perfect, (...) with Jesus the Mediator of the new Covena^^ I say she would not
want one hours Com^^nion in Heaven which she now possesses, (...) a thousand
of the best days that ever she sp^^^ with us in the Land of the living.

And lastly, This continual beholding (...) example, will dry up the stream of
our sorro^ while, thereby we shall (in Gods way) se^^ to our selves a future
fellowship with her glory. God has linked Grace, and Gl^^^ together by an
unseparable connection: that if we carefully mark every step of Saints holy
feet, of which they have left any print, and endeavor to tread exactly in
them, It will infallibly bring us to their glory; what God has joined together
all the Powers of darkness, shall never be able to put asunder. Here is work,
Christians, in finitely to bear its own charges, and compensate your labor
with unspeakable reward.

A fifth Motive; 5. Motive. The greatest honor we can do her. Ea demum est
vera religio imitari quem colis Lactant.
An exact imitation of her eminent graces, is the greatest honor we can
lawfully put upon her. As it is our tru^st worshipping of God to labor to be
like him; so to imitate our gracious friends, is the highest veneration they
are capable of; should we bring Oxen and Garlands, to do sacrifice unto her, as
Jupiters Priests would have done to Barnabas and Paul, Act. 14.13. Or should we
pray unto her and worship her as the Papists do to their Saints and Images, we
pay her an honor not due, which would be a fruitless piece of Idolatry, as to
her, Sacrilegious as to God, and pernicious as to our own souls. Whereas
conscientiously to insist in her steps and to set her up as a pattern for our
religious imitation, 6. Motive. The greatest expression of our thankfulness to
God.
will be a laudable Testimony before men, that she was highly honorable in our
eyes; and a sacrifice wherewith God is well pleased: And this hints,

A Sixth Motive; Carefully to follow her pious example, is the best
thankfulness we can render to God for her.

Two things are to be done if we would be thankful; The first is to see God in
those graces and qualifications wherewith she was beautified. To commend her
for her holiness, meekness, love to God and his Saints, fellow-feeling with
Gods suffering people, her faith, patience, her wisdom, temperance, prudence,
mercy, etc. and no more, were to magnify Her, but to neglect God; as if she
had made her self to differ, or had shined by virtue of a self-born light. She
was thus and thus, I, but who made her so? Here Is our thankfulness to
acknowledge God the fountain whence all these streams of perfection did emanare
and issue forth; So it was with those, they returned glorifying of God, who had
given such gifts unto men: This is right to see God, and to admire God in the
gifts and graces of his servants, to look upon all the excellencies of the
Saints as so many Reflections of the divine nature in them.

To overlook God in the graces of the Saints, is pride and ingratitude; but to
deny God, were Atheism. And as often as we call to mind the graces of our dear
friend or friends, let us contemplate and admire the infinite fullness that is
in Jesus Christ of whose fullness they received, and grace for grace, and yet in
comparison of whom, her brightness was but darkness, and her perfections,
(pardon the word) but small sparks of that ^un of Righteousness, but little
drops of that ^mmense Ocean of divine fullness that dwells in Him.

The second expression and testimony of our ^hankfulness after our owning of
God, and a^cribing all the glory to God, I say the second thing is, To write
after her Copy, to imi^ate those virtues for which we would be ^hankful; while
we labor to be like her, we do ^eally bless God in expressing the true end and
design of divine Grace, in leaving such a piece of heaven so long in our
Custody; improvement of mercies is our best thankfulness for mercies; while we
do indeed make use of such living Directories for our better glorifying of God,
we do offer him praise; and ordering our conversations aright, we shall (in the
end) see the salvation of God.

A Seventh Motive, 7. Motive. Hereby we shall entail Religion upon our Family.
A severe and constant imitation of her worthy example, will be a blessed
expedient of entailing Religion upon our family; while each surviving Relation,
(Oh that it might be out honor) shall really endeavor in our persons to
derive down a pr^ctical memorial of her Piety, we shall keep Religion alive in
the Family, and teach our posterity how to glorify God.

Although Saints do not propagate Saints by natural Generation; yet may even
the barren womb. and dry l^ynes, thus propagate Saints, b^ spir^^^^ Imitation
of the holy lives of them tha^ have gone before us. Thus the Fathers to the
Children may make know^ Gods truth. Isa. 3^.19.
The Grandmother Lois to the Mother Eunice, and the Mother Eunice to her Son
Timothy, 2 Timothy 1.5.
propagate the Faith.

Certainly holiness may be transferred by Pattern, as well as by Precept, from
one generation to another, and it is not education will do it with^^^ example;
the eye is the more creditable Inf^^^^^ then the ear. Teach we our Children and
E^^^^^ so that they may see us: If our practice c^^^^dict our ^^^^epts, we bid
them (as it were) (...) ^^lieve ^s; and take the next course to make th^^
Atheists. Let us labor by both, to leave an (...) Seed in our Families, of
whom we may comfortably say when we come to die, (as our Lord (...) upon the
Cross) My seed shall serve him, it shall b^ counted to the Lord for a
Generation. Ps. 22.30.


Eighthly and Lastly, By this means (throu^^ divine Grace) We shall provide for
Death-(...) Comfort. As in reference to our dear Relation who is gone before
us, Her Graces and graciou^ life, testifies comfortably concerning Her, th^^
she is blessed in her death, Heb. 1^.23
she dyed in the Faith.

So our sincere and vigorous imitation of those graces, will bear a Comfortable
Deathbed Testimony of our future blessedness also. Conformity to her in Grace,
will (by Scripture warrant) conclude a future Conformity to her in Glory; w^
being followers of her in Faith and Patience, (as she was a follower of
Abraham, and other Believer in their several generations) we shall together
with them and her, Vid. Motive. 4.3. Branch.
inherit the promis^^. But this has bin already hinted, and therefore we shall
insist on it no further.

Soli Deo Gloris.
FINIS.

