THE WARDS OF THE Key to Helmont Proved unfit for the LOCK: OR, THE PRINCIPLES
OF Mr. WILLIAM BACON Examined and Refuted, and the Honor and Value of True
Chemistry Asserted.

By JOHN CASE, Student in Physic and Astrology.

LONDON: Printed for the Author; and are to be sold by John Smith Bookseller in
Russel Street in Covent Garden. 1682.

READER,
I Do here Commend this Treatise to thee, and to all the Ingenious, as a Thing
well done and performed; briefly laying down, and heartily exposing the Grounds
of Physic, with the great Mysteries of Nature, as yet known but to few. And
also several useful and considerable Points of Philosophy, both Dogmatical and
Hermetical: And indeed he has neatly and concisely handled all things that
ought to be generally known to the Young Student, who desires to be acquainted
with Learning of this kind. However, I will say no more, but refer it to thy
perusal, not doubting but thou will be of the Opinion of thy Friend,

J. PARTRIDGE.

To the Highly Honored, and my much Esteemed Friend, Sir Thomas Gery Knight. One
of His Majesty's Justices of the Peace in the County of Middlesex.
SIR,
THE Manifold Kindnesses that I have been so happy in receiving from your
Hands, have not only Obliged, but much Encouraged me to Dedicate this little
Book to your View, no way comparable to your Worth and Goodness, not doubting
only of your Obliviating this my present Offense, but also in obtaining from
your Real Generosity a favorable Acceptance of this my First Fruits and
Labor to the World Published, and likewise to wish you all Health and
Prosperity; which are and shall be the Prayers of him who was ever most
studious to honor and serve you as

Your most Obsequious, JOHN CASE.

To the Judicious READER.
MOst of the time of my Minority, I have spent in searching out the Things of
Nature, and the Ground and Foundation thereof, as you may find was from the
Beginning of Times, as in Genesis, viz. when God had perfected that Wonderful
Work of his, I mean the Frame of the whole World, and had ascribed to every
part thereof his especial Duty, namely, to the Air, to uphold all Feathered
Foul, the Water to harbor the Fish, the Earth for all Beasts, and to produce
and bring forth good and wholesome things, which may be reduced into three
words, viz. Vegetables, Animals, and Minerals, and over all these things he
appointed Man as Regent and Governor, being the last and most Noble Creature,
and did infuse into him a Considerable Mind, apt to understand his Mysteries,
and with his Tongue to unfold the Arcanaes of his Labor and Industry: This was
that Consideration that moved that Wiseman Solomon to wade so far into the
searching out the Cause of Things and to apply his Mind to the Study of Nature,
not only of Birds, and Beasts, but likewise of Trees, even from the Cedar of
Lebanon, to the Hyssop that grows on the Wall; It is high time for me to mind
that place of Scripture, viz. Try all things, and hold fast that which is good;
So that being settled and steadfast in the opinion of my study and Labor in
secret things of Nature; I rest satisfied that the true Principles of Natural
Bodies, and the beginning of all things, proceed from Fire. There has lately
come forth a Book, whose Author is Mr. Bacon, which in perusing, I found lame
and defective, so that I thought myself obliged to take some pains in Confuting
him of his errors, by reason he persuades the World to believe what is not,
viz. that Water is the principle of all Bodies, which is not the Opinion of
your Friend

From my House in Lambeth, May 12. 1682. JOHN CASE.

CHAP. I. What are the true Principles of Natural Bodies.
I Shall not answer with the Words of William Bacon, which are these: The gross
Errors of the Schools concerning Principles, and their useless Philosophy, are
so well known and exploded by this inquisitive and sagacious Age, that it is
needless to endeavor to confute them.

In my slender Judgment these Words are erroniously scandalous and abuseful to
all Schools in general; especially to the higher Forms: For it is never known a
Child as soon as it is Born to go alone, nor those which are to learn A, B,
etc. or the Grammar-Tongue, to meddle with things of this Nature; therefore I
look upon it to be their pride, to abuse and scandal the most high and learned
Schools, Colleges of Physicians, and many old Fathers, who have laid down good
Reasons for Principles of this Nature.

Now with my slender Reason, I will endeavor to lay down some Arguments
concerning what the true Principles of Natural Bodies are; I will lay a
Foundation to work upon concerning the three Divisions of the World, Sublunary,
Celestial, and Super Celestial. First, to define unto you what the World is,
Mundus, or the World is in the Hebrew Tongue, Holam, which implies thus much,
Quodiam per aliquot secula subsistat, in quo rerum ortus and interritus sit,
which is to subsist and continue for certain Ages, and in which shall be the
Birth and Destruction of all things; the World in the Original directly
reproving all such as are of opinion that it has always been, and shall ever
last. The Greeks call it Cosmos, which imports Ornament, which the Latins for
perfect and absolute Elegancy call Mundus, because there is nothing more neatly
Polished and Beautified; for so says Pliny: Possidonius in Meteor calls that
Mundus, or the World, which consists of Heaven and Earth, Celestial and
Terrestrial Natures, or of Gods and Men, and those things which were created
for their Use.

Some call it Mundus, Quasi Ornatus Mulieris, A Woman's Ornament.

He that Builds a House, does not only Build it to be so called, but has a
farther purpose to make it habitable for some others to dwell in.

There is nothing made for a show only, but some service; even so was the World
created by the Almighty, not only to be called so, and retain the Name; neither
did he frame his Creatures for the World it self, as if it either needed the
Heat or Light of the Sun, the Breath of the Winds, the Moisture of the Clouds,
or Nourishment from those things which it self yearly produces: but He made
all things for the use of Men, and that they in it should magnify and glorify
his Name. I end this with a remarkable saying of St. Chrysostom upon Matthew,
Habemus pro Mare Mundum; We have for the Sea, the World; for our Ship, the
Church; for our Mast, the Cross; for the Sails, Repentance; for our Pilat,
Christ; for the Wind, the Holy Ghost.

Aristotle, that great Philosopher, says, Non plures Mundi sunt, etc. There
are no more Worlds, nor no more can be, if this consist of the universal
Matter, as of necessity it must: All things under Heaven in time grow old,
corruptible, and vile. As concerning the Multiplicity of Worlds, which diverse
Philosophers believe, as Metradorus, and others, whose Judgments have been
opposed by better experienced Sophisters, as by Pythagoras, Samius, Melissus,
Zeno, and as is more expressed by Aristotle, the Prince of Philosophers, above
the rest, concludes upon one World, namely, this we live in: The World, says
he, is that in which all things are contained, and without which there is
nothing that is or can be found; So by consequence, if there were any thing
without the World, then the World could not contain all things, therefore no
World: but this Question may be more fully determined.

There is but one World, and that perfect, as there is but one most perfect
Creator, the absolute Prince and Governor thereof; without this World there is
neither Place nor Time; Place there is not, because there can be no Place
without a Body; if no Body, then no Motion; if no Motion, all Time is excluded,
Nam Tempus est mensura Motus: For Time is the measure of all Motion. I shall
conclude with that which was spoken by the mouth of Moses, In principio creavit
Deus Coelum and Terram; In the beginning God created Heaven and Earth. Manifest
it is then, that there is but one World; for some have strove to maintain the
Permanency, as that it was without beginning, and shall always continue without
end.

The Foundatirn being laid, I come now to prove what the Principles of Natural
Bodies are, whether unalterable or not, and also the opinion of some learned
Men in these things; now I join my opinion with that of Hipparehis, Heraclitus,
and Ephesius, who give the sole Pre-eminence to Fire as the beginning of all
things; the Reason thus: That Fire condensed or moistened, is made Air, but a
degree more thicker than gross Water, and at length made more constrict, turned
to Earth, so bring them retrograde, Earth Rarefied, Converted to Water by
Evaporation into Air, and being purified, transmigrateth into the Nature of
Fire, and by reason of the perpetual shifting of this one Element, the order of
the Birth and Breedeing of all things do consist, and hence new work to arise.

Now give me leave to lay down some Opinions of Philosophers concerning the
beginning of the World, as Thales Milesius, counted to be the wisest Man in
that Age that lived in Greece, held opinion, that Water was the beginning and
breeding of all things; so Aristotle and Plutarch report of him: The weak
Foundation he builded upon was, because he saw and found by experience, that
there was a Moisture in the seed of all things, and as well in the Elements:
This cannot be, for Water is soon drank up by Air; neither can that Argument
hold good, that a Child not Born to turn to Water, but Corruption.

Anaximenes, the Auditor of Anaximander, reasoned that all things were begot or
procreated from Air, by those reasons that Air was capable of all Impression,
Action, and Quality, and naturally apt to be transchanged from one Form to
another; a property which the rest of the Elements cannot challenge.

Some say the Creation proceeds from two, namely, Calor and Frigus, Heat and
Cold, the Fire which gives the Motion, and the Earth which supplyeth it with
Form. I shall not trouble the Reader any more with Opinions, but conclude with
these words: Compescat se humana temeritas, id quod non est non querat, ne
illud quod est non inveniat: Let Men's rashness bridle it self, and that which
is not, let him by no means seek, lest that which is, he can no ways find.

Concerning the Elements Aristotle says, That the Beginning of them, are Heat,
Cold, Moisture, and Drought: Likewise that they have a repugnancy among
themselves, and therefore cannot be lasting.

Ignis in Aethereas volucer se sustulit Aras,
Summaque Complexus Stellantis Culmina Coeli.
The swift Fire lifts it self above the Air,
And mounts aloft to embrace round the fair,
And bright Roofs of the Starry Heavens; it claims
Prime place, and girts them with a Wall of Flames.
Air next with subtle breath it self extends,
Both through the middle part, and spacious Ends
Of the empty World, with gentle breathings feeding
The Fire next to the Stars. The third succeeding
Is that moist Element which fills the Ocean,
Ebbing and flowing with continual Motion,
The moving Waves a gentle Stem do breed,
Which so exhaled from them the Air does feed.
The Earth remotest from the former height,
Sits lowest, as suppressed with its own weight.
Drought or Dryness is proper to the Earth, which challenges it to it self.
Cold is inherent to the Earth, but not peculiarly, because it has that Quality
common with the Water; and as Water challenges Coldness, so it has humidity
common with the Air; and as the Air claims Humidity, so by a kind of fellowship
it draws a Heat from the Fire; and as the Fire does vindicate Heat as proper
to it self, so it participateth of Dryness with the Earth, which claims that
quality to it self.

Thus it is manifested what is proper to every Element distinctly, and what is
common among them which they borrow one from another by which they are connext
and knit one to another: it was necessary that they should be first distinct
and separate, that each of them might preserve its own nature.

Needful it was also that they should be connext, thence might grow the
Composition of Bodies, so that one might adhere to another, according to their
common Qualities.

The Bodily matter and the matter of the four Elements were created with the
Spiritual Creatures; that is to say, with the Soul and the Angels who were
created together, which is proved by the testimony of Saint Augustine, saying,
That by Heaven and Earth ought to be understood the Spiritual and Corporeal
Creatures, created in the beginning of Times: From these moveable and
changeable Elements all things in the World have their beginning and ending.

It is likewise observed, that God in the Creation of the World began above to
work downwards; for in the first three days he laid the Foundation of the
World, and in the other three days he furnished and adorned those parts. The
first day he made all the Heavens, and matter of the Earth, and came down as
low as the Light: The second day he descended lower, and made the Firmament or
Air: The third day lowest, and made a distinction betwixt the Earth and Water.
Thus in three days the three Parts or Body of the World was laid, and in three
days more, and in the same order, they were furnished: For on the fourth day,
the Heavens which were made the first day, were decked and stuck with Stars and
Lights. The fifth day, the Firmament, which was made the second day, was filled
with Birds and Fowls. The sixth day the Earth was replenished with Beasts; and
lastly, with Men. And thus did the Almighty accomplish and finish the marvelous
work of the Creation.

I shall not enlarge upon Beasts, Vegetables, nor Minerals here, but come to
treat on Men, which is my intended business; only this, all Creatures
whatsoever (Man excepted) are bred and born with Natural Defenses against
Injuries and Discommodities, as the Tree is preserved by the Bark, the Birds by
their Feathers, the Fish defended with his Scales, the Sheep clad with his
Wool, and Man only is brought into the World naked, and altogether unarmed: For
needful it was that Nature should take care of them who were not able to take
care of themselves.

CHAP. II. A Consideration of the Action of the Vital Spirits.
IT is well observed, that Angels were the first Creatures God made, created
pure as the Light, ordained with the Light to serve God: The same day was the
Soul of Man created, therefore it is said that Man is but little lower than the
Angels, if he lives after the Spirit.

I shall not trouble the Reader any more concerning the charge the Angels have
over the Soul of Man; but come to treat of the Archeos, that is, the Place,
Habitation, etc. wherein the Omnipotent Power has lodged the Soul of Man, viz.
the Body of Man, wherein the Soul, the Image of God, abides for a time, which
is moveable and changeable, and may be called a tottering Tabernacle. These
Earthly Bodies have their assistances and being from a Spirit in Latin called
Vita, or Life; the Vital Spirit which has its Nutriment from Blood, and this
Sanguine or Blood is maintained and preserved by Nourishment as Meat or Drink,
which we inwardly take.

It may be convenient to give you a word or two concerning the Blood, how it
comes to support the Body, or Vital Spirits, as I have told you before by Food;
and after it has passed that place called the Ventricles, or Stomach, which is
there concocted or digested, it descends into the Hungry Gut called Jejunum; it
is drawn from the Jejunum by five of the Miseraical or Sucking Veins, which
choose out the best for Blood; it is drawn into the great hollow Vein, called
Vena porta; it is drawn from Vena porta into the Liver, and there it is
converted into Blood; it is drawn from the Liver into the hollow Vein again the
second time to be refined and separated: it is from thence sent each to his
natural place and receptacle, as Choler to the Gall, and Melancholy to the
Spleen, etc. as the Principles of the Bodies so called of the Physicians.

Now the Living or Vital Spirits stand in need of two things, that it may
subsist, convenient Motion and Aliment, and so is the Body of Man preserved and
kept alive.

CHAP. III. Where, and how the Vitals do perform their chief Operation.
NOw these Spirits, as Authors have observed, are the Master-Workmen in the
Body, and as the upper Wheel which turns about the lower Wheels in the Body:
therefore whatsoever is healthful, and refreshing to the Spirits, works
powerfully good effects in the Body, and that speedily and suddenly, as the
Author says, Vapors and Affections work compendiously upon the Spirits. It is
well known that the Almighty has placed in the World all things for the use of
Mankind, and nothing in vain; it was appointed by God that Man's Body should
receive Nourishment by the Fruits of the Earth, what is a greater Earthly
Blessing than perfect Health of Body? Some say, Valetudo est summum Bonum,
Health is the chiefest Good.

First, To show you how this Wheel or Vital Spirit does work for or against us;
first for us, viz. for Health of Body. First, good Nourishment causes Health.
Secondly, good Air will revive the Vital Spirits: But for fear this small
Volume should be too big, I will only give you two Reasons which will give
light to the lowest Capacity, viz. All Bodies are guided and governed by four
Elements; not only the Bodies of Men, but all Vegetables, Animals, and Minerals.

An Element is a Body pure, Simple, and unmixt, from which all Natural Things
have their Original; they are held to be in Number four, viz. Fire, Air, Water,
Earth; Since that there is none born into the World but their bodies do
participate of all these four Elements, and these cause all Alteration, and
Change by Reason of these four Elements, because of their changing and shifting
one with the other, therefore no Man stands at one stay, but he is either
growing Rich or Poor, in Health or Sickness.

Now when these four Elements can be weighed in the Balances of Uprightness,
there can be no Sickness, viz. the Heat to oversway the Cold, or the Cold to be
prevalent, or overpower the Heat.

depiction of scales

The Cause of Sickness is when those four Elements are unequally balanced, viz.
if Heat be most prevalent, then it causes Choler, and extreme high Fevers; if
Cold be, then Phlegmatic and Moist Humors.

depiction of scales

This is the way that our Vital spirits strive for us, and against us, so they
borrow one from the other, and change this World of four Elements, which is
produced out of the two inward Worlds, and is a Glass of them, wherein Light
and Darkness, Good and Evil, are mixed; It is not Eternal, but has both a
beginning and ending, meant of Heaven, which comes out of the midst of the
Water, viz. of Mercury, whence arises the Male and Female Kind in the Spirit
of the outward World, that is the Male in the Fiery Mercury, and the Female in
the Watery.

This Separation was made all over in every thing, to the end the Fiery should
desire and long for the Watery, and the Watery for the Fiery, that so there
might be a desire and love between them in the Light of Nature, from which the
Conjunction arises; therefore the Fiery Mercury, viz. The overflowing Word,
Seperates it self according both to the Fire and Water-nature of the Light, and
thence comes both the Male and Female kind in all things, both Animals and
Vegetables.

In the third days Work, the Fiery and Watery Mercury entered again into
Composition or Mixture, and Embraced one another, wherein the Salnitre, viz,
the Separator in the Earth, brought forth Grass, Plants and Trees, and that of
the first Generation and Production between Male and Female.

In the fourth days Work the Fiery Mercury brought forth his Fruit, viz. the
first Essence on Higher Powers, or Virtue of Life; then the four Elements, and
it is in the Elements, of it the Stars were made.

In the Fifth days Work, the spiritus Mundi, viz. the Soul of the World, opened
it self in the first Essence, it is here meant of the Life of the Fiery and
Watery Mercury, wherein God Created all Beasts, Fishes, Fowl, and Worms, every
one from its own peculiar property of the Divine Mercury.

Here you see how the Eternal Principles have moved themselves according to
Evil and Good, for there are Evil and Good Creatures Created, every thing as
the Mercury, viz. the Seperator, and yet every kind of life has its Original,
in this Light of Nature, from which it is that all Creatures in their kind or
property love one another.

In the sixth days Work God Created Man; for in the sixth day the Understanding
to the Life opened its self out of the Fiery Mercury, and that is out of the
inward ground.

God Created them in his Likeness, out of the three Principles, and made them
Images, and breathed into them the Understanding Fiery Mercury, viz. according
to Time and Eternity, so he became a Living and Understanding Soul.

CHAP. IV. What is the Object of the Digestive Faculty.
THe four Administering Virtues are, Attractive, Digestive, Retentive, and
Expulsive.

But the Digestive Faculty is the principal of them all, and the other like
Footmen and Handmaids to attend it.

The Attractive Faculty, draws that which it should digest, and serves
continually to feed and supply it.

The Retentive Virtue retains the substance with it, till it be perfectly
digested.

The Expulsive Faculty casts out, and expels what is superfluous by
digestion.

I think no one will deny this* that has but a spark of Reason, but that the
Object of the Digestive Faculty is nothing else but this, viz. an earnest
desire and eagerness after those* Things of Nature it self, or Vital parts of
the Bodies after solid Bodies, which are digestable or agreeable to its self,
and so join with its Spirit, from whence that old saying may be made good, What
is one Man's Meat, is another Man's Poison.

To this my good friend William Bacon comes very nigh, which is the truest
sentence in all his Book.

In these material matters, viz. the digestive Faculty or Virtue wherein lies
the Groundwork of the Bodies of Mankind; for when this Virtue or Digestive
Faculty is debillitated, both Spirit* Vitals and Body decay, and also the
Fundamental parts on which Physicians whet their wits on, viz. in searching out
for such Medicines and Spirits as to strengthen and renew the digestive
faculty, things which will best agree and suit with the Vital Spirits.

For if a sick Person take never so much nourishment into his Stomach, it will
not nourish the Body, or Spirits, but hurt and prejudice the same, and turn to
Corruption: For prevention of which disastre, incident to most men, I will here
lay down a few Regulae Salutares, or wholesome Rules of Diet for advice, viz.

Mensae ne sint aequales sed Coena semper Levi^or.
Nu^lus sumatur Cibus, nisi priore Concocto ad quod octo h^rae^i imbecilli
stomacho requiruntur.
And withal let them take this Rule by the way with them, that Nature may not
be over-burdened, which is the cause of distempers, and twice worse than
robbing it of its accustomed duties.

Semel in septimana una mensa omittatur
Cum scilicet natura minus videbitur indigere.
There is besides Diet, another Preservative for Nature, against Distempers
that may oppose it, that is, by using a Rule in sleep, viz.

Somnus octo horas non Excedat, nec septem sit brevior,
Somnus diurnus omnino fugiatur.
The Exposition or Construction of these few Sentences are so plain, that they
expose them, in English to the open view of their Courteous Readers.

CHAP. V. Whether there may be an Universal Medicine, or not.
MR. Bacon declares thus. According to my Hypothesis, I conceive there may be;
for if there be but one formal Cause of Diseases, and also to prove it so,
because in Women's Causes: for he tells us, that the same Medicine which
preventeth Miscrrriages, the same to turn the Child in the Mothers Womb, and to
bring it away; and truly, says he, I have a Medecin of mine own may well be
called Panaceas, and besides it may well deserve the Name of Polyaceas.

I must Answer Mr. Bacon plainly, that he does not understand the Bodies of men
or Physic. I cannot compare him to any thing, but that great Mahomet, who
deluded the People by a Pigeon which he brought up, and trained to take Pease
out of his Ear, and so made the People believe that it was an Angel from Heaven
which informed him of all Transactions, and by that means he was worshipped as
a God.

Now it is convenient to give some Reasons to convince the World that there is
no such Medicine as a Panaceas, or Universal Medicine for almost all Diseases.

First, some slender Arguments, viz. Are all Men's Children of one Substance and
Constitution? or can one Pair of Shoes serve one Pair of Feet? And also of all
the multitude of People in the World, are not each of them discernable one from
another? sometimes you may see two will resemble one the other at first sight,
but bring them together, and discern them both with a strict Eye, and you shall
soon perceive a great alteration.

But some may say that there may be an Universal Medicine in case of an
Universal Distemper, as Pestilence, Smallpox, Fevers, etc. which generally
happens in Cities, Towns, and Countries. No, there cannot be any Universal
Medicinal Rules for one particular Person: For it is well and often observed in
the time of the Plague, some are taken with a Giddiness in the Head, some a
Pain in the Side, some no Pain at all before they fall down dead: some Persons
have the Sore break out in one place, some in another. And so in all other
general D^seases, which will be tedious here to nominate, which may tend all to
one Distemper. The Reasons why it is so, I will give you elsewhere. Also it is
well known that the four Complexions do not agree one with the other; for what
is good to Cure the Sanguine, is prejudicial to the Melancholy: Experience
tells me, that a small Portion will purge the Sanguine Man, but a double
Portion will hardly purge the Melancholy man, because his Nerves are very
close. I am certain, and do very well know, that many lose their Lives by the
Delusions of such new Fellows, and Pretenders to an Universal Medicine.

Some have a good Receipt for the Pox; Some have a good Receipt for a Fever;
Some have a good Receipt for the Scurvey; Some will say they had it from a very
learned Person, and that they keep it (not as it is) as a rare Jewel: I will
not deny but that it may be good to its kind, but it may want a true
Application. I have Experience that many dye with the Running of the Reins and
Pox, because they put their Lives into the Hands of such Men that do not
understand the nature of their Bodies, for it is well known by Woeful
Experience, that these Distempers break out several ways according to the
Nature and Constitution of the Bodies of men and Women: For in some it remains
in the Secret Places, in some Persons in the Head, and in other some in the
Legs, and Shin-Bones. This one Argument should be enough to Convince the
Ignorant, viz. that several Natures being mixed together, should make so great a
War and Disturbance in the bodies of Men and Women. Some Seed is very hot, and
some very cold, and by consequence your own Reason will tell you, that what is
good for one Body, is sometimes prejudicial to another. There may be an
Universal and Nutrimental assistance to the Sick, viz. good Cordials, and the
Quintessence of good things, and these the Vitals and Digestive Faculty eagerly
suck in, and revive and nourish more than ordinary; as in Cold, Fire is an
Universal help and assistance: But this cannot be taken in a Physical sense.

God by his Providence has sufficiently furnished us with Natural Things, both
for Nourishment, and Physical Uses, known to all; but still they want the true
application thereof; and if it were not so, Men would be very unwise to bestow
so many Pounds in educating their Sons, and bringing them up to understand
Things of this Nature or the Little World.

I am here obliged to give you some Account why it is so difficult to know the
Humor abounding, and perpetual motion of Man's Body, I have shown already how
the Bodies of Mankind are nourished and guided in the first Chapter, and
therefore shall not rehearse here again; but begin thus:

The Natural Faculty and Virtue reside in the Liver to nourish the Body, and is
dispersed through the Body by the Veins.

From this are bred four particular Humors, viz. Blood, Choler, Phlegm, and
Melancholy: Blood is made of Meat perfectly Concocted; it is by a third
Concoction transmitted into Flesh, the superfluity of it into Seed, its
Receptacle is the Veins, by which it is dispersed through the Body.

Choler is made of Meat more thin, perfectly Concocted, it is the spume or
froth of Blood, Cleanses all the Humors, heats the Body, and nourishes the
Apprehension as the Blood does the Judgment; it fortifies the Attractive
Faculty, as Blood does the Digestive, and moves Man to Activity and Valor;
its Receptacle is the Gall.

Phlegm is made of Meat not perfectly Digested, it so fortifies the Virtue
Expulsive, as makes it slippery and fit for Ejection; it fortifies the Brain by
its con^similitude with it: yet it spoils apprehension by its Antipathy, the
Heart thereby sustaining it, and the whole Body from the Fiery Effects, with
continual motion; its Receptacle is the Lungs.

Melancholy is the Sedement of Blood, fortifying the Retentive Faculty and
memory, and makes them sober and steadfast for study, stays the unbridled toys
and fooleries of Lustful Thoughts, and reduces them home to the Center; it is
like a Grave Counselor to the whole Body, its resident place is the Spleen.

Blood is the chief of all these four humors, yet without the other three, viz.
Choler, Phlegm, and Melancholy man connot subsist.

These four Humors, are the four Elements, which man's Body is guided by, which
I treated on in the First Part of this Book.

Reader, view over the Nature and Consistence of these four Humors or
Elements, and let your Reason be your Guide, whether one sort of Medicine will
serve to Conquer these four Elements: No, not if the World, and the whole Frame
thereof, could stand or subsist with two only, as you see it is impossible to
be, by the First Part of this Book.

The advice and counsel we ought to have of a Physician is this, viz. Physic
the sick person ought to take.

Or what diet, etc.

Or what Vein to open.

Or what humor to purge, and how much and what dose, whether in Pills or
Potion, or the like.

Now there is no Physician, or Pretender hereunto, unless he is well skilled in
the perpetual motion of these four Elements: for without this Art the Physician
can never safely judge, viz. when to purge or Evacuate, either by Potion or by
Vomit, or by Letting of Blood, or for what Humor, or by what Quantity, in all
which Cases Astrology prescribes Rules: and without these, no one can attain to
the Art of Physic; otherways they are but like Blind Men that grope out their
way with a Staff.

I have shown already in the First Part of this Book, that the Principles of
the Elements, and Natural Bodies proceed from Fire, but the main Principles,
and Beginning and Ending of the Life of mankind is taken from the Horoscope to
be the First motion of Time.

I will open by Example all or most Authentic Writers, yea, Picus himself,
attributing the Ebbing and Flowing of the Sea to the Moon, as a true and
positive Cause, according to Gallen's. Precepts, Lib. 1. Chapt. 2. de Locis
affectis, and his practice of the Pyoney Root in Curing the Epilepsie, Lib. 6.
de simplicibus Medecis.

Quo tangente afficimur, and quo seperato Cessat affectus, Causam esse apud
omnes in Confesso est, sic enim and ignem ustulationis, and gladium sectionis
Causam esse Credimus.

We see by Experience that the Moon placed in the Heavens at such a Position,
the Sea Flows, and at such a Position it Ebbs: after this way may be taken the
first beginning of life and motion of mankind, viz. from the Horoscope and
fixed stars, and from the seven Planets, viz. Saturn, Jupiter, Mars, Sol,
Venus, Mercury, Luna, at the minute of time the Child is born, and according to
their motion to the Square and Opposition Aspect one with the other, or from
the opposite places from whence they were at first.

And according to these Perpetual motions of the heavens as you see, so are the
four Elements and humors of man's Body changed, says Hippocrates and Galen.
But because these Rules do not lie in my way here, I refer the Reader to Mr.
John Gadbury's Book of Nativities, Mr. John Partridge his Works, or such like
Ingenious Persons.

CHAP. VII. A short Account of the Fixed Hermorphrodite.
I shall not Enlarge upon it, but give a Word or two of the meaning of what it
is.

A fixed Hermorphrodite is only, that which consists of two parts, viz. fixed
and Voluntary Body united together.

The Ancients tell us, that it is these two parts, pure and united together. It
will be too large here to lay down the full discourse thereof, because I intend
to satisfy the World in a short time in full of this Hermorphrodite, and also
of a seeming Potential Fire which Mr. Bacon speaks of.

Here Mr. Bacon is pleased to tell us that he can produce a fixed
Hermorphrodite, which I leave to your discretion to judge of at present; but in
my opinion it is a meet fancy, or, as they say, to build Castles in the Air.

CHAP. VIII. A Word or two in defense of Chemical Medicines.
THe Word Chemical arises from Sp^gyria, which is but Distillation, of which
there are three Principals, and Chief Distinctions and Discriptions.

First, It is a certain Art of Extracting the Liquor of the Humid part of
Things by virtue of Heat, as the Matter shall require, being first dissolved
into a vapor, and then condensed again by Cold.

Secondly, Distillation is the Art of Extracting the Spiritual and Essential
Humidity from the Phlegmatic, or of the Phlegmatic from the Spiritual.

Thirdly, Distillation is the changing of gross thick Bodies into a thinner,
and more liquid Substance or Separation of the pure Liquor, from the Impure
Feces.

So by this Means you may see what great power and dignity God has bestowed on
mankind, as it is said in the Eighth Psalm, Thou have made him to have dominion
in the works of thy hands; and in Deuteronomy. 4. where God has appointed the service
of the Stars unto all people that are under Heaven, but in particular to the
business we are on now, he has made him King and Lord over three Kingdoms,
viz. Vegetable, Animal, and Mineral, and by Virtue of these, what cannot he do?
and how honorable are they that have the Command of these? They may command
Lead into Gold, dying Plants into fruitfulness, the Sick into Health, Old Age
into Youth, and what not? Prevail with Nature, and the fair Diana of the
Philosopher is at your service. I you cannot prevail with Nature for the
fairest of her Daughters, viz. the Mercury of Philosophers; Yet there is
another of wonderful Beauty, as are the Essence and Magister of Philolophers,
which are endowed with Riches, Honor and Health, for these you may more easily
prevail with Nature.

This Art is more noble than all other Arts and Sciences, and if it did once
truly shine forth out of the Clouds, wherewith it is Eclipsed, it would darken
all the rest, as the Sun does the stars, or at least swallow up their Light.
This is that true Natural Philosophy, which most accurately Anotomizeth Nature,
and Natural Things, etc.

As you see in the first Chapter, that Fire is the grand principle of Natural
Bodies, so by Fire and Heat we are able to subdue hard Bodies, change and
separate their Souls or Spirits from their Feces, which are dull earthly
mixtures, which do but hinder the Efficacy they should have on sick Bodies, but
by the Art of Chemistry, we take their purest part of their Bodies, which will
sooner show their efficacies and power, viz. to support and heal any of the
four Humors which the Bodies of mankind are supported by, we may by good
Reasons divide Diseases into two parts, Chronick and Acute, Chronick by the
Sun, Acute by the Moon; the Acute Diseases may be cured in a very short time,
but Chronick Diseases not so soon, for they proceed from Obstructions or
Stoppages in Head or Viscera, but far sooner by our Chemical Medicines than
those of the Gallenical Way.

Mr. Bacon is pleased to tell us, in the latter part of his book, strange
things, viz. that he Cures Chronick Diseases, as continued Fevers, Agues, and
such like, in two or three Fits, and also any considerable Disease or Sickness
within six hours; and also, says he, all Pestilential Fevers. Those that
believe this, certainly must be of a strange Faith and Opinion, as to think
that Mr. Bacon is able to alter the Creation of the World, and to cause the
Signs, Circles, and Stars of Heaven, which God has made fixed, for him to make
moveable and common; surely not so: methinks he is too hasty, the only way in
my Judgment is, not to disannul, but remember and agree with that wise saying
of Solomon, Tempus est ad omnia perpetrandra, There is a time for the doing of
all things; which must be allowed of, for it is that which brings things to
perfection.

CHAP. IX. The Character of a true Medicine.
SOme will say, How shall we know how to distinguish betwixt good and bad? That
will be too large for me here to lay open to you all the ways to know a good
Medicine from the bad; for it is well known that it is very difficult to know
some sorts of Medicines by an Oculary Judgment; therefore it lies and
consists in the honesty and uprightness of the Operator, or those that sell
those medicines; for there are some who buy of Chemists Medicines Cheaper than
ordinary, and the other sell for little profit, when they know that it is not
as it ought to be: Therefore this lies and consists too in Experience. Your
best way therefore is to confide in an ingenuous and approved Chemist, or an
honest Apothecary, Drugster, or the like, by which you will not fail.

There is one thing more which casts a great scandal upon our Medicines, viz. A
mistake of the Doctor, or by his unskilfulness; First, in not Administering such
of them as ought to be, or in the quantity of the Dose, and so it works not the
expected Effects, for which we bear the blame. Secondly, by unskilfulness, for
there are many who go under the Title of Doctor, who know not what Humor or
Disease they are to Cure; neither can they give an accout of what they take in
hand.

Si tu Cupis peritus esse in art Medendi, debes in hac Oratione sequenti, (id
est) de Medicina and Astrologia gnarus esse: Nam hic ad studendum satis tibi
praebet. Scilicit, Sympathia and Antipathia, nec sunt Planulae quibus totum
Medicinae Corpus vertitur and Deducitur; hoc fundamentum tibi datum est ad tuam
erigendum Constructionem.

CHAP. X. A Word of Advice to all in general, as well as to Chemists.
NAture has given to Man no better thing than Death; it is meant here that
Death by which we fulfill the course of Nature.

Non deterret sapientem Mors, quia propter incertos casus quotidie immanent,
and propter brevitatem vitae, nunquam long potest abesse: Death cannot
terrify a wise man, which by reason of so many uncertain chances is always
imminent, and in regard of the shortness of his life can never be long absent.

The living Spirit is instanly Extinguished if it be deprived either of Motion,
or Refrigeration, or of Aliment: these three are the proper and immediate
passions of the Spirit, for all the Organs of the principal parts serve
hereunto, that these Offices may be performed. And again, all destructions of
the Organs which are deadly bring the matter to this point, that one or more of
these three fails. There are diverse ways to death, but they end in these three.
Now the whole Fabric of the parts is the Organ of the Spirit, as the Spirit is
the Organ of the reasonable Soul, which is Incorporeous and Divine.

CHAP. XI. A Word or two how the Body of Man is supported.
BY these three Intentions, First, the prohibiting of Consumptions, The
perfecting of Reparation, and The Removing of Oldness. These three Intentions
to those Operations.

First is the Operation upon the Spirits, that they may renew their Vigor.

The second is upon the Exclusion of the Air.

The third is upon the Blood and Sanguine Heat.

The fourth on the Juyces of the Body.

The fifth upon the bowels for their extrusion of Aliment.

The sixth is upon the outward parts for their attraction of Aliment.

The seventh is upon the Aliment it self for the Nutriment thereof.

The eighth is upon the least Act of Assimulation.

The ninth is upon the Intineration of the parts after they begin to dry.

The tenth is upon the purging away of the old Juice, and to the supplying it
with new.

The four first belong to the first Intention; the four next to the Second; and
the two last to the third Intention.

It may be thought good to propound sundry Remedies to the sundry Intentions;
but the choicest of these Remedies, and the order of them, is left to
discretion: for to set down exactly, which of them agrees best, with which
Constitutions of Bodies, with the several Circles of Life, and how the whole
practice of these things are to be Administered and Governed, would be too
tedious.

But it may be convenient to give a word or two, to show you what a Physician
ought to be, and how he ought to understand the whole Body of Man, viz. the
Ground and Case of all Diseases in all sorts of Bodies.

First of all, it is well known, and undeniable, that those Diseases that are
to be understood Natural, their Cure is to be effected in a Natural way, and
that all Diseases have their Original from Super-abundancies or differency,
from Heat, Coldness, Drought and Moistness; and he is a Physician that knows
which of these Qualities at any time abounds most. And also all Time is
measured out by Motion, and that all motion has its Original in the Heavens,
by which is caused Life and death: For the Elementary, World is the Womb of the
Elementary Creatures, both Animals, Minerals, and Vegetables.

God made but one World, and yet in this one World, a Trinity; First,
Elementary, which is Lowest; Secondly, Celestial, which is next above that;
Thirdly, Intellectual, which is highest in degree.

The Cause of all Diseases is to be understood to be Natural, so also is their
Cure to be effected in a Natural way; and if you do but consider the Universe
as one United Body, and Man an Epitomy of this Body, it will seem strange to
none but to Madmen and Fools.

But that the Stars should have their Influences upon the Body of Man,
considering he being an Epitomy of the Creation, must needs have a Celestial
World within himself; therefore all things which belong to Man, whether
Sickness, or any thing besides, may be taken two ways; First, from the
beginning of times, viz. from the Horoscope, or the Moment of time in which
Mankind comes into the World; Secondly, by the Decumbiture of the Sick: It is
my business to treat concerning Sickness, and so it must be taken: No man can
reasonably deny but that the whole Prognostic part of Physic is governed by
Astrology, and those Physicians who follow Hippocrates and Galen in making them
their principal Refuge, do wisely and commendably, it being an Art which shows
the first natural beginning and proceeding of all Motion and Mutations of all
inferior things, etc.

Physicians say that all Natural Infirmities not coming by outward Accidents,
prove Seeds from four Humors, viz. Choler, Blood, Phlegm, and Melancholy,
which are nothing else but a Humidous and Vaporative substance, only differing
in quality, and therefore if the quality or quantity of the Head of the
Fountain be changed from its usual course, the Streams adjacent and belonging
must consequently be altered, and differ in quantity or quality; so it comes to
pass that the Natural quantity or quality of the Influences of the Moon, being
altered with the different Influences of the other Planets, does likewise
produce an alteration in some of the four Humors, causing the same to augment
above Nature, or to diminish, or be corrupted or connexed contrary to the first
Natural Constitution of the Elementary Humors of the Body, which causes
Sickness and Diseases.

Christian Reader, this may satisfy you what a Physician ought to be, and how
he ought to Cure Diseases, unless he will go hand over head, and in the dark,
groping out his way like a blind man, and so is not certain whether he Kill or
Cure.

Seeing it is so, a Word of Advice to the Sick, Deceive not your selves in
assuring to your selves Cure by those many deluding Persons who tell you they
have an Universal Medicine, and which far exceeds all others: First of all,
you are not only at the loss of your Time, your money, but which is worse, and
most precious, your Life; they also pretend to you that they can do strange
things, as to alter the motion of the Heavens, and to cure Chronick diseases in
an instant; the one as probable as the other, and as much to be credited: Alas,
it is mere madness and folly to give car to such Persons.

It is not to be denied, but that there are many rare and good Receipts in the
Hands of many People at this day: But whoever thou art that follows the
Receipts and Ways of those pretending Persons I before have mentioned, must
needs put thy self to a great hazard; for perchance they may work their
expected effects, and perchance not, the constitution of one Body being more
easy to be wrought upon than another, and so consequently greatly different.

Our Nation is too much inclined to these Phantasms, for many we have in every
corner crying out, A good Receipt for the Scurvy, A rare Receipt for the
Dropsy, Pox, etc. But how few of these perform their promised Effects? and how
few are cured of those general Distempers which reign in our Land? For in stead
of curing and abating a Distemper, they rather the more increase and augment
it, by reason the rise and original of it is not well pryed, searched, and
looked into. As for the Scurvy, a disease which seizes on the Body of Man by
several ways and Items, so accordingly ought it to be workt upon as you see the
person affected, and as you see the distemper seize him, which certainly must
be the best way.

Seeing it is so, that the original of a disease must be first inquired into,
before a man (as he ought to do) proceed any further, let me invite you to come
to me, or to any other that understands the Elementary qualities of the Body of
mankind; for without that, not any one person deserves the Name or Title of
Physician, which many now adays assume undeservedly unto themselves: there is
an old saying, it ought not to be forgot, The Disease once known, is half
cured, etc.

A Word of Comfort to those who are under affliction: Here they may have a
speedy help after a regular way of administering Physic, and besides a certain
account of their Distempers, and their rise, approved Medicines, according to
their several diseases, and Conditions and Humors of their Bodies, which (as I
said before) being once known, a man may the more easily, and with greater
hopes of prospering, give his helping hand.

I need not enlarge much more, for I think you all have had sufficient
experience of Medicines composed by those many unskilful persons, and how many
lie languishing at this day in a very sad condition: I will go to one
particular, that is the POX, for which they think they can effect no Cure
without a Dose of Mercury, which in stead of clearing the Body, and dispersing
the Poison, afflicts the Brain, and so consequently at last the whole Body with
a greater and far more incurable Calamity, which is not my way of proceeding,
as I hope you will all in good time make experience; therefore those I desire
to repair to me, who are afflicted with any of these following Distempers,
which by Gods help and my own diligence I hope to cure; namely, THe Vertigo, er
Giddiness in the Head. The Bloody F^ux. The Worms in Men, Women and Children.
The Palsy. The first, second, and third days Agues. The Intermitting Fevers.
The Burning Fevers. The Malignant Fevers. All Vicers, Wounds, etc. The
Dropsey, Ascitis. The Falling Sickness. The Weakness of Eyes. The Running of
the Reins. The Stone in the Reins and Kidneys. The Morbus Gallicus, or French
Pox. The Consumption under thirty years. The Black Jaundies. The Scurvey. The
Dropsy, Anasaria. The Dropsy, Timpanites.


Also, All Distempers incident to the Female Sex, not here named.

As for these Distempers, and many more I here insert not, I shall provide such
sitting and convenient medicine in my Chemical way and practice, as I hope will
take effect with all in general, not only to their Cure, and perfect Recovery,
but to my great Advancement in the Opinion of all, which is the hearty wish and
prayers of

Your devoted and faithful Servant, JOHN CASE, A True Christian in the midst of
all, and a Faithful Friend to the Diseased Body of Mankind.

FINIS.
THere will shortly be published by the same Author, another Book, Entitled,
MVSCVLA, or, A Little Fly; being a Collection of his Twenty Years Experience in
Chemistry, Physic and Astrology.


