OF THE Unity of the Church A DISCOURSE WRITTEN A Thousand Four Hundred and
Thirty Years Since, In the time of Decius the Persecuting Emperor.

By CYPRIAN Bishop of Carthage and Martyr.

Most useful for allaying the present heats, and reconciling the differences
among us.

Printed at the THEATER in Oxford. 1681.

To the READER.
WHen the Idolatrous violence of heathen Rome, under the Emperor Decius,
attemted the extirpation of the Christian Faith, and brought on the seventh
bloody persecution: Novatian a Presbyter of the Roman Church separated himself
from the communion thereof, and became leader of a dangerous schism, upon
suggestion that others were polluted by the conversation of ungodly men, and
favored those who were Idolatrous: reproching them with the titles of Apostats,
Idolators and Jews, as Pacian informs us. Which most unseasonable rupture,
exceedingly weakened the hands of the Orthodox Christians, and, as S. Cyprian
expresses it, became another persecution unto them. In this unhappy state of
affairs, when Idolatry destroyed from abroad with all possible violence, and
Schism divided with like heat and earnestness within; the good bishop of
Carthage S. Cyprian, thought it lay upon him, (for the privilege of the pope of
Rome had not then placed his Church above admonition; nor his infallibility set
it beyond instruction) to endeavor the reducing the dissenters in that Church:
whose godly labors had very great effect, bringing back into communion, several
of the most eminent partisans in Schism; and thereby many others also, who by
large pretenses to godliness, and the name of some pious men drawn aside into
the party, gave reputation to it.

I need not say how parallel a case we have in the Church of England. When we
are now assaulted by the plots and machinations of Idolatrous Rome, we are
molested by domestic dissentions from within, upon the same pretenses that we
are polluted with the conversation of the Ungodly, and favor those who are
Idolators; are lukewarm Professors, Popishly affected, and protestants in
Masquerade. It would be most happy if the parallel could be advanced yet
farther; and that as the advices of the holy Bishop and Martyr S. Cyprian were
efficacious heretofore, they may again be so on the like occasion. He being
dead, above fourteen hundred years since, yet speaks; and his discourses
cannot be imagined to be levened by interest or passion; and therefore they are
faithfully translated into our English tongue; and presented to the view and
consideration of Dissenters among us.

The Christian Church stands under the same terms of duty to God and man, as
heretofore it did; we have as strict obligation to Unity among our selves, and
Obedience to those who are over us in the Lord, as had our first forerunners in
the faith. We are as forcibly bound to join in the same public Worship as they
were; and Excommunication, (especially that which the Schismatic voluntarily
executes upon himself) will be as penal, and as certain a prejudice of the
judgment of the great day, as it was esteemed in the primitive Church, and it is
declared to be by Tertullian. And not only the guilt, but also the danger of
Division, is now as great as it was ever heretofore; according to the saying of
S. Paul, If we bite and devour one another, we shall be destroyed one of
another. God Almighty grant that we may see, at least in this our day, the
things belonging to our peace, before they be hid from our Eyes.

THE Holy Martyr S. Written in the 251 year after Christ.
CYPRIAN Of the Unity of the Church.
WHEREAS our Lord instructing us has said, Prudence and obedience are to be
joined to Christian simplicity. Mat. 5.13.10.16.
You are the salt of the earth; and commanded us to be simple as to the doing
any wrong, and yet withal to join wisdom with our simplicity; what can be more
sit and becoming us, then that with watchful diligence we should endeavor to
understand, both what are the ambushes of our crafty enemy, and how to avoid
them? that we who have put on Christ the Wisdom of God the Father, 1 Cor. 1.24.
may not seem destitute of wisdom in securing our salvation: for we are not
only to fear that persecution, which by open force attemts the overthrow of the
servants of God. It Is easy to be cautious where the hazard is manifest. The
mind is prepared before for the combat, where the enemy professes himself.
Then is he most formidable and most to be took care of, when he secretly
approches, and under a fraudulent pretense of peace, by an undiscernible motion
steals upon us insensibly; from the practice of which methods the Devil has the
name of Serpent: for such has bin always his craft, and so dark and conceled
from all view is the fraud by which he circumvents the sons of men. Thus in the
infancy of the world he enterprizd upon, and by mixing flattery with lies, he
decieved our unexperienced Forefathers through their unwary credulity. Thus when
he attemted our Lord, he secretly approached, as if by stealth he meant to
deceive him: but he was immediately understood, and as soon repulsed and
vanquishd, because he was discoverd and known. Whence we may learn to decline
the path of the first Adam, and pursue the steps of Christ the victorious, that
we may not again unawars be entangled in the snare of Death; but being
provident against danger, we may at last enjoy the purchased immortality. But
how can we attain the fruition of this immortality, unless we keep those
commands of Christ by which death is to be vanquished and subdued? according to
that counsel and saying of his: If thou will enter into life, Mat. 19.17.
keep the commandments. And again: Ye are my friends, John 15.14.
if you do whatsoever I command you. Such who are thus minded and resolved, he
styles the courageous and stable, founded upon a rock of vast bulk and
strength, firmly compacted and consolidated by an unshaken immovable constancy,
against all the storms and tempests of the world. Whosoever hears, says he,
Mat. 7.24, and 25.
these sayings of mine, and does them, I will liken him to a wise man, who
built his house upon a rock. And the rain descended, and the floods came, and
the winds blew, and beat upon that house: and it fell not, because it was
founded upon a rock. It is our duty therefore to regulate our goings by his
precepts, and to learn and do the things he taught and did: for with what face
can any one profess he believes in Christ, while he neglects to do what he
enjoins to be don? or expect to reap the reward of faith, who is unfaithful in
the observation of his commands? It cannot be, but such a one must stagger, and
wander to and fro, being hurryed about by the spirit of error, like dust driven
by the wind. Nor shall he by his walking forward ever reach salvation, who
keeps not the saving way of truth.

Heresies are most carefully to be avoided.
But we must not only take care to decline the Devils more obvious and manifest
attemts; but those which his subtle craft and fraud has laid in the dark, the
more easily to entrap us. For what artifice more fine, what nicer subtilty,
then that when this enemy found himself discoverd and defeated by Christ's
coming into the world (after this light appeared to the Gentiles, Luke 2.32.
after he broke forth with healing rays for the curing and saving mankind,
Math. 11.5.
making the deaf hear the words of spiritual grace, the blind lift up their
eyes to2 God, the weak recover to everlasting life, the lame run into the
bosom of the Church, the dumb loudly and distinctly pray to God,) when he
beheld the abandoning of his Idols, and that his Temples and Houses of
superstition were left desolate and emty, by the very great numbers that went
off from his worship, and embraced the Faith: then to set on foot a new
artifice, even under the very title and name of Christianity to entrap the
unwary? He invented Heresies and Schisms to undermine the Faith, adulterate the
Truth, and divide Unity it self. Those whom he cannot detain in the darkness of
the old way, he circumvents by leading them in new and erroneous paths. Thus he
siezes and takes men out of the Church, and while they imagine with themselves
that they have made nearer approches to light, and left behind them the Night
of the world, he insensibly involves them anew in thick darkness; that not
conforming themselves to the Gospel of Christ, and the observation of his
righteous laws, and yet calling themselves Christians, and walking in darkness,
they should notwithstanding persuade themselves that they were illuminated. The
adversary flattering them in this opinion, and so beguiling them; who according
to the Apostle, transforms himself into an Angel of light, 2 Cor. 11 14* and 15.
and dresses up his ministers as if they were the servants of righteousness: so
that they miscalling night day, ruin and destruction safety and salvation,
obtruding despair under the name of hope, pretending infidelity to be faith,
setting up Antichrist for Christ; suggesting false but seeming probabilities,
frustrate the truth by subtilty.

This comes to pass, The original of Heresy is the ignorance of the Holy
Scripture, and contemt of the Unity of the Church.
my well-beloved Brethren, while we have not recourse to the source and
original of truth; while we seek not for the head and Fountain, and are
inobservant of our heavenly masters doctrine, which if well weighed and
examined, would supersede long discourses and arguments. Truth renders the
proof of our faith easy and compendious. Our Lord speaking to Peter, uses
these words: And I also say unto thee, Mat. 16.18, and 19.
thou art Peter, and upon this rock will I build my Church, and the gates of
hell shall not prevail against it. And I will give unto thee the keys of the
Kingdom of Heaven; and whatsoever thou shall bind on earth, shall be bound in
heaven; and whatsoever thou shall loose on earth, shall be loosed in heaven.
And he said unto the same person after his resurrection: Feed my sheep. Jo.
21.17.
And although after his resurrection he invested all the Apostles with equal
power, and told them all: Jo. 20.21, 22, 23.
As the Father has sent me, so send I you. Receive ye the Holy Ghost.
Whosesoever sins ye remit, they are remitted unto them; and whosesoever sins ye
do retain, they are retained; yet that he might make manifest the Churches
Unity, his Authority so ordered it, that the origination thereof should be
expres'd by the mention first of one single Person. What Peter was, that also
were the rest of the Apostles, they having a like participation of honor and
power; yet the narration begins with Unity, to signify that the Church can be
but one. This Unity of the Church the holy Spirit designs in the Canticles,
when in the person of our Lord he thus speaks: Cant. 6.8.
My dove, my undefiled is but one: she is the only one of her mother: she is
the choice one of her that bare her.

Now can he who keeps not this Unity of the Church, Schism readily passes into
Heresy.
persuade himself that he holds fast the Faith? can he who contends with the
Church and opposes her, have the confidence to imagine himself a member of the
Church; when the blessed Apostle Paul declares, and points clearly at the
mystery of Unity, saying: There is one body, and one spirit, Ephesians. 4.4, 5.
one hope of your calling, one Lord, one faith, one baptism? Which unity we
Bishops, especially, who preside in the Church, ought firmly to maintain and
defend; that we may evidence thereby the unity and individualness of Episcopacy
it self. Let none decieve the brethren with a ly, or corrupt the truth of our
faith with perfidious prevarication. There is but one Episcopacy, which tho
shared among as many several persons as there are Bishops in the Christian
world, yet each possesses the authority entire. There is also but one Church,
however her fruitfulness and growth is such, that she spreads and increases to
a multitude of particular churches. As the beams which issue from the Sun are
many, and yet the light it creates by them is one and the same: or as the
boughs growing out of a tree are many, and yet is it but one stock, fastened and
fixed to it is place by one tenacious root: So too, when many rivulets flow from
a fountain, whereby it seems so increased as to become many by the plenty of
water, which is such as to require several channels for it is conveyance; yet
it is but one water still, because it all rises at, and runs from one spring
head. Intercept a sunbeam from the body of the sun, the oness of light will
not admit of division. If you break a bough from a tree, 'twill never shoot
forth or grow again. Cut off a river from it is fountain, 'twill immediately dry
up. In like manner the Church being enlightened by our Lord, extends it is beams
through the whole world; yet is it the same light that every where appears, and is
entirely one however scattered: As a tree, she spreads her branches, luxuriant
in growth, and plenteous in fruit. And as a river enlarges by her course her
swelling streams, yet is there but one head, one source, one stock, of all this
happy plenty.

Out of the Church there is no Salvation.
We are all the fruit of the Churches womb, nourisht with the milk of her
breasts, quickened by her spirit. The spouse of Christ cannot be deflour'd, but
continues chaste and incorrupt. She is acquainted but with one house, and by a
modest shamefacedness secures the reputation of the marriage bed. It Is she who
preserves us unto God, and leads her children to a kingdom. Whosoever departs
from the Church, joins himself to an harlot, and forfeits the promises made
unto her; nor can he attain the rewards of Christ, who abandons his Church;
such a one is an Alien, is profane, is an Enemy. He cannot have God for his
Father, who disowns the Church for his Mother. If any one escaped in the Flood,
who was out of Noah's ark, he may likewise be saved, who is out of the pale of
the Church. Our Lord informs us of this, saying: Mat. 12.30.
He that is not with me, is against me: and he that gathers not with me,
scatters. He who breaks the peace and agreement of the Church, sets himself
against Christ. He who gathers and makes proselytes out of the Church. scatters
and makes havoc of it. It Is our Lord's saying: I and my Father are one. Joh.
10.30.
And again it is written concerning the Father, Son, and holy Spirit: These three
are one. 1 John 5.7.
And now can any one believe that this unity, which proceeds from the Divine
immutability and is consolidated by heavenly mysteries, can be rent asunder in
the Church, and divided into parts by the discrepancy of the jarring wills of
men? He who keeps not this unity, holds not the law of God, nor the belief of
the Father and the Son, nor the faith by which he should be saved.

The unity of the Church is expressed by our Saviors seamless coat.
This Sacrament of unity, this indissoluble band of concord is represented to us
in the Gospel by the coat of Christ, which was not divided at all or parted,
but the soldiers casting lots upon his vesture, who among them should wear it,
it remained whole and entire. The scripture says, John 19.23, and 24.
The soldiers said among themselves, concerning this coat without seam, woven
from the top throout, Let us not divide it, but cast lots for it, whose it
shall be. That garment represented the unity which descended from above, that
is from heaven and the Father, which was not to be torn and cut by any who
became possessor of it, but he was to have a firm and entire possession
thereof. He cannot have the garment of Christ, who rends and tears his Church.
So upon the other side, when after the death of Solomon, the Prophet Ahijah met
with King Jeroboam on the way, he rent the garment he had upon him into twelve
pieces, saying to him: 1 Kings 11.29, 30, etc.
Take thee ten pieces; for thus says the Lord God of Israel: Behold, I will
rend the kingdom out of the hand of Solomon, and I will give ten tribes to
thee. But he shall have one tribe for my servant David's sake, and Jerusalem's
sake, the city which I have chosen out of all the tribes of Israel to put my
name there. Thus when the twelve tribes of Israel were to be rent asunder, the
Prophet Ahijah presignified it by rending Jeroboam's garment. But because
Christ's people cannot be torn in sunder, therefore his coat which was wove
throout and of an entire piece, was not parted and shared by the soldiers,
whose fee it was. It Is being undivided, and the parts of it being closely and
imperceptibly conjoined, is a mysterious emblem of that concord and union which
ought to be between all who have put on Christ.

What person therefore can be so impious, If Christ's garment will not brook
division, much less his body.
so perfidious, so raging mad with discord, as to imagine he can compass, or
dare to attemt the rending the unity of the Godhead, the garment of the Lord,
or Church of Christ? He himself has instructed us in his Gospel saying, that
there shall be one fold, and one shepherd. Joh. 10.16.
And can any one imagine that in one fold there should be many shepherds, or
many flocks? The Apostle Saint Paul recommending to us this unity, 1 Cor. 1.10.
entreats and exhorts, saying: Now I beseech you, Brethren, by the name of our
Lord Jesus Christ that ye all speak the same thing, and that there be no
divisions among you: but that ye be perfectly joind together in the same mind,
and in the same judgment. And again he says: Ephesians. 4.2, 3.
Forbearing one another in love, endeavoring to keep the unity of the spirit
in the bond of peace. Can it be thought that any one departing from the Church,
can subsist and live, the man who raises new fabrics for himself: when it was
told Rahab, by whose house the Church was prefigur'd, Josh. 2.18, 19.
Thou shall bring thy Father, and thy mother, and thy brethren, and all thy
Fathers house home unto thee; and it shall be whosoever shall go out of the
doors of thy house into the street, his blood shall be upon his head: and the
Sacrament of the passover instituted in Exodus contains no other lesson then
this, that the Lamb (the slaying of which prefigured Christ's death) should be
eaten in one house? The Lord enjoined that it should be eaten in one House,
Exodus 12.11.
and that nothing of it should be carried abroad. The flesh of Christ, the Holy
of the Lord, is not to be cast out of doors: nor have Believers any other house
besides the Church which is but one. The holy Ghost in the Psalms designs and
expresses this house, this lodging of unanimity, Psalm. 68.6.
when he says: It is God who makes men to be of one mind in an house. In the
house of God, in the Church of Christ the loving inhabit, the kind and simple
continue therein.

Therefore the holy Spirit appeared in the shape of a dove, that innocent
gentle creature, The Dove and Lamb are the emblems of christianity.
which is not embittered with gall, bites not fiercely with teeth, nor
violently tears with talons: These creatures love the places where men dwell,
keep to the same nest, both the mates hatch their young; when they fly abroad,
they go in flocks, they pass their age in mutual converse; in their billing
together, they express in a manner the kiss of Charity, and in all points
fulfill the law of unanimity. This simplicity is to be sought after in the
Church, this charity to be acquired, that our brotherly love may imitate that
of doves, our mildness and gentleness equal that of sheep and lambs. What has
the fierceness of wolves, the madness of dogs, the deadly venom of serpents,
and the cruelty of savage beasts to do with a Christian's breast? We are to
rejoice, when such are cut off from the communion of the Church; least they
devour the doves and sheep of Christ, or poison them with their infectious
contagion. Sweet and bitter cannot incorporate or dwell together; neither can
darkness and light, rain and sunshine, war and peace, dearth and plenty,
drought and moisture, tranquillity and tempest.

Heresy is a work of the flesh; and invads not the truly good.
It is not possible for the truly good to depart from the Church. The wind
carries not away the good corn; nor does a tempest throw down the well rooted
tree. It Is the light chaff which the wind drives about, and the decayed stock
which the storm blows down. These are they whom the Apostle John execrates and
smites, 1 Jo. 2.19.
saying: They went out from us, but they were not of us; for if they had been
of us, they would no doubt have continued with us. Hence heresies have
frequently been, and still arise, while the perverse mind retains not peace,
and perfidious discord abandons unity. Which things the Lord permits and
suffers, leaving to men their liberty of will.; that when our hearts and minds
are tried by this test of truth, the integrity of the faithful may be as
manifest as the light. The Holy Spirit warns us of this by the Apostle, telling
us: that heresies must be, that the approved might be made manifest. By this
the faithful are tried, 1 Cor. 11.19.
and the perfidious detected; so that even here before the day of Judgment,
there passes a discrimination between the just and unjust, and the chaff is
separated from the good grain.

These are they who of their own heads without any warrant from the Divine
appointment, The character of heretics.
set themselves over the giddy conventiclers; who without the requisite of
Ordination, constitute themselves governors; and assume to themselves the
character of Bishops, without having that office and authority conferred upon
them. Whom the holy Ghost in the book of Psalms points at, when he mentions
those who sit in the seat of the scornful: Ps. 1.1.
they are the very pest and bane of faith, decieving with their serpentine
glosings, skillful in adulterating the truth, spitting up deadly poison from
their pestilential tongues. Whose very words spread like a canker, 2 Timothy 2.17.
whose discourses distill poison into the breast and heart. It Is against these
the Lord lifts up his voice, it is from these he restrains and calls back his
wandering flock, saying: Hearken not unto the words of the prophets, that
prophesy unto you; Jerem. 23.16, 17.
they make you vain: they speak a vision of their own heart, and not out of
the mouth of the Lord. They say still unto them that despise me, The Lord has
said, Ye shall have peace, and they say unto every one that walks after the
imagination of his own heart, ver. 22.
No evil shall come upon you. If they had continued in my way, and hearkened to
my words, and had from them instructed my people; I would have turned them from
their evil thoughts. These same persons the Lord designs and marks out again,
Jer. 2.13.
saying: They have forsaken me the fountain of living waters, and hewn them out
cisterns, broken cisterns that can hold no water. Although there is but one
baptism, they presume they may baptize. Having left the fountain of life, they
promise baptismal grace, whereby they who are immerst are not cleansed but
defiled; their sins not put away but rather multiplied: that new birth begets
not sons to God but to the Devil. The promise of our Savior that he will be in
the midst of two or three who are gathered together in his name, belongs not to
the separate from the congregation. Mat. 18.20.
Being born of a ly, they are not capable of the promises of truth: begot in
perfidiousness, they lose the grace of faith. They cannot recieve the reward of
peace, who by their mad discord have broke the Lords peace.

Nor let any decieve themselves with a false exposition of what the Lord has
said: Where two or three are gathered together in my name, there am I in the
midst of them. These corrupters of the Gospel, and false interpreters of it,
produce the last clause, and pass over the antecedent parts of the discourse;
remembering one piece of it, and craftily forgeting the other. As they
themselves are divided from the Church; so likewise they divide asunder an
entire period of the Scripture. For when our Lord advised his disciples to
unanimity and peace, he thus addressed to them: Ib. v. 19, 20.
I say unto you, that if two shall agree upon earth, as touching any thing they
shall ask; it shall be don for them of my Father, which is in heaven: for where
two or three are gathered together in my name, there am I in the midst of them;
showing thereby that the success and force of prayer was not to be imputed to
the number of supplicants, but unanimity of them. If two of you, says he,
shall agree upon earth, he placed unanimity in the front, and began with the
agreement of peace, that he might instruct us to agree faithfully and firmly
together. But how can he agree with any one, who agrees not with the body of
the Church, and the brotherhood in general? How can two or three be gathered
together in Christ's name, who apparently are separated from Christ and his
Gospel? For we did not go out from them, but they departed from us. And whereas
heresies and schisms had their birth and original from men's making of distinct
conventicles for themselves, it is they who are desertors of the head from whence
truth takes it is original. But the Lord speaks there concerning the Church, and
speaks to them who are of it and in it; that if they shall according to his
command and counsel, unanimously join in prayer, tho they be but two or three
gathered together, yet they shall obtain from the Divine Majesty a grant of
what they ask. Mat. 18.20.
Where two or three are gatherd together in my name, there am I, says he, in
the midst of them: i. e. of such who are simple and peaceable, who fear God and
keep his commands. In the midst of these, tho but two or three, Dan. 3.25.
he promised he would be. After this sort he was with the three Children in the
fiery furnace; and because they kept their simplicity toward him, and
continued in unanimity with one another; he therefore refresht them, amidst the
flames, as it were with a cooling breath of air, or the falling of dew: Act.
5.19.
He was with the two Apostles, shut up in prison; forasmuch as they were
simple, forasmuch as they were unanimous. He opened the prison gates, and
brought them into the court of the temple, that they might declare that word,
they had before faithfully preached, to the multitude. Mat. 18.20.
When therefore he commands and says, that wheresoever two or three are
gatherd together in my name, I am in the midst of them; he who founded and
instituted the Church, does not divide men from it: but upbraiding the discord
of the unfaithful, and recommending with his own mouth peace to the faithful,
he thence declares, he will rather afford his presence to two or three who are
met together with one heart and one mind in prayer, then to very many
dissenters; and that more may be obtained by the prayer of a few who agree in
what they ask, then by the supplication of many, whose very petitions as well
as themselves are at variance against each other. Upon which account, when he
gave a rule of prayer to his disciples, he added: Mark 11.25.
And when ye stand praying, forgive, if you have ought against any: that your
Father also which is in heaven, may forgive you your trespasses. Nay he calls
back the person who designs him a sacrifice, from the very altar, Mat. 5.23.
if he comes thither having a difference with his brother, and bids him first
to be reconciled to his brother, and then to come again in peace, and offer his
gift; for upon this ground God had not respect to the offering of Cain. Genesis
4.5.
For God could not be reconciled to him, who through envy, hated his brother.

Martyrdom it self cannot atone for the sin of Schism.
What peace therefore can they expect who are at enmity with their brethren?
What oblations can they offer who strive with the Priest? Can they think Christ
will vouchsafe to be in the midst of them when they are gathered together,
whose meeting is without the Church? Such if slain for the confessing of
Christ, would not wash away their sin even with their blood. The heinous and
inexpiable crime of discord is not to be purged away, no not with death. He
cannot be a Martyr, who is not in the Church: nor can he ever come to the
kingdom of Christ triumphant, who here deserts it being militant. Our Lord left
us peace for a legacy, commanded unanimity unto us, and gave in charge that we
should keep the unity of the spirit in the bond of peace. He cannot be a
martyr, who is destitute of brotherly love. Saint Paul both teaches and
contests this, saying: Although I have all faith, 1 Cor. 13.2, 3, 4, 5, 7, 8.
so that I could remove mountains, and have not charity, I am nothing. And tho
I bestow all my goods to feed the poor, and tho I give my body to be burned,
and have not charity, it profits nothing. Charity suffers long, and is kind:
charity envieth not: charity vaunts not it self, is not puffed up, does not
behave it self unseemly, seeks not her own, is not easily provoked, thinks
no evil: bears all things, believes all things, hops all things, endures
all things: charity never fails. This shall continue in that kingdom we look
for, this shall remain to all eternity in the brotherhood and never to be
divided union of glorified saints. Discord cannot enter heaven nor recieve
rewards from Christ, who has declared to his disciples: This is my commandment,
John 15.12.
that ye love one another, even as I have loved you. He can have no relation to
him who violates his love by perfidious dissension. Whoever has not charity,
has not God. It Is the blessed Apostle John's assertion: for he says: 1 John
4.16.
God is love, and he that dwells in love, dwells in God, and God in him.
They cannot dwell with God who through dissension will not abide in his Church.
Tho they fry in flames, tho cast into the fire or to wild beasts, they lay down
their lives, therein they recieve not the crown of faith, but the reward of
disobedience; not the glorious exit of religious fortitude, but the final
destruction of despair. Such a one may be killed, but cannot be crowned.

They are only Christians in name, who do not maintain brotherly love. Mark
12.6.
The schismatic assumes the Christian name no otherwise then the Devil does,
when he counterfiets Christ; according as he forewarned us, saying: Many shall
come in my name, saying: I am Christ, and shall decieve many. Now as Satan is
not Christ, tho he falsely takes his name; so neither is he to be looked upon as
a Christian, who perseveres not in the truth of his Gospel, and faith thereof.
It is indeed a sublime and wonderful privilege to prophesy, cast out Devils,
and to perform on earth works of power. And yet whosoever he be who has these
gifts, does not thereby attain to the Kingdom of heaven, unless he tread in the
strait and even path of duty. The Lord has pronounced such a one's doom in
these words: Mat. 7.22, 23.
Many will say unto me in that day, Lord, Lord, have we not prophesied in thy
name? and in thy name cast out Devils? and in thy name don many wonderful
works? And then will I profess unto them: I never knew you, depart from me ye
workers of iniquity. It Is righteousness alone that can recommend us to God when
he comes to judgment. We must obey his commands and counsels, that the good
works which we have don may be rewarded. Our Lord in the Gospel, when he would
guide the progress of our faith and hope in the shortest track, tells us: The
Lord thy God is one. And, Mat. 22.37, 38, 39, 40.
Thou shall love the Lord thy God with all thy heart, with all thy soul, and
with all thy strength. This is the first and great commandment, and the second
is like unto it: Thou shall love thy neighbor as thy self. On these two
commandments hang all the Law and the Prophets. In his instruction he joins
together love and unity; and in two precepts comprised the Law and the
Prophets. But how does he retain unity, or preserve love, or so much as think
on it, who furiously mad with the poison of discord, mangles the Church,
destroys the faith, disturbs the peace, dissipates charity and profanes all
holy mysteries.

This mischief, my beloved Brethren, The Apostles have long before foretold,
the rise of Schisms in the Church.
began long since, but now the destruction occasioned thereby, is apparently
increased; and the poisonous bane of heretical perverseness and separation has
shot up and shows it self. For the holy Spirit foretelling and admonishing us
by the Apostle, declares that in the declination of the world it was necessary
so it should be. 2 Timothy 3.1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8.
In the last days, says he, perilous times shall come. For men shall be lovers
of themselves, covetous, boasters, proud, blasphemers, disobedient to parents,
unthankful, unholy, without natural affection, truce breakers, false accusers,
incontinent, fierce, despisers of those that are good, traitors, heady,
highminded, lovers of plesures more then lovers of God, having a form of
Godliness, but denying the power thereof. Of this sort are they which creep
into houses, and lead captive silly women, laden with sins, led away with
diverse lusts, ever learning, and never able to come to the knowledge of the
truth. Now as Jannes and Jambres withstood Moses; so do these also resist the
truth. But they shall proceed no further; for their folly shall be made
manifest unto all men, as theirs also was. What has been foretold, has been
exactly fulfilled, and the world now drawing to an end, the times and men are a
proof thereof. The adversary now raging more and more, in like proportions
error decieves, stupidity thrusts forward, envy enflames, avarice blinds,
impiety depraves, pride puffs up, discord provokes, anger transports. Yet
notwithstanding all this, the abounding of iniquity ought not to shake and
disturb us, but rather the truth of the prediction ought to confirm and
strengthen our faith. Therefore should the brethren rather take heed of such,
for that all things were foretold of them: our Lord himself teaching us and
saying: But take ye heed: Mark 13.23.
behold, I have foretold you all things. Avoid I beseech you such men, and walk
not with them, and keep your ears shut, and your selves far from their
infectious communication, which carries death along with it, as it is written;
Set an hedge of thorns about thine ears, Eccles. 28.28. according to the Vulg.
Lat. 1 Cor. 15.33. Mat. 15.14.
and hearken not to an evil tongue. And again: Evil communication corrupts good
manners. The Lord instructs and counsels us to withdraw from this sort of
persons: They are blind leaders of the blind. And if the blind lead the blind,
both shall fall into the ditch. Whoever he is that lives in separation from the
Church, he is to be detested and shunned. He who is such, Tit. 3.11.
is perverted and sins, being condemned of himself. Can he concieve himself
to be on Christ's side, who acts against his Priests, who departs from the
communion of his Clergy and people? Such a one bears arms against the Church,
against God's ordinance, is an enemy to the altar, a rebel against the
sacrifice of Christ, instead of being faithful is a traitor, instead of
religious sacrilegious, an undutiful son, an ungodly servant, an hostile
brother; contemning the Bishops and renouncing God's priests, he presumtuously
sets up altar against altar, makes new and unlawful prayers, profanes by false
sacrifices the true offering of our Lord; not deigning to consider, that they
who resist the ordinance of God, Romans 13.2.
recieve to themselves damnation.

Gods vengeance pursues the invaders of the priesthood.
Thus Corah, Dathan, and Abiram, who challenged to themselves the power of
sacrificing in opposition to Moses, and Aaron the priest, were immediately
punished for their attemt. Numb. 16.32.
The earth opened her mouth, and swallowed them up. Nor did the Anger of God
thus stirred up punish only the authors of this rebellion, but two hundred and
fifty others, accomplices in their seditious enterprise: who joining themselves
to them in their insolence, Ibid. 35.
were with a speedy revenge consumed by fire from the Lord. From whence we
learn and are taught, that whatever wicked men do in opposition to Gods
ordinance, is don against him. 2 Chronicles. 26.16. etc.
So King Uzziah, taking a censer in his hand to burn incense contrary to the
law of God, violently invading the priesthood, and refusing to obey and retire
when Azariah the priest opposed his design, was by divine vengeance put to
shame, being marked in the forehead with the stein of Leprosy. The offended Lord
set the mark of his anger on that conspicuous part of his body, where they are
signed who are reciev'd into his favor. So likewise the sons of Aaron for
offering up strange fire to the Lord, which he commanded not, Lev. 10.1.
were forthwith consumed before the Lord in his displesure; and yet these are
imitated and followed by all such, who slighting what was delivered by God,
seek after and are in love with doctrines of human invention: for which crime
our Lord in his Gospel sharply rebukes and reprooves them: Mat. 15.3, and 6.
Ye transgress and make the commandment of God of none effect, by your
tradition.

This is a more flagitious wickedness then that which the Lapsed commit, The
Schismatic is more criminal then the lapst person, whose guilt even Martyrdom
cannot expiat.
who being reciev'd to Penance, by acts of mortification recommend themselves
to the mercy of God. In this case the Church is sought to, in the other she is
opposed: in this there might be some pretense of necessity, in that the crime
is purely voluntary: here the lapsed person prejudiceth himself alone; there
who so proselytes others to schism or heresy, decieves as many as he draws in:
here is the loss of one soul, there the danger of many. This is plain, the
lapsed understands he has offended, and mourns and bewails his condition; but
the sectary is puffed up in his sin, and pleases himself in his transgression;
he parts the mother and her children, whom he draws off from her; he enticeth
the sheep to follow his voice and not the shepherds; and, in short, disorders
Gods sacraments. And whereas the Lapsed person sinned but once, the persevering
schismatic goes on in daily sinning. To conclude, the lapsed recovering his
station, may be honored now with the crown of Martyrdom, and may hereafter
were a Heavenly one; while the schismatic slain out of the Church, can never
recieve those rewards which are peculiarly hers.

It is not to be wondered at, if Confessors fall into Schism.
And here, my beloved Brethren, let it be no wonder to any of you that
Confessors fall into schism; and that some of that rank may be guilty of crimes
so heinous as not to be mentioned. For it is not the confessing of Christ's name
which privileges a man from the Devils snares, or which defends and perpetually
safeguards one while in this world: for if it were so, we should never meet
with deceit, uncleaness, and adultery in Confessors, and yet these are crimes
which to our grief and sadness we see in some. Whosoever that Confessor be, he
is not greater, nor better, nor dearer to God then Solomon, who yet held that
grace he once obtained of the Lord, so long only as he walked in his ways: But
after he forsook his way, he lost his favor also, as it is written: The Lord
raised up an adversary against him. 1 Kings 11.14. Revel. 3.11.
And therefore it is said: Hold fast that which thou have, that no man take thy
crown. Which threat had not bin menaced, were it not that upon departing from
righteousness, the crown likewise was to be translated. Confession is the first
setting out toward glory, but carries not the prize: perfects not praise, tho
it initiate to honor: as it is written: Mat. 10.22.
He who endures to the end, he shall be saved. Whatsoever is before the end,
may be a step to ascend by to the height of salvation, but it is not that last
round which seats us in the utmost summity thereof. By being a Confessor, one
becomes afterward in greater danger, because it gives greater provocation to
the enemy. Is any one a Confessor, for this very reason he ought to keep close
to the Gospel of our Lord, having by the Gospel obtained glory from him. For he
has said: To whom much is given, Luke 12.48.
of him much shall be required; and the higher a person stands raised in
dignity, the more service shall be demanded of him. Let no man perish by the
example of a Confessor, nor any one learn injustice, pride, faithlesness from a
Confessors ill morals. Is any one a Confessor, let him be humble and quiet, let
him in his conversation be orderly and modest; and as he is called the
Confessor of Christ, let him imitate that Christ whom he has confessed. For when
he says: Every one that exalts himself, Luke 18.14.
shall be abased, and he that humbles himself, shall be exalted, and was
himself exalted by his father, because being the word, the power, the wisdom of
God the Father, he humbled himself here upon earth; how can it be that he
should love a proud advancing of our selves, who both himself required humility
in his law, and reciev'd from his father a name above all names as a recompense
of his humility? A Confessor he is of Christ's; but upon this condition, that he
does not afterward blaspheme Christ's Majesty and Glory. The tongue which has
once confessed Christ, ought not to rail, or be turbulent; should not be heard
making a noise in reproaches and wrangling; nor having set forth the divine
praises, spit out serpentine venom against the Brethren and Priests of God. But
if the Confessor shall grow criminal and detestable afterward, if he shall
overthrow his good confession by an ill conversation, if with some filthy
action he shall bring a foul blot upon his life, if lastly forsaking that
Church in which he became a Confessor, and cutting asunder the band of Unity,
he shall exchange his first faith for infidelity at the last, he is not to
flatter himself as if his confession made him one of the Elect, and to be
rewarded with Glory; when hereby he deserves the severer punishment. Our Lord
chose Judas to be an Apostle, and yet this Judas betrayed afterward his Lord.

But albeit the traitor Judas fell off from the fellowship of the Apostles, The
falling away of some, does not lessen the glory of those Confessors, who retain
their dignity.
yet was not this an empeachment of their fidelity and duty; and so here in the
present affair, it does not lessen the dignity of Confessors, because the faith
of some has faild. The blessed Apostle speaks to this purpose: For what if
some have not believed. Romans 3.3, 4.
(or fallen away) shall their unbelief make the faith of God without effect?
let God be true, and every man a liar. The better and greater part of
Confessors stands firm in the faith and in the truth of the Lords law and
discipline. Nor do they depart from the Churches peace, who keep in mind that
it was in the Church where through the mercy of God they obtained grace: And in
this respect their faith is more to be commended, that they withdrew from a
fellowship with them in schism, with whom they had bin joined in an
unconquerable confession: who withdrew from the contagion of guilt, being
irradiated with the true Gospel light, shined upon by the pure and bright beams
of the Lord; as much to be renowned for keeping Christ's peace, as they were for
their conquest in their conflict with the Devil.

The conversation of schismatics is to be avoided.
I wish, my beloved Brethren, and withal give my counsel and advice, that if it
be possible, not one of the Brethren may perish, and our joyful mother the
Church may recieve into her bosom the whole body of agreeing people. But if
notwithstanding her wholesome counsel, she cannot recall back some of the chief
ringleaders of schism and authors of dissension, obstinately resolved to
persist in their blind madness, into the way of salvation; yet let the rest of
you who have been caught by simplicity, or led by mistake, or beguiled by the
cunning craft and cozenage of others, disentangle your selves from the
deceitful snares, retrieve your wandering feet out of the bypath of error, and
take the straight way which leads to heaven. It is the Apostles adjuration: 2
These. 3.6.
Now we command you, Brethren, in the name of our Lord Jesus Christ, that ye
withdraw your selves from every brother that walks disorderly, and not after
the tradition which he reciev'd of us. And again he speaks to this sense: Ephesians.
5.6, 7.
Let no man decieve you with vain words. For because of these things comes the
wrath of God upon the children of disobedience. Therefore be not partakers with
them. We must therefore depart from such offenders as these, nay rather we
ought to fly from them, for fear least if one join himself to such disorderly
walkers, and goes with them in their ways of sin, wandering from the track where
the true road lay, he may at last be involved in an equal share of guilt with
them. There is one God and one Christ, his Church one, his faith one, and his
people by concord are firmly cemented together into one body. Unity is not to
be divided, nor can the same body by the dissolution of its contexture be
dissever'd from its self, or subsist, having its bowels torn out piecemeal.
Whatever infant is cut off from the womb, cannot live and breath apart, but
loses its safety and life. It is the holy Spirits admonition: Psalm. 34.12,
13, 14.
What man is he that desires life, and loves many days that he may see good?
Keep thy tongue from evil, and thy lips that they speak no guile. Depart from
evil, and do good; seek peace and pursue it. He who is a son of peace, ought to
seek and follow after it, and he who is acquainted with, and has any affection
for the bond of charity, ought to refrain his tongue from evil dissension. To
the rest of the divine precepts of wholesome instruction which our Lord being
about to suffer dispensed, Jo. 14.27.
he added this: Peace I leave with you, my peace I give unto you. This legacy
of peace he left us, and has promised us all the gifts, all the rewards he
has to bestow, on condition we preserve it. If we are coheirs with Christ, let
us abide with Christ in peace: If sons of God, we should be peacemakers.
Blessed are the peacemakers, Mat. 5.9.
says he, for they shall be called the children of God. Gods children ought to
be peaceful, of a mild spirit, innocent in their discourse, in affection
united, inviolably fastened to each other by the links of unanimity. This accord
was in the Apostles time. So the new nation of believers kept the commandments
of the Lord, and held fast their mutual charity; for a testimony of which this
Scripture may be alleged: Acts 4.32.
And the multitude of them that believed were of one heart and of one soul. And
again: These all (i. e. Act. 1.14.
the Apostles) continued with one accord in prayer and supplication with the
women, and Mary the mother of Jesus, and with his brethren. And therefore they
could pray effectually, and be confidently assured of obtaining what they asked
of Gods mercy.

But unanimity is decreased to that low degree among us, The state of the
Church declining in its primitive zeal and purity.
that the bounty of charitable giving is contracted. They sold houses and lands
then, and being mindful only of laying up tresures in heaven for themselves,
they laid down the several prices for which their goods were sold at the
Apostles feet, to be distributed by them among the poor according as their
necessities required. But alas, now adays we give not the tithe of our estate,
and when the Lord calls to sell, we are upon the buying and increasing hand. So
much has the vigor of Faith witherd and decayed; so much has the healthy
constitution of Believers languish'd. And therefore the Lord with relation to
our times says in the Gospel: Luke 18.8.
When the Son of man comes, shall he find faith upon the earth? We see that
accomplished which he foretold. In the fear of God, in the Law of
righteousness, in all our actions, we are most unfaithful. No man bears in mind
the terrors of the Lord, his wrath and future judgment; the vengeance he will
take on unbelievers, and the eternal torments to which they are consigned.
Which are such as would terrify our consciences if we did believe them, but
therefore we disregard because of incredulity: If we did believe them, we
should avoid, and avoiding should escape them. Let us rouse up our selves, my
dearest Brethren, as much as it is possible, and throwing off our old sloth and
sleepiness, let us be watchful to observe and perform the Lord's precepts. Let
us be such as he has commanded us to be, saying: Let your loins be girded
about, Luke 12.35, 36, and 37.
and your lights burning; and you your selves like men who wait for the Lord,
when he will return from the wedding; that when he comes and knocks, they
may open to him immediately. Blessed are those servants, whom when the Lord
comes he shall find watching. We ought to be ready, least the day of our
departure find us unprepared and engaged. Let our light so shine in our good
works, that it may lead us out of the dark night of this world, to the light
and brightness of eternal day. Let us carefully and vigilantly expect the
sudden coming of our Lord, that when he shall knock, our faith may be found
waking to recieve the reward of her watchfulness. If these duties are observed,
if these admonitions and precepts are obeyed; we shall not be taken sleeping by
the deceits of the Devil, but as vigilant servants of Christ in his Kingdom,
shall reign with him.

AN ADVERTISMENT.
WHereas in the sixth page of this Treatise there is omitted the mention of
Primacy being given to S. Peter; and that there was to be one Chair, the which
is his; as also that the Church was founded thereupon: words seeming to justify
the pretentions of the Sea of Rome; all which appear every where in the late
editions of this Author, and as such are cited by others, and therefore may be
suggested to have bin left out by sinister practice, and to be a falsification
of the Text: the Reader is therefore desired to take notice, that the said
passages are not to be found in the ancient Manuscript copies, nor in the old
Editions, that of Spire, that without name, or time, or place of the
impression, nor that of Rembolt, those of Erasmus, that of Morellius, and
onward to Manutius and Pamelius; whereby it manifestly appears that the
aforesaid insertions are a forgery, suitable to diverse others, which the
patrons of the Roman omnipotence have attemted to impose upon the world; and
that the omission is so far from being a falsification, that it is the doing
justice to the genuine reading: which thing Rigaltius in his commentary
ingeniously acknowledges, tho he had not courage to restore the Text.

Indeed it had bin a great shortness of understanding in S. Cyprian, if in the
same breath wherein he declared that all Bishops of the whole Christian Church,
preside therein with parity of power and honor; he should in contradiction
thereto declare, that the whole Church was subjected to, and founded upon the
primacy of the one Chair of S. Peter. And moreover the said Father, who in his
practice was known to have resisted Pope Stephen, and to have stood his
excommunication: and opposed Pope Cornelius, tho his friend, in the business of
an appeal to Rome; would have bin utterly inexcusable and self-condemned, if in
his writings he had taught, that there was a Supremacy overall Churches and
Persons, in the Roman Church.

Would to God those men who make large boasts of Antiquity and Fathers on the
one part, and those on the other side who cry out for a Reformation according
to the primitive platform; would diligently read the holy Fathers and Writers
of the first ages of the Church, particularly S. Cyprian; which if they did, it
would be impossible for them to continue their opinions, and be either Papists
or Separatists.

FINIS.

