THE Excellent Woman. A SERMON Preached at the Funeral of Mrs. Elizabeth Scott,
Relict to Humphry Scott of Conghurst in Kent, Esquire; And daughter unto Sir Matthew
Howland Knight, late of Giles in the Fields; On the 16. of December. 1658. By
Tho. Case, M. A. sometimes Student of Chapter Chapter Oxon. Now Rector of St. Giles in
the Fields.

Heb. 13.7, 8. Whose faith follow, confidering the end of their conversation,
Jesus Christ the same yesterday, and to day, and for ever.

London, printed for Robert Gibs in Chancery Lane at the sign of the Golden
Ball, near Sergeants Inn. 1659.

To the truly Honorable, and much honored, The Lady Frances Howland, Relict
to the worthy Sir Matthew Howland late of Giles in the Fields.
Madam,
I Shall not need to fear the reviving of your sorrows by this late address; I
find them still fresh upon your spirit; and I dare not accuse you for it: I
had almost said, you cannot be guilty of an excess in your mourning over the
loss of such a child; A child not only of the severest obedience, but of the
sweetest and tenderest respect to your spiritual and eternal good, that most
Mothers ever had the happiness to bring forth.

Surely it was her pious care to pay in grace, the debt which he owed you by
nature: and to compensate her natural being received from you, with your
spiritual.

Your Ladyship has often acknowledged to myself, and others what a soul-help
she was to you, ever since God was pleased to call her by his grace, and to
reveal his son in her. Surely as seldom have children lost a better mother;
so seldom did mother lose a better child. And as such a loss can hardly be
overwept, so I am afraid our times are little guilty of such a sin. Our sin is
rather that we bury our sorrows together in the same grave with our godly,
praying, soul- friends, as if we were no losers by their death; truly would
Christians put on their mourning affections, but as long as they wear their
mourning garments, for their godly dead, there were less cause of mourning.

It is true, their voice to us is that of our Lord, Weep not for me; there is
no cause (as to themselves) to sorrow even as others that have no hope; Yea,
but weep for your selves, and for your children; not for their gains, but for
your loss, loss of Counsel, loss of their quickening edifying Converse; their
prayers, comforts, loss of their holy jealousy and watchfulness over us,
their tender compassions to our souls. Alas, a great part of Christians
understand not their loss, and the most do not lay it to heart; and so though
they quit the sense, yet they aggravate their misery; while they add sin to
their affliction; even the sin of insensiblenesse: Isa. 26.11.
Lord when thine hand is lifted up they will not see. Jer. 5.3.
Thou have smitten them, but they have not grieved.

I am glad therefore Madam on your behalf to find that these tears are not yet
dried up; blessed are those mourners that prevent not the Consolations of the
holy Ghost; but do patiently wait till God himself come to wipe off the tears
from their eyes; of which this will be a comfortable pledge, if by the sadness
of the countenance the heart be made better. Eccl. 7.3.
Which that it may be your Ladyships portion, as mine own, shall be the earnest
prayer of

Madam, Your Ladyships deeply obliged, and most faithful servant in the Gospel.
The Case.

To the Honorable Sir Howland Roberts of Glassenbury in the County of Kent
Baronet.
Noble Sir,
IT is no small privilege to be born of godly parents; The blessings of the
Covenant run most kindly in the channel of the Covenant; there is more to be
presumed of such children then others; not only as they are under the blessing
of their parents prayers, ( Bathsheba called Solomon the son of her Vows;
and Monica St. Augustine the child of her prayers and tears;) but also as they
themselves have a greater holdfast upon God, by virtue of his holy Covenant;
Lord, I am thy servant, Ps. 116.16.
and the son of thy handmaid, was David's plea.

What a right you may claim to Gods family by your mother, the just character
here delivered of her, will sufficiently evidence. Her example, Counsels,
prayers, are a better portion then your Fathers inheritance: She traveled the
second time with your spiritual birth, and was in pain till she could see
Christ formed in you, and the rest of the fruit of her loins; and that all her
children by nature might be the adopted sons and daughters of God by grace;
that you might be good rather then great, serviceable rather then honorable,
that she might go out of the world with that joy of our Lord, My seed shall
serve him, Ps. 22.30.
it shall be counted to the Lord for a generation, this was the travel of her
soul. Solomon recounteth the Prophecy, Prove. 31.1
which his Mother taught him; and surely as by the example of your pious
mother, so by the gracious counsels and instructions which from the very
cradle, she was perpetually instilling into your mind, she being dead, yet
speaks; the module whereof is indelibly engraven upon your heart.

The greatness of your loss is not easy to be told; and it is not yours
only but the whole Churches: she was a Christian indeed in all the capacities
which she sustained, and filled them all with singular wisdom and fidelity. The
providence of God in taking her away in the fullness of her strength and
activity for Jesus Christ; is to me very stupendous, and compared with the
premature death of diverse others of the Lords choice ones, seems to intimate
some approaching judgment; The righteous perishes and man lays it to heart,
Isa. 57.1.
and merciful men are taken away, none considering that the righteous is taken
away from THE EVIL TO COME. When the corn is reaped and gathered into the
barn, the bruit Cattle are turned into the field: Such a general, sudden, and
(to us) untimely death of the godly, calls upon survivours to sit down, and
consider, how they may either prevent, or prepare for approaching evils; at
least how they may fill up the vacant rooms of those worthies that are gone to
rest, with a greater activity of grace, and a more diffusive service.

As for your self (Honored Sir) the remaining hopes and honor of your
Fathers house; go on to do worthily for God; and let the world know that your
Mothers Blessing is not yet worn out of your family; and that power of
Religion which she fought to stablish there, did not expire with her. Which as
it is the hope, so it shall be the prayer of him, who is,

Sir, Yours in all Christian Observance, Tho. Case

To the Reader.
Reader,
I Do easily foresee the large commendation which I have given to that truly
Honorable person, whose memory is continued in these papers, may incur censure
from strangers: or else those, who though not altogether strangers, were not so
intimately acquainted with her worth and excellency; ( painted pieces look best
at a distance, but real and living are not discovered but b^ nearer approaches.
An^ therefore a word to avoi^ prejudice will not be unnecessary.

I must confess it is ver^ sad to observe how unab^^ many Professors are to
bea^ the just commendation (...) those who do excel in ver^^tue: I am not
willing (...) search into the reasons lest I be thought to burden others with
censure, while* I seek to cast it off from m^ self, I will only say th^^ much,
It is as unworthy, Christians to envy the glory o^ them that are illustrious,
as ^t would be to detract from them: Especially when their ^minency is
reported, not for the discouragement and reproach of them that are in a lower
sphere, but for their instruction, and to provoke to imitation. It should
rather cheer us to the ^eart to see the beams of ^he Lords grace breaking ^ut
with so much glory to ^he Giver, and that God ^s glorified by others, better
then our selves; and that while we are at the bottom of the hill, others get
^earer to the top and height of Christian perfection.

My Apology is this; i^ in this report I have exceeded the bounds of trut^ and
modesty, bear witnes^ to the excess; but if I have spoken the truth, why am
(...) smitten?

As for the truth of wha^ I have spoken, let the annexed Testimonies of so many
Reverend and godly Divines, with other authentic witnesses bear record: as
also those many others that might be produced both in City and Country, who
had the happiness to be privy and conscious to her walk and course I may truly
say she had a good report of all men, 3 John 12.
and of the truth it self. Now whether in this Character given of this worthy
Christian, I have been acted by a spirit of flattery, or a desire to do good;
Yea, whither so much to honor the dead, as to provoke the living to an holy
emulation of like strictness, and heavenly Conversation, the Searcher of
hearts knows, who will both bring to light the hidden things of darkness, 1
Cor. 4.5.
and make manifest the Counsels of the hearts; and then shall every man have
the praise of God.

Reader, how much more honor and comfort will it be in that day to be a
follower of what thou read then a Judge, I leave to thine own conscience to
determine: The Lord give thee to profit by this, and other the instances of his
grace, which is the prayer of him, who is

Thine in the service of the Gospel. Tho. Case.

PROVERBS 31.29. Many Daughters have done virtuously, but thou excellest them
all.


THe nine first Verses of this Chapter contain a notable Model of Instructions
which Solomon's Mother taught him; calculated most properly for his use and
direction as he was a King.

It is called a Prophecy, under which notion Counsel and Instruction is
sometimes signified (not in the Old Testament only, but also in the New) the
Original occasion whereof was, because the Office of the Prophets was to teach
and instruct the people, as well as to foretell and reveal things to come.

This fatter part of the Chapter from the tenth verse to the end, containe^ a
most elegant description of an excellent woman.

To whom this Characte^ is to be ascribed, admits o^ varions thoughts amongs^
Interpreters.

The Papist^ attribute i^ to the Virgin Mary?

Some of the ancient Fathers to the Church, the Spouse of Christ.

Rabbi Solomon applies it to the Old Test^ment.

And (after him) Lyra to the whole Scripture.

But all these are not only wide, but wild conjectures.

Some with more probability, as^ribe it to B^thsheba, Solomon's Mother; as
penned and composed by Solomon as an Encomium or Panegyric of her Excellencies;
which he ded^cates unto her by way of a gratulatory acknowledgement of her
singular piety in these Motherly instructions, recounted in the former part of
the Chapter.

But lastly, others conceive, that the whole description to be but the
Character of an excellent woman at large, and not particularly applied to any
single person, but as it were a general Draught or Portraicture by which we may
know an excellent woman, a Wife indeed, when we see her.

And it is conceived that this description is a continued part of this
Prophecy which Bathsheba dedicated unto Solomon, and was specially intended to
be his Rule and Standard in the choice of a Wife; the special study and care of
a pious Mother, as we see in Rebecca toward Jacob, Genesis 29.46. And to this
conjecture I do rather incline.

In this description, the eighthteenth precedent verses contain the particular
virtues and praises of this excellent Woman, my Text is the summa totalis, the
Compendium and Coronis of the whole Character, the Crown wherewith she is
Crowned (as it were) in the face of Heaven and Earth, God and Angels and Men;
Many Daughters have done virtuously, but thou excellest them all.

Have done virtuously,] the Original Word signifies properly to bring forth
children, Chai^l from Chul dolor, eviti.
with sorrow and hard labor: hence also it sometimes signifies virtue,
sometimes riches: because neither is ordinarily attained and prosecuted without
much industry and activity; Gnashu Chaijl fecerunivirtutem.
the phrase here used (to the letter) is to be translated have done virtue; or
performed worthy things; they have acted strenuously which seems to approve our
translation, as that which is most proper. They have done virtuously.

Many Daughters] Daughters, here is taken more Hebraico for a Woman; as men are
called Sons, so women are called Daughters, Cant 3.5.

But how does this p urality of good Women ( many Daughters have done
virtuously) agree with that complaint of Solomon, Eccles. 7.28.
one man amongst a thousand have I found, but a Woman amongst all these have I
not found?

Some salve the difficulty thus; Solomon speaks in refference to his ^^n
experience; He had not found one good Woman indeed amongst a thousand,
(referring to his former sensual converse with women;) He had a thousand Wives
and Concubines, all the Daughters of strange profane Nations: and therefore it
was no wonder he could not find one good amongst them all, they all proved
snares to him to turn away his heart from the Lord unto Id^ls. 1 Kin. 11.3.


But these words are Bathshebas words in reference to her own experience, who
by conversing with a better so^t of Women then her Son did; found not only
one, but many good ones of that sex, many Daughters have done virtuously.

I but even she makes a very great difficulty also of finding one; Object.
Verse 10. Who can find a virtuous woman, for her price is far above Rubies:
the question seems to imply a good woman to be a rare jewel, and hardly to be
found.

But the Answer (to both these Objections) is, Answ.
that neither the meaning of Solomon nor his Mother is to condemn one sex more
then the other, But both are to be understood comparatively, (and alas it holds
too true in both Sexes) the number of the truly good is but very small and
inconfiderable, compared with the vile and vicious, whether of men or women.
The bad are like pebble stones upon the Sea shore, you cannot stir a foot but
ye stumble upon them, but the good are like precious stones, Rubies, and
Diamonds of great value, and rarely to be found; the Merchant that will find
them must travel far for them: To which sad truth the Apostle bears witness,
1 Cor. 1.26. Not many wise, nor many mighty, not many noble, etc. Blessed be
God he does not say no any wise, not any mighty, some there be which though but
a little flock, compa^ed with the Droves and Herds which the Devil carries
head^ong into the Sea of perdition; yet considered in themselve they are not a
contempt ible number; Revel. 7. from the 4th verse to the 8 9, 10^h.

But then again, amongs^ these many, there is here and there a rare one to be
found, a pearl of great price, many good; and some one excellent a paragon, a
Nonesuch in he^ place and age, To whom it may be said, Thou excelles^ them all.

The Words thus opened and cleared, will affords u^ these Observations.

1. Obser. All the Members of the Crurch are not of the same preciousness and
influence: there be several sizes of Christians.

2. God takes notice of the least grace and goodness that is in any: grace in
what degree soever it is, (if it betrue) God will not overlook it.

3. The great honor and praise of a Christian, is to be excellent in their
generations: Or, Excellency in grace and goodness, is that which is of great
price in the sight of God: God does set a special note of approbation upon it,
thou excellest them all.

All the Members of the Church are not of the same size in grace. Doct. 1.


In this firmament of the Church, it is as in the Firmament of the ^eavens; one
Star differs from another in glory; 1 Cor. 15.41.
all Stars are not of the same light and influence; some there be of the first,
some of the second magnitude; others that are of a common dimension and
influence: so is the resurrection of the dead; Ver. 42.
this here* in grace, and that hereafter in glory.

In the Household of Faith all the Members be not o^ the same Age and Office.

There be some Babe^ in Christ, Babes i^ Knowledge, and Babe^ in grace, weak
an^ tender Christans, tha^ have little more the^ the very being of spirirituall
life in them, 1 John 2.12, 13, 14.
only enough to denominate them Saints an^ Children of God.

Some there be youn^ men; strong act^ve Christians, strong to overcome the
Devil in all his temptations, and active in their generations, able to do much
work for Jesus Christ and the Gospel.

And then there be Fathers in the Church, Christians of much experience in the
mystery of the Kingdom of God: Christians of great acquaintance with God, and
communion with God who can say with the Apostle, 1 John 1.3
Truly our Communion is with the Father and with his Son Jesus Christ.

Amongst the Worthies of D^vid, all did not attain the sa^e fame and enown with
the first three etc.

Well; Let not the weak Christian envy the strong, Use.
nor the strong despise the weak; but see God and admire God in the several
gifts and graces of his Spirit. So it must be in the Church of God.

But secondly Observe; Doct. 2.
God takes notice of the least good that is in any: Grace in what ever degree
(if it be true) is not rejected by Jesus Christ. The bruised Reed he will not
break, and the smonking Flax he will not quen^h; what is weaker then a b^uised
reed; behold while it was whole, it was fit for little service; but when it is
bruised it is good for nothing: you cannot make a pin of it to hang a vessel
on: what is more useless then smoking flax; singed and scorched with the fire,
and ready to break out into a flame; ye cannot make a thread of it fit for any
work. Yet that grace which in the sense and feeling of a Christian, a Christian
that is poor in spirit, is of no more consideration then such smoking flax,
and such a bruised reed; behold Jesus Christ will be so far from quenching of
the one, and breaking the other, that he will bring it forth into victory;
weak grace shall at length get the conquest of strong corruption;

It is very observable in the seven Churches of Asia, Rev. 2. and 3. Cha^t.
there is not any thing that was good in any of them, but Jesus Christ takes
special notice of it.

I know thy labor and thy patience; Rev. chap. 2.2, 3.
and thou can not bear with them which are evil, etc.

The Church of Smy^na; verse 9.
I know thy works and tribulation, and poverty, but thou art rich.

Pergamus, verse 1^.
Thou hold^st fast my Name, and have not denied my Faith, though thou dwell
where Satan has his seat.

Thyatyra, verse 19.
Thy works and charity, and service, and faith, and patience, and (again) thy
works, I and thy last to be more then the first.

Sardis, has a few Names, and Philadelphia a little strength, Chap. 3.4. verse
8.
etc.

There was not the least good in any of the Churches, though intermixed with
much ^in, and corruption, but it is taken notice of, and recorded in the
Register of Gods remembrance, and is mentioned to their honor and praise; only
there was proud conceited Laodicea that had nothing but an high oopinion of her
self, ver. 16.
and she stands with a brand upon her forehead, instead of a Crown upon her
head; Lukewarm.

In wicked Jeroboams family, there was but one poor child, that had some good
in him, and that but very little, yet that is taken notice of, and an asterism
set upon it; In him was found some good thing toward the Lord God of Israel.
Therefore, 1 Kin. 14.13.
etc.

Here the Daughters that had done virtuously are upon Record, though they came
not up to the character of t^ excellent woman,

As all that helped to r^paire the wall of Jerusale^ had not a like share in t^
work, yet all their nam^ are upon the file, their labo^^ of love is registered
and r^ported to succeeding genrations.

The Ground or Reason^ this Observation is this, Ground.
s^ Because true grace thoug^ never so small, is the Phil. 2.13.
wo^^ of God; yea, the Ephesians. 4.24.
Image, God; a 2 Pet. 1.4.
beam of the Divi^ Nature: and God will n^ despise the work of his o^^ hands:
God will own eve^ one that is called by his Na^^ why? for I have created hi^
for my glory, I have form^ him, yea I have made him.

God knows how to disti^guish Isa 43.7.
between the Gold and the dross; between a want of grace, and a want in grace:
between sincerity and cor^uption in his people; between a child and a bastard:
And he will not throw the heap of corn into the fire, because there is much
chaff in it; he will not reprobate the gold because there is dross mixed with
it: Isa. 57.17, 18.
nor disinherit the child because a weak child: froward Ephraim, because a
child, God will heal him, and lead him, and restore comforts to him, and to
his mourners.

Use.
It may serve,

1. To encourage weak Christians, say not in thy heart I have no grace,
because thou find much corruption God does not say so. T^^ heavenly Father
can discov^^ a spark of grace in a sea (...) corruption, Christians mu^^ learn
to distinguish betwe^^ the having of corruption^ and the allowing of
corru^tion, between a little grace and being contented with (...) little grace.

2. It may serve to Cauti^^ us against despising of o^ weaker brethren. He is
n^^ of the spirit and disposition of our heavely Father, the can despise one of
Christ little ones, a little faith, an^ a little strength; some goo^ thing
toward the Lord, Go^ takes notice of, and Go^ owns; so should we; if (...)
will be the Children of ou^ heavenly Father. Him that (...) week in faith
receive, only ^ot to doubtful disputations; So is the Rule, To. 14.1.
^e should own the weakest ^hristians, to encourage and ^elp their graces, but
not (...) perplex them with unpro^able disputes.

3. It may serve as an En^ouragement to all to be ^od; to labor to get grace,
^ho would not serve such a ^od, as will own the least ^ood that is in his
children? ^^at knows how to pardon ^reat sins, and to accept of (...) little
grace where there is ^^cerity? Bring into God that thou have, thy mite shall be
accepted, if it be all ^hou have. Far litabo persius
A pair of Turtle ^^ves will be accepted on ^ods Altar, as well as cost^er
Sacrifices; where the sa^rificers ability will extend no higher. But cursed
(...) the deceiver which has in h^ Flock a Male, Mal. 1.14.
and sacrifice^ to the Lord a co rupt thin^ A man is accepted with Go^
according to what he has. 2 Cor. 8.12.
(...) according to what he has no^ Only let not this make y^^ idle, to be
content with a litt^^ grace, because God will acce^^ a little: argues no grace
(...) all: know thus much I b^seech you, that though Go^ will own the weak
Christian yet he delights in the exce^lent; which brings me upon the third and
main Doctri^^ which I intend to handle.

The great honor a d'prai^^ of a Christian i^ to be excelle^^ in goodness and
grace. Doct. 3.


Excellent Saints are Go^ delight.

Take a few Demonstrat^ons.

1. The word of Command; Them. 1.
^ll the Precepts and Exhorta^^ons of Scripture run upon that strain, walk
before me, Genesis 17.1.
and be thou perfect said God ^o Ab aham: Abraham must ^ot take up with any
thing ^hort of perfection. And that you may not think that ^as a special
instance which ^ll are not bound to follow, ^^e Evangelical Rule which ^oncerns
all Christians, ^peaks in the very same Lang^age, Be ye perfect, Mat. 5. ult.
ye with ^^s add^tion of highest emidency, as your heavenly Father is perfect.
1 Pet. 1.15
As he that has called you is holy, so be ye holy in all manner of
conversa^ion, for it is written, be ye ho^y, for I the Lord your God am holy.

Observe, Christians must make God the pattern o^ their holiness, and the
Motive of their holiness; Holy as he is holy, there is our pattern; holy because
he is holy, there is our motive; They must content themselves with no measure or
degree of holiness, but forgetting the things that are behind, press still
after further degrees of conformity unto God. These be not only Evangelicall
Counsels (as the Papists sottishly teach, that so upon this foundation they may
build their Superstructure of merit and works of supererrogation) but they be
Evangelical precepts and commands, enjoined upon the great prerogative of
divine filiation; and indeed flowing from it; Matthew. 5.45.
that you may be the children of your heavenly Father: there is no boasting of
divine Sonship, without conformity unto the divine nature: not that this
conformity is the cause of our Sonship, but the evidence, Tunc dicitur saepe
aliquid esse quum esse intelligitur, Beza in loc.
that you may be, i. e. that you may be known to be the children of your Father
which is in Heaven: According to this tenor, run all the commands of the
Gospel, perfect holiness in the fear of God: 2 Cor. 7.1
proving what that good and acceptable and derfect will of God is. Be perfect,
To. 12.1, 2
2 Cor. 13.11. Phil. 1.10, 11.
be of good comfort, sincere without offense, filled with the fruits of
righteousness. Whatsoever things are true, whatsoever things are honest: chap.
4.8.
whatsoever things are just, whatsoever things are pure, lovely, of good
report; if any virtue, if any praise, think on these things.

My Brethren, the purity of Scripture Rule, and the perfection of Scripture
Rewards are the two impregnable Arguments and Demonstrations of the Div^nitie
of the Scripture, and the truth of Christian Religion against all other
Religions in the world. Behold, the Rule is an Excellent Rule which God has
chalked out to his Saints to walk by: calling for nothing short of perfection,
in their aims and utmost contention! How perfect is the Law of God! Psalm.
19.7. 2. Them.


2. Demonstration, such God commends, and of such only God boasts in
Scripture, have thou not considered my servant Job, Job 1.8.
said God to Satan, there is none like him upon the face of the Earth, a
perfect and an upright man! etc. I know Abraham, etc. Abraham my friend: Genesis
18.19. 1 Samuel 13.14. 2 Cor. 10.18.
And David, a man after mine own heart. Not he that man commends, but he that
God commends is approved.

Thirdly, 3. Them.
these Excellent ones God sets forth as Standards and Exemplars for others
imitation: Be ye followers of me as I am of Christ; 1 Cor. 11.^
they be Saint Paul's words, but Gods command; whose Amanuensis and Secretary
the Apostle was; and it is the very same which is enjoined unto all the
followers of the Lamb, that they should be followers of the Excellent ones,
Heb. 6.12
who through faith and patience inherit the promises. Not only be ye followers
of God as dear Children, Ephesians. 5.1.
But, Be ye followers of them that excel in virtue, Heb. 13.7
whose faith follow, considering the end of their conversation, Jesus Christ,
etc. Yet this must be still with the Apostles limitation; as they are of
Christ, we must not follow the Saints further then as they follow Christ.

Fourthly and lastly, For the most excellent Saints is reserved the most
excellent glory. 4. Them.
According to the degree of grace here, shall be the degree of glory hereafter:
As one Star differs from another in glory, 1 Cor. 15.41.42.
so also is the resurrection of the dead.

For the further enlargement and clearing of this Doctrine I shall briefly
satisfy one Querie, and so pass over to the Uses of the Point. It is this.

Quest. What is it to be excellent? or, wherein does the excellency of a Saint
consist?

Wherein consists the excellency of a Christian.
Answ. Excellency consists in these three qualifications.

1. To be universally good. 2. To be eminently good. 3. To be perseveringly
good.
1. Universally heart-good, and life-good.
1. To be universally good: this is excellent indeed, when a Christian is good
all over: good quite through: good within, and good without. When a man or
woman is a good First Table Christian: and a good Second Table Christian, holy
toward God, righteous, meek, merciful ^oward man.

They be excellent ones, that are good in both their callings: good in their
general callings as Christians, good in their particular callings as men: good
on the Sabbath, and good all the week long. Good as Magistrates, good as
Ministers, good in whatsoever Trade or Profession God has fixed them in amongst
men.

Good in all their Relations, good as Husbands, good as Wives: good as Parents,
good as Children, good as Masters, good as Servants, good as Kindred, good as
Neighbors. Time will not permit exemp^ification of these particulars.

So likewise they be excellent who are good every where: good at home, and good
abroad, good in company, and good alone: good in good company, and good in bad:
good with Saints, and good with sinners: conversing with them, as a Physician
among the sick, not as a companion with them that are well: Having no
fellowship with the unfruitful works of darkness, but reproving them rather,
Ep. 5.11.
good in the Family, and good in the Closet.

He or she is excellent that is good in every state, and in every temper: good
when rich, and good when poor, good when sick, and good when well, good in
prison, and good at liberty, good when sad, and good when merry, good in holy
duties, and good in civil Recreations.

Behold, this is to be excellent; That is an excellent Christian indeed that
walks uniformly; every where, and in every thing like himself: ^omo qua^atus.
good when men see him, and good when none but God sees him; Many of these
qualifications we find in this description and character, (here) of a good
woman; she is a good Wife, a good Mother, a good Widow: and that is her
excellency, which we shall have occasion to touch hereafter.

This was the excellency of Zechariah and Elizabeth, Luke 1.6.
they were both righteoas before God, walking in all the Commandments and
Statutes of the Lord blameless, i. e. in all the duties of the Moral and
Ceremonial Law.

2. In eminency.
Secondly, The excellency of a Christian consists in being eminently good,
exemplarily good: To be followers of the Saints, as 1 These. 1.6. this is good:
But to be Ensamples to all that believe (as verse 7.) this is excellent.

To be good is profitable unto our selves: but to be Eminently exemplarily
good, is profitable to others.

He or she that is really good, shall save himself, but whosoever is rarely good
shall save others also. Mat. 5.16.
Their light does so shine before men, that they see their good works, and
glorify their Father which is in Heaven, this is excellent.

It is a Christians excellency not to set himself any bounds in holiness; not
to content himself with any measure or degree of grace: but with the Apostle,
to forget the things that are behind, Phil. 3.13, 14.
and reaching forth unto those things which are before, to press toward the
mark.

That which is the worldly man's shame, is the Christians glory, never to have
enough, what SINGVLAR thing do ye do? Mat. 5.47. (...).
was our Saviors Question; what do you more then others?

It is a Christians glory to be singular! the world hates singularity, but God
commends it.

3. In per^everance.
Thirdly, A Christians excellency consists in being p^rseveringly good.

Ye did run well; Gal. 5.7.
is the reproach of a Christian, and of his profession; perseverance is the
glory of both. It is the glory of a Christian when their goodness is not as the
morning cloud, ^os. 6.4.
and as the early dew, that quickly passes away, but as the morning light,
Pro. 4.18. Rev. 2.19.
which grows clearer and clearer to the perfect day. It was the shame of
Ephesus that she had lost her first Love, Verse 4.
but the glory of Thyatyra, that her last works were more then the first. The
Trees of God bring forth more fruit in their old age, Ps. 92.14.
they are fat and flourishing, when others wither and dye, they retain their
verdure, and are full of sap: this is the excellency of a Christian.

Use.
Use. Examinanation.
And it may serve,

First, By way of Trial in Self-examina^ion; are you such Christians?

1. Are ye universal in (...) Lord more faith, and more love, and more
holiness, (...) more meekness of s^irit, an^ more zeal, Si dixti suffieit
persisti Aug.
and more Lord of every grace: when every (...) say you have enough ye have
nothing: ye are nothing; so fa^ from excelent that ye are not real but a mere
Lukewarm Laodicean, that says, I am rich and increased with goods, and have
need of nothing; Rev. 3.17.
and know not that thou art wretched and miserable, and poor, and blind, and
naked.

3. Are ye persevering Chri^^ians? Are your s^irits steadfast with ^od? Are
your judgments sablished in the truth? Are your hearts stablished in grace?
do ye keep close to the good old Principles which you have sucked in from the
breasts of the Gospel? etc. do ye proceed in the way that is called holy? Are
ye steadfast and In^oveable always aboun^ing in the work of the Lord? 2 Cor. 15.


Alas brethren, if this be to be excellent, where shall we find an Excellent
Man, or an excellent woeman? as the 10. verse complains who can find avertuous
woman? where shall we find this exccellent daughter?

Solomon or his Mother (in this Chap.) did find her, Application.
at lest in the Character. And behold I can point you to her in person. Amongst
others and before many in whom this Character (here) was ever examplified since
Solomon's time, namely in this truly Honorable Christian whose funerals we this
day celebrate Mrs. ELISABETH SCOTT. Uupon whose monument (where ever it shall
stand) to her immortal fame and glory, may justly be inscribed This Epitaph.

Many daughter have done virtuously BUT THOU EXCELLEST THEM ALL.

Doubtless she was an exlelent Christian, a Christian of an incomparable
spirit and complexion.

All these 3 ingredients of excellency were visible in her to the eyes of all
the beholders, especially, such who had the happiness of more intimate
Converse and acquaintance with her.

She was Universally Eminently Perseveringly
good

She was Universally good: with that Elizabeth in the Gospel she walked in all
the comman^ements and statutes of God blameless. inopem me c^pia fecit.


Thardly know where to begin, less how to make an end of very much that I could
say of her I will confine my self to these 10. Excellencies.

First she was a most knowing Christian; 1 Knowldg
she had attained to an high degree of proficiency in the School of Christ: she
was as emminently verst in the methods of Grace and the Mystery of godliness,
able to speak as distinctly and pertinently to any piece of an inward
practical Christian as any of her Sex and standing in Religion that ever I had
the happiness to be acquainte^ with.

When I first set upon Sacrament-Reformation, in thi^ place she was the first
in a^^ the Congregation that appeared in the countenancing and encouraging of
that wor^ at which time she gave the most singular account of the work of
grace, and confessi^^ of her faith that I have hard; to the very high
satisfaction and admiration of such as were present. Wisdom.
Scientia, is an habit of principles in the understanding. Sapientia, a right
improvement of those principles unto practice.


2. And her knowledge was not only notional swimming in the Brain, wherewith
most of the professors of this age please themselves; but her knowledge was
joined with wisdom and prudence, whereby she brought down all her principles
into practice and turned every DOCTRINE into USE; what light there was in her
judgment, warned down into her heart, beamed out most gloriously in her life
and conversation. She was a practical Christian; and indeed her knowledge was
the fruit of her obedience; according to the tenor of that blessed promise of
our Savior, Joh. 7.17.
If any man will do Gods will, he shall know his Dotrine. A strange Method:
In nature knowledge precedes action: in Grace action precedes knowledge: where
there is an obe^ientiall disposition, knowledge flows in a pace, they that do
Gods will that they may know it, and Labor to know Gods will that they may do
it, are the thriving Christians.

So it was with this Excellent woman Her knowledge and practice ^ran paral^el,
and did mutually transfuse vigor and vivacitie one into an other.

3. Notwithstanding the greatness of her knowledge She was of Singular
humility Her knowledge did not puff her up, Humility.
1 Cor 8.1.
her head was not so high but her heart lay as low; She was as mean in her own
eyes as she was honorable in the eyes of standers by. She was a Christian of
infinite worth but She knew it not. Proud professors do not usually speak more
contemptuously of others, then she would do of her self: she was of Jobs
Spirit.

Though She were prefect she would not know her own soul; she did despise her
self. Job. 9.21.


And this humility of hers was the Nurse to all her other graces; Humilitas
con^srvatrix virtutum Bern.
faith is the mother, humility the nurse.

4. She was a woman of a Meek an^ quiet spirit, Meekness
which rendered her very beautiful in the eyes of God and man She could not
provoke any; nor easily be provoked by any.

She had much of the wisdom which is from above which is first pure then
peaceable, gentle, and easy to be entreated.

She was most fearful to give offense, but most free to forgive it: the reason
was evident; God had forgiven her thousands of talents, and therefore she
thought it no^ much to forgive a few pence.

5. She was a Merciful Christian; full of bowels: the Love of Christ both
active and passive ( i.e. Christ's lov^ to her, Mercy
and her love to Christ) had melted her all into Compassion, Compassion to the
Bodies of poor Creatures, Compassion to souls, Job 29.13.
Compassion to the Outward man, and compassion to the inward. Compassion to the
outward man: The blessing of him that was ready to perish came upon her, and
she caused the widows heart to sing for joy.

She might say with Job (again) If I have seen any perish for want of
clothing, Job. 31.19.
or any poor without covering etc.

Pensioners in Ken^, Conghurst Hawkhurst, Cranbrook, London, Giles in the
fields. Ministers.
Great was the number of Pensioners to whom she al^owed weekly sums in the
Country, and in the City, who now lie down in sorrow, and mingle their drink
with their tears.

Many precious godly Ministers, whose subsistence was scantie, and mean; did
she support and encourage with yearly stipends, whose names I could relate,
were I not restraind.

poor Scholars.
She was a liberal contributer to the maintaining of poor Scholars at the
University, witness that subscription for Kent, and diverse other, to my
knowledge.

Oh what sad lamentations and tears will it occasion in many places, when it
shall be sadly reported abroad, Mrs. SCOT IS DEAD!

At public Collections for the Churches abroad, 10. l. Piedmond.
and to Calamitous places and person at home, how open and liberal was her hand?

Besides, upon all the Emergent occasions (which were not rare amongst us) her
charity was never straightened.

I never desired her contribution to any work of mercy, but she gave, and gave
liberally; yea it was enough but to hint a considerable work of piety or
charity; Yea she would prevent asking, and overdoe expectation.

I have been sometimes forced to use the bridle to her, when the spur could not
spring some cold mettle professors of far greater abilities; the truth is, her
estate was not so large as her heart; upon which account I have sometimes left
her out of my addresses in many works of that nature; for which, when she has
occasionally understood it, she has been offended, as if a great disservice
had been done her.

The truth is, she had the most generous spirit, and the most liberal hand that
ever I met with in her rank and quality.

A fifth part of her estate went in Charity
By what I have observed, I cannot believe she could give away less in a year
then the fifth part of her annual Revenue; And all this without a trumpet, nay
her left hand KNEW NOT what her right hand did. Mat. 6.3.


Quest.
Quest. It may be some will ask, I but what good has she done at her death?

To which I Answer, Answ.
Somewhat she has done; though not much; of which I can give you this twofold
account. 1. That Joynctures are as mortal as the persons themselves that have
them: indeed they dye together. 2. And above all; she did in her life, what
others do at their death, when they can keep it no longer; she made her own
eyes her overseers, and her hands her Executors.

And her mercy to souls was not less then her mercy to the body. Mercy to the
inward man.


That was one issue of her worldly estate.

Lectures.
Contribution toward the maintaining of Lectures, in such places where there
was some defect in the public means

In her own parish in the Country, she encouraged a weekly Lecture (during the
time of her retirement in the Country) upon her own charge.

Her House was the Rendevouze for the godly Ministry within many miles of her
habitation, and her Table their Ordinary, not only upon Lecture days, but upon
all occasions. Thither repaired tempted souls, doubting consciences, opposed
Ministers, oppressed Christians; she was either their Oracle or their Advocate.
Diverse Exiles of Hungaria, Transylvania, Polonia, Exiles.
have been nourished and preserved by her bounty.

Oh how active to bring it souls to Jesus Christ! what pains she took to
inform the ignorant, to reform the places where she lived? how studious to
promote the power of godliness? to gain in opposers? to bring out of the snare
of the Devil such as were taken captive at his pleasure? yet still within her
own line and circle, she was very active, but no busibody, ever serviceable,
but never excentrick; Such a rare skill she had to distinguish between doing
good, and meddling out of her sphere. And I am humbly confident, as it was her
ambition, so it is her happiness that she is not gone to Heaven alone.

Constant and conscientious Attendance on public ordinances.
Sixthly, she was a constant and conscientious attendant on the public
Ordinanc^s: Word, Sacrament, Prayer, etc. She forsook not the Assemblies of the
Saints, as the manner of some is; But watched daily at the g^tes, and waited at
the posts of wisdom. And that with this addition of commendation, Prove. 8.34.
in her own place.

She was not a gadding fancifull Professor, who took a pride to be seen in
Foreign Assemblies; either to gratify an humor or to get a name; she looked
upon it as a duty to own and strengthen the hands of the Ministry under which
God had placed her. She attended the ordinances in her own place.


She was afraid she should sin, to desert those, who for their faithfulness met
with opposition enough, besides, from them that are without.

She counted it no Popery to say my Minister, my Pastor, though in the mean
time, she was not ignorant of her privilege, 1 Cor. 3.22.
how that Paul and Apollo, and Cephas was hers; which privilege accordingly,
she made use of, in the proper season, etc. when Congregational vacancy
justified her going abroad.

Hence, days of public humiliation, weekly Lectures, and other occasional
Assemblies both public and private, were the constant witnesses of her
unwearied devotion: yet all this without the least trespass upon her Domestic
Affairs: as I shall tell you hereafter.

As thus she was Const^nt; So likewise was she Conscientious in her public
attendances.

The time she spent in preparation BEFORE, and in reflection and meditation
AFTER the solemn Assemblies, was incredible; especially considering what time
she spent with her Family.

Oh how abundant she was in the work of the Lord, how severe in observing her
times for duty, both Domestique and personal, and how provident to prevent, or
evade distractions. Surely she was truly what the Father said of St. Paul;
Insati^bilis Dei cultrix.
An insatiable worshipper of God.

Hence she attained to a high degree and eminency in holiness (you see I am
feign to twist in the second strein of excellency with the first.)

A Christian she was of a most gracious spirit, and a most holy life, with how
much heavenly mindedness did she wind through a world of unavoidable
distractions in the world?

Surely she did wear her Profession with as few stains, and carried as
unblemished an holiness with her to Heaven; as most Christians whom this
generation has known.

A woman of a most Spiritual and profitable Society; The Law of God was in her
heart, Psalm. 37.31. and therefore her mouth spoke wisdom, and her tongue talked
of judgment, verse. 30. out of the abundance of her heart, her mouth spoke to
edification, Matthew. 12.34. there is none that ever did converse with her, but
if they did not go away better then they came, it was their own fault.

She was always giving or taking. With weak Christians she would teach, with
strong she would learn: with all she would be sweet and savory.

She had Exquisitely got the art of Time-redemption: As in the Character here:
she opened her mouth in wisdom, Prove. 31.26.
and in her t^ngue was the law of kindness.

Stability in judgment.
Seventhly, Hence also her stability in judgment.

Unsettled hearing usually begets unsetledness in opinion.

Erratick hearers (though of the better complexion) usually are not the most
stable Christians; they have (many times) their f^ncies and their why bibbles,
and their crotchets wherewith they do rather trouble themselves and others,
then edify. She was none of them (through grace;) she stood like a rock
against all blasts of Heresy and Schism; and did not only stand by her
principles, but as a Daughter of wisdom, was in a very good measure able to
justify wisdom, and give a reason of the hope which was in her. She was a
wellbottomed Christian; of a sound judgment: 1 Cor. 2. ult.
she had the mind of Christ.

In the ninth place, Ninth.
she was not a censorious Christian, as some Professors are who are always
finding fault; and many times where they cannnot find, the make offenses; and
seldom have a good word for any but themselves.

But this worthy Gentlewoman had much of the character of charity in her,
bearing all things believing all things hoping all things and enduring all
things, 1 Cor. 13.7.
which were any way capable of a fairer interpretation.

The truth is, she found so much work to do at home in her own heart, that she
had little leisure to stir abroad

It is a pretty Criticism that the same word in the Greek which signifies to
be idle, (...), or ior, arguo.
signifies also to censure: implying that idle Christians are most censorious.

She would often say to me, that she durst not too critically enquire into or
judge others who came to the Sacrament (unless she knew them scandalous) she
had enough to do, to make out her own right to that tremendous Ordinance.

Ninethly, she was of a most sweet and cheerful spirit; Cheerfulness.
she did not want her crosses and trials (and great ones too) yet seldom was
there a cloud seen upon her countenance; the ground Whereof was the inward
serenitie which she possessed in her own spirit, in the sense of Gods love and
her interest in Christ; of which she had most precious Scripture evidence,
which was ballast to her soul in all weathers. Surely the joy of the Lord was
her strength, Nehem. 18.10.

Tenthly, and lastly, She was beyond all parallel; good in her Relations. Never
Mother had a better C ie: never children bad a better Mother: never Servants
had a better Governor: never Friends a better Friend: she filled all her
Relations with wisdom and fidelity. verse before my text.


Her Children rise up and call her blessed.

She was a Mother of ten thousand to them, Both in respect of A good mother in
temporals.
Their Temporal Estates. Their Spiritual Estates.


As to their Temporals; God wrought little less then miraculously by her, for
their abundant enlargement.

Three Sons she had by two several Husbands, to whom she has left fair and
liberal Estates, as if they had been all Elder Bro^hers, though it was not in
the power of their dying Fathers hands to do it.

Her Firstborn, Sir Howland Roberts of Glassenbury in Kent.
Her Firstborn, the hopes and honor of his Fathers Family, by her wisdom and
indefatigable industry, she has quietly invested into the Ancient and
Honorable Inheritance of his Noble Ancestors of Glassenbury in Kent: in the
Possession of that Ancient Name of the Roberts, alias Rookhersts ever since the
Conquest: So making ^ood Solomon's character, the wise woman builds her
house, Pro. 14.1.

Her youngest Son.
Her youngest Son, born but to a third part of his Ancestors inheritance; and
that also not without encumbrances, by her incredible prudence, she has lest
now Heir Apprent to the whole estate; not of a mean consideration. Conghurst
in Hawkhurst in Kent.
With the Exemplar in this description of an Execellent woeman, v. 16. She
considered the field and bought it, and with the fruit of her hands, she
planted the vinyard.

Her Middle Son; Second by her first husband, Her middle son.
born to little or nothing of his progenitors; by the favor God gave his
gracious mother in the sight of her own Honorable family, was adopted into a
very worthy portion of a Noble inheritance of the Howlands.

The elder gracious, the younger hopeful
For her two daughters who were very precious in her eyes, She has Secured
sortions not beneath their living Fathers honor though far above their dying
abilities.

It is wonderful in my eyes that she should provide so fully for all her
children out of such a narrow and perplexed estate as fell to her managing by
her Husbands, for certainly the world (as it is usually) did overvalue her
incoms and undervalue her issues.

I say it is not less then a miracle to any that shall duly consider it that
she should have so little, (comparatively) and do so much; both for her one
family and for the Household of Faith.

She gave to strangers, as if she had forgotten her own Children; and so
provided for her Children as if she had been a stranger to works of mercy.

But doubtless God was with her and made good the Mystery of the widows Cruse
of Oil, and handful of Meal, for the paying of her debts, and preserving of
her Family.

This worthy Gentlewoman was not less a Mother to them in Spirituals then in
temporals: A good mother in spirituals.
the neglect whereof is the great sin of most Parents, and the ruin of their
Children; I b. 39.13.14.15.16.
of whom we may say as Job of the Ostrich, She leaves her Eggs in the Earth,
and warmeth them in the dust; and forgets that the foor may crush them, or
that the wild beasts may break them; she is hardened against her young ones,
as though they were not hers: her labor is in vain without fear, because God
has deprived her of wisdom, neither has he imparted unto her understanding.

The most of Parents, if they can but Earth their Children enough, and warn
them in the Dust, the Dust-heapes of the world, if they can but lade them with
thick Clay, as Habbakkuk phraseth silver and gold: Hab. 2.6.
they think they have provided well for them: in the mean time they consider
not that the foot of temptation may crush them, or that wild brutish lusts
may destroy them, they remember not that in all this provision heaped up, there
is nothing done for the immortal soul; nothing laid in that may be a fence
against temptation, or a preservative against sin: so much their hearts are
hardened against their young ones; as though either they were not theirs, or,
as if they had no souls. Their labor is in vain; all the care and travel for
their Children is fruitless, laid out only upon empty vanities, which perish
in the using, and their Children with them, forever without intervening grace.

The Reason follows; The god of this world has deprived them of saving
wisdom, and has shut their eyes against spiritual understanding.

This precious Handman of the Lord was not so: Her great care was to make them
good, rather then great; rich in grace, rather then rich in the world. Her word
was toward them that of the Apostle, my little children of whom I travel in
birth again, (or the second time) till Christ be formed in you. Gal 3.19.


I am confident their spiritual birth cost her more throws and sorrows; more
cries and tears then ever their natural did. Her Children were all (to my
knowledge) to her, what Aug. was to Monica, Children of many tears and prayers,
which are all upon the file in Heaven; and I am humbly confident, answers of
peace are preparing for them; they were all the Children of her vows.

Oh the care and pains she took for their holy educa ion! what perpetual labor
did that gracious foul take in Catechizing them in the princples of Religion,
Chatechizing.
continually dropping in holy instructions!

How careful was she that they should sanctify the Sabbath? read the
Scriptures? repeat Sermons? wherein all of them had attained to excellent
abilities, some by pen, the rest (even the * youngest by memory: Not above nine
or ten years of age.
) her Methods and Travel herein were incredible.

Surely, in all these respects, as it is here said of this Excellent woman,
verse 28.
Her Children rise up and call her blessed.

They do, and they have cause so to do; and great need they have to look that
the Harvest be answerable to the seed; lest otherwise, their Education rise up
in judgment against them in time to come; and they have cause to curse
themselves instead of blessing her; and to wish they had been born of a Turk or
an Infidel, rather then of so holy a Mother.

But I hope better things, etc.

Her care of her servants.
Her servants have not lest cause to bless her, then her Children; whose
Spiritual soul good she tendered as if they had all been the fruit of her own
bowels: They shared with her Children in her pious discipline and instruction
according to their several capacities she would caution them to prepare for
holy Ordinances, Holy Ordinances.
and enquire how it was with them after the Ordinance was finished, what they
remembered? what impressions they found upon their Spirits? She would be often
conferring wi^h them about their Evidences, always calling upon them to get a
bottom, to work out their salvation with fear and trembling, and to redeem the
time.

I had almost said she had none in her Family but godly servants; and the
reason is, because if she did not find them such, she would labor to make
them such, at least conformable to the outward duties of religion; which if any
after due admonition refused, she would not retain them longer in her Family.

She had a spirit of prayer.
She practiced much Devids Platform of Occon^^cal Government in the to Psalm.

She had an excellent Spirit of Prayer, but accompanied with a rare modesty,
for though (when she had (...) Chaplain in her house,) she was able to perform
the duty in her own person with much judgment and affection, Yet in the
presence of those for whom she conceived that work more proper, she could not
be tempted to undertak^ it, with the greatest Solicitation and importunity.

In a word to close this first branch of Excellency, she was a sincere
practiser of that Evangelical Rule. Whatsoever things are true, Phil. 4.8.
whatsoever things are honest, whatsoever things are just, whatsoever things
are pure, whatsoever things are lovely, whatsoever things are of good report,
if there were any virtue; and if there were any praise, these were the things
she thought of, these were the things she pursued with life and vigor.

And thus I have done with the first Ingredient Her Universality.

Her eminency in grace.
The second is her Eminency; as she was universal, so she was eminent in
goodness.

But herein I have prevented my self in the universalitie neither could I avoid
it; I could not speak of her gra^^, but I must mention also her Eminency in
those graces.

And it is well; for if that were yet to do, I might be over burden some.

I shall add only the word; that this Noble Christian; she was as much above
the size of other Professors as they are above the size of other men and women,
not only really good, but most Exemplary.

And thirdly, and lastly, (...) she was eminently good, so she was
perseveringly good.

Her perseverance.
She was no wavering Christian: And the reason is, because she built not upon
the sand but upon the Ra^^ not upon the sand of imitation (the Rule that most
t^^^ up their Religion by) but upon the Rock and Found^^^on of Scripture
evidence: (...) wa^ a most Noble B^rean; She took up nothing upon trust but
searched the Scriptures whither those things were so which were delivered unto
her in the Ministry of the Gospel. Act. 17.11. of an honorable extractions.


To conclude, she began betimes and endured to the end.

It pleased God to convert her presently after her first marriage, about 26
years since.
when (as she has often acknowledged) she before was a vain Creature carried
away into the same pride and fashions, and neglect of God and of religion as
other of her rank were. The occasion of her conversion was by a dangerous fall
from an horse, The occasion of her Conversion.
for in the days of her vanity she delighted much to ride a hunting; in her
vehement pursuit of which games Jesus Christ met her as once he did Paul and
unhorst her, so that lying at his feet and having received in her self the
s^nte^^^ of death both temporal and eternal she began to cry out (as he did)
with trembling and astonishment, Lord what will thou have me to do, Act. 9.6.

Soon after her conversion while it was but yet twylight with her she unhappily
fell in to the hands of some Sectaries who did rather perplex her then pervert
her; How she fell into the Sectaries.
but God was graciously pleased to make a speedy rescue of this tender convert,
by the Counsel and wisdom of a reverend holy Minister of an adjacent
Congregation, But was seasonably rescued.
with the care and watchfulness of diverse other judicious Christians who were
jealous over her with an holy jealousy.

I said [unhappily] but I must recall that word (though no thanks to the
seducer) Godmade it an happy occasion of much good to her soul, for the snare
being once broken and she escaped like a bird out of it, she hated herisies and
schism with a greater hatred; and stood unshaken in the truth of God, and
fellowship with the Saints to her dying day. From that time she girded up her
loins and rejoiced like a mighty man refreshes with wine to run her race.

From that time I say God carried on the work of grace gloriously in her soul.
Her goodness was no morning cloud, not early dew that goes away. But as the
morning light which shines more and more unto the perfect day: Pro. 4.18.
the Heb. is to be translated word for word thus.

The way of the just is as a light shining and growing and enlightening unto, or
until the prepared day. The description agrees singularly with this Saint of
God; the grace of God in her, was a light very conspicuous, shining in a Gospel
adorning conversation, and growing or going, still ascending and gathering
strength and illuminating; Scattering beams of of light and warmth until the
prepared day, or perfect day, the day that is prepared unto perfection, And oh
how early did this shining Christian attain to her prepared perfection! Her
Sun did set at none day. She was translated into the other Orb of glory, when
she had finished little more then half her course in the firmament of grace,
and the reason was because she did much work in a little time; she ran a pace,
and therefore arrived the earlier at her journeys end.

When she came to dye, Her death.
she had nothing to do but to dye, her work was done; she had oil in her
vessel as well as oil in her lamp, her graces were in a readiness; her
evidences were clared, her interest in Christ was sealed upon her heart by the
spirit of promise; And She her self stood always as it were at the door of
her Tabernacle waiting for her Lord: when he should return from the wedding;
that when he came and knocked, Lu. 12.35.
She might open to him immediately.

And happy it was for her she was so prepared; for death gave her but little
warning, Her death
not that it killed her outright at the first stroke; but in as much as the
nature of her distemper was such, as that seazing first upon her spirits, it
rendered her incapable of speaking much, or having much spoken to her; the
preventing whereof was the special care and charge of her Doctors.

So that had she had her evidences to seek when she should have had them to
use, her graces to get when she stood in need of her graces; death might have
bin indeed a surprise to her of the Saddest consequence imaginable.

Hence I say from the first of her sickness to the last, She spoke not but
very spiritual.
she spoke not much, but what she did speak was spiritual and heavenly; upon
the first seizure of her distemper, she called her two daughters to her and
renewed Joshuahs charge upon them to serve the Lord, and to fear him; A Fever
in her Spi^its.
to take heed of sinning against God; as they desired God should take care of
them. From the time she kept her bed she would be often speaking with holy
admiration, how infinitely good God had bin unto her evere since he had bin
pleased to reveal his Son in her. Gal 1.16.
She did often express St Paul his holy indifference to life or death, I am
willing to die, and yet contented to live if I may do more service for God.
Phil. 1.22.22.


My self standing by her once, I said to her, you would be glad to be gone
from us, would ye not* she turned her head, and with a sweet smile replied, I
desire not to leave you, but I would be glad to be with Jesus Christ.

If she were asked, how she did, she would sometimes answer, I am the Lords
Prisoner,sometimes, An admirour of free graces and so I desire to be. She was
very willing to take whatsoever was advised; and would often heavenlize
earth-refreshings with spiritual contemplation, Oh this is very good and
pleasant would she say; and if this be so good oh how sweet is my good God? how
pleasant is Jesus Christ?

Her expressions were but short, but very sweet; an heavenly ejaculation or two
and then silence for a considerable time. Her daughters standing by her beds
side, she bespake them after this manner.

Oh children how sweet and precious is Christ, but oh how bitter a thing is
sin? and after a little breathing: Be sure to get an interest in Christ and try
your faith. To the Nurses and servants that came to turn her in her bed (for
the Fever that had accended her spirits) and exhausted her strength so fast in
a few days, that she was not able to turn, or help her self in the least
measure, she would say, I am very weak; but my God is very s^rong, and there is
my comfort, he will lift me up.

Her elder daughter out of a childe-like desire of her life: would. Sometime
say.

Mother I hope the Lord in much mercy will restore you to us again;

To which she retuned what God pleases; if ho have no more work for me to do
then I am exceeding willing to dye and to be with Christ which is best of all,
but if God do recover me, the Lord give me more grace that I may walk
answerably to his mercies.

Upon the Sabbath morning it being Sacrament day, her eldest daughter came to
take her leave of her saying.

Mother, I am going to Church and to the Sacrament,

That is well, said she, but I cannot go, only be sure to go in the s^rength of
Christ, and do all your duties in his strength, knowing that we have none of
our own to do any thing that is good, and the Lord go with you; with many
other gracious words which dropped like honey from her lips.

The younger daughter staying at home, she asked her (according to her constant
use) child what do you remember of what you have read? and when the child
repeated some portion of it, she answered,

It is well, but be sure to practice it. And then she would break out again, Oh
how sweet is Jesus Christ, but what an ougly thing is sin.

When the evening came, she called to her elder daughter, to go and repeat the
Sermons she had heard in the Family, as she used to do.

On the next day coming to visit her, I found her very weak, yet I presumed on
so much liberty as to hint a word or two, to this purpose I hope ye have found
no want of a Sabbath the last day; though God tie us to means, he does not tie
himself to means, the presence of Jesus Christ I hope has abundantly
compensated the absence of the Ordinances!

Yea, (she replied) I I sat under his shadow with great delight, and his fruit
was sweet unto my taste. She was from thence (for some hours) under a kind of
delirium; but it was very calm and gracious, for that night the Curtains being
drawn (and all attendants enjoined silence by the Physicians) she lay praying
the greatest part of the night, with as much sweetness and savor as in her
health: And when the Maids and Nurses came about her, she wor^^ speak most
sensibly to them Oh labor to make your calling and election sure, get an
interest in Christ while you are in health and strength.

After this the distemper working more in her head, occasioned her to speak
somewhat erratickly, though (blessed be God) never uncomely; Yea and if any
good notion were hinted, she would close with it very sweetly, and chiding her
self would say in a very sensible manner, My foolish fancy runs upon abundance
of other things, that I cannot stay my thoughts upon God as I would.

And so continued speaking much to her self and her God, though not very
distinctly, yet all very spiritually.

From the time she kept her Chamber, which was from Wednesday till Monday, she
never spoke of any wordly affairs; and if her servant had come to ask her any
question in order to her temporal affairs, she would say to him, oh do not
trouble me with any of these things on the Sabbath day.

During the greatest part of her sickness.
For that was one of her happy mistakes, she thought all the whole time was
Sabbath.

And truly so it was to her: The Law of the Sabbath was was eng^aven upon her
heart; what others wickedly pretend (indeed to the ^^^lishing of the Sabbath,
not to the spirituallizing of then conversations) was real in this holy servant
of Christ. Every day was a Sabbath with her, especially upon her deathbed, as
she drew nearer and nearer to that rest which remains for the children of God;
she was wrought into a more suitable frame of heart to that everlasting Sabbath
her motion heavenward was natural, motions are stronger and swifter toward
the center, after which she aspired, and into which she expired: And in which
she now triumphs with Him whom her soul loved, and with the Spirits of just
men made perfect; and all the Elect Angels of God to all Eternity.

Thanks be to God for his unspeakable gift.

FINIS.
Several Letters from diverse Ministers concerning the Life and Death of
Mistress ELIZABETH SCOTT, with a Narrative under her own hand of remarkable
experiences, and the gracious dealings of God toward her.
Mr. Naltons Letter to Mr. Case.
Dear Brother,
AMong many sad signs, and symptoms of Gods displeasure toward the land, I
look on this, as not the least, viz. Gods removing so many of his precious
Saints and servants from among us, who while they were in the land of the
Living) helped to keep off the storm of Gods anger, and to turn away his
indignation from a God-provoking people. Oh that our hearts were more deeply
affected with it! that we might feelingly say with the Prophet Isaiah ( chap.
16. verse. 11. My bowels shall sound like a harp for England; Yea, we will sigh
with the breaking of our loins, Ezekiel. 21.6. One choice Jewel among the rest,
God has of late gathered to his Cabinet, namely, pious, precious, Mistress
Scott; Concerning whom, because you desired my concurrent Testimony, as being
one so well known to me, having been a member of my Congregation for diverse
years together, till she came to be under your charge: I have this to say; She
was a Gentlewoman of a choice spirit, of a marvelous sweet temper and
disposition, of an amiable winning carriage, and of a truly pious and Religious
conversation. She was one that made Religion her business, her (...), not her
(...): She made it her constant course vigorously to drive a Trade for heaven,
and to be pressing toward the mark, even the prize of the high calling of God
in Christ Jesus; She was not like those, that Austin speaks of, qui utuntur
Deo, ut fruantur mundo; But she made use of the world, but as a footstool, to
raise up her soul to the enjoyment of God, as her portion for ever. She was not
weary of Gods service, like those hypocrites that said, what a weariness is
it, Mal. 1.13. but duty was her delight, and sin her greatest burden: The world
did not make her weary of duty, but duty made her weary of the world; Her
constant frequenting of Ordi ances, (wherein she was both eminent and
exemplary) her closest retirements, wherein she saw often a glimpse of that
glory which she now enjoys in the bosom of Jesus Christ, made her long
earnestly to be at her fathers house, and to breath out her Cupio desolvi, Oh
that I might be with him whom my soul loves! In brief, she made haste to
heaven, lived much in a little time; holding forth the Word of life, by a holy
and undaunted profession, holding fast the Word of Truth by a constant and
undaunted Resolution, and so finished her course with joy. Therefore I
conceive, that this Text which you sweetly opened at her Funeral, was rightly
and suitably applied to her, Many daughters have done virtuously, etc. This
Testimony I have given not for her sake, that is dead, but for the sake of
those that are living. The dead praise not the Lord, says David, Psalm. 115.17.
Look as the dead return no praises to the living God, so neither do they regard
any praises from living men; Our commendations cannot help them, our
disco^mendations cannot hurt them, as our prayers cannot reach them, so neither
can our praises profit them; But happy surely are they, that can tread in the
Steps of those blessed Saints, that have gone before us; whose faith follow,
(says the Apostle) considering the end of their conversation, Heb. 13.7. If we
do as they did, we shall speed as they sped; The Lord of his infinite mercy,
help us to serve our generation faithfully (as this eminent godly Gentlewoman
did) that we may do every days duty with Christian cheerfulness, and bear
every days burden with Christian patience, and in the midst of all changes,
straites and storms, hold out with Christian perseverance, that in the end of
our days, we may receive the end of our hopes, even the salvation of our
souls; It is and shall be the hearty prayer of

Your affectionate loving Friend and Brother in the Lords Work. JA. NALTON.

Mrs. SCOTS own writings, which she has left under her own hand.
A Little before her death, she began to write in a book her experiences of
Gods goodness to her, and intended to have filled it up, but she was taken away
before she had done many leaves of it; only she had written before, diverse
things in some papers.

In the Book she begins and proceeds thus.
SOme notes to keep special things in my remembrance, that I may be quickened
to answer Gods ends, in all his gracious dealings to me, to whom all his ways
have been mercy and truth; and I desire, my ways toward him, may be
constrained obedience, from faith and love, wrought by his spirit in my heart,
in all things.

How God did effectually call me at first to himself.
I was born a child of wrath, and an heir of hell, and in my youth, was very
vile and vain; Yet I did duties in a formal way, and was very confident God did
love me, and of my good estate: Between sixteen and seventeen I was married,
and about nineteen year old as I was riding, it being hunting time, I fell down
and put my leg out of joint, which was a great misery to me, but in that
affliction, God did work on me with some convictions and resolutions, if I were
well again to walk in Gods ways; afterward inquiring, his Providence brought
Mr. Byfields Book to me, the Marrow of Divinity, and in reading of it, God did
convince me of my abundant abominable sins: I made a catalogue of them I could
remember, and was in much trouble for them under the spirit of bondage, I think
some months: but I have forgotten how long; but God made sin very bitter to
me, and broke my heart for my sin, and from my sin: and I know God broke my
heart, because his love did it, many a tear of Love did I shed in the bosom of
my God. When the spirit of Adoption was come to me, then how did I mourn for
sinning against the Lord, and dishonouring of his dear Name? But when I was in
the pangs of the Spirit of bondage and new birth, I had great troubles of
Conscience, and grievous pangs and after that, dreadful basphemous thoughts,
and fain would I have run away from God, looked upon his ways as grievous, and
had hard thoughts of him, but yet the Lord would not let me go, but carried me
through, that I had no power to leave seeking of him, and did unhook me, and
brought me to keep Fasts by my self, and to humble my soul before him, and
showed me how vile I was in a great measure, and made me confess my sins
with shame and sorrow; Then after this, he made me close with Jesus Christ in a
promise, and gave me full assurance that all my sins were pardoned by the blood
of Jesus Christ fully, and I gave up my self in Covenant to him, and by his
sweet influence, and shining of his face, and comforts of his spirit, and
grace, he has made me hate the most sweet and secret sin; and my hatred of all
sin appears, because I desire the death of it, and desire to be freed from the
enjoyment of the sweetest pleasure of the most secret sin, that I may enjoy
communion with my God, whose love is far better than life: and I desire so to
esteem it. God has brought me to Christ, and has made me put on his
righteousness, and has given me to Christ, and given Christ to me, and I know
it certainly that God did choose me from all eternity, because he has made me
to give up my self to Jesus Christ for these ends that Jesus Christ gave
himself for me; That by believing, I might give God the glory of his free grace
and faithfulness, and that my sins might be pardoned and mortified, and
that I may be sanctified and made holy by him, redeemed from all iniquity, and
vain conversation, and made a peculiar servant of his, zealous of good works,
that I may honor him in bearing forth much fruit, and be fully acted by his
spirit and grace, for the glory of his name in all things, that Jesus Christ
may see the travail of his soul in me, as much as I am capable, so long as I
have a being, that I may admire free grace. God has given me Jesus Christ by
faith, oftentimes in Sacraments, Word, and Prayer, and Meditation, by the
conduit pipes of his Ordinances. And I live by Jesus Christ, because his Spirit
lives in me in some measure, convincing, guiding, and councelling of me; And
my desire is, to honor him as much as I am capable for ever, in his life, and
strength, and spirit.

Thus far Mrs. Scot had proceeded in the said Book, when the Lord took her
from recollecting and improving his gracious experiences to her here, to the
immediate and perfect enjoyments of himself above.

Other Writings that Mrs. Scot has left, concerning Gods goodness to her.
ABout the middle of April, 1645. there was the second rising in Kent, and I
was grievously perplexed, thinking my husband, jewels, goods, and all I had,
and my life, should have then by the risers been taken from me, and I was in
exceeding fear, and dishonored God by over much weeping and sorrowing before
others, but that night I heard the Risers were suppressed, then I had much joy,
and resolved through Gods strength that my heart should be weaned from the
world, which before, I looked for much help from, but I found none; I saw it was
empty: then resolved I also to leave resting upon it, and to spend my life, and
strength, and means of grace, to the uttermost advantage of Gods glory, and my
souls eternal good; and never to sin away any opportunity of doing good, and
service for his glory: Thus did I see, that this great straight, and dark
Providence of the Lord wrought abundantly for my good. Two days after, I did in
private by my self keep a day of fast, and had some grief for my own sin and
others, and had some comfort in Gods acceptance, though I was much wanting in
the performance of the same. After my fast day, there was a public day of
thanksgiving for that mercy of subduing the Risers, my spirit was much sadded,
that my heart was no more in frame suitable to the said day, that I did no more
rejoice in God in it. Afterward I had sweet assurance of Gods eternal love,
and saw much vanity and emptiness in all earthly things, and desired to order
my conversation aright. Again I kept another private day of fast by my self,
and though much distempered yet had some hopes of acceptance. I kept another
day of private fast by my self, to seek to God for more grace, to honor him,
and that God would do also the same in my husband that he might honor God.

In August, 1647. a little after my husband died, my heart was exceedingly out
of frame, but a Sabbath day at night the Lord came sweetly to me, in persuading
me to trust in him from what he had done; So I had sweet assurance of his
Eternal love through Christ at prayer, and the pardon of all my sins, and
gave my self to him to do with me what he would, and so the temptation and
those thoughts went away, and I had sweet peace. Afterward we kept a fast in
the family, to humble our selves for the breach in the death of my husband, and
then I had great desires to honor God in my place, and gave up my self to God
and had peace, and afterward sweet assurance that I was his. This Sacrament at
Hawkherst I was not prepared as I ought to have been, the day before I lost my
frame of grace exceedingly, by my unsensibleness of Irelands misery, and being
merry when I should have sorrowed, and on the Lords day morning before I went
to the Sacrament, I had a grievous temptation, as if I might live without
ordinances, and as if there were no necessity of them; O this deaded my heart
to the duty, yet my faith fought with it, and brought me to the Lords supper,
where I received Christ, and gave my self to him, and found sweet comfort and
strength from Christ in his Ordinance; and I do resolve in Christ's strength, to
walk holily and closely with God all my days to his honor, and to cleave
close to Christ in all his Ordinances, whilst I can enjoy them. Being reproved
by one, my heart did greatly rise, and I found I was not willing to submit to
Gods will and ways in all things, but I had a great combat, and was resolved
to submit to God in all, and saw more of my heart and the world then ever, and
I had sweet influence from God and shinings of his face in prayer. The next
Lords day after I had received the Sacrament, I went to the Sacrament again, my
Lord having by a providence provided another feast for me, knowing my
necessities; and I did sit under Christ's shadow, and did receive his body and
blood by faith. Another Sacrament at evening I had very sweet fruits and
effects of Christ in me. Another Sacrament afterward I was much failing and
wanting in doing my duty and acting my grace, but God gave me Christ in free
grace, and I desire to live by faith upon him, to him and his glory, giving my
self to the Lord to be his, and not mine own; and desire to live on Christ as
my portion and strength.

In January, 1650. Mrs. Scot began another, of the sweet experiences (writes
she) my God has given me of his faithful performances of his Word and Promise
to me. In January 1650. The Lord sweetly told me in the Ministry of his Word,
out of the fourth Chapter of the Ephesians, the eighth Verse, how Christ had
led captivity captive in me, and for me in some measure; the same day, an
occasion there was that caused my corruptions much to arise, but my God
according to his Word did lead that captivity captive, and at night God gave me
sweet comings in of himself into my sold, and sweet assurance, and some
experience of the true and real work of Grace in me, and how God made the
risings of sin the ruin of sin in me by Christ. The Lord gave me very sweet
experience of his power in preserving me, when two in my family had the small
pox, and three the measels, according to his word in Psalm. 91.7. It shall not
come nigh thee. O never distrust thy God more. After this, God did show me in
some measure the cursed vileness of my nature, and suffered that bitter root of
blasphemy to rise up in my heart, and God did this to punish me, for my vain
and sinful thoughts, but Jesus Christ made my faith to fight against it, but
it was very sad and bitter to me, and after I was buffeted, God made me see the
vileness of sin, and sinful thoughts, and made me in his strength resolve
against all sin, and to hate it, and to walk colsely with my God, and choose
rather to offend all the world, then commit the least sin, and to lose all,
and suffer all miseries, rather then commit the least sin; For God can make
ones own heart and conscience a hell to one, and ones bed and all ones comforts
bitter as death. And I desire to prize mercy, and close walkings with God, to
lie down and rise up with him, and to pity others; This precious experience
and lesson God taught me by that affliction, as by many other, and drove sin
and vain thoughts from me in some measure, making Christ sweet, and fulfilling
his Word, in Romans 6.14. and Romans 8.28. My God does give me sweet experience of
the growth of grace in my soul, and all from the virtue of Christ's blood.
Before this Sacrament, my preparations were not so great as they should have
been, but my God did drive me from resting on any thing in my self, and brought
me to him without money and without price, and gave me sweet assurance of the
truth of the work of grace on my heart; I love him because he loved me first,
and with his loving kindness did he draw me. This Sabbath when I went to the
Sacrament, I saw my preparation small and my thoughts not so sweet as they
should, but my heart desiring the Lord to order my thoughts aright, and act my
graces in singing part of the 23 Psalm, before morning Sermon, God sweetly
melted me in some measure with some tears of love, and after did as it were
sweetly take me by the hand, set me down at his table, and comfortably
intimated it was my portion, and so I sat under his shadow with great delight,
and his fruit was sweet unto my taste, and God did act my faith to take Christ,
and pardon, sanctification, mortification in his blood, and sealed deliverance
from temptations by his body broken and blood shed, and all the fruits thereof;
some effects I had afterward, and the Word was sweet, and I came home rejoicing
and resolving to live and die, to and for and with God, giving my self for ever
to him, to live and move all in him and by him, to rest upon his word, and
promise, and expect to live by him according to it; I desire to have such a day
again to receive Christ, I was many ways failing, all is free grace, God does
all that is good in me, for I am a hell by nature, but I have found most
precious virtue in the blood of Jesus Christ, that it has in some measure
meekened my spirit and overcome wicked thoughts in me. Next Sacrament I was
failing in my preparation and acting of my graces, and was troubled I had no
more light of Gods countenance, and my corrupt nature was apt to rise: but God
kept it down, and afterward taught me these lessons by it.

1. That sin was not so bitter to me, nor so bitterly bewailed by me, as it
ought; the more bitter sin is, the sweeter is Christ.

2. That God would have me prize Ordinances to enjoy Christ, but not to rest
upon them.

3. That I should live by faith and not by sense, yea though there be no sense.

4. That Gods loving countenance is better then life, and that God would have
me depending, and contented with whatsoever he will give: O that I could learn
and practice these lessons, which were precious fruits of the Ordinances. This
Sacrament I was failing in my meditation, examination, and excitation, and my
dead heart much hindered me in the service of the living God, but the Lord
brought me to his table with some assurance it was my portion, and I sat under
his shadow, and he acted my graces, I desire to magnify free grace, and to
expect strength from him to do it according to the Covenant sealed in his
blood. This Sacrament I had some sweet actings of faith above sense, and
assurance that God was my father and his power and wisdom would order all
things for my good. This Sacrament, though I did not mourn for my sins that did
slay my Savior, nor act sacramental repentance as I ought, yet by faith I
received Jesus Christ, and came home with some comfort, and had some softness
of heart. I had sweet expe^ience of my Gods answering my prayer in the very
thing I desired. This Sacrament, though I did not receive so much of Christ as
I desired, yet I had some sweet effects of his blood, in resolving in his
strength not to give way to unbelief nor sin and desiring to come again to his
Ordinance.

This day I was at a fast, and God came sweetly in and melted my heart, and
made his promise good, that they that wait on him shall renew their strength,
God sweetly answered my (...) mercy for one of my children. This day I did
receive Jesus Christ in the Sacrament, and came home rejoicing, and assured my
sins were pardoned, and that Christ could as well be pulled out of heaven, as
I pulled from Christ. I renewed my Covenant, I gave my self to my God for his
service for ever. This Sacrament I did receive Jesus Christ, and sweet
influence from him, and I desire to honor him in all things for ever, in my
soul, body, estate, will, affections and all; I, and all I have are his, and to
be at his ruling in all things at all times; These are fruits of Christ's blood,
I desire to bear about the world with me, the dying of the Lord Jesus, and to
be crucified to the world by his cross, and to do and suffer for him, and
endeavor the good of others souls, and I found my inward man much strengthened
and sin weakened. This Sacrament God gave me some resolutions, but I had not
much comfort. This Sacrament, I had sweet assurance that my sins should be
destroyed. I kept a fast day by my self, to seek help from God, in the great
strait I was in; for no power but his could help me out and deliver me: The
Lord did graciously assist me, and afterward I kept a fast in private with
others about it, my heart was out of fra^e and very he^vy, and perplexed, but
God came in and melted, and made the duty very sweet; and at night, a sweet,
quiet, and believing waiting frame came upon my spirit; God answered my prayer
sweetly and particularly. That text in 1 Cor. 10.13. the Lord made good to me.
I resolved to keep a fast by my self and humble my soul before the Lord, and
pour out my complaint before him, and seek strength from him; God sweetly
encouraging me with many Scriptures, and melted my heart, often pouring it into
his bosom, and drew me out of my self into Jesus Christ. Again I kept a fast
by my self to seek the Lord, and humble my self for my failings, and God did
sweetly melt my heart, and helped me to pray, and made it a comfortable day,
and I desire to hope and wait for a gracious answer, and God did answer me very
graciously. I kept another fast by my self, to seek the Lord to mortify my
corruptions, that I might not dishonor him, but be acted by him and his grace,
to his glory, and to order all for me aright according to his will; the Lord
sweetly assisted me, and I desire to wait for an answer, and blessed be his
name, he has sweetly answered my prayer by many remarkable providence which I
desire to improve to his glory. God did visit me with a fever, and had shaken
his rod at me before, but I took not warning as I should, for God is so
gracious, that he delights not in afflicting the chilren of men, if they
return. Gods chastizing me was very full of tender gentleness, I felt little
or no pain, but kept my bed from monday till saturday, and God chained up Satan
that he did not at all tempt me, but I lay with abundance of peace and
assurance of Gods love, and God made my bed for me, and raised me up again in
much faithfulness, and showed me why he had contended with me, and I
acknowledged Gods dealings exceeding just, merciful, and faithful. The sin
that God did especially afflict me for at this time, as he did convince me,
was, my great sinning about the Ordinances, God will be sanctified in them that
draw nigh to him, and I had been very formal in duties, and cold in them,
neglected to go to Ordinances, did not prepare my self before I went as I
should; coming sometimes late, distracted at holy duties, and was unprofitable
under them, not so mourned when I heard Gods name blasphemed, glad when
Sabbaths were done, and vain thoughts then also, guilty of much Sabbath
profanation, in coming to the Lords day with a common worldly frame of heart,
and having such a common worldly frame of heart on the said days; Being too
long in bed on the Lords days mornings, and not doing duties as Sabbath dutys,
and not walking answerable to the Sabbath Ordinances I enjoyed. So that it was
high time for God to come now. The experiences that I have got by this are,
that God is very patient, and good, and faithful, he will not leave me
unpunished altogether, neither will he fail or forsake me in it, therefore I
resolve in his strength to love him, fear him, and his goodness, serve him,
walk closely with him, be zealous for him, give up my self and my all to be
laid out for his glory, and in his service, and to sanctify him in all my
drawings near to him, to serve him alone, in his strength, and the power and
spirit of Christ enabling me, for if he leave me, to my self, I shall sin
more then ever; these are some of the fruits I desire should come forth from
this rod. I kept a Fast by my self to humble my soul before God, and renew my
repentance, and seek help and direction from him, and my God made it a sweet
day unto me. I kept another fast by my self for the same mercies that I did the
other before, and the Lord did much assist and help me to mourn for sin, and
to pray for Zions peace, and of the land. I kept another fast by my self to
humble my soul for mine own sins, and the sins of others, and to seek for
direction in the straight I was in, and the Lord did help me, and after much
and long seeking to God, the Lord did answer me.

The fourteenth of December, 1655. God did vouchsafe unto me a very great
deliverance, wherein I saw abundance of his power, wisdom, and goodness in it
to me, which were wonderfully discovered, in the way of it, to the Glory of
God, and honor of the Gospel, even to the acknowledging it elsewhere, to be
the very hand of God; An answer of prayer. I was fully freed and cleared. I
desire this great experience should be food for faith, and that I called on God
for, it was the faithfulness of God in performing that promise; that he would
keep in his way, and he kept me in my calling, which was his way, and so I had
protection from him, and he found out a way for me, and I desire to improve my
freedom for his glory, and walk more spiritually and closely all my days with
God, then ever I have done. The experiences I got by this were,

1. That it is the duty and safety of a Christian to walk and keep in the way
of God, had I been out of Gods way, I had been gone.

2. That there is no difficulty too hard for God, but his wisdom can find out a
way, and his power can bring it to pass, and his faithfulness will do it.

3. That it is the duty of Christians to wait Gods leisure and time, which is
the best and fittest time.

4. It is their duty also never to trust to their own heart, but in God, and
expect direction, protection, and guidance from him, and I resolve in Gods
strength always to be and continue in his way, and to believe no difficulty
too hard for him, but his wisdom can find out a way, and when we cannot, his
power can bring it to pass, and his faithfulness will do it, and I will never
trust mine own heart more but wait on God, trust in him, and expect all from
him, and hang upon him by faith and prayer. I kept another fast by my self, my
God did help me in some measure: I desire to lay all my sacrifices on Christ,
that precious altar, that I may be accepted, and answered. I kept another fast
by my self for one of my children, God carried me through the duty with some
sweet meltings and incomes, I desire to wait on him for an answer, and to live
my prayers, and still to trust in him, and do duties in faith and obedience. I
kept another fast by my self about my children, desiring to do all in Christ's
strength, and to expect all upon his account, and God did give me very precious
answers. I kept another fast by my self to be humbled for my own and others
sins, as my childrens, my Fathers house, and Sir Walters, and the sins of the
times, and to seek blessings and sanctifications of Gods dispensations, and
directions from the Lord, and desire to wait. I kept another fast by my self,
for my children and other things, God did humble me in some measure, and assist
me, And God did wonderfully and speedily answer. O bless the God that hears
prayers, and follow God for further mercy. I kept another fast by self, about
one of my children, and God gave me some sweet assistance in the duty, and
acceptance in Christ. This Sacrament I received Christ and had sweet fruits
from him. This Sacrament God did help me to go against some difficulties, and
my special errand to Christ was to deliver me from vain roving thoughts, and to
fill my heart daily with heavenly meditations, and that I may still breath
forth sweet ejaculations, God gave me Christ and I desire to believe and wait.
This Sacrament, I received Christ by faith, and desire to live on him, but my
errand was for a broken heart, and sense of sin aright, and I had sweet
meltings. This Sacrament I had some hatred of sin, and God brought me home
with resolutions in his strength to honor him, and act for him, in the places
where I were going, and improve all I am and have for his use and honor, and
to be more meek to them without. This Sacrament, God freely gave me Christ, and
all his purchase and offices, and as I went for more faith and wisdom, so I
came away believeving I should have them; God did assist me. This Sacrament God
gave me Christ, and sent me comfortably home. This Sacrament I received Christ
according to his promise and desire a Law of thankfulness, should by the hand
of the Spirit, and in the blood of Christ, be written in my heart, and a law of
obedience in my whole life, and all my conversation. This Sacrament though I
was failing every way, yet God freely gave me Christ his body broken, and his
precious blood, the seal of the Covenant of Grace; and in the afternoon, God
told me out of his word, he would give me a new heart; which was that I went
for as one end, and I desire to wait and believe.

These are what as yet are only come to hand, which Mrs. Scot had with her at
Holbourn where she died, probably she may have many more in the Country whence
she newly came.

Out of these may be made many useful Observations, for our own Instruction,
in our going forth by the footsteps of this member of Christ's flock.

As Though not many wise after the flesh, not many mighty not many noble are
called, 1 Cor. 1.26. yet some are. Act. 17.12. Many of them believed, also of
honuorable women, which were Greeks, and of men, not a few. Mar. 15.43. Joseph
an honorable Counceller which also waited for the Kingdom of God.

Though vanity be never so much yet grace can overpower all, 1 Cor. 6.11. And
such were some of you, but ye are washed, etc. Titus 3.3. And we our selves
were sometimes foolish disobedient, deceived, serving diverse lusts and
pleasures, etc.

When we are making our pursuit to gratify our carnal senses, God can bring us
to better enjoyments, Romans 10.20. I was found of them that sought me not, I was
made manifest unto them that asked not after me. The Lord took her at her
hunting pleasures to bring her to the comforts of his own spirit.

Any means when sanctified, can bring us to the Word, and so to God, as the
hurting of her leg did her, and the crowing of the Cock did Peter, to remember
the word Christ spoke, and to return to him, Mat. 26.74, 75.

The Lord makes some great in the world great in grace also; rich in earthly
blessings, rich in spiritual likewise, that they have all things given them for
this life and a better richly to enjoy. Job the greatest of all the men of the
East, Job 1.3. And there was none like him in the earth, a perfect and an
upright man one that feared God and eschewed evil, verse. 8.

Those workings that come from God, carry all to him again. She endeavored to
act all for him that had done so much for her, the waters that come out of the
sea return thither again, Romans 11.36. Of him, and through him, and to him are
all things, to whom be glory for ever. Amen.

She was brought home the usual way of Gods people, by the Spirit of bondage
to the Spirit of Adoption, Romans 8.15. Ye have not rcoeived the spirit of
bondage again to fear, but ye have received the spirit of Adoption whereby we
cry Abba Father.

Gods grace works irresistably, she would fain have run away from God, he would
not let her go, but carried her through, and suffered her to have no power to
leave seeking of him, Psalm. 68 18. Thou have ascended on high, thou have led
captivity captive, thou have received gifts for men, yea, for the rebellious
also, that the Lord God may dwell among them.

Such as are most cast down in conversion are usually most lifted up afterward.
She had great troubles of conscience then, and grievous pangs, etc. And
afterward full assurance all her sins were pardoned by the blood of Christ, and
great rejoycings. The Father made merry with the Son when he returned, Luke
15.23, 24. that was driven to husks, and ready to perish, verse. 16, 17. The
Jailour that came trembling, Acts 16.29. afterward rejoiced, believing in God,
verse. 34.

The way to make our Election in God sure, is by the work of grace in our
selves: I know it certainly, (says she) that God did choose me from all
eternity, because he had made me to give up my self to Jesus Christ, for those
ends that Jesus Christ gave himself for me, 1 These. 1.4, 5. knowing brethren
beloved, your election of God, for our Gospel came not unto you in word only,
but also in power, and in the holy Ghost, and in much assurance. Romans 8.29. For
whom he did foreknow he also did predestinate to be conformed to the Image of
his Son.

Some believers are very high and eminent in the workings and ways of God, 2
These. 1.3. Your faith grows exceedingly, and the charity of every one of you
all toward each other abounds. 1 Cor. 1.5. In every thing ye are enriched by
him in all utterance, and in all knowledge, verse. 7. so that ye come behind in
no gift. 1 These. 1.5. Our Gospel came not unto you in word only but also in
power, and in much assurance. 1 Pet. 1.8. Ye rejoice with joy unspeakable, and
full of glory. Act. 13.52. The disciples were filled with joy and with the holy
Ghost. Acts 9.31. Walking in the fear of the Lord and the in comfort of the
holy Ghost. Ps. 32.8. I will instruct thee and teach thee in the way which thou
shall go, I will guide thee with mine eye. Isa. 43.2. When thou passest through
the waters I will be with thee, and through the rivers they shall not overflow
thee, when thou walk through the fire thou shall not be burnt; neither shall
the flame kindle upon thee. Psalm. 46.1. God is our refuge and strength a very
present help in time of trouble. Genesis 22.14. In the mount of the Lord it shall
be seen. 2 Chronicles. 17.6. His heart was lift up in the ways of the Lord. Psalm.
119.32. I will run the way of thy commandments, when thou shall enlarge my
heart. Psalm. 119.6. Then shall I not be ashamed, when I have respect unto all
thy commandments. She was a believer of the highest form, a star of the first
magnitude, one that had not only the graces of the Spirit, but the sealings
and joys of the Spirit in abundance, and was rich in the knowledge of the
Mysteries of Christ. One that the Lord did much council, and direct in all her
ways, and kept her in all her straights, and redeemed her with great
deliverances, her extremity often was Gods opportunity. One that was raised up
and elevated in his service fulfilling all his wills.

Great Saints have sometimes sore assaults from Satan, as she had sometimes
buffetings with Paul, 2 Cor. 12.7. happily least she might have been exalted
above measure, through the abundance of incomes. Pirates set upon the richest
ships, and trees are most threshed that be fullest of fruit.

Christians high in comforts are low in acts of mortification, and self-denial:
How often did she fast and afflict her soul before the Lord, and was sensible
of her failings, Luke 2.37. She departed not from the Temple, but served God
with fastings and prayers night and day. In all she did, she went out of her
self to the strength of Christ, attributing all to him. 1 Cor. 15.10. By the
grace of God I am what I am, and his grace bestowed upon me was not in vain,
but I labored more abundantly then they all, yet not I but the grace of God,
which was with me. Gal. 2.20. I am crucified with Christ, nevertheless I live,
yet not I, but Christ lives in me, and the life which I now live in the flesh,
I live by the faith of the Son of God, who loved me and gave himself for me. 1 Timothy 1.15. Sinners of whom I am chief. Trees with high tops have deep roots.

Such serve God truly, that conscienciously serve him secretly. Many days of
fasts and seeking God we^e in secret by her self, Mat. 6.6. When thou prayest
enter into thy closet, and when thou have shut the door, pray to thy father
which sees in secret. And verse. 16, 17. When thou fastest be not as the
hypocrites, etc. But so, verse. 18. as that thou appear not to men to fast, but
unto thy father which is in secret.

It is a happy thing to be related to them that are truly godly. How did she
pray for her husband and children? Nature helps grace, and grace acts for
nature, Romans 9.2, 3. I have great heaviness and continual sorrow in my heart,
and I could wish that my self were accursed from Christ, for my brethren my
kinsmen according to the flesh. Romans 10.1. Brethren my hearts desire and prayer
to God for Israel is, that they may be saved.

When we cannot serve God so well as we ought, we should serve him as well as
we can, and not omit duties. She was troubled for being so unprepared, yet came
to Sacraments and found God very graciously. 2 Chronicles. 30.18. etc. The good Lord
pardon every one that prepares his heart to seek God, the Lord God of his
fathers, though he be not cleansed according to the purification of the
Sanctuary, and the Lord hearkened to Hezekiah, an healed the people. Cant.
6.12. etc. I went down into the garden of nuts to see the fruits of the valley,
and to see whether the vine flourished, and the pomegranates budded, or ever I
was aware, my soul made me like the chariots of Aminadab.

It is good to come to God in Ordinances for particular mercies. She made this
and that her special errands, and the Lord vouchsafed them unto her, Job
22.28. Thou shall also decree a thing and it shall be established unto thee.
Psalm. 37.4. Delight thy self also in the Lord and he shall give thee the
desires of thy heart. Mat. 21.22. and all things whatsoever ye shall ask in
prayer believing, ye shall receive. 1 Samuel 1.27. For this child I prayed and
the Lord has given me my petition which I asked of him.

God often comes in seasonably to them that wait upon him in Ordinances, as
frequently to her in hearing, with suitable and se^sonable words, Isa. 30.20,
21. Thine eyes shall see thy teachers, and thine ears shall hear a word behind
thee, saying, this is the way walk ye in it, when ye turn to the right hand and
when ye turn to the left. Prove. 8.34. Blessed is the man that hears me,
watching daily at my gates, waiting at the posts of my doors.

Great enjoyments of God in Ordinances, should not take us from them, or make
us live above them, but carry us the more to God in and by them. Thus it was
with her, the more she received, the more she waited upon God in them. Psalm.
63.2. To see thy power and thy beauty as I have seen thee in the Sanctuary. 2 Chronicles. 30.23. And the whole Assembly took council to keep other seven days,
and they kept other seven days with gladness.

Sacraments are not only sealing, but exhibiting Ordinances, of more grace and
comfort to believers, she received much increase from God in and by them. Mat.
3.16. And Jesus when he was ^^p^ized, went up straightway out of the water: and
lo, the heavens were opened unto him, and the Spirit of God descended like a
dove, and light^^ upon him. Acts 8.39. The Eu^^^^ after Baptism went away
rejoicing. The bread and wine which are the signs in the Lords Supper, are
nourishing.

The incomes from God in Ordinances are very various, sometimes one, sometimes
another, sometimes more, and sometimes less, sometimes sooner, sometimes
later, sometimes she ha^ meltings at the Sacraments, sometimes resolutions to
serve God against sin, giving up her self to the Lord; sometimes meekning of
her spirit, sometimes desires to come again, sometimes great assurance and
comforts, sometime^ at the time, sometimes afterward 1 Cor. 3.5, 6. Who then is
P^^ and who is Apollo? but Ministers by whom ye believed, even as the Lord gave
to every man. I have planted, Apollo watered, but God g^ve the increase. Isa.
56.7. I will make them joyful in my house of prayer. Act. 10.44. While Peter
yet spoke these words, the holy Ghost fell on all them which heard the word. 2 Chronicles. 1.6. Solomon offered a thousand burnt offerings verse. 7. In that night
did God appear unto Solomon.

When we have performed duties to the Lord, we are to expect his answers. She
would wait for returns, when she had been a seeking of him. Psalm. 5.3. I will
direct my prayer to thee and will look up. Psalm. 85.8. I will hear what God the
Lord will speak.

The Lord sometimes withdraws from Ordinances, that we should not rest in
them but in himself. 2 Cor. 1.9. We had the sentence of death in our selves,
that we should not trust in our selves, but (...) God which raised the dead.
This use she made thereof when she had not altogether these incomes.

A gracious heart is as mindful of mercys received to return praises and
answerable walkings to God, as to pray for mercies wanted. Exodus 17.14. And the
Lord said to Moses, write this for a memorial in a book. Psalm. 103.2. Bless
the Lord, O my soul, and forget not all his benefits. Psalm. 116.12. etc. What
shall I render unto the Lord for all his benefits toward me, I will take the
cup of salvation, and call upon the name of the Lord, I will pay my vows unto
the Lord now, in the presence of all the people. Thus did she note down in a
Book the gracious dealings of God toward her to quicken her to thankfulness
and suitable improvements to the glory of God.

Temptations and buffetings are not to be given way unto, but opposed, to
conquer them; Her faith (she said) fought with them, and they were subdued
under her. Jam. 4.7. Resist the devil and he will flee from you.

Afflictions and mercies when improved bring forth much fruit in the people of
God, as her sickness and deliverances did in her. Heb. 12.11. Now no
chastening for the present seems to be joyous, but grievous, nevertheless
afterword it yields the peaceable fruit of righteousness, unto them which
are exercised thereby. Psalm. 32.7. Thou art my hiding place, thou shall
preserve me from trouble: thou shall compass me about with songs of
deliverance.

Gods gracious returns of prayer to his people, do much engage them in
affection to him, and encourage them for the future to seek more unto them. O
bless the God (says she, that hears prayers, and follow God for further
mercies. And elsewhere, I desire this great experience should be food for
faith. Psalm. 116.1, 2. I love the Lord, because he has heard my voice, and my
supplications, because he has inclined his ear unto me, therefore will I call
upon him as long as I live 2 Cor. 1.10. Who delivered us from so great a death,
and does deliver: In whom we trust that he will yet deliver us.

True grace is permanent and growing, the motion that is natural is
perpetual. My God (says she) does give me sweet experience of the growth of
grace in my soul: The longer she lived the more she acted, Job 17.9. The
righteous also shall hold on his way, and he that has clean hands shall be
stronger and stronger. Revelations 2.19. I know thy works, and charity, and
service, and faith, and thy patience, and thy works, and the last to be more
then the first.

Mr. Thorowgood's Letter to Mr. Case.
Reverend Sir,
I Understand you intend to print your Sermon preached at the funeral of our
most honored friend Mrs. Scot, that Saint of the Lord, that eminent believer of
the highest form, and therewith some narrative concerning her. It is not only
lawful, but sometimes very expedient to show the Coats and Garments Dorcas
made whilst living; especially the excellencies of great believers whose memory
is blessed; and which may so much conduce to the advancing of the glory of Gods
free grace, and the good of others; for which cause no doubt the several
graces and holy actings of Gods people, are left on holy record. I am willing
to cast my mite into the treasury. Her conversion (she told me) was occasioned
by a fall from her horse in hunting time, whereby one of her legs were put out
of joint, which the Lord so sanctified to her, as it brought her to the serious
receiving of the immortal seed of the Word thereby forming Christ in her, in
whom the New Birth did most evidently shine ever after. O happy fall, that did
so exalt her; before she was very vain, delighting in dancing and hunting; But
then God brought her to hear his rod, and to receive instruction, and to solace
her self in the joys of the spirit, and to pursue the ways of holiness; thus
God did not take away her comforts, but changed them, and gave her better in
the room; He did not dry up the stream, but diveried it and turned it into a
better channel. It was not long after her conversion from nature unto grace,
but she was likely to be perverced from truth unto error, and was much troubled
about the way of Separation, some of which way lived near her, and got access
to her, and so was in danger of loosing on the one side, much of what she had
gained on the other; But the gracious God, out of his continuing goodness, (as
she told me) proviced Mr. Elmestone, that old disciple, a skillful Pilot to
freer her coune again to rights, who can relate more concerning this
particular; and ever since through grace, has she sailed with a full and
steady gale in the ways of truth and holiness, and has been a fired star, in
the Church of God, no ways moved with the ermurs, and fallings of many round
about her, wandering on the right hand and on the left; after once God had
caused her ears to hear that word behind her, saying, This is the way walk in
it, she shunned their books, company and discourses tending that way, as taking
no pleasure therein, and would not tempt God, by going to the meetings of such
as caused division, being sully persuaded of the truth and way she practiced;
thus trees by shaking become more firmly stoted. She was converted in the
height of Prelacy, and was of the true old Puritan and right Nonconformist's
Spirit unto her dying day, accounting our Churches and Ministry essentially
true, though wanting in circumstantials, she earnestly desired, and in her
place fervently endeavored a through reformation, without forsaking the
Assemblies, and leaving the work to others, but would set to her helping hand
also. She went on to perfection, but laid not again foundations; she held what
was good, rejecting the ill, being of quick and sound understanding to discern
between good and bad; She would mourn with the house of Cloe, for what was
beyond her sphere to amend, and walked very comfortably with Christ her self in
the midst of the golden Candlesticks, having her own garments undesiled, and
others unworthiness did no way prejudice her. She was a very great and
constant prizer of the faithful Ministers of Jesus Christ, and rejoiced not in
their light for a season, she knew them that were over her in the Lord, and
esteemed them very highly in love for their works-sake, and endeavored peace
and unity with the rest. She walked in all the commandments and ordinances of
the Lord blameless, never missing any when able to go, and much troubled when
necessarily detained by illness; she thought not they could be too often
enjoyed, when she could not go in her Coach in Winter time, by reason of the
deepnesse of the way between Congherst and the Church, she would walk on foot
in all the rainy and tempestuous weather, that long and tedious up and down
hill way: (to ride she always dreaded since her fall) and when in London,
often did she go from high Holbourn to Christs-Church to the morning Sermons on
the Lords days, before the reft began, and then to them afterward. Constantly
did she attend Lectures and Fasts public and privare. In Summer when she was
at Congherst, usually there in the Country, she had a weekly Lecture at
Howkherst, and the Ministers still at her house. Very often did she keep in
secret whole days of fasting and seeking God by her self in prayer, and
humbling and afflicting her soul before the Lord. When I was forth she her self
would pray with her family; once I coming home late, unknown to her, heard her,
and she prayed to my very great admiration and satisfaction. Twice in the
family morning and evening, not only prayers were, but something of the word,
and singing part of a Psalm: On the Lords day at noon, singing and praying with
the family, besides morning duries, and evening reperitions of the Sermons,
together with singing of a Psalm, and Praying. A true sanctifier and spiritual
observer of the Lords days she was, and dared not to speak of any worldly
civil (though at other times lawful) things, and often bewailed the too much
liberty many professors take on those days, marvailing their consciences were
so benumbed concerning that Commandment more than others, that they could talk
of such civil and worldly things then without remorse, not considering that
Commandment is broken in words and thoughts as well as others, especially when
that place in Isa. 58.13. is so express against it, Not doing thine own ways,
nor finding thine own pleasure, nor SPEAKING THINE OWN WORDS, viz. upon the
Sabbath days. Besides her privare duties in the family, she was very much in
secret duties by her self, daily her usual manner was (as I have been
certainly informed) In the mornings as soon as she was up to go into her closet
a little while by her self, and then went to the performing of spiritual
duties together with the family; after they were done, then she retired into
her chamber by her self, and read the Bible in order, reading and meditating
about one hour, and then went into her closet afterward a pretry while. Before
supper she used to go into her chamber and closet some competent time, yea
though late, when she was necessarily detained abroad before she came home;
after duties performed in the family at nights, when the rest were gone to bed,
she would walk about half an hour meditating in her chamber, and reasoning out
any distemper that was upon her spirit, to find out the cause thereof, and to
remove it; saying, so her heart was brought into frame again, and not before;
Then she went into her closet about three quarters of an hour, and this every
day. She never went abroad but she went first into her closet for some while to
prayer, and so she did again upon her returnings home. On the Lords days at
noon after duty done in the family, she would retire by herself, til they went
to the public worship again; upon the week days she would much complain she
was so straightened for time, desiring more to speed in secret by her self. She
was a be lever that had not only the graces of the Spirit, but the sealings
and the joys of the Spirit in her; She had much assurance, even to the riches
of it; She knew she was of God, and Christ was her Redeemer having loved her
and given himself for her, and that the Covenant of Grace, with all the
promises and mercies therein contained, and Ordinances were hers; And therefore
in all places where Providence cast her, would she partake of all the
Ordinances, and not infringe her Christian right and liberty, as being tied to
one particulat place, or people only, living without the Sacrament till she
came there again; though ordinarily she looked upon her self as a member of
that Church where her usual dwelling was. She was filled with joy, and walked
in the comforts of the holy Ghost, she was of a very cheerful Spirit, and
grace did carry it on very graciously and spiritually; she had much communion
with God in all the means of grace, the Lord made her joyful in the duties of
prayer, the Word was the savor of life unto life unto her, and the rejoicing
of her heart. Exceeding incomes she had at the Table of the Lord, there she sat
under Christ's shadow with great delight, and his banner over her was love, and
his fruit was very sweet unto her taste; whilst the King sat at his table with
her, her spiknard did usually send forth the smell thereof. The Lord did
grearly bless that Ordinance of his Supper unto her; she said she could ferch
from the Lord there, any mercy she wanted, direction in straights, support and
comfort in disturbances, power against sin and Satan, grace to carry her on in
the ways of God, etc. Much refreshing she had in singing of Psalms, she had
many and particular returns of prayers from God, which she much looked up to
him for, after she had directed them unto him, and took special notice of his
gracious answers, and improved them with thankfulness to his glory. She was of
very excellent natural parts, full of wisdom and prudence; as appeared also
in the well managing of her many and weighty affairs, and did greatly abound
in the knowledge of Divine Mysteries, contained in the Scriptures; Much weaned
from and crucified to the world; Whilst her Father Sir Matthew Howland, and her
Uncle Sir John Howland lived, she would say (foreseeing the same, as being
their only heir) she was afraid of too much of the world coming to her. Never
any use or increase would she take for any money's she lent, though to a very
considerable sum and time; and left under her own hand, that her children
should take none also for the same after her, in case she died before the
principal was paid in. Her good works and charity not only Hawkherst, but
Holburn also, and other parts can testify, as your self well know, and can
amply relate. Her good works extended not only to her own Nation, but also to
the Hungarian Scholars, who come so far to partake of our practical Divinity,
counting her self a Member of the same universal Body with them. For diverse
years, often would she have one of them time after time with her, whilst in the
Country; and now did take care of one this Winter, at one of her sons, till
next Summer she thought to come again, and retake him into her Family: Their
Land, have diverse already returned into it, that have caused her piety and
liberality to sound amongst them there. She disdained not to visit any of her
poorest neighbors, and did love to do it, to raise up pity in her toward
wards them, and thankfulness to God for her self, who had made the difference:
Neither did she refuse to do the meanest offices of love for the good of them
and theirs. Her artire, your self knows, how grave and modest it was; as also
her Daughters, without nakedness, or unseemlinesse. The gracions Providence
of God were exceeding many, and very great and remarkable toward her; wherein
she saw much of her Fathers care and goodness, which she took special notice
of, and was abundantly thankful for, and endeavored to improve them answerably
to his Glory, as appears in her Diary, where she has kept an account of them,
and also of her ways toward her God, as there she often calls him. She was
like that virtuous woman your Text spoke of, in her carriages in and toward her
Family, ordering and taking care thereof, and them in it; and herself employed
about something or other of the same, when she was not in her spiritual
converses with the Lord, or taken off by other occasions. She considered well
both her husbands estates, and freed them from the incumberances for her
children, whom, she much endeavored to make the children of God, in bringing
them up in his nurture and admonition, and keeping diverse days of fasts by her
self, to seek the Lord for them, in which and diverse other respects, they could
not but arise and call her blessed, and give we her of the fruit of her hands
and let her own work praise her in the gates. As her life, so her death was
full of grace and comfort, the Lord strengthened her upon her bed of
languishing; and made all her bed in her sickness; when she was walking
through the valley, of death she feared no evil, her God was with her, his rod
and his staff they comforted her, and ministered to her an entrance abundantly
into the everlasting Kingdom of our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ. Though her
pains and tortures were great (the Physicians applying cupping glasses to her,
and lancing her) yet the Lord did comfortably lift up the light of his
countenance upon her, and put gladness in her heart, and made her patience
have its perfect work, she was full of heaven, breaking forth in expressions of
Gods goodness to her, saying, God has been very good to me, how good is God,
and how good it is to wait upon God, there has not the least cloud interposed
between God and my soul all this sickness, I will go to my God triumphing.
Thus with gladness and rejoicing was she carried to enter into the Kings
Palace, into the joy of her Lord, where there is fulness of it, and
pleasures for evermore. O mark we the perfect, behold we the upright, for the
end of such is peace. No marvail that even Balaam in the sense hereof, did so
desire to die the death of the righteous, and that his end might be like
theirs; and well had he done if he had withal desired his life alike. For ever
magnified be my good God, who has determined the times before appointed, and
the bounds of our habitations, that caused the lines to fall unto me in such a
pleasant place, so long even six years in the same family with her, and that I
should be chosen and ordained a Pastor to her and the people there at
Hawkherst; That ever I was so acquainted with such an eminent, practical
experimental, spiritual, staid believer, abounding so much with the graces,
and sealings, and joys of the holy Ghost; That I should have such a taste of
that happiness and delight that is in the society of real Saints; How did I
live as in a lower heaven, walking as in Paradise, whilst I was there,
rejoicing in the goodness of the Lord all the day long, calling the walls
salvation, and the gates praise; what sweet experiences of Christ had I
frequently communicated to me from her! How greatly did she st^engthe^ my hands
in the Lords work in the midst of all the opposition among that people; the
righteous God recompense it, and all the work and labor of love, she showed
toward his name unto me, into the bosom of he^ children seven fold, as
likewise al^ I found from my much honored long deceased friend Mr. Scot, he^
husband, in his day, whose memory is very precious to me. O unhappy Engagement,
that so disengaged us from one another, and that people there: The Lord is
righteous, and his ways also mercy and truth, his paths are judgment, a God
of truth and without iniquity, just and right, wonderful in counsel, excellent
in working; Wisdom and might are his, he changes time; and seasons making
every thing beautiful in them; manifold are his works, in wisdom has he made
and done them all, the earth is full of his riches, whatsoever he pleases that
does he in heaven, and in the earth, and in all deep places. We are not to
murmr and say, what is the cause the former days were better then these, for
we may not wisely inquire concerning this; yet unsensible we should not be of
such a loss, and breach as this is, like the sea, who can heal it? whereunto
shall I liken and compare it? that such a burning and shining light should go
out amongst us, such a fixed star, a star of the first magnitude, should se^^
our horizon: How has the Lord covered those parts with a cloud in his anger,
and cast down the beauty of them to the ground? how is the gold become dim,
and the most fine gold changed! how is the precious daughter of Zion, and the
glory of those parts departed! For these things I weep, mine eye mine eye
runs down with water; Oh that my head were waters, and mine eyes a fountain
of tears, that I might weep day and night, even with the weeping of Jazer, yea
mourn with a great mourning, as the mourning of Hadadrimmon in the valley of
Megiddon, for good Josiah, when he was taken away. Oh dolor exprome vires, non
sum solito contentus sone, ne^ indociles lugere simus, Scotam ^^emus. Ye
Ministers of Christ, weep over her, that was such a cordial constant prizer of
you. O Weal of Kent, take up a wailing for her, the brightest star in all your
firmament is set. O Hawkherst, make a bitter lamentation for her, whose coming
among you, was like the rain upon the mown grass, as shoures that water the
earth. O poor of those parts, and Houlbourn, and elsewhere, set upon the ground
and keep silence, cast dust upon your heads, gird your selves with sackcloth,
hang down your heads to the ground, arise cry out in the right, in the
beginning of the watches, pour out your hearts like water before the face of
the Lord, ^ift up your hands toward him, who has taken her away from you,
that did not with hold you from your desire, nor caused your eyes to fail, that
did not eat her morsel herself alone, and you did not eat thereof; that did not
see you without covering, or perish for want of clothing: whom your ears have
blessed, when heard her, and your eyes have given witness to her, when seen
her, and your loins have rejoiced when warmed by her; and ye widows whose
hearts she has made to sing for joy, when she sa^ as Queen among the mourners.
O Hungarian Scholars, call for the mourning women, and send for cunning women,
that they may come, and let them make haste and take up a wailing for you, that
your eyes may run down with tears, end your eye lids gush out with water, for
a great Patroness of yours is gone. Sir I am not yet out of my amazement by
this great and sudden blow, to perceive the end of the Lord. In respect of her
self, it is happiness, not suffering her to be longer absent from him here in
the body, having with her swift motion finished her course so soon. But why in
respect of us, is this Citizen of heaven so soon gone from us? when but
somewhat more then in the midst of her days? We may fear a storm coming, when
the Father calls his Children so hastily home; The Lord fit us for the worst
of times, and our last hour. When Mr. Scot her husband, that godly and
faithful Magistrate died, and soon after, that godly and faithfuull Minister
of Christ, in the neighboring place of Landherst, also died, it was much upon
my heart that some evil was a coming, and accordingly was I greatly carried
out to preach among my people on Isaiah 57.1. The righteous perishes and no
man lays it to heart, and merciful men are taken away, none considering they
are taken away from the evil to come. And that Lords day it was finished, that
very week was that great rising in Kent, in 1648. though I had not the least
hint thereof till they were up, which God was pleased notwithstanding in mercy
presently to avert. But this is not yet participated, the Lord goes by me, and
I see him not, he passes on also, and I perceive him not; his way is in the
sea, and his path in the great waters, and his footsteps are not known. These
wheels within the wheels are not yet manifested; the great thing upon my
spirit is, Lord, why have thou taken away thy faithful and tallent-improving
servant, whilst nature was so strong and vigorous in her, thus before her time?
Righteous art thou O LORD, when I plead with thee, yet let me talk with thee of
thy judgments. We cannot see thy works from the beginning to the end; yet must
we believe, though clouds and darkness are round about thee, yet
righteousness and judgment are the habitation of thy throne. I know O Lord,
thy judgments are right, and thou in faithfulness have afflicted us: Thy
works are great, sought out of all them that have pleasure therein, thy secret
is with them that fear thee; thy way O GOD is in the Sanctuary, and there are
thy goings to be seen. The good Lord sanctify this great and sore affliction
to us, and hereby the more quicken us to the improvement of our time and
talents to the utermost, whilst it is day, before our night come, when we also
shall cease to work. So prays, Sir,

Yours, affectionatly to serve you in Christ. NICOLAS THOROWGOOD. Minister of
the Gospel, sometime at Hawkherst, now at Monkton in the Isle of Thanet and
County of Kent.

Mr. Elmstones Letter to Mr. Case.
Sir,
I Am persuaded that not only we the friends and acquaintance of this lately
deceased Gentlewoman Mrs. Scot, the Paragon of Piety and Christian wisdom, but
even strangers that never before heard of her, yea those of the generation to
come will con you much thanks, for that your labor, you intend (as by a Letter
from Mr. Thorowgood I understand) to hold up her remembrance among the living,
though she be dead, that the glory of Gods grace (which was in her eminently
conspicuous) may thereby be magnified, and she set forth as a lively pattern of
piety, by Christian Gentlewomen to be imitated. It will indeed conduce nothing
to the advancement of her happy condition, who without sense of what is here
done below touching her, to her full satisfaction enjoys the beatificall
vision of her most dear Savior Jesus Christ. But it were pity, that such a
mirror of Gods grace in her, and the splendour of it shining from her, should
lie in obscurity, the knowledge whereof might cause many thanksgivings to God
for her, and happily kindle in some breast a kindly flame of a godly imitation
of her ways. Touching the occasion of her conversion what it was, I perceive
that Mr. Thorowgood has informed you, which I think he could do better than my
self, as who living a good while in her family, might hear her often relate it,
so that touching that I need to say nothing, save only that so it was, as he
writes, occasioned by a fall from a horse, and the putting of her leg out of
joint. The danger whereof put her upon the reading of Books that concerned
piety and Religion, whereby it pleased the Lord to work in her some serious
sense and care of Religion. But she did no sooner begin to mind matters of
Religion, but that some two of that way of the rigid separation called
Brownisme, and disciples of John Turner, the name of one of which was
Scotchford, both living in Cranebrook; by the means of a Tenant unto
Glassenbury, living in the Gate House took notice of it, and together got
access to her, and began to instill into her some of their principles of the
separation, and it seems had much shaken her, so that she began to be
scrupulous of holding communion with our then Churches, viz. England. It fell
out that while they were thus working at times upon her, and she wavering, that
in that Festival time of Christ's Nativity, which in such houses was kept with
some solemnity of good cheer these Sectaries came to Glassenbury, and after
dinner had gotten an opportunity to confer with Mrs. Scot, then Mrs. Roberts,
somewhat privately in a Chamber, where yet was present Mrs. Crisp her Aunt, a
godly Gentlewoman, now also deceased, and John Morgan a retainer to that
family, a very honest man, now also dead; The good Gentlewoman, and the rest
were somewhat puzzeled, with the somewhat knottydiscourses of these Sectaries:
Now it was so by Gods Providence, that I was also at that time, and had been
there for some days, invited by Sir Walter Roberts, now deceased to, and his
Son, young Mr. Roberts, who, for six years together, at least, had been my
Scholar, and boarded in my house; Wereupon it came into that John Morgans mind,
to make a motion to Mrs. Roberts to send for me, and that I should confer
with those Sectaries, she did gladly entertain the motion, and they how
willingly, I know not, yielded to it, so I coming to them, there we conferred
together for some two hours (it may be) before them, about points of
Separation, especially about receiving the Sacrament amongst such a confused
multitude, as then was the manner, by the iniquity of the times, whether it
might lawfully be done, or could be done with any comfort. The issue of our
conference was such by the Lords blessing, that Mrs. Roberts was satisfied
about such objections as they made, had her scruples cleared, listened no more
to their suggestions, and they being now out of hope of gaining her, left her,
so that from thence, she continued her attendance upon the public Ministry,
and held in, in the Communion of our Churches as true, though then in many
things somewhat corrupt and defective. And this, Sir, is the story of that
passage, if you think meet to make use of it, I should be willing that you
would not mention me by name, but only say that a Minister being at that time
there by Providence, was called in to confer with the Sectaries, and did
satisfy Mrs. Roberts. I cannot tell whether a passage or two be much worth the
mentioning, but now I am wtiting I have a mind to add them. First while Mrs.
Roberts was as a so journer in Glassenbury, summer ended, when they could not
walk abroad before supper, in the evenings when it began to be too dark to see
how to work, and it was too early to light a candle, it was her custom with
her Aunt Mrs. Crisp, and some other young Gentlewomen in the house, Mrs. Crisp
her daughters especially, to meet together in some one of their chambers, and
sit talking together about an hour or so, till candels were lighted. Their talk
it may be was sometimes of civil matters, and such accidents as had fallen out,
and come to their hearing; but there was also ever for the most part, somewhat
of Religion, in relating what they had read in some good book or other, or what
they had sometime heard. I once upon an occasion about such a time stayed at
Glassenbury one whole night, and then they called me into their meeting and
conference, where they requested me to repeat the heads of a Sermon I had
preached abroad not long before, about setting up Idols in the heart, out of
Ezekiel the 14. and to pray with them. Next, when the keeping of the house was
put over by his Father to Sir Walter Roberts his Lady, who being weak in her
intellectuals, and unable to manage the business of the house, Mrs. Roberts
then was fain to be governesse of the family, and oversee the ways thereof,
which was pretty great; In this time she was in some straight how to perform
her morning duty of closet prayer to the Lord, she thought that it was meetest
that God should be first served, and sought unto, for his blessing all the day
after; But it seems that the thoughts of household business did interpose,
that she performed it not with meet freedom of Spirit: wherefore Mr. Whitfield
that faithful Minister of the Lord, who had some relation to the family by his
wife, coming there she imparted her doubt to him; who gave her his opinion,
that it was the safest way for her first to go down and settle things in the
family for the forenoon business, and then to retire her self to her solitary
devotion, which she might attend with all freedom of Spirit from household
affairs, and without fear of interruption: Besides, if upon her giving the
first place to her devotion, if matters in the family had at any time done
amiss, it might have turned to some reproach of her religious profession, as
making her negligent in that her domestical employment. So sir after much
scribbling I have done, if any thing written will be worth the inserting in your
intended Narrative, I shall be glad of it, that I have lighted on any thing to
celebrate the memory of that gracious Gentlewoman, whose loss I shall feel
with others, for want of that encouragement, we had from her in piety, and her
respect of us, and so desire to lament it; If not, it is enough, that I have
showed my weak desire to contribute somewhat toward her Funeral Obsequies; and
so commending you to the safe keeping and love of our good God in Christ, I
rest.

Jan. 31. 1658. Yours in the sincerity of Christian respect, and good
affection; JOHN ELMESTONE.

Mr. Elliston's Letter to Mr. Case.
Worthily honored and dearly beloved Friend.
I Am requested to give in my thoughts and experiences of that pious and
precious Saint Mrs. Scot, once shining in our eyes, but now alas extinct, the
fragrancy of whose piety was as an ointment poured forth among us. I confess I
have delaied it, and had thoughts wholly to have waved it, not, etc. but
fearing I might detract from her worth, or eclipse it, and being also conscious
to my self of my unworthiness and unfitness to give testimony especially of so
eminent a servant of Christ, who alas so often doubt of mine own interest. This
femal glory blessed among women, whom God had anointed with the oil of Grace
above most of her fellows, was an insatiable worshipper of God in Christ (as
was said of the Apostle Paul) much on the wings of heavenly contemplation and
meditation was this divine Eagle. She had laid up her treasure there, no
marvel then her heart had its tendency thither, ah precious bosom wherein
was lodged so much of heaven. Oh how fearful (good soul) was she that the lean
kine should eat up the fat, that Martha's part should play the thief to Mary's.
Oh how watchful over her heart, calling it slippery and deceitful, saying she
had but a little while to keep it, and the reward would pay for her pains
urging her self on that ground to a fidelity and constancy in her watch and
ward. She carried Mary's Alabaster of precious ointment with her, which she was
ready to open and pour out plentifully on others, suting her savoury discourse
according to the conditions of the parties she had converse withal. Oh how
cautious was she of giving any offense in her attire, or any other ways,
saying she never put on her best attire but she had thoughts of clothing her
self with the rich robe of Christ's righteousness, and decking her self with
the jewels of his graces. Oh how exact in all her walkings, careful to make
straight steps to her feet, looking where she should set her foot before she
took it up, that she might tread safely, she was rich in Grace, but poor in
Spirit, eminent Grace lodged in a low heart. Poor worthless creature, was
frequently in her mouth. She would condescend to converse familiarly with the
poorest member of Christ not having the grace of Christ in respect of persons,
the ointment of her love fell as well upon the skirts of the garment as on the
head; she loved Grace for it self, looking on it as amiable clad in russet, as
in velvet, in a poor servant, as well as in her Mistress. As all her delight
was in the Saints, so her delight was in all the Saints, she had a heart truly
mortified to the world, showed in her contemptuous speeches of it, and the
glory thereof. Oh, how beautiful were the feet of Godly Ministers to her, a
rare grace in these days. How afraid of the corruptions of the times, of soul
poisoning Doctrines, ceasing her self, and persuading others to cease from
harkening to the instruction that causes to err from the words of knowledge.
She was a great lover of the Word, of the Sabboths, very careful as that her
self, so those under her charge should carefully prepare for them before they
came, so holily to observe it when it was come; A great prizer of all Gods
Ordinances, and of all opportunities of Grace, which she did husband to the
great improvement of soul good. The observation of humbling days was frequent
with her, wherein she was very solemn, according to the nature of the duty, and
now she reapes abundantly the fruit of her labor. She had a marvelous stomach
and spiritual appetite to the Lords Supper, for the which she did solemnly
prepare her self, plentifully sequestring her self from the affairs of the
world, that she might clean her heart for the acceptable entertainment of her
beloved, no question she met with many a precious dole there, who had such a
desire to be there. She came down from that mount, as Moses, with a shining
face, a heart most warm and lively, speeches savoury and ravishing, refresht
with the comfortable sense and feeling of Christ's love, sweeter then wine,
filled, satisfied with marrow and fatness; Christ did frequently then and
there manifest himself to her, kiss her, therefore her lips dropped honey, as
I my self have experience of it, I bless God for it; Blessed God what a mercy
I am deprived of! Oh she was altogether and always lovely. Her grace added
much more worth to her then her birth, or any other accomplishment she had;
much grace there was in her grace, it looked like it self in her. I never was
in her company but I went off with advantage to me, or the fault was my own, I
might have learned humility, contempt of the world, to be lively and
spiritual, etc. Oh what a pitiful heart had she to the poor, especially of
the household of faith, and as she had a tender heart, so a bountiful hand, as
she saw occasion, and would often say, God lent it her for that end, and it was a
great mercy to have a heart to it; to lay out for God, is to lay up for our
selves; 'twas her holy ambition to serve God in her generation. She was very
spiritual in her affections to her relations, to her dear Lady Mother, and
Children, wonderfully troubled at their deviations, and to think that any that
come from her should hiss or sting at Gods glory, oh that those cares,
prayers, tears, fallen into Gods bottle, when worldly tears drop besides it,
might not (as to any of them) be rendered fruitless. Sir, many of these flowers
she had growing in the garden of her heart, her vessel was weak, her grace
sound and strong, she had embarked in her those excellencies that would neither
sink nor suffer shipwreck. She was rich toward God, here she had a Christ for
grace, and now she has him and heaven with him for glory. She was a Sarah for
courage, an Abigail for wisdom, a Mary for choosing the good part, a Dorcas
for good works, an Elizabeth for walking in all the commandments and ordinances
of God blameless. Sir, if ever I had confidence in the happy estate of any
that ever I was acquainted with, it is greatned in reference to her. All that I
can say is abundantly below her; my prayer to God is, that God would favor me
with the favor that he beared to virtuous Mistress Scot; So shall I be
visited I know with his salvation. Sir, I hope you will pardon my defects, when
you understand I was necessitated to write this week or not at all, in great
haste having much other work on my hands; the rest is the subscribing my self,
Sir,

Sandhurst, Feb. 28. 1658. Your younger brother in Christ, and unworthy fellow
labourer in the Lords vineyard, PETER ELISTON.

Another Letter of Mr. THOROWGOODS. to Mr. Case.
Reverend Sir,
SInce my last to you I received further information from a friend, concerning
that useful and precious Gentlewoman Mrs. Elizabeth Scot, by way of Narrative,
of some other remarkable passages, which were not mentioned in my Letter, which
may be worthy imitation, and of singular use to Christians in these declining
days, and may tend to the magnifying the glory of Gods free grace, shining
forth in her conversation; in these following Particulars.

I. She was much in holy religious Worship and service of God in pub^ick,
exceeding careful not to lose any public opportunity for the good of her soul,
making all or^inary occasions of her own and visits of friends give place, and
not to hinder her waiting on God in the public Ministry of his Word. If there
were a Lecture she used to go unto, and persons of quality came to visit her,
after she had been with them a while, and time was to go, she would look upon
it as no incivility to leave them with the Lady her mother, unless they would
go with her. I never knew any ordinary visit or visiters detain her from
attending the Word of God preached, for almost these nine years which I have
lived in her house. She was willing to keep fair Correspondency with all her
friends, and to maintain a moral principle of love, where there was no more;
but exceeding tired with Lady's discourse at their visits, though I suppose in
her presence it was far better then otherwise. If any business unknown fell
out when she was going to the Lecture, unless it would certainly prove
prejudicial to her, she would make it stand back and wait till afterward: and
this I have frequently known; and she often said, she found Satan very busy to
hinder her from laying hold of opportunities, this I believe the whole family
can testify with my self.

II. As she was careful not to omit any public opportunity, so also as
careful of private duties, she would be sure not to lose her closet time,
where she was frequent and long, even when others were at their rest; I lying
in the Chamber over her, have often heard her up at one of the clock in the
night or rather morning. The Church has a great loss of her prayers, many a
petition did she put up in her closet, and floods of tea^^ did she pour forth,
insomuch that her eyes have been sore for some days together (which otherwise
were very well) when any calamity has been upon the Church of God, o^ the Lord
dishonored by any nearly related to her, her tears have been so many that I
have behold surrowes on her cheeks, and so likewise upon fasting days, she was
so con^cienscious in keeping her closet-time, that all her ordinary business
did stay till she had done; and when any of her family have gone to her closet
door, and told her some would speak with her, or came to visit her; If the
business were petty, or only visitors, let them have been who they would, she
would stay out her time, knowing the Lady her Mother was below to entertain
them; but if the business were of great importance, then she would come; But,
to be sure make haste to her closet again. O the sweetness she found in her
closet communions! that she would spend so much time there in the forenoons, as
that scarce she had time to dress her self; often saying, her dressing time was
the worst time of all her time; often bidding her maid make haste, saying, why
are you so long, I hate to spend so much time in dressing for this is lost
time; and whilst her maid was dressing her, she would be making up Letters, or
winding up her watch, or some employment or other, not enduring to stand idle
any time in the least measure, though it were but a very little time; She would
not (she said) for a great deal spend so much time in dressing as many do,
knowing how to spend her time if she had more* And saying, I like this fashion
well either in her apparel or dressing, that soonest could be put on, and
take up least time; often charging her maid, to get all things ready against
she came to be dressed, saying she could hardly afford her self time to be
dressed; yea in the winter evenings would she be long in her closet. She was a
diligent reader of the Scripture privately by her self every day. She kept many
days of fasts secretly by her self upon many occasions, and for her children:
And those days would she set apart for the said fasts, upon which there were
some great shows or sights to be seen in the City, as twice she did upon a Lord
Mayors day, the occasion of her fasts falling out on those times of the year,
making choice of those days rather then others, because of the vanity of the
seasons and prophannesse in the City by surfeiting and drunkenness more then
at other times; And how full of heaven would she come out of her fasts; How
heavenly would she pray in the family those nights! How fervently, how broken
hearted in confessions! How heavenlized was she! in so much that the next day
she has wished, she could live without eating or sleeping, to spend that time
upon the immediate service of God, such enjoyments of him did she find therein.

III. As she was much in holy duties public and private, so she was exceeding
careful to perform every duty in its season, that one should not justle out
another, her private performances, should not hinder her public attendances;
and her public service should not infringe her private, and very diligent she
was, in not omitting the least duty. God did give her that spiritual art of
redeeming and improving time, above thousands of Christians: Her public
performances though many, did not abate her one minute of her private.

IV. As she was careful in performing all those duties that concerned her
self, so also those concerning her family, resolving with Joshua, that she and
hers would serve the Lord. As soon as her children came to any understanding
she made them learn the Catechismes, first Mr. Wilsons, and Mr. Bal's
Catechismes, and from the year 1653. the Assemblies lesser Catechism, and God
did so bless her endeavors, that when her children were very young, yet could
they soon give her an account of their whole Catechism without book; and as
soon as any of them could read, she caused them diligently to read and would
exercise their memories by calling them to an account of what they could
remember of that they had read in the Bible or other good Books, and of what
they had heard when they had been at Church; and it was wonderful to hear what
a large account they would give of what they remembered: Surely God did much
bless her prayers for them, else I know not how possibly they could do so: She
would make all children pray privately by themselves before they went to bed,
and in the mornings when they did rise. Also she would instruct in repetitions
of what they could remember, what had bin preached, telling them often they must
give account to God of their time, and what they had read and heard, exhorting
them to walk in the ways of God, when she should not be; by seting before them
the good to be found in Gods service, and the miseries that would fall on them
if they walked not in his ways, She would not keep any servant that was
profanely wicked, saying she would not have such, if they would give her their
service: she would have no servant of an erroneous opinion; I have heard her
several times say, she would rather have those, that were profane then such,
because there is little hope of convincing the erroneous, but more hope to
convince the profane: she was very willing her servants should go to Lectures
and to the fasts, at the end of the morning exercises which were once a month;
she would afford them time, and encourage them to go to them, and if she had a
servant that could not read, she would cause her children to teach such, and
her self also would do it as she could spare time to encourage them, and buy
books for them.

V. I shall give an account of the method of her duties, and every days work.
First, in the morning as she did rise, before she was off her bed, she made her
children give her an account at her beds side, of their Catechismes in course,
one, one morning, and another another, when they were so large in their
accounts as she could hear but one a time; when she was off her bed, she went
to her closet for some time, then afterward she had refreshed her self with
something, she would perform family duties with the family, when she had no
Chaplain, in reading something of the Word, and prayer; Then she would use
some little exercise she could find best for her health, which should not be
long, and so to her closet again, reading the Scripture by herself, and
spending the rest of the forenoon, unless some great occasions called her off
till about eleven a clock, when she came out, and while she was making up her
own bed (which she did every day, except the Lords days, for her exercise) she
would cause her children to read the Scriptures, one one morning, and another
another, and as they read she would ask them, what they understood by such a
place, instructing them as they read; if a place where some judgments were
denounced against sin or a sinner, she would say, see what cause you have not
to sin, and what you must look for if you do so, exhorting them from every such
place. By that time she had done and was dressed it was well nigh dinner time;
in the winter time, she loved not to come out of her chamber before dinner was
at table, because the forenoons were so short, unless some business more then
ordinary had called her away. In summer time, sometimes she would walk a little
before dinner in Lincolns-Inne-fields, and twenty to one if she had not found
an object of charity to scatter her benevolence upon, before she came in again:
after dinner, after some little space, to her closet again, where she was
sometimes longer and sometimes shorter as her occasions would permit; if that
afternoon she went to a Lecture, or to visit friends, she would be sure to go
into her closet before she went out of doors, and when she came home to her
closet again for some time; then when she was undressed and in her night
garments, that was the time of her meditation, when she would walk sometimes an
hour, or until it drew near to suppertime, and so to her closet again till
supper was ready, after supper, she would walk again till the servants had
supped, and then called them in to family duties together with singing of a
Psalm; after the same were ended, and she discoursed sometime with the Lady her
Mother, she would go to her chamber, where she would walk for some time, and so
to her closet where then she spent much time, so long as at the soonest it
would be one of the clock before she went to bed; oftentimes would she be up
till one of the clock in the morning, and manytimes the Belman would cry in the
streets, two a clock in the morning, and she no more then a bed, and not a
sleep, asking her maid, if that were the Belman. I verily believe there was no
shop, keeper more diligent in keeping his shop, then she her closet; O what a
trade did she drive for heaven! she was one that made Religion her business
indeed. Upon the Lords days, she would be up somewhat earlier then on other
days, though later up on the Saturday nights; and if in London, in the
summertime, she would go to the morning Sermons at seven of the clock, if the
weather were good, and then to the rest; She was full of heaven in all her
discourses on the Lords days, she was one as in Isa. 58.13. that did turn away
her foot from the Sabbath, from doing her pleasure on Gods holy day, and called
the sabbath a delight, the holy of the Lord, honorable, honoring him, not
doing her own ways, not finding her own pleasure, nor speaking her own words;
all her discourse at table dinner and supper, and every where those days,
should be heavenly, and speaking of what was taught those days, not a word
would come from her unsuitable to the day. I verily believe if one had been set
to watch her all those days long, he should not have trapp'd her in one word
unsuitable to the day; if any thing had displeased her, she would not have been
displeased on those days. On Lords-dayes-nights when she was come from Church,
and undressing her self, her children gave her an account of what they had
heard at Church, and what such had read, as stayed at home and could not go;
and those of her children she could not hear then, she would call to account
while the servants were at supper, and afterward the family to duty, and
repeated amongst them what she had written at Church those days; This last
year she caused her eldest daughter Mrs. Frances Scot, to repeat in the family,
being able also to write; After repetition, a Psalm they sung and then she her
self prayed; in which duty, as she was heavenly, so longer then other nights;
the Lord did not only give her the grace and spirit of prayer, but also a
great gift in prayer: And as she was one of great gifts and parts, so very
humble, her parts did no way puff her up or cause her to go out of her sphere
in the least, one of her Chaplains did much urge her in the Country (where she
commonly had one in her house) to hear her pray, but at no hand would she do
it, this by the way: After duty done in the family, she went again to her
chamber, and so to her closet, and would be there somewhat longer then other
nights and take her bedtime the monday mornings, indeed it would be morning,
before she went to bed. Her usual Lecture days at London, every week, were
Tuesday's at Clements, Wednesdays Mr. Jenkins at Black-Friars, in the forenoon,
and if she could have time in the afternoon Mr. Calamy's at Aldermanbury;
before Mr. Jenkins Lecture was at Black-Friars, she was constantly at
Aldermanbury; Thursdayes at Dunstones in Fleetstreet, to hear Mr. Manton, or at
Mr. Case's Lecture at Martines in the fields, and Saturdayes at Gregory's in
the afternoons, besides the morning exercises when they were near.

VI. As she did lay out her self and time in the service of God, so also the
greatest part of her estate, laying up little here; her layings out, were more
then her layings up: she was heaping up her treasures in heaven, where neither
moth nor rust consume, nor thief break through and steal, how did she scatter
her benevolence every day! and so as her left hand knew not what her right hand
did. Much money did she cast into the poors basin at Fasts, and at those fasts
once a month at the morning exercise, the keeping of which she omitted not,
though many times not well; at other private fasts she gave very much; there
was seldom a week in the winter time, but she was called to a private fast for
particular persons in some great affliction, many weeks she has bin known to
have been twice a week at those extraordinary dutys, to the performance of
which she would be sure to make all ordinary businesses and visits of friends
give place; some weeks it has bin known she has bin at 3 fasts a week, at
which fasts she gave the more, knowing it would be given to the godly poor, and
being winter time, and the harder with them; which scatterings would arise to
no small sum in a year if they could be known how much they were. Sometimes
it has bin observed and sometimes could not, at the least it has been
observed to have bin 2 shillings a time; at the more private fasts she would
give more: In her going to those fasts, if she thought the farness of the way
would weaken her strength, which she kept for the dutys, she would send for a
Coach; at nights if fair, she would often come home on foot, both for her
healths sake, and to give the more to the poor; saying many might think, she
went on foot out of covetousness, but they would be much mistaken; and when
she came home from those fasts, what shift would she make to steal up to her
chamber by the door of the room, where such as came to visit, were, that she
might not be detained from her closet duty's. But to return to her charity
every day, how did she scatter her bounty among the poor! not to such as made a
trade of begging, though they used never so moving expressions, knowing they
were profane, and would take no other course of life, from such she would
receive many a hard word, when they saw her give to others and not to them, and
her servant has been fain to defend her sometimes from their affronting her,
by not giving her way enough to pass. Now as she walked London streets, she
would carefully observe, if she could see any poor old people, whom she would
call to her, or command her servant to go and call them to her; and would ask
them if they were very poor, and if they were careful to serve God, and did go
to Church, and what hopes they had to be saved, to which they would answer as
they were able, and some would say, I bless God Mistress I am not so poor,
but the Lord does provide for me, that I am not driven to beg, nor extremely
want, to whom she would then give; if she had been in have, and gone by any
poor people, and saw they did not beg she would send her servant sometimes with
something to them, whilst she kept on her way: She would not walk London
streets long but one or other would come to her begging for an alms, and she
would ask her servant if he knew them to be common beggars, if he thought no,
she would be sure to give. At Lectures, if she saw any that were old or in poor
habit attending the word, then she would be sure to give them. In cold seasons
when it was hard with poor people she would be always a speaking of the
sufferings of the poor, that had no fire, or scarce any bread, much
sympathizing with them, asking her servant if he knew any that it went hard
with, that she might relieve them, sending her benevolence: her charity was so
well known, that seldom a day, if at home, but she had petitions from one or
other for the same, many under the notion of distressed Ministers, because they
knew they should receive the greater alms, and that they might be sure not to
miss of the same, they would get a testimonial of their godly lives,
sufferings, and necessitys, with the names of some godly Ministers, she knew or
had heard of, and then has she given the more, when she thought their
condition real, but give it so privately her self, as none should know how much
but the receivers. None that came with petitions did go away without alms,
unless she had known they had come the second time, having bin relieved
before: many a time have her servants gone up to her chamber, or when she was
at dinner, with a paper or petition (they knowing when best to find her at
home) she would ask them if they knew them fit objects of charity, but let the
answer be I or no, she would send them down something if she could not go down
her self, saying, she would rather give to them that had no need, then send one
empty away that had; sending them down word, if they had counterfeited other
men's names, they would very much wrong themselves (as sometimes we could
perceive they abused her charity, and grew so subtle, that they would indite
Letters punctually to her by name, they having their alms according to their
demerit.) Her charity was exceeding much amongst all the poor people at
Hawkherst in Kent, where her house was, where she was many summers since she
used to be in London the winters, they have all cause to remember how many have
had relief at her door; Seldom a Lords day but eighteen had relief there, she
would exhort those poor to serve God, and ask them if they had been at Church
those days, and if they had not they should have nothing; which caused some of
them to go the oftener, for they would be sure to tell one of another, and not a
day in the week, but many of them came and had relief at noon and at nights.
Sir, more I could relate but Mr. Case spoke of them in his Sermon, and
therefore shall proceed no further in these particulars, wherein also it may be
well said, She exceeded many daughters that have done virtuously.

It pleased the Lord to fill her concluding days with many troubles, and
abundance of business, it was wonderful the trouble and the many businesses
she had, and how cheerfully she went through them, and how eminently the Lord
appeared to be with her in carrying her through all, and making whatsoever she
took in hand to prosper. Since she came out of the country last, she scarce had
any time to visit her friends, this winter which I never knew before, but
spending her time much with God. Indeed her life was a continual motion never
idle in the least, either in her closet, or with her family in performing
religious dutys, or reading, or writing, or going to Lectures and fasts, or
giving instructions concerning household affairs, she being now house-keepper
in London also as well as in the Country, to ease the Lady her Mother in her
ancient years, which she did never before in London, though always in the
Country, till this last winter.

O what a loss has her friends, yea what a loss has the Church of God, and
hundreds of poor people, whose bowels she refreshed; But now she is gone
before, where her soul long desired to be. The Lord help us to make after, and
not to wish for her again or that she had not dyed. Why should we be so
foolish, it will not avail; and why so sinful and so impudent, as to
contradict God, he saw it best to remove her hence, and why should we wish her
back again, she is triumphing in heaven over the world, sin and Satan,
singing Alleluja unto Him that sits on the Throne, and unto the Lamb for
ever and ever. She is among the spirits of just men made perfect, and the
innumerable company of holy angels, and with the great God the judge of all,
and with the blessed Jesus the Mediator of the new Covenant, and with the holy
Ghost the Comforter, in the large fruition of the beatificall vision, where is
fullness of joy and pleasures for evermore, and why should I wish her from such
glorious company, and transcendent bliss, as never eye has seen, nor ear
heard, neither has entered into the heart of man; to which mercy's the Lord in
his due time bring us by the merits of his dear Son and our Savior Jesus
Christ.

Sir, These six Heads which I have here sent you, are what my friend writ, who
has known her many years.

Yours, affectionately to serve you in Christ, NICOLAS THOROWGOOD.

FINIS.
Errata.
Page 79. lin. 19. for Landherst, r. Sandherst. p. 118. l. 12. dele comma after
shop.


