SATIRICAL CHARACTERS, And handsome DESCRIPTIONS In LETTERS, Written to
several Persons of Quality. Dedicated to the Duke of ARPAION. By Monsieur De
Cyrano Bergerac. Translated out of the French, By A Person of Honor.

LONDON, Printed for Henry Herringman; and are to be sold at his shop at the
Anchor in the Lower Walk in the New Exchange. 1658.

DEDICATION.
My Lord,
THis Book hardly contains any thing, but a confused heap of my first
Caprices, or, rather the first follies of my youth; I confess it is with some
shame, that I own it, now in my more advanced years: Nevertheless my Lord, I
dedicate it to your Lordship with all 'its defects, and beseech you to let it
travail the world under your glorious protection. What will your Lordship think
of so strange a proceeding, you will believe perhaps, that it is want of respect,
to dedicate to you, that which I my self contemn; and prefixe your
Illustrious Name in the front of a work, where I blush to see my own: I hope
nevertheless (my Lord) that my respect and my zeal, are so well known to
you, that you will not impute the liberty I take, to a cause that will be so
disadvantageous to me. Its now almost a twelve month since I gave my self to
you, and since that happy moment (esteeming all the time of my life lost that
was not employed in your service) and not being satisfied, with having devoted
to you that which remains, I have endeavored to repair that loss, by
consecrating likewise to you my beginnings; And because that which is passed
cannot be recovered to present you with, I offer to you at least all that is
left me of it; and by that means (since I have not had the honor to be yours
all my life,) my life has in some sort been employed for you. Besides (my
Lord) you know that of all the Offerings that were made to God under the old
law, none were so acceptable as the first fruits, however they are not usually
the best. And (if it may be permitted to add that which is profane after a
thing so holy) you are not ignorant neither that the Athenians thought they
could not make a more pleasing and agreeable present to Apollo then by sending
to his Temple at Delphos their first hair, (which they consecrated to him) as
the first production of their brain. This makes me hope (my Lord) that you will
not refuse the offering I make to you of these works, and that you will not be
displeased, that I style my self at the beginning of these letters, as well as
at the beginning of Agrippina,

My Lord Your Lordships most Humble, most Obedient, and most Obliged servant De
Cyrano Bergerac.

To the Reader.
PRefaces in General are like those bills of notice that players post up,
which give large promises of satisfaction, thereby to attract the more
Mlutitude and money; And the Credulous buyers of books, who think to gain wit
by parting with their Coin, are as much deceived as those that go to the
Theater with hopes to become great Politicians by seeing the Countermine of a
Periwigd plot, or expect to learn Comportment from a Comoedians Demarche. And
they usually fall to the Stationers task as being the Person most concerned;
to whom I would gladly have left it now, if my design had been to give praises
to the book, and not to gain Pardon for my self.

Those that spend their time in brewing of Books are compared by Seneca to
petty Painters that busy themselves in Coppying out Originalls; and this half
verse of Horace is thrown at them. O Imitatores, servum pecus!


And great loades of Censures they undergo that meddle in this kind, how
deservingly I will not now question, But certainly the cry against them would
be less if 'twere considered that these reproaches concern many who are not
looked upon by the world as Translators, and who are so far from being
capable to judge others that they are guilty themselves. With what confidence
might I affirm this great truth that very few of those that would be thought
the fathers of that which they do but usher into the world, are so indeed? And
hardly have they so much right to any whole Page, as they pretend to have to
the whole volume. What are for the most part the Productions now a days, but
Translations, and the riches of our Ancestors? We speak through their mouths,
and scarce have we a good thought which we are not their debtors for:
Everyone. Pilfers and thinks it no injury to take from them that have to spare;
some prey upon the sense, and by clothing it in the Country dress, make it
pass for a native; Others content themselves with petty Larcins, and will
confess that they borrow their best expressions, if you will grant the invention
to be theirs; But the greater number are those that do not only filch here and
there, but take it as they find it, word for word, and only alter the Title
and instead of Virgill and Cicero put -- and -- Nor are they content with the
spoils of one Ancient, but pick up and down, feasting their Readers palate
with a sallad of many simples, which does no more better the Peruser, then
compound meats does the stomach, when they fill is with a confusion of corrupt
humors; Thus do they make many Authors meet in the same sheet now they are
dead, which living had diverse ages to part them. If what is taken out of
Aristotle, Plato, Seneca, and some others, were deducted from the works of some
that pass for smart Composers, and Dictators amongst us, I doubt the remains
would be little better then a babell of words. Such as these in learning are
like our Quakers in religion, those Concordancemen; that are stufft with scraps
of Scripture. To conclude, the riches the Press presents us withal now a
days, were dug out of the Ancients mines, and there is nothing new.

The Arabes have a Proverb which says, That we merit little, if we cannot do
as much as the spider that spinnes her web out of her own bowels, without
being beholding to any either for matter or form.

My intention is not to raise my own merits by detracting, and dispraising
other men; for I acquiesce in the Proverb, and confess I have deserved
nothing, I would only persuade the world that Translators merit little, and
those we have spoake of, Plagiaries, less. The one convicts himself by his
Confession in the front of his work. The other adds disingenuity and
false-hood to his felony.

But however we may speak much ill of Translators; certainly Translations
deserve better from us, for (although it may be granted that) it is no small
difficulty to render all Authors, without, in some sort, doing them injury,
(for every Language has its Proprietyes and advantages, and that which is wit
in one Tongue will not be so in all) yet who is there I wonder that had not
rather want one of his Eyes then both? because we cannot be so happy as to have
every excellency of an Author, must we therefore loose him altogether? 'Twas
the great Cardinal Richelieu's Care to have books in all sciences translated
to render them more Communicable.

But, as it is usual for those that come to beg pardon for an offense to
aggravate and add to it by their Importunities, so I doubt my Exceedings may
gain me a severer sentence then perhaps was intended me. I confess I might
have spoke much less, and yet have said enough, concerning this translation:
but having now this Opportunity which I shall not often give my self, I was
the willinger to say something in general.

It Is likely this Version will bring but few of those advantages to the world
that I conceive accrue to it from many other Translations; yet, why should not
wit be made communicable as well as knowledge since they are both ingredients
of a perfect man. Wit I dare Promise you plentifully in these essays, clothed
by the Author, in smooth and significant expressions, and such high and
unthought-of raptures you will meet with, that I believe you will confess he may
with some allowance pass for a French Cleveland, and indeed if our Author were
not ignorant of this tongue I should think he endeavored to imitate that great
satyrist, for like Pliny's fish he carries teeth in his tongue.

These letters were the Recreations of his youth, as they have been here to
fore mine, at those hours that I studied the French, and as they taught me
French I learnt them English; with what success, others must judge. I confess
there are some Conceptions which I understand not, although I endeavored to do
it from others. Such, as near as I could I englished verbatim, and so disposed
the words that they might import as much in English as in French. Those that
can judge of the Original will I believe grant, that it is almost as hard a
Book, to translate well, as any in prose that is extant in that Language.

The Readers are desired, when they meet with that, which they do not so
clearly understand, to have recourse to these Equivocall Words.
French. English. GElee, Signifies Gelly and Frost. page 4. and 117. Cloches.
Bells and Chilblanes. page 4. Gravelle, Hailstones, and gravel in the reins.
p. 3. and 20. Glace. Ice, and glass. p. 4. Charbon. A plague sore, also a
coal. p. 15. Voutee. Vauted, also crooked. p. 18. and 20. Eventee. That has
taken vent, also foolish. p. 20. Pointee. Is the point of any thing, or the
sharpness of wit. p. 27. Press. A printing-presse, also a crowd. p. 63. Quart
and Tiers. Thrusts that are made in Fencing, also a Tertian and Quartan Ague.
p. 64. and 118. Plume Feathers for the Hat, also a quill or pen. p. 64. and
128. Ombre. A shadow, also a ghost. p. 64. and 128. Esprit. The wit, also a
ghost. p. 66. Hasles. Sun-burning, also shamble or market. p. 76. Verse. Verses,
also Worms. p. 78. and 125. Depoviller. To undresse, used likewise when one
steals from another. p. 88. Poulet A Pullet, also a love-Letter. p. 110. Mules.
Chilblanes, and Mules. p. 4. and 117. Palettes. A Battledore, also a thing to
spread plasters. p. 117. Voler. To steal, also to fly. p. 128. Soufflets. A
pair of Bellows, also a box on the ear. p. 131. Bote. A Boot, also a thrust
with a foil. p. 130. Fleau. A Flail, also a scourge. p. 135.


A TABLE Of the several LETTERS.
1 AGainst Winter. page 1. 2 For the Spring. p. 5. 3 For the Summer. p. 9. 4
Against Autumn. p. 13. 5 To my friends, the Water-drinkers. p. 17. 6 Another on
the same subject. p. 19. 7 Upon the shadow of Trees in the water. p. 24. 8 Of
the Cypresse-tree. p. 26. 9 Of a Tempest. p. 28. 10 In commendations of a
red-hair'd Lady. p. 30. 11 Of a Country House. p. 30. 12 For Witches. p. 40. 13
Against Witches. p. 48. 14 To Monsieur Gerson, upon his Book, The Lady's
Triumph. p. 60. 15 The Duellist. p. 63. 15 Upon a Recovery. p. 65. 16 Against a
Coward. p. 66. 17 Against a Detractors p. 70. 18 To Madam****** p. 72. 19 Of a
Dwarf. p. 74. 20 Against Soucidas. p. 75. 21 A Letter. p. 79. 22 A Consolation
for one of his friends, upon the Eternity of his father in Law. p. 83. 23
Against a Plagiary. p. 85. 24 Another on the same subject. p. 85. 25 Against a
great Max. p. 90. 26 Against Scarron. p. 94. 27 Another Letter. p. 100. 28
Against a Pedant. p. 103. 29 Against Lent. p. 107. 30 For Madam***** to Mr.
Cock. p. 110. 31 To a Count of mean birth. p. 112. 32 To a reader of Romances.
p. 113. 33 Against Physicians. p. 114. 34 Against a Coward Bragadocio. p. 121.
35 A Dream. p. 123. 36 Against the Frondeurs or Slingers. p. 134. 37 Theseus to
Hercules. p. 152. 38 Upon Aenigma, that the Author sent to Monsieur***** p.
156.
Amorous Letters.
1 To Madam***** p. 161. 2 Letter. p. 163. 3 Letter. p. 164. 4 Letter. p. 165.
5 Letter. p. 167. 6 Letter. p. 169. 7 Letter. p. 170. 8 Letter. p. 172.
SATIRICAL LETTERS And Handsome DESCRIPTIONS TO Mounsier Le Bret A Counselor.
1. Against Winter.
SIR,
NOW it is, that Winter has tied the Earth's Codpiece point, and has made the
substance Impotent; nay, and the very soul, although Incorporeal, is not secure
against his Tyranny. Mine is so shrunk into its self, That in what par soever
I touch my self to day, I want above four fingers of reaching the place I am
at. I feel without being sensible, And a sword might have let out my life at a
thousand doors, and never once knocked at that of Pain. In fine, we are almost
Paralytick, yet (to make a wound of a small hurt.) God has given but one balm
for our sore, and the Physician that brings it too, is to visit six other
houses, before he comes to us; this lazybones I speak of, is the Sun. Do but
see what little Journeyes he goes, he sets out but at Eight, and goes to his
Inn at four. I believe he is of my mind, and thinks it too cold weather to rise
early; But pray God; it may be laziness only that stays him, and not spite;
for, me thinks, what ever the reason is, he has looked upon us this many
months Ascuint; for my part I cannot imagine why it should be, unless he,
seeing the Earth so hardened by the frost dares not Mount too high, for fear of
hurting his Beams in precipitating them. Thus are we far from being revenged
on the season for the injury he does us. In vain the fire puts himself into a
heat and Choler against him, his rage (after having sent forth a great many
sparks of Anger) ends; in being constrained to devour himself the faster;
'Twere to little purpose to take up a shield, Winter is a sixmonth's death
fallen upon one whole side of the Globe, which we cannot escape, It Is a short
old age of things animated, It Is a being that has no action, which never comes
near us (be we never so stout) but he makes us quake, our porous, delicate, and
fine slender bodies, shrink up, become hard, and hasten to close their passages
to baricadoe a million of invisible doors, and to cover them with little
Mountains: he is moved, contends, and blushing gives this for Excuse, that his
shiverings are sallies that he purposely makes to beat off the Enemy from his
outworks. Finally it is a Miracle that we resist the destiny of all living
creatures. This Tyrant is not Content to silence our birds, to strip our trees,
to cut Ceres's locks, nay and her Ears to boot, and to have left our
Grandmother stark naked and bare; but, that we might not fly by water to a
more temperate climate, he has enclosed them with Diamant walls; and least the
rivers by their Motion should have caused some heat to help us, he has made
them fast to their beds. But he exceeds all this, for, to affright us, by the
very Image of prodigies which he invents for our destruction, he makes us
mistake the Ice for a Hardened light, a Petrified day, a solid nothing, or some
horrible Monster whose body is nothing but an eye. The Seine at first,
affrighted at the tears of Heaven was troubled, and fearing some more sad
disaster would have befallen her inhabitants, stopped her course, and kept her
self in a readiness, upon occasion to assist us. Mankind, being likewise
terrified, at the Prodigies of this horrible season, gather from it presages
proportionable to their fears; If it snow, they presently imagine the Milky
way is dissolving, that the heavens foame for madness at the loss of it, And
that the earth, out of care to her Children, for fear becomes gray. They fancy
likewise the universe to be a great Tart that this Monster (Winter) strowes
Sugar upon, intending to devour it, that the snow is the foame of the plants
that dye mad, and conclude that the cold winds, are the last sighs of
languishing Nature. I my self, that use to interpret all things for the best,
and that in another season should have persuaded my self, that the snow was
the vegetative Milk that the Planets suckled the Plants withal, or the Crumbs
that, after Grace, falls from God Almighty's table, am now carried away with
the torrent of Examples. If it hail, I cry out, what Punishments are reserved
for us sinners, since the Innocent heavens piss Gravel: would I describe
those frozen winds, so great, that they overwhelm Towers and Castles, and yet
so small that they are invisible, I cannot imagine what to call them, unless,
the Blustrings of some devils broke loose, which having binne benumbed under
ground, run about to catch themselves a heat. Every thing that is like winter
puts me into a fright, I cannot endure a looking glass because of its
resemblance with Ice, I shun Physicians because they are called snowie or gray
Doctors, and I can convict the Cold of many Murders; for, in most of the howses
in Paris where I have seen Gelly, there has been a dying Person. In troth Sir,
I do not believe that Saint John's tide will perfectly cure me of my Christmas
distempers; when I think, that I must still see in the Casements great panes of
Glass, which is nothing else but Icecles hardened in the fire. Yeas? This
cruel wretch has put me into so ill a humor, that the August sun will
hardly purge me from Januaryes fleame. The least heat will make me say that
winter is nature's cold fit, and Summer her feavour: for judge you if I
complain without a cause, and whether all these frozen fellows
(notwithstanding the liberality of the season that gives them as many pearls as
nose-Drops) will not take me for a Hercules that pursues this Monster their
enemy. What rigors does he not every where Exercise? Under the Conduit you will
see the frozen tankard-bearer, compel his heart by blowing, to restore the
life to his fingers ends, which this Murderer has taken away. The street walkers
make more noise upon the stones then ordinary, because they have chilblaines at
their heels, the Revenging school Boy with a snow-ball in his hand, watches for
his Companion at some corner, to dround his face in a piece of river. To
conclude the Frost is so great, that every thing is taken, to our very cloaks,
at ten at night the shivering sharke makes music with his teeth under a
Penthouse, and comforts himself with the sight of the first man that passes
by, which he mistakes to be his tailor bringing him a suite, when it shall
please winter that hardhearted offender to go to Confession, here you have the
examination of his conscience, one sin only excepted; for that is a
Particular he shall never be absolved of, judge your self if it be not
unpardonable; he just now benumbed my fingers to persuade you that I was but a
cold friend, since I tremble, now there is an occasion to declare my self,

Sir, your Servant.

To the same. 2. For the Spring.
SIR,
Weep no more; Fair weather is returned: The sun is reconciled to mankind,
and his heat has made winter find his legs, as benumbed as they were; he has
lent him only strength enough to run away, and those long nights, that seemed
to go but a step in an hour (for being in the dark they durst not run) are as
far from us, as the first that laid Adam to sleep. The air not long since
so condensed by the frost, that there was not room enough for the birds, seems
now to be but a great Imaginary space, where shrill Musicians (hardly supported
by our thoughts) appear in the sky like little worlds, balanced by their
proper Center: there were no colds in the Country whence they came, for here
they chatter sweetly. Lord! what a noise they make, doubtless they are at law
for those lands, Winter at his death, made them heirs of. This jealous old
Tyrant not content to have rung all creatures, had frozen the very rivers that
they might not produce so much as their Images; and Maliciously turned the
quicksilver of those running looking glasses toward them, which had so
continued if the Spring at his return had not rectified them. The Beasts now
see themselves swim as they, run along, the Linnet and the Chaffinch
re-produce themselves without loosing their Unity, they revive without dying,
and wonder that so cold a neast in a Moment can hatch little ones as big as
themselves. In fine, we are of opinion the earth is in a good humor; we need
now only make much of her favor: in troth by Winter's assistance she was
become so hard hearted toward us, being vexed to see her self plundered this
Autumn, that, had not the heavens wept two Months in her bosom, she would
never have binne mollified: but God be thanked, she has forgot all our thefts,
all her Care now is to devise some new fruits: she clothes her self with short
grass to be the more easy for our feet, she sends nothing to our tables that
does not overflow with her milk. If she present us with Catterpillars, it is in
the form of wild Silkewormes, and those great Beetles, which are little birds,
shows she has been so careful, as to invent even play-things for our
Children: she admires her own riches, and can hardly persuade her self to be
the Mother of all she brings forth. But a fortnight gone with Child she
miscarries of a thousand insects, and being not willing alone to enjoy so much
of pleasure, she brings forth hasty births, and rough-cast Children, to be
objects of her bounty. Would one not think that by making the Branches of our
Forests so thick with leaves, she had in a frolic carried (to make us sport)
a whole field to the tops of our trees: but knowing that Excessive joys are
prejudicable, in this season she makes beans to Blossom that the fear of
becoming fools may a little allay it. This is the only ill presage that she
has not drove from off the hemisphere. Nature brings forth in all places, and
her Children as they are borne, play in their cradles. Consider the Zephyrus,
which dares hardly breathe in fear, how she plays and courts the Corn. One
would think the grass the hair of the Earth; and this wind a comb that is
careful to untangle it. I think the very Sun woes this season, for I have
observed that wheresoever he retires, he still keeps close to her. Those
insolent Northern winds that braved us in the absence of this god of
tranquillity (surprised at his coming) unites himself to his rays, to obtain
his pardon by their caresses, and those that are greater offenders, hide
themselves in his atoms, and are quiet, for fear of being discovered: all
things that are not hurtful, enjoy a free life, nay our very soul wanders
beyond their Confines, to show she is not under restraint. I think nature's at
a wedding, we see nothing but dances, feasts, and balls; and he that should
seek a quarrel, would not have the contentment to find one, unless those that
arises amongst the flowers contending for beauty, where it is possible you may
see a bloody Pink newly come from combat, fall with weariness; there a
rosebud, sweld by the ill success of his antagonist blows for joy; there the
Lillies, that collosse amongst flowers, that curded Giant, proud to see his
images triumph in the Lowre, raises himself above his fellows, looks down
upon them, and makes the Violet prostrate her self at his feet; which being
jealous and angry, that she cannot rise to the same height doubles her
sweetness, that our noses may give her that precedence which our eyes denies
her; there a bunch of time humbles it self before the Tulip, because she bears
a Chalice; in another place, the earth vexed that the Trees carry the blossoms,
and flowers, she has crowned them withal, so high and remote from her refuses
to give them any fruits till they have returned him his flowers. Nevertheless
for all these little disputes and differences, I do not find the Spring least
pleasant and agreeable. The jolly country-lad swears by godsnigs he will outstrip
his neighbors at the Maypole, The vine yard-keeper leaning on his bill smiles
to see his vine weep. To conclude, Nature's example persuades me so much to
pleasure, that all servitude and restraint being painful, I am almost against
my will,

Sir, Your servant.

3. For the Summer.
WHat would you not say of the Sun, if he had spoiled your own flesh, if you
complain of him for having only visited your meat, he has made a great pot
of the whole earth and has kindled fuel under it to make it boil, he has
disposed the Winds round about as Bellows to keep it from going out, yet when
he lights your Kitchen fire, you take it in dudgion, he warmes the waters, he
distills and rectifies them, lest their crudities should hurt you, and yet when
he drinks your health you scold at him. For my part, I know not henceforward
what posture this poor god can put himself into, to please us: he sends the
Birds to give us goodmorrow, with their Music, he has warmed our bathes, and
does not invite us to them till he has first plunged himself in, to see if
there be any danger. What could he add to all these honors, unless to eat at
our table? And judge you what he seeks when he is never nearer our houses then
at noon. After all this, Sir, do you complain that he dryes up the humors of
our Rivers? alas, were it not for this attraction what would have become of us?
The floods, the Lakes and the fountains have sucked up all the water that made
the earth fertile: and we are angry that to the hazard of giving the middle
region the dropsy, he undertakes to draine 'um, and walks the clouds those
great watringpots over us, with which he quenches the thirst of our fields at a
season, in which he is so much taken with our beauties, that he endeavors to
see us naked. I cannot imagine if he did not attract a great quantity of warer
to cool his rays, how he could kiss us without burning us: but whatsoever we
pretend, we have always water enough to spare, for when the Canicular by his
heat, leaves us but precisely enough for our necessities, has he not taken
care the Dogs should run mad, for fear they should drink any from us? You
likewise thunder against him for that he has (you say) robbed us of our very
shadows. He takes them from us, I grant you, but it is because he sees they
take delight hourly to fright us: see how he climbs to the top of our Horizon
to lay them at our feet, and to drive them underground from whence they came.
Nevertheless how much soever he hates them, and as near as they are to their
end, if we interpose he gives them their life: therefore these daughters of the
night run about us to be protected from the arms of the Sun, well knowing that
he will rather leave the victory ungotten, then resolve to kill them through our
bodies. It Is not but that he is on fire for us all the year, and he shows it
sufficiently, resting neither night nor day, but in summer. Nevertheless, his
passion is quite another thing, he flames, he runs, and seems to descend from
his circle, and endeavoring to hang about our necks he goes so near us, that
notwithstandding the light essence of this god, the one half of mankind sweat
and drop with carrying him: nevertheless we are troubled when he leaves us,
the Night sympathizing likewise with his complexion becomes clear and hot;
because intending suddenly to return, the Sun left at his departure upon the
horizon part of his retinue. The month of May indeed makes the fruits sprout
and knits them and makes them grow; but he leaves them a mortal sharpness
that would choke us, if June did not sweeten them. Some perhaps will object
that by his excessive heat he makes ashes of our herbs, and afterward poures
upon them storms of rain. But do you not think he has great reason (seeing
us so tan'd) to buck us, and admit that he were so hot as to consume us,
'twould at least be a blessed sign of our peace with God, since formerly with
his people he sent fire from heaven only on purified Victims. Besides, if he
intended to burn us, he would not send the Dew to cool and refresh us, that
blessed dew that makes us believe, by his infinite drops of light, that the
torch of the world is in the dust in our fields, that a million of little
heavens, are fallen upon the earth, or that it is the soul of the Universe,
that knowing not what honor to render to his father, goes out to meet and
receive him on the tops of odoriferous flowers. The Country-fellow he thinks
they are silver-lice, fallen from the Sun's head which he combs in the morning;
another while, he believes he sweat of the Air corrupted by heat, has bred
these glittering worms; or takes it for the spittle that falls from the
planets mouths as they sleep: To conclude, let it be what it will, it imports
not. Were they amorous tears, her grief becomes her too well to afflict us:
besides, this is a time that Nature puts all her treasures into our powers, The
Sun in person waits on the beds of Ceres, and every Ear of Corn seems a
bakehouse of brittle and milky loaves which he has taken the pains to bake.
If any one complains that his too long stay with us makes our leaves and
fruits yellow, let them know, that this Monarque of the stars does it to make
our Climate the garden of the Hesperides, by giving golden leaves to the trees
as well as golden fruits: notwithstanding all this, it is to little purpose for
him to heat himself in his zodiak with the Lion, he cannot stay four and
twenty hours with the Virgin, but he will be inamoured, he will every day grow
colder, and at last how ever he leaves the title of virgin to the poor maid,
he will come out of her bed so enervated and weakened that six Months will hardly
recover him of his impotency. Oh how fearful am I to see summer increase
because I apprehend his decrease! it is he that sets at liberty the water, wood,
metals, herbs, and stones, that the frost had made prisoners, he appaises the
coldness amongst them and reconciles and mediates betwixt them an exchange of
Prisoners, he conducts peaceably each to his own home. And to show you that he
seperates the natures that are the most Joined you and I being but the same
thing, I never the less at this time consider my self apart from you, to
avoid the impertinence of saying to my self that I am,

Sir, Your servant.

To the same. 4. Against Autumn.
SIR,
ME thinks now, I could with a great deal of pleasure rail upon Autumn, if I
feared not to incense the Thunder. He is not content to kill us, but is
unsatisfied if he employ not 3 different executioners for one Death, and kill
us at once, by the Eyes, the Ears, and the Touch, that is, by Lightning,
Thunder, and the Bolt; the Lightning is kindled, to extinguish our sight by too
much light, and precipitating our lids on the apples of our Eyes, it passes us
from two little nights, no bigger then a penny, into one as big as the
Universe. The Air, by its continual agitation, inflames his Impostumes. In
what part soever we turn our sight, a bloody Cloud seems to have drawn between
us and the light, a dark gray Curtain lined with red taffety. The Thunder,
begotten in the Cloud bursts the belly of his mother, and the Cloud in hard
labor is delivered with so much noise, that the most savage rocks are split at
the Cries of this production. It shall not, though, be said that this surly
season speaks to me such high words that I dare not answer him; this insolent,
to whose sins there only wanted this to impute to the Creator the crimes of
nature, but if the injustice of 100 thousand Claps of thunder, were a
production of the Inscrutable wisdom of God, it follows not for all this that
the thundering season, that is the season destinated to punish offenders, should
be more pleasant, then the rest, else you must conclude, that the sweetest time
of a Criminalls life, is that of his Execution. I think that from this fatal
Meteor, we may come to the wine, since that is a liquid Thunder, a potable
wrath, a death that kills drunkards with health. It Is he, the tyrant that is
the Cause, the Definition of Rationale Animal given by Aristotle of man, is
false, at least for them that drink too much. What think you, may one not say
of a Tavern that it is a place where folly is sold by the bottle? and I doubt
the vapors are ascended as high as the sun, which may be the reason he goes to
bed adays so early. Some Philosophers of our age have swallowed so much of it,
that it made the Earth turn round under them, and if she does really move, I
think they are reelings that drunkenness causes her to make. For my part, I am
so great a hater of this poison, that although Aquavitae be the stronger venom
of the two, yet I pardon him because she is a witness to me that she has made
him give up his spirit. Thus we are in this season condemned to dye with
thirst; and since our drink is poisoned, let us see if the food which she spreads
on the Earth as on a table, is less dangerous then her drink. Alas for one
fruit that Adam Eat, 100 thousand persons dyed that were not yet born, and
Nature forces the Tree to begin the Execution of his own Criminal children,
he throws them against the ground with their heads foremost, the wind shakes
and the Sun precipitates them. After this, Sir, you will pardon me I hope, if I
disaprove that it should be said, here is good harmless fruit; how can he be
so that has hanged himself? and if we consider likewise how the stones fly at
them, have we not cause to doubt of their innocence? do you not see also that
the trees in producing their fruits are careful to encompasse them with leaves
to hide them; as if they wanted impudence to show their shameful or Privy
parts; But consider also, how this horrible season uses the trees at her
farewell, she lades them with worms, spiders, and caterpillars; and although
she leaves them bald, yet she fills their heads with vermin, call you these
gifts of a good Mother to her Children? and does she dese ve we should thank
her when she has taken away from us almost all our sustenance? But her malice
extends yet further, for she attempts to poison those, that are not dead with
hunger, I speak nothing but what i will prove. Is it not true, that of all the
things which are necessary for our use, none of them are remained pure but the
air: this Stepmother has choakt it with contagion. See you not how she
carries the plague a long with her, this disease without a tail, at whose
tail death hangs, in most of the Cities of the kingdom, how she over throws
the Economy of the Universe, the Society of men, covering with Purples
miserable wretches on a dunghill; and judge you if the fire she has kindled
against us be vehement, when one cole of it is sufficient to consume a man.

These Sir are the Treasures and Benefits of this adorable season, by which you
thought to have found the secret of the Cornucopia. To say truth, does she not
rather deserve Satyrs than Elogies? and ought we not almost to hate the other
seasons, because they are in her Company, and do follow, and go before her? For
my part, I do not doubt but one day this wicked one, will corrupt all her
Companions: And indeed we already see that after his example, they have their
particular ways of maiming us, and for the miseries they bring upon us, Winter
makes us implore St. John, the spring St. Mathurin, the Summer St. Hubert, and
Autumn St. Poch, for my part I know not what hinders me from procuring my own
death, for vexation that I cannot live but under their government, but chiefly
for that this accursed Autumn goes over my head every year to make me mad, She
endeavors I think to engage her Sisters in her crimes. For to conclude Sir,
big with thunders as we see him; would she not persuade us to believe, that
they altogether compose a monster that barks with the feet, she for her part is
a ravenous Harpuy that carries Ice in her mouth and fire in her tail; who
saves her self from an embracement, by a deluge, and at fourscore days old is
so passionately in love with Winter, for killing us, that she dies in his
embraces; but that which seems to me most of all strange, is, that I have not
all this while taxt him with his greatest crime; I mean the blood that for many
years he has covered the face of Europe withal. I ought to have done it to
punish him for that having been prodigal of his fruits to every body else, he
has not as yet given me one, that can say to you after my death I am,

Sir, Your Servant.

The second Description of the Aquaeduct or Fountain of Arcueil.
5. To my friends, the Water-drinkers.
THis Letter having been lost, the Author long after writ another, but having
almost forgot the former, he lighted not on the same fancies. Since he found
the lost-one, and being as he is no small enemy to labor and paines-taking, he
thought not the subject worthy enough, to purge each other Letters from the
conceptions that might be found in the other.

Sirs, Stand, stand! My head is the point of a River, I am under, at the very
fadome without swimming, and yet I fetch my breath at ease, you may well judge
that it is of Arcueil that I write you. The water here led in triumph marches in
files by a regiment of stones; they have reared a hundred Portalls to receive
her; and the King thinking that she was weary with coming on foot so far,
caused her to be ushered lest she should fall. These extreme honors has made
her so proud, that she would not go to Paris, if they did not carry her
thither; Having got cold with lying so long upon the ground, she has raised
her self a higher bed, and it is held by tradition that this Aquaeduct seemed so
fair and stately to her, that she came thither of her self to walk for
recreation: in the mean time she is shut in with four walls. Is it perhaps that
she has been convicted of having formerly been in the Sea's company, in some
shipwreck? It must be so, for here Justice is so severe, that the very
Fountains are made to walk up right and strait, and the air of the City is
so contagious, that she cannot come near it without getting the Stone.
Notwithstanding these obstacles she has such an itch to see it, that she rubbs
her self for half a mile together against the Rocks, she thinks long till she
counterfeits Hippocrene among the Muses of the University. She cannot hold her
water, for longing to see how from the mountains of Rongy in the air, she
pisses to the suburbs of St. Germain; she receives order from his Highness
Royal of what visits she is to make: And for all the private threats that she
murmurs out by the way: how formidable soever she appears, Luxembourgh has no
sooner spied her, but with one look only she disperses her on every side. Could
Love indeed join Arcueil and Paris by a stronger bond then that of life? This
Reptile is a bit for the Kings mouth: It Is a great sword that makes the
waterbearers put on their belt, it is an immortal Snake, that shrinkes into her
skin, still as she comes out on it: it is an Artificial impostume that cannot be
broake without indangering Paris's life, it is a Pie whose sauce has life: it is
a Bone whose marrow walks; it is a liquid Serpent whose tail goes before his
head: In fine, I think she is resolved to do nothing here but things that are
impossible to be believed: She goes strait because she is arched and bent: She
corrupts not although she be in the grave; she is alive under ground: She goes
on the top of those valleys whose doors are open; she hits her way in the
dark, and runs withal her force without falling. Well Sirs, after all these
miracles deserves she not to be Canonized at Paris under the names of St.
Cosme, St. Benoist, St. Michell, and St. Severin? Who would think in the mean
time, that a foot's breadth measures the destiny of a whole people? By this you
may know what honor it is to you that I who can, when I please, stop that
liquor which quenches the thirst of so many honest men at Paris, and that can
every day be served before the King, should yet descend so low as to style my
self,

Sirs, your Servant. De Bergerac.

6. Another on the same subject.
Sirs,
A Miracle, a Miracle! I am at the bottom of the water and yet cannot find
drink; I have a whole River upon my head, and yet I have not lost my footing:
In fine, I find my self in a Country where fountains fly, and where Rivers
are so dainty that they go over bridges for fear of wetting themselves: It Is no
Hyperbole, for if you consider the great Arches upon which she marches in
triumph, you would think that she is got upon Scaffolds to see the further, and
take notice in what places in Paris she is most needful; they are like so many
Bows from which she lets fly a thousand silver liquid shafts against thirst.
But Now, she was bare briched upon the ground; And at present there she walks
upon stately Galleries, she carries her head even as high as the Mountains; And
do not believe that her stature is the worse because she is vaulted; I know not
whether our Citizens take this Arch for the Arck of the Covenant, But I am sure
were it not for her, they would be all feign to make their last. She in favor of
them enhaunces upon Natures strength, she does things impossible for them, and
runns two leagues together with dead legs, that she cannot stir; to see her
spurt up as she does, one would think that after a long contest with the Globe
of the earth that lay heavy upon her, finding her self eased of a sudden, she
cannot contain her self and continues in the air whether she will or no, by
the swing that she gave; But what is the reason that at Rongy where she is only
troubled with a little gravel in her reins, she Urines but by drops, and that
in Arcueil, where she is troubled with the stone, she pisses over mountains.
Besides, this is nothing, she does otherguise miracls; she continually glides
out of her skin, yet can never get quite out of it; and more learned then the
Doctors of Hippocrates's profession, she cures with a look only, every day at
Paris above four hundred thousand thirsts. She grows cold with running, she
buries her self alive, in a Tomb that she may live the longer; Is it not her
beauty that obliges her to hide her self from the sun for fear of being
stolen away; or that having found her self courted in the Country, she is
grown so proud, that she will not go unless she be carried. I know that she
cannot be taxed of having too much vent, running as she does in a stone pitcher
(where so much as a ray of light cannot get in) yet I question her wisdom, in
going over the tops of doors that are open: But perhaps I blame her wrongfully,
for I speak of this piece of Architecture, without understanding truly what it
is, it is perhaps a petrified Cloud, a great Bone whose Marrow runs, a solid
rainbow, that pisses water in Arcucil to power it into this City, A paste for
Fishes that has too much sauce, a Nayade in lead that has the flux, An
Apothecary that gives the University glisters: In fine, the mother-Nurse of a
whole City, the Cocks being the teates that she gives us suck by: since then
so long an Imprisonment has so disguised her that we cannot know her, let us
go a little nearer, and view her as she comes out of her mothers belly; good
gods! how sweet she is, how fresh a complexion, and how smooth a face she has:
I hear her prattling with the gravel, and seems by her pretty lisping desirous
to learn the language of the Country: look nearer do you not see heroft
streacht at her whole length in this marble Basin; she reposes, and yet swells
under the drops of her source, as if she indevoured to suck her Nurce's breast
as she sleeps: you will not find in her so much as one fish; for the pretty little
one is too young yet to have Children; it is not however for want of knowledge,
for with her birth she received a natural light of good and evil; and to make
it appear to you, none never comes near her, but she presently shows them
plainly their deformities, or their perfections. At her Age however, because
her features are yet shapelesse, it is hard to discernwhether it be not a light
of four foot square, or an eye of the earth that weeps. No it is not, I am
deceived, she is too lively to resemble things that are dead It Is doubtless
the Queen of the fountains of this Country, and her royal mind may be
observed by her extraordinary liberality. For she never receives a visit from
any Ladies but she makes them a present of their picture; and in recompense she
has received from heaven the gift of miracles: it is not a thing that I invent
to make out her Panegy ricke; come near to her side, and you will see, that, like
that sacred fountain which deified them that bathed, she makes bodies without
substance, plunges them into the water without wetting them, and shows us men
that live with her without the use of respiration: and yet these are things she
does when she sleeps; and hardly has she rested so long as while you may go
four steps, but she quits her Inn, and stays not till she has received a
favorable look from Paris: her first visit is to Luxembourg, she is no sooner
arrived there, but she casts her self at his Highness Royal's feet, and seems
by her murmuring to ask of him in the River's Language what houses she must go
to. She Is come hither in such haste, that she is all of a water, and having
not had the time to light by the way, she is forced to piss in the Basin
before every body, at the Palace of Orleans. In the mean time, it is to little
purpose that she quarrels with our spouts, and sheds torrents of tears to move
us to pity her toil. Ingratitude is so prodigiously great now a days, that
the thirsty ones make mouths at her, abundance of Rogues pumpe her; and every
one is glad to see her bepisse her self. One cries that she is very unmannerly
to make such haste to come and lodge with the Citizens to piss in their
mouths: others, That she had need walk with so much state indeed, to come and
make nothing but fair water at Paris: others, That her impudence is very great
to stretch out her neck at such a length, only to spit in our faces: some
others say, That she is very sick, that she cannot hold her water: In fine, not
so much as those that seem to kiss her but grind their teeth at her. For my
part, I wash my hands, for I have many examples before my eyes, of the
punishments of Drunkards that slight her. Nature her self, that is Mother of
this fair Nymph, it seems, fearing that any thing should be wanting in the
state of her reception, gave mankind Palaces to receive her in: but this fair
one does not abuse the honors that are done her; contrarywayes hardly is she
got to Paris, but finding her self at the extremity, by reason of her too
long Journey, and foreseeing her end draws near, she runs to St. Cosme, St.
Benoist and St. Severin, to obtain their Benediction. This is all I can say in
praise of that stately Aquaeduct, and of her Hospital. My good friends, well
then, who wants water, will you have any Gentlemen? I Will warrant it fountain,
upon my life, and you know that I am,

your Servant.

7. Upon the shadow of Trees in the water.
SIR,
LYing on my belly upon the green banck of a river, and my back strecht, under
the branches of a Willow that views himself in it, I see the history of
Narcissus renewed in the trees, a hundred poplars tumble a hundred other poplars
into the stream, and these Aquatiques were so frighted at the fall, that they
tremble still every day for fear of a wind that touches them not. I imagine,
that night having made all things black, the Sun plunged them in the river to
wash them. But what shall I say of this liquid Glass, this little world turned
topsie-turvy, that places the Oaks under the moss, and the heavens lower then
the Oaks? Are they not of those virgins formerly Metamorphos'd into Trees, that
still finding their Chastity violated by the kisses of Apollo, desperately cast
themselves into the flood with their head foremost; Or is it not Apollo
himself, who, offended that they durst keep the air from him, has thus
hanged them by the feet. Now the fish walk in the woods, and whole forests in
the midst of the water without wetting themselves: there is an old Elm amongst
the rest, would make you laugh, which does almost loll on the other side, to
the end that his Image taking the same posture, he might make of his body and
his shadow an Angle for the fish: the river is not ungrateful to the willowes
for their visites; she has made the universe bored through transparent, lest
the down of her head, should foul their branches; and not content to have made
crystal with mud, she has vaulted the heavens and the Planets underneath,
that it might not be said, that those that visited her, were deprived of the
light which they forsook for her. Now we may look down on the heavens, and by
her the light may brag, that as weak as she is at four in the morning, he has
the power to precipitate the heavens into the Deep: Butadmire the power that
the lower region of the soul exercises upon the higher. After having
discovered, that all these wonders are but delusions of the sense, I cannot for
all hinder my sight, from taking this Imaginary Firmament for a great Laque, on
which the Earth floates. The Nightingale who from the top of a bough sees
himself in it, believes he is fallen into the river; he is on the top of an
Oak and yet is afraid of being drowned, but after having freed himself by his
eyes and his feet, from fear; his picture then seeming a Rival, come to
combat, he chatters, and warbles, and that other Nightingale to his thinking,
silently does the same, and cosen the Soul with so many Charms, that one would
fancy he sung purposely to be heard by our eyes, I think he by motion chatters
and sends no sound at all to the ear, that he may at the same time answer his
enemy, and that he may not infringe the laws of that Country he inhabites,
whose people are dumb: the Perch, the Trout, and the Goldenie, that see him,
know not whether it be a fish clothed with feathers, or a bird divested of his
body; they gather about him, and look on him as a Monster; and the Pike, the
Tyrant of Rivers, jealous to see a stranger in his Throne, seeks him; when he
has found him, touches him and yet cannot feel him, runs after him when he is
upon him, and wonders that he has so often passed by him without doing him any
hurt. I my self remain so much amazed that I am forced to quit this
description. I beseech you suspend his Condemnation, since it is difficult to
judge of a shadow: for although my Enthusiasms should have the reputation to
be very clear, yet it is not impossible that the light of this may be dull,
having been taken in the shade. Besides, what more can I add to the description
of this illuminated Image, unless that it is a visible Nothing, a spiritual
Camelion, a darkness that the night kills, a debate betwixt our reason and our
Eyes, a privation of light, that the light produces: In sine, that it is a slave
that is no more wanting of master then the end of my letters are of,

SIR, your Servant.

8. Of a Cypress Tree.
SIR,
IT was my design to have sent you the description of a Cypress, but this is
only the rough drauft, because it is so sharp that the keenest wit dare not
undertake it. His color, and form, makes me think of a Lizard turned upside
downwards, which stings the heavens at the same time he bites the Earth; If
there be among trees as among men diversity of trades, seeing this ladder with
awles instead of leaves makes me believe heis the Trees shoo-maker. I hardly
dare bring my Imagination near his prickly niedles for fear of being provoked
to say too much; of 10 thousand lances he makes but one, without joining them:
one would think it a shaft that the universe in rebellion darts at heaven, or a
great nail with which nature fastens the empire of the living to that of the
dead: this Obelisk, this Dragon-tree, whose tail is at his head, seems to me a
more commodious Piramid then that of Mausolus: for instead of carrying the dead
Corpse, as they did, into that; this is carried to the burial of the dead. But
I profane the Adventure of young Cyparissus the beloved of Apollo, to make him
act the persons of those monuments, unworthy and below him. This poor
Metamorphosis still remembers the Sun, he bursts his Sepulcher, and rising,
whets himself, that he may pierce the heavens, and the sooner arive at his
beloved: he would have bin there before this, but that the earth his Mother
holds him by the foot. Phobus, to make him gratify him, makes him one of his
vegetals, to whom all the seasons bear respect: the heats of the summer dare
not hurt him, he being their Master's minion; the winter frosts fear him as a
thing the most fatal in the world, so that were it not for Crowning the heads
of Conquerours or Lovers, he is no more obliged to uncoife, than the Laurel or
the Myrtle at the yeare's farewell. The Ancients who knowing this Tree to be
the soul of the Parks brought it to the funerals, to awe death with the fear
of losing her household-stuffe. This is all I can say to you of the body and
branches of this tree. I would now end with the top that I might conclude with
a point of wit, but I am so unhappy, that I should not find water in the sea. I
am upon a point, and yet cannot see it, because perhaps it has put out my
eyes. Consider a little I beseech you, how, to escape my fancy, he pines away
in his birth; he becomes less by growing, and I would say, he were a fixed
river, that glides along in the Air, did he not contract himself by running;
and if it were not more probable that he is a Pike on fire whose flame is
green. Thus I force the Cypress, that fatal tree, that delights it self only
in shady groves, to represent fire; for it is but reasonable, that he should be
once a presage of good, and that by him I may daily remember when I see him,
that furnishing me with matter for a Letter, he was the cause that I had the
honor, ending, to write my self,

SIR, your Servant.

9. Of a Tempest.
SIR,
HOwever I am here very softly lodged, yet I am not much at Ease; the more I am
rockt the less I sleep; round about us the hills groan at the shock of the
Encounter; the sea becomes pale with anger, the winds whistle against our
cables, the water squirts salt upon our Decks, whilst our Anchor and Sails are
drawn up: already the passengers Letanies are mixed with the Mariner's
blasphemies. Our vows are interrupted with hichops, certain ambassadors of a
painful deglutition. Good god! all nature assaults us, nay our very hearts and
stomachs rise up against su; the sea spues on us, and we vomit on him. One wave
alone does sometimes so generally enclose us, that whosoever should consider us
from the shore, would take our Ship for a house of glass in which we are sat:
the sea lances purposely to swell into unhandsome shapes to represent to us the
drauft of a Churchyard; and when I give attention, I fancy to my self that I
distinguish (as proceeding form under the Ocean) from amongst the dreadful
hollowing of the waters, some verses of the dead man's prayer book: Nor is the
water our only enemy; the heavens are so fearful that we should escape, that
they draw up a squadron of Meteors against us, he leaves not so much as one
Atom of the air, that is not employed as a hail-stone against us; the Comets
serve as Torches to celebrate our funerals; all the Horizon is but a piece of
red Iron: the thunders disturb our ears like a piece of rent camelot; and
seeing the Cloud so bloody and big as she is, one would think she were tumbling
on us, not thunderbolts but whole mount Aetna. Oh god! are we of such
consequence, as to breed aemulation between the Elements, which shall first
destroy us? It Is then out of design, that the water mounts as high as the
hands of Jupiter, to extinguish the flames of lightnings, and deprive the fire
of the honor of destroying us. But not satisfied with this, swallowing us up
in the great hollow, she has made in her breast, just as she sees our Vessel
ready to split against a rock, she claps between and brings us off, lest that
other Element should share in that victory she alone pretends to. Thus we are
sick at heart to see our Enemies dispute the honor of a defeat, where our
lives are to be the spoils; she is sometimes so bold, to daube the Azure of
the firmament with her foame, and to carry us so high amongst the stars, that
Jason may perhaps think, that it is the Ship Argo beginning a second voyage:
then darting of us to the very sand of her bed we rebound to the light in so
quick an instant, that there is none of us, but believes when our ship is got
up again, that she has past through the whole mass of the world, and is got
on the Sea at the other side: alas where are we! The insolence of this storm
spares not the very Alcyons nests, the Whales are stifled in their own proper
Element. The Sea endeavors to make us a tilt of our boat. There Is only the
Sun that does not join in this assasinat. Nature has blinded him with a
dish-clout of great clouds, for fear he should see it. Or else he being
resolved not to participate of this base action, and being not in his power to
remedy it, he got to the flying River side, and washes his hands of it. O you
nevertheless to whom I write, know that sinking I drink down my own error;
for I should be still at Paris in health, if when you command me to keep on
terra ferma, I had been,

your Obedient Servant.

10. For a Red-Lady.
MADAM,
I Well know that we live in a Country, where opinions of the vulgar are so
unreasonable, that Red-hair, a color that is an honor to the fairest heads,
is in great contempt: but I know very well likewise, that these stupids, that
are animated but with the froath of reasonable souls, cannot judge as they
ought of things excellent because of the great distance that is betwixt the
lowness of their fancy, and high excellence of those works of which they
ignorantly give their judgment. But whatever be the false opinion of this
hundred-headed-monster, permit me to speak of your divine Hair like a man of
understanding. Glorious fruit of the essence of the most beautiful visible
Being! intelligent reflection of the radical fire of nature! Image of the
Sun, the most perfect! I am not so brutish as to mistake for my Queen, the
daughter of him that my Ancestors acknowledged for their god. Athens bemoaned
the fall of her Crown, in the ruin of Apollo's temp's. Rome ceased to command
the world, when she denied incense to the light: and Bizantium first began to
inslave mankind, when she took for her Arms those of the Sun's Sister: As long
as Persia did homage to this universal spirit, for the rays that she held
from him, 4 thousand years could not make old the vigor of her Monarchy; but
being ready to see his Images broken, he took sanctuary in Pequin from the
abuses of Babylon. At present, the Sun's unwilling to warm other lands then
that of China; and I fear one day he will fix himself on their Hemisphere, if he
can, and not coming to us, give them the four seasons. Nevertheles, Madam,
France, by the power that your face gives her, is as able as was Joshua, to
chain him up, your triumphs like to the victories of this Hero's; are too
glorious to be hid in darkness; he will sooner break his promise with mankind
then not so place himself, as he may always at ease behold the work, of his
works the most perfect: see how by his love the last Summer he warmed the
Signs with a heat so long and vehement, that he had almost burnt the one half
of his houses; and without consulting the Almanacke, we could never distinguish
the Winter from Autumn by reason of his gentleness, because that beng
impatient to see you he could not resolve to continue his voyage so far as
the Tropic. Do not think that this discourse is an Hyperbole; if heretofore
Clymene's beauty made him come down from heaven, the beauty of M. is
considerable enough to make him go out of his way. The equality of your ages,
the conformity of your bodies, the resemblance perhaps of your humors, may
well kindle in him that noble fire; but if you are daughter of the Sun,
adorable Alexis, I am to blame to say your father is in love with you: he loves
you indeed and the passion that disquiets him, is the flame which made him
lament the misfortune of his Phaeton and his Sisters, not that which made him
shed tears at the decease of his Daphne. This fire that he burns with, for
you, is that with which he formerly burned the whole world, not that flame with
which he himself was burnt; he daily beholds you with tenderness and
tremblings, which brings to his memory the dysaster of his Eldest Son; he
sees none on earth but you in which he knows himself; if he viewes you
walking, Behold, says he, the generous confidence, with which I came to
encounter the Serpent Python; if he hears you discoursing of some delicate
matters, Thus, says he, I speak upon Parnass^s with my sisters. In fine, this
good father knows not, in what manner to express that joy which transports
him, when he imagines that he begot you: He is young, as you; you are fair,
like him; his temperature and yours is all of fire; he distributes life and
death to mankind, and your eyes do the same things as his; you have red hair
like him. I was just here in my letter, adorable M. when a censorious person,
contrary to reason, snatched away my pen, and told me, That I had undertaken
amiss in my Panegyric, to extol a young person for beauty, because she was
red-hair'd. I not knowing how more sensibly to punish this proud thing, then by
silence, took another pen, and went on thus.

A brave head, covered with red hair, is nothing else, but the Sun in the midst
of his rays; or the Sun himself is only a great eye, under a red Periwig; yet
all the world speaks ill of it, because few have the honor to be so. And among
a hundred Ladies, you shall hardly find one, because they being sent from
heaven to command, it is necessary, there should be more subjects then
Sovereigns. Do we not see, that all things in nature are more or less noble,
according as they are more or less red; amongst the Elements, he that contains
the most essence, and the least matter or substance, is the Fire, because of
his color; Gold has received of his dye, the honor to reign over the
Mettalls; and of all the Planers, the Sun is most considerable, only because
he is most red; the hairy Comets that fly up and down the skies, at the death
of Heroes, are they not the red mustachoes of the gods, that they pluck off for
grief? Castor and Pollux, those little fires, that make seamen foretell the
end of a storm, can they be any thing else, then the red hairs of Juno, which
she, in token of love, sends to Neptune? In fine, had it not been for the
desire men had, to possess the fleece of a red sheep, the glory of thirty
demy-gods would be in the cradle of those things, that never were born. And (a
ship being yet but a reasonable invention) Americus would not have told us,
that the world has 4 parts. Apollo, Venus, and Love, the fairest divinityes of
the Pantheon, are crimson red; and Jupiter is brown but by accident, because of
the smoke of his thunder, which has blackt him. But if the examples of
Mythologie do not satisfy the obstinate, let them consult History. Sampson,
whose strength hung at his locks, did he not receive his miraculous energy from
the redness of his hair? Did not the destinies make the conservation of the
Empire of Athens depend upon one red hair of Nisus? And God, would he not have
sent the light of Faith to the Aethiopians, if he could have found amongst them
but one red? One would not doubt of the excellency of those persons, if one
considered, that all men that were not made by men, and for whose forming God
himself chose and kneaded the substance, were red. Adam, that was created by
Gods own hand, ought to be the most accomplished of men, he was red. And all
perfect Philosophy ought to teach us, that Nature, which inclines to the most
perfection, always endeavors in forming a man, to make a red one, just as she
aspires to make Gold, by making of Mercury, but that she seldom hits upon it.
An Archer is not esteemed unskilful, who letting thirty arrows fly, but five
or six hits the mark. As the best balanced Constitution is that, which is
between phlegmatic and melancholy, one must needs be very happy, to hit
exactly an indivisible point. The flaxen and the black are besides it, that is
to say, the fickle and the obstinate; between both is the medium, where wisdom,
in favor of red men, has lodged virtue, so their flesh is much more delicate,
their blood more pure, their spirits more clarified, and consequently, their
intellect more accomplished, because of the perfect mixture of the 4 qualities.
This is the reason, why red men become not so soon gray, as those that are
black, as if Nature were angry and unwilling to destroy that, which she took a
pleasure in making. In troth, I seldom see a flaxen head of hair, but I think
of a distaff ill periwig'd. But I grant, that fair women, when they are young,
are pleasing; but as soon as their cheeks begin to grow woolly, would one not
think, that their flesh divides it self into little threads, to make them a
beard. I speak not of black beards, for it is well known, if the devil wear
any, it cannot be but very dark. Since then we must all become slaves to
beauty, is it not far better to be deprived of our freedom by golden chains,
then by hempen cords, or iron fetters? For my part, all that I desire, O my
fair M. is, that walking of my liberty up and down those golden Labyrinths,
that serve you for hair, I may soon lose it, and all that I wish for is when I
have once lost it, never to Recover it again, would you but promise memy life
shall not exceed my servitude, and that you would not be angry that till death
I style my self.

Your I know not what.

11. Of a Country house.
SIR,
I Have found the Paradise of Eden, I have found the golden Age; I have found
the perpetual spring: In fine, I have found Nature in swaddling clouts; one
laufs here withal ones heart; the Country Cow-keeper and I am cozengermanes,
and the whole Parish makes me believe that one day with a little pains taking
I shall be able to teach Robin Good Fellow to whistle. O Good Sir, how can such
a Philosopher as you, prefer the vanity, the troubles, and the Confusions of
a court, to such a quiet Retirement Ah? Sir if you knew that a Country
Gentleman is a disguised Prince, that hears the King spoke of but once a year,
and knows him not, but by some old Cousenship; and if from that Court where
you are, your eyes were good enough to diserne here the fat-fellow that keeps
your Pigs, on his belly lying in the grass, quietly snoring a nap of ten
hours all of one piece, cure himself of a burning fever by eating a quarter
of Rusty becon, you would confess that the sweetness of a quiet life cannot
be enjoyed under a gilded sieling, Return then I beseech you to your solitude;
for my part I believe that it is quite lost in your Memory: without doubt you
have quite forgotten it. But in troth, does there yet remain in your Memory
any dark Idea of this enchanted Palace, from which you have banished your
self? Ah I see there does not, I must send you a drauft of it in my Letter.
Harken to it then, this is it; for it is a Picture that speaks. Oh! at the
door of the house you meet a star with five accesses or passages; the Oaks
that compose it makes one, with ecstasy, admire the excessive height of their
tops, raising ones eyes from the Root to the Culmen; then precipitating them
down again. One doubts whether the earth bears them, and whether or no they
carry not the Earth at their roots: you would think that their proud heads are
forced to bend under the weight of the Heavenly globes, which burden they with
groaning support; their arms, strecht toward heaven, embracing it, seems to
beg of the stars their Influences altogether pure, and to receive them before
they have at all lost of their innocence: In the bead of the elements, there on
every side the flowers, having had no other Gardener but nature vent a sharp
breath that quickens and satisfies the smell. The sweet innocence of a Rose on
the Eglantine, and the glorious Azure of a violet under the sweet briars,
leaving us not the liberty of choice, makes us judge that they are both one
fairer then the other. The spring there composes all the seasons, there no
venomous plant buds, but her birth soon betrays her safety, there the brooks
Relate their travells to the pibbles, there a thousand feathered voices makes
the forest Ring with the music of their songs, and the sprightfull assembling
of these Melodious throats is so general, that every leaf in the wood seems
to have taken the shape and the tongue of a Nighringale, sometimes you shall
heare'em merrily tickle a Consort, another while thay'le drag, and make their
Music languish; by and by thaile passionate an elegy by interrupted sobbs;
and then again soften the violence of their voices, more tenderly to excite
Pity, and at last raise their harmony; and what with their Crotchtts and
Warbling, send forth their lives and their voices together. Echo is so
delighted with it, that she seems to repeat their aires only that she may
learn them; and the Rivolets jealous of their Music, as they fly away
grumble, much troubled that they cannot equal them. On the side of the Castle
two walks discover themselves whose continued green frames an Emeraud too big
for the fight: the confused Mixture of colors that the Spring fastens to a
million of flowers scatters the changes of one another; and their tincture is
so pure that one may well judge that they get so close one to another, only to
escape the amorous kisses of the wind that courts them. One would now take this
meddow for a very Calm sea; but when the least Zephyrus comes to wanton there,
it is then a proud Ocean full of waves, whose face furrowed with frowns,
threatens to swollow up those little fools: but because this sea discovers no
shore, the Eye as afrighted to have run so long without finding any coast,
quickly dispatches the thought, and the thought being doubtful too that that
which is the end of his sight is the End of the world, does almost persuade
himself that this place is so full of Charms that it has forced the heavens
to unite themselves to the Earth. In the midst of this, so vast and yet so
perfect Carpet, runs in with silver bubles and streams a rustic fountain,
who fees the Pillowes of his head enameled with Jessemines, Orange trees, and
Mirtles, and the little flowers that throng round about, would make one believe
they dispute who shall view himself in the stream first, seeing her face so
young and smooth as it is, which discovers not the least wrinckle, it is easy to
judge she is yet in her mothers Breast, and those great Circles with which she
binds and twines her self by reverting so often upon her self, witness that,
it is to her grief and against her will, that she finds her self obliged to go
from her native home: but above all things I admire her modesty, when I see her
(as ashamed to be courted so near her mother) murmr and thrust back the bold
hand that touches her. The Traveller that comes hither to refresh himself
hanging his head over the water, wonders it is broad day in his Horison when he
sees the funne in the Antipodes, and never hangs over the bank but he is
affraied to fall into the firmament, I could be content to be carried with this
fountain into the belly of that pool that devours it; but it is so vaste and
profound, that I doubt whether my Imagination could save it self by swimming.
I Will omit the other particulars of your little Fountain bleau, since she has
formerly charmed you as well as my self, and that you know her better; but
know nevertheless that I Will show you somewhat in her that is new, even in your
Painters Inventions. Resolve then once to distintangle your self from the
troubles of Paris: your steward swears he will not kill the brawner till your
return, he is resolved to make you lay aside that gravity which you dominere
over the people withal, in your Illustrious Offices. Last night at table after
having a little trinque, he told us that if you spoake to him by Thou, he would
answer you with Thee, and doubt not but he will, since he had the boldness to
maintain, that I was a fool because that you paying me no wages, I said I was,

Your obedient servant.

21. For Witches.
SIR,
SInce I had the honor to see you, there is so strange an adventure arrived
me, that to give any credit to it, you must have much more faith then that
Person, who, by the strength of his, removed Mountains. To begin then my
story, you must know that yesterday being on my bead wearied with giving
attention to that foolish book that you heretofore so commended, I went forth a
walking to dissipate the vain and ridiculous Imaginations, which the dark
gibbrish Gallimatias of the Sciences had filld me withal: and as I labored to
free my thoughts from the memory of those obscure tales, being got far into
your little wood, after a quarter of an hours walk, as I thought, I perceived
a broom staff that came and thrust it self between my legs, and made me, in
spite of my teeth bestride him, and presently I felt my self fly through the
empty air; and now without remembering the place where I was taken up, I find
my self upon my feet in the midst of a desert, where I can find no Path. I
returned upon my footsteps, but this solitude was a new world to me, I resolved
to discover further, but (not seeeing at all any obstacle) it was in vain to
strive against the air; my efforts made me only find an Impossibility of
getting forwards, at last much wearied I fall on my knees, and that which did
further occasion my wonderment, was, that in a moment noon was turned to
midnight, I saw the stars shine in the firmament with a bleuish fire: the
Moon was in her full, but much paler then ordinary, she was thrice eclispt and
thrice went below her Circle; the winds were Paralytick, the fountains were
mute, the birds had forgot their Chatterings, the fishes thought themselves
encompast in glass, all Creatures had no more Motion then was necessary for
them to express their fear by. The horror of an astonishing silence, that
governed in all places, made Nature seem to be in suspense of some terrible
accident, my fear began to be as great as that which the face of the Horizon
appeared troubled withal, when, by Moonlight I saw coming out of a vast Grot,
a tall and venerable old man, clothed in white, with a swarthy face, his
Eyebrows thick and long, a wall and frightfull Eye, his beard thrown over
his shoulder, on his head he had a hat of verveine, and about him a girdle of
Mayfearne woven in tresses, upon his gown near his heart was fastened a Bat
half dead, and about his neck he wore a collar set with seven several
precious stones; each of which wore the Character of that Planet that governed
them. Thus Mystcally dressed and carrying in his left hand a triangular Vial full
of dew, and with his right a sappy Elder Rod, one end of which being well tipped
with a mixture of all mettalls, the other served as a Handle to a little
Censer; he kissed the flore of his Grot, and after having pulled off his shoes,
he grumbling, brought out certain words, from the bottom of his stomach, he
went backward under an old Oak, four foot from which he drew three Circles
one within another, and the earth Obedient to the commands of this Nigromancer
trembling put her self into those figures which he intended to have made in
her: he wrote in it the names of the Intelligences, as well of the age, as of
the year, the season of the months, of the weeks the days, and hours, in
their different characters each in their proper place, and center, every one of
them with their particular Ceremonies. This finished, he put his glass in the
midst of the circles, opened it, put the small sharp end of his Rod between
his teeth, lay down with his face turned to the East, and fell a sleep. About
the midst of his sleep, I saw five fearne seeds fall into the vial, which
when he waked he took out and put one in each ear, another in his mouth the
forth he put again into the glass, and the fifth he threw out of the Circles;
but hardly was it out of his hand when I saw it encompasst by a Million of
Male-ominous creatures, as well Insects as others; he touched with his rod an
Owl, a Fox, and a Mouse, which instantly came into the Circles, making a
frightfull noise; with a brass knife he ripped open their stomachs, and took out
their hearts, which he wrapped up in three Bayleaves, and swallowed them; he took
away the liver, which he squeezed into a hexagonall vessel: This ended, he
reiterated the suffumigations, he mixed the dew and the blood together in a
basin, dipped in it a glove of virgin-parchment, which he put on his right hand;
and after four or five horrible houlings, he closed his eyes, and began the
Invocations.

He did hardly stir his lips, nevertheless I heard in his throat a humming,
as of many voices mixed together: He was raised from the ground about a palm,
and ever now and then he would fix his eyes upon the nail of his left
forefinger; his face was much inflamed, and he more disquieted. After many
gastfull contortions, groaning, he fell on his knees; but no sooner had he
pronounced three words of a certain prayer, but he became more strong then a
man, and without wagging, stood the monstrous shock of a most horrible wind,
that blowed against him, sometimes in sudden blasts, and sometimes like a
whirlwind; this wind seemed to endeavor, to make him go out of the Circles.
After this, the three Circles went round under him, there followed a storm of
hail as red as blood, and this gave place to a fourth much more terrible; 'twas
a torrent of fire, that cracked as it turned round, and divided it self into
globes, each of which burst in pieces, with great claps of thunder.

This was the last; for a fair light, white and clear, dissipated these sad
Meteors. In the very midst appeared a young man, his right leg was on an Eagle,
and the other on a Lynx, who gave to the Magitian three Vialls, full of I know
not what liquor. The Magitian presented him with three hairs, one plucked from
his forehead, the other two from his temples. He was struck on the shoulder
with a little wand that this spirit held, and then every thing vanished. This
was, when the Stars, grown pale by the arrival of the Sun, joined color with
the Heavens. I was just going to seek out my village, but the Magitian having
spied me, drew near to the place where I was; although he walked very slowly,
yet he was got to me before I saw him wag; he laid so cold a hand upon mine,
that it was benumbed a great while after; he neither opened his eyes, nor his
mouth: And in this deep silence, he led me over some fields, under the
dreadful ruins of an old uninhabited Castle, where the Ages for this thousand
years, have been laboring to carry the Chambers into the Cellars. As soon as
we were got in, Boast thy self, said he, (turning himself to me) to have seen
face to face the Sorcerer Agrippa, whose soul by Metempsychosis, heretofore
inspired the learned Zoroastres, King of the Bactrians: Since (almost an Age)
Ivanish'd from amongst men, I have here preserved my self with Aurum Potabile
in health, that no disease ever yet disturbed me. Every twenty years I swallow
a quantity of that universal Medicine which renewes my youth, and restores to
my body the forces it has lost. If thou did consider, the three Vialls that
were presented me by the King of the fiery Demons. The first of them is full
of it, the second of powder of projection, and the third of oil of bones: In
fine, thou art much obliged to me, since I have made choice of thee, from
amongst all mortal men, to assist in these mysteries, which I celebrate but
once in 20 years. It Is (by my Charms) in my Power at my pleasure, to render a
Country fruitful or barren, I stir up wars by breeding dissension among
those Genius's that govern Kings, I teach the shepherd the woolfs
Paternoster, and to the Cunning men how to turn the sieve; I send St. Hermes
fire (Jack in a lanthorn) to the Marches and Rivers to drown travelers, I make
the Fairies to dance by moonlight, I encourage the Gamesters to look under the
Gallouse for the four of clubs. I send at midnight the ghosts out of the
Churchyard, wrapped in a sheet, to demand of their heirs the performance of
those vows and promises they made to them at their deaths; I command the
spirits to haunt the uninhabited Castles, and to strangle those that come to
lodge there, till some resolute fellow compells them to discover to him the
treasure. I make those, that I will enrich, find hidden wealth. I cause the
thieves to burn Candles of dead men's grease, to lay the Hoasts asleep while
they rob their houses; I give the flying money, that returns again to the
pocket after it is spent; I give those Annulets to footmen that enable then to
go 200 miles a day; it is I that invisible tumble the dishes and bottles up and
down the house without breaking or spoiling them. I teach old women to Cure a
feavour, by words. I waken the Country fellow on St. John's Eve to gather his
Herb fasting, and in silence. I teach the Witches to take the form of woolves
and eat children, and when any one has cut off one of their legs (which
proves to be a man's arm) I forsake them when they are discovered, and leave
them in the power of justice. I send to discontented persons, a tall black man,
who makes them promises of great riches and other felicities, if thay'le give
themselves to him. I blind them that take Contracts of him, and when they
demand thirty years time I make them see the (3) before the (0) which I have
place't after: it is I that strangle those that by conjuring raise me and give
me nothing; I quietly quit those that when they have called me up, give me a
hair, an old shoe, or a straw. I take away from dedicated Churches, the stones
that have not been paid for. I, make the witches seem to those that are
invited to sabat nothing but a troop of Cats of which Marcou (a Gib-cat) is
Prince. I send all the Confederates to the offering, and give them the Goats
tail (seated on a Joint-stool) to kiss. I treat them splendidly but give
them no salt to their meat; and if any stranger ignorant in the Customs gives
God thanks, I cause all things to vanish, and leave him 500 Miles from his own
home, in a desert full of nettles and thorns. I send to old Letchers beds,
Succubusses and to the whorish, Incubusses. I convay Hob-goblins in shape of a
long piece of marble, to lie by those that went to bed without making the sign
of the Cross. I teach the Negromancers to destroy their Enemies, by waking a
little image in wax, which they throwing into the fire or pricking, the
Original is sensible of those torments that they expose the Image to. I make
Witches insensible in those parts where the Ram has set his seal. I give a
secret virtue to Nolite fieri, when it is said backwards, that it hinders the
butter from coming. I teach husbandmen to lay under the grounds of that
sheepfold which he has a mind to destroy, a lock of Hair, or a Toade, with
three curses, that destroys all the sheep that pass over 'it. I teach the
shepherds, to tie a bridegroomes point the marriage day, when the Priest says
Conjungo vos; I give that money that is found by the leaves of an old Oak. I
lend magitians a Familiar that keeps them for undertaking any thing without
leave from Robin-goodfellow. I teach how to break the Charms of a person
bewitched, To kneade the triangular Cake of Saint Woolfe, and to give it in alms
to the first poor body. I cure sick Persons of the Hob-thrush, by giving them a
blow with a forke Just between the two eyes. I make the witches sensible of the
blows that are given them with an Elder-stick. I let loose the Hob-goblin at
the advents of Christmas; and command him to roll a barrel, or draw a chain
along the streets, that he may wring off their necks that look out at the
window. I teach the Composition of the Charm's seals, Talismans, Spells, of
the Magique looking glasses, and of the enchanted figures. I teach them to find
the Misseltoe of the new year, the wandering herbs, the Gamahely and the
Magnetique plaster. I send the Goblins the shodmule, the spirits, the
Hob-goblins the haggs, the night bats, the scrags, the breake-neckes, the black
men, and the white women, the fantasms the apparitions, the scar-crowes, the
bug-beares, and the Shadows: in fine, I am the Devil of Vauvert, the Jew
errant, and the Grand Hunts-man of Fountain-bleau forest. With these last
words the Magician vanished, the Colors of the several Objects, which with a
thick and black smoke covered the Climate, disappeared; and I found my self
upon my Bed, my heart still throbbing, and my body in great disorder, by the
distemper of my mind; and with so great a weariness, that when I remember it,
I do not think I have so much strength left me, as to write at the bottom of my
letter,

SIR, Your servant.

13. Against witches.
SIR,
TEll me true, did not my last letter fright you? say what you will, I believe
the great black man made some disorder in you, if not in your soul, at least
wise in some of your senses. This you got by having formerly frighted me with
spirits, they have had their revenge, and I have maliciously avenged my self
for those importunities you have perfecuted me withal, to make me acknowledge
the truths of Magique. Howsoever I am sorry for the feavour, that I am told
this horrible Picture has brought upon you; but to wipe away my fault, I will
rub it out, and upon the same cloth show you the deceitfulness of his Colors,
of his strokes, and shadows. Consider then a little, (Although so many
witches have been burnt in all parts, convinced of having made a compact with
the devil, so many poor wretches upon the Pile have confessed to have been at
sabat, nay although some at their examination, having confessed to the Judges,
that they had eaten at their feasts children, which since their death have been
found alive and in health, who being questioned concerning it, know not what
was asked them, and understood nothing of it: Yet one is not obliged to believe
all things, that a man says, because a man can say all things: For I grant,
although a spirit, by a particular permission from God, could return upon the
earth, and implore the benefit of any ones prayers, must it therefore be
believed, that spirits and intelligences (if there be any such) are so foolish,
as to oblige themselves to appear in every corner, at the pleasure of an
ignorant brainsick Clown, according as his melancholy humor shall be more or
less strong, in his ill-timber'd head; or come to the lure of a ridiculous
shepherd, like a Hawke to the fist of a Faulconer; and to the capritious
humor of such a rascal, dance the Matachin or the Antic? No, I do not
believe there is any Witches, although many learned personages are of another
opinion; and I contradict no man's authority, if that authority be not backed by
reason, or if it comes not from God; God, who alone ought to be believed what
he says, because he says it. Nor does the name of Ariosto, although more
learned then I, or that of Socrates or Plato persuade me, if my judgment be not
convinced by reason, of what they say. Reason only is my Queen, to whom I
willingly subscribe. Besides, I know by experience, that the sublimest wits
have erred the grosliest, their fall being the greater, in that they are higher
then others. In fine, our forefathers have erred formerly, and their children
are subject to mistakes at present, and so will ours one day. Let us not then
embrace an opinion, because a great many hold it, or because it is the fancy of
a great Philosopher; but only because we see more probability it should be so,
than otherwise. For my part, I laugh at those Paedants, that have no stronger
arguments to prove what they say, then to allege, that it is a Maxim, as if
their Maxims were more certain, than their other propositions. However, I Will
believe them, if they show me a Philosophy, whose principles cannot be
questioned or doubted of, in which all the world agrees; or that has been
revealed to us from above; otherwise, I laugh at them. For it is easy to prove
all things, when one adjusts the principles to the opinions, and not opinions
to principles. Besides, although it were just to rest satisfied with those
great men's opinions; and though I should be forced to allow, that the first
Philosophers have established these principles, I would make them in their turn
acknowledge, that those Ancients, no more than we, have not always written
what they have believed. The Law and Religion of their Country, has often
obliged them, to accommodate their precepts to the politic intent and
necessity; therefore one ought not to believe a man in any thing, but what is
humane, that is, possible and ordinary. To conclude, I admit not that there are
any witches, unless some body will prove it: If any one can by stronger and
more enforcing reasons then my, own demonstrate it to me, you need not doubt,
but I Will say to him, Sir, you are welcome to me, you are he that I wished for;
I renounce my own opinions, and embrace yours. Otherwise, what advantage would
the wise man have over the fool, if he thinks what the fool thinks? It ought to
satisfy the vulgar, that a wise head seems to acquiesce the opinions of the
greater number, without manacling his own reason, that they may not have a
torrent to resist. Contrariwise, a Philosopher ought to judge the vulgar, and
not judge like the vulgar. However, I am not so unreasonable, now that I have
freed my self from the tyranny of Authority, as to establish my own without
proofs. You Will therefore please to permit me, to acquaint you with the motives I
have had, to doubt of so many wonderful effects, which are related of spirits;
I fancy, that I have observed many very considerable things, to free me from
these Chimeraes. First then, I never yet heard any story of witches, but I have
still observed, that it was said to have been acted above a hundred miles from
the place, where 'twas told me; this distance made me suspect, that they had a
mind to render it impossible for the curious, to inform themselves of the
truth. Add to this, that these men in the shape of Cats, found in the midst of
a field, without witnesses, (the testimony of one person only, ought to be
suspected in things miraculous) near a Village, (it was the easier to cozen the
clowns); 'Twas a poor old woman, (necessity might make her lie, to get money)
she was old, (age weakens reason, and makes one talk too much); she has
invented this tale, to entertain her neighbors withal; age decaies the sight,
she took a Hare for a Cat; age makes one fearful, she thought she had seen
fifty for one. For it is much more probable, that any one of these may happen,
which are every day seen, then a supernatural accident, without reason or
example. But pray let us examine the witches that are taken.

You Will find, that it is a very dull country fellow, that has not the wit to
disintangle himself, from off the snares that they entrap him in, whose
understanding is so stupefied with the greatness of the danger, that he is not
in a capacity to justify himself, and dares not give any pertinent answer, for
fear, least the preoccupated should conclude, that it is the devil that speaks
in him. Now if he says nothing, every one agrees, that he is convinced in his
conscience, and presently he is thrown into the fire. But is the devil such a
fool? he that at another time could turn him to a Cat, can he not now give him
the form of a Fly, that he may escape? No, witches (say they) lose their power,
when they are in the hands of justice. O! in good faith, that was well thought
on; Mr. John Guillot then, (whose father stole the sons estate) purchased by
means of 20000 Crowns, (which his Judge's place cost him) the power to command
the devils. The devils indeed have a great respect for thieves. But these
devils at leastwise, should have sent this poor wretch (their humble servant)
out of the way, when they knew the Justice was in search after him; for it is
not the way to encourage any body to serve him, thus to abandon his Creatures;
for those that are but spirits he will make great strides. I have likewise
observed that all these pretended Magitians, are so many beggars like the
Diogeneses. O heavens, is it then probable that a man would expose himself
(upon the hopes to continue poor, hated, and famished) to eternal fire, and to
the continual fears of being boiled in all places of Judicature? Satan would
certainly give to such a one not the leaves of an Oak, but good weighty money,
to purchase him Offices that would protect him from the Justice. But you will find
that the devils of our age are extremely simple, and have not the wit to
contrive so many sleights. That loutardly shepherd now in your Prison, that is
to be boiled the next Vigil upon what convictions do you condemn him? He was
catchtperhaps saying the woolfs Paternoster: for Gods sake, let him repeat it
and you will find nothing in it but great fooleries, and less hurt in it, then
there is in a dead devil, for which none are condemned: besides this, say
they, he has bewitched whole flocks, he did it either by certain words, or by
the hidden virtue of some natural poisons; by words, I do not believe, that
the four and twenty letters of the Alphabet hatch the occult Malignity of so
quick a venom, nor that opening of the mouths, shutting the teeth, clapping the
tongue to the palate in what manner soever, has the power to infect the
sheep, or cure them: for if you reply, that it is by reason of the Compact, I
have not yet read in Chronology, the time in which the Devil agreed with
mankind, that when they pronounced certain words (which were to be specified
in the Contract) he would kill; at others, heal; and at some others, that he
would come and converse with us, I Will grant, although he had passed such a
contract with any Particular, yet that particular person would not have had the
general consent, thereby to oblige all men to that agreement; nevertheless at
some words that a Lout shall unawares pronounce, he will presently fly unto him
(to affright him) and not give the least visit to some powerful, depraved,
eminent, and spiritual Person that gives himself to him withal his heart,
and one that by his Example will be the occasion of the loss of a hundred
thousand souls. You Will allow perhaps, That magical words have no manner of
power, but that under such barbarous words they cover the malignant virtue of
simples, with which all inchaunters poison Cattle; well then, why do you not
let them suffer under the name of impoisoners and not of witches. They confess
(say you) that they have been at sabat, and that they have sent Devils into
the bodies of some Persons that have proved Demoniacques. As to the
sabat-voyages, this is my belief; they anoint themselves with some somniferous
oils, and as while they wake they easily fancy to be carried aftride upon a
broom through the chimmy, into a Hall, where is feasting, dancing, and where
they kiss the Goate's brich. The imagination being strongly touched with these
apparitions, represents to them in their sleep the same things, as a broom
between their legs, a field that they fly over, a goat, a feast, and ladies,
and therefore when they wake they think that they have seen that which they
only dreamt. Concerning possession of bodies, I Will give you likewise my
opinion, with the same freeness. I find in the first place that for one man,
there are a thousand women. Is the Devil so great a Leacher to seek with so
much ardor to couple whith women? No no, but I easily guess the reason, A
woman has a more fickle brain then a man, and consequently more ready to
adventure in a Comedy of this nature; she is in hopes, that by speaking a
little Latin, making a few faces, and by putting her self into some certain
postures, thay'le believe her far beyond the strength and power of a bashful
girl; besides, she thinks herself so strong by her weakness, that the
Imposture being discovered, thay'le attribute her Extravagances to some
suffocation of the Matrix, or at the worst, thay'le pardon the weakness of
her sex. You Will answer, it may be, that we must not conclude that none are
really possess't, because there are some that are counterfiets and Cheates. But
if that be your Gordian-knot, I Will quickly be his Alexander: let us then
examine (without careing whether or no we oppugn the opinion of the vulgar) if
there have formerly been Demoniacques and if there are any now adays. That
there have been some heretofore I do not doubt, because the holy scriptures
assures us, that a Chaldean by Magical Art, sent a devil unto the Cadaver of
the Prophet Samuel, and made it speak; that David with his Harp conjured that
which Saul was possess't withal; and that our Savior Jesus Christ drove the
devils out of the Bodies of certain Jews and sent them into the swine. But
we are obliged to believe that the devils Empire ceased, when our Savior came
into the World. That Oracles were stifled under the cradle of the Messiah, and
that Satan lost his speech in Bethlehem, the dry influence of the three kings
starr; having without doubt given him the Pip. Therefore, I laugh at all
energumeuus's in our days, and will deride them till the Church commands me to
believe them, for to Imagine that the Penitent of Goffridy, the Nun of Loudun,
or the Maid at Eureux, are bewitched, because they tumble, show tricks, and
make faces. Jack Pudding, scarecrow, and Tabarin, would a done'em; why they
cannot so much as speak Latin: Lucifer has but little care of his devils,
not to send them to school; some will answer pertinently enough, when the
Exorcist declaims a prayer out of the Breviary, of which (in a manner) they
gale the sense by their often going over the same thing: but at othertimes
you will see them counterfit madness, pretend to a perpetual distraction in the
brain when they preach to them. Nevertheless I have caught some very
attentive, who watch for the verse in their hours that they may give an answer
to the purpose, (like those that will sing at vespers and know them not) waking
at the Gloria Patri etc. that they may gargle it in their throats, and spew it
out. That which I likewise find very pleasant, is, the contempts they entangle
themselves in, when they must obey or not obey. The Conjurator commanded one to
kiss the ground, as often as he pronounced the sacred name of God; this devil
of obedience did it very devoutly: but when another time he came to command him
the same thing, in other terms, (for he conjured him by the Co-eternall Son of
the Sovereign Being); this Novice of a devil, that was no Theologian, was at
a stand, blushed, and began to rail, till the Exorcist having appeased him in
more ordinary words, he began again to reason. I observe further, that as the
Priest raised his voice, the devil increased his rage, oftentimes at words of
very little weight, only because he had spoke then somewhat louder. And
contrarily, he swallowed, glib as oil, exorcisms that made me tremble, because
he being somewhat weary of bawling, he pronounced them with a low voice. But it
was a great deal worse not long after, when an Abbot took them to task; they
were not used to his style, which was the reason, that those that would answer,
answered so contrarily, and against sense, that the poor devils (in whose
forehead there was still some shame left) were lamentably out of countenance,
and all that day after, it was impossible to get a word from them.

They said, a good while indeed, that they found there were some unbelievers
present, and for that reason they would do nothing miraculous, for fear of
converting them. But this pretense appeared to me very gross; for if it had
been true, to what purpose did they give them notice of it; they ought rather
contrarily to have hid themselves in those bodies, to harden us in our
incredulity, and not do things, which were capable to disabuse us. You Will
answer, That God compels them to it, to manifest the faith. Well, but I am not
convinced, nor obliged to believe, that it is the devil that shows all these
tricks, since a man can naturally do them: To turn one's face behind one, I
have seen it done by Gypsies; to leap, who does not do it, except the
Paralyticks? to swear you meet with too many; to make certain Characters upon
the skin, either waters or some sort of stones, colors our flesh without a
prodigy. If the devils are constrained (as you say) to do miracles to illu
ninate us, let them do convincing ones: let them take the steeple of our Ladies
Church in Paris, (where there are so many unbelievers) and without breaking,
make it dance a Spanish Saraband in St. Dennis's field, we shall then be
convinced. I have taken notice likewise, that the Devil, (who is said to have
been so great a reviler) in the midst of their mad fits, never induces them to
rail one at another; to the contrary, they have for one another a great
respect, and are not likely to behave themselves otherwise, because the first
that takes offense, discovers the whole mystery. Why, is not your process (my
reverend Father) instructed in consequentiall crimes, which the devil accuses
you of? The devil (say you) is the father of lies; why then did you cause the
other day a Magitian to be burnt, who was only accused by the devil? for, I
say with you, that the devil is the father of lies. Confess, confess, most
Reverend, that the devil says true, or false, according as it is advantageous
to your crafty paternity. But (God help us) I see this devil start, when they
throw holy water upon him: Is it then a thing so holy that he cannot without
horor endure it; that is the reason truly that makes me wonder, how he durst
enter into a humane Body, that God has made after his own Image, capable of
the most Beatifique vision, acknowledged his Child, by the regeneration in
Baptism; marked with the Holy Oils; The temple of the holy Ghost, and the
tabernacle of the holy Sacrament; how had he the impudence to go into such a
place, that he must needs more reverence, then water, over which has only
been repeated some prayers. But we shall have a good issue of our business. I
see the Demoniach is very much disturbed at the sight of a Cross that is
brought before him? O Master Exorcist, how good are you, do you not know that
there is no place in nature where there are not crosses, since that every where
and in all substances there is length and breadth; and that cross is nothing
else but a length, considered with a breadth. If you grant it not, that cross
you hold is not a cross because it is Ebony, the other is not so because it is
silver; but both of them are crosses because upon a length, a breadth goes
travers. If then this Energumenus, has a thousand lengths and breadthes that
are so many Crosses about her, what need is there to bring her any others? and
yet you see this woman for having touched it with her lips perforce, pretends to
be interdicted, and is silent. Take, take a good handful of rods and whip her
me smartly; for I pass my word, that if it were commanded that all the
Energumenus's that could not be cured by a hundred stripes a day, should be
thrown into the water) not one would be drowned. It Is not as (I told you
before) that I doubt of the Creators power over the Creatures: but unless I am
Convinced by the Authority of the Church, which we ought blindly to obey, I Will
call all these great Magical effects; the fools Gazetts, or the Credo of those
that have too much faith.

I perceive my letter is somewhat of the longest, it was the subject that
carried me beyond my intentions; but you will pardon this importunity in a person
that has vowed to be till death to you and to your witty tales,

An humble servant.

14. To Monsieur Gerzan upon his Book, The Ladies triumph,
SIR,
AFter those Elogies you have given to Ladies I am resolved to be no longer a
man, I am presently going to offer my wax-light to father Bernard that I may
obtain of that Pitiful saint that which the Emperor Heliogabalus impetrated
of his Empiricks rasor, since that the Miracles that every day exaltes that
precious Mummie are so numerous, that they overflow the walls of the
Charity-convent, as far as your Parnassus. It is not impossible but that one
perfectly happy may do for me, that which the pen of an unhappy Poet was able
to do for Tiresias; But however it is but cutting off that bit which makes me
wear Breeches, it is a foolish thing indeed, never to mask ones self but in
Carnivall time: in truth I could hardly have believed it, if you had not sent
me your book.

Well did our Savior know, what one day you would say upon this subject, when
at the Confusion of mankind he would be borne of a woman, doubtless he knew
the worthiness of their sex. It Is likewise an Evident marque of the
particular esteem he has of them, that he has chose them to bear us, being
not willing to trust us in our youth, to our selves, but nature likewise has
taught us by the distribution of her riches, that she would advance the younger
to the prejudice of the firstborn, giving him beauty, every lineament of which
is an Army that at its pleasure overthrowes Thrones, ravishes Diademes, and
drags into captivity the haughty powers of the earth: And if like us they do
not apply themselves to Murders; if it be horor to them to wear by their
sides that which makes us detest an Executioner; it is because, it were a shame,
that those which give us life should carry that about them, which takes it
away; and likewise because it is much more honest to sweat at the Construction,
then at the Destruction of ones kind. In point of face then we are not to
compare: and in good faith, generally in all blessings of the earth, they
exceed us; and if hair make the principal distinction between the brutall and
the reasonable, men are (at leastwise in the stomach, the cheeks, and the chin)
more beasts then women; nevertheless in spite of all these dumb, but
convincing predications of God and of Nature, had it not been for you, this
deplorable sex was truckling under ours; you, that are feeble and ready to
fall from this life, have raised up many thousand Ladies that had no supporter.
Let them bragg (after this) that they brought you to light, although their
delivery had been more painful than was that of Hercules his Mother; yet they
are still much your debtors, who not content to have brought them forth all at
once, have made then triumph in their births. A woman indeed carried you, nine
Months, but you have carried them all above the heads of their Enemies for
twenty ages. They had fought, they had conquered, for other twenty; and you
within this four Months only have decreed them the Triumph: yes, Sir every
period of your book is a victorious Chariot, where they more proudly triumph
then ever the Scipios, or the Caesar's did in Rome: you have made a Country of
Amazons of all the Earth, and have brought us to the distaffe: In fine, one may
say that before you, all women were but pawnes, which now you have made Queens;
In the mean while, we see that you betray Us, that you turn your back to
Mankind, and fly to the other sex; but how can we punish you for this offense,
how can we resolve to defame a person that has got our Mothers and Sisters of
his side: besides we cannot accuse you of Cowardice, you that have taken the
weakest side; or tax your Pen with self interest, having begun the praises of
Ladies at an age that renders you incapable of receiving any favors from them.
Confess however after having made them Triumph; and having Triumphed in their
Triumph, that their sex would never have been Conquerous without the help of
ours. That which (in truth) makes me wonder, is, that you have not put into
their hands to destroy us the usual arms; you have not nailed stars to their
Eyes; you have not raised Mountains of snow, instead of their breasts. Gold,
Ivory, Azure, Corrail, Roses and Lillies, have not been the Materials of your
fabricque; like to our Modern writers, who notwithstanding the Sun's diligence
to get home betimes, have the impudence to rob him in broad day light, and the
stars likewise (but those I do not pity, teach them to walk so much a
nights) but neither fire, nor flame, has given you any cold fancies. You have
made Thrusts at us which we know not how to ward; never man was raised so high
upon women. To conclude, I find in your Book so devine conceptions that I can
hardly believe the Holy Ghost was at Rome when you Composed it; The Ladies
never came forth of the Press in so good a posture, nor was I ever better
resolved never to go more to the tomb of father Bernard to see a Miracle,
since Monsieur de Gerzan lies at the Church doer; O gods, once more how rare a
thing is your Ladies! you have by this Panegyrique so obliged the sex, that
now a days to merit a Queens affections one need only be,

SIR, your servant.

15. The Duellist.
SIR,
ALthough I am ready to burst with health, yet I have been sick this three
weeks; ever since my Philosophy was at the mercy of the Gladiators, I have
been troubled with the quartan and the tertian; I should have lost the
knowledge of paper if Challenges were written on any thing else: already I
cannot distinguish betwixt inck and blacking: and in fine, to give you an
answer, I was almost forced to write to you with my sword, so great a
reputation it is to write ill among persons whose plumes are never cut. God
almighty I think (if he would end my quarrels) must compass somewhat as
Miraculous as Caligula's wish; if all mankind had but one head; if of all the
living were left but one; that would be another duel for me to fight, you
would certainly be much to blame, to call me now the first of men, for I vow
to you, I have been second to every body above this month; your departure sure
must needs have desarted Paris, and made grass grow in every street, for where
soever I go, I find my self always in the field: In the mean while it is not
without hazard, the Picture which you caused to be made of me, has perhaps
been so well liked, that death it may be has a mind to the original; To that
purpose she brings me into a 1000 dutch quarrels I almost fancy sometimes that
I am become a Porcupine since no body comes near me but they are incensed and
pricked; and every body knows that when any one bids his Enemies, go mischief
himself, it is making work for me. Do you not see likewise that there are now
more shades upon our Horizon, then there was at your departure? it is because
(since that time) my hand has so peopled Hell that he spues them up again
upon the earth. It Is indeed a great consolation to me to be hated, because I am
beloved; to find every where Enemies, because I have friends in all places; and
to see that my misfortune proceeds from my happiness: but I am afraid that this
same Itch of glory, will oblige me to carry my name even to Paradise, sooner
then I would. Therefore to avoid these dangerous Prophesies, I conjure you to
return speedily, and restore me to my Philosophical humor: for 'twould much
trouble me that instead of finding me in my study at your return, you should
find in a Church, Here lies,

SIR, Your servant.

15. Upon a Recovery.
SIR,
You Will permit me to jest with your Feavour, now that she has turned her back
to you: by my troth, I wonder how she durst throw her glove to so bold a
Cavalier as you; for all the bravadoes she made at her entering the lists, I
fore saw the shame of her defeat; in the mean time, every body believed you
upon your way to the Elysium fields; and already some (none of your dearest
friends) published your arrival in that fearful City, whose suburbs you were
not yet come neerto: in troth, I admire, that you (who always make choice of
that which is most easy, there being but a stride betwixt your Chamber and the
Chapel where your Ancestors sleep) should so suddenly face about; how ever
I Will maintain it to the teeth of your stout-heart, that you have behaved your
self like an wise man. That lodging is not good, where the host never changes
his sheets; and although the Bed stands so firm that nothing can shake it but
an Earthquake, yet the Chamber is cold and rheumatick; they observe there,
perpetual fasts, and notwithstanding (according to the Flemish fashion) the
Beer is always by you, yet you drink nothing but holy water: besides you would
not have found there one reasonable creature, of either sex; for men are not
admitted there, till they have given up their spirits, and senses; and for the
women (although they have there the good quality to hold their peace, which
they cannot do here, yet they are so ugly that the greatest beauties amongst
them are flat-nos'd; Do not then repent (Generous, as we believe you) to have
made so good a use of the Privilege of Normandy: the shadows there below,
are not altogether so pleasing as those of your close walks; and I protest to
you, you were going to far a journey, in the twinkling of an eye, that you
could not have come back again before the Resurrection, nor could I have
procured any body here that would have undertaken to have told you from me that
I am,

SIR, Your servant.

16. Against a Coward.
SIR,
I Know that you have too much wisdom ever to advise a man to a duel;
therefore I ask your Counsel in one that I am resolved to fight: for (as you
know very well) stained-honour cannot be washed clean but with blood.

Yesterday I was called Fool, and one took the boldness before my face to give
me a box on the Ear: it is true it was in the Company of very honorable
persons; some that are ignorant in Composing such matters tell me, that I must
revenge my self or perish. You Sir, my dearest friend, whose judgment is too
good to excite me to any cruel action, tell me, Have I not been sufficiently
abused already by the tongue, and the hands of this Coward, not to provoke his
sword too? for although it troubles me to be called fool, yet 'twould much more
vex me, if a scandal should be raised that I was dead: if I were shut up in my
grave, he might at his pleasure and in safety speak ill of my Courage; had I
not better then stay in the world, that I may be always ready to chastize him,
when his temerity shall provoke me. Infalliably, those that advise me to the
Tragedy, do not consider that if I am the Catastrophe, he will laugh at my
valor; if I kill him, people will be apt to think that I sent him out of the
world, because I durst not stay here whilst he was alive; if I take away his
sword thay'le say I apprehended his being armed; if we come off with equal
honor, to what purpose should we expose our selves to the worst of all
dangers, (which is death) and decide nothing? Besides although I had Mars his
power, and could end the Combat to my honor, he might nevertheless brag that
he had force't me to commit a great folly. No, no, I Will not unsheafe, to drive
your enemy by death far from you, or to remove your self from him by it, is to
fear him: For my part, I fear not to be, or to let him be. He thinks it an
honor to him, that he never stood in fear of the Parques,; if he will have me
believe it, let him kill himself. I Will consult all the wise men for this
threescore or fourscore years, and if I and he has done well, I Will then
endeavor to live as many more, and repent, to expiate my cowardlinesse. You Will
think perhaps this proceeding (in a man of courage as I am) very strange; but
to speak my mind freely to you, Sir, I find, that life is so fine a thing,
that I had rather content my self with this that I enjoy, then hazard for a
better, and get a worse. This same Monsieur le Mat amore would, it may be, dye,
that he might be quickly out of his pain: But I that am more stout, endeavor
to live a great while, that I may run the hazard of being a long time, in a
capacity to die. Does he think to advance his credit, by declaring that he is
weary, and desires to return to darkness, his first lodging? What, is he
afraid of the Sun? poor fool, if he knew what a scurvy thing it is to be
deceased, he would not make so much haste. It Is not bravely done in a man to
hazard his life, before he is thirty years old, because he exposes that that he
knows not; but if after that age he ventures it, I Will maintain he is mad,
having known it, to venture it. For my part, I like daylight well, and love
not to sleep under ground, because one cannot see there. Let him not be puffed
up, though, at this refusal; for I Would have him know, that I have two or three
killingthrusts, besides other sleights; and I will not fight for fear of
discovering them. There are a hundred other reasons, that make me abhor Duells;
Yeas, I should go into the field, and the Sithe would perhaps dispatch me for
the other world among the grass: alas, my creditors wish no better, that they
may accuse me of banquerout. But does he think, if he had taken away my life,
that he had done with me? To the contrary, I should by it become more terrible,
and I am confident in a fortnight after, he could not look upon me, without
being frighted. Nevertheless, if he aspires to the honor of destroying me,
provided I am in good health, I permit him to brag in all places, that he was
my hangman; for if he had killed me, the honor would not be great, a few
Spanish figgs would do as much. He fancies perhaps, that Nature has used me
very ill, in denying me courage; but let him learn, that Nature cannot do us a
greater shreud turn, then to employ it against Fate; and that the least Flea
alive, is better then the great Alexander dead. And in fine, that I find my
self unworthy to oblige the blessed Torches, to weep upon my Scutchons. The
truth is, I love to be told, that I have all the qualities of a good wit,
except that of a happy memory, which I cannot away with, for some reasons.

Another thing forbids me fighting too; I have writ my Epitaph, which has much
wit and sharpness in it, provided I live a hundred years: but if I should
hazard my self, and die sooner, the jest would be lost. Add to all this, that
above all things I abhor sickness, and there is nothing more contrary to
health then death. Is It not better then, to encourage ones self to become a
coward, then to be the occasion of so many dysasters? so (strong in our
weakness) none can see us tremble or look pale, but for fear of having too
much courage. And to thee, comfortable Cowardice, I vow to rear an Altar, and
promise to serve thee with so devout a worship, that (to begin from this very
day) I dedicate this Epistle to the faint-hearted, the stoutest of all your
children, for fear (if I had sent it to some brave fellow) he might have
thought, that I was a man that would serve him, because of the four scurvy
words, that one is obliged to put at the bottom of every Letter. I am

Your Servant.

17. Against a Detractor.
SIR,
I Know, that so ignoble a Soul as yours, cannot naturally abstain from
detracting, nor is it an abstinence that I would condemn you to. The only
courtesy that I ask of you, is, that you would tear me so softly, that I may
seem not to feel you. By this you may know, that I have good intelligence. I
thank God, that he has given me a soul so reasonable, that I do not believe
the world in every thing, because the world can say all things; otherwise, I
should have applied to your disease of the spleen, a more powerful and solid
Antidote, than this of discourse: Not that I ever expected any very civil
actions from those, that have lost their humanity; but I could not believe,
that your brains had so generally been shipwrackt, upon the Rhetorical shelfs,
that you had born in Philosophy a man without a head. One would have wondered in
truth, that in so vast a body, your little wit did not lose it self. Nor was it
very long lived, for I have heard some years since, that you cannot leave this
life, but that your miraculous death will make you be canonized: Yeas, take
leave of the Sun when you please, you are sure of a line in our Letanies, when
the Consistory shall hear that you are dead, without losing your senses.
However, comfort yourself, you will not hold out the less for that; the Deer, and
the Ravens, whose wits are proportionable to yours, live four hundred years.
And if the want of brains be the occasion of long life, without doubt you are
he, that must write Mankinds Epitaph. Certainly, it is by reason of the brutish
instinct of your nature, that you make choice of gold and precious stones, to
defile with your venom. Permit me then, (although you pretend to exempt your
self from the power, that God has given men over beasts) to command you, to
spew upon something more foul then my name, and to remember, (for I believe,
beasts of your nature have some kind of remembrance) that the Creator gave a
tongue to those of your species, only to swallow, and not to speak. Remember
it then, it is the best counsel that you can take; for, although your weakness
excites compassion, yet, the same in Fleas and Lice that disturb us, does not
oblige us to pardon them. In fine, Simulacre of envy, leave your biting; for
although I am not over sensible of an Injury, yet I am very severe to punish
it: nothing could hinder the virtue of a Hellebore (which in French is called
Tricot) which I would chastise you with; nay and to show you that I am a
Philosopher (a thing which you believe not) I would do it with so little
animosity, that with my Hat in one hand and a good Cudgel in the other,
breaking your bones, I would tell you that I am

SIR, Your humble servant.

18. To Madam*****
MADAM,
IF all men were obliged to send money (as I am feign to do) to facilitate the
reading of my letters, The Balzacks had never writ, and the blind would be able
to read. But what? unless mine be made clear by the reflection of some golden
Lewises, I am sure they appear Hebrew to you; to open the mouth and move the
lips in all forms necessary to express our language, seems all Arabic; to
speak French to you one must open ones hand, thus my purse is become my only
Organ, by which I can explain to you the hard places of the Bible, and render
the Centuries of Nostredamus as easy to you as the Pater: In fine Madam, it is
of you alone that it may with truth be said, No money, no Suisser. However
notwithstanding your humor, I easily comfort my self, knowing that as long as
you change not, I shall be sure still to drive out of your Body the devil of
avarice more easily with the Cross of some Pistolls, then with holy water or
Exorcisms: But I am to blame to charge you with this baseness. Contrariwise
they are virtuous motives that makes you proceed thus; for if you fall oftener
under the Cross then the malefactors of Judea, it is because you believe that
the Just-ones can ask nothing unjustly of you, and that Gold the symbol of
purity, cannot be given you but with pure intentions: besides I think that as
you are a good Christian, so you are a better subject, for that you humble your
self before those that brings you the Image of our Kings; and that you being
of an exemplary probity, who will wrong no body, you are so scupulous in the
distributing your favors, that you rely more upon the embracement of ten
pistolls then of nine: this Oeconomie does not at all displease me, for,
holding my Purse in one hand, I am sure to hold your heart in the other; That
which troubles me, is, that that Image (which you often swore had made so deep
impressions in your heart) cannot stay with you three days without paying for
his lodging, but he is turned out by head and shoulders: for my part I believe
you have forgot the definition of a man, for all your actions prove, that you
take me for an Animal donant, whereas by the opinion of Aristotle I thought my
self an Animal rational: but I plainly see that I must resolve to cease to
be what I am, at that very moment that I cease to feel in my pocket; Rectify I
pray you this Error, that very ill becomes your youth, and this Generositie you
whereby you become pale: for it is a shame for to take wages of me that am,

Madam, Your servant.

19. Of a Dwarf.
SIR,
BY the affection I bore you (notwithstanding your undesert) I have made you
worthy of being my Enemy; if the Philistines heretofore had not died by the
hands of Samson, we should not have known now, that there had been any
Philistines; they were beholding to their death for their life; and if they had
lived ten years later, they would have died thirty ages sooner; thus you, in
spite of me, reap the same glory; by your baseness having compelled me to
punish you. I know I shall be told, that by killing of a Pigmy I shall not add
to my fate the substance of a glorious Epitaph. But to look uninteressed upon
the reverse of the Paradoxe, That Marius, that in three Combats made a grave
for three Nations was not esteemed a Coward for killing the frogs in that
marsh, wherein he cast himself; and Socrates by killing the lice that bit him
in Prison, did not lose the honor of being the prime man in the universe; No,
no, little dwarf, (do not think your self any other) endeavor to humble this
nothing of yours; and believe as an article of faith, (if you be still as
little as you was on your birth day) that the heavens permits it, to hinder
small Evil from becoming great: In fine, you are no man, what (a devil) are
you then? you are perhaps a Mommy, that some spirit has stolen from the
Physitian's College, to fright the world withal: nor is this very improbable;
since the Eyes are the Mirrors of the soul, yours is something very deformed;
nevertheless you boast of my friendship. O heavens, chastiser of heresies,
punish this with thunder. I have loved you then, and given up my heart an
offering to you; it seems then, you thought me so foolish, as in charity to
have given my soul to the devil: But it is not of me alone, that you have thus
ill spoken; the most flattering Elogies that come from you, are Satyrs, and God
himself had not escaped you, if you had known him. All things that breathe,
concerned in the destruction of Monsters, would before this have tempted me to
kill you, but they have forborne it, as being assured, that in me alone you had

Your Party, Your Judge, and Your Executioner.

20. Against Soucidas.
UDs death, master rascal, I find that you have the impudence to live,
notwithstanding you injured me; you, that signify nothing in this world, and
that are at best but a byle in Natures buttocks: you, that will fall so low, if
I give over supporting you, that a Flea licking the ground, will hardly
distinguish you from the pavement: you, in fine, so foul and stinking, that
makes men doubt when they see you, whether your mother was not delivered of you
backward. If you had sent at least, and begged leave of me for time for a
peccavi. But, without satisfying your self, whether 'twas my pleasure you
should see to morrow, or die to day; You have the impudence to eat and drink,
as if you were not dead. Ha! I vow I will so annihilate you, that it shall not
be true to say, that you ever lived. Doubtless you are in hopes to mollify
me, by the dedication of some troublesome Burlesque. No, no, I am inexorable;
it is resolved you shall die, and that presently, and then (according as a good
humor may render me merciful) I Will raise you again to read my Letter; for what
if, to regain my favor, you should put my name in the front of a farce. I
know, that all things that are foolish, do not cause laughter; and besides
that, to make something very ridiculous, you need only speak seriously. Your
Poems have too much of the shambles in them, and that I think is the reason,
that your Judgment of Paris does not sell. Then (if you will take my advice) save
your self, and fly to Pegasus his Bar, you will make there an incorruptible Judge,
since your judgment cannot be bought. To proceed; It Is not only from your
Bookseller, that I heard you made Rhymes, I did much suspect it before; for
'twould have been a great miracle, that in so corrupt a volume as your body,
the worms should not have had footing. Your very breath is sufficient to make
us believe, that by agreement with death, you are to breathe nothing but
infection; and your musk-comfits cannot prevent your stinking, in every ones
opinion. I am not incensed against this putrefaction, it is the fault of your
leprous parents. Your very flesh is nothing else, then earth chapt by the Sun,
and so dung'd; that if every plant that has been set, had taken root, you
would now have upon your shoulders a tall copps. After this, I do not at all
wonder, that you say, you are not yet known: four foot of dirt indeed keeps you
from being seen; you are so finely buried under the dunghill, that (if you did
not want a potshard to scrape you) you would be a complete Job. In troth, you
give the lie bravely to those Philosophers, that slight the Creation; if any
of them be now to be found, I wish they may meet with you, for after they have
seen you, they will easily believe, that Man may have been made of dirt. They Will
preach you, and make use of your own self, to draw you from that sad Atheism
you groan under. You know, that I do not speak by rote, and that I am not him
alone, that has heard you pray to God, to give you so much grace, as not to
believe in him. Why how now, impious wretch! God dares not shut a door against
you, when you fly from a beating, but it is presently by you broken down; and
yet you begin to believe in him again, only that you may have some body to
swear by, when your dice do not give a favorable answer to your avarice. I
grant, that yours is not a fortune that can bear a loss patiently, for you are
as beggarly as Diogenes, and hardly would the whole earth be enough to satisfy
you, that is, it has made you affront such a world of people. It Is no more
possible for you, to find out a street in this City, to walk in, that is not a
Creditrix, unless the King causes another Paris to be built in the air. The
other day, at a Council of War, the Marshall de Jurenne was advised, to put
you into a morter-piece, and let you fly into Saint Menehou, to compel the
inhabitants for want of provisions, in three days to surrender. In troth, I
think, that this stratagem would take, since your nose, that has not the use
of reason; that poor nose, the resting place and the paradise of fillips, seems
to turn up, only to get further off your famished mouth: your teeth (good god!
how I run on) are more to be feared then your hands, their length and
rottenness fright me. But some body would upbraid me, and say, that I torment
too much a person, that says, he has so great an esteem for me. O little
Jackanapes, O Puppit incarnate, can it be possible? but I see you leap at this
glorious surname? Alas, ask all the world what you are, and you shall see, if
every body does not say, that you have nothing in you of a man, but the
resemblance of a Baboon. I compare you not to this little four-footed man,
because I think you discourse as well as a Monkey; no, no, Tumbler, for when I
consider you thus flesh-forsaken, I imagine, that if you stir, your sinews are
dry enough, to make that noise, which you call words; that, infallibly, is the
reason you prate, and riggle up and down without any intervall. But since there
is a speaking, pray tell me, if you speak by stirring, or if you stir by
speaking? that which makes me doubt, that all the noise that you make, comes
not from your tongue, is, that one tongue cannot speak a fourth part of what
you talk, and that the most part of your discourses are so far from reason,
that one may well think, that you speak from a part that is not very near the
brain. In fine, my little Ape, it is so true that thou art all tongue, that (if
it were no impiety to adapt sacred things to profane) I should believe that
St. John Prophesied of you, when he writ that the word was made flesh: And
indeed if I were obliged to write as much as you speak, t'ware but necessary
for me to become Pen; but since that cannot be, you will permit me to bid you
farewell; Adieu then, little companion, for you would be but scurvily obeyed if
I were

Your servant.

21. Letter.
SIR,
SO many caresses of Fortune as I have deprived my self of, in losing your
friendship, persuades me at last to repent that I contributed so much to the
loss of it; and if I am in disgrace, I confess I deserve to be so, for not
being more careful to preserve my self in your esteem, the esteem of a Person
that makes the least that visites him, pass under the title of Count and
Marquess. Certainly Sir, you make your self the father of many great
Persons, that did not believe themselves so; and I begin to perceive that I was
much to blame, thus to neglect my good fortune; for by this account I might
perhaps have got a principality; There are some that condemn this Prodigal
humor in you, but they are ignorant, that it is your great desire of multiplying
the Nobility, that obliges you to these Magnificent actions, and that being
incapable of producing Gentlemen according to the flesh, you will at least
create them according to the spirit. The Romanticke Authors that you are
acquainted withal, do oftentimes give Empires to those that perhaps before
enjoyed not two Acres of ground, and your talent is so like theirs that it
gives you the same Privileges. It Is well enough known, that all those great
Authors do not speak better then you, because you say the very same as they do,
and that every moment you vomit out Cassander and Polexander, so undisgested,
and as you took them in, that one would think one saw in your Mouth the very
paper under the words: the Critics mutter, that the great noise that you make
in the world, is no sign of a great wit; that Empty vessels sound more then
full ones, and that perhaps by reason of the Concavity of your empty brain
your mouth (like to a Grot) makes an ill distinguished Echo of all the sounds
that strikes it. But you must comfort your self for all this; for that man
that can hinder envy from biting virtue, is yet unborn: for I grant, as they
say, that you are no great wit, you are nevertheless a great man; what, you
are able by your very shadow to black a whole tennis court; none hears your
stature spoken of but believe that one is a telling a story of a Cedar or a
Firtree; and others that know you more particularly provethat you have nothing
of man but the voice, assuring us that they have learnt by tradition that you
are an Oak transplanted from the forest of Done: it is not by my advice that
they give this testimony, for I have told them a hundred times that it was not
likely that you were an Oak seeing the most learned all agreed that you are
but a block; for my part I that have been of a longer acquaintance with you,
maintain to them, that it is very far from truth, to imagine that you are a
tree; for, although your superior part (which by reason of the situation is
called your head) does no reasonable nor sensitive function, yet I could not
believe it to be of wood; but I imagine, that it was deprived of the use of its
senses. And because that one humane soul being not large enough to animate from
one end to the other so vaste a Colosse; nature was forced to leave the upper
region, desert. And indeed, is there any body that knows not, that when nature
loged that, which in others is called wit, in your immense body, for all her
stretching and pulling she could never make it reach to your head; your very
Members are so prodigious, that who considers them thinks you have two Giants
hung to the bottom of your belly instead of thighs and your mouth is so wide
that I am sometimes afraid that your head will fall into it; in truth if it were
an Article of our faith to believe that you are a man, I should have strong
motives to suspect, that to give life to your body, they had been feign to put
into it, the universal soul of the world; You must needs be something very
great indeed, since the whole Community of Broakers are employed to cloth you,
or else that those people seeking to sell their commodities, and not being able
to bring all the streets in Paris to the market, have laden you with their
fripperie, that the market may walk about the streets: but this reproach needs
not trouble you, contrariwise it is very advantageous to you, it makes you known
to be a public Person, since you are clothed at the public charge, besides
many other things renders you very considerable, without adding to them; that
as the Egyptians judged of their abundance, by the thickness of the mud of
Nilus, after her overflow, so may we by your good case, suppute the number of
illegitimate embraces, that have been made in your suburbs. Well, but
concerning the Tree I just now compared you to, it is said, you are so fruitful
a one, that there is never a day, but you bring forth: But I know, that these
kinds of injuries come not near you, and that your calumniators (when the third
coat of the Cards was your Picture) durst not offer so many affronts to your
face; you then wore a blade, that would have had satisfaction of such
backbiters, they would not have accused you of impudence, as now they do, when
you was in a condition to change your color so often. These, Sir, in a manner,
are the abuses, with which they persecute your lamentable reputation: I would
make a little longer Apology for them, but that my paper being at an end, I
must be so to. Permit me then to take my leave of you, without the customary
ceremonies: for these persons that thus scorn you, and whom I have a great
esteem for, would think, that I were a servant to the Jamboncineux's servant,
if I had said at the bottom of this Letter, that I am,

SIR, Your Servant. Tambourineux.

22. Consolation for one of his friends, upon the Eternity of his Father in Law.
THe Doctors (better then I) will one day ease you of the life of this person,
let them but alone, their strokes none can put by. You Will answer me without
doubt, That he has already above a dozen times, passed by the time of dying,
that the Parque forgot him, and that having gone so far beyond him, she is now
loath and lasie to come back so far and fetch him. No, no, Sir, be in good
hope, till he has lived nine hundred years, the age of Methusalem. But speak
to him continually, and that scoldingly, roar, play the devil, thunder in the
house, let every thing be cross to him, and take some course to make him
aweary of his life: Why, Artephius and the Sybill Cumea, lived nothing in
respect of him. He was brought forth before Death was born, and that is the
reason death dares not strike him, for she is afraid to kill her father; and if
this consideration did not hinder her, she sees him so weak with age, that he
would not be able to go into the other world. Besides too, I think another thing
may be the reason, which is, that death, who sees him do no action of life,
takes him rathtr for a statue, then a living creature, and thinks it belongs
rather to time or fortune, to overthrow him, then to him. After this, Sir, I
much wonder, that you should say, that he, (being ready to close the circle of
his days) being arived at that point where he first set forth, he is becoming
a child again. Ah, Sir, you jest, and for my part, I cannot so much as
believe, that he ever was one: What, he a Boy? No, no, he never was, or Moses
was out in his Calculation of the worlds creation. Though, if it be permitted
us to name every thing so, that can hardly die, the functions of a child I
grant you; for he must indeed be more ignorant then a plant, that knows not
how to die, that which every thing that has life, understands without a
Master. Oh, had he been but known by Aristotle, that Philosopher would not have
defined Man a rational Animal. Those of Epicurus his sect, which demonstrate,
that the Beasts have the use of reason, must except this: Ah! if it were but
true that he were a beast. But alas, in the order of animated beings, he is a
little more then a Hartichoke, and somewhat short of an Oyster: insomuch that,
but that you think he has no feeling, I should believe him to be that which
they call the Sensitive plant. Confess then, that you are to blame, to be
weary of his life; he has not yet lived, he has only slept, have patience at
least, till he has taken a nap. Has no body told him, are you sure, that
death and sleep are brothers? He speaks perhaps a scrupule, (being tender
conscience'd) having enjoyed me, to have any thing to do with the other. Infer
not hence, that I would by this prove, that the person of whom we speak is a
foolish man; not at all, he is nothing less then a man: For however he may
have been baptized like us, that is a privilege the parish-Bells enjoy as well
as he. I could speak of his life, till I end my own, to allay your griefs; but
sleep begins to cause so great weaknesses in my hand, that my head for company
falls upon my ear. Ah, as I live I write I know not what. Farewell, goodnight.

SIR, Your Servant.

23. Against a Plagiary.
SIR,
SInce our friend planders our Conceptions, it is a sign he esteems us; he
would not take them, if he did not believe them good; and we are much to blame
to take it ill, that having no children of his own, he adopts ours. That which
troubles me, (for you know, that I am a revenger of wrongs, and am very much
inclined to distributive Justice) is, to see him attribute to his wicked
Imagination, the good services done him by his Memory, and that he calls
himself the father of a thousand high fancies, which at most he has been but a
midwife to, often. This, Sir, let us brag, that we write better then he, whilst
he writes just as we do; and laugh, to see him at this age have a
writing-Master by him, since by it he does us no other mischief, then to render
our works more legible. We ought contrariwise receive with respect, those wise
and moral advertisments, by which he endeavors to reclaim the extravagances
of our youth; yea certainly, we ought to give more faith to them, and make no
more doubt of them, then of the Evangelists; for all the world knows, they are
not things that he has devised. In troth, to have such a friend, is to
maintain a Press at an easy rate. For my part, I imagine, (for all his great
Manuscripts) that if after his death, they make an Inventorie of his Study of
Books, that is, of those that proceeded from his own brain, all his works
together, (taking away that which is not his) will make a Library of white
paper. He assumes the spoils of the dead, and he believes to have invented that
which he remembers. But it is but an ill proof, of the noble extraction of his
thoughts, to derive their antiquity but from a man that is still alive: But by
this he concludes for the Metempsychosis, and shows, that if he should make use
of what Socrates was the Author of, he should not rob him, he himself having
formerly been the same Socrates that invented them: And then, has he not
memory enough to be rich with that only? why he has one so vast, that he
remembers that which was said, thirty Ages before he was in the world: Obtain
of him for me, (I that am a little more sensible then the dead) a permission to
date my thoughts, that my posterity may not remain doubtful. There was
heretofore a goddess, Echo, this without doubt must be the god; for, like
her, he never says any thing, but what others have said before him, and
repeats it so verbatim, that transcribing the other day one of my Letters, (he
called it composing) he had the most ado in the world, to subscribe, Your
servant, Beaulieu, because at the end of it there was,

Your Servant, De Bergerac.

24. Another, on the same subject.
SIR,
AFter having put in a heat against us, this man, that is nothing but phlegm,
do we not fear, that one of these days they will accuse us of burning the
River? This water-wit murmurs continually, like the fountains, yet no body
understands what he says. Ah! Sir, what a strange accident this man makes me
foresee at the end of the world, which is, that if he dies not, till his memory
have an end, the resurrection trumpets will never be silent, this only faculty
in him leaves room for no other; and he is so great a persecutor of common
sense, that he makes me suspect, that the universal judgment was promised,
that such as he might have some, who had none in particular. And to speak
ingenuously, who ever sends him out of this world, will be much to blame, to
dispatch him without reason. Nevertheless he speaks as much as all Authors,
for they all seem to have spoken but for him: He never opens his mouth, but we
find a theft in it, and he is so accustomed to thieving, that when he holds his
tongue, it is that he may steal from those that are dumb. For all this, ours is
but a false valor, and we unjustly share the advantages of the combat, to
oppose our understandings that have three faculties, to his, that has but one.
Therefore it is, that he has a great vacuum in his head, he ought to be
pardoned, since it was impossible for Nature to fill it with a third part of a
reasonable soul: But to make amends for that, he never lets it sleep, he still
employes it in undressing. And those great Philosophers, who by professing
poverty, thought to have freed themselves from contribution, pay him every day
(the very poorest amongst them) a tax of ten Conceptions, and this wretched
wit-stealer lets not one escape, but imposes on them according to the extent of
their income: It Is to little purpose that they hide themselves, he will make them
disburse, and speak English: Nay, sometimes they must be content to see their
whole Estate confiscated, when they have not wherewithal to pay the tax. He
exercises these rapines in safety, for Greece and Italy being under other
Princes, he shall not be questioned in England for the robberies he has done
them. I believe he thinks, because that the Heathens are our enemies, that what
he plunders them of, is lawful prize. This, Sir, is the reason, that in every
page of his Epistles, we see the Cameter of the living and of the dead; after
this, you need not doubt, but that (if at the resurrection, every one takes
that which belongs to him) the sharing of his writings, will be the last
difference among men. After he has been five of six days in our companies,
rifling us, more laden with points of wit, then a Porcupine, he goes and sticks
them in his Epigrams and Sonnets, like Pins into a Cushamet: Yet for all this,
he boasts, that there is nothing in his Writings, that does not as justly
belong to him, as the Paper and Ink which he paid for; that the twenty four
Letters of the Alphabet are as much his, as ours, and consequently, the
disposition of them: And that Aristotle being dead; he may lawfully seize upon
his books, since his lands, which are immoveables, are not now without Masters.
But besides all this, when we find sometimes the cloak upon his shoulders, he
adopts it his own, and protests, that he never lodged in his memory any fancy
but his own; but that may well enough be, his writings being the Hospital
where he receives mine. Now if you should ask me the definition of this man, I
would answer you, That he is an Echo, that has purged himself of a short
breath, and that would have been dumb, if I had never spoke. I for my part am
an unfortunate father, that lament the loss of my children. It Is true, he is
very generous of his wealth, for it is more mine then his own; and it is true
too, that if they were on fire, I should, in throwing water on them, save
nothing but mine own. Therefore I retract all that I have reproch'd him with:
And indeed, of what fault can I accuse an innocent, that has done nothing? and
although he has erred, he has done it but after me. I no longer accuse him
then, we are two good friends; and I have always been so concerned for him,
that he never yet was employed in any thing, but that I did it to his hand; his
works were my only thoughts, and when I was a studying, I thought of what he
was to write. Rest assured then, I beseech you, that all that I before seemed
to upbraid him with, was, only to persuade him, to spare his ridiculous
comparisons of our fathers, for that is not the way to arrive to what he
aspires, to be an incomparable Author, seeing that it is a sign, his Bias is
strong to theeving, to filch for rags, and to have no better flowers of
eloquence, then some even as's, so that is, or such like. How now, is not the
thunder in the middle region of the air, far enough from his reach? nor the
torrents of Thrace rapid enough, to hinder his diverting them into this Kingdom
by force, to marry them to his comparisons? I cannot find the drift of this
filcher, unless it be that this Flegmatique, endeavors to make of his
aquatique fancies torrents, for fear they should become corrupt, or that he
would warm his cold conceits with the fire of lightning and thunder; but
since, in spite of what I can say to him, he will not be able to overcome the
Tyrannical malignity of his Planet, and since this theevish inclination has
so great an Empire over him, let him gleane at least on the good Autors: for
what booty does he pretend to find in so miserable a one as I am, he will load
himself with triflles; nevertheless he consumes whole nights and days in
stripping me from head to foot: and this is so true that I will show you in all
his Letters the beginnings and endings of Mine, I am

SIR, Your servant.

25. Against a great man.
AT last I have seen thee (mighty man): My eyes have performed great journeyes
upon you; and that day that you corporally rouled to me, I had the leisure to
run through your hemisphear; or, to speak more truly, to discover some parts
and Cantons of it: But my eyes being not the universal ones of the world,
permit me to give your picture to Posterity, who will one day be glad to know
how you were fashioned. They must know then, in the first place, that nature
who placed you a head upon your breast, would give you no neck purposely
thereby to take it from the malignity of your Horoscope; That your soul, is so
big that it would very well serve one a little slender for a body; that you
have that which in men they call Face, so much below your shoulders, and those
that are called shoulders, so high above your face, that you resemble, a St.
Dennis, carrying his head in his hands: yet I tell but half of what I see, for
if I carry my eyes a little lower to your gorbelly, I imagine I see in Timbo
the faithful in Abraham's bosom, Saint Ursula that Carries the 11 Thousand
virgins in her apron, or the Trojan Nag, stuff with forty thousand men: but I
am deceived, you are something that is bigger. I have more reason to believe
that you are a wenne in the intrails of Nature, and twin to the earth: why, you
never open your mouth, but you put us in mind of the fable of Phaeton, where
the globe of the earth speaks; the globe of the earth I say, and if the earth
be an animal, you being as round and as big as she, I Will maintain that you are
her Male, and that she safely was delivered of America, which you made her big
withal: well! what think you, Is the Picture like for the first touch? By the
description of your sphere of flesh, all whose members are so round that each
of them make a Circle, and by the universal roundnesse of your thick Mass,
have I not toldour Nepheus, that you were not a Chouse, since you go roundly to
work? Could I better convince of falsehood those that threats you with
Poverty, then by making it appear to them that you will roll continually. And in
fine, was it possible more intelligibly to demonstrate that you are a Miracle,
since the good case you are in makes your spectator take you for a lump of
Veale that struts about upon its lardons. I believe you will object that a bowl,
a Globe, nor a piece of flesh, are no writers, and that your fair Sydon has
made you Triumph upon the Theaters of Venice: but, between you and I, you know
where the business lies, every body in Italy knows that this tragedy is
Aesopes Crow; that you knew it by heart before you invented it, for it is taken
from Guarini's Aminte et Pastor fide from Cavalier Marin and a hundred others:
one may call it the Piece of Pieces, and you not only a Bowl, a Globe, and a
lump of flesh; but likewise a looking glass that takes all that is set before
it, but that you represent the Language but ill. Confess then, and I Will not
speak on it, but i will excuse you, and tell the world that your Queen of Carthage
must needs be a body composed of all natures, being of Africa, whence comes all
the Monsters. I Will add besides that that piece took so well with all the Nobles
of that republique that they like the actors played with it: some Block head
perhaps by reason of the barrenness of wit in it, will conclude, that you
thought of nothing when you made it: But all the learned know that to avoid
obscurity you have placed the good things in it very thin, to make them the
more clear; and what if they had proved that from the nettle to the fire tree,
that is, from Tasso to Corneille, all the Poets have brought forth your Child,
they could infer nothing from it but that an ordinary soul being not big
enough to quicken your great Mass from one end to another, you were animated
with that of the world, and that is now the cause that you imagine with the
brain of all men; but they are far enough from granting that you imagine.
They maintain, that it is not possible that you can so much as speak; or if
you do, it is as did heretofore the Sibill's grot, that spoke without knowing
it: but although the fumes that come from your Mouth (your bung I would say)
are as capable to intoxicate as were those that were exhaled from that grot, I
see nothing in it that is Prophetical, that makes me think that you are at
most but the seven sleepers den, that snore through your mouth. But good gods!
what is it that I see? you seem more swelled now then ordinary. Is it anger then
that does it? Already your legs and your head is so united by their extention
to the Circumference of your Globe, that you are now but a bundle: you fancy
perhaps that I jest; in truth you guess right, and the miracle is not great
that a bowl should hit the Mark. I can besides assure you that if a basting
could be sent in writing, you would read my letter with your shoulders; and do
not wonder at my proceeding: for your vast Extent makes me so really believe
you, the earth; that I would willingly plant some timber upon you, to see how
it could bear? Do you think then, (because a man can fully beat you in 24
hours, and that he cannot in a day Chine but one of your Omoplates) I will
trust to the Hangman for your death. No, no, I my self will be your Parque; and
there had already been an end of you, if I were well delivered from the spleen;
to cure which, the Physicians have ordered me four or five takings of your
Impertinencies. But as soon as I am become banquerout of pleasure, and that I
am weary of laughing, rest assured, that I will make you no longer count your
self amongst those things that live. Adieu, it is done. I would have ended my
Letter as I use to do, but you would not for all that have believed, that I was
your thrice humble, obedient, and affectionate; therefore, great bursten-gut.

Servant to the Bedstraw.

24. Against Scarron.
SIR,
YOu demand of me my judgment of this Fox, to whom those grapes seem too green,
that he cannot reach. I am of opinion, that as one arives to the knowledge of a
cause by its effects, so to know the strength of this man's wit, or his
weaknesses, we need only cast an eye on his productions. But I am out, to say
productions, for he never could do otherwise then destroy; witness the god of
the Roman Poets, whom at this time he makes rave. I Will confess to you then,
concerning that, in which you demand my opinion, that I never saw a ridiculous
thing more serious, nor a serious more ridiculous, then his. The people approve
of him, by that you may conclude. It Is not, but that I esteem his judgment;
however, in having chose to write a mock-style; (for to write as he does, is to
mock the world) his companions may, if they please to heighten his glory, say,
That he treads in a path, wherein none has gone before him, and that he has
had no guide. I grant it. But let them lay their hands upon their consciences,
say true, is it not easier to make Virgiis Aeneids like Scarron, then to make
Scarrots Aeneids like Virgil? For my part, when I see him to profane Apollo's
holy art, methinks I hear an angry frog croak, at the foot of Parnassus. You Will
say perhaps, that I use this Author something ill, to reduce him to the
Insects; but since you oblige me to draw his picture, to do it, I cannot
proceed otherwise, (having never seen him) then to follow that Idea, which I
have received of him from all his friends: There is not one but confesses, that
he has left off being man, without dying, and is nothing else but form. But by
what shall we know him? he goes contrary to the common opinion, and he is
arrived to this point of bestiality, to banish points of wit and fancy from
compositions; when reading, he unfortunately lights upon one: to see the
horror he is surprised with, one would think, that his eyes are lighted upon a
Basilisk, or that he has trod upon an Aspe. If the earth had never known
other points, then the pricks of Thistles, Nature has so formed him, that he
would not have disliked them; for between you and I, when he seems to be
sensible, that a point pricks him, I cannot but believe, that he does it to
persuade us, that he is not insensible: But whether he be so or no, I Would let
him alone, if he did not erect Trophies to stupidity, and support them by his
example. How? this good Gentleman would have one write nothing, but what one
has made, as if we now spoke French, only because heretofore they spoke
Latin; or were not reasonable till we are molded. We are then much obliged to
Nature, for not making him the first man; for without doubt he would never have
spoke, if he had heard braying first. It Is true, to make his conceits
understood, he makes use of a kind of Idiotisme, that makes the world wonder,
how the twenty four Letters of the Alphabet can meet in so many fashions, and
say nothing. After this, you will ask me, what judgment I make of this man, that
saying nothing, speaks continually? Alas, Sir, none at all, unless it be, that
his disease must needs be well rooted in him, that it is not yet cured, although
he has fluxed at the mouth above fifteen years. But concerning his infirmity,
it is believed as a miracle of this holy man, that he had no wit till he was
brainsick; that had she not troubled the economy of his temperature, he was
cut out for a great fool; and that nothing can blot out his name which he has
plastered on the front of memory, since Mercury, and Larchet could not do it.
Those that jeer him, add, that he lives by dying, because that the Neapolitan
drogme, which has cost him dear, and raised him to preferment in the number of
Authors, he sells every day to the Stationers. But let them say what they will,
he will never dye with hunger; for, provided his chair be not defective, I am very
confident, he will rub out well enough till death; if he had as well secured his
Poems against the fury of oblivion, they would not be in danger as they are, to
be inhumed in blew paper; nor is there any likelihood, that that paltry-style,
and those tales of Robin Hocd, will eternize Scarron so many days, as the
history of Aeneas has done Virgil: Methinks he would do a great deal better, to
get an Order from the Court, commanding all fish-wives to speak the same
Gibberish, lest introducing new ^rebus's instead of the old ones, before four
months be at an end, one be doubtful in what language he has write. But alas,
in this earthly habitation, who can promise himself eternity in men's good
opinions, when it depends on the vicissitude of there proverbs: I Will assure
you, the thoughts of it has made me often judge, that he had need make use of
some points and sharpnesses of wit; to prick forward the horses that draw the
chariot of his renown, otherwise she is not likely (if she goes as slow as he
does) to go far: Why? the Greeks were less time in besieging Troy, than he
has been about his. To see him without arms and legs; (if his tongue were
quiet) one would take him for a sprout, planted in the porch of Death's Temple.
He does well to speak, otherwise one could not tell, whether he were alive or
no; and I am much mistaken, if every one did not say, (after having so long
heard him houl under Larchet) that he is a good Violon. Do not imagine, Sir,
that I give him this thrust, to fence with the equivocation of Violon or
others, I can assure you, if ever the Parque should have a fancy to dance a
Saraband, she would take in each hand a couple of Scarron's, instead of
Castagnetes; or at least wise she would hold their tongues between her fingers
and make use of them as they of do the Lazeres snappers; faith, since we are
gone thus far, we had as good finish his picture. I fancy then (for we can
but fancy those beasts that are not showed for money) that if his conceits are
molded in his head he must needs have a very flat one, that his eyes are of
the biggest size, if nature has made them of the same length that he has made
the craze in his head. They add to his description that the Parque above 10
years since wrung his neck, but could not strangle him; and some days since,
one of his friends assured me that having considered his bent arms petrified
upon his haunches, he took his Body for a Gibber where the devil had hung a
Soul; and persuaded himself that it might very well be that heaven animating
this cadaverous and rotten Insect, to punish him for the sins he was to
commit, would before hand throw his soul to the dunghill: well Sir, you may
please to exhort him from me, not to be incensed at these fancies, by which I
endeavor to divert his thoughts from the cruel pains that torment him; I do
it not to augment his afflictions, but it is not easy to gain his belief to
all pressing troubles: Besides (having taken a draft of his ill built face,) Is
it not manifest to every one that since the Physicians have been so long
employed in the cure of his Carcass, he must needs be very hollow; and who
knows, but that God punishes him for the hatred he bears to those that have
noble thoughts and conceptions; since we see his disease is become incurable,
by having differr'd too long the putting himself into the hands of one that is
learned. I am persuaded that this is also the reason that this enraged Cerberus
throws his venom upon every body: for I was told that one showing him a Sonnet,
which he told him (being ill informed) was mine, he cast such an Eye upon him,
as obliged him to put it up again without reading it. But these Caprices do
not seem strange to me: for how could he look otherwise then asquint upon this
composition, that looks no otherwise on the heavens? he that persecuted with
three scourges, remains only upon the earth to be a continual object to men
of Gods vengance; he, whose calumny and rage has dared to throw his foame
upon the purple of a Prince of the Church, and endeavors to cast the shame
upon the face of a Heroes, who happily under the auspices of Lewis governes the
first kingdom of Christendom. In fine, all that is noble August, great and
sacred, does so incense this monster, that like a Turky-Cook in his anger as
well as in his deformity, he cannot endure a Red Hat though France under it
secure from her Enemies enjoyes a glorious and happy quiet. You may now easily
judge that his scorn concerns me as nothing, and that 'twould have been a kind
of a Miracle, if my Sonnet that passes for smooth and full of salt, had
relished with a Person so peppered: but I perceive I am a little too saucy to
entertain you with so abject a subject; To conclude, I advise you to rest
satisfied without that pleasant Comedy that you would entertain your se'fe
withal in showing him my Letter, or else learn first Aesop's Language, that
you may conster the French to him. This is a part of what I had to send to you,
the other consists in adding the, I am, for fear of bringing it ill in: for he
is so much an enemy to good thoughts that if this Letter should one day fall
into his hands, he would publish every where, that I had ill concluded, if he
should find that unawares I had not put at the Bottom I am,

SIR, Your servant.

27. Another Letter.
Master Ican,
I Much wonder that on the Pulpit of truth you erect a Mountebanks Theater;
that instead of preaching the Gospel to your Parishoners, you fill their Ears
with a hundred ridiculous stories; that you have the impudence to recite things
that Jack pudding under his vizor would blush to bring forth; that profaning
the dignity of your office, you describe the most licencious and debauched
pleasures under color of reproving them, with so particular Circumstances,
that you put us in mind (O abominable) of the sacrifices that were heretofore
made to the God Priapus, whose Priest was the Pimp. Certainly Master Ican you
ought to exercise your Office with less scandal, if you were no other ways
obliged to it, then that it raised you from the dunghill on which you was
borne, to the state Eclesiastique, for if you have not the power to forbear
your Boffon humor, dissembleat least; and when your duty obliges you to preach
the Gospel, to make us believe it, do you seem to do so? Permit us to deceive
our selves, and blind the eyes of our Reason, that we may not see your
Impertinences; and since in spite of the bug bears, you are resolved to
deliver these holy Mysteries like a farce or pappet play, do not ring the bells
to call your people to the sermon. Come down from the Chair of truth, and get
up upon a stall at the Corner of a street, make use of a Biscayin drum, set a
Capering Monkey upon your shoulders, and to end the momery, in all points, slip
your hand into your shirt and you will find Godenot in his knapsack; Then no body
will be scandalized that you give pastime to the Clownes; you may like a
Mountebanck tell the virtues of your Mitridate, utter your pomander bracelets,
and balls for the itch and gald Arses; you may likewise make provision of
Ointment for a burn; for the witches of the Country, swore to me that they
read in the scedule you gave (you know to whom) that the term expires at
Christmas: you may if you will give no belief to the Possessed, it is seen
enough by the contorsions that disturb you and your corporal torments, that
you have the devil in you: and it is to little purpose that you think to free
your self from the torments of hell, by a strong imagination and haunting
debauched places. But we care not, provided you lime none but old, or barren
ones, because the coming of Antichrist startles us, and you know the prophecy
but you laugh master Ican, you that believe in the Apocalypse as in the
Mythologie, and say that hell is a foolish story to fright men withal, as they
use to fright Children by threatening to make them eat a piece of the Moon.
Confess, confess that you are the Incomparable! for, expound a little, how
can you be impious and Bigot at the same time, and weave with the thread of
your life, a mixed stuff of Superstition and Athism? Ah! master John my friend,
you will dye dancing to the Saints-bel; and indeed when we consider the joint
pieces that compose the symmetry of your members we are so satisfied that we
need not consult an Oracle to be assured; and were your hair more clean and
upright then your Conscience, your forehead cut into Lanes (after the Model of
the fields of Beausse) where the sun marks your flats by the shadow of your
furrows as exactly as he shows the day-hours upon a sundiall; your eyes under
shelter of your bushie eyebrows, that look like two precipices on the brink
of a wood, are so much sunk, that if you live but a month longer you will look
upon us with your Occiput, to see them so red as they are: one is persuaded
that one sees two bloody Cometts, and I find some resemblance, a little above
in your Eyebrows is discovered, fixed stars (that some call otherwise) your
face is shaded by a nose whose infection is the cause that you stink, in all
men's opinions: and my shoo-maker assured me the other day that he took your
cheeks for a piece of black Spanish leather, nay I have suffered my tongue to
say that the smallest hairs of your Mustachoces, charitably furnishes your
Church with a holy water-brush: this I think is somewhat near in Hieroglyphick
the Image that Constistutes your Horoscope. I would proceed, but expecting
visiters I feared least I should omit telling you at the bottom of my Letter,
that which is not ordinarily set there, that I am not, nor ever will be,

Your Servant, Monsr Ican.

28. Against a Pedant.
SIR,
I Wonder, that such a log as you, (who by your habit seems to be become but a
great Charcoal) should not yet blush, and become red, with the fire that burns
you within. Think at least, when your bad Angel makes you rebel against me,
that my arm is not far from my head, and that till now, your own weakness,
and my generosity, has secured you; although you are a very contemptible
thing, yet I Will free my self of you, if you become troublesome. Give me not
occasion then to remember, that you are in the world; and if you will live
above a day, call to mind often, that I have forbid you to make me the object
of your slanders; my name fills a period but ill, the thickness of your square
waste would close it a great deal better. You act Caesar, when from your
Pedagogist-Tribunall, you see your little Monarchy tremble under your wooden
Scepter. But take heed, that a Tyrant raises not up a Brutus; for although you
are the space of four hours upon the head of Emperors, your Domination is not
so strongly established, but that the sound of a Bell destroys it twice a day.
It Is said, you boast, that you expose in all places your conscience and your
salvation. I believe this of your piety. But to hazard your life for it, I know
you want courage, and that you would not stake it against the Monarchy of the
world. You consult and plot my ruin, but they are bitts that you cut out for
others. You would gladly, from the shore in safety, behold a ship wrack at Sea;
and I the whilst am condemned to the Pistol, by a Puritanicall pedant; a
Pedant in sacris, who ought for an example, if the image of a Pistol had taken
place in his thoughts, to be exorcised. Barbarous Schoolmaster! what cause have
I given you, to wish me this ill? You run over all the crimes perhaps, which
you are guilty of, and then you think of accusing me of that impiety, which
your own memory taxes you withal. But know, that I know a thing which you know
not, and that thing is god, and that one of the strongest arguments (after
those of faith) that has convinced me of his true existence, is, the
consideration, that were it not for a summary and sovereign goodness, that
reigns in the Universe, thus wicked and weak as you are, you could not have
lived so long unpunished. Besides, I have learnt, that some little works,
though much above yours, has caused in your timorous courage, this passion
that you thunder against me: But in truth, Sir, I am ready to quarrel with my
own imagination, that she has made my Satyr bite harder then yours, although
yours be the fruit, that the best wits of the ancients have sweat for. You
ought to be offended at Nature, and not me, that cannot help it, for could I
imagine, that to have wit was to injure you? You know besides, that I was not
in the belly of that Mare that conceived you, to dispose to humanity those
organs, and the complexion that concurred to the making you a Horse. I pretend
not however, that these truths that I preach to you, should reflect upon the
body of the University, (that glorious mother of Sciences) of which, if you are
any member, it is the shameful one. There is nothing in you, that is not very
deformed, your very soul is black, it being in mourning for the death of your
conscience, and your habit, as its giblets, keeps the same color. I confess
it is true, that a miserable Hypocondriack, as you are, cannot obscure the merit
of the learned men of your profession; and however a ridiculous vainglory
persuades you, that you are the ablest Regent of the University, I protest to
you, (my good friend) that if you are the greatest man in the Muses Academy,
you are beholden for it only, to the greatness of your members, and that you
are the greatest personage of your College, by the same right, that St.
Christopher is the greatest Saint in our Ladies Church; it is not but that, if
fortune and justice were agreed, you would very well deserve to be the chief of
four hundred Asses, that are taught at your College; yea, certainly you
deserve it, and I know, that the Master of the high function, whom whipping
better becomes then you, nor none to whom it more justly belongs; and of that
great number, I know those that would give ten pound to flea you; and if you will
believe me, take them at their words, for ten pounds is more, then the skin of
a horned beast can be worth. From all these, and from all the other things that
I writ to you the other day, you may conclude, (little Doctor) that the Destinies
command you by a Letter, that you content your self to shipwreck the wits of
the youths of Paris, against the seats of your School; and not think to
domineer and play the Regent over him, that does acknowledge the Empire neither
of Monet nor The saurus. In the mean time, you gore me with sharp horns, and
resuscitating in your memory the thoughts of your cruelty, you compose of it a
Romance, of which you make me the Heroes: Those that will excuse you, lay the
fault on Nature, that brought you forth in a Country, where beastialitie is
the first patrimony; and of a race, that the seven deadly sins has composed
the history of. After this, in troth I am to blame to take it ill, that you
endeavor to attribute to me all your crimes, since you are of age to give away
your wealth; and that sometimes you seem so transported with joy, in reckoning
up the debauched persons of this age, that you forgot your own self. It Is not
necessary, that you ask, who told me of this stupid ignorance, that you think
secret, you that glory in publishing it, and bellow it out so loud in your
School, that it is heard from the Orient to the Occident. I advise you however,
Master Picar, henceforward to change the subject of your Haranges, for I will
no longer see you, hear you, nor write to you; and the reason is this, That
God, who possibly is upon terms of pardoning my sins, would not forgive me, if
I should have to do with a beast.

29. Against Lent.
SIR,
YOu may canonize Lent as long as you please. For my part it is a holy day, that
my devotion will never celebrate; I look upon it as a great gash, in the body
of the year, through which Death introduces himself; or as a great Caniball,
that lives upon man's flesh, whilst we eat nothing but roots: The cruel Tyrant
is so afraid of failing to destroy us, that having learnt, we are to perish by
fire, the very first day of his reign he puts the world into ashes, and
afterward by a deluge, to exterminate the embracements remainders, he brings a
tide of fish into our very Cities. The Turk, that told the Grand Signior, that
upon a certain day of the year, all the Frenchmen became frantic; and that a
certain powder being applied to their forehead, made them come to themselves
again, was not of my opinion; for I Will maintain, that they are never wiser then
upon that day: And if they object their Mascarades, I answer, That they
disguise themselves, that Lent who looks after them may not find them; and
indeed, he never carches? em, but the next morning a bed, when they have plucked
off their visors. The Saints, who (being inspired by God) are wiser then we,
disguise themselves likewise; but they unmask not till Easter day, when the
enemy is gone. It Is not, that this Barbarian has pity on us, that makes him
depart: No, no; but finding us so altered, that he himself does not know us, he
retires, thinking he has mistaken us for some others. You see already, that
our arms lose their flesh, our cheeks fall, our chins grow sharp, our eyes
hollow, the paunch-belly that you know, begins to see his knees; human Nature
looks hideously: To be brief, the very Saints in our Churches would fright us,
if they did not hide themselves. And after this doubt whether Martyrs have
escaped the wrack, the furnace, and boiling oil, when in six weeks we see so
many persons in good health, after they have appeased the fury of six and forty
executioners, their presence alone is terrible: And I fancy Shrovetide, (that
great day of Metamorphosis) a rich elder brother, that bursts his belly, whilst
the poor younger ones, dye hunger-starved. It Is not, but that the law of Fasts
is a well invented stratagem, to exterminate all the souls out of a Republic,
that are like to come to the fire. But I think these fish-daies are to blame,
to kill so many Calves in a season, in which they permit them not to be eaten;
and to permit March to blow such bad winds from the quarter of Rome, that they
make us eat but half what we would do. Why, Sir, there is not one Christian,
whose belly is not a Sea of frogs, or a Kitchen-garden. I think upon the
carcass of a man, that dies in Lent; one may see sprout out beet roots,
skerrets, turnips, and carrets. But to hear our Preachers, you would think,
that at this time we ought not to be flesh. What, is it not enough, that this
lean Tyrant ruins our bodies, would he corrupt our souls too? he has so
perverted our precepts, that we may now communicate to women our temptations to
the flesh, without offending them, or god almighty. Are not these crimes, for
which it ought to be expelled out of well-governed Kingdoms? But it is not only
in our days, that he rules with so much insolence, for our Savior died in the
first year of his reign. The whole machine of the world was like to have
vanished, and the Sun, (who was not used to these long fasts) faild the same
day, and lost his complexion, and would never have recovered his weakness, if
they had not presently made an end of Lent. O thrice and four times happy is
he, that dies on a Shrove-tuesday, he is almost the only man that can boast,
that he lived a year without Lent. Yeas, Sir, if I were assured to abjure the
heresy every holy-Saturday, I would turn Huguenot every Ash Wednesday. Our
reformed fathers may well pray to God, that the Pope may never happen to be my
prisoner of war; for, although I am a Catholic good enough, yet I would not
set him at liberty, till he had for his ransom restored all the flesh-daies, he
has taken from us: I would oblige him likewise, to degrade March from the
number of the 12 months of the year, as being the Ganelon, that betraies us to
a great deal of hardship. It Is to no purpose to say, that he is not altogether
against us, since either with his head, or his heels, he always dips in the
dripping-pan; that he only frees himself from the Megrim, by the Cramp; and,
in fine, that Lent is his Gibbet, where every year he finds himself hung,
either by the neck, or by the heels: He is the principal cause of the
mischiefs, that our enemies do us, because it is he that lodges them, whilst
they persecute us; and these persecutions are not imaginary, if the earth did
not stop the mouths of the dead, I know what they would say well enough. And I
think, that Easter was purposely so placed at the end of Lent, because they
that Lent had killed, could not but want a resurrection. Wonder not then, that
so great a part of the world exterminates him; for after having killed so many,
he well deserves to be broke. In the mean while, Sir, you make Panegyricks to
Lent, you praise him, that takes away my life, and I suffer without repining. I
must needs be,

SIR, Your Servant, D. B.

30. For Madam***** to Mr. Cock.
Mr. Cock,
YOur Hen desired me to send you this Poulet from her; all the others that you
received from her, lived only in paper, but this, brought up with more care,
sucks, laughs, and breathes: For the Hen (contrary to the ordinary custom of
her species) has been nine months a hatching it. One would take this Chick for
a little Man without a beard, and those that have cast his horoscope, have
foretold, that he shall be one day a great Lord at Rome, because that the first
time he broke silence, was with the word Papa. I have strictly charged him, to
tax you with your ingratitude, and to conjure you to return to the nest of your
loving Hen; and although he does it but in his tongue, be not harder hearted
then St. Peter, to whom heretofore the same language was sufficient, to bring
him to repentance. Leave then, O unconstant Cock, to debauch your neighbors
wives; return to the roof of her, that so long since gave you her heart; of
her, whose embraces did so often prevent your desires; and of her, in fine, who
has protested to me, (as ungrateful as you are) to oppress you with her
dearest favors, if you show but the least shadow of repentance: But nothing
moves you. Why, impudent Cock as you are, do you not see, that your beard
blushes for shame, that instead of humbling your self at her feer, and drailing
your wings on the ground, you stand upon your points, and crow at her. You
think perhaps, that this is not spoke like a Hen. But I understand likewise,
that those tunes that you send forth to her praise, are not Cock a doodle's. In
truth, these are fine testimonies of gratitude, to acknowledge the liberality
of a person, that sends you her first brood. Without doubt, when you were the
other day to see her, you did not half consider her. Look upon her now nearer
hand, this little picture of your self, he does much resemble you, and indeed,
she made it by you; and I vow to you, it is the fairestfruit of good Christian,
that has been gathered with her this Autumn. But hold, I am mistaken, it is not
a fruit, it is a Poulet; make this Poulet then as welcome, as she has made
yours. If it were only for curiosities sake, you might show it all over Paris,
as the first Cock that ever was born without a shell; otherwise I Will disavow
all, and to excuse the cackling of your Hen, I Will publish in all places that
all she did was only to make.

Mr. Cock.
A little Cock-a-l'asne.
31. To a Count of mean Birth.
SIR,
I Know not by what good fortune it was, that at the same time that you read my
examinations, I was showed yours; where it is affirmed by irreprochable
witnesses, that a Count within this three days, a Count at pleasure, a
ridiculous Count; in fine so little a Count, that he is none at all, would in
spite of the wholesome counsels of his peaceable humor, create himself
valiant, that he who had so trained himself up to the Battle of Cuffs that
imagining that a duel tends at most but to the destruction of half an Ell of
Cloth, he believed to have found in his wives smock matter enough for a
thousand Combats; that he that had never been in the field but to Graze, and in
fine that he was Baptized only for the same reason that they give names to
Bells. Well then? young Knight of the enchanted arms, put forward, grind your
teeth, bite your Thumbes, stamp with your foot, swear a God dam me, and
endeavor to become corragious, I advise you however to hazard nothing, till
you are certain that your Courage is come to you: feel your self well first,
that according as your heart tells you, you may expose your breast to the
sword, or your back to the Cudgel; but I see well enough you submit your self
to the last, for it very rarely kills: besides it is not likely that the Queen
of Pearls who did you the honor to advance your Feif to a Count, and who
speaks so honorably of you, has made you a Mischievous Count. I am troubled
that you understand French no better, you would think by this Complement, that
there were a Cudgel a cutting; and (faith) you would guess right, for I
protest to you that if a basting could be convayed in writing you would read my
Letter with your shoulders, and that you would see there a man, armed with a
Cudgel, visibly sallie out of the place where I use to put,

SIR, Your servant. D. B.

32. To a Reader of Romances.
To me Sir,
SPeak, Roman, tell me pray, Are Polexander, and Alcidiane Cities that Gastion
is going to besiege? In troth till now, I believed my self at Paris living in
Marests du Temple, and I thought you had been a voluntier in our troops in
Flanders once drawn into a faction by a Corporal; but since you assure me
that I am not my self, nor you him that I took you for, I am in Christianity
bound to believe it. In fine, Sir, you command whole armies, O! Let us render
thanks to fortune, who is now reconciled to virtue: certainly, I no longer
wonder that looking for your name every Saturday in the Gazetes, I could not
meet with it? you are at the head of an Army in a Country that Renauldot is not
acquainted with But tell me, dear Sir, do you think in your conscience you
behave your self like a true Frenchman thus to abandon your Country, and by
the absence of your Person weaken our Sovereign's Party? it were much more for
your honor I think to join in the sea of Italy your fleet to ours, than to
aspire to the Conquest of a Country that God has not yet created. You ask of
me the way: faith, I know it not; nevertheless I think you must leave that
which you have taken: for to arrive at the Canaries it is not the nearest way to
pass by the fools little houses. I Will gothen, and make some vows and prayers
for your prosperous voyage, and carry a candle to St. Mathurin and beseech him
that I may one day see you well, to the end that you may certainly know, that
all that I write you in this Letter, is only to testity how much I am,

SIR, Your affectionate servant.

33. Against Physicians.
SIR,
SInce I am condemned (but it is only by the Physician) from which I can more
easily appeal then from a Criminal decree, you will allow me (as they do
Malefactors who from the ladder preach to the people) I that am in the hands of
the hangman, to give some admonition and warning to Youth: The feavour and the
Poticary holds a punniard to my Breast, with so much rigor, that I hope they
will not suffer my discourse to be troublesome to you. This graduate
notwithstanding tells me, that it will be nothing and at the same time protests
to every body else, that I cannot escape without a Miracle. Their presages
however, although fatal, do not at all startle me; for I know well enough that
the cunning of their trade obliges them to condemn all sick persons to death,
to the end that if any one escapes his recovery may be imputed to their
powerful remedies; and if he dies, that every one may cry him up for an Able
man, and say, that he knew well enough what would become of him. But admire a
little, the Impudence of this hangman, the more I find the ill increase that
his Physic is cause of, and the more I complain of some new distemper, the
more he rejoices; and says nothing, but, All the better. When I tell him that
I am fallen into a swoonding Lethargy, that held me almost an hour, he answers
It Is a good sign; When he sees me in the Claws of a bloody flux, that tears
me in pieces, it is well, says he, this is as good for you as letting Blood:
When I grow sad to feel an excess of cold to take hold of all my extreme
parts, he laughs, and says he knew it well enough, that his Physic would
quench that extreme fire; nay sometimes, when being almost dead, I have lost
my speech, I hear him chide my friends that weep to see me in this sad
condition, Fools that you are (says he) do you not see that it is his feavour
that is at extremity, and is leaving of him? Thus this traitor rocks me, and in
the meene time I am so well, that I am almost dead. I am not ignorant how much
I was to blame to call my Enemies to my help; but, could I imagine that those
whose knowledge makes profession to cure, would employ it altogether to kill
me; for alas, you may believe, that if this were not the first time that I fell
into the ditch, I should not now be in a condition to bemoan my self. I for my
part advise those weak wrastlers, that they may be revenged of those that have
thrown them, to turn Doctors, for I Will assure them, they will send those to the
ground, that had laid them there. In truth I think, that to dream in ones
sleep, that one meets a Physician, is sufficient to put one into a feavour; to
see their lean steeds (covered with a long hearse-cloth) feebly support their
feeble Master; would one not think 'twere a Beer, that the Parque is got
astride upon? and may we not take his ridingrod for death's standard, since she
brings along his Lieutenant? This is the reason without doubt, that Policy
commanded them to mount Mules, and not Mares, lest the race of Doctors becoming
more numerous, there would have been at last more executioners then patients.
Oh! what pleasure could I take, in anatomizing their Mules, those poor Mules,
that never felt spur, neither within, nor upon their flesh, because boots and
spurrs are superfluities, that the delicate wisdom of the Faculty cannot
digest. These Gentlemen govern themselves with so much scruple, that they make
these poor beasts (because they are their domestics) observe fasts more
rigorous, than those of the Ninivites, and abundance of very long ones, the
custom of which are forgotten. By these diets they leave them only their bare
skin upon their bones, and we that pay them well, are not better used, for
these frozen Doctors take more Gell^y out of us, then they put in. In fine, all
their discourses are so cold, that I find but one difference between them, and
the people of the North; that is, those of Norway have always mules upon their
heels, and these have always their heels upon their mules. They are so great
enemies to heat, that they have no sooner found out in a patient any
luke-warmness, but, as if that body were a Vessuvius, they are presently a
bleeding, and glistering, drowning this poor stomach in Sena, Cassia, and
Barly-water, and weakening life, to debilitate (say they) this heat, that takes
nourishment as long as it meets with matter to work upon; insomuch, that if the
special hand of God makes them bound again toward the world, they presently
impure it to the virtues of the refrigerative, with which they have benumbed
this incendiary. They steal from us the heat and energy, that is in the blood.
Thus having bled too much, our souls flying from us, serve as a shittlecock, to
their Surgeons Palletes. Well, Sir, what think you then, after this, are we
not much to blame, to complain, that for a weeks sickness, they ask ten pound;
is it not a cheap cure, where the life escapes? But confront a little, I
beseech you, the resemblance that is between the Doctor's proceedings, and the
process of a criminal. The Physicians having considered the Urine, questions
the patient upon the stool, and condemns him; the Surgeon binds him, and the
Apothecary discharges his office behind: Those very persons that think they
stand in need of them, do not much esteem them; no sooner are they come into
the chamber, but one lolls out ones tongue at the Physician, one turns ones
arse to the Apothecary, and holds up ones fist at the Surgeon. It Is true,
they revenge themselves with a witness, it always costs the jeaster his life.
I have observed, that all that is fatal in Hell, is comprehended in the number
three; there is three Lakes, three Dogs, three Judges, three Parques, three
Gerrons, three Hecates, three Gorgons, three Furies. The scourges God uses to
punish mankind, are likewise three, the Sword, Pestilence, and Famine; the
World, the Flesh, and the Devil; Hail, Thunder, and Lightning; the Blooding,
the Physic, and the Glister. In fine, three sorts of people are sent into the
world, purposely to martyrize man in this life; the Lawyer torments the purse,
the Physician the Body, and the Divine the soul. But these Masters of the Mules
brag on it too; for mine coming one day into my chamber, I only said, Quot, to
him; this impudent homicide presently apprehending, that I asked him the number
of his murders, laying hold of his great beard, answered me, ^ot. I am not
ashamed on it, says he; and to show you that we teach how to kill as well as
Fencers, we all our lifetime exercise our selves upon the Tierce and the
Quart. That which I concluded upon the brazen impudence of this person, was,
That if the rest of the profession confessed less, they notwithstanding did as
much: That this was contented only with killing, and that his companions to
murder added treachery. That if one would write the Physicians travells, one
could not count them, by the Epitaphs only of one Parish: And, in fine, the
Feavour assaults us, the Physician kills us, and the Priest sings. But 'twere
nothing, for Madam Faculty to send our bodies to the grave, if she did not
attempt our souls too. The Surgeon would run mad, rather then not kill with
his lint, all those that are shipwrackt in his hands, and send them to sleep
with their fathers. Let us conclude then, Sir, that sometimes they send death
and his fyth, buried in a grain of Mandragon, otherwhile liquified in a
Serringe, sometimes upon the point of a Launcet, that sometimes with a Julip,
they make us die in October; and, in fine, they usually cloth their poisonings
in so fine terms, that not long since I thought, that mine had obtained for me
of the King an Abbey, in commendum, when he told me, that he was a going to
give me a Benefice for the belly. Oh! how glad I should have been, if I could
have found some way equivocally to have beaten him, as the countrywench did,
who being asked by a Mountebank, whether she had any Poulxe, (which in French
signifies also Lice) she answered him with boxes on the ears, and good
scratches, that he was a fool, and that in all her life she never had neither
Lice nor Fleas. But their crimes are too great, to be punished only by
equivocation, let us summon them to appear before a Justice, in the name of the
dead. Amongst all mankind, they will not find a Lawyer, thre's not a Judge, that
cannot convince some of them of having killed his father; and amongst all those
they have practiced, that they have laid in the Churchyard, there is not a
head, that does not grind his teeth at them; should they devour them, there
were no fear, that the tears shed for their loss, would enlarge the Rivers.
None weeps at the death of such people, but those that lament, that they lived
so long. They are so beloved, that every thing that concerns them is so, even
their very death, as if they were other Messias's, for they die for the good of
Mankind. But, good gods! is not this my evil Angel again? ah! it is the same, I
know him by his gown. Vade retro Satanas. Champagne, bring me the holy water
pot. Graduated devil! I renounce thee, O impudent Satan! do you not come to
give me another purge? Have mercy Lord, it is a Huguenot devil, he does not
care for holy water. Oh! if I had but strength enough to break his pate. But
alas, that which he has made me take, is so well turned to nourishment, that
by taking a great many consumed broths, I have quite consumed my self. Come
quickly then to my help, or you will lose,

SIR, Your most faithful Servant, D. C. D. B


34. Against a coward, Bragadocio.
SIR,
THe Prophet lies, cowards do not die at your age; besides, your life is not
considerable enough, to be of those, that the heavens takes care to mark the
duration of. Those of your scantling, may expect to die without a Comet, as
well as a great many more that are like you, which Nature asleep brings forth
every day, without taking notice of. I have been told in many places, that you
brag, that I had a design to kill you. Alas my friend, do you think me so
foolish, as to undertake an impossibility? Ha! pray tell me, to kill a man
suddenly, that has neither brain nor heart, in what place must I strike him?
I Will never be seen, if your way of living impenitrable by injuries, makes not
the world believe; that you have undertaken to try, how long a man without a
heart, can naturally subsist. These reflections were considerable enough, to
oblige me to make you feel the wait of a cudgel. But the long continuance of
your Ancestors, whose antiquity you proclaim, will hold my hand. I find indeed
some likelihood, that it may be so, since a famous Genealogist made it clearly
appear to me, that all your titles of nobility were lost in the Deluge; and
that he proved to me, that you are as evidently a Gentleman, as the
country-fellow did to King Francis the first, when he told him, That Noah had
three sons in the Ark, and that he was not certain, from which he was
descended. But however, I should have guessed, that you were of a good House,
for no body can deny, but yours is as new a one, as any there is in the
Kingdom. If you will believe me then, take a Coat of Arms, let the Heralds be
offended if they will; you shall give these: Vous porterez de gueules a deux
felles, chargees de cloux sans number; a la vilenie en caeur, and un Baston
Brisc sur le chef. But as they give not Arms to a Peasant, that one would make
noble, till he has rendered himself worthy of it, by performing some warlike
act, I stay for you, where this lackey will conduct you, that according to the
prowess of chivalry, that you shall make appear, I may clap a pair of spurs on
you. You need not fear to be the sacrifice; for if fate waits for you any
where, it is rather in the stable, than in the bed of honor, or upon the breach
of a wall. And for my part, I that understand a little in Physiognomy, I engage
you my word, that you are not destined to die in the field, unless it be by a
surfiet of grass. Consult upon it, however, all the powers of your soul, that
I may arm my self quickly with a sword, or that which they call in French a
Baston.

End of the Satyricall Letters.
35. A Dream.
SIR,
THat vision of Quevedo which yesterday we read together, left so many deep
Impressions in me of the pleasant things it represented, that the last night I
dreamt I was in hell, but that hell seemed to me very differing from ours; the
variety made me believe, that they were the Elisium fields; and indeed I had
not gone far but I saw the lake Avernus which I knew by the Greeks and the
Romans descriptions of it, I saw Acheron, and the flood Lethe, the vigilant
Cerberus, the Gorgons, the Furies, and the Parques, Ixion upon his wheel,
Tityus devoured by a vulture, and many other things that are amply described in
the Mythology. Having gone a little further, I met diverse persons clothed in
the Greek and the Roman fashions, the one speaking Greek, the others Latin; and
I perceived others employed in leading them to several apartments: they all
seemed very sociable, which made me put my self into their Company. I remember
I accosted one; and, after many other discourses, having told him that I was a
stranger, he answered me, that I then was come at a good time: for that day,
the dead that have complained that they are ill associated, are all to change
their lodgings; and that, if I were curious, I might have the pleasure of
seeing it: he afterward very courteously proffered me his hand; and I gave him
mine. We go, continued he, into the Hall, where order is taken for the parting
those that have a mind to leave me another, and lodging them with others, we
shall have the Convenience to see at ease, without tyring our selves, how every
one will behave himself to make his cause good. We walked together then to the
place, where at last we arrived. My guide gave me a place just by him, and by
good fortune it happened to be so near the Judges Chair, that we could hear
plainly each parties difference. As they came out of their ancient habitations,
I observed (if I am not deceived) not as one would think they should have done,
the kings with the Kings, etc. but many times the king, with the shepherds,
Philosophers with peasants, very beautiful persons with very deformed ones,
and old with young ones. But to begin, I perceived Pythagoras was very weary of
his company which were a Company of Comedians, who by their continual babble
disturbed his high speculations. The Judge that governed there, told him, that
esteeming him a man of a great memory, since after fifteen hundred years, he
could remember that he had been at the siege of Troy, he was coupled with those
persons that were not unprovided of it. Ho! if that be all the reason (said he)
why you lodge me with these tumblers, you may as well put me indifferently with
any of the other dead; for there is hardly a deceased person here (if you will
believe their Epitaphe) that is not of happy Memory: since then they are not
the only persons, with which I sympathise for Gods sake deliver me from the
troublesome prating of these Kings and Queens, whose Reign lasts but two or
three hours, These reasons being heard, the Judge sent him to another place I
know, but where I do not remember. Ariesto, Pliny, and Elian, and many other
naturalists, having had to do with Beasts were coupled with the Moors, and the
painter Zeuxis was likewise lodged with them, his picture of grapes which the
birds came to peck having convinced him of presumption. Dioscorides desired no
better then to be set among the Lorrains, saying that he should agree with them
very well, because he perfectly knew the nature of simples. But they considered
better and sent him to Pelias his daufters, charging him to teach them to know
the virtue of herbs better then they did when they would have made their
father young again. Raimond Lulus that swore he had made Aurum Potabile, was
placed with certain rich Drunkards that had done the like. Lucan that Nero put
to death, jealous of his Poem of the Pharsalian wars, associated himself
with some little Children that dyed of the worms. The Pimpes apartment fell to
Virgils share for having debauched Dido, who (had it not been for him) had been
a very discreet Lady. Ovid and Acteon, Criminalls by chance, were lodged
together, as persons that their Eyes had rendered miserable; they chose a
retireing place very obscure, fearing (said they) to see too much. I saw
Orpheus lodged with the Ballat singers of Pont-neuf, because they could allure
beasts. Aesop and Apulaeus, kept house together, by reason of the conformity of
their Miracles, for Aesop of an Ass made a Man, making him speak, and
Apulaens of a man made an ass making him bray. Romulus ranckt himself with
the faulconers, because he trained up birds to fly, not a Partridge, but the
Roman Empire. They talked of putting Caesar amongst the Gamesters, I asked the
reason, and was answered, Because that with one cast that he threw upon the
Rubicon, he won the Empire of the world; nevertheless they thought it more
convenient to crush his pride, by putting him among the slaves that were
heretofore thought to have spells to run with; you may, said the master of the
Ceremonies to him, make trial once again of your Veni, Vidi, Vici. They
lodged Brutus with those that used to ride the Bears because he was not afraid
of spirits. Cassius whose ill sight had caused his death, among the great
bellyed women whosesight is dangerous. Caligula would needs have had a more
Magnificent apartement then Dacius, because his adventures were incomparably
more glorious: for, said he, I Caligula, I made my horse an Emperor, and
Darins was made an Emperor by his horse. Nero appeared next, whom they joined
with a company of fiddlers, that he might perfect himself: they would have
coupled him with Timon man's enemy, but fearing lest that nature one day might
sympathise with their wishes, and make but one General head of all mankind,
there might be a dispute betwixt them who should cut it off. I saw king Numa
present a petition that he might be permitted to dwell with a certain famous
Hydromancer who formerly had done Miracles by water, as being as capable as
the other, having made the fountain Aegerie speak, and rendered it so
cleare-sighted in state-affaires, that whereas an other Ingeneere would have
conducted that, he suffered himself to be guided by it. Nebuchadnezzar was put
into a Mountebanks hands, who promised himself great gains, by showing him,
because that such a beast had not yet been seen. Patroclus took it ill, to see
himself coupled with the curers of incurable diseases; but he was satisfied
with reason, when they told him, that it was, because he, like them, had
cousened death. Jason was much out of countenance, to find himself in a great
Hall, among a company of Spanish Courtiers, because he understood not their
language; for he could not imagine what they meant, when he was told, that all
the adventures of those young Knights, tended (as well as his) but to the
golden Fleece. But consider a little, what it is to apply ones self to the
reading of things fabulous, in an age, whose weaknesses adds faith to all one
knows. I have read nothing in the fables of the Heathens, that did not
confusedly appear again in my fancy. Me-thoughts I saw Jupiter ranked with the
fools, for that Momus had told, that he had been trepan'd: Jupiter being
offended, asked, By trepaning, what the fool meant? That, answered Memus, when
Vulcans grace clove your brain, to make you bring forth Minerva. The old Saturn
that understood no cunning, received without murmuring the company of a troop
of Mowers, because of the conformity of the Scepter. Phoebus was made to follow
some experienced players at Battledore, with order not to leave them, till he
had learnt, not to take his friends head any more for a mark. Me-thoughts I
heard Svsiphus commanded, to accost certain stone-hewers, that were there, to
rid himself of his Rock to them; I know not if he disposed of it, because
curiosity made me turn my eye upon Thetis, who disputed for the choice of an
associate; they put her by a certain Hypocondriack, who thinking himself Brick,
would not drink, for fear of spoiling himself; for as if she formerly had
feared the same thing, she durst not dip her son Achilles heel into the Sea,
wholly to immortalize him. Hecate thrust into the crowd, to get to Garagantua's
mother; For, said she, if I have three faces, this has one that is so big,
that it is worth them all. 'Twas moved, that Io might be lodged with Poppea,
Nero's wife, for certain reasons which I cannot call to mind: This Princess
was content, provided, the other would have a care how she kicked, for she was
much afraid of 'em. Dedalus, the great artizan, made no resistance, although
they gave him for companions, Sergeants, Clarks, and Atturnies, and other men
of the horn, because he was told, that quills were the instruments of their
mischief, as well as of his; and that if they had not sometimes played the
Harpyers, they would not have been brought to the beggars Fiddle. Dalila,
Samson's Mistress, was put amongst the bald-pates; for fear if she had been
with any others, she should have served them as she did Samson. Porcia was
placed with those, that had the green sickness, the Judges of hell suspecting
her to have it, since she swallowed coals. Jocaste and Semiramis kept house
together, because they had both of them been mothers and wives to their sons,
and twice made big by the same child. I saw every body very busy to accompany
Artemise; some would join her again to her husband, because of their so much
extolled love; others would cartie her to the Hospital of great bellied women:
But she quieted all their differences, lodging her self on her own accord, with
some laundresses that she found there; upon condition, though, said she to
them, that if I help you in your Bucks, the Ashes shall be at my disposal.
Theseus desired to lodge with the Weavers, intending to teach them how to guide
the thread. Perseus, Andromede's Brave, found himself well, with all the
institutors of Orders indifferently, because they, like him, have all of them
defended women. Nero, for whose place there was so much debate, chose at last
of himself Erostrato's apartment, that famous madman, that fired Diana's
Temple; For I am, said the Emperor, strutting up and down, one that loves as
well as he, to warm my self at a good great fire. Juvenal, Persius, Horace,
Martial, and almost all the Epigrammatists and Satyrs, were sent to the Manage,
with the Academick riders, because the one and the other have had the
reputation of Prickers. They put likewise with these Poets, a great many
Pin-makers, Point-makers, Cutlers, and others, whose work is good for nothing,
unless it be sharp. The Duke of Clarence, that voluntarily drowned himself in
a barrel of Malmsie, went looking about for Diagenes, in hopes to get a room
in his Tub; but he being not to be found, and they perceiving great Socrates,
that was not yet coupled, Here Is your business, say they to him; for both you,
and this Philosopher, died by drinking, Socrates made a low bow to his Judges,
and pointing, showed them old Heraclitus, that staid for a companion; order was
given to the Romances Heroes, to take him along with them, He is a person (said
the Harbinger that matched them) from whom you will have a great deal of
satisfaction; he has a heart of flesh, you cannot tell him your adventures,
(as amongst you it is a thing inevitable) without drawing tears from him; for he
is no less tender of weeping, then your selves. Euridice took Achilles by the
hand; Let Us along, let us go, said she, for they cannot match us better, since
both of us have our souls in our heels. I saw Curtius, that famous Roman, that
cast himself into the gulf to save Rome, placed with a certain brutish fellow,
that lost his life, in the protection of a debauched woman; I much wondered to
see them couple persons so unlike; but I was told, that both of them died for
the Re-publick. Afterward they made Icarus and Prometheus companions, the one
and the other having been addicted to steal. Echo was lodged with our modern
Authors, because, like her, they say but what others have said before 'em. The
Triumvirate of Rome, with that of Hell, that is, Anthony, Augustus, and
Lepidus, with Radamanth, Aeaques, and Minos; because it was said, that those as
well as these, had been Judges of Death. They were about to put Flamel, who
pretended to have found the Stone, with those that were dead of that disease;
but he was much offended, and cried, That his was the Philosophers Stone, and
that there was an infinite difference, between the virtues of these two sorts
of Stones; for they, continued he, are not tormented with theirs, till after it
is made; but we contrariwise are most troubled in the making it; besides, we
are never cut of ours. These reasons heard, they sent him to find out Joshua,
because that some of them have bragged, that they had, as well as he, fixed the
Sun. Abundance of other Chemists followed this, with great respect, and
received as Oracles the follies that he dispersed, in which, these people
thought, that the secret of the great work lay hid. They were divided, one half
was put with Colliers, as men of the Furnace, and the other with those, that
have given blows to Princes. Hecube was placed with Cerberus, to augment the
number of infernal Porters, she bark't against the Officers for this affront;
but at last they satisfied her, telling her, that she was a three-headed
monster, as well as the other, since she had one as she was a Bitch, as a Woman
two, and that one and two made three. I remember, they put some by themselves,
amongst which was Midas, because he is the only man in the world, that has
complained of being too rich. Phocion likewise was apart by himself, he being
only found, that had ever given money to die; and Pigmalion also was alone,
because never none but he married a dumb woman. After this disposal of things,
by which every one had their proper place, the representations of my Dream grew
less distinct, and I could only perceive a general figure of things; as for
example. I saw a whole body of Thieves, join company with the Fowlers now
adays, because they shoot flying; our Writers of Romances with Aesculapius,
because, like him, in a moment, they do miraculous cures; the Hangmen with the
Physicians, because they are paid for killing; a great company of Fencers
desired to be lodged with these of the faculty, because the art of Fencing
teaches them, as well as it does the Physicians, the knowledge of the Quart and
the Tierce: But they were put among the Shoo-makers, in regard the perfection
of the Art consists, in the well making of a Boot. Among the confused noise of
a number of malcontents, I distinguished the voice of Bouteville, who
thundered, and was monstrously enraged, that every one refused his company, but
'twas to no purpose; none durst come near him, for fear of being engaged in
quarrels. This man carried solitude with him, and I think, he would have been
fain to have made himself a Hermit, if he had not at last applied himself to
the great Grammarians, that invented Duels. A Mountebank that sold his
medecines, increased the crowd, by the number of fools that were got about him;
many advised with him, and amongst the rest I saw Orpheus his wife, that
desired of him a Cataplasm, for the itch of the eyes. There was Priam likewise,
that came for an Unguent for a burn; but the Saltinbanca had not enough, for
the whole City of this poor Prince was all burnt. I saw there abundance of
Lawyers condemned to the fire, that they might see clear, into some businesses
too obscure. As for the wisemen, they were put with the Architects, as
persons, that in all things ought to use Rule and Compass. 'Twas impossible to
get the Drugsters from the Furies, so fraid were they to want Torches. I much
wondered to meet Tiberius, who expecting to be placed, in the mean time
lay-upon some stones to rest himself. I asked him if 'twould not be more for his
ease to lie upon a bed: I should fear, said he, that the heat of the feathers
would do me more hurt then the stones; In the mean while Agripina, Nero's
Mother, conjured him to revenge her quarrel with Sencca who published that she
had had four Children since her Marriage, she appeared furious, and almost out
of her senses, but Nero quieted her by these words; Madame, one must believe
but half what a slaunderer says. The Parques, were contented to be with poor
Country wenches that feed their husbands with their distaffes, when they were
told that those Country girls as well as they had spun men's lives. There came
thither certain Thrashers, and because they wanted flails, or scourges, they
gave them Attila to make use of instead of others. The impudent persons
associated themselves with the keepers of Lions, that they might learn of
them, never to change color, I should have seen a great deal more, if my
Clock striking Eleaven had not waked me and put me in mind that at all hours
of the night, and day, I am, and will ever be until my last sleep,

SIR, Your most affectionate servant.

36. Against the Frondeurs, or Slingers.
THe Reader must take notice that this Letter was sent during the siege of
Paris, and during the Peoples greatest animosityes against the Cardinal, one
must not then wonder to find things not altogether so fit for the present
Estate of Affairs, which have much changed since that time.

To Mr. D. L. M. L. V. L. F.
SIR,
It Is true I am a Mazarin, it is neither fear nor hopes that makes me so
ingenuously confess it, it is the pleasure that I take in a truth, when I
pronounce it. I love to make it known if not as much as I can, at leastwise as
much as I dare; and I have such an Antipathy to his adversaries, that to give
them justly the lie, I could with a good heart come from the other world. Nature
took so little care to make me a good Courtiers, that she gave me but one
tongue, for my heart, and for my fortune; if I had been desirous of the
Applauses of Paris, or pretended to the Reputation of being Eloquent, I should
have writ in favor of the slingers, because there is nothing more Easy to
persuade the people, then that which is easy to believe: But as there is
nothing too, that more show a vulgar soul, then to be of the same opinion with
the vulgar, I resist as much as possible the rapidity of the torrent, that I
may not be carried away with the stream: and, to begin, I declare to you once
more that I am a Mazarin. I am not however so unreasonable, as not to declare
to you the cause why I betook my self to your party: know then, that it was
because I found it the Justest, and because it is true that nothing can acquit
us of the obedience we owe to our lawful Sovereign: for however the slingers
stone us for it, I pretend to return it them so smartly, that I Will drive them
from all the Forts that their calumny has reared against his Eminence. The
first thing that in vain the Poets of Pont neuf let fly (against the
reputation of this great Person) was the alleging that he was an Italian: To
that I answer (not to these Heroes of blotted. Paper, but to reasonable Persons
that deserve to be disabused) that an honest man is neither a French man, a
Dutch man, nor a Spaniard; he is a Cosmopolite a Citizen, of the world, and his
Country is every where: but I grant that the Cardinal is a stranger; are we
not the more obliged to him that he will leave his domestic Gods, to defend
ours? Besides if he were a natural Sicilian (as they believe) he is not for
all that a vassail of the King of Spain; for History is witness that our
Lillies have more right to the soveraignity of that state, then the Castles of
Castile,

But they are very ill in formed of his Cradle; for although the family of the
Mazarins was originally Sicilians, the Cardinal was born in Rome, and since he
is Citizen of a neuter town, he might consequently engage himself for the
interest of that nation he pleased to make choice of: it is well known that the
people of Rome, and the nobles and Cardinals do thus take upon them the
particular protection of a king or Prince, or a Republique: there are some that
hold for France, others for Spain, and others for other Sovereigns, and his
Eminence embracing the justness of our Cause, has followed the example of the
Almighty, who always espouses the interest of the just. Certainly the happy
successes of our Armies, has well enough showed both the Excellency of his
choice, and the justness of our cause, and our kingdom swelling under his
Administration has witnessed that for his sake heaven has undertaken our
quarrel; and indeed almost all those that desired his departure, have since
been found Pensioners to the Enemies of this Crown; and the glorious actions
of our great Cardinal, which multiply his rays, has plainly showed that his
luster dazeling and hurting their eyes, they have imitated the woolvs in the
Fable, that promised the sheep not to meddle with them, if they would send away
the dog from their sheepe-fold.

Well, these State-reformers (who cover their black designs with the Cloak of
public Benefit) have nothing else to say but that the Cardinal is an Italian,
yeas. But what is it they complain of? he advances none but French, and those
whose greatness cannot have any Eclipse; he has not made any Creature, and we
see at Court thirty Italians, Persons of quality of great families, some drawn
hither by their neerenesse of blood to him, others by his renoune, that have
been here idle this ten years, because he thought them not fit for the Kings
service. In the mean time what wisdom soever he makes use of, in the Conduct
of the Government, it does not please our Politic Citizens; they cry down his
Administration. But it is no new thing for the unfortunate to impute to the good
fortune of others, the ill offices of their own. In that envious humor that
gnawes them, they will complain that they have nothing to complain of: because
his Eminence has raised no Creatures they call him ungrateful; if he had
advanced any, they would have accused him of ambition. Because he has carried
our frontiers into Italy, he is a traitor to his own country; and if he had
not led our armies that way, there had then been a private understanding
against us between him and his Countrymen: what way soever the glory of this
kingdom is advance't, his Eminence will always be to blame, unless his
Enemies be let become great enough not to envy him any longer. Let the fire of
Calumny use his violence against him as long as he pleases his Reputation is a
rock in the midst of the billows, that the waves washes instead of shaking;
and that very strength that makes it able to support the burden of an Empire,
will not leave him when it concerns him to bear injuries. The second Battery
that they rear against him, assaults his birth: What, are we obliged to
instruct those that are voluntarily ignorant? must we teach them that only
pretend not to know that the family of the Mazarins, whence came the Cardinals
father, is not only one of the Most noble families, but likewise of the best
allied in Italy; and that the Arms of his illustrous Ancestors are of the most
ancient that Rome has preserved the name of. The ignorance of fools would have
a great privilege, if we were obliged to hear patiently their contradictions,
to all the truths that they are unacquainted withal. The people of the Market,
and of the place Maubert, will not agree to these truths, that are so manifest;
but these people would not be of the rout, if they could be truly informed of
things. Besides, it is the custom, where they find eminent virtues, above their
reach, to revenge themselves by slandering it. Although Cardinal Richelieu was
well known, to come from one of the antientest Houses in Poiton, that he was of
kin to the Lords of greatest quality in France, and that our very Princes took
part with him, in the blood of their Ancestors; his Nobility was
notwithstanding questioned. Such tales as these are never wanting, in seditious
persons mouths, who seek to draw a pretense from every thing, to deny their
obedience to those Rulers, that heaven has placed over them.

They prosecute him further, and accuse him of protecting the Cardinals
Barbarins. Would it have been for the honor of France, to have denied those
sacred persons, that implored our aid, the Nephews of a Pope too, that all the
time he reigned, was a true friend to France? Other Nations would have imputed
this denial, to a want of power to protect them; and this testimony of
weakness, would it not have been of great prejudice to his most Christian
Majesty, whose Empire is as much maintained by reputation, as by force?

When our calumniators felt themselves too much pressed in this place, they
presently shift arguments, and cry out, that he has oppressed the people with
great extortions. I know not, if this rabble hold intelligence with foreign
Kingdoms, that inform them more truly of the management of the Treasury, then
the Council, the Espargne, and the Chamber of Accounts, are informed. But I
know well, that the Parliament of Paris, that accused him of Transportation, or
ill management of so much monyes, after having made a strict examination, and
spent much time in it, the Negotiations of Cantarini, did not impute to him so
much, as the appropriation of a Cardecu; and I believe, his enemies would not
have forgot to charge him with Peculate, if he could have been convinced,
rather then of false crimes, with which they have endeavored to soil his
reputation, for want of true ones. Besides, is any impost laid upon the Kingdom
now, that was not established in the other reign? Methinks, they are not
exacted with so much rigor now, as was used then, although the Stock advanced
by the Treaters, was consumed in Cardinal Richelieu's lifetime, and that the
same Wars must be continued against as many Enemies, as before. Do they
believe then, that five or six Armies are paid with the leaves of an Oak? that
with it, new Levies are made, that Intelligence from all places can be
maintained, that we can make whole Provinces and Kingdoms revolt from our
enemies; and, in fine, that an only Minister of State can govern, to the
hazard of all the Potentates of the world, without prodigious sums of money,
which are only capable to buy our peace. Yeas, Mr. Draper fancies, that it is
with the government of a Monarchy, as with his Chamber-maid's wages, or his son
Peter's board.

They add to their ridiculous stories, that oftentimes things have succeeded
well, to the contrary of what he counseled. I believe it, for he is Master of
his own reason, and not of the Caprices of fortune. How often do we see good
success authorize ill conduct? And I should much more wonder, that, through the
obscurity of things to come, a man could with the eyes of his understanding,
dispose of hazardous events, and by his diligence, guide the steps of Fate.

When these praters have been repulsed in this assault, they charge him with a
Palace that he has built at Rome: But let them know, that the least Cardinal
in the Court has his Palace: Being a French Cardinal, the pomp of a Palace in
Rome, is for the glory of France, as his meanness would be, in the opinion of
the Italians, a shame to our Nation. Some of our Kings (I speak of the most
August) have furnished Cardinals with very considerable sums, to build their
Palaces, upon condition, they would place our Lillies over the Portall. Yet in
spite of all these special reasons, a poor little Mercer, making up his
ribbands, will not allow the Cardinal, to build a house at his own charges.

The scum murmurs besides, that if France should forsake him, he has no
retyring place. What, blind Sirs, because he has purchased enemies every
where, by protecting you, is he therefore an hateful and an abominable
person? and do you judge him unworthy of pardon? His fault indeed is
unpardonable, of having so faithfully served ungrateful persons; and God, that
gave him as an example of those that exposed themselves for the people, has
permitted, that having comported himself as gallantly as Phocion, Pericles, and
Socrates, that he should meet with as wicked Citizens, as they did, that
formerly condemned those great personages.

He is blamed likewise, that he refused peace; and my Laundresse swore to me,
that Spain offered it on very honorable and advantageous terms, for this
Kingdom. I exhort those that are wise, not to judge by outward appearances, and
to remember, that the time when our plenipotentiaries refused to conclude it,
was, when the most violent fits of the Naples revolt, first began, and when
fortune seemed to offer us the restitution of a Kingdom, that belongs to us.
'Twould have been contrary to the rules of human prudence; to neglect that
conquest, that we were almost sure of. Besides, the Catholic King always
insisting, that we should abandon the interests of the King of Portugal, 'twas
not lawful for us to sign to that Peace, (unless we would have been thought
the most perfidious of Nations) and not comprehend him in the Treaty, since he
attempted only upon our word and promise, to set the Crown upon his Families
head.

But this is the last and greatest shock, by which they pretend to obscure the
brightness of his glory. He is (say they) author of the Siege of Paris. I
answer them in the first place, That it was his duty to give such advice, the
Queen Regent having had notice of many plots, that were contriving against the
person of the King: Nevertheless, the very common report is satisfied, that he
was not the first, that gave his voice for this enterprise; and contrariwise,
he has been ever blamed, to have been too much inclined to clemency. Besides,
why must it needs be, that he alone gave order, for the carrying away of our
young Prince. Those that understand any thing, know, that he is not alone in
the Council; and that he does but give his opinion like others. He is far then
from being the only author of this design; he would not suffer things to be
put in execution, that without doubt would have hastened the reduction of this
City, because they appeared to his nature a little too cruel. And if the
Parisians ask me, what those things were; I Will make them understand, that with
a great deal of justice, he might have punished with death the prisoners of
war, as traitors and rebels to their King. He could besides, in one night, if
he had pleased, by the intelligence that he had from within, have caused the
Suburbs, that were but poorly guarded, to have been plundered and burnt, have
drove those that fled into the City to starve it, or put them all to the sword,
after the example of Henry the fourth, that made half the women of Paris
widows in one day; and by taking this blood, have abated the feavour of the
Inhabitants. But instead of these acts of hostility, he forbids the beating
down of those Mills, that were about the City, although he knew, that by their
means, they continually received great quantity of corn. And although he had
notice of all the marches of their Soldiers, he often made the royal Troops
steer another course, then that of our Convoyes, that they might not be obliged
to famish, and beat us at the same time.

He has besieged Paris then, but in what manner? like one that was afraid to
take it, like a good father to his children: He was content to show them the
rods, and threatened them a great while, that they might have leisure to repent.
And to speak freely, their disease being an effect of their debauches, it was
the duty of a good Physician, to make them observe a diet. In truth, if I might
dispense with a little sport, in a matter of this importance, I would say, that
our King seeing so many Kings on Twelfth Eve, come by night into his Capitol,
he went out against them, and would adventure to conquer fifty thousand
Monarchs.

These, I think, are all the aspersions, by which this rascality have
endeavored, to render odious the person of his Eminence, without ever having
had any one lawful cause to complain of him: Nevertheless they forbear not to
cry down his most eminent virtues, to blame his administration, and prefer to
him his Predecessor; but by what reason, I know not, if it be not perhaps, that
Cardinal Mazarin sends none out of the world privately, and without cause;
because he has not a Court, fat with the blood of people; because he takes not
off the heads of Counts, Mareschalls, and of Dukes and Peers of France; because
he keeps not the Prince from the knowledge of businesses, because he is not a
vindicative man; infine, because they see him so mild, that the very attempters
against him foresee their pardon: this is the reason why these factious
Persons, do not esteem him a great Politician. O! stupid vulgar! a Benign
Minister displeases thee, take heed the Misfortune of the Birds in the fable
befalls you not, who having demanded a king was not content to be governed by
the Dove that Jupiter gave them, that ruled mildly; but so importund him for an
another, that he sent them an Eagle that devoured them all. The Cardinal
deceased was a great man, as well as his successor, but having not the
boldness to decide betwixt the merit of these two eminent persons, I Will be
contented to put the world in mind that Cardidall Richelieu had the honor to
be Chosen by king Lewis the Thirteenth the most just Monarcle of Europe, to be
his Minister, and Cardinal Mazarin, by the Cardinal Richelieu himself, the
greatest head piece of that age.

They are to blame likewise to allege that we are under a government, where
Arms, Letters, and Piety are contemned. I Will maintain to the contrary, that
they never were so well esteemed of. For Arms; witness Monsieur Gastion, and
de Ranthau, who by their Credit and counsel, were made Marshalls of France;
without speaking of Monsieur the Prince, who by the Queens rewards, possessest
he alone, more wealth then some Kings of Europ: for Piety, father Vincent shall
answer; to whom she has committed the charge of judgeing of the consciences,
abilityes, and life, of those that pretend to benefices: for Letters, witness
the wise choice she has made of one of the most judicious Philosophers of our
time, for to instruct Monsieur the kings brother, witness the learned Naude
whom he honors with his Esteem, admitting him to his table, and by presents!
In brief witness that great and Magnificent Bibliotheque, built for the
public, to which by his means and care, all the learned of Europe
contribute. What can we add more, Sirs? nothing, after this; unless, that the
Glory of this kingdom cannot rise higher, since she is in the hands of his
Eminence. Do you not think it necessary at last that the People should leave
off vexing the patience of their Prince, by the wrong they do to his Favorites;
that they should accept with thankfulness the pardon that is offered them,
which they are not worthy of? no Sir, they deserve it not, for is it a fault
pardonable to rebel against ones King, the lively image of God? to take arms
against him that he has given us to exercise over our Lives and fortunes, the
functions of his Almighty power? Is It not to accuse his divine majesty of
Error, to control the will of the Master he has chosen us? I know, it may be
objected, that the particulars of a Republique are not out of the way of
salvation. But it is very true, nevertheless, that as God is but one, governing
all the universe; and that as the government of the heavenly kingdom is
Monarchical, that on earth ought to be so likewise. The holy Scriptures
witness that God never appointed so much as one popular State, and some
Rabbis assure us, that the sin of the Angels was, to have attempted to put
themselves under a Commonwealth. Do we not find that long before his coming,
he gave David to be king over the people of Israel, and that since our
Redemption, he has sent from heaven the holy Vial, with which he would have
our kings sacred. By a supernatural Character to distinguish them from all
those that were to be born to obey them. The Church militant, that is the Image
of the Triumphant, is governed Monarchically by the Popes, and we see that the
very particular houses must be governed by a kind of king too, that is, the
father of the family; It Is as the first spring in society, that moves our
actions to order, and it is the secret instinct that compells the whole world to
submit themselves to kings. In vain the people endeavor to extinguish that
light in their souls, that guide them to submission, it is at last carried in
spite of them by this first mover, and they are enforced to render their due
obedience. But nevertheless those of Paris have had the boldness to lift up
their hands against the Lord's Anointed, alleging for a pretense, that it is
not the King they aim at but his Favorite; as if, as a king is the image of
God, a Favorite was not the image of the Prince. But it is not enough to say an
image, he is his son. When he ingenders according to the flesh, he begets a
Prince? when he ingenders according to his dignity, he begets a Favorite. As
man, a successor, as a king, a Creature; and if it be true that to Create is
more noble then to Generate, because Creation is Miraculous, we ought to adore
a favorite, as he is the Miracle of a king: were it only then against his
Eminence that they take up arms, do they think they are Christians when they
attempt against the life of a Prince of the Church; no Sir, they are Apostates,
they offend the holy Ghost, that presides at the promotion of all Cardinals,
and you need not doubt but that he I punish their sacrilege with as much
rigor, as he punished the murder of the Cardinal of Lorraine, whose death
(however just) bled twenty years, through the throats of four hundred
thousand French: But what can they promise themselves by a rebellion that can
never succeed? and if it should so prosper as to overthrow Monarchy, what
advantage would they have by it? he that now possesses only a Cloak would not
then be master of it. They would be authors of a Lamentable desolation, which
their nephew's sons would never see the end of: besides it were very strange,
if they should think or persuade themselves that Christendom could see the
destruction of the Eldest son of the Church without interessing her self for
him? All the Monarchs of Christendom are they not concerned for their
conservation of that king that can settle them again in their Thrones, if
their rebellious subjects should one day throw them down? And suppose that this
revolution could be brought about without a greater destruction then that which
Holland yet bleeds for; I Will maintain that a popular Government is the worst
scourge that God afflicts a State withal, when he would punish it. Is it not
contrary to the order of Nature, that a Boatman or a Porter, should have power
to condemn the general of an Army, and that the life of the greatest person
should be at the disposal of the meanest fool, that in all haste will put him
to death? But God be thanked we are far enough off from such a Confusion.
Those that name the Cardinal, without adding his Title, my Lord, already hide
themselves; and every one begins to believe, that'tis a hard matter to speak
like a rascal, and not to be one. And if the whole Kingdom were in league
against him, I should be confident of his victory; for it is the fate of the
Julies, to overcome the Gauls. I hope then, that we shall suddenly see a
general reconcilement in the minds of men, and a perfect harmony, amongst the
diverse members of the body of this State. Monsieur de Beaufort being animated
but with French blood, it is not credible, but that blood will stay him, from
dying his sword in the breast of his mother; and like little Rivers, after
having straied some time, reunite themselves to the Ocean, whence they first
came, I do not doubt, but that this illustruous Blood, will incorporate again
suddenly with his springhead, that is, the King; for the other Commanders, I
cannot have so ill a thought of them, as to believe, that they will refuse to
follow the steps of so heroic an example; methinks, I see them already bow
with respect, before the Image of the Prince. Reflecting what favor, the chief
of their Families have received from precedent Kings, they are too just to be
against it. That the fortune of another Family should likewise, in his turn,
have a favorable aspect.

Monsieur the Coadjutor knows well, that the Duke of Rets his grandfather,
was Favourit to Henry the third. Monsieur de Brissac may have read, that his
grandfather was raised to great offices and dignities, by Henry the fourth.
Monsieur de Luynes has seen his father have the greatest power, over the heart
and fortune of King Lewis the thirteenth. And Monsieur de la Houdancourt yet
remembers the time perhaps, that he was in favor under the same favourit of
the King deceased. They have no cause then to complain, that my Lord, the
Cardinal, should now sway; it is no more then their Ancestors or themselves at
another time have done.

But if all these considerations should prove too weak, to bring them to their
duties, they are noble; and the apprehension of appearing ungrateful, for the
benefits they have received from his Majesty, will make them desire to forget
these discontents, rather then to appear unthankful. And the example of a
thousand traitors, that have returned injuries to the Court for her favors,
will have no power over them, that know too well, that ingratitude is the vice
of a rascal, of which the Nobles are incapable. It only belongs to the Poets
of the Pont-neuf, such as Scarron, to vomit foam upon the purple of Kings and
Cardinals, and to lay out the liberalities, that he continually receives from
the Court in paper, that he fills with Libels against him. After having bragged,
that he had received a thousand Francs of his Pension from the Queen, he had
the impudence to say, that if a thousand more were not sent him, 'twas not in
his power to forbear another Satyr, that strove with him to come to light; and
conjured his friends to give speedy notice of it, because he could not possibly
keep it any longer. Well, was ever such an example of impudent ingratitude fees
in any age? Ah! Sir, this was without doubt the reason, that God (who foresaw
the number and the greatness of his sins) to punish him sufficiently, was fain
to be twenty years beforehand with him, and by a continual death chastize
those crimes, that were not yet committed, but those that he was to commit.
Permit me a little, I beseech you, to turn my discourse a little to these
Rebels. Seditious people! come and see an object worthy of Gods judgments,
it is the monstrous Scarron, that is given you for an example of the punishment,
that the ungrateful, the traitors, and the slanderers of their Prince, are to
suffer in Hell; consider in him with what scourges Heaven punishes calumny,
sedition, and detraction? Come Burlesque writers, and see a complete Hospital,
in the body of your Apollo; when you see the King's Evil that devours him,
confess, that he is not only the Queens sickman, (as he calls himself) but
the Kings likewise; he dies every day in some member, and his tongue stays
till the last, that his howling may tell you the torments he endures. You see
him, what I tell you is no story; since I have been speaking to you, he has
perhaps lost his nose, or his chin. Does not such a spectacle stir you up to
repentance? Admire, stony-hearts, admire the secret judgment of the most High:
Hearken with an ear of contrition. This speaking Mummy, she complains, that she
is not able to bear all the pains that she endures. The very blessed ones, to
punish his impieties, and his sacriledges, teach Nature new infirmities, to
confound him with. Already by their Ministers, he is oppressed with the disease
of St. Roch, of St. Fiacre, of St. Clon, of St. Run: And that we may, in a
word, comprise all the enemies that he has in heaven, heaven it self has
ordained, that he should be sick of the Saint. Admire then, admire, how great
and profound are the secrets of the divine providence. She knew of the
ingratitude of the Parisians to their King, that was to break out in 1649. But
not desiring so many Victims, she caused to be born forty years before, a man
ungrateful enough, alone to expiate all the punishments, that a whole City had
deserved. Make your profit then, O people, of this miserable miracle; and if
the consideration of the eternal flames are weak motives to make you wise, and
to hinder you from casting your Gale upon the scarlet of the Tabernacle; at
least, let the fear of becoming Scarrons, terrify you.

You Will please to excuse, Sir, this little digression, since you are not
ignorant, that Christian charity obliges us, to run and help our brethren,
that, without perceiving it, are upon the very brink, ready to fall into a
precipice. You have no need of it, you that in these great shocks of State,
have still held fast to the body of the Tree. And indeed it is one of the most
considerable motives, that I am, and will be all my life,

SIR, Your very humble, obedient and affectionate servant, De Cyrano Bergerac.

37. Theseus to Hercules.
DO you not wonder, my dear Hercules, that I should write to you from the other
world? That being past the flood Lethe I should remember our friendship and
that I should preserve the memory of it? where the memory of men are
shipwrackt, Ah! I foresee that you do not: you know too well that that
correspondence and society whose mutual esteem knit our souls, is not a knot
that Death can loosen; and the very inaccessable hell where I am detained, is
not far enough to hinder my sighs from reaching to you. I know, that you have
been seen to shiver and tremble with anger against this Tyrant of the night,
whose rigorous government I endure, and that the great Hercules, after having
dis-horned Bulls, torn Lions, strangled Giants, and carried upon his shoulders
the Machine of the world, that Atlas could not bear, is not a man to be
afraid of the barking of a Dog, that keeps my Prison Gate; it is a Monster
that has but three heads, and Hydra that he overcame had seven each of which
grew to seven more: Come then, O triumphant Protector of heaven! Come and take
the last victory upon your Enemies; come into these dark Dens and take from
death the Privilege of Immortality; and at last resolve to satisfy the
suspense that the terror of your arm holds nature in: you have spread your
name enough over the Mountains of the earth, and the stars of the firmament;
think of those that languish in the Center of the world, oppressed with the
weight of the earth for having fought under your banner. Can you imagine, to
what a miserable condition the unfortunate Theseus is reduced, now that his
complaints makes his misfortune ring again in those climates that the Sun
gives light to; he is in the most sad and fatalest quarter of the Elisium
fields, seated upon the trunck of a Lyprus; tore with Thunder, uncertain
whether he should send you his Request or his Epitaph; his ears affrighted and
his Eyes offended with the croaking of Ravens, and the continual cries of a
cloud of Ospreys; his head leaning on the black marble of a monument in the
midst of a frightfull Cymetire, environed with rivers of blood, where
deadbodies float, whose ponderous motion is excited by the doleful sound of
sighs that the souls breathe out, that pass over her. This, O invincible Hero!
is the fatal Employment of those years that I ought to spend more gloriously
in your service, but because that no sad Circumstance should be wanting to my
grief I am tormented not only by evil it self, but likewise by the Eternal
fight of him. I Will tell you, that the other day (excuse me if I speak in this
manner in a place filled with darkness, where blindness raigns every where,
and where every object wears a perpetual black) the other day then, whilst the
rigor of the most unfortunate aspects that an accursed Climate can be deadlily
looked on: I perceived all affrighted, the horrible habitation of the Parques,
who turned their eyes on mine. I was a long time employed in considering these
homicide mothers of mankind, who had hung at their distaffs the haughty
Arbitrer of peoples liberties, and wound as negligently the silk of a glorious
Tyrant, as the thread of a simple shepherd. I conjured them by my tears, to
spin out the thread of my life more quick, or else to break the woofe. And
since the fear of death frighted me more, then death it self, I desired them to
free me from a hundred thousand torments, by one only. But I read in their
countenances, that they had decreed, not to grant my petition so soon. This
frightfull company made me leave my abode; but alas, I fell into another more
horrid, 'twas a vast floating Fen, in which being engaged, I found I was at the
mercy of an hundred thousand Vipers, that has none, and who with their tongues
burning with venom, having sucked on my cheeks the painful degorgements of my
heart, gave me in the room of it, the air of their hissings to breathe. There I
saw those famous offenders, whose crimes have condemned them to extreme
torments, bring themselves forth again, by the fire that consumed them, endure
in the flames all the insupportable torments of a frost, and under the
unmercifull Empire of a violent Eternity, have nothing left them of their
being, but the power to suffer. I met Sisyphus at the top of a mountain,
bewailing the loss of his stone, that was newly slipped from him. Tityus
continually revive, to satisfy the insatiable hunger of the Vulture, that tore
him. Ixion loosing at every turn of his wheel. The memory of the former
Tantalus, devoured by the very fruit, that he in vain endeavors to devour; and
the Danaides employed, in continually pouring into a tub full of holes, that
they could not fill. There was there hard by, a very thick bush, under which I
discovered, through the fortifications of this vegetative Labyrinth, lean Envy,
whose eyes were frightfully fixed on the earth, the hands yellow and dry, the
thighs quaking, and without flesh, the stomach sticking to the sides, the
breath contagious, the skin tan'd by the heat of the Acribilaria, who vomiting,
was chewing a piece of a Toad half disgested. Afterward I had the conversation
of the Furies, who were employed in such rufull actions, that I leave them to
imagination, lest by the relating them, your design of rescuing me should by
their horror be changed, with your courage. Behold, these are my misfortunes,
O generous Prince, the relation that I have made to you, is not to call you to
my succor, for I should stain the honor of great Alcides, if I should think,
that there were any need of words, to excite him to produce a virtuous action.
And I am confident, that the time that he spends in the reading my Letter, will
be all that shall stay him from taking this voyage, from which I may expect my
liberty. But in the mean time, I cannot find the way to make an end of it; for
how can I, that stand in need of the service of all the world, dare to style my
self, O great Hercules,

Your Servant, Theseus.

38. Upon an Aenigma, that the Author sent to Monsieur*******
SIR,
TO acknowledge the Present you made me the other day, of your rare Aenigma, I
thought I was obliged to acquit my self, by sending you the like; I say the
like in respect of the name Aenigma that it bears; for as to the lofty style
and character of yours, I confess mine much beneath it, and that I should be
very inconsiderate if I should but dare to follow its flight, only with the
eyes of the Fancy. However, if mine may be so happy, as to see her self
entertained in the quality of an attendant to yours, her father will be too
much honored: I confess she is impatient to entertain you. If your goodness
then will grant her this favor, you need only continue the lecture of this
Letter,

Aenigma, upon Sleep.
I Was born nine hundred years before my sister, and yet she passes for my
elder; I think that her ugliness and deformity, is the cause of this error:
there is no body but hates her company and conversation; there comes not a word
of good news out of her mouth: And although she has more Altars on earth,
than any of the other deities, she receives no pleasing sacrifices, but the
vows of the Despairers. But I that charm all those that I come near, there
passes not a day, but I see: that which breaths in the air, the sea, and the
earth, fall at my feet. I find my cradle in the Suns tomb, and in my Coffin,
the Sun finds his cradle. The perfectest and most amiable thing that man ever
saw, was made the first day of my reign; Nature laid the foundation of my
Throne, and makes my head in the highest place of a stately Palace, of which
she takes care, when I repose, to keep the door shut. And the workmanship of
this Edifice, is elaborated with so much art, that no body ever yet knew the
order and the symmetry of its Architecture. In fine, I make my abode in the
center of an unexplicable Labyrinth, where the reason of the wise and the
foolish, of the learned and the idiot, wanders together. I have no Host but my
father; and although he be a great deal more rational then I am, yet I make
him go whither I please, and am his conductor. It Is to little purpose, in the
mean time, that I cosen him, a few hours does so clearly disabuse him, that
he resolves (although in vain) to trust no more to my falsities; for, in spite
of him, I lay in irons the five slaves that serve him; as soon as they are
tired, I compel them, whether they will or no, to submit themselves to my
caprichios; not but he endeavors to shun my re-encounter, but I watch him in
places so black and dark, that he never fails of falling into my snares; he
yields presently to the character that my divinity, amases him with, insomuch
that he has no eyes, but what are mine. Not but that I have many other
powerful adversaries, the most considerable amongst which, is the sworn enemy
to silence, who would long since have drove me out of the confines of his
Kingdom, if the greatest part of his subjects, had not, in my favor, revolted
against him; and these revolters, that reason makes to rise against their
Tyrant, are the best governed, and the only persons that live under a perfect
harmony: They protect my innocence, quiets those disturbances and clamours,
that conspire my ruin; introduce me by little and little into their Kingdom;
and at last help me themselves unawares, to become the Master of it. But I
advance my victories a great deal further, I share with the god of day, the
extent and the duration of his Empire; and if that half that I possess be not
the most glorious, it is at least the most tranquil and quiet. I have this
advantage of him besides, that I entrench upon his dominions, when I please,
and he cannot entrench upon mine. The Astre that gives light to the Universe,
goes not down from our Horizon, till I yoke to my Chariot the one half of
mankind. I stir up and maintain trouble among the people, to keep them at rest.
They must needs love me, for I use every one of them according to their humor;
those that are merrily disposed, I lead to Plays, Balls, Feasts, and other
pleasant divertisments; the choleric I lead to the wars, and plant them at the
head of an Army, and make them break through thirty squadrons with their
swords, gain victories, and take Kings prisoners; for those that are
melancholy, I sink them into the darkest horrors of a frightful solitude, I
carry them to the top of an hundred terrible and inaccessible Rocks, to make
their abyss seem more deep to them. In fine, I give every body an occupation,
according to his fancy; I enrich those that are most miserable, and sometimes,
in spite to fortune, I take pleasure to precipitate her favorites, to the
lowest part of her wheel; I raise likewise, when I please, a rascal to a
Throne, as heretofore I prostituted a Roman Empress to the embraces of a Cook.
It Is I, that for fear the Lovers should brag of their good fortunes, take care
to close their eyes, before they get to the bedside. It Is by my art likewise,
that they fly without feathers, that they go without stirring their feet: And,
in fine, it is by me only, that they die without losing their life. I spend
half the time, to repair the lean bodies, I give color to the cheeks, and make
the Roses and Lillies bud in the face. I am two things together very unlike,
the gods Truchman, and the fools Interpreter. When I am seen near hand, they
know not who I am, and they do not begin to know me, till they have lost sight
of me. The Eagle, that looks fixedly upon the Sun, winks at my presence. I know
not, if any amongst my Ancestors have been counted Lions; but in the fields,
the Cock crowing makes me fly; and, to speak freely, I my self have much a do,
to explicate what I am. Unless you will fancy, what a boy makes his Top do, when
he whips it, I make all the world do so. Well, Sir, this is speaking plain
enough; and yet I dare lay a wager, that you have not found it out. But; in
troth, I Will not expound it to you, unless you command me; for then I Will
ingenuously confess to you, that the word you look after is, Sleep; and I
cannot forbear, for I am, and will be all my lifetime,

SIR, Your very humble Servant.

1. Amorous Letters.
To Madam.*******
Madam,
BEing a person as beautiful as Alcidiane, it was without doubt fit you should
have an inaccessible habitation, as had that most worthy Lady; for since none
could approach that Roman's without danger, and without the like hazard none
can come near yours; I believe that by the magic of your Charms you have
removed since my departure the Province where I have had the honor to see you,
I mean, Madam, that she is become a floating Island, that the furious wind of
my sighs drives backwards and forwards before me, when I endeavor to come
near it. My very Letters, full of submissions and respects, for all the Art of
the best instructed messengers cannot arrive: it is to no purpose that your
praises that they publish makes them fly into all parts, they cannot meet with
you; and I verily believe, that if by the Capricio of fortune or of fame (that
often times take the charge of that which addresses it self to you,) one of
them should fall from heaven down your Chimney,' twould be capable to make your
Castle vanish. For my part, Madam, after adventures so surprising, I doubt not
any longer but your County has changed climate with the Country that was its
antipode; and I am afraid that looking for it in the Map, I shall find in its
place, as we find in the extreamities of the North, This is a land that the Ice
keeps from approaches. Ah! Madam, the Sun whom you resemble, to whom the order
of the universe allows no rest, was pleased to stand still in the heavens, to
give light to a victory which little concerned him. Stay Madam and be witness
to one of the greatest of yours, for I protest (provided you cause not any more
to vanish the enchanted Palace, where I every day speak to you in Imagination)
that my converse, dumb and discreet, will never offer any thing to your Ears
but vows, homages, and adorations: you know well that my Letters contain
nothing that can be suspect, why then do you hinder the conversation of a thing
that never spoke; if I may have leave to declare my doubts, I believe you deny
me the sight of you, that you may not communicate a Miracle above once to a
profane person; yet you know that to convert an unbeliever as I am (that's a
quality you have formerly taxed me with) requires that I should see it more
then once.

Give access then to testimonies of veneration that I intend to pay to you.
You know that the Gods receive favorably the incense we burn to them here
below, and that their glory would be imperfect, if they were not adorad: do not
then refuse to be so, for if all their attributes be adorable, since you
eminently possess the two principal ones, the Wisdom and the Beauty, you would
make me commit a crime, if you should hinder me from worshipping the divine
Character that the Gods have imprinted in your person; I especially that am,
and will be all my life,

Madam, Your most humble, and passionate servant.

2. Letter.
Madam.
THe fire that you consume me with, has so little smoke, that I defy the
severest Capuchin, to black his conscience and his humor, with it; that
Celestial heat, for which St. Xavier was so often like to burst his doublet,
was not more pure then mine, since I love you, as he loved God, without having
seen you: it is true indeed that the person that named you to me, made so
perfect a draft of your Charms, that whilst he was about his Masterpiece, I
could not believe that he drew you, but that he brought you forth; it was upon
his security that I articled to surrender. My Letter is the hostage, use it
courteously I pray you, and give it some quarter; for if the laws of war did
not oblige you to it, the Prize is not so inconsiderable that the Conqueror
need blush to own it. I do not deny but that the powerful darts of your eyes,
made me lay down my arms, compelled me to beg my life of you; but in truth I
think I have much contributed to your victory, I fought as one that had a mind
to be overcome, I turned always the weakest places to your assaults, and
whilst I encouraged my reason to the victory, in my soul I vowed its overthrow:
I, against my self, I assisted you strongly, and if the repentance of so
temerare a design made me weep, I persuade my self that you drew those
tears from my heart to make it more combustible, having taken away the water
from a house you had a design to fire; and I was confirmed in this opinion,
when I considered that the heart was a place contrary to others, that one could
not keep without burning it. You do not believe perhaps that I am serious. I am
intruth, and I protest to you, if I do not see you quickly, that the Bille and
Love, will roast me in such a manner, that I shall leave the grave-wormes the
hopes but of a lean Breakfast? what, you laugh at it; No, no, I do not jest,
and I foresee by so many sonnets, Madrigalls, and Elegies, that you have
received from me (that knows not what belongs to Poetry) that Love designs me
a voyage to the kindome of the gods, since he has taught me the language of
the Country: however if some pity moves you to defer my death, send me word
that you permit me to come and offer to you my servitude: for if you do not,
and that quickly, you will be accused of having in humanely killed without a cause
of all your servants the most passionate, the most humble, and the most
obedient servant,

De. Bergerac.

3. Letter.
Madam,
YOu have a kindness for me, Ah? in the very first I ne I am your most
passionate obedient servant, for I feel already my soul by excess of joy
spread so far from me, that she will have gone past my lips, before I can have
time, so, to end my Letter: nevertheless it is now concluded and I can if I
please, seal it: for since you have given me assurances of your affection, so
many lines is needless against a place that's already taken and were it not
that it is the Custom, for a Hero to dye standing; and a Lover complaining, I
had taken leave both of you and the Sun, without acquainting you with it: but I
am obliged to employ the last sighs of my life to publish (in bidding you
farewell) that I dye for love, you know, of whom; you believe it may be, that
the dying of Lovers, is only a manner of speaking that they have got, and
because of the conformity of the words Passion and suffering, desire and death
that they often taken one for the other. But I am very confident that you will not
doubt of the Possibility of mine, when you have considered, the violence and
the continuance of my disease; and the less, when after having read this
discourse you find at the Extremity,

Madam, Your servant.

4. Letter.
Madam,
I Was so far from loosing my heart when I did you homage, with my liberty,
that since that time I find it a great deal bigger, I believe he is
multiplied, and that being not enough of one for all your wounds, he has used
his endeavors to bring forth others in all my arteries, where I feel him
beat, that he may be present in diverse places and that he only may become the
only object of all your Darts, in the mean time Madam, freedom, that precious
treasure, for which Rome heretofore ventured the empire of the world; That
dear liberty, you have taken from me; and nothing that passes from my vital
spirits to my senses has made this conquest: your wit only deserved this
glory, his vivacity, his sweetness, his extent, and his strength, merited
enough to make me deliver it up to so noble fetters: that fair and great Soul,
raised into a heaven so far above that which is the reasonable one, and so
near to the Intelligible, that she eminently possesses all the fair one, Nay,
I Would say too, much of the Almighty Creator that made her, if of all the
attributes that are essential to its perfection, there was not wanting that,
of Merciful; yeas, if we can imagine any defect in a divinity, I accuse you of
that: Do you not remember my last visit, when complaining of your cruelty, you
promised me at my departure, that I should find you more favorable, if you
found me more discreet; and that taking your leave of me, you bid me come
again the next day, because you were resolved to make the trial: But Alas!
take a days time to apply remedies to wounds that are in the heart, is it not
to suspend your assistance till the languishing party is dead? And that which
makes me wonder the more, is, that you mistrusting that this Miracle might come
to pass, you fly from home, to shun my fatal re-encontre: Well Madam, well,
fly me, hide your self, from my very remembrance; one ought indeed to fly and
hide ones self when one has committed a Murder: good gods, what do I say! Ah
Madam, pardon the fury of one that is desperate, No, no^, Appear that's a law
for Mankind, which does not concern you; for it was never heard that
Sovereigns ever gave an account of the death of their slaves: yeas, I ought to
esteem my fortune very great, that I deserved, you should take the pains to
ruin me; for since you have been pleased to hate me, that will at least
witness to posterity that I was not indifferent to you. Besides the death that
you thought you had punished me withal, makes me rejoice; and if you are
troubled to apprehend what this joy might be, it is the secret satisfaction that
I have to have dyed for you in making you ungrateful. Yeas Madam, I am dead,
and I find you will have much ado to conceive, if my death be real, how it can be
that I should send you the news of it: nevertheless there is nothing more true:
but learn; that man must endure two deaths in this world; one violent, which is
love, and the other natural, that reunites us to the insensible substance. And
this death that is called Love, is the more cruel, because when we begin to
love, we begin to dye; it is the reciprocal passage of two souls that seeks one
another to animate in common that which they love, and of which the one half
cannot be parted from the other half, without dying, as it is happened to,

Madam, Your faithful servant.

5. Letter.
Madam,
AM I condemned to weep much longer? I beseech you, my dear Mistress, in the
name of your good Angel, be so much to a friend me as to let me know your
intentions, that I may betimes provide me a place amongst the Quinze vingts;
for I perceive, that I am by your courtesy predestined to die blind: yeas
blind, (for your ambition would not be satisfied, to have me only a
Monoculus). Have you not made two Alimbecks of my two eyes, through which you
have found out the art, to distill my life, and to convert it into clear water.
In truth, I should suspect (if my death were any advantage to you, and if it
were not the only thing that I cannot obtain) that you exhausted those springs
of water, that are within me, only that you might the more easily burn me; and
I begin to believe some such thing, since I perceived, that the more humidity
my eyes draw from my heart, the more he burns. I cannot think, that my father
did make my body of the same clay, that the first man's was composed of; but
without doubt, he formed it of a limestone, since the humidity of those tears
I shed, has almost consumed me. But can you believe it, Madam, in what manner
it has consumed me? I dare no longer walk in the streets thus all on fire, for
fear the boys should come about me with squibs, for they will certainly take me
for a past-bord figure, that was got loose from some artificial fireworks;
neither dare I show my self in the Country, lest I should be thought to be one
of the walking Hermes's, that lead people to drowning. In fine, you may easily
understand what all this means; it is, Madam, that if you do not come back, and
that quickly; if you enquire after me at your return, you will find that I am shut
up in the Thuiberies, and that my name is the Fire-beast, which is showed to
the people for money; you will then be much ashamed to have a Salamander for your
lover, and be troubled, to see burn in this world,

Madam, Your Servant.

6. Letter.
Madam,
I Have received your magnificent Bracelets, that seemed to me very proud, to
wear your characters. You need not fear, after this, that a prisoner, held by
the arms, and by the heart, can make an escape from you. I confess, I should
have suspected your present, because that there always goes hair and
characters into the making up of charms. But you, having so many more noble
ways of killing, it is not likely I should suspect you of witchcraft; besides,
I should be to blame, to withdraw my self from the secrets of your Magic, it
being not possible for me to escape my Horoscope, that is agreed with you of my
sad dysaster. Add to these considerations, that 'twill be much more for her
advantage, if it comes by some supernatural means, and if it be caused by a
miracle. I believe, Madam, you think all this is jeasting; well then, let us be
serious, tell me, in your conscience do you not think, that you have gained a
heart at a cheap rate, since it cost you but half a dozen blows? By my faith,
if you find any more at that price, I would advise you to take them; for hairs
will sooner grow again in the head, then hearts in the breasts. But did you not
cunningly choose, to make me a present of hair, to explain to me in
Hierogliphick, the insensibility of your heart? No, I esteem you more generous.
But how ill soever you intend, I so confound in my joy every thing that comes
from you, that the hands that strike me, or stroke me, are alike welcome,
provided they be yours; and the Letter that I send to you, is a proof of it,
since it is only to give you thanks, for tying my arms, for drawing me by the
hair, and by all this violence, for having made me,

Madam, Your Servant.

7. Another Letter.
Madam,
I Do not only complain of the mischief, that your fair eyes have been pleased
to do me; but likewise of a more cruel torment that I suffer, by their
absence. You lest in my heart, when I took my leave of you, a tyrant, that
under pretense of being your Idea, takes upon her a power over me of life and
death; nay she enhaunses tyrannically upon your authority, and goes to this
excess of inhumanity, to tear open those wounds, that you had closed up, and
to make new ones, in those old ones, that she knows cannot heal. Let me know,
I beseech you, when that Astre (that was eclipsed only for my sake) will come
and dissipate the clouds of my afflictions. Have you not enough to exercise
that constancy, to which you promised victory? Did you not swear to me, when
you took your last journey, that all my faults were wiped out, that you would
forget them for ever, but me never? O sweet hopes! that are vanished with the
air that framed them. Hardly had you ended these deceitful words, shed some
perfidious tears, and sent forth artificial sighs, with which your mouth and
your eyes belyed your heart; but fortifying some cruelty, that yet lay hid in
you, you doubled your kindnesses, that you might eternize in my memory, the
cruel remembrance of your favors, which I had lost:

But you went further, you fled from those places, where the sight of me, would
perhaps have been capable, to have moved your pity; and absented your self
from me in my sufferings, as the Kings that abandon those places, where
criminalls are punished, for fear of being importuned for a pardon. But to what
purpose so many precautions, Madam? you know too well the power of your wounds,
to be afraid of their cure. The Physic that has spoke of all maladies, has
said nothing of that which destroys me, because she spoke of them, as being
able to deal with them; but that which the love of you has begot in me, is
incurable; for how is it possible to live, when one has given away ones heart,
which is the cause of life? Return it me then, or send me yours in the place of
my own; otherwise in the condition I now am, to end my life by a bloody and
cruel death, you will add to the conquest of your eyes, too sad a destiny, if the
Victim that I immolate to you, be found without a heart. I conjure you then
once more, since you need not have two hearts to live, to send me yours, that
offering to you a complete sacrifice, she may make both your love and your
fortune propitious to you, and hinder me from making an ill end, although I
should tell you improperly at the bottom of my Letter, that I am, and ever will
be, even in the other world,

Madam, Your faithful Slave.

8. Letter.
Madam,
YOu complain, that you discovered my passion, from the very first moment, that
fortune obliged me with the sight of you. But you, to whom your glass (when he
shows you your image,) tells, that the Sun has all his light and ardour, the
very first instant that he appears, What reason have you to complain of a
thing, that neither you nor I could hinder? It Is as essential to the splendor
of the rays of your beauty, to illuminate bodies, as it is natural to mine to
reflect toward you that light, which you bestow upon me. And as it is in the
power of your consuming looks, to kindle a disposed matter; so is it in that of
my heart, to be consumed by it. Do not complain then, Madam, unjustly, of this
admirable concatenation, by which Nature has joined, by a common society, the
effects to their causes. This unexpected foresight is a continuance of the
order, that composes the harmony of the Universe; and 'twas a necessity, known
at the birth day of the creation of the world, that I should see you, know you,
and love you. But there being no cause, but tends to some end; the very time
that we are to unite our selves, is now come. 'Twere in vain for you and I to
attempt against our destinies. But admire the course of this predestination,
'twas a fishing that I met you; the lines that you (looking upon me) cast, did
they not declare to you my being taken? And although I had escaped your lines,
could I have saved my self from the baits, hung at the lines of that fair
Letter, that you did me the honor to send me, some days after; every obliging
word of which, was composed of diverse characters, only to charm me; and I
received it with such respects, as I would express, by saying, that I adored
it, if I were capable of adoring any thing besides your self. At leastwise, I
gave it many tender kisses; and laying my lips to your dear Letter, I fancyed,
that I kissed your excellent wit, that framed it. My eyes took a pleasure, in
often passing over those characters, that your pen had made; and grown insolent
by their good fortune, they attracted my whole soul to them, and by fixed
looks, stuck there, to unite it self with those draughts of yours. Could you
have thought, Madam, that with one sheet of paper, I could have made so great a
fire, 'twill never go out, though till my days are extinguished; for if my
soul and my passion parts themselves in two sighs at my death, that of my love
will go out last. I Will conjure la Gonie, the faithfullest of my friends, to
repeat to me that beloved Letter; and when he shall be come to the end of it,
where you humble your self so much, as to say, that you are my servant; I Will
cry out, till death, Ah! that cannot possibly be, for I my self have always
been,

Madam, Your most faithful, most humble, and most obedient Slave, De Bergerac.

FINIS.
The Errors of the Press.
Her her, for him his, in the 23 line of the 8 page. Had, for have, in the 25
line of the 9 page. Little, for brittle and, in the 3 line of the 12 page. Her,
for him, in the 17 line of the 14 page. Roch, for Poch, in the 5 line of the 16
page. He, for she, in the 10 line of the 16 page. He, for she, in the 12 line
of the 16 page. He for she, in the 19 line of the 16 page. Bottom, for fadom,
in the 2 line of the 17 page. For, for to, in the 11 line of the 18 page.
Walls, for valleys, in the last line of the 18 page. Hostess, for Hospital,
in the 26 line of the 23 page. Moss, for Mess, in the 13 line of the 24 page.
Matter, for Muster, in the 17 line of the 26 page. Set, for sat, in the 4 line
of the 29 page. Seems. for Lances, in the 4 line of the 29 page. To show his
innocence in, line 21. page 30. O gods, for O good, in the 13 line of the 36
page. Leave out with, in the 5 line of the 39 page. They, for he, in the 8 line
of the 47 page. Leave out of, in the 11 line of the 52 page. Tambocineux's, for
Jambonomeux's, in the last line of the 82 page. Do, for die, in the 6 line of
the 84 page. Makes, for spakes, in the 25 line of the 84 page. After, for
often, in the 15 line of the 85 page. There, for them, in the 16 line of the 88
page. Cushonet, for Cushomet, in the 28 line of the 88 page. Lately, for
safely, in the 27 line of the 91 page. Cannot, for Can, in the 32 line of the
93 page. Read, for made, in the 3 line of the 96 page. Truths, for troubles, in
the 27 line of the 98 page. No, for that the, in the 27 line of the 105 page.
Roost,, for roof, in the 3 line of the 111 page. She, for he, in the 23 line of
the 111 page. Others, for other. in the 20 line of the 139 page. That a
Republic, for, the particulars of a Republic, in the 23 line of the 145 page.
Read, for head, in the 17 line of the 157 page.

