THE USE OF DAILY PVBLICK PRAYERS, in three Positions.

printer's or publisher's device

LONDON, Printed for John Maynard. 1641.

The use of daily public Prayers, in three Positions.
I. That daily public Prayers have been in use among Christians from the
beginning (so far as persecutions gave leave) and were accounted a principal
part of Gods worship.

II. That those Prayers were at set hours, in a prescript form; not arbitrarie
in either.

III. That the peace and prosperity of the public Weal, in the long life, and
happy preservation of pious Princes, and other particulars; and the good
success of Armies in times of war; have been thought by ancient Christians,
of purest times, the fruit and effect, in part, of these public Prayers, and
daily Service of the Church.

I.
IT is most certain, and acknowledged by all, That in the Primitive times, the
holy Communion was publicly administered every day. The word Liturgia* is, for
the most part, by ancient Writers, appropriated to the Communion, because that
was the most solemn service: though sometimes, it is also taken more generally.
The form of administration (which Saint Augustine says in diverse places, was
the same in all, or, almost, all Christian Churches in his time I was
instituted and prescribed by Saint Paul himself, as is directly affirmed by
Saint Augustine, Au^^st. (...). 118.(...)6. ad Januar.
in his Epistle to Januarius: Apostolus de hoc sacramento loquens statim
subtexuit: Caetera cum venero ordinabo: unde intelligi datur, (quia multum erat
ut in Epistola totum illum Agendi ordinem insinuare^, quem universa per Orbem
servat Ecclesia,) ab ipso ordinatum esse, quod nulla morum variatur diversitate.

Besides the Prayers at the Communion, there were public Morning and Evening
Prayers; and those daily also. Mention of those Prayers is made in the Council
of Laodicea, in the eighteenth Canon, (...): that is, That the form or
Liturgy of Prayers, both at the Nones, and at the Vespers, ought always to be
the same.

Saint Chrysostom, upon the Psalms, In Psalm. 140. and alibi.
occasionally speaking of diverse Psalms and Hymns, which made part of the
public Prayers, derives the first institution from the Fathers; by which words
it is likely he understood men Apostolical, or at least of next antiquity to
Apostolical. By him also it appears that Christian people in his days were
wont so studiously to frequent the public Prayers of the Church, that they
knew by heart diverse of the Psalms that were ordinarily used.

What Saint Paul writes, 1 Timothy 2.1.
I exhort that first of all supplications, prayers, intercessions, etc. is by
St. Augustine understood of the daily solemn Prayers and Supplications at the
celebration of the Sacrament; but by Saint Chrysostom, upon the place, is also
expounded of the solemn Morning and Evening Prayers of the Church. His words
are these, Every Priest is as it were a common Father of the whole earth, and
therefore ought to take care of all men, as God does, to whom he is
consecrated: Therefore says the Apostle, I exhort, etc. But what means he,
First of all* that is, in the daily service; and this, all the faithful know,
how it is daily performed both in the Evening, and in the Morning: How we make
intercession for the whole World, for Kings, and all Magistrates, or
Governors, etc.

Origin (whose antiquity, I hope, is sufficiently known by all men) does often
exhort the people to come to Church, not only upon Sundays and other Holidays,
but upon ordinary days also, to hear the Word of God read, and to be present
at the Prayers of the Church: yea, and sharply reproves them that did it not,
as careless of their spiritual welfare and salvation. See him, for example,
in his tenth Homily upon Genesis, throughout the whole Homily, as where he
says: Sine intermissione orandum Apostolus praecipit. Vos qui ad orationes non
convenitis, quomodo impletis sine intermissione, quod semper omit titis? Sed
and Dominus praecipit, vigilate and orate ne intretis in tentationem. Quod si
illi vigilantes and orantes, and semper verbo Dei adhaerentes, tentationem
tamen nequaquam effugerunt; quid faciunt hi qui diebus tantum solennibus ad
Ecclesiam convenient? etc.

II.
OF set hours, because I do not find it much opposed, I will not spend many
words in vain. If there be that make any question, I shall refer him to Clemens
Romanus, a man of very authentike authority, because Apostolical, and
mentioned in the New Testament: who presses it very close in that
unquestioned, and so much commended Epistle of his to the Corinthians, lately
set out and made common by Learned Master Patrick Young, out of the rich
Treasures of his Majesty's Royal Library. It seems by him that no small part
of that (...), or, good order, required by Saint Paul, (whose mind he might
best know, as one of his Disciples) 1 Cor. 14.40 does consist in the due
observing of those times and hours, limited and prescribed by authority for
our Prayers and Devotions. But I desire his own words may be looked upon, page
52.53 As for set forms of Prayers, I should not have thought that I should have
needed to have said much of that neither, but that I have lately seen a Book,
which came to my hands under the recommendation of a Masterpiece, wherein I
find this strange assertion, Answer to the Humble Remonst. p. 7.
That liberty in prayer (it is spoken of public Church-prayers) was not taken
away, and set and imposed forms introduced, until the time that the Arrian
and Pelagian Heresies did invade the Church, etc. The Author calls himself
Smectymnuus, both name and man, being altogether unknown unto me. Which if
they were not, yet should I be worse than a Heathen, if I should prefer any
wordly love or friendship, before the truth of God. In some small things,
mistakes may happen without any great harm; and may be passed over with as
little danger. Let us therefore consider whither that be not most true which
he peremptorily denies; and then examine the validity of his objections.

For the first, we will begin with a great man, both for his piety, and his
learning, Saint Basil the Great; who indeed was some years later then Arius,
but many years before Pelagius: However, that which he speaks of his times, he
so speaks it, as that his testimony may stand for times long before. A friend
of his that was gone to travel, had written to him, that he would be mindful
of him in his Prayers: Ep^st. ^41. p 1014.
to whom his answer is this: (...)* that is, To forget thee in my prayers is
impossible, except I shall first forget our work, to which the Lord has
ordained us. For thou can not but remember, being by the grace of God one of
the faithful, the solemn Biddings, ( or Praeconizatio^s) of the Church, how
that in the holy Church we make prayers for all our brethren that travel, for
all that are enrolled Soldiers, for all that take liberty for the Name of the
Lord, (or, for all that confess freely the Name of the Lord) for all that
bring forth spiritual fruits, etc.

I think no man will think it probable, that if these solemn set Prayers of
the Church had been of late institution, and therefore easily alterable, he
would have spoken of them so peremptorily, That it was impossible, etc. But
here I must needs give a reason why I translate the word (...), a Bidding, or
Praeconization, and not with the Latin Interpreter, concionem: and this the
rather, because I see Bellarmine, De Cler. lib. 1. c. 13.
as great a Clerk as he was, grossly to mistake in the like, and upon the
mistake of the word, to ground a false opinion, that Deacons in ancient times
were wont to preach. In ancient times it was the Deacons office, in the time of
public Prayers and Liturgy, by loud speech and proclamation of the matter, to
let the people know what was done, or to be done. Which was to this end, that
both they whom it particularly concerned might take the better notice; and also
to quicken and stir up their intention and attention generally, that they
might all remember themselves where they were, and what they were about, and
carefully hoc agere. Sometimes their cry was, Hearken to the Word of God: to
the Gospel: the Epistle: and then they were said, (...): or, (...) Praedicare
lectionem, or, Euangeliu^, etc. Sometimes they said, O ye Cathecumeni, ye are
to pray: O ye believers, let us pray for the Cathecumeni: etc. and then they
were said, (...): praedicare orationem, that is, to bid the prayer. It belonged
also to the Deacons to direct the people when they should kneel or stand: as
also when and who should draw near; when and who should retire or depart: for
which part of their office Saint Chrysostom in Heb. c. 9. hom. 17. (as some
read the place, out of what Edition I know not, for my Edition of Saint
Chrysostom has it there, not, (...), but (...)) shows how they may properly
be styled (...). But this is not to our purpose here.

I would gladly know, whether, when Saint Cyprian said, Pro arcendis hostibus,
and imbribus impetrandis, (...)rian ^pist. (...) D(...)t^.
and vel auferendis vel temperandis adversis rogamus semper and preces
fundimus: and pro pace ac salute vestra, etc. or, when Tertullian, Oramus pro
Imperatoribus, pro ministris eorum ac Potestatibus, (...). 39.
pro statu saeculi, pro rerum quiet, pro mora finis; either of them, by any
reasonable man, can be understood otherwise, then of solemn set Prayers? Both
these were many years, the latest of them a full hundred or thereabouts,
before Arius was talked of.

Origin, of as great antiquity, very nigh, as the most ancient of those two, in
his sixth book against Celsus, gives this description of a true Christian:
(...): that is, They that serve the God of all through Christ, and live
according to his Gospel, who also frequently and duly, both night and day, use
those Prayers that are prescribed. Where if any object, that the words night
and day (which also are in Saint Cyprians passage) must needs infer private
prayers: I answer, that there would be no absurdity perchance in it, if by
night and day, Morning and Evening were understood. But if this please not, I
can make it good, that the ancient Christians were wont to use the public set
prayers of the Church in their private houses and families, and there might use
them at what time of the day or night they thought good: whereof we shall by
and by give an example in Constantine. And yet I profess, I do not allege
this passage as an infallible proof, because I know the word (...) may be also
otherwise interpreted.

The same Origin, in his fourth book against Celsus, quotes three or four
several passages of the Scriptures out of their (...), or Prayers; by Prayers,
meaning that which now the Graecians call their Euchologium, or Prayer-booke.
And I hope it will be granted, that if the Prayers gave the denomination to the
whole Book or Rituall, it is more then probable, that it contained many forms
of set composed Prayers.

But if all this will not serve to persuade men, that are not wont easily to
believe any thing, that crosses their fancies, though of it self never so
probable, or plausible: why yet I hope, if we can produce some Formulae of
those very Prayers then used, that they will at last yield to the truth. This
because it is done to my hand by men, whom I think they will not suspect to be
partial in this point* I will spare my self further labor, and only here
set down what I find in the Centurists of Magdeburgh: Denique and hunc ritum in
Orationibus publicis, Cent. 3. c. 6. p. 135.
etc. That is, Moreover, that this rite also was then used in their public
Prayers, Cyprian in his Sermo de Oratione Dominica, does witness, to wit, That
when they were to begin Prayers, the Priest was wont to stir up, and prepare
the minds of his Brethren, to a more fervent calling upon God, by saying, Lift
up your hearts: to which all the Congregation together did answer, We lift the^
up unto the Lord. Moreover, it is out of all question (their very words,
Formulas denique quasdam precationum sine dubio habuerunt:) That they had (in
those days) certain Formulae (that is, set and prescribed forms) of Prayers.
For Origin in his eleventh Homily upon Jeremy, seems to allude to those
Prayers, now commonly called Collects, in these words: Vbi frequenter in
Oratione dicimus, Da Omnipotens, da nobis partem cum Prophetis, da cum
Apostolis Christi tui; tribue ut inveniamur ad vestigia unigeniti tui, etc. So
they.

Besides these Centurists, I find it to be the judgment of famous Du Mornay,
De M^ssa c. 3. Ed Gallans^l. p. 32.
who thinks it probable that some Ritualists of the middle age, as Walafridus,
and others, who describe the simplicity of the first age in matters of Rites
and Ceremonies, might have seen some of those first Ritual-books, or
Formularies, as he calls the^.

This was written before the late Defense came out.
As for Jewish Liturgies, I leave that to the learned Author of the
Remonstrance, as best able to answer for himself, if he see occasion. Only
this I shall here say by the way, that if this gain-sayer were, at least in
late Writers, as well read, as we find he is not in the ancient, he would not
have made such a wonder at the matter. He might have read^, at least in the
same Mornay, (an Author much canvased by men that meddle with Controversies)
of a Jewish Liturgy yet extant, containing several forms of Prayers,
composed (according to the opinion of the learned Jews, not contradicted by the
said learned noble man) by Esdras, and used by the Jews ever since their
return from the Babylonish captivity: yea and of other forms of prayers, long
before that, used by the Jews ever since Moses, and them also yet extant. And
as for the Prayers that Saint Peter and Saint John used, when they went up
together to the Temple at the hour of Prayer, Act. 3.1. he might have read of
set forms of prayers appointed for that hour, and commonly used by the Jews of
those days, yea directly by the said Saint Peter, Lud. Capell. Spicileg. p
68.69.
and Saint John, in a late Protestant Writer, of as considerable authority for
his learning generally, but especially in those kind of studies, as any whom
he can allege for the contrary opinion. However I speak not this to interpose
mine own opinion in that point, which I suspend: but only to show that a
little more reading would have done well in one that had undertaken such a
work, as the refutation of that learned Author.

Now we come to the examination of his objections against ours, and proofs for
his own assertion. His words are: [ But that there were not such stinted
Liturgies, as this Remonstrant disputes for, appears by Tertullian, in his
Apol. cap. 30. where he says the Christians of those times did in their
public Assemblies pray sine Monitore, quia depectore, without any Prompter,
but their own hearts. And that so it should be the same Author proves in his
Treatise, de Oratione: Sunt quae petantur, etc. There are some things to be
asked according to the occasions of every man: the lawful and ordinary Prayer
(that is the Lords Prayer) being laid as a foundation; it is lawful to build
upon that foundation other Prayers according to every ones occasions. And to
the same purpose, Saint Augustine in his 121 Ep. Liberum est, and.] The
passages out of Tertullian de Oratione, and out of Saint Augustine, in his 121
Ep. are nothing at all to the purpose, and make as much for public set
Prayers, as for private: for public set Prayers also are grounded upon this,
That it is lawful to add to the Lords Prayer. What any Father ads of any man's
particular occasions, may be understood of private Prayers, whether at home, or
in the Church. For it is out of all question, and we have store of examples to
that purpose, that the Christians of those times did frequently repair to the
Churches in private devotion, and for particular occasions. But now to the
passage of Tertullian, out of his Apol. c. 30 where he makes Tertullian to
say, that the Christians of those times did in their public Assemblies pray
sine monitore, quia de pectore: I say, first, that it does not appear by
Tertullian, that he speaks it of public Assemblies, and more probable it is
that he does not. Secondly, I would know of this Author, what it is that he
would have, or does infer upon this passage of Tertullian. What, that
Christians, when they assembled together, did betake themselves every one to
his own private devotions, and used such prayers, every man by himself, as his
own heart, and particular occasions did suggest unto him? This if he say,
(besides that it is very absurd in it self, and never practiced any where,
that I know, amongst Orthodox Christians) will easily be refuted by express
passages of ancient Fathers, as Ignatius, Saint Cyprian, and others, who teach
the necessity of joint and unanimous common Prayers at such times. But it is
apparent, that that which our Author drives at by his whole Discourse, is, not
that the people, but the Minister is to be left to his own liberty, to use in
public Assemblies what form of prayer himself thinks fit. And are not then
Tertullians words (if understood as he would have them, of public Prayers) as
much against this kind of praying with and after the Minister his conceived
prayer; as he calls it: as against prescribed Book-prayers? Nay, if there be any
difference, they may more truly be said to pray cum monitore, who follow the
conceptions of a private man, then they that follow a public, prescribed,
usual form, which having often heard, it is likely that in time they learn and
can say without book; so far at least, as to follow it readily, and with a
quick and clear apprehension of what is said: whereas they that depend of
private conceptions, which are not always the same, must needs have their
understandings suspended, till the end of the sentence; and when at the end,
have much ado, sometimes, to make sense of it.

I have heard more then once some men, who thought themselves as good at it as
the best, make this objection against set or stinted Prayers, as they call
them, because by them the spirit is straightened. Which though it be but a
frivolous objection, and easily answered* yet, because it is the nature of
those men, for the most part, not to be satisfied with any reason that proceeds
from men, whom they affect not: I was glad to see it, in a book which lately
came to my hands, fully answered by one, whose name (I intend it not as a
reproach to his memory, whom I have heard men of singular worth to speak of,
with great respect:) is great amongst them. It comes very near to the point
that we are now upon, and therefore I shall not think much to set down here
the whole passage.

The Saints daily Exe(...)i(...)* by J. P. D. D. p. 81.
Object. That in stinted Prayer the spirit is straightened, when a man is tied to
a form, then he shall have his spirit as it were bounded and limited, that he
cannot go beyond that which is prescribed; and therefore, say they, it is
reason a man should be left to more liberty, (as he is in conceived prayers)
and not tied to a strict form.

To this I answer, even those men that are against this and that use this
reason, they do the same thing daily in the congregation for when another
prays, that is a set form to him that hears it; I say it is a form to him:
for put the case, that he which is an hearer, and does attend another praying,
suppose that his spirit be more enlarged, it is a straitning to him, he has no
liberty to go out, he is bound to keep his mind intent upon that which the
other prays: And therefore if that were a sufficient reason, that a man might
not use a set form, because the spirit is straightened, a man should not hear
another pray though it be a conceived prayer) because in that case his spirit
is limited; it may be the hearer has a larger heart (a great deal) then he
that speaks and prays so that there is a bounding and straitning, and a
limiting of the spirit to him. And therefore that reason cannot be good. Again
I answer, etc.

I have no more to say concerning this passage of Tertullian, but that (as is
well obs^rved by those that comment upon him) his chief aim in these words
(and that which gave occasion unto them) was, to deride the custom of the
Heathens of his time, who truly and really in their, whether private or
public, Temple devotions did use such Monitors or Prompters, to suggest unto
them the true titles and manifold appellations of that supposed Deity, what
ever it was, which they intended to worship. Now their Gods being very many in
number, and every one having several titles and appellations; no wonder if
their worshippers, most of them (for some did not, and were accounted very
religious for it) needed these Monitores, or Nomenclatores, at their elbows.

The next proof or objection (which you will) is out of Justin Martyr, in these
words: And before this in that famous place of Just. Mart. Apo. 2. He, who
instructed the people prayed according to his ability, Nor was this liberty,
etc. and in the margin: Just. Mart. Apol. 2. (...).

No man can otherwise imagine, but that his intention in this allegation is, to
infer out of these words, according to his ability, conceived prayer, in
opposition to set or prescribed prayer. I think I shall clearly enough show,
that Just. Mart. had no such meaning at all, and consequently that our Author,
to make the best of it, is much mistaken. But I must needs say, though
unwilling to make the worst of it, I can not but suspect something, when I
consider that, neither in his Text, nor in his Margin, he does set down the
words of the Father, fully, and faithfully as he ought. The words are these,
(...): That is, The Bishop, or President, does in like manner is before
present, or offer unto him prayers and thanks to the utmost of his power; or as
far as his ability does reach. It is a co^plement of civility, even amongst
men, (ordinary in all languages, I think, but in the Greek and Latin
Languages I am sure,) when we thank a man, to qualify our thanks with this
restriction, pro virili, o^, quas possum. As when we say, Ago gratias, non quas
debeo, sed quaspossum; or, quantas possum maximas: what more ordinary in Latin
Writers, whether old, or late? How much more does it become us, when we say,
that we thank God; and which is more, when that we do (...)? the weight of
which word is well observed by learned Graecians, and by the use that it has
sometimes in ancient Authors, it does little less import then retaliation, or
a return of good offices. We know who said, my goodness (beneficentia mea)
extends not unto thee: and Saint Augustine, in a prayer of his somewhere,
even of thoughts (de quo semper cogitare debemus, and de quo digne cogitare non
possumus) uses this civility of language; and shall we wonder, if any use it
of thanks? This being so obvious, I should wonder this Author could not think
of it here; but that I know, some there be in the world, who are never more
bold, or less heedfull of their speeches, then when they speak to God, by way
of Prayer, or praises, though it be in the public. And this their boldness
and impertinency, be it never so great, some there be so blind, as to deem it
zeal. Others excuse, as harmless Solaecismes, or ^autologies, what a right and
sober judgment, guided by the light of Gods Word, will find little better
then blasphemies. I say therefore (...), is no more then, gratias agere quantum
humana potest infirmitas* aut vilitas: and this I hope, is as proper and
ordinary in prescribed set Pr^yers; as in conceived and arbitrary. Yet I will
not deny that I find the words, (...), otherwise understood by some learn
men, who render the pass^ge thus; Does give God thanks with as loud voi^^, as
he is able* and considering there be other Fathers that testify the accustomed
lowdne^s o^ their solemn Pr^yers, I will not say that this interpret^tion is
altogether impertine^t; but this, that our Author does bring, and his inference
upon it, I dare confidently say to be most groundless and impertinent.

His third and last objection is out of Eusebius concerning Constant. in these
words: And blessed Constantine was herein as unhappy as we, who needed not have
composed forms of prayer for his Guard, to use upon the Lords day, but might
and would have taken out of former Liturgies, if there had been any, etc. I
answer, that I do not (nor perchance any other) understand what is the strength
of this inference: A peculiar certain prayer was made by Constantine (a most
devout and religious Prince) to be used by his guard; therefore there was no
common Liturgie-book extant in Constantines days, for the use of the public. I
have read three Prayers made (they are printed under her name, I am sure, as
made by her:) by Queen Elizabeth, of ever blessed and glorious memory, for the
success of her Navy, etc. Would the inference be good upon this, either that
there was no Book of common Prayers then extant, and used; or that the Queen
had no Bishops, or Chaplains, at that time, that might have saved her that
labor? This I think, might suffice; there having been enough said before,
concerning forms of public prayers, extant and used long before the times of
Constantine. And indeed, the Truth is all that I aim at, and not any bodies
shame. But why should I spare him, that has not spared his Mother; and who
does so lightly esteem of those things, which I do, (and ever shall, I hope,
as long as I breath, however the times go) most honor and reverence? Let us
therefore look into Eusebius a little more exactly, that it may the better
appear, how this man has dealt with his Reader.

First then, whereas he tells us of Prayers composed by Constantine himself, I
say it is more then does appear by Eusebius. Where the Latin has it, cap.
18. Preces ab Imperatore descriptas: it is in the original Greek, (...), that
is, Such as the Emperor did most affect; and therefore descriptas here, must
be, not, written, or, composed; but, selected. Again, where the Latin has it,
cap. 19. Formulam vero precandi ipse militibus praescripsit, etc. it is in the
Greek, (...): that is, he taught it to all his soldiers. And I hope if a man
be said or reported to teach children or ignorant people the Pater Noster, or
Creed; he must not therefore of necessity be conceived to be the Author of
either.

Secondly, whereas he says, it was for his Guard, that Constantine composed
these forms of Prayers, to use upon the Lords day; I say, it was not for his
Guard, but for all his Soldiers in general, and especially for them that were
not Christians, that Constantine either made himself, or caused to be made,
that Prayer which Eusebius speaks of, and sets down in his twentieth
Chapter: that being the only Prayer, that Constantine can, in any probability,
(so far as appears by Eusebius) be conceived, to have composed, if he
composed any. For, as for the Guard that lived within his Palace, to them were
appointed, says Eusebius, those Prayers which he calls, (...). And as
concerning the Soldiers, whereof Eusebius says some were Christians, and some
were not; those that were Christians, he commanded them (dispensing with them
for their ordinary service, or attendance, upon that day) to repair to public
Churches, and there to celebrate the day: those that were not, even them he
compelled to meet together in the fields upon that day, and there to praise God
in that form of Prayer which is recited by Eusebius. The Prayer was this: Te
solum Deum agnoscimus: te Regem profitemur: te adjutorem invocamus: per te
victorias consequuti sumus: per te hosts superavimus: abs te and praesentem
foelicitatem consequutos fatemur, and futuram (future, that is, for the time to
come, as is more plainly expressed by the Greek:) adepturos speramus: tui omnes
supplices sumus: abs te petimus, ut Constantinum Imperatorem nostrum, una
cumpiis ejus liberis, quam diu^issime nobis salvum and victorem conserves.

Here you see is no mention of Christ at all, nothing but might very well be
said by a Heathen of those times, as may appear by diverse of their Prayers yet
extant, the first words, Ye solum Deum agnoscimus, excepted, which
nevertheless might bear a very commodious interpretation, according to the
tenets of diverse of their own Philosophers and Wise men. If any shall press
the words, Omnibus militibus praescripsit, to show that it was common to all,
whether Christian or Heathen Soldiers, I shall not stand upon that, it being
likely enough, that the same Prayer upon other days was to be used by them
all, when they were mixed together, and therefore of purpose so composed, that
it might be used by any, whether Christians, or Heathens of those times. But in
the mean time if it be granted, (as I do not see how it can be denied) that it
was principally intended for the use of the Heathen Soldiers; how can it be
conceived, that such a form should be sound in a Book of common Prayers
appointed for the use of Christians; how much less inferred from hence, (as
this man would gladly) that the Christians of those days had no Book of common
Prayers? But I have not done with him yet. I think it will easily be granted
unto me, by what has been said hitherto, that it is very probable, that this
man in these his allegations out of Eusebius, took more notice of the Latin,
then of the Greek. Now if you look upon the Latin, in the Chapter just before,
(to wit the 17) you shall find that plainly contradicted, which this man would
have inferred out of the eighteenth. The words (because it is but a short
Chapter) are these, Cap. 17. Sed his quidem multa magnificentiora contemplari
potes, si animadvertas quemadmodum in ipsis Regiis Ecclesiae Dei formam
instituerit, populo in Ecclesia congregato, ipse studiose exordiens. Sumptis
enim in manus libris, vel sacrarum literarum contemplationi diligenter animum
adhibebat, vel constitutas cum universo Ecclesiae coetu preces reddebat. What
sense can any man in the World make of these words, but that it was Constantine
his custom, taking the books themselves into his own hands, sometimes to turn
the Holy Scriptures, and sometimes the Book of common ((...), is the word in
Eusebius) Prayers, according as the Order of the Liturgy by him there and then
used, required? Now if any man shall ask me, for his own satisfaction, how
it is in the original Greek, I will ingenuously confess that the Greek does
not so fully and distinctly express it, as the Latin does; though it be as
true, that the Latin says no more, then what the Greek will very well bear.

And now I have done with this Author; with whom I should not have had to do at
all, but that he came so cross in my way in this point of set forms of
Prayers. Whether he, or I, be in the right, I shall willingly submit to the
judgment of any that are truly indifferent; that is, that seek the truth for
it self, and embrace it, where ever they find it; not blindly zealous to
maintain their own side, whether it be in a just cause or not. If it shall
appear to others (as hitherto it does unto me) that this man (as confident a
man in his way of writing, as ever I met with) is much mistaken in this point;
then I shall yet, before I leave him, advise others, whosoever shall happen to
read this, to pause awhile and consider with themselves:

Much talk there is of a Reformation; and for my part, how he can be
accounted a true Christian, that would not be heartily glad to see that
amended, what ever it be, which, to the prejudice of Gods Glory, is amiss,
though perchance not to be amended, without his particular loss and prejudice
in worldly respects, I know not. Now then, if that Reformation, so much talked
of every where, and by many so much desired, shall go on, how far such men as
he, so confident, and so apt to mistake, may, either to direct or to inform,
be trusted with it, to the glory of that God, which is the God of Truth; and
to the content of men truly zealous, that is, zealous according to knowledge;
this is the thing, (and God is my witness I have no end in it but his glory:)
that I would desire all men seriously to consider of. But this, by the way
only; and so I come to my third Position.

III.
FIrst of all I would have it here remembered, that what S. Paul writes, 1 Timothy
2.1, 2. I exhort therefore, that first of all Supplications, Prayers,
Intercessions, and Giving of thanks be made for all men: For Kings and all that
are in authority, that we may lead a quiet and peaceable life, etc. is by S.
Chrysostom and S. Augustine expounded of the daily public Prayers of the
Church: as has already been declared. Upon which I infer, that when the
ancients speak of the power and effica^ie of prayers and Supplications to the
procuring of public blessings, as peace, plenty, etc. they are (which I think
no reasonable man will deny) especially to be understood of daily, public
Church-prayers. So is Origin to be understood in those words of his, in his
eighth book, contra Celsum: thus rendered by Sigismundus Gelenius: Postremo
hortatur nos Celsus, ut opem feramus Imperatori totis viribus, and geramus ejus
ausp^ciis justa piaque bella, neve detrectemus militiam si res ita postulet.
Respondemus, far nos Imperatori auxilia suo tempore, sed divina (ut ita
loquar) armatura fretos, non humana. Idque facimus Apostoli monitis obedientes,
^ Tim. 2 1.
cujus haec sunt verba; Obsecro vos primum ut faciatis deprecationes, etc.

Dionysius, Bishop of Alexandria, who lived in S. Cyprians time, that Dionysius
so much admired by the Ancients, as that Eusebius makes him the chief subject
of more then one of his Books of Ecclesiastical History, in a letter of his
recorded by the said Eusebius, wrote thus of Gallus, who succeeded Decius,
about the year of the Lord 250. Quin Gallus neque Decii recogitavit
calamitatem, etc. As for Gallus, he neither remembered the calamities of Decius,
neither did he so diligently, as he ought, consider with himself before hand,
what it might be, that had bin the chief occasion of his ruin: but unhappily,
to his great misery, stumbled upon the same stone, though apparently set before
his eyes. Who in the full sail of prosperity, when he might have boasted of his
hearts desire in all things, by cruel Edicts, began to proscribe those
Religious men, who ((...), it is in the Greek, whence may easily be gathered
what men he speaks of:) both for the peace of his Kingdom, and for the health
and safety of his own person, were wont to make earnest Prayers, and
intercessions unto God: who therefore at the same time, when he drove them
away, drove with them those Prayers also, which for him they were accustomed to
power unto God.

This Gallus was a Heathen, not a Christian. And lest any man think it strange,
that this holy Bishop should lay it to a professed Heathen Empe(...) charge,
that he made no greater account of the solemn Prayers and Supplications of
Christians; I would not have it unknown, that even Heathen Emperors (some of
them) though otherwise very ill affected to Christianity, had nevertheless
such an opinion of these Prayers, as that they thought themselves and their
Empire, the more secure for them, as will appear by an Edict of Maximinus
recorded by Eusebius, in the eighth Eccl. Hist. c. 29. where we find these
words: Vnde Christiani hac indulgentia a nobis concessa devincti, debent Deo
suo obnixe supplicare pro nostra, pro Reip. pro sua ipsorum salute, ut quovis
modo cum publicus rerum status integer and incolumis retineatur, tum ipsi in
suis familiis absque cura and solicitudine vitam traducere queant, etc. Thus a
Heathen Emperor. Let us now hear Christians: and amongst them, whom before
him, who was so highly favored of God, as to be the first fruits (though I
know what is written of some before him) of all Christian Emperors, even
Constantine the Great, the glory of all Emperors? Of him thus Eusebius in his
life: Lib. 4 c. 14.
Ita igitur universo orb sub unius gubernatoris prudentia constituto, etc.
Imperator cum existimaret p^orum hominum preces magnum sibi momentum afferre ad
salutem, and custodiam universae Reip. eas cum necessario adhibuisset, non
solum ipse se Deo supplicem abjecit: verumetiam ut pro se ab Ecclesiae
Praesidibus supplicaretur, mandavit.

(...)b. Ecc. Hist. l. 10. c. 7.
And thus he himself in an Epistle or rather Sanction of his, by way of Epistle:
Quare eos qui in Provincia tuae fidei concredita, in Ecclesia Catholica, cui
Cae^ilianus praeest, huic sanctae religioni sedulo inserviunt (quos Clericos
nominare solent) ab omnibus omnino communibus and civilibus Rerumpub.
ministeriis solutos volo: ut nullo modo per errorem, vel per sacrilegam ac
profanam prolapsionem, quae in hujusmodi negotiis accidere solent, a cultu
divinae Majestati debito abstrahantur; sed absque ulla molestia propriae legi
obsequium praestent. Qui quidem cum sacrum numen summo honor and veneratione
prosequantur, incredibile est, quantum Reipub. adjumenti videantur allaturi.

What Culius is here especially meant, is more clearly expressed in the Greek,
by (...), and (...), words which all know (the latter especially) to be
commonly used of the daily Service of the Church. Neither was this the Divinity
of that godly religious age only: For Justinian, who swayed the Empire two
full hundred of years after, (...). lib. 1. tit. 3 l. 42.
spoke much after the same manner. As where he says: Omnem adhibentes
providentiam circa sanctissimas Ecclesias in honorem and gloriam sanctae and
incorruptae homousiae Trinitatis, per quam and nos and communem Rempub. salvos
fore credidimus: insistentes etiam doctrinae sanctorum Apostolorum de creandis
irreprehensibilibus sacerdotibus, qui quidem ob id potissimum ordinantur, ut
suis precibus benignitatem clementissimi Dei rebus acquirant communibus, (id
est, Reipub.) praesenti lege sancimus, etc. Where Dionysius Gothofredus (a man
well known amongst Scholars for his learned labors; whose son, or Kinsman, as
I take it, Jacobus Gothof: he also a very learned man, was lately Consul of
Geneva:) his marginall note is: Nota munus Episcopi; and ita Petrus Act. 6.
ver. 4.

Again: the same Justinian elsewhere, Ibid. tit. 4. l. 34.
Certissime credimus, quia Sacerdotum puritas, and decus, and ad Dominum Deum
and Salvatorem nostrum Jesum Christum fervor, and ab ipsis missae perpetuae
preces multum favorem nostrae Reipub. and incrementum praebent, per quas datur
nobis and Barbaros subjugare, etc. Where again the marginall note is; Munus
Episcopi, precari. Preces Episcopi, Reipub. utiles. And again, Novel. 133. cap.
5. Si enim illi puris manibus, and nudis animabus pro Repub. supplicent Deo,
manifestum quod and exercitus habebunt been, and civitates been disponentur,
Deo quoque placato, etc. Sed and terra nobis feret fructus, and mare quae sua
sunt dabit, illorum oratione propitiationem Dei ad omnem Rempub. deducente,
etc. And there also the Margin is; Operae Dei Ministrorum quaenam sint.

Thus have I now, through Gods grace, gone over my three Positions, and I hope
I am not come short (though I have endeavored to be short) of my undertaking in
any of the three. I have no more to say, but that I desire them that shall read
this (if any shall) all passion and prejudice laid aside, as becomes good
Christians, to consider, whether the religious use of Cathedrals, where (as by
the end of their institution it ought to be: if through abuse, incidentall to
best things, it happen to be otherwise any where, authority may look unto
that;) public prayers and supplications, for particular persons, as Princes,
and Magistrates; and for all men in general, of all estates and conditions;
for the peace and prosperity both of the Church, and of the Commonweal, with
much reverence and devotion are daily offered unto God, may not hence, in part,
be inferred. I say in part, because of diverse other particulars, that might be
alleged to the same purpose: as for example, Sermons; another main part of
Gods worship: which I think are more frequent (not to say any thing of the
Choice) in Cathedrals, then in any other Churches of the Realm: and God
forbid, but it should be so.

FINIS.
Errata.
Page 6. line 2. read, little danger. But this I conceive to be a matter of
great consequence. Let us therefore, etc.


