THE CASE OF Charles Price, Merchant, And OTHERS; Owners and Freighters of the
Ship ANDALVZIA.
THAT the East India Company had a Charter Granted to them by King Charles the
Second, in the 13th Year of his Reign, and afterward Confirmed, with further
Privileges, by King James the Second; wherein there is a Clause, That no
Person should trade to the East Indies, without License from the Company, upon
pain of Forfeiting their Goods. And also a Proclamation was put forth by the
Late King James, to the same purpose. And although there had been former Grants
made to the Company, yet the Forfeiture was never insisted upon, till about
Five Years ago.

That the said Owners and Freighters were advised by their Council, That the
said Clauses in the said Grants and Proclamation, were void in Law, and that
they might lawfully Trade to the Indies, notwithstanding the same.

Whereupon in the Year 1684, they freighted the said Ship with Cloth and Lead,
and sent her to Spain, where she took in Plate, and from thence Sailed to the
Indies. and disposed of her Cargo, for the Commodities of India.

That she Coming for England in 1686, was so disabled by a Storm, that she was
forced to put in to the Harbor of Portsmouth to re-fit.

That the East India Company having Notice thereof, prevailed with his said
Late Majesty, King James, to cause the said Ship, and all the Men and Goods in
her, to be Seized by Process out of the Admiralty-Court, pretending a
Forfeiture, by virtue of the said Charter and Proclamation, and kept them at
Portsmouth, and would not suffer them to be brought up to London; and upon one
of the Members of the Company's producing the said King's Letter to the Court,
the Judge refused to take Bail, although 100000 l. or what other Bail they would
insist upon, was offered.

That they could not get a Libel, till near Two Months afterward, (the Ship
and Men being all that time in Custody), and when the Libel was put in, the
Ship and Goods were libelled against, as Forfeited for trading to India,
without the Companies License; which (if so) that Court could not try; and to
prevent a Prohibition, (whereby the said Owners might have had their Ship and
Goods delivered them), they did in the same Libel Charge all the Seamen with
Piracy; which was a notorious Falsity, and a mere Trick, to keep the Cause in
the said Court.

That they finding themselves under this Necessity, were forced to agree with
Sir Josiah Child, and Sir Benj. Bathurst (Managers for the said Company) at
their own Terms; and before they could get their Men discharged, or any Account
of their Goods, they were compelled to acknowledge themselves to be Interlopers,
and to submit to the Determination of the Admiralty Court, without further
Appeal, or any Action to be brought in Law or Equity, and also to pay them one
Fifth of the whole Proceed of the Cargo; which, with other Charges, amounted to
above 10000 l. They having also in the Indies been forced to Pay for their
Liberty there, upon the Companies Prosecution, about 3000 l. and afterward to
give them a General Release of all Demands.

All which Doings tend to the Subversion of the Laws, and to the Great Damage
of the Owners and Freighters of the said Ship; they being remediless (by the
Contrivances of the said Company) unless in Parliament.


