THE Accomplished Commander.

Being Necessary INSTRUCTIONS FOR THE Prudent Conduct OF OFFICERS IN AN ARMY.

Written by a Person of great Experience in Military Affairs, and published for
the common Benefit, By R. C.

LONDON, Printed for J. Tailor at the Ship in St. Paul's Churchyard, and S.
Holford at the Crown in the Pall Mall. 1689.

The Preface.
MY Zeal to oblige the World (though it has still been unkind to me) has
tempted me to be unjust to my Friend, in publishing this his admirable Work
without his knowledge: For his Occasions having called him beyond the Seas, I
took this Opportunity of printing it, to which I could never as yet obtain his
Consent. But to make some Atonement for my Fault, I discover hereby the
Author's great Modesty, as well as you, in the Perusal hereof, will find his
solid Learning, and judicious Observations in all things relating to a good
Soldier: To these let me add, that his other Virtues are so conspicuous in the
conduct of his Life, and his Knowledge and Experience in Military Affairs so
exquisite, that those who have been so happy to enjoy his admirable
Conversation in his several Marches and Camps up and down in the World, will be
apt to say, That the Character which he has so ingeniously painted out, of an
accomplished Commander in an Army, may not improperly be attributed to the
Author.

After a long Contest which I had within my self, betwixt my Respect to my
Friend, and the Temptation I had to gratify the Public with a sight of this
small but excellent Treatise, I upbraided my self not much unlike the poor
Lepers of Samaria, when they had found the Treasures, and tasted of the Stores
of Provisions the Assyrians had left in their Camp, at their hasty Flight from
thence; Shall we, cried these Lepers, conceal this great good, and not
communicate it to the famished Inhabitants of our City? So, Shall I, argued I
with my self, at a time when we have such Armies in the Field, not only at
home, but in other Countries, where this Treasure may be so acceptable, and of
such great Advantage amongst them, keep it locked up in Obscurity? These and the
like Thoughts were sufficient Motives to prevail with me for its publication.

But were I sure to obtain my Friend's Pardon, for this breach of Trust, which
I do not much doubt, for I am confident I shall gain Advocates enough to plead
in my behalf; and because the Piece in it self is such, that some of our best
Pens need not blush to own; yet I can never hope it, for permitting it to come
forth thus disguised and blemished with Faults, merely through the
unskilfulness of the Transcriber; For my part, I can make but too just an
Apology for my self herein; for, ever since I delivered the Copy to the
Bookseller, my own troublesome Affairs have unhappily diverted me from taking
that due Care of it which I ought to have done, either by reviewing it before
it went to the Press, or preventing its being so published; so that it happens
to be printed with many gross Errors, particularly amongst the proper Names,
some of which I have rectified in an Errata for the present; and promise
beforehand, that if it bear another Impression, I shall be very industrious to
make it appear very correct, and in its native Beauty.

R. C.

The Contents.
OF War, Page 1. Preparation for War, Page 9. How Commanders ought to be
qualified, Page 17. How to gain and keep the Love of Soldiers, Page 29. Of
Wisdom and Policy in War, with Examples thereof, Page 35. Of Courage and Valor
in War, with Examples thereof, Page 49. Of Strategems in War, with Examples
thereof, Page 65. Of Expedition and Resolution in War, Page 76. Of Errors in
War and the evil Consequences thereof, Page 88. Of honorable Retreats, with
Examples thereof, Page 95. Of Temperance and Chastity, in War, with Examples
thereof, Page 99. Compassion in War, Page 108. Of Fame gotten in War, with
Examples thereof, Page 116. Of Monarchy, Page 124. Experience in Arms, is the
Original of true Nobility, Page 129.
ERRATA.
Page 51. read Callisthenes, Lysimachus. p. 59. r. then the best. Prisoner home
by. p. 61. r. Aemyties have. p. 63. r. Gauls. Cyrnbri. p. 80. r. Lerida. p. 81.
r. Munda. Corduba. p. 89. r. three great. p. 112. r. Crasus taken.

OF WAR.
AFter a long scene of Peace War ever enters the Stage, and is so much of the
World's Physic, as it is both a purge, and a Bloodletting. Peace, Fullness,
Pride, and War, are the four follies that, being let in to one another, make
the wheel that the Times turn on, as we see in Bees, when the Hive multiplies
and fills, nature has always taught it a way of ease by Swarms; so the World,
and Nations, when they grow overpopulous, they discharge themselves by Troops
and Bands. It Is but the distemper of the Body politic, which, like the natural
rest and a full diet, has burdened with repletion; and that highthens humors
either to Sickness, or Evacuation: When it is eased of these it subsides again
to a quiet rest and temper; so War is begotten out of Peace graduately, and
ends in Peace immediately. Between Peace and War are two Stages, Luxury,
Ambition; between War and Peace, none at all. The Causes of War may be reduced
to five heads; Ambition, Avarice, Revenge, Providence, and Defense. The first
were the most usual causes of War among the Heathen; yet what all the conquered
called Pride and Covetousness, both the Romans and Grecians were taught by
their high blood to call Honor, and increase of Empire. That which has grown
from the propagation of Religion, was never of such force, as since the
Mahumetan Law, and Catholic Cause, has ruffled among the Nations; yet
questionless to lay the foundation of Religion in blood, is to condemn it
before we teach it. The Sword may force Nature, and destroy the Body, but
cannot make the Mind believe that lawful which is begun in unlawfulness; yet
without doubt in the enterprises the Opinion has animated much: we see how it
formerly fired the Turk, and is yet a strong motive to Spanish, and French
attempts. For that of Revenge, I see not but it may be lawful for a Prince,
even by War to vindicate Himself, and People; and the reason is, because in
such causes of injury the whole Nation is interessed, and many times the
Recompense is more due to the Subjects than the Sovereign. That of Providence
may well have a pass, as when Princes make War to avoid War, or when they see a
storm inevitably falling it is good to meet it, and break the force, should they
ever sit still while the blow were given them, they might very well undo
themselves by Patience; we see in the Body men often bleed to prevent an
imminent Sickness. For that of Defense, both Religion and all the Rules of
Nature plead for it: Sharp War and the very novelty of sudden Violence use to
dismay any State or Country not inured to the like; but custom of Danger
hardens those that are unwarlike.

Nineveh had been the Palace of many valiant Kings lately reigning therein; it
had suffered and resisted all the fury wherewith either domestical Tumults
between the Sons of Senacharib, or foreign War of the Babilonians could afflict
it; and therefore it is less wonderful Phraortes did speed so ill in his
journey against it; he and the most part of his Army perished in that
expedition. For the weapons of War, they differ much from those in ancient
times, and I believe the Invention of Ordinances have mightily saved the lives
of men; they command at such distance, and are so unresistible, that men come
not to the shock of battle as in former ages: We may observe that the greatest
numbers have fallen by those weapons that have brought the Enemies nearest
together; then the pitched field was the trial, and men were so engaged, that
they could not come off till blood had desided Victory. The same advantages are
still, and rather greater now than of old; the Wind, the Sun, the better
Ground, in former Wars: For all their Armies the air was ever clear, but now
their Pieces mist and thicken it, which beaten upon by disadvantages, may soon
endanger an Army. Surely Wars are the same with Offenses they must be, yet they
are mightily in the fault that cause them; even Reason teaches to cast the
blood of the slain upon the unjust authors of it; that which gives the Mind
security is a just cause, and just deputation; let me have these, and of all
other I shall think this one of the noblest and most manly ways of dying.

Preparation for War.
HE that will make Preparation for War, ought principally to consider six
things.

First, In calling a wise and judicious Council, according to that of Solomon,
every purpose is established by Counsel, and with good advice make War. Cyneas
got more Cities by his Wisdom, than Pyrrhus by his Puissance. Caridemus, a
banished Grecian of Athens, told Darius, when he made a view of his Army about
Babylon, (viz.) That the multitude which he had assembled of diverse Nations,
richly attired, but poorly armed, would be found more terrible to the
Inhabitants of the Country, whom in passing by they would devour, than the
Maeedonians whom they went to assail, who being old and obedient Soldiers,
embattell'd in gross Squadrons, which they call their Phallaux, well covered
with Armor for defense, and furnished with Weapons for offense, of great
advantage, would make so little account of his delicate Persians, loving their
ease and their palate, being withal ill armed, and worse disciplined, as
except it would please him to entertain (having so great abundance of treasure
to do it withal) a sufficient number of the same Grecians, and so to
encounter the Macedonians with men of equal courage, he would repent him over
late, as taught by the miserable success which followed; but Darius, who had
been accustomed to nothing so much as his own Praises, and nothing so little as
to hear Truth, commanded that this poor Grecian should be presently slain, who
while he was a sundering in the Tormentor's hands, used this speech to the
King, That Alexander, against whom he had given this good avice, should
assuredly avenge his death, and lay deserved punishment upon Darius for
despising his counsel. It is a saying of a wise man, The Princes safety is in a
desperate case, whose ear judges all that is profitable to be sharp, and will
entertain nothing that is unpleasant; for liberty in Counsel is the life and
essence of Counsel.

The Second, Provision of Victuals, without which no one ought to enter upon
any designment.

The Third, Provision of Money, for all such things as might be necessary, or
behoof-full for the action.

The Fourth, In a Megazine well furnished with all sorts of Ammunition, which
may at least be thought useful, or advantageous in all designs or
undertakings; for the want of which store we have often seen, that great Armies
have been for'cd to quit the field, leaving the Victory to men of smaller
number, and of less courage, having the advantage in being better furnished.

The Fifth. In an Army well armed, either in all, or for the most part
consisting of old beating Soldiers; for upon raw and fresh Fellows it is not
safe to repose one's hopes: And in truth that General can never securely come
to the trial of Battle, nor safely encamp, whose Army for the greatest part
consists not of old experienced Soldiers; a rule ever verified by the most
judicious Captains that ever were, Alexander, Hannibal, Scipio, and Caesar, who
never entered into any Enterprise, but did first of all provide themselves of
great numbers thus qualified.

The Sixth, In experience of his Enemies Forces, by which measuring thy own;
and if thou feast the advantage on thy side, then bid them battle; if it stands
upon indifferency, or equal terms, if thou can trust on thy own skill and
conduct, never refuse it; but if thou find thy self inferior, then either by
Strategems make thy self fuperior, or by temporifing stay until time shall
either lessen thy Enemies Forces, or make thy own more stronger: But in all
such warlike cases, that Prince which is most absolute in his self seems to
have the greatest advantage. The Empire of Germany had doubtless sooner
encountered the Turks, and given a stop to his free entrance the first year of
thee War into Hungary, had he not been necessitated to expect the consent of
his several Princes, and the result of a Diet, when the Turks were ready to
enter Germany; for when many heads or hands are required, all business moves
slowly, and more time is spent in agreements of the Manner of Action in
arguments and debates, (which are most commonly carried on by Faction,) than in
the most difficult point of Execution.

How Commanders ought to be qualified.
COmmanders in War ought to be built upon these three Virtues; they should be
Wise, Valiant, and Experienced: Wisdom in a General many times ends the War
without War; of all victories the Romans thought that best, which was least
stained with blood; and they were content to let Camillus triumph when he had
not fought in these times: It is especially requisite, since Strategems and
advantages are more in use than the open and daring valor: yet valiant he must
be, else he grows contemptible, loses his Command, and by his own fear infects
his Troops with Gowardice. To the eternal honor of CaesarCicero reports, that
in all his Commands of the Field there was not found an Ito, but a Veni, as if
he had scorned in all his on-sets to be any thing but still a Leader, always
teaching by the strongest authority his own forwardness, his own examples.
Although these be excellencies, they be all without experience lame; let him be
never so learned, his books cannot limit his designs in several, and though he
be perfect in a paper plot, where his eye has all in a view, he will fail in a
leagure, where he sees but a limb at once. Besides, Experience puts a Credit on
his actions, and makes him far more prompt in undertakings; and indeed there is
a great deal of reason why we should respect him that with an untainted Valor
has grown old in Arms. Scipio conquered the greatest part of Spain, in the four
and twentieth year of his age; and Polibius does attribute to his honor, that
the chiefest Virtue whereby he got the eminency of Excellency, and whereby he
mastered the actions he undertook, how difficult soever, was his great
Industry, and large Experience in military Affairs; and Titus Livius ascribes
unto him a particular dextery of Wisdom, appropriated above common measure unto
himself only; For, says he, it could not be otherwise, unless by some
extraordinary favor from above, that he over-weighed the greatest dangers and
difficulties befalling him, both at home and abroad.

It is also very requisite that all Commanders should be well skilled in the
Art of Arithmetic; for without which Art it is very hard and difficult for the
wisest of Men to divide Armies into Regiments, and so into Campanies of equal
number; or to proportion the quantity of Provision, or Ammunition, according to
the number of Soldiers, either for days, weeks, or years; or to be exact in
their payments; or for digging of Trenches, or raising of Bullworks, or any
other Fortification, according to strength and time; or to proportion ground,
either to encamp on, or battalia an Army to fight, or defend an Enemy at the
best advantage; or degreeing of Guns according to place and distance. Alexander
Magnus without all doubt was well skilled in all such like Arts; for if you
read his life, you shall see that famous Philosopher, Aristotle, his
Schoolmaster. Besides all these Arts, Swimming is very necessary to be learnt,
both by Commanders and Soldiers; for there is hardly an Island or Country so
barren of water, but there are Rivers of that breadth and depth which are not
passable without swiming; for if an Army be forced on a River, either by
retreat, flight, or in pursuance of an Enemy; the former like to perish, the
latter loose their enterprise. It is storied of the same Alexander, though
being so complete a Captain and Soldier, and to the admiration of all
Commanders that followed him, that he being so expert in War, yet he never
leart to swim, being a thing so necessary as he himself found it in all actions
of War; for his Soldiers not daring to approach unto Nisa, a City environed
with a deep River, he standing by, and looking upon it, wept full bitterly that
he had not learnt that Art, terming himself to be a man of no worth, and basely
brought up.

It is possible, though very rare, to find a Commander qualified with all these
Warlike Virtues: With all the Authors I have consulted, I find none come so
near as Epaminondas, which I shall leave to the world (as he is recommended)
for an example. Epaminondas at the great Battle of Mantua was mortally wounded
with a Dart; the wood breaking of, left the Iron in his breast, and being
brought into his Tent, was told by the Physician, that when the head of the
Dart should be drawn out of his body, he must needs dye; hearing this he called
for his Squire, which brought him his Shield, which to have lost, was held a
great dishonor; he bad them tell him which part had the victory, answer was
made, the Baeotians had won the Field, Then, said he, it is fair time for me to
dye; and withal sent for Joledes and Diaphantes, two principal Men of War,
that were both slain, which being told him, he advised the Thebeans to make
Peace, whilst with advantage they might; for that they had no one left that was
able to discharge the Office of a General. Herewithall he willed that the head
of the weapon should be drawn out of his body, comforting his Friends that
lamented his death, and want of Issue, by telling them that the victories of
Luctra and Mantinna were two fair Daughters, in whom his Memory should live.

So dyed Epaminondas, the worthiest Man that ever was bred in that Nation of
Greece, and hardly to be matched in any Nation or Country; for he equaled all,
even in the several Virtues, and in each of them was singular: His Justice and
Sincerity, his Temperance, Wisdom, and high Magnaminity were no way inferior to
his Military Virtue; in every part whereof he so exceeded, that he might not
improperly be called a wary, a Valiant, a Politic, a Bountiful, or an
Industrious, and a Provident Captain: All these Titles and many other, being
due unto him, with which his notable Discipline and good Conduct made a perfect
completion of an Heroic General. Neither was his private Conversation
unanswerable to these high Parts, which gave him praises abroad; for he was
Grave, and yet very Affable and Courteous; resolute in public business; but in
his own particular easy, and of much Mildness; a lover of People, bearing with
Men's infirmities; Witty, and pleasant in Speech; far from insolence; Master of
his own Affections, and furnished with all Qualities that might win and keep
the love of his Soldiers. To these Graces were added a great ability of Body,
much Eloquence, and very deep Knowledge in all parts of Philosophy and Learning;
wherewith his Mind being enlighten^^ rested not in the sweet contemplation, but
brake forth into such effects, as gave unto Thebes, which had ever been an
underling, a dreadful reputation among all People adjoining, and the highest
command in Greece.

How to gain and keep the Love of Soldiers.
NOthing procures the love of Soldiers like a Commander, whose noble Heart is
the Seat of Humility, attended with the hand of Bounty; where the heart is
stuffed with Pride, nothing more begets Hate: The proud Captain walks among
Daggers pointed against him, whereas the humble and affable have the people for
their guard in time of danger: The Captain that is Noble to his Soldiers,
although he seems low, yet carries such a sway that commands their very Souls:
But let him take heed he expresses it not in unworthy actions, for then
leaving Virtue, it falls into disdained baseness, which is the undubitable
badge of one that will betray Society; so far as a Commander, both in words and
deeds, may be free from Flattery and unmanly Cowardice, he may be humble with
commendation.

The great affection which Caesar's Soldiers bore to him proceeded chiefly from
these two Causes: The first from his Humility; for we read in his Orations, and
set Speeches, he would not call them by the name of Soldiers, but Companions,
and Fellows in Arms. The second from his Liberality; for one while he would
give his Soldiers Prisoners, another while Corn; and for all such as were
disabled, or by Age forced to leave the War, he took the care that they should
have a competent maintenance during their lives.

He also valued the Reputation of his Soldiers at the highest rate imaginable,
as it plainly appears; for after the Overthrow given, and his Soldiers
defeated by Sabynus, he would never trim his Beard, nor yet as much as once
smile, until such time as making their Loss his particular Prejudice, he had
revenged that disgrace.

He severely punished injuries, and such as were treacherous unto him; he was a
most strickt and severe observer of Martial Discipline, but at all other faults
he would wink, as if he saw them not: So accomplished a Captain and Soldier was
he, that by his Humility, Liberality, and good Conduct, he had so much won the
hearts of his Soldiers, that it is even said, Caesar's Eye made his Soldiers
prodigal of their Blood. Plt.

To keep the Love of Soldiers.
But the chiefest thing in a General is when he has brought his Soldiers under
obedience, and that he does intend to keep their love, he must as well make
them partakers of his Victories, as to oblige them by Gifts; for he that does
not as well impart of the Honor which he gains in the Wars, as he does of
the Spoils, shall never be long followed by those of the better sort; for men
that are well born, or well bred, and have more of Wealth than Reputation, do
as often satisfy themselves with the purchase of Glory, as the weak in
Fortune, and strong of Courage, do with gain of Gold and Silver.

Lastly, I could advise all Commanders to do their Soldiers that right,
agreeable to that of Hannibal toward his Enemies, Hostem qui feriet, erit mihi
Carthaginensis, Let him be of what condition he will in all offices or actions,
he that deserves best shall have best.

Of Wisdom and Policy in War, and Examples thereof.
A Wise Man scaleth the City of the mighty. Wisdom is profitable for all things
in Military affairs. Prudence is better than Puissance. How did Archimedes by
his rare Engines preserve Syracusae against the Romans; and how many
impregnable Cities have been surprised by Warlike Strategems, As,

Babylon by Cyrus, and afterward by Zaphirus, under Darius; Jerusalem by
Pompey, taking the opportunity of the Sabbath day, wherein he knew the
superstitious Jews would not stir to defend themselves.

A prudent Man foresees the evil, etc. Premission is the best means for
Prevention. A wise Man's Eyes are in his Head, and his Heart at his right Hand.

The Chinois say, That all others in the World, see but with one eye, and they
only with two. The Italians say, that they look before they leap, forecast all
evil before it befalls them; but these are praises belonging to those that have
Heavenly Wisdom, that by Signs discern a Tempest in the Clouds, and seek
seasonable shelter under the hollow of God's Hand, under the shadow of his
Wings; as did Noah, Joseph, Jonadab, Josiah, the Christians at Pella, etc.

Homer makes the Prudentest and Valiant, ever best Armed when they come to
Battle. And the Lawmakers amongst the Grecians do ever punish him that casts
away his Target, but never him that casts away his Sword or Lance; for every
man should first think of defending himself, before he seek to hurt his Enemy.

What a prize did Agamemnon set upon his Nestor for his Wisdom, and Darius upon
Zophirus. Scipio did nothing without his Polibius, and ascribed most of his
Victories to his Wisdom.

It was said of Octavius Augustus, that he never made War upon any People
without just and necessary Causes. His Saying was, That neither Battle, nor
War, was to be undertaken, unless there might be evidently seen more hope of
Gain, than fear of Damage. He likened such as sought after small Commodities
with great Danger, unto those that angle with a golden Hook, which if it be
broken off, no draught of Fish whatsoever is able to make amend's for the loss.
He deemed nothing less beseeming a perfect and accomplished Captain than
Temerity, or Rashness, using this Speech, That is done soon enough, that is
done well enough.

Policy governs the World, Policy.
Nature Policy, but Religion all; and as we seldom see those Kingdoms governed
by Viceroys flourish like those where the Prince is present in Person, so we
never find Policy, or Nature, to keep a Man in that quiet which Religion can:
The two first I may use as Counselours, hear what they say, and weigh it; but
the last must be my Sovereign. Lysander, King of Sparta, Examples of Policy.
a gallant General, and very Politic, used to say, That where the Lyon's skin
would not suffice, it was meet to put the Fox's skin upon it.

Philip and Alexander, Kings of Macedon, used to buy Victory with Money, not
Money with Victory, by which Policy they did many notable things, and conquered
the World; whence came that common saying, That not Philip, but his Gold and
Silver won him the Cities of Greece. For certainly Policy runs smoothest when
it turns upon a golden Hinge; without the supply of means, it is but like a
Clock without a Weight to set it going, curious Workmanship, but it wants a
Mover.

Alexander perceiving Darius with his huge Army at hand, entrenches himself
upon a ground of advantage, which the Persian had abandoned. And whereas
Darius, for fear of surprise, had stood with his Army in Armor all the day,
and forborne sleep all night; Alexander gave his Men rest, and store of food,
for Reason had taught him this Rule in the Wars, Soldiers do the better stand
to it in fight, if they have their bellies full of meat and drink; for Hunger
within fights more eagerly then Steel without. The Constable of France made
frustrate the mighty preparation of Charles the Fifth, when he invaded
Provence, by wasting the Country, and forbearing to fight. So did the Duke of
Alva weary the French in Naples, and dissolve the potent Army of the Prince of
Orange in the Low Countries.

It was a Policy of the Romans to make their Conquest sure; they would always
ease the conquered of their burdens, giving them more liberty than they had
before; that made the Gascoigres bear such a faithful affection to the Kings
of England, for that they governed more mildly than the French. This enlarged
the Venetian Jurisdiction in Lombardy; for the Towns that they won, they won
out of the hands of Tyrannous Oppressors. And this did cause the Macedonians,
with other Nations that had been Subject unto the prosperity of Alexander's
followers, to serve the Romans patiently, if not willingly; for that by them
they were eased of many burdens, which had been imposed upon them by their own
Kings. When Scipio saw his Horse to be beaten at the battle of Facinium, by the
strength of Hannibal, and the rest of his Army thereby greatly discouraged, he
thought it a point of Wisdom, having lost so many of his Fleet, upon the first
puff of Wind, to take part with the rest before the extremest of the Tempest
overtook him; for he saw by the louring morning what manner of day it was like
to prove: Therefore his Battle of Foot being yet unbroken, he in a manner stole
the Retreat, and recovered the Bridge over Ticinus, which he had formerly
built; but notwithstanding all the haste he made, he left six hundred of his
Rear behind him, who were the last that should have passed, and staid to break
the Bridge. Herein he followed the rule of a Politic Man of War, which must be
understood in this sort. If a General of an Army by some unprosperous
beginnings doubt the success, or find his Army fearful, or wavering, it is
more profitable to steal a safe Retreat, than to abide the uncertain Event of
Battle.

Alexander Severus gave such Lands as he won out of the hands of his Enemies to
his Lords, Marches, and Soldiers, that they should be theirs and their Heirs
for ever, so they would be Soldiers; neither should they at any time come to
the hands of private Men, saying, They would the more carefully serve, if they
fought for their own Lands.

Campidus Lycurgus commanded his Spartans that they should never make War often
with one Enemy, lest in process of time they should grow more expert and
valiant than themselves.

It was looked upon as Policy in Scipio, because he would not hazard his own
Person, unless moved by opportunity, or forced by necessity; whereupon being in
some sort taxed for not adventuring himself, he made answer, That he was not
born a Soldier, but a Commander; inferring thereby that Forwardness is
especially to be expected in private Soldiers, good Conduct and Temporizing to
be the most requisite parts in a General. It was likewise a saying of his, That
the passage whereby an Enemy was to take his flight is not to be stopped; for
as their flight will administer occasion of slaughter and advantage, so it is
most dangerous to fight with People standing upon terms of despair and
necessity.

But the truest Policy in War, and for the most part with good success, is that
which is ordained against the richest Nations, for as the Needy are always
adventurous, so Plenty is wont to shun peril; and Men that have wherewith well
to live, do rather study how to live well, I mean wealthy, than care to dye (as
they call it) Honorably; no man makes haste to that Market where is nothing to
be bought but blows.

Of Courage and Valor in War, with Examples thereof.
Whilst a People walk in obedience to God, he has promised that they shall
chase their Enemies, who shall fall before them on the Sword; and that five of
them shall chase one hundred, and one hundred shall put ten thousand to flight;
whence it appears, that the Spirit of Courage and Valor is from the Lord, who
by weak and small means does many times effect great and wonderful things,
that the Glory of all may be his.

What wonderful Valor did David show in killing the Lion, and the Bear, and
in the duel with that huge Polypheme of the Philistians, and in many other
Martial Acts against them; so that it seems that action is best done, which
being good is done with the Vigor of the Spirits; What makes Zeal so
commendable, but the Fervency that it carries with it? Other Examples. In the
Battle of Cynaegyrus, an Athenian, who showed such incomparable Valor, that
pursuing the Persians to their Ships, when some of them were putting off from
the shore, he caught hold of one of the Ships with his right Hand, holding it
till his Hand was cut off, then he laid hold on it with his left Hand till that
also was cut off, and then he caught hold of it with his Teeth. Justin.

When Alexander had put Calshenes to death, he suspected Lysimaches, another of
his Captains, because he had been a familiar to Calshenes, and thereupon caused
him to be cast naked to a most fierce Lion; but when the Lion came roaring upon
him, Lysimaches wraped his shirt about his arm, and thrusting his arm into the
Lion's mouth, and taking fast hold of his Tongue, he slew the Lion; of which
Alexander being informed, having his Valor in admiration, he not only forgave
him, but esteemed him more highly than before. Valor was so much esteemed
among the Lacedaemonians, that in public Feasts they had always three dances:

The 1st. of old Men, who Sung,
We have been young and strong,
And valiant heretofore,
Till broken Age did hold us back,
And bid us do no more.
The 2d. of young Men, who Sung,
We yet are young, bold, strong,
And ready to maintain
That quarrel still against all Men
That do on Earth remain.
The 3d. of Children, who Sung,
And we do hope as well
To pass you all at last,
And that the World shall witness be,
Ever many years be past.
In their War they assaulted their Enemies very fiercely, and never gave over
till the flight of their Enemies had assured them of Victory, and then they
quickly and quietly returned into their own Camp, judging it unworthy of their
Manhood, and an ignoble action, to kill and hew in pieces Men once scattered
and out of order; this much furthered their Victories, their Enemies being upon
slight, secure from farther danger.

Julius Caesar was of a most Magnanimous Resolution, insomuch as being
forewarned of a Conspiracy that was made against him in the Senate, he
answered, That he had rather dye, than admit of fear.

Arestomenes King of the Messenians, was a very Gallant and Valiant Man, who in
a Battle against the Corinthians, slew one hundred Men with his own hand; the
like he did in diverse other Battles; whereupon he used to offer Jupiter a
Sacrifice, called Hecatomphona, or conticideum Pausen. After the Battelat
Chaeronea, wherein Philip King of Macedon overcame the Athenians, and after the
Victory looking upon the dead bodies of his Adversaries, he much commended them
for their Valor; for that all their wounds were in their foreparts, and for
that they dyed in those Stations which were assigned by their Captains.

The two Scipios, Brethren, were samous for the Wars in Spain, and against the
Carthaginians, so that they were called duo fulmina belli, the two thunder
bolts of War.

Claudius Marcellus fought one and fifty Battles, and was for his Valor
called, Gladius Romani Populi, the Sword of the Romans; as Fabius was called
Clypeus, their Buckler, for his Policy.

George Castriot, alias Scanderbeg, Prince of Epirus, was inspired with such a
Spirit of Valor by God, in defending his Country against the Barbarous Turks,
that in fighting against them, for very Egerness of Spirit his Blood would
usually burst out of his Lips, and with such Violence he struck, that many of
them he clove in sunder from the head to the Middle, and usually cut off an
armed Arm at a blow; and with his own Hand he slew above two thousand of them
at several times.

News being brought to the Grecians of the huge Army that Xerxes had brought
over into Greece, whole Archers were so many (as it was reported) that the
flight of the Persian Arrows would be so thick, as they would darken the light
of the Sun; Dioneces, a Spartan, answered, Its good news, for then we shall
fight in the shade.

Julius Caesar was a very Valiant Man, and successful in all his Wars; so that
in his Life time he took a Million of Men Prisoners, and slew as many.

But why should I range the world for Examples of Valor, whilst our own Nation
can give a better account than any Romish Author; for if we read what a French
Writer says of the inequality that was between the French and English, when
King John was ready to give the onset upon the Black Prince, at the Battle of
Poictiers: John had all the advantages over Edward, both of Number, Force,
Show, Country, and Conceit, the which is commonly a consideration of no small
Importance in Warlike Assairs; and withal, the chief of all, his Horsemen
es^eemed them the best in Europe, with the greatest and wisest Captains of his
whole Realm, and what could he wish more. I think it would trouble a Roman
Antiquary to find the like Examples in their Histories, the Example, I say, of
a King brought Prisoner to Rome by an Army of eight Thousand, which he had
surrounded with forty Thousand better appointed, and no less expert Warriors;
all that have read of Cresse, and Agincourt, will bear me witness that I do not
alledg the Battle of Poictiers for lack of others, as good Examples of English
Valor; the Proof whereof has left many hundred better Marks in all quarters
of France, than ever did the Valor of the Romans. If any man shall ask, How
then came it to pass, that they won so many great Battles, having no advantage
to help them? I may with best Commendation of Modesty, reser him to the French
Historian, who relating the Victory of our men at Crevant, where they passed a
Bridge in face of the Enemy, uses these Words: The English comes with a
Conquering bravery, as he was accustomed, to gain every where without any stay;
he forced our Guards placed upon the Bridge to keep the passages: Or I may cite
another Place of the same Author, where he tells how the Britains, being
invaded by Charles the Eight, King of France, thought it good Policy to apparel
a Thousand one Hundred of their own men in English Cassocks, hoping that the
very sight of our English red Crest would be enough to terrify the French. But
I will not stand to borrow of French Historians, all which, excepting Deserres,
and Paulus Aeucylius, were reported wonders of our Nation; and likewise our own
Histories, who tell us that the Military Virtue of the English, prevailing
against all manner of difficulties, ought to be preferred before that of the
Romans, which was assisted with all advantages that could be desired: If it
should be demanded, Why then did not our Kings finish the Conquest, as Caesar
had done? my Answer may be, (I hope without offense,) That our Kings were like
to the race of the Aeacide, of whom the old Poet Ennius gave this note, They
were more Warlike than Politic. Who so notes their proceedings, may find that
none of them went to work like a Conqueror, save only King Henry the Fifth,
the course of whose Victories it pleased God to interrupt by his Death. But the
question is more easily answered: If another be first made, why did not the
Romans attempt the conquest of Gall before the time of Caesar? At all these
times they had good leisure and fit opportunity, when, under the Conduct of
Marius, they had newly vanquished the Cymbry, and Tutones, by whom the Country
of the Galls had been pitiously wasted. Surely the Words of Tully were true,
that with other Nations the Romans fought for Dominion, with the Galls for the
Preservation of their own safety. But now it is high time to lay aside
Comparison, and end my Discourse of this matter: Were it possible for me to
particularize the Valor of our English Princes, Nobles, and Gentry, I should
swell my Volume, and not attain my end, which is Brevity.

Of Strategems, and Examples thereof.
IT has been ever held for a Maxim in War, that it is more Commendation to
overcome by Strategeme, than by Sword; for how many Cities has there been
surprised by Warlike Strategems, when all the strength imaginable could not
have taken them otherways. Certainly Strategems in War are like Diamonds in a
Ring; for as the Stones are more to be valued than the Ring it self, so
Strategems in War are more to be esteemed than any other Warlike action
besides; and the lawfulness thereof we need not doubt, Joshua 8.2. we read that
God commanded Joshua to lie in ambush behind the City of Ai^ Judge. 20.29. by
which Stategeme it was destroyed, and likewise Israel to set l^ers in wait
round about Gibeah, etc. Other Examples.

Darius besieging the impregnable City of Babylon, which had revolted from him,
after many ways and means assayed, knew not how to prevail; at last one of the
Chief Colonels, called Zopyrus, caused himself to be beaten black and blue,
his Nose, Lips, and Ears to be cut off, and acquainting Darius with his
purpose, he went to Babylon, into which being admitted, he showed the People
his dismembered and torn Body, complains of the cruelty of Darius, and profereth
his best assistence to them against him; the Citizens knowing the worth of the
Man, and not suspecting the fraud, made him their Captain; in some Skirmishes
he beat the Persians; at last having drawn forth all his strength of the City,
he betrayed them to Darius, and so delivered up Babylon into his hands. After
which Darius used to say, That he had rather hove one Zopyrus, than twenty
Cities of Babylon.

After the Lacedaemonians had taken Thebes, seven of the banished Men forsook
Athens privately, and entered by night into the fields of Thebes, where spending
the next day secretly, they came late in the evening to the Gates, like
Husbandmen returned from work, and passed undiscovered unto the house of
Charon, whom Philidas the Scribe had drawn into conspiracy. The day following a
solemn Feast being held in the City, Philidas promised the Governors, who were
insolent and lustful Men, that he would conveigh unto them that night the
beautiful Dames of the Town, with whom they should take their pleasure; having
cheared them with such hope, and plenty of good Wine, he told them when the
time of performance (which they urged) came, that he would not make good his
promise unless they would dismiss their followers, because the Gentlewomen who
attended without in a Chamber, would not endure that any of their Servants
should see their faces; upon which occasion the Attendents were dismissed, and
the Conspirators attired like Ladies, and their Maids brought into the place,
who taking advantage of the Governors loose behavior, slew them all upon a
sudden, with Daggers, which they brought hidden under their Garments; so by
this Strategeme they did not only purchase the Thebans liberty, but freed
themselves of the Lacedemonian Garrison. Sir W. Rawleigh.

Cymon General of the Athenians triumphed over the Persians twice in one day;
for first, He lought a great Battle with them by Sea, upon the Confines of
Asia, wherein he gave them a great overthrow; and then taking the Persian
Ships, he put all his Valiant Soldiers into them, and dressed them in the
Persian Apparel, and so sailing to the place where their Land Army lay, they
took them for Persiant, returning in Triumph from the slaughter of the
Athenians; Cymon therefore by his Strategeme landing his Men, broke suddenly
into the Camp of the Persians, whom he quickly overthrew with a great
slaughter, and took twenty thousand Prisoners, together with an infinite mass
of Treasure, the tenth part whereof the Athenians dedicated to their God's.
Diod, Sic.

Sertorius, the Roman General, in his passage into Spain was forced to pay
Tribute to many Barbarous People that inhabited the Pyrenean Mountains, over
which he was to pass; at this some of his Soldiers muttered, saying, That it
was an act very dishonorable for the Romans; but he told them, he only bought
time, a commodity which such as aspire to haughty enterprises, must take up at
any rate.

Cyaxazes, King of the Medes, who in his extremity was no better than a
Rent-gatherer for the Scithians, perceiving that his Land lay unmanured and
waste, through the negligence of his People, that were out of heart by daily
oppressions, and that the matter could not be remedied by open force, resolved
to prove what might be done by Strategeme; the managing of the business is thus
delivered in brief: that he, and his Medes, feasted the better part of the
Scithians, made them drunk and slew them, recovering thereby the possession of
all that they had lost. Herod.

Hannibal, to bring Fabius into dislike, and in suspicion with the Romans,
commanded his Soldiers, when they came near any of Fabius his Lands, that they
should burn and destroy all round about them, but in no ways to meddle with or
hurt either his Land, or any thing that was his. He also appointed a Party of
Soldiers to see that nothing belonging to Fabius might miscarry. Plut. in Vita
Fa.

The Moscovites, not many years since, having besieged the City of Smolensko in
Lithuania with an huge Army, Valdislaus, King of Poland, came to relieve the
place; but the Enemy being strongly Entrenched, he was not able to beat up
their Quarters; whereupon he so entrenched himself, that he cut off all
Provisions from the Moscovitish Army, whereby he reduced them to such
extremity, that they were forced either to starve, or to render themselves to
his mercy. A terrible thing, and not heard of before, that a Hundred Thousand
Men should bring their Arms and Colors, and cast them at the feet of this
victorious Prince: This was not only a Victory, but a monster of a Victory; he
pardoned them all, and made the Strangers, which were about one Thousand four
Hundred Men, to promise never to bear Arms more against the Crown of Poland,
and so dismissed them. Hist of this Iron Age.

Of Expedition and Resolution in War.
HE that will act great Matters, has no greater need of any thing than Time;
and therefore ought a Prince to beg these two things at the hand of God; Length
of Life, and Expedition in Execution. Curtius does attribute to Alexander for
his great Expedition in War: For, says he, I never commended any Virtue more
in him than his Celerity: And in truth, as if he had been the presager of the
shortness of his own Life, both in Beginning and Prosecution of his Enterprise
of Asia; for coming very late to the River Granico, and being expected on the
other side by the Lieutenants of King Darius, Permenio did advise him to defer
the Battle till the day following, which he refused to do, for loosing of
time, telling him, that Hellespont would blush for shame, if having passed it
so boldly, he should fear to adventure on so small a passage: After his second
Battle he pursued Darius with such speed, that in Eleven days he marched more
then Six hundred Miles.

And Caesar says, That to give time of Preparation is the only way to arm his
Enemy, and to put him in readiness; and indeed it behooves a good Captain if he
be to deal with an Enemy, which is not all together weak in Force, or Judgment,
to use such Expedition in assailing him, or Art in deceiving him, that either
he may want time to make Preparation, or Courage to encounter the Danger; for
unfortunate must that Captain be, if wanting neither Power nor Valor, and
having time and intelligence, he does not provide and order his Affairs as
thereby he be able to make the designment of his Adversary either of none, or
if any, yet of small and contemptible Effect.

Caesar, in all his Battles, his use was to follow his Conquest, never leaving
the chase, and pursuing his Enemies, (having once defeated them,) until he had
spoiled them of their Lodging, and made them wholly unable to make Head against
him, wherein he did excellently help himself, by making use of their fear and
disorder: When Pompey knew not how to do the like at Darrachium, Caesar did
thus consure his oversight, That Pompey knew well how to overcome, but not how
to use his Victory.

The same Caesur did also advantage himself by the heat of Victory, insomuch
that many times he finished a whole War with one only Overthrow; as by that of
Pharsalia, he became Lord of all the East. With these of Lereda, and of Munda,
first he conquered, and afterward recovered Spain; with that of Thapsus he
made himself Master of Africa, in which point Hannibal committed a great
oversight, who having won four or five pitched Fields, yet in the end sat down
with the loss, and was quite overthrown.

But as in Actions, so in Marching Caesar used Expedition in all his Voyages;
for in eight days he came from Rome to Geneva, and in twenty six days from Rome
to the Land of Ovilcone near unto Cordiba: He used the like Expedition in
getting and gaining of time, for that he might more fitly wage War. All the
Summer he would let himself forwards, and travel in Winter; in which season he
passed from Bunda into Albina: In the Winter he made a cut out of Italy into
Africa, and afterward passed the Alps when the Snow lay six foot deep.

The same he used in all his other Actions, for in fifteen days he raised a
Wall of Six foot in highth, and above Nineteen miles in length, (to wit) from
Geneva Lake to Mount Saint Claud: In ten days he built a Bridge over the Rhine;
and in so many he haled his whole Navy on shore, wherewith he passed in to
Britain, Rigging it anew and making it fit for the Sea:

To sum up all his Enterprises, he used that expedition, that overcoming King
Pharnases, and being desirous to advertize one of his friends of his quick
Expedition in dispatching that War, he wrote only three Words unto Anitius at
Rome: Veni, Vidi, Vici. I came, I saw, I overcame.

But it is not enough for a Commander to use Speed and Expedition in Execution
of his Enterprise, Of Resolution in War.
unless he be also constant, and resolute of Courage in Chances and Checks of
Fortune, in Perils and Dangers; whereupon the said Caesar without all doubt
surpassed all other Captains, whose memorable Prowess, by the help of Learning,
has come to the Knowledge of Posterity: For upon many occasions opposing
himself alone against his flying and discomfited Soldiers, sometimes pulling
them back one by one, and another while forcing them to turn again, He would
rally Ranks half broken, and renew a Battle at the point of wavering,
re-securing whatsoever before was doubtful: In the Field which he fought with
the Nericy, the Battle being brought to that Exegent, that his whole Cavalry
was upon point of flight, and the Seventh and Twelfth Legions in great
distress, their Captains and Commanders being almost slain; Caesar casting his
Shield on his Arm, and pressing through the midst of the Squadrons to the Front
of the Battle, he made such Proof of his Valor, that partly upon his Example,
and partly for the Danger wherein they saw their General engaged, the Soldiers
perceiving hopes, gathering strength and courage a fresh, renewed the fight,
and so Valiantly behaved themselves, that fifty thousand of their Enemies lay
slain on the Place; by which President it may plainly be seen, how much
Resolution and Expedition import a General: For albeit that Caesar was a
Captain so wary, and so circumspect, yet was he suddenly and secretly set upon
by the Policy of his Enemies, who being covered with the-thickness of these
Boughs which did over spread them, were sooner felt than seen; he wanted but
little of his latest Ruin, and final Overthrow, had he not helped himself by
his innate Valor, and speedy Order.

In his War of Africa, his Soldiers being put to the worst, he lugged one of
his Ensign-bearers by the Throat, and turning him toward his Enemies, There,
there, said he, are those against whom thou must fight: In the very same War,
the Enemies having given his Men so furious a Charge, that they had already
entered their Rampires, and fell pell-mell with his Soldiers, Caesar thrusting
forward amongst them, by his presence and example reheartened the one, and
restrained the other.

And likewise in Spain, perceiving his Soldiers ready to fly, traversing the
Troops, and posting themselves from one unto another, what with ealling upon
them, and what with lying about, he so managed the Matter, that his Men for
very shame, not to be said to forsake their General, if not betray him, took
Heart and Courage, and obtained Victory, with the death of thirty Thousand
Pompeians.

Of Errors in War, and the evil Consequences thereof.
IN Military Affairs it is extreme folly, and much blamable to say, I did not
think it; for in other occurrences an Error may happily be amended, but
Oversight in War-fare, without punishment and repentance instantly
accompanying them, cannot possibly be redressed; and therefore it stands with
the Reputation of a General to premeditate thoroughly upon his designments, and
to have an open and a watchful Eye, even upon Matters of smallest Moment.

We read that Sempronius committed there great Errors, which every one
deserved to be recompensed with the loss that followed; the first was, That he
fought with Hannibal in a Campaigne, being by far inferior in Horse, and
withal thereby subject to the African Elephants, which in enclosed or uneven
Grounds, and Woodlands, would have been of no use.

His Second Error was, In the Battle of Trebia, both the Roman Consulswere
beaten by Hannibal.
That he made no discovery of the place upon which he fought; whereby he was
grossly over-reacht, and ensnared by the Ambush which Hannibal had laid for him.

The third was, That he drencht his Foot men with empty Stomachs in the River
of Trebia, even in a cold and frosty day, whereby in effect they lost their
Limbs; for there is nothing in the World more inconvenient and perilous, than
to present an Army, tired with Travel, to an Enemy fresh and fed, since thereby
the Strength of the Body fails, the Generosity of the Mind is but an empty
Vapor. When the Knowledge of Alexander's Landing on Asia side was brought to
Darius, he so much scorned the Army of Macedon, and had so contemptible an
opinion of Alexander himself, as having styled him his Servant on a Letter
which he had wrote unto him, reprehending his Disloyalty and Audacity, (for
Darius entitled himself King of Kings, and Kinsman to the Gods,) he gave order
withal to his Lieutenants of Lesser Asia, that they should take Alexander
alive, whip him with Rods, and then convey him to his Presence; that they
should sink his Ships, and send the Macedons taken Prisoners beyond the red
Sea, belike into Aethiopia, or some other unhealthfull Part of Africa; Darius
lost in one Battle, against Alexander, as Curtius says, 100000 Foot, and as
many Horse, and 40000 taken Prisoners, when Alexander 's Army there miscarried,
but 200 and 80 in all sorts.
but by the Experience of his own overthrow, he found his grand Error,
imputing too much confidence in a multitude of disorderly and unwarlike Men.

We see what Error the Empire of Constantinople committed (in using the help
of foreign Auxiliaries) in taking ten Thousand Turks against his Nighbour
Princes, he could never, by Persuasion or Force, set them again over Sea upon
Asia side, which gave beginning to the Christian Servitude, that soon after
followed.

Alexander, the Son of Cassander, sought aid of the great Demetrius, who, being
entered into his Kingdom, slew the Son, Alexander that had invited him, and made
himself King of Macedon.

Syracon the Turk was called into Egypt by Sanor the Soldane against his
opposite, but the Turk did settle himself so saft in Egypt, that Solidon his
Successor became Lord thereof, and all the Holy Land soon after.

What need we look about for Examples of this Kind, every Nation in effect can
furnish us; the Britains drew the Saxons into this our Country, and Macmurrough
drew the English into Ireland; but the one and the other soon became Lords of
these two Kingdoms.

Of Honorable Retreats, with Examples thereof.
IT is the true Judgment of Men of War, Honorable Retreats are no way
inferior to brave Charges, as having less of Fortune, more of Discipline, and
as much of Valor: Darius was overthrown with all his Cowardly and Confused
Rabble, when those Grecians under their Captain Amyntas held firm, and marched
away in order, in dispight of the Vanquishers; old Soldiers are not easily
dismayed. We read in Histories Ancient and Modern, what brave Retreats have
been made by them, though the rest of the Army in which they have served has
been broken.

At the Battle of Ravenne were the Imperialists were beaten by the French, a
Squadron of Spaniards, old Soldiers, came off unbroken and undismayed; for it
is truly said by these men, who by being acquainted with dangers, fear them
not, they go about the business it self, how hard soever it be, not standing to
consider of danger, which the mischief hanging over their Heads may bring, and
as truly of those that do know the Wars but by hearsay; they have ability
enough, and to spare, till dangers appear, but when Perils indeed come they get
them gone.

In the Year one thousand five hundred and eighty two, was that memorable
Retreat of Gaunt, than which there has not been an Exploit of War more
celebrated; for the number of English were but three hundred Horse, and as many
thousand Foot, (commanded by Sir John Norris) charged by the Prince of Parma,
coming upon them with seven thousand Horse, beside that, the whole Army of
Spaniards was ready to march on, nevertheless Sir John Norris maintained a
Retreat without disarray, by the space of some Miles, (part of the way
Campaign) unto the City of Gaunt with less loss of Men than the Enemy; the Duke
of Anjou, and the Prince of Orange beholding this noble Action from the Walls
of Gaunt, as in a Theater, with great Admiration.

Of Temperance and Chastity in Commanders, with Examples thereof.
TEmperance in Commanders is the only Safeguard against all Surprizals. We read
of Commodius his Deputy in Britain: Vlpius Marrellus was so Temperate, that he
caused his bread to be brought into the Camp from Rome, that for the staleness
of it, he might eat no more than was needful, and so vigilant, that his
Soldiers thought he never slept at Night, by which imitation they became a most
Watchful and Obedient people; for it is very observable, that Soldiers are
ambitious to follow Examples of their Captains, whether it be either in Arts of
Virtue or Vice.

Alexander as long as he lived within the bounds of Temperance, how Obedient
were his Officers and Soldiers to him! but as soon as he gave himself up to
Wine, we read not only Mutinies amongst his Soldiers, but Treason (by his
Officers) hatching against his own Person, for Wine begets Fury, Fury matter of
Repentance, but preceding mischiefs are not amended by succeeding bewailings;
Drunkenness both kindles, and lays open every Vice, it removes out of the way
that shame which gives impediment unto bad attempts; for where Wine gets the
Mastery, all the ill that before lies hidden breaks out: Drunkenness indeed
rather discovers Vices, than makes them.

Amongst the Turks the prohibition of Wine in time of War is ever punished with
Death: I have read of two men put to Death for bringing a very small quantity
of Wine into the Camp; for here men become Sober, Diligent, Watchful, and
Obedient; in the Turkish Camp, no brauls, quarrels, nor clamours are heard; no
abuses are committed on their People in the march of their Army; all is bought
and paid with money as by Travelers that are guests at an Inn: There are no
Complaints by Mothers of the Rape of their Virgin Daughters, no violences of
Robberies offered on the Inhabitants: All which good order tends to the Success
of their Arms, and the Enlargement of their Empire; as on the contrary, too
much Liberty given to the Christian Soldiers, especially in drinking, is the
only cause which moves them to a lust and promtitude to all Evils, and is the
occasion of the horrid outrages they commit, quarrels amongst themselves, and
disobedience to their Officers, and betrays oftentimes a whole Army to ruin by
surprizal; for how can those men be watchful, whose Heads are charged with the
fumes of strong drink?

Agesilaus, King of Sparta, Chastity.
was a great Lover of Chastity, and he was a great Conqueror of others, so also
he conquered his own Lusts; insomuch that in his Journeys he would never lodge
in private Houses where he might have the Company of Women, but ever lodged
either in Temples, or in open Fields, making all men witnesses of his Modesty
and Chastity. Plut.

Alexander the Great, being in the heat of Youth, showed an admirable Example
of Chastity, when having taken the Wives and Daughters of Darius, which were
Women of admirable Beauty, yet he neither by Word nor Deed profer'd them the
least Indignity, thinking it a greater Honor to overcome himself, than his
Adversaries; and when he looked upon the other Captive Ladies that exceeded in
Stature and Beauty, He merrily said, Persides oculorum dolores esse, That the
Persian Women were a disease of the Eyes; and yet he looked on them as but on
so many Statues; and understanding that two of his Captains under Permenio had
ravished two of the Persian Wives, he wrote to him to enquire after the matter,
and if he found it true, that he should cut off their Heads, as of Beasts born
for the hurt of Mankind; he also wrote him Word that he himself was so far from
contemplating the Beauty of Darius's Wife, that he would not as much as have
her commended in his presence; and that he was so careful of her and her
Daughters Chastity, that they lived in his Camp, shut up in their Tent, as if
they had been in a Temple. Plut.

Scipio Africanus warring in Spain, took new Carthage by Storm, at which time a
Beautiful and Noble Virgin fled to him for Succor to preserve her Chastity:
He, being but Twenty four years old, and so in the heat of Blood, hearing of
it, would not suffer her to come into his sight, for fear of a Temptation, but
caused her to be restored in safety to her Father, Aurel. Victor.

Aurelian, an Heathen Emperor, was so careful to preserve the Chastity of
Women, that one of his Soldiers being found guilty of lying with his Hostess,
he commanded that two young Trees should be bowed down, and the Soldier's legs
tied thereto; which being suddenly let go, tore him into two pieces.

Compassion in War.
Valor is then best tempered, when it can turn out of a stern Fortitude, into
the mild strains of Pity: It is written to the Honor of Tamberlane, that
Conquering the Moscovites with a Princely Valor, he falls from the Joys of the
Victory to a Lamentation of the many casual miseries they endure, who are tied
to follow the leading of Ambitious Generals, and all this from the sight of the
Field covered with the Soulless men. Some report of Caesar that he wept when he
heard how Pompey dyed: Though Pity be a downy Virtue, yet she never shines more
brightly than when she is clad in Steel. A martial man compassionate shall
conquer both in Peace and War, and by a twofold way get Victory with Honor.

Titus Vespasianus, was so Compassionate, That he said, he would rather dye
himself, than put others to death: He proceeded no farther against two Noble
Men, convicted for Affecting, and Aspiring to the Empire, than to admonish them
to desist and give over, saying, That Sovereign Power was the Gift of Destiny
and Divine Providence, if they were Petitioners for any thing else, he promised
to give it unto them.

Sueton, when Alaxander by Permenio won Miletus, and by force mastered
Halicarnassus, which, because it resisted obstinately, he razed to the ground;
from thence he entered into Caria, where Ada the Queen, who had been cast out of
all that ever she held (except the City of Alinda) by Darius his Lieutenant,
presented her self unto him, and adopted him her Son, and Successor, which
Alexander accepted in such gracious part, that he left the whole Kingdom to her
disposing (Sir Walter R.)

It was duly observed, that as often as Octavius Augustus entered Rome, no
punishment that day was inflicted upon any person; he was grieved himself when
he pronounced a grievous Sentence, and he thought himself punished when he
punished others. Senec.

When the same Augustus had by Proclamation promised a great sum of money to
him that should bring in that famous Pirate Corocoto, and put him into his
Power, he knowing the Emperor's mild and temperate Vein, took the boldness to
come in himself, and demanded the sum promised to him that should bring him
in, Augustus both Pardoned him, and gave him the Money. Dion.

Crassus taken by Cyrus and imprisoned, despoiled of all things but the
expectation of Death, he was forthwith tied in Fetters, and set on the top of a
great and high heap of Wood, to be consumed to ashes thereon; to which when the
Fire was kindled, remembering the discourse which he had had with the Athenian
Lawgiver, he thrice cried out on his Name; Solon, Solon, Solon, and being
demanded what he meant by that invocation, he first used silence, but urged
again, he told them that he now found it true which Solon had long since told
him; That many men in the Race and Courses of their lives may well be counted
fortunate; but no man could discern himself happy indeed till his End: Of which
Answer Cyrus being speedily informed, and remembering the Changes of Fortune,
and his own Mortality, he commanded his Ministers of Justice to withdraw the
Fire with all diligence, and did not only spare his Life, but entertained him
ever after as a King, and his Companion. Sir Walt. R.

Julius Caesar said, the greatest Pleasure that ever he took of his Victories
was, that he daily saved the Lives of some of his Countrymen that bore Arms
against him: And when Pompey's Head was presented unto him, he wept bitterly
and caused him to be honorably Buried; Saying, Ego Pompeii casum deploro, and
meam fortunam metuo; I lament Pompeys Fall, and fear my own Misfortune.

From which we may observe in the general, That the most famed Men in the
World, have had in them both Courage and Compassion, and often times wet Eyes
as well as wounding hands.

Of Fame gotten in War, with Examples thereof.
PLutarch tells of a poor Indian, that would rather endure a dooming to death,
than shoot before Alexander when he had discontinued, least by shooting ill he
should lose the Fame he had gotten. Doubtless even this man was ordered by a
Power above him, which instilleth into the minds of all men, an ardent
Appetition of a lasting fame. Desire of Glory is the last Garment that every
Wise man lays aside, not that it betters himself being gone, but that it stirs
up those that follow him to an earnest endeavor of Noble Actions, which is the
only means to win the Fame we wish for.

David durst fight with the great Philistian, after he heard how the man should
be honored that slew him.

Themistocles, that streamed out his youth in Vine and Venery, and was suddenly
changed into a Virtuous and Valiant man, told one that asked what did so
strangly change him, That the Trophy of Miltiades would not let him sleep.

Tamberlane made it his practice to read often the Heroic Deeds of his own
Progenitors, not as boasting in them, but as Glorious Examples propounded to
inflame his Virtues: Surely nothing awakes our sleeping Virtues like the Noble
Acts of our Predecessors; how many Valiant Soldiers does a generous Leader
make! Brutus and others bred many constant Patriots. Fame, I confess, I find
more eagerly pursued by the Heathens, than by the Christians of these times;
the Immortality as they thought of their Name was to them as the Immortality of
the Soul to us, a strong reason to persuade to worthiness; their Knowledge
halted in the latter, so they rested in the first, which often made them
sacrifice their Lives to that which they esteemed above their Lives, their Fame.

When Philip asked Dometritus, if he did not fear to lose his Head; He answered
no, for if he did, the Athenians would give him one Immortal, he should be
statued in the Treasure of Eternal Fame.

Alexander Magnus, when he came to Achilles's Tomb, he fell a weeping, to
consider that he had Homer to sing his Praises, and to perpetuate them, whereas
he had no such Poet to set forth his Commendation. And Lysander, the
Lacedemonian, seeking after Fame, had always about him Choerilus the Poet, that
he might celebrate in Verse all his Victories and Virtues.

Augustus Coesar, when he had made his Will, affixed to it four Books, wherein
all his great Actions were recorded, requiring that they should be engraven in
Brazen-Pillars of his Sepulcher. And Alphonsus King of Aragon and Sicily,
seeking Glory and Fame, did not only build many stately Edifices, but kept
about him Parnormitan, an excellent Poet, and Bartholomew Faccius, a skillful
Historian, to record his Actions.

Cornelius Gallus being sent by Octavius Caesar to govern Egypt, he began to
grow very Proud of his great Honor; commanding his Statues to be erected upon
the Pyramides.

Pompey the Great, when Theophanes of Mytelene had written his great Victories
and Praises, by way of Recompense, bestowed a City upon him.

Belizarius, after he had often overcome the Goths in Italy, and had taken
Prisoner their King Vitiges, as also Gilimer King of the Vandals in Africa, and
had settled Africa and Sicily in peace, and often Triumphed over the Persians,
he caused a Golden Cross of an hundred pound weight, set with precious Stones,
to be made, and thereon to be engraven all his Victories; which he dedicated to
St. Peter's Church in Rome, presuming that out of respect to the Holiness of
the Place, it would continue there as a lasting Monument of his Praises. But of
all, I like him best, who does things that deserve a fame without a search, or
caring for it; Since for a mean man to thirst after mighty Fame, is a kind of
fond Ambition.

Can we think a Mouse able to cast a shadow like an Elephant? Can a Sparrow
have a train like an Eagle? Great Fame is for great Princes, and such who for
their Parts are the Glory of Humanity. Good Parts may adorn a private Man. The
same fire may be in the Waxen Taper which is in the gilded Torch, but is not
equal either in Quantity or Advancement. Let the World speak well of me, and I
will never care, though it does not speak much.

Of Monarchy.
THE first, most Ancient, most General, and most Approved, was the Government
of one, Ruling by Just Laws, called Monarchy. And Aristotle tells us in few
words, That a Magistrate, or Prince, is the keeper of Right and Equity; but the
same is best taught by St. Paul, who expresses the Cause efficient and final;
(that is) by whom Magistrates and Princes are ordained, together with their
Duties and Offices. A Magistrate is the Minister of God for thy Good; but if
thou do evil, fear, For he bears not the Sword for naught. He is the
Minister of God, to take vengeance on him that does evil; Romans 13. v. 4. He
also teaches in the same place, that every Soul ought to be subject to the
Higher Powers, because they are by God ordained; and that whosoever resists
that Power, resists God the Giver and Fountain thereof. Ver. 1, 2. And shall
not only be subject to the Judgment and Condemnation of Man, but of God; for
you must be subject (says he) not because of Wrath only, but also for
Conscience sake. Ver. 5.

The Examples are not to be numbered of God's punishing those who have resisted
Authority by God ordained and established: Neither ought any Subject therefore
to resist the Power of Kings, because they may be taxed with injustice or
cruelty, for it pleased God sometimes to punish his People by a Tyrannous hand:
And the Commandments of Obedience are without distinction. The Prophets and
Christ himself subjected themselves to the Power of Magistrates. Christ
commanded the Dues to Caesar should le given unto him; and he paid tribute for
himself and Peter. Jerem. 29. v. 7. Jeremiah commanded the Israelites (even
those that were Captives under Heathen Kings) to pray for them, and the Peace
of Babylon: So Abraham prayed for Abimelech, and Jacob blessed the King of
Egypt; and it is acceptable in the sight of our Savior (says St. Paul) that
you make Supplications and Prayers for Kings, and for all that are in Authority.

And if for such Kings as were Idolatrous, much more for Christian Kings and
Magistrates; and so much did St. Chrysostom, in his Homily to the people,
prefer Monarchical Government, that he rather commended the Rule of Kings
(though Tyrants,) than that they should be wanting: Prestat Regem Tyrannum
habere, quam nullum, Better a Tyrannous King, than no King: And if they be good
Kings, (which is generally presupposed,) then is there no liberty more safe
than to serve them: And certainly howsoever it may be disputed, yet it is safer
to live under one Tyrant, than under ten Thousand Tyrants; under a wise man
that is Cruel, than under the barbarous Cruelty of the Multitude.

For as Agesilaus answered a Citizen of Sparta, that desired an Alteration of
the Government, viz. That that kind of Government, which a man would disdain in
his own house, were very unfit to govern great Regions by.

Experience in Arms is the Original of true Nobility.
THe Romans made a Law that no Man should be admitted into the Council, or
Civil Magistracy, without he had first served ten years in the Wars; and the
reason was, that they, by undergoing the Severities and Difficulties thereof,
might be the better Judges how to prevent it in times of Peace. And we see,
that by experience in Arms Kingdoms subsist, Justice flourishes, and true
Nobility has its Being: For before Wars were known, all Men were of an equal
Birth, and the difference of Estates and Offices, made the sole distinction of
persons.

War, in ancient time, was neither the Refuge of the wretched, nor the
Sanctuary of the banished; and the Romans received none but chosen Men into
their service, who were obliged to put themselves in good Equipage, and for the
space of twenty years serve upon their own expense, either amongst the Horse or
Foot; and when they had fulfilled the term of their Service, they received from
the Commonwealth Rewards suitable to the Merits of their Actions; either by
being promoted to Honor, or endowed with the Lands of those they conquered.

Besides, Experience puts a difference between those that have carried Arms,
and such as have not; for from the Reputation of their brave Exploits, which
they had engraven on their Shields, as a mark of the Nobility which they had
acquired by their Valor; from thence, I say, we have Escutcheons, and the
Titles of Knight, Esquire, and Gentleman. Such, I say, were of chiefest note
amongst the Nobility, and from them are descended the illustrious Families of
great Lords, who carry Coronets over their Arms, and who, in process of time,
have changed their ancient Titles into those at present, according to the new
Dignities wherewith Sovereigns have been pleased to honor them; as of Duke,
Marquess, Earl, Viscount, Baron, and the like. Experience in Arms has also
raised to the Throne many of low and despicable birth; King David was a
Sheepherd; and Saul, his Predecessor, thought it no scorn to seek his Father's
Asses. Antipater, King of Macedonia, was the Son of a Juggler; Agathocles, King
of Syracuse, of a Potter; Cambises, King of Persia, was said to be the Son of a
Carter; King Sibaris was a Servant in an Inn; and Ottoman, the raiser of that
mighty Family who at this time possesses the greatest Empire in the World, was
at first no better than a Groom, or one who drove Camels. These Examples oblige
us to acknowledge, that it is only Experience in Arms that renders Men worthy
of the most glorious employments; and that in the Profession of Arms is
likewise to be learnt that brave gentile way of Demeanor, which is no where to
be found but amongst the Nobility and Gentry. There every thing goes by Honor,
without Lucre or Profit. There Men learn to be generous, liberal and faithful.
There are nothing to be found in the Histories of the greatest Captains, but
acts of Honor and Virtue.

The Valor of Alexander, the Prudence of Caesar, the Modesty of Tyberius, the
Justice of Aulus Fulvius, the Clemency of Augustus, the Magnificency of Titus
Vespasian, the Chastity of Scipio Affricanus, and the Integrity of Atillus
Regulus, are sufficient proofs of what I have alleged.

Yet nevertheless, without flattery let it be spoken, to the praise of this our
Nation, It is no where to be found in Histories, either ancient or modern, that
ever English Valor gave place to any other Nation in the World, but always
ranked it self in the Front. What wonderful exploits have there been done by
English Soldiery, as the most famous Battles of Craessy, Agincourt, and
Poictiers can bear me witness? And to the eternal Honor of Edward the third,
and his Son, the Prince of Wales, famous by the Title of the Black Prince, I
may with Justice say it, that they with their small numbers of Men, showed more
true Valor in fighting their Battles, and gaining their Victories, than ever
Alexander with his Parmenio, and the rest of his great Captains, did, in
conquering the whole World.

Therefore let not English Valor degenerate now; let not the charming Beauty
of Venus cause us to forget Mars; for I am sure the courageous Heart takes more
delight to be in the Fields of War, than in the Arms of a Dalilah; for the
Actions of the former crown us with a lasting Fame, but the latter only load us
with Scandal and Ignominy.

THE END.

