ON Mr. ABRAHAM COWLEY His Death, and Burial amongst the Ancient Poets.
By the Honorable Sir John Denham.
OLd Chaucer, like the morning Star,
To us discovers day from far,
His light those Mists and Clouds dissolved,
Which our dark Nation long involved;
But he descending to the shades,
Darkness again the Age invades.
Next (like Aurora) Spencer rose,
Whose purple blush the day foreshews;
The other three, with his own fires,
Phoebus, the Poets God, inspires;
By Shakespeare, Johnson, Fletcher's lines,
Our Stages luster Rome's outshines:
These Poets near our Princes sleep,
And in one Grave their Mansion keep;
They lived to see so many days,
Till time had blasted all their Bays:
But cursed be the fatal hour
That plucked the fairest, sweetest flower
That in the Muses Garden grew,
And amongst withered Laurels threw.
Time, which made them their Fame outlive,
To Cowley scarce did ripeness give.
Old Mother Wit, and Nature gave
Shakespeare and Fletcher all they have;
In Spencer, and in Johnson, Art,
Of slower Nature got the start;
But both in him so equal are,
None knows which bears the happy'st share;
To him no Author was unknown,
Yet what he wrote was all his own;
He melted not the ancient Gold,
Nor with Ben Johnson did make bold
To plunder all the Roman stores
Of Poets, and of Orators:
Horace his wit, and Virgil's state,
He did not steal, but emulate,
And when he would like them appear,
Their Garb, but not their Clothes, did wear:
He not from Rome alone, but Greece,
Like Jason brought the Golden Fleece,
To him that Language (though to none
Of the others) as his own was known.
On a stiff gale (as Flaccus sings) His Pindaricks.

The Theban Swan extends his wings,
When through the aetherial Clouds he flies,
To the same pitch our Swan does rise;
Old Pindar's flights by him are reached,
When on that gale his wings are stretched;
His fancy and his judgment such,
Each in the other seemed too much,
His severe judgment (giving Law)
His modest fancy kept in awe:
As rigid Husbands jealous are,
When they believe their Wives too fair,
His English stream so pure did flow,
As all that saw, and tasted, know.
But for his Latin vein, so clear,
Strong, full, and high it does appear, His last work.

That were immortal Virgil here,
Him, for his judge, he would not fear;
Of that great Portraicture, so true
A Copy Pencil never drew.
My Muse her Song had ended here,
But both their Genii strait appear,
Joy and amazement her did strike,
Two Twins she never saw so like;
Such a resemblance of all parts,
Life, Death, Age, Fortune, Nature, Arts,
Then lights her Torch at theirs, to tell,
And show the world this Parallel,
Fixed and contemplative their looks,
Still turning over Natures Books:
Their works chaste, moral, and divine,
Where profit and delight combine;
They guilding dirt, in noble verse
Rustic Philosophy rehearse;
Nor did their actions fall behind
Their words, but with like candor shined,
Both by two generous Princes loved.
Who knew, and judged what they approved
Yet having each the same desire,
Both from the busy throng retire;
Their Bodies to their Minds resigned,
Cared not to propagate their Kind:
Yet though both fell before their hour,
Time on their offspring has no power,
Nor fire, nor fate their Bays shall blast,
Nor Death's dark vail their day o'recast.
FINIS.
(...) August 1^. 1667. Roger L'Estrange.

London, Printed for H. Herringman, at the Blew Anchor in the Lower walk of the
New Exchange. 1667.


