THE CASE OF Sir Robert Atkyns, Knight of the Honorable Order of the BATH;
UPON HIS APPEAL AGAINST A DECREE obtained by Mrs. Elizabeth Took (the now Wife
of Thomas Took, Esquire) and others, Plantiffs in Chancery, about a Separate
Maintenance of 200 l. per Ann. clear above all Charges settled on Mrs. Took,
besides a Large Jointure.

LONDON: Printed in the Year MDCXCV.

Mrs. Elizabeth Took, the Wife of Thomas Took (now living) is Plaintiff in
Chancery.

Sir Robert Atkyns (the late Chief Baron) Defendant.

Mrs. Took has obtained a Decree, and Sir Robert Appeals to the Lords.

The CASE upon the Appeal.
THE Plaintiff Mrs. Took by her Bill in Chancery, Mrs. Took's Title.
sets forth a Title to John Bennet, Esquire (as her Trustee) to a Lease for Lives
in Nineteen Houses in Castle-Yard in Holbourn, in Trust to pay her 200 l. per
Ann. clear above all Charges and Payments, for her Life, as a Separate
Maintenance while her Husband Lives. This was by a Deed made by her Husband,
Mr. Took, in April 1686.

And by the same Deed she claims further 300 l. per Ann. clear in like manner
for her Jointure, if she outlive her Husband.

Sir Robert (the Defendant) Lent 820 l. to the Husband, Sir Robert's Title.
Mr. Took, to help him out of Prison, and to pay his Debts; and took a Mortgage
of him of the same Houses, Three years after Mrs. Took's Deed, viz. in May
1689. So that Mrs. Took's Separate Maintenance is first in time (if it be not
fraudulent).

The Chancery upon hearing of the Cause Trinity Term, Decree for a Separate
Maintenance. Perpetual Injunction.
1694. has Decreed the Separate Maintenance to be good in Law against Sir
Robert's Mortgage; and has granted a perpetual Injunction to stay the Trial at
the Common Law, upon an issue, whether Mr. Bennet's Estate be Fraudulent or
not. Which Issue was joined before Mrs. Took's Bill was Exhibited: But the
Chancery will not suffer it to be Tried at Law, though it be matter of Fact.

The ground and pretense for Equity against Sir Robert, The Equity. Sir
Robert's Notice.
is, That Sir Robert had Notice of this Trust of a Separate Maintenance before
he took his Mortgage.

Answ. Sir Robert claims not under the Estate in Trust, nor by, nor under Mr.
Bennet the Trustee; and therefore no Bill nor Equity lies for it against him:
And therefore his Notice of the Trust (which he admits he had) is not Material.

That which, probably, misleads the Chancery, (as Sir Robert supposes,) is the
common Case in our Law Books of an Use, (which was the same thing as a Trust
now is).

Viz. If a Feoffee to an Use (before the Stat. of 27. of H. 8. for transferring
the Possession to the Use) had Enfeoffe'd I. S. of the Land, although for a
Valuable Consideration; yet if I. S. had Notice of the Use, he shall be Subject
to the Use, although he were a Purchaser, and a Subpoena lies against him by
Cestuy que Use, (the Party for whom the Use was); the true reason is, because
I. S. in this Case claims in privity of the Estate, and derives under the first
Feoffee himself, and comes into the Estate in the (per) as the Law
distinguishes, and terms it, and not in the (post) as Sir Robert does.

And so are the Books, The Defendant in Chancery, and Appellant before the
Lords, comes in not in the (per) but (post).
viz. 7. H. 7. Fitzh. Abr. tit. Sub poena, plac. 18. and 5 E. 4. ib. placit. 2.
and 5. and Dame Burgh' s Case Moor' s Rep. 602.

And in this Case if I. S. were not a Purchaser, and paid no valuable
Consideration, it is all one whether he had Notice or not; and if he paid a
Consideration, yet if he had Notice beforehand, he shall be subject to the
Use, and liable to a Subpoena in Chancery at the Suit of Cestuy que Use.

But Note, The true reason and distinction in this Case is, I. S. comes in
under the first Feoffee himself, and under that Feoffee's Estate; so that there
is a privity of Estate between them, which is termed (coming in the Per).

It has been Resolved by a Chancellor and all the Judges, That the Heir of such
a second Feoffee is not liable to a Subpoena by Cestuy que Use (but they must
seek to the Parliament) though he be (in the 22. E. 4. 6. by the Chapter Just.
Hussy. Bro. Conscience. plac. 23.
Per) and under a Privity of Estate. 8 E. 4. Fitz. Subp. plac. 8. and 22. E. 4.
6. Bro. Abr. tit. Conscience, plac. 23.

But all the Books are, That no Subpoena in Chancery lies against a Stranger,
that is, who is not privy, nor comes not under the very Estate, out of which
the Use issues, or the Trust arises, (which is all one) for a Ld. Cook 4. Inst.
85. in the middle of the Fol.
Stranger is he that comes not in the (per) but in the (post) and this is very
Case of the Appellant Sir Robert Atkyns; he Claims not from, nor under Mr.
Bennet; and in such Case Notice is not material.

Where a Man is a mere Wrong-doer, as a Trespasser, or Disseisor, and who has
Notice too beforehand of an Use or Trust, even in such Case the Cestuy que
Use, or Cestuy que Trust, (as Mrs. Took in this Case is,) cannot maintain a
Subpoena, nor has any Remedy in Chancery against such Trespasser, or
Disseisor; but must take his Remedy by Sub-poena against her own Feoffee, or
Trustee, (if there be Cause,) to Compel him to enter again upon such a
Disseisor, Mich. 42. and 43. Eliz. in the Chancery. Sir Edw. Cook. 4. Inst. 85.
Chap. of Chancery. And so is the Ld. Cook. 1. Rep. 139. b.
or to bring an Action against such a Trespasser. So is 11 E. 4. 8. Bro.
Conscience 17. at the end of that placitum, and ib. placit. 17.

Sir Moile Finche's Case in Chancery referred by Queen Elizabeth to all the
Judges of England, after hearing Council on both Parts on several days, and
after Conference between the Judges themselves; it was Resolved, That a
Disseisor is subject to no Trust, nor was a Subpoena maintainable against him:
Not only because a Disseisor was in the (post) but because the right of
Freehold and Inheritance was determinable at the Common Law, and not in 22 E.
4. 6. ut supra. by Hussy, Chapter Just.
Chancery; neither had Cestuy que Use (while he was in being) any Remedy in
such Case.

If no Subpoena will lie against a Disseisor, (i. e. a wrong-doer,) much less
against a Purchaser, who comes in by a Legal Conveyance, without any Privity of
Estate, as Sir Robert Atkyns does.

But, which is yet much stronger than all those Cases before-cited, there is
not only a want of Privity in this present Case of Sir Robert's, (which is a
sufficient reason why no Subpoena, nor remedy in Equity ^ies against him by
Mrs. Took, the Cestuy que Trust): But he pleaded to her Bill in Chancery, and
insisted upon it at the hearing, That he is a Purchaser upon a Valuable
Consideration, and that the Estate for Life made by the Husband, Thomas Took,
to Mr. Bennet in Trust for a Separate Maintenance for the Wife, is Fraudulent,
and therefore void by the Stat. A Fraudulent Conveyance.
27 Eliz. cap. 4. and that this ought to be tried by a Jury, and determined at
the Common Law.

And that by their Distreining the Tenant for his Rent, Triable by a Jury, not
by Witnesses in Chancery.
who sued a Replevin, they themselves had put the matter into a right course at
Common Law, where a matter of Fact, (Fraudulent, or not Fraudulent,) ought to
be tried by a Jury, and not by Witnesses in Chancery, and a Fraudulent
Conveyance being made void by the Statute before mentioned: the Exposition of
Statutes belongs to the Judges of the Common Law, A Statute is to be expounded
by the Judges, not in Chancery.
and not to a Court of Equity; and especially there being Estates of Freehold
and Inheritance on both sides concerned in this Case, which is examinable and
determinable by the Courts of the Common Law, and the Rules of Law, and not in
Equity by Witnesses: And they themselves had joined Issue upon the Fraud, The
Chancery may not determine Freehold.
and a Jury returned to try it before they Exhibited their Bill in Chancery.
And Notice of the Trust before he took the Mortgage, being also confessed by
Sir Robert in his Answer, (if it be at all material,) it is so upon the trial
of the Issue, to prove their Deed not Fraudulent; so that she might take the
benefit and advantage of that upon the Trial at Law, if it be material.

Note, Sir Robert has no way to overthrow their Deed and Title but by making
it out to be Fraudulent: If it be not Fraudulent, they are safe, for their Deed
is prior in time to Sir Robert's Deed by Three years; so that they had no need,
if it were not Fraudulent, to resort to Equity: If it be a Fraudulent Deed,
Will a Court of Equity support it? Which should rather relieve a Purchaser
against frauds; especially in the Case of such an upstart, and mischievous, and
late invention, as a Separate Maintenance is, granted by the Husband, Thomas
Took, about Ten Years after Marriage, (there being no preceding Agreement
before Marriage for it;) and being in Consideration only of her joining with
her Husband in a Fine for the Sale of some other Houses, wherein she was also
Entitled by the Marriage to her Thirds, and this being done in the year 1686.
Whereas,

1 st. She had before (in the year 1684) levied a Fine with her Husband to
enable him to Mortgage, and Borrow Money to pay his Debts, and then 100 l. per
An. Separate Maintenance was settled on her, which was large enough,
considering his mean Estate; and she parted with no Thirds in 1686; (so the
Consideration was but feigned in 1686. when the 200 l. per Ann. was Settled).

2 dly. The Husband in 1686. was much more Indebted than in 1684. and yet the
Separate Maintenance must then be doubled, viz. from 100 l. to 200 l. per An.
clear, and many of those Debts remain unpaid to this day, as is proved in this
Case.

3 dly. The only consideration for the Separate Maintenance of 200 l. per Ann.
clear in the Deed of 1686. being her then joining in a Fine, and barring of her
Thirds; (all which was done before in 1684.); but by this Deed of 1686. She has
300 l. per Ann. besides, clear above all Payments settled upon her for her
Jointure, in Lieu of her Thirds (if she survive;) which is far greater in
proportion too, than the whole Estate would have born, had she been left to her
Thirds. 300 l. per Ann. Jointure besides.
And this is a more suitable Recompense too for her Thirds, being in case she
survive, (as the Thirds would have been,) but she must hook in a Separate
Maintenance too in the mean time, while the Husband is alive.

And there is nothing else left to maintain him, nor to pay his Debts, but he
was forced to take up Money of Sir Robert to pay off some of his Debts, and to
fit him for an Employment in the Army; for which Money so borrowed, Mr. Took
Mortgaged these Houses to Sir Robert Six years ago; and not a Penny, Principal
or Interest paid in Six years time, nor like to be (if this Decree stand) while
Mrs. Took lives, who is about 34 years old.

4 thly. A Separate Maintenance is the same thing with Alimony. Now in the
Exchequer Chamber, The nature of a Separate Maintenance.
15 Car. 2. in the Case of Manby against Scot, the then Chief Justice Bridgman,
and the rest of the Judges there, were of Opinion, That by Law the Wife shall
be maintained according to the present Estate, and not only according to the
Degree of the Husband. See Siderfin's Reports, Fol. 128. But this Separate
Maintenance, and Alimony of 200 l. per Ann. clear of all Payments, swallows up
all the Husband's Estate; none is left.

There are many other Badges of Fraud, which Sir Robert reserved to be made out
upon the Trial before the Jury, but held them not proper at the Hearing; so
that the Opinion of that Court for Allowing and Confirming the Separate
Maintenance, was a surprise upon Sir* Robert.

Sir Robert at the Hearing moved the Lord Keeper that he would hear the Opinion
of some of the Judges, in the Case concerning the Jurisdiction of Courts of Law
and a Court of Equity) but it would not be granted.

Yet it appears by the Cases before-cited, (and many more in the Books,) That
in Cases of Uses, the Chancellor was heretofore used to Adjourn such Cases into
the Exchequer-Chamber, and to go thither himself, and to have the Cases there
debated by all the Judges; which kept a good Correspondence among the Courts,
and kept Equity within some bounds. See the before-cited Case of 8 E. 4. Fitz.
Abr. Tit. Subpoena Plac. 8. and much of that Title, to the same purpose.

It may be Observed out of all that has been said, That the present Decree
incroaches upon the Common Law, in several main points.

1 st. In Examining and Determining a Matter of Fact (whether a Conveyance be
Fraudulent or not Fraudulent) by Witnesses, which ought to be Tried by a Jury
of Twelve Men. And this is done by the Chancery too, after an Issue joined at
Law, upon that very point, before any Bill Exhibited: And Sir Robert at last
must pay the whole Charge of both, near 200 l. Costs, besides his own Charges,
and mighty trouble.

2 dly. The Chancery by this Decree has taken upon it to determine a Matter of
Freehold, (which is in Question on both Sides, and claimed by both Parties,)
which is not Determinable in a Court of Equity, but only at the Common Law, and
by Judges Sworn to judge according to Law, and not after the Rules of Equity.

3 dly. By drawing in a Purchaser to answer to, and to be Subject to a Trust,
to which he is neither Party nor Privy: Neither claiming under the Trustee,
(Mr. Bennet,) nor under Mrs. Took, for whom the Trust is, contrary to all the
Authorities in the Books both Ancient, A Trust is the same thing as an Use was.
and Modern, in this very point, and against the Rules and Precedents in
Chancery: A Trust now being the same thing with an Use, as it stood before the
Statute of 27 H. 8. for Transferring the Possession to the Use. As fully
appears by that Statute, wherein Use and Trust are often repeated as signifying
the same.

4 thly. By entertaining a Suit, and Decreeing in Equity, when there is a plain
Remedy at Law, Mrs. Took has Remedy at Law in the Trustee's Name.
(in the Name of the Trustee, Mr. Bennet.) For if Mr. Bennet's Estate be good
in Law, (which ought to be determined at Law,) then the separate Maintenance
must be good, and cannot, nor will not be contested: And Mr. Bennet's Deed and
Title at Law is Prior in time to the Appellant Sir Robert's Mortgage: So that
if it be not Fraudulent, it is not in the least danger.

1. It is supposed, that this is the first Precedent wherein a Court of Equity
has countenanced that new thing, (a separate Maintenance, or Alimony,) and
that against a Purchaser.

2. And so large a separate Maintenance as 200. per An. clear above all
Payments, out of so small an Estate as her Husbands is.

3. And which was Granted by the Husband Ten years after their Marriage, and
not in performance of any Marriage-Agreement.

4. And the Husband being,* at the time of Granting of it, greatly Indebted,
many of which Debts are unpaid to this Day: So that the Husband is driven from
his Wife and Home by reason of his Debts; and the Husband has nothing left him
to live upon, but what his Wife secretly spares him, (as he has received
several Sums since the Granting this separate Maintenance, as appears in
proof,) which proves the Fraud.

5. The Husband having borrowed the Appellant's Money to enable him to pay his
Debts, and to set him at Liberty, and to procure and fit him for an Employment
in the Army.

6. And where the Wife had a former separate Maintenance of 100 l. per An. A
former separate Maintenance.
Granted her about two Years before, upon her joining in a Fine, and barred her
self of her Thirds, (if she Survived), in Recompense of which Thirds too, A
Jointure of 300 l. per Annum.
she has by this very last Settlement 300 l. per An. clear above all Payments
for her Jointure, (if she Survive.)

And in this Case, the Purchaser (the Apellant Sir Robert Atkyns) has not had
one penny Principal or Interest, after Six years parting with his Money; which
Money he is still willing to have repaid him, and to quit the benefit of the
Purchase.

The Appellant, Note,
Sir Robert, has had so great tenderness and respect to the Respondent Mrs.
Took, Sir Robert Atkyns lets Mrs. Took enjoy 18 of the 19 houses.
(that claims this present Maintenance) as to gain to himself the Possession
but of one House of nineteen Houses, which he has gained too, not against her,
nor her Trustee, but by his own Suit, and at his own charge, against one
Collins, who detained it from the Estate of Captain Took several years, and
concealed it from them: So that it was given by them for lost, and not so much
as looked after by them, (tho it had some time paid them Rent;) they contenting
themselves all the while with the other Eighteen Houses, and may (if they will
be quiet) enjoy their eighteen Houses for the future. Which eighteen Houses (if
well looked after, and if the Rents of them were duly Collected) will be very
sufficient to answer Mrs. Took her full separate Maintenance of 200. per An.
during her Life, if Sir Robert might have the naming of the Collector, which is
denied him by the Decree.

There are Two things more yet remaining in this present Case to be remembered.
-- 1. The now Appellant Sir Robert Atkyns (then Defendant) moved the Lord
Keeper at the Hearing, That he might have Reparation against the Plaintiffs in
that Bill, especially against the Plaintiff Bedford, a Clerk in Chancery, who
needlessly thrust himself in to be a Plaintiff, and drew the Bill himself, as
appears by the Bill Fol 34, 35, 36.) and also against the Plaintiff's Council,
who signed the Bill, viz. Sir William Williams, Sergeant Bretland, and E.
Otterborn, for the Scandals cast upon the Appellant Sir Robert, Scandal.
(who at that time was Chief Baron of the Exchequer, and an Assistant to the
House of Lords.)

1. The Bill charges the then Defendant, (Sir Robert,) as acting against the
Plaintiff, (Mrs. Took,) by his Greatness and Power. Fol. 44. and 46. (which
Reflects upon him in Relation to his Judge's Office.)

2. And Fol. 54. and 55. That Sir Robert threatens to ruin the Plaintiff, (Mrs.
Took,) in Lawsuits, unless she will comply with his unreasonable desires.

3. And Fol. 58. and 60. That Sir Robert carried on the Suit at Common Law, in
the Replevin, in the Name of Hook, contrary to Hook's desire.

All which are very false, and the Plaintiffs have not made the least proof of
them; but the contrary of them appears by Hook's owning the Suit by Replevin,
Nor were they at all material to the Bill, which had been as sufficient without
them.

By the Stat. of 8 Eliz. Cap. 2. Parag. 4. The penalty for Suing in another's
Name without the consent of such Person, is six Months Imprisonment without
Bail, and not then to be delivered out of Prison, till first paying treble
Damages, and Costs, and Ten pounds penalty besides; yet the Court would have no
regard to all this, but it must remain to Posterity upon the File.

It is usual in Chancery, (as it was also in the Star Chamber,) and other
Courts, to give Damages to the Defendant for the Scandals in the Bills, and
there are Precedents of it. -- But the Lord Keeper held these no Scandals.

Sir Robert Appeals to the Lords herein, and prays he may have Reparation, as
well against the Council that Signed the Bill, as against the Plaintiffs; and
that the Bill may be taken off the File.

It may perhaps be offered by the Respondents, (Mrs. Took, etc.) upon the
Hearing this Appeal before the Lords, That in the hearing of the Cause in
Chancery, a Bill Exhibited by the Appellant, (Sir Robert,) in the Exchequer,
against Mrs. Took, and her Husband, (Capt. Took,) and against her Trustee, (Mr.
Bennet,) and against Hook, (the Tenant of the Rose-Tavern, etc.) was read;
whereby it appeared that Sir Robert in Effect then admitted of Mrs. Took's
Separate Maintenance, and Mr. Bennet's Estate, (in Trust for her,) as good, and
claimed to himself only the overplus of the Rents, (if any) during her Life,
and the Reversion of the whole after her Death.

In this Bill of Mrs. Took's in the Chancery, Answ.
whereupon the Decree now Appealed from, is made, there is not any Allegation,
nor the least touch or mention of that Bill of Sir Robert's in the Exchequer,
nor of the Matter of that Bill: For had it been alleged in Mrs. Took's
Chancery-Bill, Sir Robert could have given it a full Answer, and shown how that
Sir Robert at the Exhibiting of his Bill in the Exchequer, had not so fully
discovered the Fraud of the Separate Maintenance, as he has done since, but
believed; (as the Deed for the Separate Maintenance, does allege, see her
Deed,) that the Rents were sufficient to answer her the 200 l. per An. and that
160 l. per. An. over, would have been left for Sir Robert, which by her proofs
appear to be false, and the Rents short of making good her 200 l. per An. as
she alleges: See her Bill. A Court must proceed Secundum Allegata.

2 dly. The reading that Bill of Sir Robert's in the Exchequer, and indeed all
the proof offered at the hearing the Cause in Chancery, were irregular, there
being nothing in the Cause in the Chancery put in Issue by the Bill and answer.
The only Equity of the Plaintiff, Mrs. Took's Bill, being a Trust of the
Separate Maintenance, and Sir Robert's Notice of it; both which were confessed
by Sir Robert in his answer. He only insisted upon it both by his Plea and
Answer, that their Deed was Fraudulent, which ought to be tried at the
Common Law; and that he being a Stranger, (neither Party nor Privy,) therefore
the notice was not material. Here was nothing remained that required proof in
Chancery; yet to increase the Charge, the Plaintiffs proceeded to proofs, which
has given occasion to Sir Miles Cook, to load Sir Robert with near 200 l. Cost;
which, tho excepted too, is confirmed by the Court.

3 dly. Had the matter of Sir Robert's Bill in the Exchequer been the least
hinted at, or stirred in Mrs. Took's Bill in Chancery, Sir Robert had been
awakened by it, and forewarned to have answered to it, and made proof upon it,
Viz.

That his Bill in the Exchequer was designed merely to state the Debt owing to
him by Mr. Took, and to compel him to a Redemption of the Mortgage, or to be
barred of his Redemption; and all Parties, (as was proposed to Sir Robert on
the behalf of Mr. Took,) were inclined to get an Act of Parliament passed for
the sale of Mr. Took's Estate; and to have the Debt due to Sir Robert upon the
Mortgage, and the Debts to his other Creditors paid off, and a provision
afterward made for Mrs. Took, which Sir Robert offered to further: So that it
was not so seasonable nor proper at that time to question their Title, nor to
object Fraud against it. Nor was it proper for Sir Robert to Object or
Controvert the Fraud of it in Equity, there being sufficient Remedy against it
at the Common Law; which Course too he afterward pursued; when he found they
proceeded not in their Agreement to get the Act of Parliament passed. And the
Fraud more plainly appearing,

4 thly. Sir Robert at the hearing of this Cause in Chancery, opposed the
reading of his Exchequer-Bill in Evidence, as being no regular proof or
evidence either in Law or Equity. A Bill in Equity is no Evidence in another
Suit.
Bills in Equity being the Invention and Surmises of the Council that draw
them; and the Suggestions and Allegations that are in them, are indeed but of
the Nature of Interrogations to enforce a Discovery from the Defendants, but
are no Conclusions, nor Estopples to the Parties that exhibit them, nor
evidence against them, who do not so much as Sign them themselves.

Nor shall Sir Robert's Bill in the Exchequer control his Indenture of
Mortgage, whereby the Fee-Simple of the Houses in Question is conveyed in
possession to him, and not a Reversion only.

Nor shall it overthrow his Answer upon Oath in this Cause, wherein he makes
Title to the Houses in Possession, as being the Purchaser of them for a
valuable consideration, Note.
and being indeed forced to accept the Mortgage, (by Mr. Took's defrauding him
of a former security, which Sir Robert had for his Money,) or else Sir Robert
must have lost his money.

Now that Sir Robert's Exchequer-Bill ought not by the Rules of Law to have
been allowed for Evidence, no not in the Chancery, tho between the same
Parties, appears by a printed Case, by the Resolution of a Lord-Chancellor too,
in the very like Case in the main; but the present Case on Sir Robert's part is
much stronger than that too on his Side.

The Case is Mich. 14. E. 4. Fitzh. Abr. Tit. Subpoena plac. 15. One Tate was
Sued in Chancery by a Bill in Equity, (as Sir Robert is,) and made to answer
upon Oath at the Hearing, (just as was in this present Case,) a Bill of Tate's,
(then Defendant,) exhibited by him in the same Court too, and for the same
matter, (and thereupon so much the stronger against Tate,) was offered to be
read, which did contradict and differ from his answer: By the Chancellor, (by
advice of the King's Sergeants,) Tate's Bill was not to be regarded, for he was
Sworn to his Answer, but not to his Bill.

5. If Sir Robert's Exchequer-Bill had been Evidence, (as it is not,) yet it
serves only to prove, that (in Sir Robert's opinion at that time when his bill
was Exhibited,) Mrs. Took's Deed of Separate Maintenance was not Fraudulent, or
that he then had not discovered the Fraud.

This would then have been proper to have been offered upon the trial of the
Issue at Common Law, but is no Ground for a Decree: And Sir Robert may change
his Opinion upon further Discovery of the Truth of the Case; for it is at most
but his then apprehension of it, it alters not the truth of the Case, nor the
matter of Fact in it: and he was seduced into that good opinion of Mrs. Took's
title to her Separate Maintenance by Mrs. Took's own Deed, which did affirm the
yearly value to be 360 l. per An. which (had it been true,) would have been
sufficient for both their turns; but in truth there has not been enough to pay
the 200 l. per An.

Separate Maintenances are but of late Invention, and bring many mischievous
consequences after them: And not one Precedent of the Chancery, (as it is
believed) can be produced, where ever, (before this Decree,) a Separate
Maintenance has been Countenanced against a Purchaser. Which Purchase to the
Appellant, (Sir Robert Atkyns,) never was made out of any greediness of profit,
Sir Robert was forced to take this Mortgage.
but he was merely driven to it, to accept it as a farther Security, after he
had parted with his Money to the Husband, who had defrauded Sir Robert of a
former Security, (as appears by the proofs.)

And either the Husband or the Wife, or any Friend of theirs on their behalf,
may still redeem if they please, if it be done in some reasonable time, Sir
Robert will be willing to accept of his money again.

Sir Robert hopes to be excused for using this Freedom with the Chancery; It
being generally known, that long before this present occasion, even while he
himself Sat in a Court of Equity, (established by Act of Parliament,) he both
in that Court, and in the Highest Court, (the House of Lords,) discharged his
Conscience, by inveighing against the Encroachments of Courts of Equity.

To Conclude, The Apellant, (Sir Robert Atkyns,) humbly moves the Lords, to
take up the same resolution in this present Case, (which appears in the
Precedent and Example to be of highest consequence,) as their Noble Ancestors
and Predecessors did in the Twentieth Year of King Henry the IIId. when the
Statute of Merton was made, Chap. 9 th. The Lords being pressed by all the
Bishops to make the Ancient Law of England to conform to the Constitution of
the Church but in one point, Viz. That Children born before Matrimony might be
accounted Legitimate, and Inheritable to Lands. All the Earls and Barons with
one Voice answered, That they would not change the Laws of the Realm, which
hitherto have been Used and Approved.

Erratum, P. 4. l. 30. add the.

FINIS.

