THE CASE OF JOHN HIND Goldsmith WITH HIS CREDITORS JUSTLY STATED.

Giving an Account to the World of the occasion of his Failing, his fair
Proposals, and the Justness and Honesty of his Designs to all his Creditors.

LONDON, Printed in the Year 1685.

The Case of John Hind with his Creditors Stated.
HIND was a Banker in Cornhill and dealt for great Sums of Money, and
formerly was concerned in his Majesty's Duty of Hearth-Money, in Company with
Mr. George Dashwood, Mr. Abraham Anselme, Captain John Perry and Mr. Edward
Buckley, for which there is a great Sum of Money now due to Hind: That since
Hind received and paid many great Sums of Money to and for the now Managers
of that Duty, upon which account he is now Indebted.

That about two or three Years since he became (unhappily) concerned in the New
Buildings at Albemarle-House, Grayes-Inn-Fields, and other places thereabouts:
That being engaged, the Concern increasing and requiring continual Supplies of
Money to prevent the whole from perishing, he was compelled to advance above
60000 l. there.

That he being in full Credit had great Sums of Money forced upon him, and
being in Trade must proceed till he could draw his Effects together in prospect
of paying off all before he discontinue it; For as the case with all Bankers
is, if he had, or they should put a stop to their general Receiving or Paying
before they are ready to pay off all, it may procure a sudden Call, and then
they are undone though they have a good Fund at bottom to pay all.

That it was formerly his Case when in Co-Partnership with one Mr. Kirwood who
died some few years since; But then their Creditors being moderate Men, and
considering that Bankers Estates could not be called in when they pleased,
allowed Hind and Kirwood time, and they paid off all Men to a Penny and had a
good Estate left; and Hind then withdrew his Share and gave over, and left
Kirwood in the Trade singly, who dying, and a great Estate being abroad and
doubtful how the Creditors should fare, they not being able to manage it,
Hind at the persuasion of some of Kirwood's Creditors, who were his old
Friends, undertook the Trade again; and to preserve them, generously involved
himself, upon which he had more Money forced upon him than he knew what to do
with: And the Buildings of Albemarle-House, Grayes-Inn-Fields and those other
places being presented as a very profitable Design, he engaged in it, not
suspecting so sudden a Call as now has happened.

That at the latter end of July last, some of his Creditours grew jealous, and
made enquiries with whom he was concerned, and joined together to call in their
Money out of his hands, that he paid away all his present Cash, well hoping it
was their occasions that called for it not a design to ruin him. But the
paying some made others more violent; for they could not be content to receive
their own, but put others upon calling in of theirs. Having before given
securities out of his Estate, such as could be separately disposed of, to
satisfy others which rather increased than assuaged the desires of
satisfaction in those that remained unpaid, nay, some that had got securities
for half, their Debts were fiercer for the remainder than those that had
received nothing. And in the beginning of September last, because he would not
privately secure them without the privity of forty more that were then
demanding their Debts also, procured an Extent for 10000 l. to be sued out, and
seized Hind and his Goods for it when there was but 420 l. due, and that
secured otherwise too.

Upon this Toplady, Hind's Partner flies: But Hind designing to pay them to
the utmost stood his ground, and sent for the Officer to know by whose
direction this was done, and so the Officer seized Hind, and so Hind became a
Prisoner.

The Case being thus, and it being in vain to hope to support his Credit, and
pay his Creditours presently he sent for them and acquainted them with his
condition, advising with the chiefest of them in what manner they could manage
the Estate for their own satisfaction, most of them commiserated his Condition,
and desired him to deliver his Estate, and they would allow him 5000 l. nay,
some said 10000 l. thereupon he drew up a Proposal to give them all upon oath,
reserving 5000 l. to himself and Partner, and referred himself to them to put
it into writing, desiring nothing but his Liberty and a mean livelihood.

Others of the Creditors being desirous to be at a certainty, and to know if
the Estate would make them any considerable satisfaction, ordered him to
propose what the Estate would amount to. To comply with whom, Hind to justify
his Integrity makes another Proposal to pay the Creditors their whole Debts in
Lands, Houses and Goods as they cost, and if that fall short, to make it up in
Debts justly due to him, and summons all his Creditors together, and makes
these two Proposals. The Creditors then met, adhere to the first Proposal, and
some of them come to Hind and tell him they were agreed and demand the Books,
Hind profers his Books if they would sign the Agreement. But instead of that
they present him with a Draught of an Agreement quite contrary, and which in
effect obliged Hind to deliver and assign all his Estate: But he never to be
free.

Hind desires to advise with Council, and profers to submit to a reasonable
Deed. But they fall in Passion and swear to hang him, and in order thereunto,
sixteen of the Creditors Petition the Honorable the House of Commons to make
such a Law against him, if he deliver not up his Books to them upon many untrue
allegations therein, and Print a Paper entitled the Case of the Creditors of
John Hind and John Toplady.

Whilst this is in Transaction, the Managers of the King's Revenue of
Hearth-money, extended all or most part of Hind's Estate.

The Heads of the Instrument proposed by Hind to his Creditors are as
follows. (viz.)
That he will discover all his Estate both Real and Personal to his Creditors
save 5000 l. which he prays they will allow him for the support and maintenance
of himself, Wife and Family.

That within a Week after his Creditors have Subscribed his Instrument to the
purpose aforesaid, He will deliver up all his Books of Account, Bills, Bonds,
Specialties and other Writings touching his Estate to six such persons, as his
Creditors should appoint as Trustees, such six persons to be of the chief
Creditors.

That within one month after delivery of his Books and Writings as aforesaid,
or at any time then after; he will at the request, costs and charges of the
Trustees on behalf of the Creditors, make, execute and perform all and every
such Deeds, Conveyances, Assurances and Assignments of his Estate both real and
personal, for the enabling them to get in, receive, recover, sell and dispose
of the same to and for the benefit of all his Creditors in Proportion to their
several and respective Debts, As they the said Trustees shall from time to time
require, order, and appoint, and deliver up all his Estate he has in
possession, or in the hand of any Person in Trust for him, except the value of
5000 l. as aforesaid, and his Houshold-Goods and wearing Apparel, for himself,
Wife and Children.

That upon his discovery, and assigning and delivery of his Estate as
aforesaid, to the said Trustees as aforesaid; He shall make Oath before a
Master in Chancery, that such Estate so discovered and delivered is his whole
Estate, within the value of 1000 l. over and above the said Sum of 5000 l. for
himself to be reserved as aforesaid, and his Houshold-Goods, and his own Wife
and Childrens Wearing Apparel as aforesaid, which said Sum of 1000 l. when he
discovers the same, or such part thereof as he shall at any time hereafter
find, or hear of, he shall forthwith discover and assign, convey and deliver
unto the Trustees, as the Case shall require.

And therefore the Oath of the said John Hind, shall be binding to all the
Creditors, and be definitive, and concluding to them as for and touching what
Estate the said John Hind has. But that such Oath may be the more binding and
penal to the said John Hind, if he falsify the same, he shall at any time
upon demand at the request, costs and charges of the Creditors, answer gratis
to any such Bill or Bills in Chancery, or any other Court of Equity, as the
said Trustees or the Survivors, or Survor of them shall at any time hereafter
prefer against him for the Discovery of what Estate he now has, saving that by
such Bill or Bills he shall not be obliged to answer in what the said Sum of
5000 l. by him so to be reserved for himself does consist in, or in whose hands
the same is in.

That Hind shall employ himself, and use his best endeavors to assist the
Creditors, to get in the Estate from time to time, as the Trustees shall order
and command him.

That upon his discovery and delivering up his Estate to the said Trustees as
aforesaid, the Creditors shall deliver up all Bills, Bonds and Specialties, and
vacate all Judgments, and other Securities they have for any Debts from him to
them now due, and these presents shall be a good release and discharge to him
from the same.

That if at any time within seven years to come, any Person shall lawfully
prove he has or does conceal or shall not discover his whole Estate within the
value of 1000 l. over and above the said Sum of 5000 l. for himself reserved,
and his Household Goods and wearing Apparel as aforesaid, Then he will be liable
to pay the remainder of his whole principal Debt to each Creditor.

That this shall be no stop of any proceedings against the said John Hind, or
any of his Estate to any Creditor subscribing, this Agreement, until the
discovery and delivery of the Estate as aforesaid.

The Heads of the second Proposal made by Hind to pay his Creditors their
whole Principal Debts were these, viz.
THat he will pay each of his Creditors his full Principal Debt, in Goods,
Wares, Houses, Lands Tenements and Debts owing to him, In case the other fall
short in manner following.

The Creditors to choose as many, and such of themselves as they shall think
fit for Trustees, as well to settle this Agreement as also to have the Estate
delivered, and assigned to; for getting in and disposing of the same, and
dividing the same amongst themselves, and the rest of the Creditors for their
satisfaction.

And, that within a week after all have subscribed, he will deliver in the
Goods and Wares, and an Account of the Houses, Lands and Tenements which the
Creditors shall accept of at the price they cost him. Which price shall be
ascertained by good proof of the Persons the same were bought of, or for
default thereof by his own Oath, which shall be definitive.

That what the Lands, Tenements and Goods shall fall short of paying his whole
Principal Debts, he shall make up by Just Debts owing him, a Catalogue whereof
he will deliver to the Trustees, within a week after all the Creditors have
subscribed, and shall make proof of each such Debt being due to him, sufficient
to prove the same at Law if need require.

That each Creditor forthwith after his subscription, if he have no specialty
to ascertain his Debt, make up his Account, and settle the same with Hind,
That he may be able to deliver in sufficient for their satisfaction.

That Hind his Heirs, Executors and Administrators, from time to time
hereafter, make such Deeds, Assignments, Conveyances and Letters of Attorney to
the Trustees to settle the Estate upon them, and enable them to get in the same
as they at their charge shall require.

But no further warranty to be contained in them, than only against himself,
and all clayming under him.

That Hind be put to no charge in settling or getting in the Estate, but be
saved harmless from all Charges of Suits and Non-suits in Law or Equity.

That upon Hinde's delivering up the Goods and Deeds of his Estate, all the
Creditors to seal Releases to him and his Partner of all Actions to the day
before the date of the Instrument. And the Instrument to be a good Release to
him and his Partner of all matters to that day.

That this Instrument be no hindrance or bar to any of the Creditors, from
proceeding at Law against him till he have delivered up his Goods and Deeds,
and a Catalogue of his Debts as aforesaid.

That if some few of the Creditors stand out, yet if the Subscribers will
defend him from the rest he will perform this Agreement, and deliver enough for
all as above, as well the Dissenters as the Subscribers.

The Major part of the Creditors adhering to the first Proposition, Hind
applied himself to that and therein condescended further, That the 5000 l.
should be reduced to 2000 l. and 'tother 3000 l. to be allowed him by 12 pence.
in the Pound out of the Estate, as it should come in for his pains and service
in getting in the Estate, And delivered several Copies of this Instrument to
several of the Creditors, and the only thing remaining that they object to it
is, that the 2000 l. should be discovered to them in what that consists, which
they propose to avoid fraud. That under Color of securing 2000 l. there be not
more concealed, which as it seems fair on their parts, so it lies hard on
Hinde's part, for when discovered, a Commission of Bankrupts which they are now
violently prosecuting against him, may lay hold of it. Yet to remove all
objections on his part, he hereby declares be will submit to that also.

But he must crave leave of his Creditors to undeceive them, and the World, and
show them that the Agents or Advisers of those few Creditors who oppose this
Agreement, and insist on the Instrument of their own drawing, have put them
upon unreasonable Demands. And because he believes the greatest part of his
most worthy Creditors know it not, and even those worthy Gentlemen who ordered
the Agreement to be drawn up, did not intend it for a Snare to him. But ordered
an Instrument to be drawn up, that might have answered all their ends; to wit,
the securing the Estate to the Creditor's use, and Hinde's Liberty upon
performance of it. He therefore here subjoins the Heads of the Instrument, by
Order of some of the Creditors presented to him upon his making the Proposals
aforesaid.

Which are these, viz.
THat a Letter of License be prepared, and forthwith signed by the Creditors,
and delivered to Hind and his Partner Toplady, and thereupon they to discover
and deliver up all their Estate.

That they shall convey their Estates to the Trustees of the Creditors, as they
shall be desired, and shall do all such Acts, and be assisting in getting in
the Estate as the Trustees shall desire.

That for the plainer and suller discovery of their Estates, they shall answer
one or more such Bill or Bills in Chancery, as the Creditors or some one of
them shall for that purpose exhibit, and that within three weeks after the Bill
exhibited.

That out of such Estate so to be discovered, each of the Creditors shall or
may have 16 s. in the Pound or more, and not less for their Debt.

That for the speedier getting in the Estate, a Commission of Bankrupts be
taken out, and when 2 s. in the Pound above all charges be gotten in, It be
divided amongst the Creditors.

That Hind in consideration of discovery of the Estate, and being assisting as
before shall keep his Houshold-Goods, and his own and Wises wearing Apparel,
not exceeding 200 l. and shall and may receive 5000 l. as follows, (viz.)
when any Dividend shall be made amongst the Creditors, for every (...) in the
Pound divided to the Creditors (...) to Hind till the 5000 l. be paid.

And the Creditor's Covenant, that in Case Hind make a true Discovery, or do
not leave undiscovered the value of 1000 l. and convey all his Estate as
before, and so much of this 1000 l. as he shall from time to time discover;
then the Creditors will not sue Hind and Toplady for their Debts for 99 years.

Provided, that if Hind and Toplady do not make a true Discovery, and assign
the Estate as before all the Covenants for the benefit of Hind and Toplady,
therein contained shall be void.

Provided also, That this Deed shall not bind any of the Creditors, unless all
the Creditors shall sign this Deed by a Day, to be named then next ensuing.

Upon this Instrument Hind advises with Council, who inform him the Import
and Consequences thereof to be thus considered.

That when this Instrument was drawn, Hind was a Prisoner in the Fleet, upon
the Extent of 10000 l. above mentioned, and all his Houshold-Goods seized on,
to the value of 3 or 4 Hundred Pounds, when there was but 420 l. due upon that
Extent.

In the Instrument the Proposition is, Hind may keep his Houshold-Goods, and
yet they seized on, and no Provision made to restore them to him.

That a Letter of License should be forthwith signed by his Creditors, but for
no time limited, he a Prisoner in Execution upon the Extent and no provision to
Discharge him, and the time the Letter of License from the Creditors was by
them proposed to be but for so long as he could take an account of his Estate,
and discover, deliver and assign it to the Creditors.

Whence it follows if he were at present discharged of his Imprisonment, as soon
as that time were elapsed the Creditors were at liberty to sue him, and he must
deliver all upon Oath and not have two pence allowed him to maintain himself
and Family, which is a Wife and five Children, till the Creditors have settled
the Estate and made a Dividend.

And if this be reasonable for every honest Man to do, then let the Reward be
considered which follows in the Instrument: Viz. That the Estate shall make 16
s. in the pound to each Creditor, or more and not less, over and above all
charges and expenses in recovering, getting in, settling and dividing the
Estate amongst them, and this to be done by a Commission of Bankrupt. Now what
this will amount unto is easily judged. An Estate to be managed by a Multitude,
a Commission of Bankrupt to have the harassing of it, each particular Creditors
Attorney or Solicitor to be gratified, or the Estate to be torn in pieces by
private Quarrels and Dissensions: As many Bills in Chancery to be answered as
any of them for their own private gain shall advise to be brought: An hundred
and fifty Creditors to be brought to be of one mind in each particular, or till
they all agree who shall be Managers, and how far such Managers shall bind each
Man's particular Interest; or if no Agreement, as in such cases that is not
suddenly done: Till then Hind to have no Allowance. But the Estate by delays
decays and is lost, and by Lawsuits is wasted; and yet if Hind, when all help
and power is out of his hands cannot make them agree, who already are divided
into several Parties, and are quarrelling who shall have the dividing of the
Bears Skin, and the Estate wasted very probably above half the value by delay
and unnecessary Charges of the Commission and other Expenses, and pay them 16
s. in the pound he must perish. And if all this were possible for Hind to
perform, which cannot be done if the Estate really and truly would now make out
30 s. in the pound for each Creditors Debt. Then they covenant not to sue him
for 99 years, which is so great a kindness, that when almost double his Debts
are paid to them, and spent by them, they will forbear to trouble him but not
discharge him.

Nor is this the Case by the ill consequence that may happen only, but expressly
by the last Provisoe all the supposed benefit to Hind proposed in the former
part of the Deed in this latter Clause is totally destroyed. For all the
Creditors may sign him a Letter of License as is proposed in the beginning of
the Instrument, to encourage him to discover and assign his Estate; but when
that is done if every individual Creditor do not sign this Instrument, this
shall not bind any of the Creditors subscribing, so he is left to lie in a Gaol
and his Family to starve.

Now for the Information of all the Creditors who may mistake his honest
Intentions, and be misled by the Passion of some angry Men, and to convince all
Men of their true Interest in this Affair, that the Estate may not be spent in
Lawsuits, and be destroyed by the charge of prosecuting Commissions He gives
the World the trouble of this Paper, and hereby assures them, That to this good
end he is ready to comply with his Creditors in either of these ways, or such
other way as the major part of his Creditors shall reasonably desire, so they
will but grant him his Liberty and the meanest support for his Livelihood that
has been proposed to him; and hereby most solemnly protest, That he is still
ready to perform his part of the Agreements by him proposed to his Creditors,
and so he will ever be ready to comply with them to the utmost of his ability.

FINIS.

