A PANEGYRIC ON HIS EXCELLENCY The LORD GENERAL GEORGE MONCK: Commander in
Chief of all the Forces IN ENGLAND, SCOTLAND, AND IRELAND.

LONDON, Printed for Richard Marriot in Fleetstreet, 1659.

A PANEGYRIC ON HIS EXCELLENCY The Lord General GEORGE MONCK.
IF ENGLAND'S bleeding Story may transmit
One Renowned Name to Time, Yours must be it:
Who with such Art do heal, that we resound*
Next to our Cure, the glory of our Wound.
Thou sav'st three shattered KINGDOMS gasping Life,
Yet from our desperate Gangrene keep'st thy Knife*
And though each searching Weapon rallied stand,
And all Fates keen Artilery wait at hand:
Thou curb'st those Terrors from inflicting harms;
Swords are Thy Instruments, but not Thy Arms.
Thou with Thy Pause and Treaty rout'st Thy Foes;
And Thy tame Conference a Conquest grows.
With the Great Fabius then advance Thy Bays,
Who sinking Rome restored by wise Delays.
Let other Victorscount their Dead, and lay
Sad Wreaths of conscious Laurel, where they slay;
Whilst Thou alone Dry Trophies do assume;
They know to Kill, but Thou to Overcome.
Hence, though some foming spleens and working hates
Make Thee the Sampson to our City Gates;
At length Thou introducest cooler Votes,
To be the temper to impetuous Throats.
Choosing that safe Sobriety of thy way,
Not to Eject their fury, but Allay.
With like inspired Prudence did Thou guide
Thy doubtful Answers, when their fears applied
Their subt'lest Emissaries to disclose,
Which struggling Cause Thy Courage would oppose.
When though Thy innocent breast resolved stood
The steady Bulwork of the General Good;
Thy then unripe Affairs left them such scope,
That who deserved no help, might still have hope.
The Superstitious thus returned of old
From their consulted Oracles, that unfold
Two-handed Fates, which when they false appear,
Delphos spoke true, false the Interpreter.
Apollo's awful Tripos would not lie,
Yet the Receivers sense might mis-apply.
So Thy Consultors from their proud hopes fell:
They gave Delusion, Thou gav'st Oracle.
Hence secret trains and snares Thy steps pursue*
So dangerous amongst the False it is to be True.
Return, Return! and shroud Thy envied Name,
In those glad Roofs thy sole Arm skreen'd from flame.
Thus threatened TROY no stronger Fortress seeks*
Than her Palladium, against the treacherous Greeks.
And that Palladium never was seen no more,
When once by Rapine from the Temple tore.
What she to Troy, Troy did to her become,
And was the Pallas to Palladium.
Thence did their mutual Protections start*
Together both, neither were safe apart.
So Thou without Us safe can hardly be,
And we despise all safety without Thee.
Return, Return! Enshrine Thy Glories here;
Thou, whom both Seas and Shore do love and fear.
'Midst Triumphs great, like those, Thy Valor stood,
Whilst Hollands faithless Gore did stain the Flood:
When Thy bold Shot made their proud Vessels creep*
And cleanse their guilty Navy in the Deep.
Let Land and Waters yet thy Deeds proclaim,
Till Nature mints more Elements for Thy FAME.
FINIS.

