RINALDO and ARMIDA: A TRAGEDY, etc.

Rinaldo and Armida: A TRAGEDY: As it is ACTED AT THE THEATER IN
Little-Lincoln's-Inn-Fields.

Written by Mr. Dennis.

Falsis Terroribus implet. Vt Magus.

Horace Ep. LONDON, Printed for Jacob Tonson at Graye's-Inn-Gate in
Graye's-Inn-Lane. M CD XC IX.

TO HIS GRACE THE Duke of Ormond.
My LORD,
THE World has not been displeased to see in Rinaldo a Character Resembling
Your Grace's, a Character of a Hero who neither Rants nor Whines, but is great
with a solid and real Greatness, very Valiant without Extravagance, and very
Human without Weakness, and deserting Pleasure for Glory. And that Character
naturally claims your Protection, which resembling yours has pleased all sorts
of People: For your Grace at the same time that you have been the Darling of
the Fair, has been the Passion of the Brave, and the Esteem of the Wife. The
University of Oxford is proud of such a Chancellor, and the Armies of the King
of such a Lieutenant General. All who are engaged in the Cause of Truth,
whether they defend her by Force or Argument, are animated and excited by
having your Grace at the Head of them. But at the same time that you have been
the Darling of the Fair, and the Esteem of the Wise, the Largeness of your
Soul, and the Height of your Courage, the Love of your Country and the Love of
Glory, have made you almost the Adoration of the Armies. Whenever you were
Encamped, the old Officers beheld with Wonder in you a double Portion of the
greatness of Soul of the Noble Duke of Ormond, your Grandfather. And whenever
you were engaged in the Field, the old Animated Soldiers Reviewed with
Ravishment the Heroic Courage of your Father, the Brave Earl of Ossory. I must
confess, My Lord, the commendation of any Man's Ancestors, is for the most part
a Superficial and a Foreign Praise; But to show the High Esteem that we have of
yours, is to show the Value that we have for your Grace. I admire indeed the
old Noble Duke of Ormond, and the Brave Earl of Ossory, but I admire them most
in your Grace. For the Blood of your Illustrious Family, like the Flood of a
noble River, becomes more great and more august the farther it descends from
its Source.

The Earl of Ossory did as much as Man could do at Mons, and Success attended
his Actions. Your Grace deserved to be Victorious at Landen, but Fortune would
not have it so. But it is easy, my Lord, to look great in Prosperity; To be
great in Adversity that is the Work. Your Grace in yours appeared so exalted to
your Enemies, that they almost condemned that Fortune which had declared for
them, and blushed in their Captive to behold their Superior. I am afraid that I
have gone too far, while I have endevour'd to please; For to show that I am
sensible of your extraordinary Merit, cannot but be pleasing to all the World
but your Grace. But to show that I had rather have your Approbation than that
of the World, I here restrain the Passion which I have to proceed, and
subscribe my self,

My LORD, Your Grace's most Obedient Servant, and most Humble Admirer, JOHN
DENNIS.

THE PREFACE.
THE Prologue to this Play is a sort of Preface to it; yet because Prose seems
to be more Adapted to Criticism than Verse, I desire the Reader's leave to say
something more largely of things which were mentioned there. I had only the
Hint of Rinaldo's Character from Tasso, but the Character is my own. And if any
one objects that by differing from Tasso, I offend in this Character against
the Resemblance of the Manners, to him I answer; That the Manners of Rinaldo in
Tasso being unequal, they are Consequently not well marked, and that by
Consequence there can be no Character. I was therefore at Liberty to form a
Character from Tasso's Hint the most agreeable to my Subject that I could.

I designed Rinaldo then neither a Languishing nor a Brutal Hero; He is Fond
of Armida to the last degree, and yet resolves to leave her; but ow's that
Resolution to the Strength of his Reason, and not the weakness of his Passion.
And as he resolves to leave her out of a sense of his Duty and Honor, and not
any Levity or Barbarity of Nature; so upon their meeting in the fourth Act, he
demurrs upon executing that Resolution, neither through Fear, nor any tender
Infirmity, but something that happened which seemed to Require it from his
Goodness, and his Humanity.

For Armida, some Gentlemen who have read Tasso, may expect to see that wanton
alluring delicious Creature who appears in the fourth Canto of the
Gierusalemme, with all that is tempting in Art; but I desire those Gentlemen to
consider that in that Canto she only appears in Masquerade, and Acts a part at
the Request of her Uncle.

Fa manto del vero ala Menzogna, making use of Artifices that were contrary to
her Nature, in order to the Seducing the Heroes of Godfrey's Army. The Poet
gives her true Character in the 38th Stanza of the 16th Canto of that Poem.

E cosi pari al fasto hebbe lo sdegno
Ch' amo d esser Amata, odio gli amanti.
She is by Nature a Proud and a disdainful Beauty, Proud of her Triumphs, yet
disdaining the Slaves which adorned them, and so much the more violent in the
Love she bore to Rinaldo, because he was the only Person who had touched her
Soul with tenderness. And therefore I was obliged to show her, as the Nature of
her Character and of my Subject required. I say not this to Arraign Tasso, who
is certainly one of the greatest of Modern Poets; but to defend my self: for I
leave it to any Man of Sense to Judge, whether affectation be becoming of a
Poem which ought only to express Nature; or the little Arts of a Iilt, of the
Gravity, and Severity, and Majesty of the Tragic Muse.

But now it is time to answer an Objection. There is, say some Gentlemen, a
Softness that is Natural to Love, and only that Softness, say they, should be
capable of Engaging Rinaldo's Heart; for it is hard to conceive, say they, how
such a Hero should be passionately fond of a Woman, who appears always either
in a furious disorder, or using of horrible Incantations.

To this I answer, that the Action of the Play begins, but between three and
four Hours before the Death of Armida; That before that, the Lovers had been
three Months together in the Enchanted Island, where she had entertained him
with all that is Soft and Engaging in Art and Nature; That the fury of her
disorder began but an hour before the Beginning of the Action of the Play, from
a Hint which one of her Spirits had given her of the approaching Danger. All
this will appear to the discerning Reader from the Play it self, who then may
perhaps be inclined to believe that I have had a little Discretion in my
Conduct, and that I have taken up the Story in that very part of it which alone
is proper for Tragedy.

The Action is very Great and Important; upon the last Event of it depends the
Success of the most Happy, and most Glorious Croisade, in which ever the
Christians engaged against the Infidels. Godfrey's Army had Beleaguered
Jerusalem, which, according to the Fable, could not possibly be taken till
Rinaldo was returned, and had cut down the Enchanted Grove. As the Action is
Great, the Characters are Illustrious, and the Scene is extraordinary. All the
Objects that appear to the Agents are almost entirely new; every thing they see
in Nature, being wonderful, and surprising; every thing that they see in Art,
being Terrible, and Astonishing.

I resolved therefore to do my Endeavor to treat this Subject with something
at least of that Sublime at once and Pathetick Air, which reigns in the
renowned Sophocles. I resolved to use some Effort to make the Greatness of the
Sentiments and of the Images answer to the Height of the Subject, and the
Dignity of the Expression to the Greatness of the Sentiments. I designed in
this Poem to make Terror the prevailing Passion, which is likewise the
predominant Passion in that admirable Grecian.

The Action is not only Regular in the Mechanism, (the Incidents falling
without any restraint into the narrow compass of the Representation) but Decent
too, I hope, in the Conduct of it; and (to the Reserve of the Machines to which
the necessity of the Subject obliged me) reasonable.

I have endeavored to show as much Address as I could in the management of it.
The first Act but just opens the Design, and just shows Armida in such a Light
as was likeliest to prepossess an Audience in her Favor, and make them Espouse
her Interests. As soon as I had done that by the mouth of Urania, I thought fit
to oblige her to kreak off the Narration, according to that Important precept
of Horace.

Ordinis haec virtus erit et Venus aut ego fallor,
Ut Jam nunc dicat, Jam nunc debentia dici,
Pleraque differat, and praesens in Tempus omittat.
Armida resumes and continues the Narration in the second Act, and by
displaying the grounds of her Jealousy, shows the fundamental qualities of
Rinaldo's Character, and her own; the greatness of her Mind, the Pride of her
Soul, the Violence of her Temper, and the Height of her Passion; and prepares
what she says and does in the fourth Act, as Phenissa by endeavoring in this
second Act to bring Armida off from her Passion, lays the Foundation of, and
prepares the Catastrophe.

It may now perhaps be expected that I should say something in the defense of
the Catastrophe. But the Objection against that being almost Universal, I
should be unpardonably Presumptuous, if I should Imagine that I could be in the
Right, against the Consent of so many Illustrious Assemblies as Composed the
Audiences of this Tragedy. All that I shall say in my Defense is this, that
perhaps I may one Day Retrench that which displeased them, and that I shall be
a little more Cautious the next time I am to entertain them.

PROLOGUE.
SInce what is new, will likeliest Entertain you,
With a new Prologue first, we'll strive to gain you.
The Prologue's so entirely new to Day,
It nere can serve for any other Play.
Th^n all you Sparks who have to Paris Rid,
And there heard Lullys Musical Armide;
And Ye too, who at home have Tasso read,
This in precaution to you must be said;
Armida's Picture we from Tasso Drew,
And yet it may Resembling seem to few;
For here you' see no soft bewitching Dame,
Using Incentives to the Amorous Game,
And with affected, Meretricious. Arts,
Secretly Sliding into Hero's Hearts.
That was an Error in the Italian Muse,
If the great Tasso were allowed to accuse;
And to Descend to such enervate Strains,
The Tragick-Muse with Majesty disdains.
The great Torquato's Heroine shall appear,
But Proud, Fierce, Stormy, terribly severe,
Such as the Italian has Armida shown,
When by the Worlds disorder, she would revenge her own.
To change Rinaldo's manners, we had ground,
Who in the Italian is unequal found.
At first he Burns with fierce ambition's fire,
Anon he Dotes like any feeble Squire,
The mere Reverse of all that is noble in Desire.
Then in a Moment leaves the Lovesick Dame,
And only Burns, and only Bleeds for everlasting Fame.
In a Just Play such Heroes nere have part,
For all that offends Nature, offends Art.
What we have Changed, we leave to you to Scan,
Yet Judge with all the Candor that you can;
So shall your pleasure be the Writers Care,
Who for it neither Time nor Thought will spare;
Which were not wanting now, to give this Play its due,
To make it truly great, and truly worthy you.
Dramatis Personae.
RInaldo. Mr. Betterton. Vbaldo. Mr. Thurman. Carlo. Mr. Scudamore. Armida.
Mrs. Barry. Urania. Mrs. Boman. Phenissa. Mrs. Lee.
Aerial, Terrestrial, and Infernal Spirits.

SCENE, The Top of a Mountain in the CANARIES.

ERRATA.
PAge 5. l. 13. for scarce Twenty, read just Twenty. P. 15. l. 25. for immerst
in the Air, read immerst in Matter. P. 35. l. 7. put the Comma after Is gone.
P. 40. l. 7. for Raging Friends, r. Raging Fiends. Ibid. l. 27. for your
selves, r. your self. P. 47. for and yet, r. yet. P. 53. l. 4. for dreadful, r.
dread.

RINALDO and ARMIDA.
ACT I.
SCENE, A Delightful Wilderness on the top of a Mountain in the Canaries.
Overture with Trumpets. Enter Urania, Ubaldo, and Carlo. Ubald. THus Heaven
declares the Importance of our Enterprise,
While Angels their Aetherial Trumpets sound,
To animate us in our glorious March.

Uran. At length the Labors of that March are over,
At length the sharpness of the Ascent is conquered;
And we through ways untractably abrupt
Have reached this Towering Sommet of the Mountain,
Where never Mortal yet, by Mortal Force,
Was known to ascend, from whose commanding Height
At once Two Worlds lie subject to our view.

Ubald. By its transcendent Beauty and its Height,
This sure must be the Paradise of Nature.
O Blessed Retreat! O Fields beloved by Heaven!
O Island justly called the Fortunate,
And with High Reason by the Ancients thought
The Elysian Seat of Happy Heroes Souls!

Carl. But, O Amazing Height!
At what Remote, and what Stupendous Distance,
Yon Tyrannizing Main below,
Insults the foaming Shore!
Ubaldo, see how very far beneath us
With flagging Wings the Painted Meteors fly
Through all the Infernal Regions of the Air!
How far below, Illustrious in its flight,
The nimble Lightning scowres along the Sky!
And hark how far, how very far beneath us,
The exasperated Thunder roars!
To plague the guilty World!

Ur. But never Storm disturbs this Happy place,
The very pride and pomp of Wanton Nature,
The very Darling of Indulgent Heaven;
Which still the Sun, the Worlds great Eye, contemplates,
And never suffers Interposing Cloud
To bar the Eternal prospect; It Is a Scene
Not unbecoming of the glorious Action,
Which Heaven's Almighty Will has chosen you
Its Ministers to Accomplish; To this place
Armida's Magic power conveyed Rinaldo.
Here the great Champion of the Christian Faith
Lies Languishing, and half dissolved in Love.
The Terror of the Unbelieving World,
And of thy proud Oppressors, O Jerusalem;
Is here become an Impious Woman's Slave!
A Woman, who, like Lucifer of old,
Of all the Angels of her Sex created,
The Brightest and the nearest to Divinity,
Is fallen, and lost by her excessive Pride:
And not contented with her Native Charms,
Holds guilty commerce with Infernal Spirits.
Here in the Embraces of his young Enchantress
The Blooming Hero passes all his days,
And his Luxurious Nights in Wanton Joys,
As wanton as the Wings of Western Winds,
Whose spicy breaths throughout these slowry Plains
Maintain Eternal spring. Him you must free,
Or thou must still be enthralled, O Sacred City;
For on Rinaldo's Conquering Sword
Thy Destiny depends.

Carl. The very Place assists us in the Action,
The very Place inspires magnanimous Thoughts,
As by the help of so sublime a Station
Here on the Frontiers of the rolling Skies,
We stand and breath, the Borderers of Heaven;
So it exalts our very Souls, and lists them
As far above the Level of Mankind
As here we walk above the Inferior World.

Ur. So had it need, for Dangers are to ensue,
Enough to shake the Constancy of Martyrs*
And move the Blessed Inhabitants of Heaven.

Carl. What greater Dangers can Enfue,
Than what in reaching hither we Surmounted?
For, have we not by Heaven's supreme Decree
Transgrest the Bounds established by Alcides?
Have we not insolently dared to Plow
The Worlds uncultivated waste, the Ocean,
And dauntlesly explored its dreadful Wonders?
And in Ascending this Aetherial Mountain
Stood firm against the fierce Assaults of Hell.
Repelled more Monsters than Alcides vanquished,
And baffled Futies, who in hortid Shapes
With stormy Rage opposed our Steep Ascent?
And can we now be capable of Fear,
In the Great Cause of Heaven! And in a place
Intended for Delight, and not for Terror?

Ur. But yet remember, Carlo, that Alcides
Who subdued Monsters, triumphed over Hell,
Nay, and suppored Heaven, became a Slave
To Pleasure.

Ubal. Things terrible are Enemies to Nature, Carlo,
Declared and open Eenemies,
And all that is Great and Noble in that Nature,
At their approach still Rouses to Resist them.
But Pleasure, though its secret Foe,
At least appears its Friend.

Carl. Hark! What enchanting Sound salutes my Ear? Music


Uran. Ay, now the dangerous Conflict must begin,
For in this Moment Hell begins the Attack,
For know thou hear'st no Human Sounds, the skill
Of all that is exquisite in mortal Man,
Could nere produce such Harmony, the Work
Of Spirits which Usurp the Aetherial Air,
Who formerly enjoyed sublimer Stations,
And so Divinely touched Empyreall Lyres
As pleased, even him who turns the harmonious Spheres,
And sweetly Tunes the Universe. But see
How yonder Fabric like a Meteor rises, The Enchanted Palace rises to Music.
Advancing through the Skies its pompous Front,
To this Enchanting Symphony.

Carl. Hark! Voices in the Air.


Lofty Music. A Song by the Spirits in the Air.
YE mighty Powers who Rule the Air,
Ye Gods who in the Ocean dwell,
And ye who at the Center govern Hell,
Hither at great Armida's Call repair;
And while by your Command these Towers arise,
Till with unequaled Pomp and State,
Their soaring Heads salute the Skies,
Show those above that Hell can too create.
Ubald. But why, O sacred Minister of Heaven,
Just at this Juncture does this Fabric rise?

Ur. Know to this Hour Rinaldo and Armida
Have loosely Revell'd in Enchanted Wilds,
And Wantoned in the open Face of Heaven.
But now the Enchantress who suspects his Constancy,
Has to Secure him, by the advice of Hell
Raised this Majestic Structure.

Ubald. But can the Hero of our Age Rinaldo
The Champion of the Christian Cause, Rinaldo
Descend to love a Sorceress?

Ur. No, not a Sorceress, Rinaldo Loves
The Beauty, not the Enchantress, He ^oves
The Masterpiece of Heaven, not that of Hell,
The most Accomplished Work of the Creator;
One who both Speaks and Looks above a Woman,
Whom Heaven designed with more peculiar care,
A whole vast Species in one single Person;
And an Idea of Sublimer Beauty
Than that with which the Loveliest of our Sex
Ensnare and Captivat the Souls of Men,

Carl. She is indeed a wonder.


Ur. A Beauty, in the prime of her perfection,
On whom scarce Twenty blooming Eastern springs
Have shed their sweetest Influence;
Not an Asiatick Monarch but Adores her,
But Eastern Kings are soft as is their Climate.
Have you forgot the time when this Armida,
Leaving her Unckles Kingdom of Damascus,
With a dissembled Discontent, approached the Christian Camp
On the Pretense of asking Aid
Against the Oppression of a Tyrants power?

Ubel. That cursed design we never shall forget,
Which was to weaken and destroy the Army,
By drawing all our bravest Warriors after her.

Ur. Tell me, one Hero of you all, whose Virtue
And whose Religion did not melt at sight
Of this Triumphant Beauty? nay and melt,
Even as you stood upon the Sacred ground.
Where for your Lusts a God Expired in Torments:
Have you so soon forgot this?

Ubel. Our blushes say we have not.


Ur. The very rude Plebeians of the Camp
By Habitual hardship mortified to Pleasure,
By Sanguinary deeds inured to Cruelty,
Gazd all the fierceness of their Souls away,
And at that sight dissolved in soft desire;
Those brave Adventurers whom their fervent Zeal,
The flaming Love of Everlasting Glory,
Engaged the noble Voluntary Champions
Of this Renowned Croisade Heavens darling cause,
Disbanded all with shameful stealth by Night
And left the Field, their Glory and their God,
To follow this Enchanting fair, of all
Only Rinaldo still remained Invincible,
But I want time to say the rest --
E're yet approaching Night usurps the World,
Both thou and Carlo must once more behold Her,
And in a Cloud with me Converse before Her,
Unmoved, unseen, unheard, unthought of by Her.
Such is the Will of the Most High, but Hark!
More Harmony, and this way it approaches.

Carl. And see the Happy Natives of the place.


Ur. These are by Heavens permission come to try you,
And with soft Sounds seduce your Souls to Pleasure,
Now stand upon your strongest Guards.

Spirits in the Shapes of Shepherds and Nymphs. Shep. Welcome to these Lovely
Plains,
The happy Seats of Blissful Swains.

Nym. Welcome to these blissful Shades,
The soft Retreats of Happy Maids.

Shep. Here we feel no want nor Care,
And no inclemency of Air,
And Lovers never here Despair.

Shep. Sorrow ever from us flies,
Pleasure revels in our Eyes.
If we pass an Hour in Courting
It Is for more Delicious sporting,
Never cruel Nymph denies.

Nym. If any thing like Sorrow's seen
In our Voice, or in our Mien,
It Is not Grief that gives the Anguish,
It Is with Pleasure that we languish;
And if ever Nymph denies,
It Is like one in Love who is Wise;
It Is like one who would invite
To more delicate Delight,
It Is with wishing, dying Eyes.

Cho. All about us and above
Gaiety and Love inspires;
All about us and above
Infuses Tenderness and Love,
And wanton fine Desires.

Shep. The Jolly Breeze,
That comes whistling through the Trees,
From all the blissful Region brings
Perfumes upon its spicy Wings,
With its wanton motion curling.
The Crystal Rills,
Which down the Hills
Run over golden Gravel purling.

Nym. All around Venereal Turtles
Cooing, Billing, on the Myrtles;
The more they show their Amorous trouble,
More fiercely dart their piercing Kisses,
And more eagerly redouble
The Raptures of their murmuring Blisses.

Ur. Enough, ye Ministers of Hell be gone,
Behold the waving of this potent Wand,
Whose sight can make the fiercest of you tremble,
And whose least touch can with Ten thousand plagues
Transfix your Howling Furies; Hence, take hence
Your Lying Forms, the Mimick Shapes of Men.
Or, by the unutterable Name -- they vanish.
Now, Heroes, I observed you well, and find,
That you unmoved have past a dangerous trial,
And gained a glorious Conquest over your selves.

Ub. Let us Advancing, our success pursue,
They who themselves overcome can Hell subdue.

Ur. Then as we move toward yonder Magic Towers,
Protect us in our March ye Guardian Powers;
Y' Immortal Ministers to whom by Heaven
The Care and Charge of this great Action's given,
Defend us from Hell's Terrible Alarms,
And guard our Hearts from Pleasure's fatal Charms;
Ye Angels strike your everlasting Lyres,
Sound, sound the Lofty Trumpet, which inspires
The exalted Soul with your Celestial Fires.

The End of the First Act.
ACT II.
SCENE, The Inside of the Enchanted Palace. Enter Phenissa, Nisroe, Rinaldo
Sleeping on a Couch. Phen. SSleeps he Secure? And is the Queen Obeyed?
Though here is a Magic Symphony might Lull,
The raving Furies into soft Repose,

Nis. There he lies Buried in eternal Sleep,
Unless my self or some more powerful Spirit
Unbind and Rowze him from his Iron Slumber.
Thrice while I muttered Mystic Sounds I sprinkled
His Temples with the Drowsy Deadly Dew,
Brushed by the Infernal Ravens Baleful Wing
From the Black Poppies which on Lethe grow.
How Fares Armida?

Phen. She dotes, alas, she dotes on this Rinaldo,
Her Love, and Fear of losing what she Loves
Disquiet her sometimes almost to Madness,
Thou know the greatness of her Soul; from whence
Conclude how this Tempestuous Flame must Shake her;
Alas, I pity her.

Nis. I cannot blame thee.
Even I, who for these long Six thousand Years
Have never felt one motion like Remorse,
I, were I not a Devil, I should Pity her;
The Fairest Creature which on this side Heaven
My Eyes have ere beheld.

Phen. Say, what Success attends this desperate Love?


Nis. Alas, I dare not; for Remember Ramiel,
Who but for barely Hinting at her Fare,
Lies Howling at the Bottom of the Abyss,
Under the Vengeance of that Dreadful God,
Who makes even Furies tremble;
Scourged till at each resounding Stroke
He Bellows to the Blow:
While all around, the poor tormented Ghosts,
Gastfully staring with their Balefull Eyes,
Cease their shrill Cries, and their lamenting Wails;
All with Amazement hushed, and as they Listen,
Shuddring with Horror at his Hideous roar,
Yet what I dare I Will tell thee.
Fame, that with Indefatigable Wings
Born through the boundless Regions of the Air,
Incessantly Surveys this Globe of Earth,
Once in the Course of the revolving Year,
Stoops at these Isles of Fortune, the Abodes
Of happy Heroes, separated Souls,
To visit her Adopted Sons, all Demy-Gods,
Who undisturbed in these Elysian Shades,
Pursue Immortal Pleasures. If he shrinks not
When next the Goddess comes, He Is ours for ever.

Phen. When arrives she?


Nis. I dare no more, but it is thy part to try
To Cure Armida of this raging Passion.

Phen. Nay, then thou say Enough; Alas I have,
Thou know it is my Interest more than Hers;
Rinaldo is a Christian,
And wins each Moment on Armida's Soul,
Who knows how far at last He may prevail?
If he should once Seduce her from her Faith,
What could be so Abandoned as Phenissa.
It is my daily Study to Reclaim her,
A Thousand times in vain I have attempted it.

Nis. Once more attempt it, then if thou Succeed'st not,
Lull her with Hope, true Woes are to Succeed,
Let her enjoy false Pleasures while she may.
But she appears, I vanish. sinks.
Enter Armida.
Arm. Phenessa, sleeps Rinaldo?


Phen. He does.
Why were you absent at the Magic Rites?

Arm. I hate this cursed Art since first it showed me
That, that to which the hardest things are possible,
Yet wants the power to calm my rageing Grief;
All Nature lies subjected to my Charms,
I give her Rest, and Rowze her with Alarms,
My Arbitrary voice she hears with awe,
And standing fixed suspends the eternal Law.
I to the Tempest make the Poles Resound,
And the conflicting Elements Confound;
At my Command
The Thunder rushes out on flaming Wings,
And all the hollow deep of Hell
With hideous Uproar Rings;
Fierce Spirits who great Heaven's command disdained,
Submit themselves and are by mine restrained.
The Wildest things are by my power Confined:
All but my Wild ungovernable Mind.
But I have homebred Furies which Rebel,
While I subdue the fiercest Powers of Hell.
Oh, my foreboding Soul!

Phen. Compose your self, Consider you are a Queen.


Arm, Consider I Am a Slave, Consider I Am a Lover.


Phen. No Common Queen, they Rule but Common Slaves;
You Govern with a Nod all Asia's Monarchs.

Arm. Effeminate, Slothful, Lukewarm Creatures all,
Whose Souls were but half kindled by their Maker.

Phen. Then what they want from Heaven they have from you;
Your Eyes have Blown those Suols into a Flame.

Arm. Those Kings I scorned before, I knew my Hero;
What are those Royal Pageants? Thou have seen them,
And what is my Rinaldo? Thou have gazed on him.

Phen. The greatest of Mankind, since to this Height
The great Armida by her Favors Raised him;
Before, the last of the Italian Princes.

Arm. But the first of Conquerours.


Phen. A private Man, without Command in the Army.


Arm. Fortune, and Fame, and Victory obeyed him,
Him, the Sole power of that Victorious Army.
Who was the Terror of the East, but He!
This private Man made all your Monarchs Tremble,
Even in the midst of their own shivering Slaves,
To whom they owed their Power and their Security.
His Power was in himself, His dauntless Soul,
And his unconquered own Right Hand his Safety.
What? though he Rules no Empire, he deserves One,
And has both Conquered and Rejected Crowns:
He in his Inborn Worth is more Exalted.
No drowsy Monarch by a Dull Descent,
But for his High Desert preferred by Heaven,
And singled from the rest of Human kind,
To Execute the vast Designs of Fate.

Phen. The Theme transports you.


Arm. It Is my Love Transports me.


Phen. It Is frankly owned,
For such a Proud, Severe, disdainful Beauty.

Arm. Yes, I am Proud that I my self have Excellence,
To Know and Love such Merit; Surely Love
In this Excess has something that is Divine;
Women who Dote on Monsters even to Madness,
Are proud of their own Fury. What must I be,
When the consenting World admires my Choice!
Thou, whose cold Mass runs Curdling through thy Veins,
Thou gazest on Rinaldo with Desire;
Yet thou have only seen the God of Love,
In the fresh Beauries of my Blooming Hero:
Oh, even in thee, what Raptures had he Raised!
Had thou once seen him like the God of War,
While Grizly Terror perched upon his plume;
Severely shining in his dreadful Helmet,
And Thundering through the Tempest of the Field.

Phen. Well! tho you Love with fury, you possess;
Since then the God of Love has made you Blessed,
Why should you toil to make your self unhappy?

Arm. Once more, I tell thee, Love has taught me fear.


Phen. Fear! Fear of what?


Arm. The Torments which the Souls in Hell endure;
Nay worse, those Souls have only missed of Heaven,
But to have lost it, that is the Plague of Devils.

Phen. You seek those groundless fears.


Arm. Ah no!
Hell threatened me with fate by Ramiel's voice,
And Heaven by these Foreboding thoughts fortells it;
And, what is more than Heaven or Hell to me,
Rinaldo has confirmed it.

Phen. It Is but an Hour since he declared He Loved you.


Arm. But with such Accents and such Eyes declared it,
His very Anger had been less provoking;
Can one who Loves with such a Soul as mine,
Be Tortured worse than with endearing Words,
Spoke with the Coldness of that cruel Air?

Phen. But how should Natute bear perpetual Rapture,
When she quite sinks in Momentary transports?
Sometimes He meets your Love with equal Fury.

Arm. If he did not, he would be less then Man,
This Desert Isle divides us from the World,
Where He, and I, and Thou, are Human kind:
He loved me not in Palestine, where I
Seduced the very Flower of Godfrey's Army,
Subdued their inmost Souls by my soft Arts;
And led them from the Army through the East
In Amorous Pomp, the common Foes of Asia,
And Victims to my Unkles great Revenge,
Only Rinaldo's Soul remained Impregnable;
A fiercer Flame than that of Love had seized it,
And his Eyes sparkled with severer fires;
The Love of Glory reigned sole Tyrant there,
Which in great Souls still rages to a fault,
The Crime of Angels, and of Men like Angels;
Who conscious to their own surpassing Excellence,
Would by great Actions force the Envious World
TO acknowledge their Transcendency of Nature.

Phen. But still the Ambitious love, as well as others:
Nature makes use of Love in Mighty Minds,
Who else would be aspiring to be Gods,
To show them they are Men.

Arm. Yes, they can Love, but think that Love their Frailty,
And not their Virtue;
And when that Love comes once to obstruct Ambition,
With all their might they make a vast Effort,
And tear it from their Souls.

Phen. The knowing this,
One would have thought, might have secured your Heart.

Arm. This made me Dote on him, and as he slept
Transport him on a Storm's sonorous Wings,
Far from the War, and the shrill Trumpet's sound,
To this sweet Place designed for Love and Joy.
Yet even here, where Earth and Heaven, nay Hell
Conspires to Indulge the sweetest of all Passions;
Where even I, for whom a Thousand Lovers
Have sighed, and sighed in vain, with all that is soft
And delicate in Love descend to incite Him,
Even here he has but Intervals of Passion;
It Is true those Intervals are Furious All,
For He in every thing is more than Mortal:
But then anon, even in my very Arms,
My Eager Arms, he languishes for Glory:
He meditates profound, and fetches sighs,
Which, while He vainly struggles to repress,
With terrible Revulsions shake his Soul:
With Eyes upon me fixed He sees me not,
And gazing upon his, I find him absent.
Often in his Sleep he takes Convulsive Starts,
And cries, to Arms, Hark, Hark, the Trumpet sounds,
And Glory calls to Arms; I come, I fly,
Thou Darling of my Soul, thou Mistress even of Gods!
Then with the fury of the Transport Waking,
He fetches sighs that shake his Inmost Soul.

Phen. Well, since Ambition Rules in all great Souls,
Shake off this softer Rage.

Arm. I want the very Will to shake it off,
Ambition rules in Men, but Love prevails in Women;
Had Heaven, that gave us such attractive Grace,
Not Tempered our unruly Souls with Love,
We had been more dangerous to Men than Devils:
Phenissa, I am a Woman.

Phen. But no Vulgar Woman.


Arm. No, nor is mine a Vulgar Passion,
I bear a Mind no Stranger to Ambition,
But still my Love prevails above my Pride.
Oh, let me never know Indifference more;
I never can, nor will be calm again;
For who could live indifferent as to Heaven,
That had but known the vast delight of Gods,
And had a taste of Immortality?

Phen. It Is the mere Fever of your mind that talks thus,
For Love is nothing else.

Arm. Thou rail'st at Love as Fiends blaspheme their God,
Because He has abandoned thee for ever.

Phen. My Years will bring my Sentiments to you.


Arm. Oh never, never let me see those years,
The Soul, that sparkle of Celestial Fire,
The longer it has lain immerst in the Air,
The colder feels its sense of Heaven and Love,
The great Originals from which it sprung.

Phen. Reason requires that you should rule this Passion.


Arm. Talk not of Reason, what, but Love, is Reason?
For, what, but Love, is Happiness?
Love first appears with Reason in the Soul,
And by degrees with Reason it decays.
But cease, forbear thy foolish ill-timed Counsel,
With silent awe attend my Potent Charm.
And thou, O Air, that murmur'st on the Mountain,
Be hushed at my Command, Silence ye Winds,
That make outrageous War upon the Ocean;
And thou, old Ocean, lull thy wondering Waves;
Ye Warring Elements be hushed as Death,
While I impose my Dread Commands on Hell;
And thou profoundest Hell, whose dreadful sway
Is given to me, by Fate and Demogorgon,
Hear, hear, my powerful Voice through all thy Regions!
By Demogorgon, I Command thee, Hear!
And from thy gloomy Caverns thunder thy Reply. Subterranean Thunder.
I am obeyed --
Now send up Dreams that may be fittest found
T'impose upon Rinaldo's slumbring thoughts,
And to enslave his Soul.

Spirits or Dreams arise in the shapes of Bertoldo and Sophia, Parents to
Rinaldo; and of some that Rinaldo had slain in Battle. Bert. Rinaldo!


Soph. Rinaldo!


Bert. Look up, Behold the Mournful Shade
Of him who gave thee Breath,
Who steps to see thee, while you are laid
Upon the Confines here of Death;
T'inform thee of thy future State,
And, e're yet it be too late,
To prevent thy wretched Fate.

Soph. Look up my Son, Look up on me,
In me the Aflicted Sophia see.
Ah Son! not all the grinding throws,
With which, when thou were born,
My Tortured Nerves were torn,
Equaled half the wracking woes,
Which now thy Mother undergoes,
Thou Darling of my Soul, for thee.

Bert. Last night I cast a Look
Upon Fates dreadful Book,
And read a Lesson which no Brain
That is Mortal can Sustain,
While all my Soul with Horror shook.

Soph. Oh! the distraction of the sight
And Oh! the Torments of the fright
I never, never shall forget that Night.

Bert. Rowze all thy Faculties my Son,
And to my Fatal words give ear,
For know that they concern thee near;
No longer let thy Fancy run
After that Aerie Fantom Fame;
But Love Armida with a constant Flame:
Or Destiny decrees,
Thou shall feel woes, which but to hear
Would distract thy Soul with fear,
And all thy Blood with Horror freeze,

Soph. Ah! see around the Raving Hosts
Of purple Ghosts;
Whose Blood thou have in Battle spilt,
With fearful Guilt.
Who, unless awed by her Commanding Power,
Would, ah, this Moment, tear thee and devour!

Bert. How they advance with whirling Brands, Dance begins.
All flaming in their threatening Hands!
And as they go their dreadful Round,
Revenge, Revenge Resound!
Chorus of Spirits. For Revenge, for Revenge, to Armida we call,
That we terribly may on our Murderer fall;
That as now we with Sulphurous Torches surround him,
We with our Screams and our Scorpions may wound him;
And with astonishing Horrors confound him.

During the Chorus a Dance of Spirits. Armida. By Heaven Rinaldo smiles at all
their Threats,
And slumbering scorns this terrible appearance.
Confusion and Amazement! What do I hear? Fame's Trumpet.
What Trumpets, this whose great and Martial sound
Makes the World Echo to its Music?
Ha! Disappeared! All vanished on the sudden! Spirits vanish.
Gone undismiss'd! The Charm not yet unbound!
Ho! Ariec! Hear, and know my awful Voice,
At my Command appear again I Charge thee,
Or else be Banished from my sight for ever.
Ariec half rising. O Queen, to whom thy Excellence of Nature,
And thy Transcendent Beauty gives Command
Over all the Infernal Powers, for in thy Brightness
We see what once we were in our High Stations,
And some Reflected Beams enjoy
Of that supreamly Blissful Vision,
From whose Enjoyment our aspiring Minds
Have banished us for ever.
Excuse thy Slaves unable to obey thee,
For know a greater Power now drives us hence,
One of the Brightest of the Empyreal Mansions
Expels us with a Stream of Light
That sets this Atmosphere on fire,
And with its Blaze insufferably Bright
Confounds Hell's Gloomy Powers;
Summmon the Aerial Spirits to thy Aid,
For they who poised upon expanded Wings,
Like Basking in the Sun's Meridian Glory.
Are fitter to sustain Heavens flaming Ministers
Than we who sojourn in the Dusky Deep;
And they, perhaps too, with Enchanting Voices,
To Pleasure may seduce Rinaldo's Soul.
Pleasure thou know can tame that Dauntless Soul,
Which thou no more by Terrors can subdue,
Than fright the Dreadful God who darts the Thunder.
But, Oh, dismiss me, for I can no more,
A Deluge of Empyreal Light o'rewhelms me.

Arm. Begone then, and for Ease to Hell repair. Vanisher.
But see Rinaldo wakens, Oh! Astonishment,
How every thing I see and hear confounds me,
And shows a Power above my own controuls me,
Let us retire, and then unseen observe him,
I from himself my Destiny would learn.

Rinaldo rises from the Couch, Armida and Phenissa retire to the side of the
Stage. Rin. Me-thought the Trumpet's noble Sound
Alarmed me to the Combat,
Was it Illusion that, or was it real?
Let it be what it will, it gives thee Cause
To ask thy self this Question, what thou were,
And what thou art at Present? O Rinaldo,
Heaven gave thee Reason for thy Guide of action,
But that is a Lamp set up in every Breast.
Heaven gave thee yet a more exalted Spirit
Which reached above the frail Efforts of Reason;
For Reason only teaches Man his Duty:
That raised thy freeborn Soul to nobler Heights,
To things Superlatively Great and Good,
Beyond what Reason or what Heaven Required.
But where is that Spirit now? That Towering Faculty,
Which mounting Soared above Humanity?
It Is now half Quenched by an Ignobler Fire.
Oh base Desertion from my self and glory.

Arm. Hear this Phen ssa, now are my Fears groundless?


Rin., Nay, thou have stifled too the very Dictates
Of Common Reason which Mankind Obeys,
And while Ten thousand Slaves before Jerusalem,
Urged by their Duty in this very Moment,
To Danger and to Death bid loud Defiance,
Thou Loyter'st here in soft Inglorious Ease.
Perhaps the Fable of the Army, Ha!
Can thou bear that? Can thou so much as Think
That thou deserve to be Contemned and Live?

Arm. Oh, I am lost, beyond all Hope, Undone?


Rin. Nay, can thou bear even this? That thou no more
Deserve to be preferred above the Rest,
Above the Rest, admired? That in this Moment
The Brave Tan^redi like Celestial Jove
With Thunder in his Hand distributes Fate,
While Thou -- By Heaven I Would rather be a Dog,
And lead a Brutal Life, without Reflection
Than to be stung with the tormenting Thought
That one who is my fellow Creature
Merits to Command me.
Oh, what is what is become of that aspiring-greatness
That once disdained to yield to less then Infinite!
It Is lost, it is to a Woman's will Abandoned.

Phen. Madam contain your self.


Rin. It Is true thou love her with that height of Fury,
Which none but her Inimitable Beauties
Cold ever have Inspired.

Phen. Observe him now.


Rin. But what? The Vulgar can Command small Passions;
It Is for Rinaldo to Control the Fiercest.
Why art thou by Fames Hundred Tongues extolled?
Why by her Golden Trump proclaimed a Hero,
If thou have only Brutal force to boast of?
It Is chiefly force of Mind that makes a Hero.
Then, O thou loveliest of thy Sex, Armida,
Thou only one of all created Beings,
That ere had power to Fire Rinaldo's Heart
Be satisfied with this, that only thou
Had power to move his Soul, which for a time
Admired thee Equal to eternal Glory.

Fame's Trumpet and Voices. Rinaldo, in the Enchanted Grove
Prepare to meet immortal Love;
Straight to the Bower of Bliss repair,
Fortune nd Fame attend thee there.
Rin. Again that noble Clangor, and with Voices!
Nay then it is Evident it is no Illusion.
Who ere thou art that with those God-like Sounds
Thus raisest all that is powerful in my Nature,
This moment in the enchanted Grove I Will meet thee.
But O Rinaldo whither were thou fallen?
Who want a call to rouse thee from thy Lethargy,
That might Awake the Dead and make them Start
From their Eternal Slumbers Exit.

Arm. Patience ye Heavens, or thou Hell Revenge!
But let us to the Enchanted Grove Repair,
And thither call the Powr's that Rule the Air;
Yet least the Charms of Pleasure too, should fail,
Hell, let thy gloomy gods their last Efforts prepare,
If Destiny Decrees that after all,
I needs must perish, like my self I Will fall;
I Will fall like one whose Arbitrary Sway,
The Aerial and the Infernal gods obey:
With me the Traitor shall not only Die,
But groaning Nature in Convulsions lie.

Now to the Bower of Bliss let us fly
And all the Way we go,
Hell, by thy Music show
Thou art enraged as well as I. Exeunt.
The End of the Second Act.
ACT III.
SCENE, The Enchanted Wilderness. Soft Music, Rinaldo solu. Rin. WEre then
those glorious Voices but Delusions,
That called me with that Pomp of noble Harmony?
Fortune they cried, and Fame attended here,
But all things here as soft as Lovers VVishes,
This Magic Symphony with sweetness sooths me,
And every thing around me Breaths Desire,
Which passes through my Senses to my Soul,
And to Armida's Beauteous Image there
Imparts fresh force and new Divinity.
That Image to perpetually torments me,
Reflecting on the Exstatick Joys,
Which I must loose for ever.

Enter Armida and Phenissa. Arm. See where he walks in gloomy Contemplation!
Summon the Aerial Spirits to their Duty,
While I unseen observe him.

Rin. Could thou resolve, then should Heaven send the occasion
To leave this lovely Masterpiece of Nature;
To leave her in this fullness of Desire,
This height of all thy Furious Wishes;
When each succeeding Hour
Adds to her Graces, and sublimes thy Pleasure.
Can thou resolve to see that Face no more;
And never more to hear that Voice,
Whose Music Charms above the Magic Songs
Even of the Immortal Ministers who serve her.
Can thou Resolve? Ay, There Is the Dreadful Question!
For what can be so terrible to Nature
As to fall all at once from blissful Rapture
To the Cursed State of Wishing without Hope?
Can thou make this Effort and live? No matter,
Life's not the thing in Question now, it is Glory.

Arm. See how the Tempest of his Passion tears him!
But can thou hear him thus contrive thy Ruin,
And yet stand tamely by?
Thou who can crush him in a moment!
Since thou have cloyed him with thy softness,
What if he heard thee thunder in his Ears,
With that terrible Voice that untunes Nature,
And makes the Inverted Spears fall into discord?
But something tender in my Soul restrains me,
Is it Compassion? No, it is something softer,
Thou love the Traitor still; Love him to madness.
I do, I will, I must. Can ever Woman
Behold that Form without a bleeding Heart?
That Mien that claims the Empire of the Universe?
With which he may give Laws to Human Kind.
May the High place with Dignity maintain
Of Heaven's great Viceroy for this Under-World,
And Represent Immortal Majesty.
Once more I Will try Endearments. She comes forward.

Rin. Ha! The Queen! Perceiving her.
Now, where are all thy feeble Resolutions?
One Glance has humbled thy Aspiring Thoughts,
Pleasure flows streaming from those Lovely Eyes,
And with it is sweetness overcomes my Soul.
If it is a Crime to look and be Transported,
Why was I made thus sensible to Pleasure?
Why was she formed with that surpassing Beauty,
That might transport an Angel from his Sphere,
And fix him by Divine Resemblance here?
Armida! My Queen! My Mistress!

Arm. Yes, she is here, and still the same she has been,
Unless that to her self she is altered;
That I must see, Pulls out a Glass, and looks in it.
At least I Am sure she is the same to thee;
But thou art altered to thy self and me,
And thou art lost to both.

Rin. So lost indeed I was, while I
From thee, the dearer part of me, was absent;
But I shall find my self again in thee. To her looking in the Glass.
Why do thou vainly seek thy likeness there?
Can the frail Crystal represent Divinity?
Would thou behold these Eyes in all their Glories?
To see the force of their Celestial Fire,
Turn them on mine all flaming with desire;
Or look upon the Crystal of the Skies,
And view thy own in the World's flaming Eyes;
Those Eyes which vast Intelligences move
Minds made like thine, all Knowledge and all Love.

Arm. By all my Hopes of Happiness and Him,
His Heart's once more my own. Rinaldo sit,
To drive away all Sorrow from thy Soul
I Will give thee Music that may lull Despair,
And tempt the Dire Tormentours of the Damned,
With listed Brands to listen to its Air.
Aerial Spirits who attend me, Hear,
And shaped like Gods whom Greece Adored, appear.

Symphony of Flutes, Venus, Cupid, and a Chorus of Loves and Graces. Ven.
Cupid, come to the Relief
Of thy Mother's piercing Grief;
Hither quickly, Cupid, fly;
With thee bring thy keenest Dart,
To subdue a Rebel Heart,
Thou art Scorned as well as I.

Ritornelle. Cho. Come Cupid, on thy Golden Wing,
And in thy sounding Quiver bring
Pernicious Arrows, winged with Fire,
T'inflict incurable Desire.
Symphony. Cupid flying down Thus flying through the Balmy Air,
To my great Parent I repair;
And though the World's maintained by me,
Yet, Mother, to attend on thee,
I leave the mighty Care.

Ven. A Mortal in this Fragrant Bower,
Presumes that he is above our Power.

Cup. I Will make that Mortal know,
That none too Great for Love can grow:
I tame the mighty Powers above,
And cruel Gods below.
Ritornelle. Great Jove, whose Arms the Lightning, sling,
Has felt my fiercer Fire,
And Hell's Inexorable King
Has yielded to Desire.

Cho. Great Jove, whose Arms the Lightning sling,
Has felt thy fiercer Fire, etc.

Cup. Now quickly through the Enchanted Grove,
Let all my nimble Brethren Rove.

Dance Ven. Let Earth, and Air, and Flood, and Fire,
And every thing around conspire
To breath forth soft and sweet Desire.

Cho. Let Earth, and Air, etc.


Enter Urania, Ubaldo, Carlo. Ur. Thus we unseen have past the winding Mazes
Of this Enchanted Labyrinth, and now
Stand here invisible to Mortal sight,
To all unless Rinaldo's
See where the wanton Lovers lie reclined
In all the soft and pleasing Pomp of Luxury.
But now it is Heavens High will that I Retire,
And the remaining Task consign to you: To Carlo.
To you, I Delegate this Sacred wand,
This wand whose powerful touch no Impious Spirit,
Whether of Earth, or Air, or Fire can Bear,
With which thou shall expel these shining Fantoms.
Then waiting the Departure of the Enchantress,
Ubaldo, thou shall first approach Rinaldo,
And to his Eyes presenting that bright Orb,
Show him himself, the only form can shake him. Exit.

Carlo goes round waving his Wand and the Spirits Vanish. Arm. What? All upon
the Wing? And undismiss'd too!
All Starting with amazement from their Stations,
Like watchful Fowl, that spring upon descrying
The Fowler's sly approach.
What can this mean, that neither is in Nature,
Nor in the Compass of my powerful Art;
That Hell or cannot, or else dare not Speak!
Rinaldo too, seems strangely discomposed;
What ails my Love? What means that furious Start?
Why do thy lovely Eyes appear thus Terrible?
And threatening shoot their fiery glances that Way?

Rin. Why have you done this?


Arm. What have I done? Thou art not well my Love.


Rin. Why have you raised these Fantoms to delude me,
In that provoking Posture?

Arm. These Fantoms are within thee, I see nothing;
I who a hundred times a Day view Beings,
That are to thee Invisible.
Sure, it is the effect of his distempred Mind;
But then my Spirits who are fled unlicens'd:
The more I think, the more I grow Confounded.
My Genius seems to whisper me within,
Armida! Fate approaches.
An iey Horror strikes through all my Veins,
And Freezes as it runs; not far from hence,
There is a dismal Cave, the Mouth of Hell,
Out of the which, the old ugly Beldame Night,
With Twenty thousand fiends, her fearful Equipage,
Each Evening Rushes to usurp the Sky,
And in her hideous flight Deform
The afflicted face of Nature; Straight, Phenissa,
Into its monstrous Caverns shall Descend
And thither Summoning Hell's blackest Furies,
Fiends too abominable to behold
The face of Heaven or mine,
Shall there Compel them to unfold my Destiny*

Ubaldo and Carlo go up to Rinaldo, who had been all this while observing them.
Rin. Ha! What are you,
That in this posture of Defiance,
Thus dare to explore the Secrets of a Solitude,
That Is Sacred to the Immortal Powers and me?
What are you? Speak or --

Carlo. Men.


Ub. Soldiers.


Carl. Friends.


Ub. Ubaldo,


Carl. Carlo.


Ub. Now, what art thou? Look there and satisfy thy self. Presents the
Adomantine shield to him


Rin. Damnation, what indeed? For it is Impossible
That thou can be Rinaldo. Oh, Dishonor!
Earth open quick, and take me to the Center!
Ye Cedars fall and Crush me to Conceal me!
But what Retreat can hide me from my thoughts?
For I have seen my shame, and that is to me
As much as if the assembled World beheld it.
What Godlike Forms are those, compared to mine?
Off ye vile Trappings of soft Syrian Slaves, Tears of his Ghirlands.
The Pride of little base Esseminate wretches,
That want the very outside of Humanity.

Carl. Now He begins to be once more Rinaldo,
Throws off the Captive, and resumes the Demy-god,
We come to free thee from inglorious Thraldom,
Follow us.

Rin. Whither.


Ub. To Jerusalem.


Rin. Ha!


Ub. Godfrey Invites thee.


Carl. The universal Camp demands thee,
Victory on her Eagles Wings attends thee.

Ubal. Fortune, and everlasting Fame expect thee.
Art thou not Fired? When Europe and when Asia
Contending for the Empire of the World,
In dreadful Conflict meet, Is this a place;
This soft Retreat for that aspiring Soul,
That once was foremost in the Race of Glory?

Rin. Great Deeds are often in Solitude performed.


Ubal. Of all created Spirits, is there one
So Covetous of Deathless Fame as thine?
Then where are thy Applauders here?

Rin. The Brave can never be without Applauders,
The Gods, and I my self approve my Actions.

Ubald. Can thou Desert the darling Cause of Heaven,
And yet affirm that Heaven approves thy Actions?
What wants there but thy Sword, O Fatal Warrior,
To finish this Croisade with glorious Victory?
TO extinguish that abominable Sect,
And put an end to all their Impious Rites?
Break forth, and be thy God-like self once more,
The matchless Champion of the Christian Cause,
Who art now the Egregious Champion of a Woman;
Break from her Influence, whose malignant Aspect
Eclipses all thy glory.

Rin. Have neither of you seen this Woman,
Whom thus disdainfully you mention?

Ubald. Thou know we have*


Rin. Did you unmoved behold her? No, you Loved her,
Even to the loss of Reason, both you loved her,
Contemned and used like Slaves, you Doted on her;
I met you led in Triumph both, and Bound,
Bound in Ignobler Bonds than those of Love;
I met you, and delivered you, unmann'd
To that degree, you grumbl'd at your Freedom,
Because your Baseness had excuse no longer.
Have I a Soul so little Sensible,
That I should leave the soft, the kind Armida,
When her Disdain and her Imperious fierceness
Could so engageing prove to you?
Me she yet never gave just cause to leave her,
Unless because for me She left an Empire.
And the Addresses of all Asia's Monarchs.

Ub. Our Actions ought not to be Rules for yours,
You have a Soul of a Superior Order.

Rin. Could you persuade my Vanity to that,
Great Souls by Mighty'st Passions are tormented,
Besides, Armida has Ten thousand Charms,
Of which you never can have any Notion.
Could Cruelty have binding force for you,
And am I urged to leave the last Endearments?
That only by their sweet Remembrance pierce
My Inmost Soul, and Rowze up sleeping Raptures.

Ub. A Hero nere can want a worthier Mistress.


Rin. Thou talk, but Ah! thou do not think, Ubaldo.
For him who has Enjoyed Armida,
There is no other Mistress.
Thou have beheld her Angel Form,
And Frowning, it has Ravished thee.
Thou know her Science, and her wondrous Wit too,
But Ah, thou nere can know with how much Art,
She makes that Wit subservient to her Happiness,
When she designs to bless the Man she Loves,
And raise him to a God, with height of Rapture
Were you that happy Man, would you forsake her?
At least, thou should not Carlo.
Thy languid Eyes, that glow with humid Fires,
Declare too well thy Soul.

Carl. I must confess, I should not.


Vb. Nay, then all is lost. Heaven's darling Cause is lost,


Rin. Ubaldo, No,
What I have said, has been designed to show,
That the great thing I now shall do is owing,
Not to the Influence of your frail persuasion,
Who stand Convicted both, and both Confounded;
But the full Force of my own Reasoning Virtue.
Tho Dearer than my Life I Love Armida;
I Love my Duty and my Honor more.
And since they call, Rinaldo will obey.
But Oh, thou Tyrant, Glory, How much gentler,
And how much Lovelier in the Field I found thee,
When stained with Human Gore, from far thou beckon'st,
And I while Death and Horror stalked before me,
Broke through the whole Arabian Horse to join thee,
And Mowed my passage through the Syrian Infantry.

Ub. There spoke the very first, and best of Hero's Entering


Ur. Nay, then Appear Urania.


Rin. The blessed Urania here!


Ur. Yes, now you purge your stains by such Contrition,
Urania dares appear,
She has with transport, and with wonder heard thee.
Thou have assumed a god-like Resolution.

Rin. Yes, I will leave my very Life, my Soul.
Farewell thou Dearer part of me, and with thee,
Pleasure farewell, a long farewell ye Raptures,
That have so often in this blissful Bower,
Rais*d me above the height of mortal Happiness.

Enter Phenissa. Phen. My Lord, the Queen your Mistress, Ha!
Bless me, what shapes are those?

Ur. Tell her, she is no more Rinaldo's Mistress,
And he no more a Slave.

Phen. What Is this I hear? Nay then assist me Hell;
Fly Nisroe, fly, and on the Wings of Lightning,
Convey this News I charge thee.
This certainly must turn her Love to Hate,
To mortal Hate; and force her to destroy him. Exit.

Rin. Now all ye separated Souls of Heroes,
Who in this happy Isle, enjoy Immortal Pleasures;
Who hovering in the Balmy Air around me.
Beheld the dreadful Conflict in my Breast,
And saw me with a bleeding Heart, a Victor;
Say all, if I deserve a place
In your Illustrious Roll?

Ur. No Roman ere did half so much for Glory.
True, they resigned their Lives for Glory,
But soon their pangs were over.
Thou art contented to Live greatly miserable,
But quickly let us fly, thou know Armida,
And know how far her dreadful power Extends;
That power that sets Earth, Hell, and Heaven in uproar,
While Chaos Hushed, stands listening to the noise,
And wondering at Confusion, not his own;
And though she should not hurt us, she may shake us.
But hark, already she begins, already,
Hells grizly Tyrant takes the dire Alarm The Serpent and Bases softly under
the Stage.
In Frantic haste even now the Furies Arm,
The Infernal Trumpet through the Abiss profound,
Horribly Rumbles with its dreary Sound.
Hark! Here the Music plays out.
In that Roar Hells dreadful Mounds ir past.
Hark! Here the Alarm plays out again.
Now the vaulted Heaven's restore the dismal Blast.

Ub. I stiffen with Astonishment,


Carl. And I grow Chill with Horror.
Bless me, what hideous Forms are those,
That threatening Nod their ghastly skulls,
And Stalk to oppose our passage,
Rin. Why? those are Creatures whom their Crimes have thrown
So far below us, we to them are Gods
In Scorn of all their empty threats I Will on.
Are we not Spirits too? Immortal Beings,
Whom only we our selves have power to hurt? Alarm again.
I fear the fair Armida's softness more
Than all these ghastly shapes, and all this dreadful Roar.

The End of the Third Act.
The foresaid Alarm is repeated for the Act Tune.
ACT IV.
SCENE, The Country before the Enchanted Palaces. Enter Phenissa, and Nisroe.
Nis. Why am I called with so much eager haste?


Phen. Oh, I want time to tell thee, Haste, Be gone,
Fly, fly, this very moment,
Swift as a Storm, Impetuous as the Lightning,
To execute Armida's Dreadful Will.

Nis. Rinaldo --


Phen. Is gone with Vengeance, and with Death overtake him;
Go, bid the avenging Ministers of Fate
Rush through the inmost Chambers of the Earth,
And shake the World's Foundations.
Bid the Tempestuous Powers that rule the Air
Let loose the unbridled Fury of the Winds,
To overthrow their Empire.
And let the Furies with Infernal Horrors
Affright, astonish and confound the Traitor.
What! stand'st thou pausing now the Queen's betrayed?

Nis. I do not pause, this moment you are obeyed.
Behold that grisly Form which there ascends, Spirits ascends.
The Dire forerunner of Confusion;
As in this Western Main a small black Cloud
Lifting its threatening Head above the Horizon.
The Signal of the Warring Winds
Foreruns the Dreadful Hurricane --
This Rising Fantome by its black appearance
Alarms Millions of Immortal Spirits,
To raise up Tumults that will shake all Nature.

Phen. Let us be gone then, Thou to Hell,
And to the Queen, my Mistress, I,
To tell her what thou have done. Exeunt.

Thunder and Lightning; Spirit comes forward and sings. Spir. Ye Spirits that
dwell in Earth, Fire, and Air,
Hither, Hither, Hither, Hither, hurrying repair:
Behold your great Mistress, Armida's betrayed,
Hither, hither, hither, Hurry all to her Aid.

Cho. Lo, from Earth, from Hell, and from Sky,
With Vengeance laden we fly.

Spir. Ye Fiends that are lurking in Graves,
Or gliding in Vaulted Caves,
All working amain in your Holes,
Heave, Heave up the Crumbling Earth like Moles.
Till the Mountain shakes,
And the Rock its Basis forsakes,
And the Heart of the Traitor quakes.

Cho. It Is done, see the Mountain shakes,
And the Rock its Basis forsakes.

Spir. Ye Powers who govern the Air,
Let naught but Confusion be there;
Haste to send forth
The stormy North,
And unbind the Deep Mouth
Of the Blustering South:
Let them blow, let them blow, till with Fury they Roar,
And ambitious old Ocean disdains the Shore.

Cho. Hark how they blow! Hark how they blow!
If they go on, through the Void they will sweep
The Heavens, the Earth, and the Deep,
And the World into Chaos will throw!

Spir. Now flying in Crowds,
Charge, Charge all your Clouds,
Charge them all with Destructive Thunder,
Let it roar, till it rends the Vast all asunder.
Let the Lightning fearfully blaze,
Till Mortals who gaze,
Fall Dead at the terrible Wonder.

Cho. It Is done, it is done, and we shake
At the dire Confusion we make.

Spir. Ye Furies who Reign in Unquenchable Fires,
To the sound of your Yells tune your Horrible Lyres;
And give us that Music by which you Redouble
The Horrors of Hell, and unspeakable Trouble.

Cho. It Is done.


Spir. Now add to the Symphony clinking of Chains.
Cho. It Is done.

Spir. Add the Howls of the Damned, in the height of their Pains;


Cho. It Is done.


Spir. Add their Scream and their Roar, and their Serpentine Hiss;


Cho. It Is done.


Spir. Let Lucifer's Thunder now answer to this,
And Bellow alternately through the Abyss.

Cho. It Is done, and it is past our power to know,
Whither this be Chaos or no?

Enter Armida and Phenissa. Phen. At length you have moved his mighty Soul.


Arm. But it is with Anger not with Fear, he is moved,
See where transported with a Noble Fury,
Lovelily dreadful as a Warring Angel,
He drives the Infernal Fantomes all before him.

Phen. Redouble your Efforts.


Arm. That certainly destroys him.


Phen. No matter, since you cannot shake him, crush him.


Arm. Thus Godlike! Thus insensible of Fear!


Phen. Think He Is insensible of Love too.


Arm. Perhaps He may relent. He comes this way,
And I will make the Trial.

Phen. Relent! What can you hope? What can you do?
When Furies cannot prevail?

Arm. Show him a greater.


Phen. A greater? What greater?


Arm. A Woman,
An injured Woman!
VVrong'd in her Love, and Raging for Revenge.

Phen. Be Wise, and let him perish.


Arm. Yes, he shall perish if he dares persist;
But thou the giver of bold fatal Counsels,
Assure thy self that thou shall perish with him.
But see, he comes, and to my VVish alone,
Divided by the Tempest from his Friends,
Without Reply, be gone. Exit. Phem.

Enter Rinaldo; Thunder and Lightning, and Horrid Music alternately. Arm. Be
still, at my Command be still, ye Furies,
And ye, Restrain your Roaring Mouths, ye Thunders,
For I am to be heard.

Rin. Ha! The Queen!
The only Object which I would avoid!
Ay, here is the sight at which my Genius shrinks.
Now, all ye Motives to my great Proceeding,
Thou the Remembrance of my former Triumphs,
And Thou the Hope of Future, Thou, O Glory,
That Day and Night in my aspiring Mind
Ragest with inextinguishable Fire;
United aid me in this Dreadful Conflict.
And thou, too conscious of thy great Original,
Rowze, Rowze each nobler Faculty, my Soul,
Exert thy utmost force in thy Defense,
For dreadful is the Danger.
Armida!

Arm. Traitor!


Rin. Traitor!
Armida has had kinder thoughts of me.

Arm. Ungrateful Wretch! Am I at last reproached with it?
I have, and therefore doubly you are a Traitor.
Have I selected thee from all Mankind,
To heap upon thee Obligations! --
And basely after all to steal away!

Rin. You wrong me.
Are not your Sentinels in every Corner?
Have not your Airy Scouts over spread the Island?
How could I hope then to depart unknown?

Arm. Confusion? Am I then defied? Hark!
The Impatient Thunder grumbles to be at thee;
Ten thousand Raging Friends around thee wait,
Watching the sign to spring and to devour thee,
At my least Nod most certain Death attends thee.

Rin. I go to seek him in the search of Glory,
And if I find him here,
There Is a long Voyage saved.

Arm. Then you will go?


Rin. Will! Have you not urged it?


Arm. Oh, Confusion! What do I hear?
Audacious Fool to tempt thy certain Ruin,
And basely to presume to that degree
Upon the poor Remains of Tenderness,
Which to this moment have preserved thee,
I urged it?

Rin. Yes, Urged it by your Impotent Attempts,
To fright me from departure.

Arm. Oh, Patience yet a Moment!


Rin. The greatness of my Mind is now concerned,
And tho I had no other Call then that,
I would be gone. Gods! that you should descend
So far beneath your selves,
To think that you could love a Man so base,
As to be swayed by Fear.

Arm. By my Remaining Hopes of great Revenge,
I never designed to fright thee, but destroy thee;
I know thy Soul incapable of Fear,
Even of the Fear of doing basest Wrongs.

Rin. Whom have I wronged?


Arm. Whom have thou sworn Eternally to Love?


Rin. Armida! And that Hour I cease to Love her,
Hear me, ye Gods! pierce me with all your Bolts;
But from this Hour I will never see her more.

Arm. Hell and Confusion! Dare thou mock my misery?


Rin. I dare not do a thing so much beneath
The Greatness of my Soul.

Arm. Did thou not say that thou Resolv'st to Love me?


Rin. Eternally.


Arm. And yet resolv'st to Leave me?


Rin. By Heavens for ever.


Arm. O vile Dissembler!


Rin. Madam I must be gone, for I am called
With such a Voice as Man dares not resist.

Arm. By whom?


Rin. By Victory, by Fame, by Heaven.


Arm. To do a Barbarous thing? Impossible!


Rin. 'Twas but this moment that the Immortal Powers,
Called loudly from above Begone Rinaldo,
Without delay Begone, it is We command Thee;
Fortune, and Victory, and Fame attend Thee;
This very night Begone or stay for ever.

Arm. Mere Vapor! and Deluding vision all!


Rin. It Is real all by Heaven, this very moment
I heard the Aetherial Trump upon the Mountain,
While the Hill trembled with the eternal clangour;
Urania too, and Carlo and Vbaldo
With Messages from Godfrey are arrived.

Arm. They must return.


Rin. Without me?


Arm. Fate has by me pronounced it.


Rin. What will the Army? what will all Asia think?


Arm. The greatest and most glorious of them all,
Will envy thy Transcendent Happiness.

Rin. But envy always stirs up Base born minds,
To blacken whom they Envy.
I shall become the common talk of Slaves.

Arm. They can but talk, while in Revenge we will live.


Rin. Nay, then I leave you as my Mortal Enemy.


Arm. Your Mortal Enemy! Provoking wretch!
On every side avoidless Fate surrounds thee.
To whom then do thou owe the very Breath,
That thus pronounces this audacious Insolence?
Is it thy Mortal Enemy preserves thee?

Rin. Yes, It Is my Mortal Enemy who e're
Preserves me from a glorious Death,
To see me live a cursed Life with Infamy.
Think of my purple Rivals of the East.
What will they say? That they were all disdained for --
Gods! I want patience to support the Thoughts of it.
But if no sense of my dishonor moves thee,
Think of thy own; what will they say of thee?
That you so far beneath your self descended,
To give a wretch possession of your Soul,
Who vilely could renounce eternal Fame,
To squander an Inglorious Life away
In a fond Woman's Arms.
If thou so little art concerned for me,
I who Love thee beyond all bounds, must leave thee,
To vindicate thy Fame from bold Blasphemers;
And carrying Terror to the very Courts
Of my Imperial Rivals, make them know
That he alone was worthy of thy choice,
Who had the power when Duty called to Leave thee.
Oh! would but thou Armida do thy part,
And show by bearing this Departure greatly,
That she of all her Sex was worthy me;
Who in the Furious Height of all her Love,
To glory could resign me.

Arm. Ay, Here Is another cause for my detaining thee,
My Fame as well as Love requires thy stay;
What would those Monarchs say should thou Desert me?
How would they Scorn the weakness of my choice,
Or meanness of my Beauty?

Rin. Then to secure that Fame lo here I Swear,
The memory of what has past between us
Shall in this corner of the World lie Buried:
In Europe and in Asia unrecorded:
And that of all the Actions of my life,
Alone shall be forgotten.

Arm. Me would thou have give faith to thy False Oaths?
The very Breath that swears, declares thee perjured?
Am I to be forgot, as well as left?

Rin. You mistake me.


Arm. Fate never mistakes, and Traitor is at Hand. Thunder and Spirits
approach.


Rin. I thank thee; since for glorious death I leave thee,
How could I ever hope to fall more greatly,
Than dauntless, in this dreadful wrack of Nature?

Arm. So brave! His greatness shakes my Soul, He frowns.
With congregated clouds about his brows,
As if he were the God who threw these Thunders;
And he commanded Nature.
Yes, thou shall die, but not with so much pleasure
As fondly thou believ'st, for thou shall die
Convicted, and Remorse shall plague that soul
Which fear of danger never could disturb.
Can thou thy self believe thou art not Perjured?

Rin. Perjured!


Arm. Yes Perjured!
Have thou not sworn eternally to Love me?

Rin. Well!


Arm. And yet have sworn to leave me too for ever?


Rin. That is to say, I Love thee with a Passion
That Hopeless and in absence will endure.

Arm. But thou art called alas! and by whom called?
By Victory, by Fame, by Heaven; fine Visions!
By thy Satiety thour't called, false man,
By the base lightness of thy changing temper.

Rin. You wrong me.


Arm. I do not; Had Heaven enjoined thee to Depart,
Would it command thee to appear Inhuman;
Sprung from a Rock and by a Tygress Nursed?
For have thou, say, fetched one Reluctant groan?
Have not thy unrelenting Eyes been dry,
Yet seen my poor Distracted Heart weep Blood?
Have thou so much as cast one Pitying glance,
On my Hard Fortune? On my Fortune said I?
My dreadful Fate, my Everlasting ruin,
And can thou falsely then affirm thou Love?
Do thou not now Convicted fall a Traitor?
Be gone, and meet the Fate which there attends thee.

Rin. Farewell.


Arm. What I have done? He goes to certain Death.
Stay; Have thou not one word to excuse thy crime?

Rin. Yes, yes, it is in my power to justify my self,
To your confusion too, of that be certain.

Arm. Do it then.


Rin. No.


Arm. You must.


Rin. I Will die a thousand Deaths first.


Arm. By Heavens I feel I am a very Woman. Aside.
Rinaldo, if ever I was Dear to thee;
If e're I gave thee high and Perfect pleasure,
Here by its dear Remembrance I conjure thee,
That thou would satisfy this last request,
Let me but know thou art not false,
And I shall die with pleasure.

Rin. O urge it not, if e're thou Love Rinaldo,

Arm. Why?


Rin. In pity to us Both.


Arm. Ha! now by Heaven I long, I die to know it.


Rin. Yet, if tho love Rinaldo, let it die with me,
Thou have alas! endured too much already,
Why should thou strive to know a thing which known,
Will break thy wretched Heart?

Arm. To break my heart you must continue silent,
If I persist to think thee false I die;
Then speak and let me live.

Rin. Thou have overcome, but dread the fatal consequence,
Here I relax the Violent effort;
Which has thus far suppressed the struggling Passion,
That tore my very Vitals to get free,
I told thee That I Loved thee my Armida,
I told thee not how far, that thou shall see;
Then with those Eyes that through the Stars see Fate,
Look upon mine and through them view my Soul;
Say, do I Love thee now, art thou yet satisfied?

Arm. Prodigious alteration in a moment!
Thou do not only Love, but thou art Love;
Come to my Heart, and feel it leap to meet thee.

Rin. Why would thou urge me to this fatal Weakness
That has undone us both? and why return it
With that bewitching softness, which afresh
Must plunge me in the Torments of the Damned?
Why would thou sharpen thus the cruel Sting
Of that severe necessity, which now Breaks from her.
O cursed Hour! Eternally devides us?

Arm. Ah Gods! Ah wretch! Ah Cursed perfidious wretch!
Blast him ye Lightnings, and ye Furies tear him;
The Traitor has dissembled Tenderness,
To torture me the more.

Rin. Now, now O all ye Heavenly Powers defend me.
In this first dreadful moment of my Life,
Not from the Danger of her potent art,
But from my self, y' Eternal Powers defend me!

Arm. Now, now Tartarean Deities Revenge me,
But hold, what Fury want I but my own;
Mine is the wrong, the Vengeance shall be mine:
Die Traitor. Holds up her Dagger.

Rin. Do strike and pierce thy Image here, so fixed, Presenting his Breast.
That nothing but a Dagger can Remove it.

Arm. What has he said? And can thou pierce him now?
I can for his is a persidious Tongue,
But then his Eyes, his Lovesick Eyes speak Truth;
I cannot hurt him with that melting Look:
Love in his Eyes defends him. Curse on thy Tenderness
Then pierce thy self, then Stab him here. Stabs her self.

Rin. Oh Heaven's!
What has thou done? The Dagger's in thy Bosom.

Arm Could I oblige thee more?
Now I prevent thy Barbarous design;
This was the only way, I had to abandon thee.

Rin. I have a Soul that Loves and Dares like yours,
And thus.

Arm. Ah Hold, Rinaldo Hold, if I am Dear to thee,
By that Dear Love I here conjure thee Hold!
Throw down that Cursed Instrument of Death,
I can with constancy support my Wound;
I die to think of thine.

Rin. Ho, there, Phaenissa, Help Vbaldo, Carlo?


Arm. Alas! thou call'st in vain, I die Rinaldo.


Rin. What will become of me, thou bleedst to Death,
And yet no succors nigh.
Let me support thy Lovely Fainting Limbs,
Back to the Palace where Phaenissa waits thee;
Now where is Ambition.

Arm. If I would Live, I want no mortal aid;
A Thousand powerful Spirits round me wait,
Hark! how they groaning all deplore my Fate!
Hark! how their Lyres resound a Rueful Strain,
Which shows them sensible of all my pain.

Rin. O Grief! O Infinite excess of woe!
That makes the very Damned with Piercing moan
Lament our Sorrows, and forget their own.

The End of the Fourth Act.
ACT V.
Enter Rinaldo, Armida, Phaenissa. Rin. NOw you and Heaven have perfected my
Joy,
And all I would have asked prevented:
Thou have renounced thy Faith, renounced thy Art,
And thy Wound is not Mortal; my Friends too,
My Friends will all be ravished, I Will but seek them,
And with them in a moment I Will return.

Arm. Will thou begone then?


Rin. I must, it is in order to our Happiness.


Arm. I know it, and yet methinks it is Death to part with thee?


Rin. It is but for a moment.


Arm. But yet that moment sure will break my Heart.
How Dolefully it beats with Dying Blows?
As if with thee my very Soul departed.
How would Eternal separation plague me?
But see, Rinaldo there, look here Phaenissa!
What mean these winged ill Omens of the Air
That passing brush me with their deadly Pinions,
And seem the forlorn Hope of Fate?

Rin. I see nothing.


Phaen. Nor I.


Arm. Is it possible? nor hear you any Voice?


Rin. None but that Voice whose Music Charms my Soul.


Arm. Nor you?


Phaen. Nor I.


Arm. Hark! how it cries again, prepare Armida,
Dispatch, we are grown Impotent of Delay:
See, where we all stand ready to Receive thee,
Assembled in the Air, we hovering stand,
And Instantly expect thee.

Rin. What do I hear? Her mind is much disturbed,
And Danger's Imminent, I must be swift,
On wings of Fear which thou have lent I Will fly,
And in a moment with my Friends return.

Phaen. My Lord. Just as he goes out.


Arm. What want you?


Phaen. Madam, I thought my Lord Rinaldo called.


Arm. Sure so he did, for see he turns this way,
And seems to Beckon to you.
Fly, to know what he wants. She goes after him to the Door.

Rin. Wants the Queen any thing Phaenissa?


Phaen. No my Lord!


Rin. Why am I called then?


Phaen. My Lord,
I have something of Importance to Impart to you,
Which the Queen must not hear.

Rin. I am now in haste, my Impatient Friends expect me,
I Will instantly return. Exit.

Phaen. You will! why then the Sun, that all things sees,
Sees not a wretch that is so forlorn, as I am:
Return! for what! To bear the Queen to Palestine?
Whither must I transport my self? to Syria?
Without Armida! or to Godfrey's Army?
Thou! thou the mortal Foe to their Religion!
But such Armida was! Renounce thy Faith!
Thou have a Queens Example!
Suppose I should? alas! I have an art,
An Art, which Christians utterly abhor,
And that, I never, never can renounce:
Her, all the Infernal powers obeyed, attracted
By Supreme knowledge and by Sovereign Beauty!
For in her face, they saw the bright Reflection
of that refulgent place, from which they fell,
But I, alas! O dire Remembrance! I
Am by indissoluble contract bound.
This Voyage I must then obstruct or Perish!
Then his return I must obstruct or Perish.
But the black stratagem that Fate suggests,
Perhaps may touch Armida's precious Life:
No, by discovery of the Truth at last
I can prevent that dire Calamity. --

Arm. What says Rinaldo?


Phaen. What said your doleful heart at his departure?
What said the Winged ill Omens of the Air?
And what the Voices of the Eternal Beings?
Hear them once more! Ye Spirits now assist me. Waves her wand.

Spirit rises and Sings. Spirit. Ah Queen! ah wretched Queen give over,
Cease, cease with hopeless Fire to burn,
Ah cease his absence to deplore:
Who now, even now forsakes the Shore,
And never, never will return,
No never see thee more. Sinks.

Phaen. What say they now?


Arm. Gods I am tortured, I am stung to madness! aside.
Let 'em say what they will: I Will not believe 'em.

Phaen. Will you give Credit to Rinaldo then?
Since you must know what he himself has said.

Arm. Ah Gods, and was it that?


Phaen. And was it that? what could it be but that?
Or what could he declare but that?
Which you were not to hear:
He coldly bad me Comfort you.

Arm. Ah! Comfort from a Devil! but be hushed! aside.
Be hushed my Soul but only for this moment:
And be as mad as all the Winds the next,
And ye, ye Tyrant Gods, unless y' are pleased
To see perfidiousness pass unrevenged:
While thus you plague the Creature of your hands,
Only for too much truth; for too much Love;
Assist my enseebled Arm this once, and then
Hurl all your Thunders at my wretched head,
And take your willing Victim.

Phaen. So, she resents it greatly.
I see a noble Fury in her Eyes.

Arm. Why then Rinaldo's gone?


Phaen. Most certainly.


Arm. Confusion! I must now make haste:
I shall be mad too soon else.
But how durst you, my Slave! conceal his Treason:
How did you dare to abett his damned design?

Phaen. To abett it.


Arm. Ay, how did you dare to abett it?


Phaen. Hell had suggested --


Arm. What?


Phaen. Why, that you --


Arm. Die, and consult it better. Stabs Phaen. she dies.
So: 'twas exactly levelled at thy Heart:
Would I had always taken aim as justly.
And have thou then forsaken me! what me!
Me, could thou then forsake! is it possible!
Me, that had laid out all my Soul upon thee!
That willingly, that gladly would have died for thee!
And could thou not be satisfied, unless
Thou murderst me thy self! O wretched man!
Can you see this! you Gods! and not Revenge it!
Revenge it then, Revenge it then ye Devils!
Who with Abhorrency and Detestation
Foretold this more than Devilsh Act!
They hear thee not! my Spirits too have left me.
But behold!
Phaenissa there lies dead! Rinaldo's gone.
Whither must I go! ha! where am I left!
Thrice has yon Planet wayn'd and thrice increased,
Since I came flying to these Isles of Fortune:
In all which time no Footstep has appeared
Of any humane Creature here inhabiting:
Nor has one Sail bin seen to dare the winds!
Upon this unknown Ocean! But this morning
I seemed to be the darling care of Heaven!
The pow'rfull'st Queen of all the Eastern World!
The adoration of Mankind: O dreadful change!
But have I not one Friend in Heaven or Hell?
Yes: one I have: then let him come! Come death!
Come thou most Generous of the Immortal Powers!
The only God, that is true to the Unhappy:
Thus let me guide thee to my faithful Heart:
Take heed; how thou a second time mistak'st!
Ah Gods! thou have a second time mistaken!
And I have now not strength enough to assist thee!
Yet have thou done thy work! and though thy hand
Is slow; I find it is sure. A noise without.
What Is that a Noise!
The trampling sure of Feet! which this way tend.
Oh all ye powers the Christians are returning!
Is it my weakness that deludes my Eyes,
Or has the barbarous man relented? ha!
He has, he has! Oh all ye Eternal Powers!
What have I done! now death forbear a Moment!
That with my dying breath I may upbraid him:
That with my dying breath I may forgive him,
And that my Soul may blessing him, expire.

Enter Rinaldo, Urania, Vbaldo, Carlo. Vran. Not far from hence you know you
left Armida!


The Stage is darkn'd. Rin. A very little further on the right:
Upon a sudden it is exceeding Dark.

Vran. Yes, with a Darkness foreign to the place:
A Fog, that steaming from the Mouth of Hell,
Doubles the Native Horrors of the Night:
Be cautious! Cautious, how thou treadst, Rinaldo;
Lest blindly guided by thy headstrong Love
Thou stumblest on despair!
Whom lest you with Armida?

Rinal. Phaenissa.


Vran. Armida's evil Genius bore that name,
The Sourse of all her woes.

Arm. Oh Cursed Phaenissa! have thou then betrayed me!
Is It Possible?

Carl. Angels, and all ye Host of Heaven defend me,
What dismal Shape is this. Stumbling on Phaenissa.

Vran. The Remnant of the wretch that was Phaenissa.


Rin. Look down upon me ye eternal Powers!
Phaenissa! where! Oh where!

Vran. Where! here! Look here Rinaldo,
Now see thou show'st thy self a man! a Man!
That Is not enough. Be what thou art, a Hero!
And then with steadfast Eyes, and heart unshaken,
Behold ill Fate lie their.

Rin. Oh! Oh!
Nor Man nor Hero can ill fate resist,
And thus it tears me down: all Conquering Death
Thou art indeed the Greizly King of terrors!

Vbald. Son of Bertoldo! be thy self this moment.


Carl. Think of thy Glory!


Vbal. Think of past Trophies and of future Triumphs!


Carl. Think that the Army of the East Survey's thee!


Vran. Think that a Thousand Demigods Surround thee.


Rin. O my Armida.


Armid. And art thou come my Hero! art thou mine!
Take, take my fleeting life! ye Envious powr's!
For life with thee, exceeded Mortal happiness.

Rinal. What wrought this dreadful work of Fate!


Vran. Leave that Discovery to me, Rinaldo!
For know that in three Minutes she Expires.

Rin. Heart rending sound! has Heaven expressly formed
My Soul, for her alone! and will it part us.
For ever part us! we will not part a moment:
Behold her with my Eyes! ye Heavens! and spare her.

Vran. Thy prayr's are all delivered to the winds,
Heaven hears not: and she dies.

Rin. Oh sad reward of Constancy divine!


Arm. It Is the dreadful punishment, of Lawless Love!


Rin. Oh Faith! Oh matchless Truth oppressed by Fate;
For Truth it self embodied lies in thee:
And with its Beauty charms the admiring World.

Vran. It Is not for Man to censures Heavens decrees;
As it knows how to Punish, it can recompense?
By Impious Arts, she drew thee to her Arms!
No sacred rites prepared; the unlicens'd way:
For which, by Heavens severe decree, she dies
A Terrible Example.
But yet because her Faith, her Truth, her Constancy;
Seemed to have more then humane Virtue in them,
And she Expires repentant.
Heaven, that in all its sacred dispensations,
Makes the perfection of its Justice shine;
A more then mortal Recompense ordains for them:
For after both your mortal Dates are past,
Here in this blissful Region of the Air;
Thou shall for ever Live, with thy Armida.

Arm. Nay, then you Powers! you make amends for all:
These, these are Sounds, which can make Death delightful.

Vran. Thus with the motion of this sacred Wand,
I in a moment drive away the Mists;
That Cloud your mortal Eyes.
Scene opens, and discovers Fame, Heroes and Heroines in the Clouds. And now
behold!
If that your Eyes can bear Immortal Splendour;
Behold where hovering on her Golden Wings:
Bright Fame illuminates her Godlike Equipage.
Heroes, and Heroines? in the Air assembled,
A Thousand Glorious forms that live in pleasures;
To mortals inconceivable;
With these you shall for ever live;
Over these you shall for ever reign,
For ever reign united.

Arm. Thou Kindest, Dearest, Best of Men, farewell?
I come ye Powers!
Rinaldo! let no grief come near thy Soul:
In insupportable delight I die. Dies.

Rin. Break Heart; this very Moment! Cruel Powers!
Why am I such a Wretch, that Death avoids me:
Faith, Beauty, Truth, and Constancy farewell;
For a short time farewell; farewell, ye Hero's,
Who in your Mansions of the Air expect me.
Death! who should join me to you here, avoids me?
Then to Jerusalem I Will fly, and there
Provoke him, and compel him, to unite me;
Eternally to you and my Armida.

Vran. There I Will Proclaim, how he who rules above!
Takes severe Vengeance of unlawful Love. Exeunt. Omnes.

FINIS.
EPILOGUE.
TO some fine Sparks methinks in yonder Rows,
The Brave Rinaldo, a Barbarian shows:
His leaving for a Camp his Amorous Care,
Is a rude thing they will never Forgive they swear:
They never could think so barb'rously they say,
No, that Young Hero's mere Reverse are they:
On his young Cheeks Love's Charming power abides,
While in his Manly Breast the God of War resides:
In their soft Hearts, Ten Thousand Loves have places;
But Wars stern God dwells on their dreadful Faces:
While the late War in all it is fury Raged,
They never with Gauls in Belgian Plains Engaged:
Nor Towering Fame on Alpine Mountains sought,
But here with Frightful looks, while others Fought,
They guarded the weak places they had Bought.
But you, who to your Country and your Fame,
Great Souls, still sacrificed your Amorous Flame:
Who in each Spring, the season of Desire,
Left the Bright Dames, that set your Souls on Fire;
To follow William, forcing France to yield,
And hunting Glory through the Dusty Field:
You sure with Pleasure should Rinaldo view,
Who less deserves Immortal Fame than you:
He flew from a polluted Beauties Arms,
And from the Influence of malignant Charms.
You from such Beauty and such Virtue flew,
As might enamour Gods as well as you.
And you Bright Nymphs --
Whom for a time the Noble Youths forsook,
With Pleasure may on Lost Armida Look:
Since by her weakness, your High merit shines;
And to your praise, the rudest Hearts inclines.
She to retain her Hero in her Arms,
The utmost force exerted of her Charms:
You when their Glory Summoned yours away,
Your Looks rebated and relaxed your sway,
By which you force even Savages to obey.
Your Countrey's happiness you first designed,
To that the Darlings of your Souls resigned,
And sent them Death, or Victory to find.
O Roman Virtue! which it is trial past,
Well merits the Reward it meets at last:
For since with Peace the Noble Youths returned,
They for such worth with Double fires have burned.
May long Fruition but foment the Flames,
And be your Loves Immortal as your Fames.

