The CASE of Cornelius Be and his Partners, Richard Royston, William Wells,
Samuel Thompson, Thomas Robinson, and William Morden, Booksellers.
THE CRITICI SACRI, being a Collection of diverse Eminent Authors, all or the
major part of which were out of print, Cornelius Be and his Partners, by the
Advice of diverse Learned Divines, did undertake the Printing of them: which
Great Work was carrying on (though with as much expedition as possible) about
six years, and completed in Nine Volumes in Folio, An. 1660. The Authors which
were before sold for Fifty or sixty pounds severally, being so collected and
printed verbatim, the Price was reduced to Thirteen pounds ten shillings. The
Charges of which said Work in Nine Volumes, by buying several Manuscripts, and
preparing and methodizing the Copy fit for the Press, amounted to about a
Thousand pounds, besides Paper and Printing.

Upon Consideration whereof the KING's Majesty, upon the Petition of the said
Cornelius Be, was graciously pleased to grant to him and to his Assigns his
Royal Privilege in Anno 1660. for the space of Fourteen years from thence next
ensuing; thereby prohibiting all and every person and persons to reprint the
said Work, or any part or parcel thereof, within His Majesty's Dominions,
during the said Term, without the Leave and Consent of the said Cornelius Be:
As by the said Privilege (printed in the First Volume of the said Nine) it does
more fully and at large appear.

Notwithstanding which said Privilege, and likewise Acts of Parliament, which
prohibit the reprinting of all Books, either in part or whole, without the
Consent of him who makes a due Entry of the same in the Register-Book of the
Company of Stationers at their Hall, which the said Cornelius Be had done
accordingly at the Cost of about Seven pounds; one Mr. Matthew Pool has (in
the said Cornelius Bee's Absence in Holland, without his Leave and Consent)
undertaken a Work which he calls A Synopsis of the Critical and other
Commentators upon the Bible: in pursuance of which Design he has nominated
several Voluminous Commentators, and amongst them the said CRITICS, of which
especially he intends to make an Epitome with the rest. The dealing with which
Voluminous Authors the said Cornelius Be and his Partners shall not at all
look upon themselves as concerned in, provided he forbear the Injustice of
taking any thing out of the said CRITICI SACRI in Nine Volumes, which they have
printed at so vast a Charge. Which nevertheless if he shall pursue to do,
(besides the infringing the Right that the said Cornelius Be has in them by
his Majesty's said Privilege and the said Acts of Parliament) he will hazard
the making the said Books unsailable, and, so much as in him lies, contribute
to the Ruin of him the said Cornelius Be and his Partners: too many men
considering what they shall save by the smallness of the Price, rather then
what they shall gain by the Goodness of the Book.

To these Considerations the said Cornelius Be and his Partners are forced to
join this necessary Addition, viz. That in the late sad and dismal Fire in
September 1666. it pleased God that there were burnt and consumed above
Thirteen hundred of the said CRITICI SACRI, which, if reckoned but barely as
they cost, amount to Twelve or thirteen Thousand pounds; of which Loss the said
Cornelius Be sustains the one half, and his said Partners the other half.
(Besides diverse other Books belonging to the said Cornelius Be that were also
then burnt and consumed, to the value of Four thousand pounds, all which lay at
his Warehouse in Sion College near Cripplegate.

Now the said Cornelius Be (by this sad Accident being frustrated of his hopes
and expectations of reaping the Benefit and Advantage of his great Care, Cost
and pains) does intend and has designed to re-print the said CRITICS in far
better Method then this already done, and hopes and is verily persuaded that no
person whatsoever, that is swayed either by Reason, Conscience or Justice, will
endeavor to abridge him of or obstruct him in that lawful and laudable way of
Advantage, having already suffered so extremely in an Undertaking tending so
highly to the Glory of God, the Public Good, the Propagation of Religion, and
Credit of our Nation.

And although the said Mr. Poole, to strengthen himself in this his
Undertaking, has gained the Subscriptions of diverse Reverend and Learned
Persons, to testify the Usefulness of this his Work, of which the sa^d
Cornelius Be and his Partners do not pretend to be Judges: yet they have
reason to believe, that he never acquainted them with the said Cornelius Bee's
Right and Interest therein, who (he doubts not) would else have declared that
they had no design to prejudice the just Title o^ ^he said Cornelius Be.

The Premises rightly considered, they leave it to the Judgment of all prudent
and sober persons, to judge how this Design of Mr. Poole's can consist with
that Honor, Conscience and common Prudence which he pretends to in his printed
Papers.

So that the said Cornelius Be and his Partners do in reason and common
Justice expect that the said Mr. Poole should desist from that part of his
Design wherein the aforesaid Nine Volumes are concerned, and likewise leave the
Epitomizing or other digesting of the said CRITICI SACRI to the said Cornelius
Bee's own discretion and disposal, seeing it evidently appears that they are
absolutely his own proper Right and Propriety.


