Truth outweighing Error: Or, An ANSWER TO A Treatise lately published by J.
B. Entitled, A Confession of his Faith, AND A Reason of his Practice. OR, With
who he can, and with who he cannot hold Church Fellowship, or the Communion of
Saints.

By John Den, a Servant of the Church.

He that is first in his own Cause, seems just; but his neighbor comes and
searches him, Prove. 18.17.

For it was not an Enemy that reproached me, then I could have born it, Psalm.
55.12.

Sed nullum est Atrocius vulnus quam defectio amici. Sophocles.

London, Printed for the Author, and are to be sold by F. Smith, at the
Elephant and Castle near the Royal Exchange in Cornhil, and at the same sign
the first shop without Temple Bar, 1673.

To the Church of God; in God the Father and his Son Jesus Christ, especially
to my well beloved Brethren in the Counties of Huntington and Cambridge: Grace,
Mercy, and Peace be multiplied unto you from God the Father, and the Lord Jesus
Christ the Son of the Father in Truth and Love.
Dearly Beloved,
IT is once, yea twice declared in the Book of Job, That when the Sons of God
came to present themselves before the Lord, Satan came also amongst them;
surely, not only to espy what miscarriage might give him advantage against
them, but also to endeavor their subversion by the crafty insinuations of
himself, and ministers, stirred up to that end; and no marvel, for if he durst
presume to practice the same against our blessed Savior, we may more assuredly
expect his subtilty and puissance to be bent against us: wherefore Diligence
and Sobriety is required, (1 Pet. 5.8.) that by the one you may avoid giving
him occasion against you; and by the other discover his crafty devices,
although carried on by fair pretenses, like a Wolf in Sheeps-cloathing, making
use therefore of some of your own selves, according to the words of the Apostle
Paul, (Acts 20.29.) which (as heretofore) is this day apparently verified; and
that (amongst others) particularly in that Book presented to the World by J.
Bunyan, entitled, A Confession of his Faith, and the reason of his practice
touching Church Fellowship: wherein, (amongst other things) he endeavors the
vilifying (the ready way for the extirpation) of the Ordinance of
Water Baptism, and that under the specious pretenses of Charity,
Church-edification, etc. that his Design might be so masked, as to be received
by many conscientious Christians, who cannot (through his crafty vail) discover
his intentions in reference to the aforesaid Ordinance, which he would not have
us at all respect in the matter of Church Communion. Which I no sooner saw, but
I was filled with displeasure, apprehending my self obliged, as once Phineas
was (in a matter whereunto this is not inferior, if the spiritual concern be
respected) to manifest an holy indignation against the same, and (according to
my ability) to vindicate the Truth therein degraded; whereupon I resolved to
send abroad the ensuing Treatise, which I now commend to you; (what is well
done, expects your Approbation; and what is amiss, your gentle Correction):
withal entreating you to look to your selves that you may not be ensnared; hold
fast the form of sound words, lest that otherwise you be unawares beguiled;
retain always a reverent esteem of God's Ordinances. Which if you do not, you
will suddenly be surprised by that Adversary, who goes about like a roaring
Lion seeking whom he may devour; keep close to the Holy Scriptures, continue
instant in Prayer, and that for me also, that Wisdom, Boldness, and Patience
may be given me, that I may not cease to speak the things I have believed.
Brethren, farewell, the God of Peace fill you with all Joy and Peace in
believing. Amen.

Your unworthy Brother in the Lord Jesus Christ, John Den.

The Epistle to the Reader.
READER,
IF Solomon had cause to say in his time, Eccles. 12.12. in making many Books
there is no end, what may be said in our days, when the World is so
replenished with Books, and those pro and contra, even in matters of
Christianity, insomuch as the question propounded by Paul, 1 Cor. 1.13. Is
Christ divided? may now seem justly to be answered on the affirmative, or
(which is rather to be consented unto) that the prediction of Christ Jesus
(Matthew. 24.24. That there shall arise false Christ's, many coming in his Name,
saying, Lo here, and lo there is Christ) is now accomplished, for the discovery
of whom, and demonstration of the Truth, that one Book ( viz. the Holy
Scripture) is only necessary, which of it self is able to make a man wise unto
Salvation, through Faith which is in Christ Jesus; who therefore advises the
Sons of Men to search the Scriptures, Joh. 5.39. because they are they which do
testify of him: The consideration whereof has hitherto obstructed my
presenting any thing to public view, although diverse times thereto incited, as
well by the persuasion of some Friends, as the apprehension of the want of some
assistance in the vindication of the Truth as it is in Jesus, which (as
formerly has required my hand) at this time induces me to step forth
particularly upon the perusal of a Treatise subscribed by J.B. entitled, A
Confession of his Faith, and the reason of his Practice touching
Church Fellowship: Which (although sometime published) came lately to my view,
wherein an apparent wrong and public abuse being offered to God and his Son
Christ Jesus, in his endeavoring the explosion of the Holy Ordinance of
Baptism; it took such impression within me, that I could not now forbear the
presenting the ensuing Treatise to the view of the World in answer thereunto,
whereof it may perhaps be said (as Paul of himself, 1 Cor. 15.8.) It is born
out of due time: but if so, I presume wise Persons will allow, that an Abortive
birth, wherein there is life, must not be rejected; wherefore, although
peradventure there may be others (which I know not of) that may precede this
upon the same account (whereto the priority must be granted): Touching this,
let me say as (Abigail to David) Accept it as a Servant to the Servants of the
Servants of our God, whereby perhaps some (although mean) Service may be
rendered, which may be advantageous in the discovery of Truth from the disguised
face of Error: Wherefore (in the Name of our Lord Jesus) let me entreat thee to
read impartially, and try diligently by the Scriptures of Truth, what thou
find in this following Treatise declared, and the Lord give thee therein the
Spirit of discerning; which shall be the earnest Prayer of

Thine in the Lord Jesus Christ, John Den.

Truth outweighing Error, etc.
WHen the Woman clothed with the Sun, and the Moon under her feet, Rev. 12.1.
and upon her Head a Crown of twelve Stars, was with Child, and cried traveling
in birth, and pained to be delivered; then there appeared, verse. 3. a great
Wonder in Heaven, viz. a great red Dragon, having seven Heads, and ten Horns,
and seven Crowns upon his Heads, who with his Tail drew the third part of the
Stars from Heaven, and cast them to the Earth. This Dragon stood before the
Woman to devour the Child as soon as it should be brought forth: but his
purposes therein being frustrated, he endeavored (by diverse assaults and
stratagems) not only the destruction of the Child, but also the Mother thereof;
seeking so craftily the pursuance of his enterprise, that he was fitly termed
that old Serpent, the Devil and Satan, verse. 9. who by his subtilty deceived
Eve, 2 Cor. 11.3. persuading her, That God was not so much their Friend as they
imagined* for, says he, God does know that in the day you cat of that tree
which he has forbidden, your eyes shall be opened, and you shall be as Gods,
etc. Genesis 3. thereby endeavoring to bring them into a dis-esteem of the Laws
of their Creator, that so he might induce them to consent to his wicked device;
which craft (as then began) is daily practiced for the corrupting the minds of
Saints from the simplicity that is in Christ, of which devices Paul was not
ignorant, 2 Cor. 2.11. but understood the working of Satan, to get (in his
time) an advantage of Christians; sometimes (for that purpose) transforming
himself into an Angel of Light, the easier to deceive mankind, and thereby to
accomplish his own designs; for the effecting whereof he also sends forth
Ministers transformed into the Apostles of Christ, and Ministers of
Righteousness* 2 Cor. 11.15. of whom our Savior does admonish us to take heed,
Matthew. 7.15. as of false Prophets which come in Sheeps clothing, but inwardly
are ravening Wolves; thereby intimating, that it ought to be the continual care
of Saints, in all Ages, to avoid such, lest that with feigned words, and fair
speeches, their Souls should be ensnared in that crafty snare of Satan, wherein
men become captivated at his will to their utter ruin and destruction. And as
this we are admonished of, so, by continued experience, the necessity thereof
is demonstrated. Time would fail me to relate how t^^t evil one has, and does
endeavor, by subtilty, to accomplish what by force he cannot; That, as of old
his Tail did more harm than his Horns; so now by the crafty insinuations of his
Ministers, he endeavors the violation of God's righteous Laws, in procuring,
first, a disesteem thereof in the hearts of Christians, that so they may (with
the greater content) be negligent in the performance of the same, he well
knowing what the event thereof will be, for through idleness of the hands the
house falls down; and thereby may he craftily accomplish his wicked design.
An Instance whereof is apparent in that little Treatise lately published by J.
B. entitled, A Confession of his Faith, and a reason of his Practice with who,
and who not, he can have Church Fellowship or Communion of Saints: Wherein the
Reader may as well discern the Spirit of the Author clearly demonstrated, as
his Person by the letters of his Name subscribed; who (amongst other things)
endeavors to vilify the Holy Ordinance of Water Baptism, that thereby he
might bring it into such dis-esteem with others, as it is (notwithstanding his
specious pretenses) with himself; who knows, that if he could persuade
Christians to think that the doing it is never the better, and the not doing it
never the worse, it would then soon fall to the ground, J.B. page 104. For the
prevention of which design, I shall presume (through the assistance of God) to
weigh what (to the purpose) is said (by the Author of the aforesaid Treatise)
in the balance of the Sanctuary, if peradventure it may be so far outweighed
by the weight of Truth, that the vanity thereof may appear.

Wherein I shall first take notice of the Confession of his Faith.

Secondly, The reason of his Practice, etc.

First, In his Confession you have diverse things declared in the beginning
thereof (as the Author says) which (I suppose) few men deny; and thereto I
shall yield my Concession; saying to him in the words of the Apostle James,
Chap. 2.19. Thou say well; the Devils also believe and tremble.

But when he proceeds further in the 15th Article of his Faith, page 9. wherein
he would be thought to be some body, in giving a clear demonstration (as is
pretended) how men come to obtain Righteousness, Redemption, and Salvation from
the Curse of the Law,

He says;

I believe therefore that the Righteousness and Redemption by which we that
believe stand just before God, as saved from the Curse of the Law, is the
Righteousness and Redemption that consists in the personal acts and
performances of this Child Jesus, this God-man, the Lord Christ; I say, in his
personal fulfilling the Law for us, to the utmost requirements of the Justice
of God; by which means he became the end of the Law for Righteousness to every
one that believes, so finishing transgression, and making an end of sin, and
making reconciliation for iniquity.

Answ. In this Article are two things to be considered, viz. First, what is
believed: Secondly, wherefore it is believed. First, What is believed: The
Confessor tells us, That the Righteousness, Redemption, and Salvation from the
Curse of the Law, obtained by Believers, consists in the personal acts of
Christ. Art. 15. page 9. But sure this is not consonant to the Scriptures of
Truth, which declare them to be wrought and accomplished by the Sufferings of
Christ; this Peter acknowledges, 1 Pet. 3.11. For Christ also has once
suffered for Sins. And if we come to particulars, the truth thereof will
appear: For, First, How are we made Righteous? does not the Apostle declare, 2
Cor. 5.21. He has made him to be sin for us who knew no sin, that you might be
made the Righteousness of God in him. So that you see we obtain Righteousness
by Christ's being made Sin; and if you would know how he was made sin, let the
Prophet answer, Isa. 53.6. The Lord laid on him the iniquity of us all; as it
is written, He bare our sins upon his own body on the Tree, 1 Pet. 2.24. and
this was his Passion, and not his Personal act. Secondly, the Redemption of
Christians is wrought by the shedding the blood of Christ, 1 Pet. 1.19. And
sure if that was a personal act, it must be the personal act of the Soldier
that pierced him, and not of Christ himself. Thirdly, Salvation from the Curse
of the Law; the Apostle declares, Gal. 3.13. consisted in his being made a
Curse for us; and how that was, the Apostle testifies by his hanging on the
Tree, viz. the Cross; and that also was the suffering and not the act of
Christ, which as it ought to be distinguished by every Christian, so much more
he that pretends himself a Preacher (who should show himself in all things a
Workman that needs not to be ashamed, rightly dividing the Word of Truth, 2 Timothy 2.15.) ought to distinguish between doing and suffering, and that more
particularly in this matter; for if Righteousness, Redemption, and Salvation
had been performed by his personal acts, there had then been no need of his
Death and Passion, the necessity whereof is declared by Christ himself, Luke
24.46. (Thus it behoved the Christ to suffer) and confirmed by the Apostle,
Acts 17.3. that the Christ must needs have suffered: wherefore it must be
concluded that the aforesaid blessings were not effected by the personal acts
of Christ. And therefore, although the Confessor (J. B. Epist.) presumes a
candid Christian may judge the root of the matter to be found in him; it may
from what has been said, be feared that the root is evil, and then it is easy
to judge what the branches will be.

But now in the second place, let us see wherefore the aforesaid Article is
believed, I was enforced to consider it: because he urges it so emphatically,
I believe therefore, as if there was something preceding that would demonstrate
the truth thereof: But I have weighed both the precedent and consequent
Articles, with the Scriptures annexed; and I profess I know not what he means
by Therefore.

The Article precedent is, I believe this very Child is both God and Man, the
Christ of the Living God. J. B. Art. 14. page 8.
And the Scriptures annexed are, Luke 2.7, 12. Matthew. 1.21, 22. But why he
should say from thence; I believe therefore, etc. to me does not appear.

This Confessor tells us, J. B's. Epist.
That above eleven years he has weighed, paused, examined, and paused again
these Doctrines, and that in cold blood. Surely it demonstrates his instability
to be so tedious a tract of time (to use his own words) in pausing and
weighing; I wish that may not be true in him according to the words of Paul, 2 Timothy 3.7. Ever learning, and never able to come to the knowledge of the Truth:
For hitherto his Judgment and Understanding (notwithstanding his long pausing)
seems as cold as his blood.

If any object, That it is written, Christ gave himself for us, laid down his
life, was obedient to death; all which amount to acts of Christ.

I Answ. 1. That the sufferings were all voluntary; that he readily
condescended to obey his Father's Will, wherein we have cause to accept the
Grace of Christ. But, 2. This was no act, viz. no Personal act of his: There
may be a voluntary submission, a free condescension, even so far as we may be
said to lay down our lives, to obey God, and yet no personal act. Christians
are required to obey God in sufferings; and it is accounted an Obedience to God
when we lose our lives for his sake; wherefore although I do extol the personal
acts of Christ in the days of his Flesh, and desire to respect them in their
own Sphere; yet I must conclude, as aforesaid, that those blessings are not
wrought by his personal acts, but by his sufferings; as it is written, The
Captain of our Salvation is made perfect through sufferings, Heb. 2.10. Christ
has also once suffered for us, that thereby he might bring us unto God, 1 Pet.
3.18.

J.B. Art. 16. page 10. I do believe that for the completing of this work, he
was always sinless; did always the things that pleased God's Justice, that
every one of his acts, both of doing and suffering and rising again from the
dead, was really and infinitely perfect, being done by him as God-man:
Wherefore his acts before he died, are called, the Righteousness of God, his
blood, the blood of God; and herein perceive we the love of God in that he laid
down his life for us. The Godhead which gave virtue to all the acts of the
humane nature, was then in perfect union with it, when he hanged upon the Cross
for our sins.

Answ. It is the advice of the Holy Ghost, 1 Pet. 4.11. That if any man speak,
he should speak as the Oracles of God: But sure this Confessor's words are more
like the Oracles of the Devils, that of old were accustomed to be given so
ambiguous and obscure, that no body could understand them aright, yet they
might be wrested to the understanding of any.

Such is the matter of the aforesaid Article, wherein it is hard to determine
what he means; unless it is that the Godhead of Christ suffered death: which
although he does not plainly declare, yet he does imply (if he says any
thing); For (says he) every one of his acts of suffering was really perfect,
being done by him as God-man.

I wonder that he (who pretends that he does not abusively present to the
Reader, any other Doctrine but what he holds, J.B's. Epistle.
professes, and Preaches) should be so abusive to himself and Doctrine, as to
Preach and Print that which is so inconsistent with common sense.

But to proceed; he says, The Godhead which gave virtue to all the acts of the
Humane Nature, was then in perfect union with it when he hanged upon the Cross:
Now to be in perfect union, was to be even as that was, viz. hanged upon the
Cross, and also dead; which sure the Confessor means; for he further urges,
that therefore his blood was called the blood of God; and hereby perceive we
the Love of God, in that he laid down his life for us.

Now if this be his meaning, it is directly contrary unto Truth: for the
Godhead that was equal with the Father, Phil. 2.6. with whom there is no
variableness or shadow of turning, Jam. 1.17. an Eternal Spirit, immortal, etc.
(as it has neither flesh nor bones, Luke 24.3.) cannot die, has no blood to
shed.

Death and Immortality are not congruous; and therefore herein this Confessor
is mistaken: for the death of Christ was only as he was man. And therefore it
is said, Heb. 10.5. (When he comes into the World) A body have thou prepared
me. If the Godhead could have died, there needed not the preparation of this
body of flesh, but thereby (being made man) he became subject to death (which
he was not before:) as it is written, Heb. 2.14, 15. Forasmuch as the Children
are partakers of flesh and blood; he also himself likewise took part of the
same; that through death, he might destroy him that bad the power of death:
wherefore he did not assume the nature of Angels, but the seed of Abraham,
verse. 16. As it is said, Heb. 2.9. He was made a little lower than the Angels,
for the suffering of death: This also our Confessor acknowledged, saying, (
Art. 12.) The great reason why Christ clothed himself with our flesh and blood,
was, that he might be capable of obtaining Redemption, and that was by his
Death, even the death of the Manhood; As the Apostle says, 1 Pet. 3.18. Being
put to death in the flesh, in the body of his flesh, Col. 1.22. And therefore
although some Scriptures, alleged by the Confessor, call the blood of Christ
the blood of God, and God's Life; it must not be taken as properly spoken, but
in respect to that conjunction between the Deity and Humanity; as figuratively
Christ is said to be Hungry, Thirsty, Naked, etc. Matthew. 25.42. when it is
properly to be understood of his People, as himself says, Inasmuch as ye did
it not to the least of these, ye did it not to me: And in this sense God says,
He that touches you, touches the apple of mine eye, Zech. 2.8. In which sense
also the aforesaid Scriptures may well be understood, although the Deity is
Immortal.

Touching diverse other Articles of this Confessor's Creed, although stuffed
with many profuse words and incongruities of speech, contrary to that advice, 2 Timothy 1.13. Hold fast the form of sound words, I shall say nothing at this time,
but pass to Art. 19. page 13. I believe that the sufferings of Christ were all
voluntary, that he readily condescended to obey his Father's Will, wherein we
have cause to accept the Grace of Christ. But 2. this was no act, viz. no
personal act of his. There may be a voluntary submission, a free condescension,
even so far as we may be said to lay down our lives to obey God, and yet no
personal act. Christians are required to obey God in suffering, and it is
accounted an obedience to God when we lose our lives for his sake; wherefore
although I do extol the personal acts of Christ in the days of his flesh, and
desire to respect them in their own sphere, yet must conclude, as aforesaid,
that those blessings are not wrought by his personal acts, but by his
sufferings; As its written, The Captain of our Salvation is made perfect
through sufferings, Heb. 2.10. Christ has also once suffered for us, that
thereby he might bring us unto God, 1 Pet. 3.18.

The Articles about Justification, Election, and Effectual Calling; which I
shall only give you the sum of what he says, collected (for brevity sake) out
of them all, wherein he declares That there is a Decree, Choice, or Election,
J. B. Art. 3. page 26. Art. 7. page 30.
before the Foundation of the World, even that which contains in it self the
Persons Elected, and the Graces that accompany their Salvation, which must be
wrought in the hearts of such Persons, there being a necessity of the use and
effect thereof, Art. 1. page 31.
because they are chosen, and therefore they, and they alone are effectually
called; it being the fruit of Electing love; page 32.
which Call is a word that out-goeth all opposition, wherein the Voice of God
is heard, the Gates of Heaven are opened; page 33.
there is an effectual awakening of the Soul, in reference to sin, page 34.
and the World to come; a sanctifying virtue, whereby Faith, Hope, page 35.
page 36. page 37. page 28.
and Repentance are so necessarily produced, that there is not any impediment
that can hinder their Conversion and Eternal Salvation; which things are thus
effectually wrought only in those which before the World were appointed unto
Glory; and the rest were blinded, page 23. page 24. page 31.
that as they will not, so they cannot hear and turn.

Answ. Here you have an account of this Confessor's Faith, which he says, (in
his Epist.) he would have open to the view and judgment of all men: Wherein
(although he is so confident, that he makes his appeal even to his Enemies)
such unsoundness appears, as even strikes at the Justice of the God of Heaven,
declaring him to be exceeding partial and unequal in his dealings. For I appeal
to the World, whether it must not be so, if John Bunyan's Doctrine aforesaid
(although eleven years examined) be true.

If God has chosen to Salvation before the Foundation of the World any
persons, without any respect to qualifications; or if he has in their Election
ordained, That they shall be supplied with such Grace which shall of necessity
produce the Effects intended, and that so beyond all opposition, that there is
no impediment can hinder their Conversion and Eternal Salvation: And again,
Has blinded others, that they cannot hear, or turn: What respect of persons,
without control is this? Yea, what iniquity and injustice is it which J. B.
declares? But far be it from our God: Shall not the Judge of all the Earth do
right? Whom that I may (according to my abilities) vindicate to the world
against John Bunyan and his groundless Creed, I shall first endeavor to show
his deceit; Secondly, I shall demonstrate the righteous dealings of our God in
behalf of the Salvation of mankind. Wherein consider these things in opposition
to John Bunyan's Creed, viz.

1. That God does not Elect any man unto Salvation, without respect to
qualifications foreseen.

2. That there is not any such Eternal purpose of God, which necessarily
produces John Bunyan 's Effectual Call.

3. There is no such Call as is beyond all opposition.

4. There is not any such Estate as no impediment can hinder the Conversion and
Salvation of a man.

5. There is no Person originally so far blinded by the God of Heaven, that
they cannot hear, and turn to him.

These things, although Negatives, I shall Essay to demonstrate to be (although
contrary to John Bunyan) consonant to Truth, by the ensuing Arguments: viz.

Arg. 1. If God Electeth some Persons without respect to qualifications
foreseen; Then there is respect of Persons with God: But there is no respect
of Persons with God; Ergo.

The Major is undeniable; for if there be no respect to qualifications, there
must be respect of persons, or respect to nothing. Peradventure it will be
said, that there is respect to nothing, it is of God's mere will and pleasure:
whereto I shall Answer, That if God looking upon every man alike, viz. without
respect to any qualifications, chooses one and not another, it is partiality;
and therefore the Major appears true.

The Minor is evidently proved, Romans 2.11. 1 Pet. 1.17. and positively
affirmed, Acts 10.34. I know of a truth (says Peter) that God is no respecter
of persons: which afterward he demonstrates, verse. 35. In every Nation, he
that fears God, and works Righteousness (he does not say he that is
Elected) is accepted of him.

Arg. 2. If God has from the beginning Elected any persons to Salvation,
without respect to qualifications foreseen: Then the Sentence shall not pass
at the last Day, and Judgment be rendered to every man according to their works.
But the Sentence at the last Day shall pass, and Judgment be rendered to every
man according to their works. Ergo.

The Major is plain; for if it shall be according to our works, then not
according to such Election; if it be of Election as aforesaid, then not
according to works.

The Minor is confirmed, 1 Pet. 1.17. Matthew. 16.27. and Romans 2.6. where it is
said, God will render to every man according to his deeds; and verse. 7.
speaking of Eternal Life, he says, It shall be rendered to them who by patient
continuing in well-doing, seek for glory, honor, and immortality. Christ also
declares, Rev. 22.12. That at his coming he will give to every man (without
exception) according as his works shall be.

Arg. 3. If those men that are saved, are saved through Election without
respect to qualifications; Then must the residue be reprobated without respect
to qualifications. But God reprobates no man without respect to qualification.
Ergo.

The Major is evident; for if there be a certain number Elected, the residue
must be damned, let their qualifications be what they will: The consideration
whereof, has induced Learned men to blaspheme, saying, That God ordained men
to sin, that he might justly accomplish his Determination; So says Zanchius,
Reprobates are held so fast under God's Almighty Decree, that they cannot but
sin and perish. And again he says, There lies upon Reprobates, by the power
of their unchangeable reprobation, a necessity of sinning, yea of sinning unto
death without Repentance; and consequently of perishing everlastingly, Zanch.
lib. 5. de Not. Dei. The same also says Piscator; Reprobates are precisely
appointed to sin, that they might be justly punished. Piscat. resp. ad dupl.
vorst. part. 1. page 220.

Maccovius also was of this mind, saying, God did will sin, ordain men to sin,
that he might justly accomplish his determination. Macc. disp. 17. page 11.

Thus you see the Major is acknowledged by those that believe such an Election
as J. B. describes.

The Minor I shall prove thus, viz.

Arg. 4. If God reprobates any man without respect to qualifications; Then are
not his tender mercies over all his works. But God's tender mercies are over
all his works. Ergo.

The Major is unquestionable; for sure no mercy (much less tender mercy) can be
to that man reprobated (and that without respect to qualifications) to Eternal
damnation.

The Minor is proved, Psalm. 145.9. The Lord is good to all (without exception)
and his tender mercies are over all his works.

This that has been said, may suffice also to show, that there is no such
Eternal purpose, which necessarily produces John Bunyan's Effectual Call: For
the aforesaid Arguments have the same validity against that, as the former
Proposition. I come therefore now to show you that there is no such Call as
John Bunyan pretends to be beyond all opposition. Which I shall prove thus: viz.

Arg. 5. If God's Call is oft-times rejected, his Spirit resisted, and his
Counsel despised; Then his Call is not beyond all opposition: But God's Call is
oft-times rejected, his Spirit resisted, and his Counsel despised. Ergo.

I think I may spare the proof of the Major; for sure, unless (as J. B. seems
to do) you will so distinguish in this case, as if God did not Call those that
reject it, with such an intention as he does others: (as Piscator presumes to
affirm, That although God commands Reprobates to believe the Gospel, yet he
will not have them believe. And again, God does not offer Grace to those that
are Called, with an intent to give it. And he further says, Though God in
words protest that he would have Reprobates believe, yet indeed he will not
have them. Piscat. contra. Scasm. page 60, page 74, page 143.) which I hope you
will not, lest you make the God of Heaven as deceitful as the false Godds, whom
the Poets feign, did once set Tantallus up to the Chin in a goodly River, under
a Tree full of beautiful Fruit, which hung even to his Nose; but so, that he
could neither reach the fruit, nor stoop to the water to drink: which far be it
from the Lord, who is true and holy in all his words and actions.

Wherefore I shall proceed to the proof of the Minor, which is evident, Prove.
1.24. I have called, but you have refused. Acts 7.51. Ye have always resisted
the Holy Spirit, ye have set at naught all my Counsel, Prove. 1.25.

The next thing I come to, is to show that there are impediments which hinder
the Conversion and Salvation of men; which will thus appear:

Arg. 6. If God uses such means with the Unconverted as is sufficient for
their Conversion, and yet they continue unconverted; Then something in
themselves is an impediment: But God uses such means with the Unconverted as
is sufficient for their Conversion, and yet they continue unconverted: Ergo.

The Major is true; for if the means be sufficient, and such means used by the
God of Heaven, their own obstinay must hinder.

The Minor I prove from the words of Christ to Chorazin and Bethsaida, Matthew.
11.21. If the mighty works which have been done in you, had been done in Tire
and Sidon, they would have repented long ago. Now hereby it appears, That the
means used with Chorazin and Bethsaida, would have been sufficient for the
Conversion of Tire and Sidon; and if so, why not to them? Surely because they
were more obstinate. So that we must conclude, that was an impediment which did
hinder their Conversion, and consequently their Salvation.

But further concerning Salvation, I offer this:

Arg. 7. If the Righteous man may turn from his Righteousness, put away a good
Conscience, and make shipwreck of Faith; Then something may impede his
Salvation: But a Righteous man may turn from his Righteousness, put away a good
Conscience, and make shipwreck of Faith: Ergo.

The Major is undeniable: and the Minor I prove, Ezekiel. 18.24. When the
righteous man turns from his righteousness, and commits iniquity, he shall
die: Hymeneus and Alexander put away a good Conscience, and made shipwreck of
Faith, 1 Timothy 1.19. Wherefore also Paul says, 1 Cor. 9.27. I keep under my
body, and bring it into subjection, lest that by any means when I have Preached
to others, I my self should be a castaway. It seems Paul was not of J. B's
mind, to think that no impediment could hinder his Salvation, for then he would
not have used these words, Lest that by any means, I my self should be a
castaway: But he thought and knew, as it was said of Eli to Samuel, 1 Samuel
2.30. They that despise me, shall be lightly esteemed; As the Lord said by
Oded, 2 Chronicles. 15.2. If ye forsake me, I will forsake you: Whereof David did
advisedly admonish Solomon, 1 Chronicles. 28.9. If thou forsake thy God, he will
cast thee off for ever.

I proceed now to the last thing, viz. To show you that no Persons are
originally so far blinded by the God of Heaven, that they cannot turn to to
him: which is thus proved;

Arg. 1. If God does so blind any man, Then he is willing that some should
perish: But God is not willing that any should perish: Ergo.

The Major is plain; for God must needs be willing to that which himself is the
cause of.

The Minor is proved, 1 Pet. 3.9. The Lord is not willing that any should
perish. He confirms it by an Oath, (which ought to put an end to all strife,
Heb. 6.16.) and because he could swear by no greater, he swears by himself; As
I live, says the Lord (Ezekiel. 33.11.) I have no pleasure (at all) in the death
of the wicked, but desire that he may turn from his sin and live.

Arg. 2. If God does so blind men ( viz. originally); Then their unbelief is no
sin: But the unbelief of any man is sin: Ergo.

The Major is plain; for if they cannot believe, it is no sin; our Proverb
says, Necessity has no Law; and the Scripture says, Where there is no Law,
there is no Transgression: And it is true in this case, as John Bunyan himself
confesses, Laws themselves must give place sometimes for the profit of the
Church, page 111. (I will not assent to that): But for the proof of the Major,
I say, if they must give place for the profit of the Church, much more when
necessity may be pleaded. No King would account that a fault which his Subjects
cannot help; which is the case with men if they be blinded as aforesaid.

The Minor is clearly proved, Joh. 16.9. The Spirit shall convince the World of
sin, because they believe not on me: It seems it is such an apparent sin, as
men themselves shall be convinced thereof.

Arg. 3. If God does originally so blind men; Then some men shall be excusable
at the Day of Judgment: But no man shall be excusable at the Day of Judgment:
Ergo.

The Major is undeniable; for what better excuse than to say, Lord, thou did
so blind me, that I could not hear, or turn; it was thy own act, O Lord, I
could not any ways help it; I was bound in the fetters of determined
blindness, to do even contrary to mine own will, that thy destiny might be
accomplished, (this Calvin says, The Reprobate are not only held fast in God's
fetters, so as they cannot do as thy would, but are also urged and forced by
God's bridle to do as he would have them. And again, That Men have nothing in
agitation, that they bring nothing into action, but what God by his secret
direction has ordered, Calv. Instit. lib. 1. chap. 17. sect. 11. Chap. 18.
sect. 1.) Wherefore, O Lord, how could I avoid my impenitency and incredulity!
and will thou punish me for that which I could not help; even for that which is
the effect of thy Almighty Decree! that, Lord, be far from thee, who have
declared, Acts 17.31. That thou will judge the World in Righteousness. This
surely would be a sufficient excuse.

The Minor is proved, Romans 2.1. Romans 3.19. Every mouth shall be stopped: Thou
art inexcusable whosoever thou art that judge. The truth whereof will
hereafter (through God's assistance) be more abundantly demonstrated.

Thus the Error of John Bunyan's Faith is discovered, and that the contrary may
further appear, I come now to show you, in vindication of our God, his
righteous dealings with mankind.

Wherein touching Election, know, That God has, from before the Foundation of
the World, chosen some in Christ Jesus to Eternal Salvation; but not without
respect to qualifications: For, though no qualification of ours was the
efficient cause of our Election, yet God having testified his good pleasure
concerning Man, in Christ Jesus, whose Sacrifice he was pleased graciously to
accept, as a Propitiation for our sins; in him he is pleased also to declare
his acceptance of all those who shall obey his will declared in Christ Jesus;
not as any thing merited by us, but the effect of his everlasting kindness,
wherein he was pleased to choose unto Salvation all those whom he foresaw to
continue obedient to his holy Will; according to what is said, Romans 8.29. Whom
he did foreknow, he also did Predestinate, etc. determining that the rest
should be damned, because of their disobedience, in not harkening to his
Counsel, and not submitting to his holy Desires; which are frustrated through
their obstinacy, thereby treasuring up to themselves wrath against the day of
wrath, Romans 2.4. contrary to the good pleasure of God, who endeavored
earnestly their Salvation. Now this Election is warranted by the Scriptures, as
1 Pet. 1.2. Elect according to the foreknowledge of God the Father, through
Sanctification of the Spirit. Now what is the Sanctification of the Spirit; but
when the heart being enlightened by the Spirit of God, is induced to accept of
Grace offered, and to walk suitable thereto? And this being foreseen, the
Apostle declares our Election to be according to the foreknowledge of God, in
respect of those qualifications considered; As Paul says, 2 Thessalonians. 2.13. God
has from the beginning chosen you to Salvation, through Sanctification of the
Spirit, and belief of the Truth. Now that cannot be without respect to
qualifications, which you see is through such apparent qualifications, as is
further plainly demonstrated, in the considerations of the dealings of God with
men in general; wherein I shall show you how God invites every man to obey his
Will, that they may be saved; yea, strives with them to bring them to
Repentance, and also waits long in expectation of the effects of the powerful
working of his Holy Spirit in their hearts; promising Salvation according to
his everlasting purpose, to all those that obey him, and threatening damnation
(although with much lamentation) to those that obstinately despise him: which
sure must needs be inconsistent with such an absolute Election as is pretended
by John Bunyan; Which therefore I shall proceed to do in order; First, showing
you the invitations of God: there is no Prophet silent therein, he calls by
Ezekiel, Chap. 18.30. Repent, and turn from all your transgressions; so
iniquity shall not be your ruin. As if he should say, Be not mistaken in your
selves, neither do ye mistake me, as to think I have determined your
destruction: for if you repent, you shall live. Wherefore it is added, verse.
31. Cast away all your transgressions, etc. for why will you die, O House of
Israel? God does frequently call upon sinners; yea, rising up betimes, and
sending, to procure their Repentance, because he has compassion upon them, 2 Chronicles. 36.15. As Jeremiah witnesses, Jer. 25.4. The Lord sent unto you all his
Servants the Prophets, rising early and sending, saying, Turn ye every one from
his evil way, and from the evil of his doings. Now to what purpose was all
this, if God had determined either their sin or their damnation? But hear what
Solomon says, Prove. 1.20. Wisdom cries without, she utters her voice in the
streets, she cries in the chief place of concourse, in the openings of the
Gates; in the City she utters her words, saying, How long, ye simple ones,
will ye love simplicity, and Scorners delight in their scourning, and Fools
hate knowledge? turn you at my reproof: behold, I will pour out my Spirit upon
you; I will make known my words unto you: As it is further declared, Chap. 8.1.
Does not Wisdom cry, and Understanding put forth her voice? It is answered,
verse. 2. She stands in the top of the high places; she cries at the Gates,
at the entry of the City, at the coming in of the Doors: Unto you, O men, I
call, and my voice is to the Sons of men; O ye Simple, understand Wisdom, and
ye Fools be ye of an understanding heart. Consider the gracious and general
invitations of the God of Heaven; he calls and inviteth men to the obedience
of his holy Will; yea, even the worst of men, Fools, Simple ones, and Scorners;
and not only such who were so originally, but even those who continued so; as
appears Chap. 1. verse. 24. Because I called, and you did not answer; therefore
shall destruction come upon you as a whirlewind. Yet these persons did the Lord
invite, persuading them by the motives of Grace, and entreating them by
familiar expressions of kindness, as Paul says, 2 Cor. 5.20. We then are
Ambassadors for Christ, as though God did beseech you by us; We pray you in
Christ's stead, be ye reconciled unto God. What expressions of mercy are here!
was ever the like Grace heard of! which is again found in that text so full of
love, Isa. 55.1. Ho, every one that thirsts; Come ye to the Waters, Come
freely; he that has no money, come buy and eat; yea, come buy Wine and Milk
without money and without price. (O great Grace!) Wherefore (says the Lord) do
ye spend money for that which is not bread? Hearken diligently unto me; incline
your ear, and hear: and come unto me, and your Soul shall live: What promises
and gracious invitations are here! (Is this consistent with God's blinding of
men? Is it likely that the only wise God should speak thus to such as he knows
cannot hear or turn? surely nay). Christ himself calls, Matthew. 11.28. Come unto
me all ye that labor, and are heavy laden, and I will give you rest. Not only
so, but God also strives with wicked men (and that very forcibly) to bring them
to Repentance; As it is written, Romans 10.21. All the day long have I stretched
forth my hand (even) to a disobedient and gainsaying People. Now what is it
for God to stretch forth his hand? Is it because God has hands as we have? No:
but the hand of God is taken in Scripture sometimes for the Power of God, as
Exodus 3.20. I will stretch forth my hand and smite Egypt: Yea, sometimes it is
taken for his Mercy, as Isa. 66.14. The hand of the Lord shall be toward his
People. So that for God to stretch forth his hand to the wicked, is to strive
with them by his Power, and manifestation of Grace. Thus God strove with
backsliding Ephrahim, Hos. 11.3. I taught Ephraim to go, I drew them with the
cords of a man, with the bands of love; and I was to them as they that take off
the yoke on their jaws; and I laid meat unto them. What expressions of love are
these! I am not able furthey to illustrate them; none knows better this
Declaration of the dealings of God, than a tender Nurse, who takes great care
of her little Babes, and uses great pains with them: Even so does the Lord
with Sinners; yea with All, as Christ says, Joh. 12.32. And I, if I be lifted
up from the Earth, will draw all men unto me. Christ draws; the Father
draws; he strives earnestly with men by his holy Spirit; which being
resisted, he says, My Spirit shall not always strive with man, Genesis 6.3. What
shall we say to this? Did the Spirit of God strive with these Rebellious men
(who died in their iniquity) or did it not? If you say it did, then is the
truth of the matter granted, and God's Grace to damned persons acknowledged;
but if you will say it did not, what means then this speech, My Spirit shall
not always strive? Surely therefore we may conclude, there was a time when God
did strive with them by his Spirit; yea, by the same powerful Spirit that
raised Christ from the dead; As it is written, 1 Pet. 3.18, 19. Quickened by the
Spirit; by which also he went and preached to the Spirits now in Prison, which
were sometime disobedient in the days of Noah while the Ark was preparing.
What is it for Christ to preach by his Spirit, but by the operation of his
Spirit, to enlighten, and convince the Sons of men: This he did to the old
World, and this he does to every man, Joh. 1.9. Christ is the true Light, which
lights every man that comes into the World.

Quest. But peradventure you will say, If God deals thus graciously, what is
the reason men continue in disobedience?

Answ. Not because God does so blind them that they cannot hear and turn (as
Joh. Bunyan says) nor because God does not work powerfully in their hearts;
yea, so powerfully as to afford them, sufficient means to obey his Will, (as
Moses says, Deuteronomy. 30.14. The Word is nigh thee, in thy mouth, and in thy
heart, that thou may do it)?

Quest. But if then you further ark the Reason?

Answ. I say, It is through their own obstinacy, and perverseness, whereby they
do despite to the Spirit of Grace, as it is said, Romans 2.4. Despisest thou the
riches of his Grace, not regarding the goodness of God that leads thee to
Repentance; but after thy hardness, and impenitent heart, thou treasurest up to
thy self wrath against the day of Wrath. God leads to Repentance, but his
goodness is despised; Man through the hardness of his heart, treasureth up
wrath against himself; resisting the motions of God's Spirit; as Stephen said,
Acts 7.51. Ye have always resisted the Holy Ghost, as did your Fathers, so do
ye: As it is witnessed by that pitiful complaint of our Savior, Matthew. 23.37.
How often would I have gathered thy Children together, as a Hen gathers her
Chickens under her wings, but ye would not? This obstinacy of man is the cause
of his ruin, God sent his Prophets, but they would not hear, 2 Chronicles. 24.19.
They pulled away the shoulder, stopped their ears, and made their hearts hard
as an Adamant stone, lest they should hear the words which the Lord sent in his
Spirit by his Prophets, Zech. 7.12. And therefore wicked men are charged with
doing despite to the Spirit of Grace, Heb. 10.29. So that in truth it is wilful
and obstinate disobedience that men are guilty of in not harkening to the Lord.

God would have them obey his voice, but they will not; yet to manifest his
Grace he waits abundantly for the Effects of the operation of his holy Spirit,
and gives space of Repentance, Rev. 2.21. that so he might win them to himself
by his long-suffering; and therefore be waits that he may be gracious, Isa.
30.18. by his long-suffering, leading Sinners to Repentance, Romans 2.4. as Peter
says, The Lord is long suffering, not willing that any should perish, 2 Pet.
3.9. M^^^ing till there is no remedy, 2 Chronicles. 36.16. Which we have evidently
described by a Simile, Jer. 6.29. The Bellows are burnt, the Lead is consumed
in the fire, the Founder melts in vain, for the wicked are not plucked away.
The Lord here alludes to a Refiner, who takes great pains in the Refining a
Mass of Silver; and exercises such patience, as to wait till the Lead (which
Refiners use to put in for the better purifying the Silver) is consumed, and
(through the extremity of heat) the Bellows burnt; so that all his labor is
(more then) in vain: (thus God deals with men) whereof he complains, Isa. 49.4.
I have labored in vain, I have spent my strength for naught, and in vain:
Insomuch that (in justification of himself against John Bunyan and such others)
he appeals to his Enemies in the case, viz. Judge, I pray you, what could I
have done more for Sinners than I have done? Isa. 5.4. I have given my Son to
redeem them from death, and in him I have also offered them Eternal Salvation,
which I have invited them to embrace; and also endeavored to effect in their
hearts, by the motions of my holy Spirit, for the operation whereof I have
waited, even until I perceived all my endeavors to be in vain; my Spirit is
resisted, and in despite thereof they have persisted in wickedness, wherein
what could I have done more, or what can I now do? save only bewail their
folly, in that they should so (against my will) forsake their own mer^^^^ Jona
2.8. and that also the Lord frequently does; he grieveth for the destruction of
Sinners, Jer. 4.19. My bowels, my bowels; I am pained at my very heart: Not
that God has Bowels or an Heart like men, but the bowels of the Father are his
tender mercies, and great compassion, being unwilling to punish; For the Lord
does not afflict willingly, nor grieve the Children of Men, Lam. 3.33. It is
hard with the Lord ( viz. against his good pleasure) How (says he) shall I
give thee up (O backsliding) Ephraim? How shall I deliver thee (to death) (O
sinful) Israel? How shall I make thee as Adama? How shall I set thee as Zeboim?
My heart is turned within me, my repentings are kindled together, Hos. 11.8.
Thus the Son of God, being like unto his Father in compassion, when he beheld
Jerusalem, Luke 19.41, 42. he wept over it, because they would not know the
things that belong to their peace; he was grieved for the hardness of their
hearts, Mark 3.5. wishing it had been otherwise; O that thou had hearkened to
my Commandments, Isa. 48.18. O that Israel had walked in my ways, Psa. 81.16.
What great compassion is this? what demonstrations of love are here? When Jesus
wept for Lazarus, Joh. 11.35. The Jews looked upon it as a great demonstration
of love: and is it not so in God toward Sinners? When David wept after Abner's
Bier, and bewailed him, it is said, 2 Samuel 3.37. That all Israel understood
that day, that the death of Abner was not of the King; but far contrary to his
mind: And surely also we may conclude (from what has been alleged) that the
death of Sinners is not of our God, he never determined any such thing; neither
is he any ways the cause thereof, it is far from him; whereby, as we may
perceive the death of Sinners is altogether of themselves, and not by or
through God's blinding them. So the order of his Election may be perceived
contrary to John Bunyan's Faith; the Confession whereof I have now done with:
(having offered thus much, because that God is much dishonored, and many
People deceived through the not understanding these things); I come now to the
Reason of his Practice in Worship.

J.B. page 48. Wherein he first distinguishes between those with whom he dares
not have Communion, and those with whom he dares (have Communion with, I
suppose he means.)

Concerning what he says touching those with whom he dare not have Communion,
I shall leave him unto himself; only take notice, That those who do not profess
Faith and Holiness, yea, the open Profane, may be nearer Heaven than those
that pretend great Zeal without Knowledge. Our Savior said of old, Matthew.
21.31. That the Publicans and Harlots enter into the Kingdom of God before you.

But I shall now consider what J. B. says concerning whom he dare; which he
thus declares, I dare have Communion, yea, Church Communion with those that are
visible Saints by calling; with those that by the Word of the Gospel have been
brought over to Faith and Holiness. page 65. Although (as afterward he
declares, as well as in his Title Page) they dissent about Water Baptism.

Answ. If J. Bunyan had only said this, I know not who would have gainsaid;
nay, if he had told us, that he could have Communion with the Church of Rome; I
know not who would have opposed him, except the Catholics themselves, who
peradventure (considering the Errors of his Faith) would not judge him fit for
Communion with them.

But John Bunyan proceeds to persuade others to do the same, and therefore he
urges greatly the reason of his Practice, to draw Disciples after him. I wish
the event be not as Christ said to the Pharisees, Matt. 23.15. Ye compass Sea
and Land to make one Proselyte, and when he is made, ye make him twofold more
the Child of Hell.

But before we judge, let us hear him speak, let us weigh what is said therein;
I readily perceive he has learned what Solomon says, Prove. 1.17. That in vain
is the Net spread in the sight of any Bird: Wherefore by crafty insinuations,
and subtle evasions, he endeavors to darken Counsel, the better to
undermine the hearts of the weak, that his deceit might not be discovered.

Wherefore not suddenly coming to the matter, he endeavors by fair pretenses
(although mixed with tautologies and incongruous relations) to pre-engage the
Reader.

Quest. And then (at length) propounds this question, page 70. By what rule
would you receive him into Fellowship?

To which he answers himself thus; Even by a discovery of their Faith and
Holiness, and their declaration of willingness to subject themselves to the
Laws and Government of Christ in his Church.

Quest. This answer being given, he offers a second question, viz. But do you
not count that by Water Baptism, and not otherwise, that being the initiating
and entering Ordinance, they ought to be received into Fellowship?

To this he presumes to answer, No:

Answ. If I understand this answer, it denies Baptism to be a discovery of
Faith and Holiness, or a declaration of willingness to subject to the Laws of
Christ in his Church; for the Question is, Do you not count that by
Water Baptism, etc. which must have respect to the former description of his
Rule, wherein (it seems) Water Baptism has now no part, and in truth it must
be so excluded (by J. Bunyan's opinion) for otherwise that (in despite of what
he has said) would be the Rule proposed by himself.

But herein has not John Bunyan forgot himself? Page 64. he acknowledges
Water Baptism to be an Ordinance of Christ, a holy Ordinance, a duty enjoined
to such as have received the Gospel before, yet now he denies it to be a
discovery of Faith and Holiness, or a declaration of willingness to subject to
the Laws of Christ in his Church. page 122, 123.

What impudent Contradictions are here! an Ordinance of Christ, an holy
Ordinance, a duty enjoined to Gospel-Receivers, and yet no discovery of Faith,
Is not Faith discovered by Works? Jam. 2.17. And by what works, if not
obedience to Christ's Ordinances, to holy Ordinances, to enjoined duties, I
know not, surely? what, if not this, discovers Faith?

Again, an Ordinance of Christ, an holy Ordinance, a Duty enjoined, and yet no
discovery of Holiness? Is it not Holiness it self to obey Christ's Ordinances;
his holy Ordinances; to perform duties enjoined? Thus the wise are taken in
their own craftiness; 1 Cor. 3.19.

Further, Is not a real subjection to Christ's Ordinances, a real performance
of those Duties enjoined us, the best declaration of a willingness thereto? yet
all this John Bunyan is pleased positively to deny; although he does not only
confess concerning Baptism as aforesaid, viz. That it is an Ordinance of
Christ, an holy Ordinance, a Duty enjoined: But further tells us, It is of
excellent use to the Church. page 64.

But what is that? It seems it is no discovery of Faith, nor Holiness, nor a
willingness to subject to Christ's Laws (it is of no use in these things) nor
of any use in Church Communion, what excellent use is it then of?

John Bunyan answers; It is a representation of the Death and Resurrection of
Christ; an help to our Faith; yea, meet to instruct us in the most weighty
matters of the Kingdom of God, page 64, 65.

Reply. Well said, John Bunyan! it seems now Baptism is good for something; the
Devils sometimes were enforced to confess Christ, (saying, Mark 3.11. Luke
4.34, 41. We know thee who thou art, Jesus the Holy One of God) although they
were his great Enemies: Even so J. B. is (in this) inconsistent (not only to
Truth, but also) to himself; for sure the obedience to such an Ordinance as is
ordained by Christ; a representation of his Death and Resurrection, a help to
our Faith, an instruction in the most weighty matters of the Kingdom of God, an
enjoined Duty; is a discovery of Faith and Holiness, and a declaration of
subjection to Christ's Laws.

And if so, then it is the Rule of Communion John Bunyan himself proposes in
his aforementioned description, page 70. and so the cause he has wilfully
lost: but no marvel that men are deceived, when they stand up against the
Ordinances of Christ.

But tarry; We must not conclude, he says, Baptism is no initiating or entering
Ordinance into Church Communion; and herein is the mistake, to think it is so;
because in time past Baptism was administered upon conversion. page 70.

Answ. If by time past, he means the Apostle's days (which I presume he
does: for he further confesses that Water Baptism in the Primitive times was
generally submitted to before Church Communion, page 91, 92.)

I wonder where is the greatest mistake, whether in John Bunyan's vilifying the
Ordinances of Baptism; or in the observation thereof (according (as himself
confesses) the Practice of the Primitive Church; and that upon Conversion
before Communion? sure there can be no mistake in following so good a pattern.

But he proceeds to tell us, The Word does not testify it to be an initiating
Ordinance. page 70.

Answ. What testimony need we have further than your own Confession, (out of
thy own mouth thou shall be judged); Is not the Primitive pattern, their
general Practice, a sufficient testimony? Does not the word of the Scripture
enjoin us to follow that Example? But peradventure J. B. would have a plain
Text to say Baptism is an initiating Ordinance: wherein I commend John Bunyan
in putting the question into such terms, as he well knew were not to be found
expressly in the Scripture: he thought it would make most for his advantage, and
might carry the best gloss in the denial; which to illustrate, he tells you,
page 71. It wants the nature and power of such an Ordinance; for that which is
the initiating Ordinance (says he) does give to the partakers a being of
Church Membership in that particular Church, by which it is administered,
without the addition of another Church-act; And this he endeavors to prove
by the Example of Circumcision, which (says he, page 71.) was to the Jews an
initiating Ordinance, whereby they were made forthwith Church Members; and also
none so accounted, nor admitted, but those that did partake thereof.

Answ. His proofs for what is here said are various, although when enquired
into, there is no such thing to be found, and therefore I may say it is a
deceit of J. B; for (as he says of Baptism, so must I say of Circumcision) by
the Word there is no such thing to be found. Where is Circumcision called
expressly in Scripture, an initiating Ordinance? yet J. B. is pleased so to call
it; upon far less grounds than there is for Baptism so to be called: for if
Circumcision was such an Ordinance as he describes, what must be said of Sarai,
Rebeka, Deborah, and all the holy Women of old, who at once John Bunyan shuts
the Church-door against, and will not suffer them to enter.

It is well God's thoughts are not like men's. Surely I might upon better
grounds than J. B. prove, That some uncircumcised persons were admitted to
Church Fellowship. For if uncircumcised persons were admitted into the Temple
of God to pray there, etc. Then uncircumcised persons were Church Members; for
the Temple was more peculiar, than the Passover: But Anna, and diverse Holy
Women (uncircumcised persons) did reside in the Temple. Ergo.

Yea further; if I should say, Holy Women did eat the Passover, I suppose I
should not be gainsaid: although it overthrows John Bunyan's position: but we
see this, like the Sodomites, that whilst they endeavored to break open the
door of Lot's house, they were so smitten with blindness, that they could not
find the doors of their own, Genesis 19.11. this astonished them. But John Bunyan
is more obdurate, for he yet persists in the defamation of Baptism, and tells
us, p. 74. First, There was none debarred or threatened to be cut off from the
Church, if not first baptized, Secondly, That Baptism does not give a being of
Membership in this or that particular Church, by whose Members the Parties are
baptized.

Answ. First, how can J. Bunyan expect any instance to be given of the
debarring of any unbaptized Person, when that (by his own Confession, page 91.)
in the Primitive times they were (generally even all Disciples) baptized upon
Conversion? And if so, much less can it be expected to find any threatened to be
cut off from the Church, because not first baptized, there not being in those
days such an Heretic hatched as would so explode Baptism.

To the second, That Baptism does not give a being of Membership into this or
that particular Church.

I answer, It is not required, if considered distinctly, neither did
Circumcision so; although much boasted of. Did Circumcision give a being of
Membership in particular Churches distinct; one Person to be a member at
Jerusalem, another at Capernaum, etc. and there only? No surely; he that was a
member in one place, was a member in all; and therefore J. Bunyan's needless
questions and assertions, page 74. might have been spared; for the Eunuch,
Cornelius, Lydia, the Samaritans, etc. were accepted as Church Members in
general, and so of every Church in particular, and that even upon their
Baptism, although this Anti-Baptism would have you believe that in the second
of the Acts, Baptism, and adding to the Church, appear to be two distinct
things; whom I would have remember Solomon his advice, Prove. 30.6. Add thou not
to his words, lest he reprove thee, and thou be found a liar.

But John Bunyan is now grown positive, and confidently says, page 76. Take it
again; Baptism makes thee no member of the Church, neither particular nor
universal: neither does it make thee a visible Saint: It therefore gives thee
neither right to, nor being of Membership at all.

Answ. Here is a brave flourish; but an impudent assertion, contrary to truth:
but no marvel that you find him contrary to truth, who is contrary to almost
all Christians, yea to himself, and that often in one little Book. Wherefore,
although he excludes Baptism so utterly, as to say it does not make us members
at all; yet I shall affirm that Baptism in a sense (yea, in a great measure)
does make us Church Members, which also J. Bunyan does confess, and that from
the Example of the Primitive Saints: For he acknowledges, page 70. That in the
Primitive times Baptism was administered upon Conversion; yea, he further
grants, page 91. That in the Apostles days Water Baptism went before
Church Membership.

Now that which was administered upon the Conversion of Persons; yea, before
they were Church Members, and thereupon to be accounted Church Members, (which
John Bunyan in his right mind is forced to acknowledge of Baptism); sure must
be said in a great measure to make us Church Members; and Baptism being so
administered in the Primitive times, is it not necessary it should be so now?
Can we alter the Primitive manner of receiving into the Church, without being
guilty of great iniquity? ought we not to follow the Examples of the Primitive
Churches?

Since I have proceeded thus far, having now the appearance of so good grounds,
I shall (through God's assistance) adventure to prove the necessity thereof,
(not being at all affrighted with J. Bunyan's opprobrious censures), wherein if
I should affirm Baptism to be an initiating Ordinance, it would appear to be
true by John Bunyan's own Confession.

Arg. 1. For that which ought to be administered upon Conversion, before
Church Membership, is an initiating Ordinance: But Baptism ought to be
administered before Church Membership upon Conversion: Ergo.

The Major I suppose none will deny; the Minor I prove thus:

Arg. 2. If Baptism was so administered in the Primitive Churches; Then it ought
to be so now: But Baptism was so administered in the Primitive Churches: Ergo.

The Minor is J. Bunyan's own grant, page 70. page 91. The Major is proved, 1 Thessalonians. 4.1. where the Apostle beseeches and exhorts, and that by the Lord
Jesus, That Saints should walk as we have received from them; yea, in 2 Thessalonians.
3.6. he commands the Churches in the Name of our Lord Jesus Christ, to
withdraw from every one that walks so disorderly; viz. not according to the
Traditions of the Apostles.

Again; Is not Baptism called ( Heb. 5.12. and Chap. 6.1, 2.) one of the first
Principles of the Oracles of God, a Principle of the Doctrine of Christ, part
of the Foundation? and what is that but an initiating or entering Ordinance? Is
not the laying the foundation of an house a great entrance to the building? So
is Baptism in the practice of Christianity? And are not the first Principles in
any Matter or Doctrine, the initiating or entering thereinto? The same is
Baptism, as aforesaid, in Christianity. I might evidently set forth that it may
truly be so called: but leaving that denomination, I shall (touching the
Controversy in hand) state this Proposition, viz.

That Baptism is a duty necessarily to be observed by Christians in obedience
to God, and in order to Church Communion: I say, necessarily to be observed;
for some things are lawful for a Christian, but not expedient: Some things
again are expedient, but not necessary; but other things are necessary and must
be done, of which sort is Baptism. This Christ himself testifies, Matthew. 3.15.
Thus it behooveth us, (mark) he speaks not particularly of himself, but also
of his followers, us: And also he says, Thus it behooves, Oportet nos: we must
do thus to fulfill God's righteous Commands. When Paul was miraculously
converted, he was Commanded by the Lord, to go into the City, and there it
should be told him what he must do, Acts 9.6. and what that was appears from
the words of Ananias, rehearsed by Paul himself, Acts 22.16. Arise and be
baptized; This Peter shows the necessity of, 1 Pet. 3.21. by a figurative
demonstration, speaking of the Ark of Noah, Wherein few (that is eight Souls)
were saved by Water: The like figure whereunto, (says he) Baptism, does also
now save us.

Surely, the Ark was so necessary for their Salvation ( viz. their preservation
from death) that only they that were therein were saved; and the Apostle tells
you Baptism is the like: but (as he afterward explains) not the putting away
the filth of the flesh, but the answer of a good Conscience toward God.

Now how necessary a good Conscience is, and how much to be pressed after, I
think I need not tell you; and Baptism is the answer of a good Conscience
toward God, it is so venerable an Ordinance (notwithstanding John Bunyan is
pleased to slight it, saying, page 104. We are not the better if we do it, or
the worse if we do it not: not the better (says he) before God, nor the worse
before men). That those who are subject thereto, are said, Luke 7.29. to
justify God, (what greater applause can men have) and on the contrary those
that do not submit thereto, reject the Counsel of God against themselves: and
must not this be concluded to be a necessary duty? yea surely, it was Commanded
by Christ himself, Matthew. 28.19. to be administered to all Disciples; Disciple
all Nations, baptizing them, etc. teaching them (that are so baptized) to
observe the same, verse. 20. in the performance whereof Christ has promised his
continual Presence: wherefore Peter gave this counsel to the distressed Jews,
Act. 2.38. (that cried out in great terror, What shall we do?) Repent and be
baptized every one of you. As this was his advice to the distressed; so also it
was to those that received the holy Spirit plentifully. Acts 10.48. He
commanded them to be baptized in the Name of the Lord. It seems it is an
Ordinance meet to be observed by all sorts of Christians: the Jayler and his
house, Acts 16.33. Lydia and her house, verse. 15. Crispus and his house, Acts
18.8. Samaria, Acts 8.12. the Eunuch, verse. 38. yea, all (without exception)
that gladly received the Word were baptized, and thereupon added to the Church,
Acts 2.41.

I might be large herein, but John Bunyan has spared my labor, for he yields
the case; and confesses, page 122, 123. That Baptism is an holy Ordinance of
God; a duty enjoined such who receive the Gospel: And what can be more said, if
it be a duty enjoined, it is a necessary duty; etc. Wherefore I shall only add
for Confirmation some Arguments as follow, viz.

Arg. 1. If the non-subjection to Baptism debars men from Church Communion;
Then the subjection thereto is necessary in order to Church Communion: But the
non-subjection to Baptism debars men from Church Communion: Ergo.

The Major is undeniable; the Minor I shall prove thus:

Arg. 2. If the walking disorderly, not according to the Traditions received
from the Apostles, debars men from Church Communion; Then the non-subjection to
Baptism debars men from Church Communion: But the walking disorderly, not
according to the Traditions received from the Apostles, debars men from
Church Communion: Ergo.

The Minor is proved, 2 Thessalonians. 3.6. where the Apostle commands, That all who
walk disorderly not according to their Traditions, should be debarred
Communion. The Major I prove thus:

Arg. 3. If the non-subjection to Baptism be a disorderly walking, not
according to the Traditions of the Apostles; Then the Major is true: But the
non-subjection to Baptism is a disorderly walking not according to the
Traditions of the Apostles: Ergo.

Nothing in this Argument can be questioned, except the Minor, and that surely
cannot be denied by John Bunyan, (with whom I have now to deal); for by his own
Confession, page 64. Baptism is an Ordinance of Jesus Christ, an holy Ordinance
of God, page 123. and that of excellent use to instruct in the most weighty
matters of the Kingdom of God, p. 65. an enjoined Duty, p. 122. an apparent
Tradition of the Apostles; for in those days (he confesses, page 70.) it was
administered upon Conversion, and used then to go before Church Communion. Again,

Arg. 4. If the non-subjection to Baptism be a sin against God, a rejecting the
Counsel of God against our selves, and the breach of a good Conscience; Then it
debars men from Church Communion: But the non-subjection to Baptism is a sin
against God, a rejecting the Counsel of God against our selves, and the breach
of a good Conscience: Ergo.

The Major I think none can deny; and the Minor is evident by John Bunyan's own
Confession, as aforesaid, and the Scriptures before alleged, Matthew. 28.19. and
7.29. 1 Pet. 3.21.

Further,

Arg. 5. If all Church Members in the Apostles days were baptized; Then
Baptism is necessary to Church Communion: But all Church Members in the
Apostles days were baptized: Ergo.

One would think this Argument should put the matter out of doubt; both
Propositions being acknowledged by John Bunyan himself, yea, urged by him as
weighty truths; for he makes the Example of the Primitive
New-Testament-Churches the ground of his Communion, p. 52. yea, so far, that he
says, He dares not do otherwise than they did: And if we follow that Rule
proposed by himself, we must not do otherwise; and what then? Surely they
baptized all Church Members before Communion, as he confesses, page 91. But
that I may not conclude with the Confession of a man so various (although it
may well be alleged against himself) as in one little Treatise to speak so
many inconsistencies; I shall proceed to another Argument.

Arg. 6. If all Church Members are commanded to be baptized; Then the
subjection to Baptism is necessary to Church Communion: But all Church Members
are commanded to be baptized: Ergo.

The Major is apparent; The Minor I prove thus:

Arg. 7. If Baptism is commanded to all Disciples; Then it is commanded to all
Church Members: But Baptism is commanded to all Disciples: Ergo.

No man can doubt of the truth of the Major, that believes Church Members to
be Disciples, which I suppose no Christian, in his right mind, will deny: And
the Minor I shall prove from the words of Christ, Matthew. 28.19, 20. Go teach
all Nations, baptizing them, etc. the Text is read, (...), etc. (...): which
being interpreted, is, Disciple ye all Nations, baptizing them, etc. (viz.
those that are Discipled, as by the Grammatical construction of the words may
appear) teaching them (that is, the baptized Disciples) to observe (or keep
diligently) all things whatsoever I have commanded you: One whereof was, to
baptize those that were discipled. But it seems that either J. B. was never a
baptized Disciple, or that his Instructors forgot to teach him this Rule of
Christ, or else he has soon forgotten what he learned, if it be not a perverse
transgressing of what he knows, and so guilty of many stripes, Luke 12.47.

But to return; since John Bunyan is pleased (notwithstanding his
aforementioned Confessions) to deny Baptism to be the Rule of Communion; let us
hear what Rule he would have, which he thus declares, page 78. Even that rule
by which they are discovered to the Church to be visible Saints; and willing to
be gathered into their Body and Fellowship.

Answ. Well said; but how must that be if not by obedience to Christ's
Ordinances, to the holy Ordinances of God, yea, the Principles of the Doctrine
of Christ? is not the subjecting thereto a discovery of a visible Saint, and a
willingness to be gathered into the Body, even the Church?

John Bunyan to this, page 79. answers, No: it is not (says he) the practicing
of a circumstantial, but the commendation of their Faith by the Word of Faith,
and their conversation by a moral Precept; wherefore he tells us, page 79. That
when Paul had declared his Faith, he falls down to the body of the Law, saying,
Receive us, we have wronged no man, we have corrupted no man, we have defrauded
no man, 2 Cor. 7.2. From whence (with diverse such Instances and Paraphrases of
his own thereupon) he concludes, page 79. That by the Word of Faith and good
Works, (viz. Moral Duties Gospelized) we ought to judge of the fitness of
Members, by which we ought also to receive them into Fellowship.

Answ. We read that Moses put a vail over his face, to hinder the splendour of
his countenance from dazzling the eyes of the beholders; but, lo here, J. B.
puts a vail over his face, to impede the discovery of his perverting the
Ordinances of God, and the Rule of Communion; which that I may so far put away,
that he may appear as he is,

Concerning what is said; Consider, First, how this Thesis is consistent with
John Bunyan's own judgment concerning Circumcision: for sure Baptism is not
more a Circumstance than that; yet, by his own grant, that was of old the Rule
of Communion. Secondly, Why (in his sense) he should call Baptism a
Circumstance, I know not, it has been proved a Principle of the Doctrine of
Christ, a Foundation-principle, Heb. 6.1. A necessary duty, a duty enjoined to
those that receive the Gospel; and is it notwithstanding all this but such a
Circumstance; the Lord God of Heaven judge between us.

Again; He comes to affirm; page 79. what is the Rule of Communion, viz. To
have our Faith commended by the Word of Faith, and our Conversation by a Moral
Precept, etc.

Wherein know, that the Word of Faith, according to Paul's mind, Romans 10.7, 8.
is Christ: And what Faith does he commend? surely not a bare Profession which
consists only in words, but that Faith which presently produces obedience: For
so he says, Luke 6.46. Why call ye me Lord, Lord, and do not the things that I
say? (of which Baptism is one; yea, a great Duty): to which also the Apostle
bares witness, 1 John 2.3. He that says he knows him, and keeps not his
Commandments (of which J. Bunyan confesses Baptism to be one, and that of
great use) is a liar, and the truth is not in him.

But perhaps John Bunyan will say, He would have works attend Faith, and
therefore he adds, our Conversation must be commended by a Moral Precept.

Wherein let me ask J. Bunyan, or any rational Christian, how this is possible
in diverse cases: as First, upon Conversion, when men are presently (upon the
Preaching of the Word) turned from darkness to light, and so are received as
Church Members, as soon as they are Converted, who before were Fornicators,
Murderers, Thieves, and what not, 1 Cor. 6.11. but upon their Conversion are
received as Church Members even the same day, Acts 2.41. What experience can
there be of their Conversion who were Adulterers the day before? If you say
they are changed now, let me tell you it must appear otherwise than by so short
forbearance (which is common with the worst of men), or else they may be as bad
as ever, and so John Bunyan's Rule very uncertain.

Secondly; The most Holy Conversation, in reference to what John Bunyan speaks,
cannot demonstrate a Christian (for there are Wolves in Sheeps clothing, Matthew.
7.15.) neither is it sufficient to be the Rule, the initiating Rule for
Church Communion; it must be said in this case as Christ once said, Matthew.
5.20. Except your righteousness exceed the righteousness of the Scribes and
Pharisees, ye cannot enter into the Kingdom of Heaven. Was not Paul exact in
such a Conversation before his Conversion? Phil. 3.6. and it cannot be imagined
that he did degenerate afterward; and yet when Ananias was sent to tell him
what he must do, he delivers his Message thus, Acts 22.16. Why tarriest thou?
arise, and be baptized. Again, Cornelius was a devout and holy man, Acts 10.1.
yet when he received the Truth and the Holy Spirit also abundantly, Peter
commands him to be baptized, verse. 46. Surely if John Bunyan's Rule had been
sufficient, John the Baptist might then, upon good grounds, have forbad the
Baptism of Christ; and our Savior, who fulfilled all those Moral Precepts,
needed not have said, Thus it behooveth us (concerning Baptism) to fulfill all
Righteousness. Wherefore, although I must extol an holy Conversation in its due
place, wherein I wish that (as the Apostle says, 2 Timothy 2.19.) All that name
the Name of our Lord Jesus Christ, may depart from all iniquity; yet let me
tell you, The Apostle never urged any part of the moral Law, as the Rule of
Communion under the Gospel; and therefore John Bunyan is strangely mistaken, to
advise us, to make use of the Ten Commandments, page, 79. to judge of the
fitness of persons by; wherein (if we have respect but to the 4th, which
enjoins the Sabbath so exactly, and upon such a penalty) I cannot wonder that
he should conceit Christian-tenderness would not be exceeded by such
strictness, whenas Christians are dehorted from judging one another therein,
Col. 2.16. And truly I wonder more that a wise man should allege that instance
of Paul, 2 Cor. 7.2. as a Rule for Church Communion, when as he knows it was
spoken to such as were begotten to the Faith through Paul's Ministry; and it is
then strange, that he should offer that as a Rule for his reception amongst
them, when that in truth he speaks not at all in reference to Church Communion,
but in a holy boasting of his own behavior, and the rest of the Apostles, for
the ornament of the Gospel.

Which notwithstanding John Bunyan, page 80. fraudulently proceeds to defame
the holy Ordinance of Baptism, urging that it is said, Romans 14.18. The Kingdom
of God, or our service to Christ (says he) consists not in meats and drinks,
but in righteousness, peace, and joy in the holy Ghost; and he that in these
things serves Christ, is accepted of God, and approved of men: which he
afterward tells you, page 81. is meant of the Law given upon Sinai, etc.

Answ. John Bunyan says, page 45. That he believes that Jesus Christ by the
Word of the Scriptures, will judge all men at the day of Doom: But sure, if in
his heart he thought so, he would be afraid of a sharp censure, if not the
addition of many plagues, for adding to the words of God, and setting his post
by the Lord's, which here he does in telling you, That Paul says, Our service
to Christ consists not in meats or drinks, etc. when that it is the Kingdom of
God he speaks of; which in this place I never read was understood of our
service to Christ: But if so, what does this respect Baptism? The Apostle
speaks only of meats and drinks, which you may perceive by his words, the
Romans (which J. B. confesses were baptized) did differ about; which things
also Paul (where he exalts Baptism) does speak against: wherefore what all this
is to the matter in hand, let a wise man judge, except to show John Bunyan's
singularity; which also appears in his Explication of Righteousness, Peace, and
Joy in the holy Ghost, which (with many fair glosses) he would have you to
believe to be the moral Law given upon Sinai, which (notwithstanding what he
says) appears not only an addition, but even such a one as is inconsistent
with the Scripture. For, First, Righteousness, (Paul tells you) comes not by
the Law, viz. the Law given upon Sinai, Gal. 2.21. Secondly, Peace cannot come
by it, because it cannot give life, Gal. 3.21. neither joy; for it could never
make the comers thereunto perfect; and what joy or peace in such an Estate
there can be, or in such a Law, I know not.

But in truth, the righteousness, peace, and joy in the Holy Ghost, which the
Apostle speaks of, is none other but that which Christians are made partakers
of in Christ Jesus, without the works of the Law, (and therefore to say we must
do this Righteousness, is to derogate the honor of Christ) and he that in the
fruition thereof serves Christ according to his appointments (of which Baptism
is confessed to be one of great use) is accepted of God, and approved of men,
without looking back to Sinai, which J. Bunyan falsely calls, page 81. a perfect
Law, contrary to the Scriptures, and the holy men of old, who call it weak and
unprofitable, Heb. 7.18. that which could not give life, Gal. 3.21. or
righteousness, Gal. 2.21. nor make any of the comers thereunto perfect, Heb.
7.19.

But stay, says John Bunyan, page 81. although this of old was declared
thereof, now the moral Precept Evangelized is perfect.

But may not I herein use John Bunyan's own words, and turn them against
himself, as one justly guilty of Fictions, and Scriptureless Notions: for,
where do you read in Scripture of the Law Evangelized? Surely the contrary is
often found; and although James (as it is urged by John Bunyan) Chap. 2.
prelling love, which he calls the Royal Law, (and indeed was before the Law
given upon Sinai, 1 John 2.7.) urges it to be according to what was before
written, yet he does not call the Law given upon Sinai, the Royal Law, or the
Law of Liberty, as J. Bunyan falsely pretends, contrary to Paul's words, who
says, Gal. 4.24. It was a Law (although as much Evangelized in his days as
now) which gendreth to bondage, yea, the Ten Commandments (written in stone)
(so exalted by John Bunyan), he calls the ministration of death, 2 Cor. 3.7. of
condemnation, verse. 9. and places it in opposition to the ministration of the
Spirit, and of Righteousness, which is the glorious Gospel of Jesus Christ,
that needs not have any recourse to the Law, being in it self much more
perfect, as indeed the Law of Liberty which James intends; As also Paul says,
Romans 8.2. The Law of the Spirit of Life in Christ Jesus, has made me free from
the Law of sin and death.

Wherefore in short, The Apostle James does not (as John Bunyan pretends) exalt
the Law given upon Sinai, as the Rule of Communion, but writing to the Brethren
of the dispersed Twelve Tribes, whom he well knew were zealous of the Law, he
endeavors thereby to convince them of their Duty, as Christ did to the Jews,
Joh. 5.39, 45. And Paul the Heathens, by the words of their own Poets, Acts
17.28. confirming the Truth by the witness of themselves, Tit. 1.12. as I also
often take occasion to do, from J. Bunyan his own Confession, although I should
be as far from making his words the Rule of Truth, as Paul the writings of the
Heathen Poets, which never were alleged to that end; yet. J. Bunyan might as
well affirm it, as to say that James, Chap. 2. calls the Law given upon Sinai,
the Law of Liberty, which also he is pleased to avouch as the Rule of
Communion, page 82. alleging the words of Paul, I am under the Law to Christ;
which sure (as he shunned naming the place) he might have been ashamed to have
instanced in this case, it being only a Parenthesis in 1 Cor. 9.21. where Paul
having declared his endeavors to gain many, that it might not be thought (
John Bunyan-like) he would wave Christ's Ordinances, or pervert his Doctrine;
he tells us, That in all this his condescension (before spoken of) he is not
without Law to God, but under the Law to Christ, having (as if he should have
said) great respect to his holy Ordinances, (which must not be violated by any
means); not the Law of Sinai, for (if himself may be heard) he says, Gal.
2.19. That he was dead to that, and that dead to him, as is confirmed, Romans
7.1, 2, 3. by the Example of a Widow whose Husband is dead; from whence the
Apostle concludes, verse. 6. That we are delivered from the Law, that being dead
wherein we were held; whereupon sure it may be concluded of John Bunyan, as
Paul says, 1 Timothy 1.7. He would be a Teacher of the Law, although he
understands neither what he says, nor whereof he affirms; (although we know
the Law is good, if a man use it lawfully) as farther appears in that
Distich, page 83. where he says, Communion is forbidden with such as live in
the transgression of a moral Precept, alleging Paul's words, 1 Cor. 5.11. If
any man that is called a Brother, be a Fornicator, or Covetous, or an Idolator,
or a Railer, or a Drunkard, or an Extortioner, with such a one no not to eat:
Paul says not (John Bunyan tells you) if any man be not baptized, or join with
the unbaptized, these (says J. B.) are fictions and Scriptureless-notions.

Answ. I must say to John Bunyan herein, as was said to Peter, Matthew. 26.73.
Thy speech bewrays thee: If any man that is called a Brother, etc. They were
Church Members whom these words were spoken of, and already baptized (by John
Bunyan's own grant) and therefore Paul needed not to say, If any be unbaptized,
for there was none such amongst them: but it seems there were some that so far
degenerated from their Profession, as to be guilty of some of the aforesaid
Evils; wherefore Paul tells them, (without the Law of Sinai) they ought to be
excluded from the Church, for the Gospel of Christ Jesus permits none such
wicked persons to be retained. We say therefore, Although upon Confession of
Faith, and submission to Baptism, etc. We ought to receive persons into
Fellowship and Church Communion, according to the pattern of the Primitive
Churches; yet if any such shall be guilty of the aforesaid Evils, they must be
again separated according to the blessed Rule of Christ, which Paul by the
aforesaid words intends; wherein, although he does not say, If any man be
unbaptized, etc. (having then no occasion for such words) yet sure it is great
impudence in John Bunyan to say they are Fictions, and Scriptureless Notions.
Is it a Fiction to deny Communion with those that are disobedient to a
Principle of Christ's Doctrine? is that a scriptureless Notion? Does not the
Scripture say, If any man transgresses and abides not in the Doctrine of
Christ (whereof Baptism is a part) he has not God? 2 John 9. and v. 10. If any
man come (like John Bunyan) and bring not that Doctrine, he is to be rejected.

But to color the design, John Bunyan proceeds to tell the World, page 83.
That the Word of Faith, and the Moral Precept, is that which Paul enjoins the
Galatians and Philippians, still avoiding outward Circumstances (he might as
well have said Baptism): Hence therefore (says he) when he had treated of
Faith, he falls point blank upon moral Duties, urging, page 84. that in Christ
neither Circumcision nor Uncircumcision avails any thing, but a new Creature;
and that peace is promised to as many as walk according to this Rule, Gal.
6.15, 16. Which Rule (he would have you believe) excludes Baptism; and
therefore he adds, page 86. In Christ Jesus no outward or Circumstantial thing,
but a new Creature, (wherein he proceeds to tell us a fair tale): from whence
he concludes, page 90. That seeing Baptism is no initiating Ordinance, nor
visible Character of a Saint, no breach in a good and holy life, nor
intrencheth upon any man's right but his own; Faith may be effectual without
it, and his life approved by the worst of his enemies, he may keep the Law:
wherefore his friends should not dishonor God in breaking the Law; Alleging
the words of James, Chap. 4.11. Speak not evil of one another, Brethren; for he
that speaks evil of his Brother, speaks evil of the Law, and judges the
Law: From whence he reasons, That the failer must be in a Circumstance, for
which he ought not to be judged.

Answ. To all this I must answer in the words of Paul, Acts 13.10. Oh! full of
all subtilty and mischief, will thou not cease to pervert the right ways of
the Lord? Were not the Galatians and Philippians, to whom the Apostle wrote,
Church Members, and baptized by thy own confession? Did the Apostle, in any of
his Epistles, avoid Baptism in reference to Church Communion, or count it such
a Circumstance as thou do? Did not Paul exalt it even to the Galatians, Chap.
3.27. where he demonstrates their Faith thereby? For, says he, as many as have
been boptized into Christ, have put on Christ. Can the Evangelical Precepts be
enjoined without it? Was it ever said, that in Christ Jesus Baptism, or no
Baptism, avails not? Was it ever said (in Scripture) in Christ Jesus, no
outward or circumstantial thing, but a new Creature? Is not this contrary to
the Rule of the Apostles? Why art thou so bold to pervert the right ways of the
Lord, as to conclude Baptism (which has been proved a Principle, a first
Principle of the Doctrine of Christ, a necessary Duty) to be no initiating
Ordinance; no, nor the visible Character of a Saint, no breach in a good and
holy life? What, is not obedience to Christ, to an holy Ordinance, to a Duty
enjoined, a character of a Saint, yea a visible character? is not the contrary
a breach, some breach at least in a good and holy life? Surely, if thy senses
were not stupefied, thou would never deny it, nor once mention (for
justification thereof) that disobedience to Baptism intrencheth upon no man's
right but his own. What is Infidelity, is it not a horrid sin?

But says John Bunyan, Whose right does it entrench upon but their own? The
God of Heaven says, Isa. 3.9. Woe unto their Soul, they have rewarded evil to
themselves.

But J.B. says, His Faith may be effectual without it, and his Life approved
by the worst of his Enemies.

Touching his Faith let the God of Heaven answer, 1 John 2.3. He that says he
knows me, and keeps not my Commandments, is a liar: And concerning his
Life, I must say with the Apostle, 2 Cor. 10.18. Not he that commends himself
is approved, but whom the Lord commends: Wherefore if he may keep the Law (as
thou say) know it is not the Law of Christ, for that requires Baptism, and
therefore no circumstantial, as the failer therein must not be judged; and
therefore in this place the Objection offered by thy self, page 91. is well
placed, viz. But notwithstanding all that has been said, Water Baptism ought
to go before Church Membership; show me one in all the New Testament that was
received into Fellowship without it.

Answ. Sure, J. Bunyan, when thou did Pen this Objection, thy craft deceived
thee, and thou did not see how thou have ensnared thy self; What answer can
thou make?

John Bunyan will say, he has a ready answer, which consists in two parts.
First (says he, page 91.) that Water Baptism has formerly gone first, is
granted: but that it ought of necessity so to do, I never saw proof. Secondly
(he says) None ever received it without Light, etc.

Reply. First John Bunyan here confesses, That Water Baptism went before
Church Membership in the Primitive Times: Well said, John Bunyan, thou have
given away the Cause, and overthrown thy self. If it did so then, sure it must
now, for we are to walk according to their Examples, Phil. 3.17. It seems God
is stronger and wiser too than the Devil, he has made a hedge about
Water Baptism that it should not be violated, but instead thereof acknowledged
for truth (even) by its Enemies.

But John Bunyan says, He never saw it proved to be of necessity.

Answ. What, John Bunyan, how now! did the Apostles practice generally what
they ought not? sure in plain terms thou will not say so; and if not so, it was
their duty, and there was necessity for them to do their duty.

But then, secondly, John Bunyan says, None ever received it without Light
going before.

Answ. See if this man be not stupefied in his senses whilst he contends
against the Truth; for he has lost the matter in question: Who ever pretended
that any received Baptism (upon good grounds) without light in it?

The question is not, who have Light therein, but who ought to have Light
therein? viz. Whether it is the duty of Christians, before Church Membership,
to be baptized?

Wherein (for Answer) I will offer John Bunyan's own words; Baptism (says he,
page 122.) is a Duty enjoined to those who receive the Gospel. Again, page 82.
In the Primitive times it was generally practiced first (viz. before
Church Communion) yea so as the unconverted themselves, knew it belonged to the
Disciples of Jesus Christ; What can we have more than is here acknowledged?
Surely, if it was so generally practiced before Communion in the Primitive
Churches; it ought to be so now. Did the unconverted then know it was the duty
of Christ's Disciples to be baptized, as aforesaid? and must it be questioned
now by John Bunyan, or any pretending themselves Christians? Was it then a duty
enjoined to those that receive the Gospel? and is it not so now? surely yea. It
may from hence be hoped, that John Bunyan is become a new man, and repents what
he pretends in the beginning of his Book.

But stay, he is presently of another mind, for he again says, page 82. That
all that were received into Fellowship, were even then baptized first, would
strain a weak man's wit to prove, if Arguments were closly made from these
three Texts of holy Scripture, 1 Cor. 1.14. Gal. 3.27. Romans 6.3.

What, John Bunyan, art thou so unstable? I now understand plainly that Text of
Scripture, Jam. 1.8. A double-minded man is unstable in all his ways; for he
that wavereth is like a Wave of the Sea, driven with the wind and tossed: even
so is this man, who in the same page of a little Treatise, confesses Baptism
to be a general Practice in the Primitive times before Communion, and yet again
says, it would strain a weak man's wit to prove it. But surely John Bunyan
means a Fool that knows not to prove any thing; (and such a one as he, cannot
in John Bunyan's apprehension maintain, will never hurt the practice of
Baptism) otherwise it may be proved from his own Confession, if that be worth
any thing. But it seems that may be contradicted, if Arguments were closly made
upon the aforementioned Texts, wherein I shall advise John Bunyan (since he
thinks so) the next time he meddleth in the derogation of Baptism, to make his
Arguments from them.

But, Sir, if you do, pray, (according to your own words) do them more closly
than you have already, otherwise your fallacy will be discovered, and your
Arguments fall to the ground.

But I perceive he is willing (as he says, page 82.) To pass those Texts at
present, and instead of making Arguments thence-from, pretends that if we can
show the Christian that in the Primitive times remained dark about it, then he
will show the Christian that was received into Fellowship without it.

Well said, Mr. Bunyan; When the sky falls, you will catch Larks. You have
already told us the Primitive Christians all believed it, yea the unconverted
knew (as you say) it did belong to the Disciples of Christ, and yet you would
now know the Christian that was dark therein; and in that you know that to be
impossible (if your own words be true) therefore you offer if we do that, then
you will show the Christian that was received without Baptism; which you well
know is also impossible to be done: Wherefore to show your resoluteness, right
or wrong, we have this Thesis from you, page 82. That if you should grant
(which you say is more than can be proved; but it is but your say so) Baptism
to be an initiating Ordinance, and that it did, as Circumcision of old, give a
being of membership to the partakers; yea, set the case men were forbidden to
enter into Fellowship without it; yet the case may so be that (these things
notwithstanding), men might be received into Fellowship without it. Where are
we now? what is John Bunyan not content to set his posts by the Lord's posts;
but Antichrist-like, he must needs advance himself above God? 2 Thessalonians. 2.4.
giving new Laws contrary to what the God of Heaven has given in his Son Jesus
Christ. If Baptism be an initiating Ordinance, and gives a being to Membership;
yet all that avails nothing with J. Bunyan, he will receive members without it,
and that in despite of God, although he has forbidden it. What Doctrine is
this? Would you know a reason of his Practice which he pretends to show you? In
short, it is his will, maugre all opposition, even of God himself. For set the
case men are forbidden by the Lord to enter into Fellowship without Baptism,
yet J. Bunyan will receive them.

But let us hear what he pretends as his warrant, page 83. And that is first,
the Example of the Jews in the Wilderness, who (says he) notwithstanding
Circumcision, gave a being to Church Membership, without which it was (if you
will believe John Bunyan) positively commanded none should be received into
Fellowship, yet for all this more than six hundred thousand were received into
the Church without it, and also retained there, and that even by Moses and
Joshua.

Answ. To this Position I shall say, First, Circumcision never gave a being to
Church Membership, neither was there any such positive Command (as is
pretended) that none should be received into the Church without it.

John Bunyan I suppose will grant the contrary, for sure he will allow Holy
Women to be Church Members.

Secondly, The six hundred thousand were not received into Fellowship by Moses
and Joshua, neither were they any ways accounted by them Church Members; but
as they were the natural seed of Abraham, to whom the Promise was made.

Thirdly, Their neglect of Circumcision was an evil, and a reproach to them,
which was said to be rolled away in their Circumcision, Josh. 5.9. wherefore,
whatsoever was the impediment, it matters not; it was a sin in them, and a
reproach unto them, although J. Bunyan pretends they had a legal reason to
excuse it, which also (as he thinks, or at least says, page 94.) many have in
these days to neglect Baptism, although an enjoined Duty, an holy Ordinance of
God.

What excuse (I mean legal) can that be?

He says, The want of Light: Our Brethren (says he) have a manifest reason,
an invincible one, one that all the men on Earth, or Angels in Heaven cannot
remove; for it is God that creates Light: wherefore, if Moses and Joshua
thought fit to Communicate with the Uncircumcised as aforesaid, why may not I
have Communion, yea, the closest Communion with visible Saints, although they
want Light in, and cannot submit to that? (meaning Baptism) I shall therefore
(says he) hold Communion with such.

Answ. Who could ever have thought that John Bunyan should have Preached the
Doctrine of those persons, against whom he has so frequently manifested
inveterate hatred? He has often cried out against others for saying, The Light
within is the Rule for Christians to walk by; but now he himself confidently
affirms it, yea, in opposition to positive Commands, and express Prohibitions,
making it the great reason for and against a Practice; yea, such a one as
neither Men or Angels can remove. But this is no strange thing: Herod and
Pilate, two great Enemies, agreed in one against Christ.

But let me ask J. Bunyan, Whether Light makes a thing to be a Duty or no Duty?
is God's Law subservient to our Light?

I suppose he must answer, Yea; for it is congruous with his reasoning, that
what God Commands, is no Duty to those that have no Light therein; or, at
least, the want of Light is a sufficient excuse for the neglect thereof; For
(says he, page 94.) God creates Light (I suppose he means); therefore if they
have no Light, it is because God has not given it, etc.

Well would it be, if this be so, for the greatest part of men to have such an
Advocate as John Bunyan at the last day, to plead on the behalf of their
disobedience, that they wanted Light to do otherwise; yea, that God never gave
them Light. If the Rich man we read of, Luke 16. had but in this condition, had
John Bunyan to plead for him, his mouth would not have been so soon stopped.

But stay, I remember Christ said unto the unprofitable Servant, Luke 19.22.
Out of thine own mouth will I judge thee: And what if it should be so said to
John Bunyan, where would he be then? and what would become of his Brethren
under whose arm-holes he has sowed pillows? Does not he say, page 45. I
believe Jesus Christ by the Word of the Scriptures, will judge all men at the
day of Doom? And if so, the Word of the Scriptures says, Luke 12.48. He that
knew not his Lord's Will (viz. has no Light in it) shall be beaten; and good
reason, for the want of Light is through their own neglect; the Light shined in
darkness, but the darkness comprehended it not, Joh. 1.5. It has been before
proved, That this is the Condemnation, that Light is come into the World; but
men love darkness rather than Light, Joh. 3.19. Would J. Bunyan think it a
sufficient reason against Faith, for a man to say, I have no Light? If it be a
good reason in one thing, it is good in all. Paul once said, Romans 7.9. I was
alive without the Law, at least he thought so when he did not know Sin; which
by John Bunyan's reason is a sufficient excuse for any evil, if I want Light to
do otherwise.

But surely John Bunyan is conscious to himself, that notwithstanding what he
has pretended concerning the weight of the aforesaid Reason, which he says is
invincible; yea, so that all the men on Earth, or Angels in Heaven cannot
remove; I say, he is conscious of the weakness and fallacy thereof; otherwise
he would never have spent so much time in vain, as to allege afterward Ten
other Reasons to confirm his Opinion and Practice, when he had done it so
invincibly before; unless therewith (as the Red Dragon with his ten horns) he
is minded so to push against the Truth, that he might overthrow it root and
branch. For the prevention whereof (although it need not much be feared from
John Bunyan) I shall adventure a further encounter to try the strength of his
Weapons, and the force of his Reasons: The first is this:

Reas. 1. Because the true visible Saint has already subjected to that which
is better, even to the Righteousness of God, which is by Faith in Jesus Christ,
etc. He is therefore to be received, not by thy light, not for that in
Circumstances he jumpeth with thy Opinion, but according to his own Faith,
which he ought to keep to himself before God, as Paul says, 1 Cor. 10.29.
Conscience I say, not of thy own, but of the other, etc. page 94, 95.

Answ. Here you have John Bunyan's first Reason, wherein he tells you, the true
visible Saint has subjected to that which is better. But can a man be a true
visible Saint, that visibly opposes Christ's Ordinances? He that has my
Commandments, and keeps them, says Christ, Joh. 14.21. he it is that loves
me; he is my friend, Joh. 15.14. And our Savior renders the Reason thereof,
Chap. 14.23. If any man love me, he will keep my words: And again, verse. 24. He
that keeps not my sayings, loves me not, (surely without offense I may add)
Is no true visible Saint. But John Bunyan (not forgetting to oppose the Lord
Christ) will vindicate such disobedience, and tell you the Saint he describes
has subjected to that which is better.

Well, be it so; does it therefore follow the less must be despised? I hope
John Bunyan will allow, The life is more than meat, and the Body than raiment;
yet the lesser must be received for the preservation of the greater. Besides,
had not Paul the greater when he was Converted to the Faith? Yet Ananias
(although he was informed that he was a chosen Vessel, which was the better)
commands him to be baptized, Acts 22.16. Had not Cornelius and his Companions
the greater, when their hearts were purified by Faith, and also replenished
with the Holy Spirit, Acts 10.44. Chap. 11.15, 17. yet Peter commands them to
be baptized. Yea, had not Christ himself the greater, to whom the Spirit was
not given by measure, Joh. 3.34. Yet when John (peradventure upon the same
account as John Bunyan pretends) forbad his Baptism, Matthew. 3.14. Christ
answers, verse. 15. Suffer it to be so, for thus it behooveth us to fulfill all
righteousness.

Baptism, it seems, is no indifferent thing, although John Bunyan would have
you believe it so, alleging as aforesaid the words of Paul, 1 Cor. 10.29.
which words only have respect to the eating of meats, which were permitted,
(although not enjoined) wherein (therefore) if a weak Brother should be
offended, they were advised not to eat for Conscience sake; Conscience, says
Paul, not of thy own (for it is lawful in it self) but of the other (who thinks
it unlawful): touching which J. Bunyan pretends (that you might think him to
make his way plain) it may be objected, that what the Apostles wrote, they
wrote to such as were baptized, and therefore the Arguments in the Epistles,
about things Circumstantial, respect not the case in hand.

To which he answers, First, that this is a mistake, the first to the
Corinthians, the Epistle of James, the first and second of Peter, the first
Epistle of John, were expressly written to all the godly as well as to
particular Churches. page 86.

Secondly, That if Water Baptism (as the Circumstances with which the Churches
were pestered of old) trouble their peace, wound the Consciences of the Godly,
dismember, and break their Fellowship; it is, although an Ordinance for the
present, to be prudently shunned; for the Edification of the Churches is to be
preferred before it.

Answ. Touching this, as is here said, I must tell you first J. Bunyan is
mistaken; and sure he either mistakes or forgets himself; for is not this the
same J. Bunyan who in the same Treatise confessed, page 91. That in the
Apostles days Baptism went before Church Communion: Yea, he further says,
page 92. It was then generally practiced by all Disciples, and if so, then sure
the forementioned Epistles (although general) were directed to baptized
persons.

Secondly, Those things which the Apostles treat of as indifferent, were such
only, as were permitted either to be done, or not done; wherein many times
there was no expedience in the performance thereof; as Paul says in the
aforementioned, 1 Cor. 10.23. All things are lawful, but all things are not
expedient. Wherein he also says, All things edify not; and therefore advises,
That no man should seek his own, but every man his Brothers wealth: but there
is no such indifferency in Baptism, which has been proved a necessary Duty; if
that be a Circumstance, it is a necessary Circumstance that must be performed;
Although J. Bunyan supposes it may pester the Churches, trouble their Peace,
wound their Consciences, etc. wherefore in his judgment, although an Ordinance,
to be shunned.

How! Do Christ's holy Ordinances ever pester the Churches, trouble their
Peace, wound the Consciences of the Godly, dismember and break their
Fellowship: I never heard it so to do; (but very efficacious on the contrary);
But if so, let me tell you, it is an evil sign (even as when the stomach is
offended with wholesome food) A sign of an evil heart, from whence undoubtedly
the cause thereof proceeds; But I (...) think, it is but the delusion of John
Bunyan to conceit it, as once Ahab counted the holy Prophet Elijah, the
troubler of Israel, 1 King. 18.17.

Wherefore herein let us not be persuaded to shun that which ought to be
embraced; But rather as David said to Michael, 2 Samuel 6.22. let us resolve,
that if it be accounted vile and evil to obey our God in his Holy Ordinances;
We will yet be more vile: Thus much for the answer to his first Reason. His
second follows.

Reas. 2. Observe secondly, One Spirit, one Hope, one Lord, one Faith, one
Baptism, not of Water, for by one Spirit are we all baptized into one body, one
God and Father of all, and through all, and in you all, is a sufficient Rule
for us to hold Communion by, and also to endeavor the maintaining that
Communion, and to keep it in unity, within the bond of peace, against all
attempts whatsoever, p. 96.

Answ. What presumption is this, in wresting the Holy Scripture which
persuades to unity, (amongst other Reasons) because there is one Baptism!

But John Bunyan would have fellowship with the unbaptized (contrary to what is
here intended by the Apostle) and that (as he says) because this one Baptism
is not of Water. Although the Text says no such thing, and John Bunyan himself
has often acknowledged, Baptism of Water to be an Holy Ordinance of Christ,
page 123. generally practiced, page 92. And then, if one Baptism, what other,
but that one ( viz. Baptism of Water) so generally practiced by all Disciples?

He will tell us the Baptism of the Spirit, for by one Spirit are we all
baptized into one body.

To which I answer, The Baptism of the Spirit was not general, and so could not
be intended by one Baptism.

Secondly, It is not meant in the aforesaid Text, which says by, not with, one
Spirit: for, in truth, those that are baptized with Water, are by one Spirit,
in one Faith, having one Hope, in one Lord, even one God and Father of all,
baptized with one ( viz. Water) Baptism, into one Body and Fellowship, which
ought therefore to be kept free from John Bunyan's mixture.

His Third Reason follows, page 97. viz. I am bold therefore to have Communion
with such, because they also have the Doctrine of Baptisms, I say the Doctrine
of them: For here you must note, I distinguish between the Doctrine and
Practice of Water Baptism, etc. they have the best of Baptisms; the heart of
Water Baptism, the Doctrine of Water Baptism, and want only the Sign, the
outward Circumstance, which is forborne for want of Light.

Answ. Oh Lord, what delusions are here! Righteous art thou in sending strong
delusions upon them that receive not the love of the truth, 2 Thessalonians. 2.10, 11.
John Bunyan has received Baptism, but what love he has thereto, appears by
his words; wherefore no marvel that his mind is blinded, and his understanding
darkened, that he might believe lies, and deceive himself with fallacies, as he
does in the aforementioned Reason, where he tells us of some (of his
Proselytes) that have the Doctrine of Baptism, but do not practice it because
they want Light therein.

What a Contradiction is this! if they want Light, they cannot have the
Doctrine; if they have the Doctrine, they must have Light, so far as to know
it; and therefore John Bunyan's distinction between the Doctrine and Practice
of Water Baptism will nothing avail. We readily allow that, and oftentimes find
that many have the Doctrine (although not without light) without the Practice,
whom it seems are such as John Bunyan is bold to have Communion with.

He may well say, Bold, for he has no Scripture-warrant for it, and it is a
great boldness to adventure in Church Communion beyond what is written, yea,
contrary to what is written; for our Savior says, Luke 12.47. He that knew
his Lord's will (that had the Doctrine of a Duty) and prepared not himself (to
Practice) neither did according to his will, shall be beaten with many stripes.
And as such as neglect their duty are thus threatened, so evil is declared to
persecute those that teach men so, and encourage them therein, Matthew. 5.19.
wherein what John Bunyan may expect I wish him seriously to consider; he seems,
page 122. to be conscious to himself that some might judge him guilty thereof,
whose mouths he would stop by his Equivocations, etc. but at the last day such
things will stand in no stead.

Reas. 4. I come now to his fourth Reason, page 99. I am bold to hold Communion
with visible Saints, as aforesaid (viz. unbaptized) because God has Communion
with them, whose Example in the case we are straightly Commanded to follow;
Receive you one another as Christ Jesus has received you, says Paul, Romans
15.1, 6. to the Glory of God; yea, though they be Saints of Opinions contrary
to you; though it goes against the mind of them that are strong, we that are
strong ought to bear the infirmities of the weak: What Infirmities? (says John
Bunyan) Those that are natural, are incident to all: they are infirmities then
that are sinful, all such infirmities are laid upon Christ, page 100.
wherefore, vain man, think not by the streightness of thy order in outward and
bodily conformity to outward and shadowish Circumstances, that thy peace is
maintained with God; for peace with God is by Faith in the blood of his Cross,
who has born the reproaches and errors of you both: Thou errest in a
Substance, he erreth in a Circumstance, upon whom must these errors fall? page
101. Must they for this be cast out of the Church? No: These are all, yea those
reproaches, wherein the wisdom of Heaven is reproached, are fallen upon Christ,
page 102. wherefore God has received him, Christ has received him; wherefore
do ye receive him. There is more solidity in this Argument, than if all the
Churches of God had received him. Will any say we cannot believe that God has
received any but such as are baptized? I will not suppose a Brother so
stupefied, and therefore to that I will not answer.

Answ. In the answer to this long Reason, wherein John Bunyan has run himself
out of breath; Consider first, That those Scriptures alleged by John Bunyan,
nothing concern the matter in hand, for they were written to baptized persons
by his own Confession, page 92. as also appears by the Apostle's words, Romans
6.3, 4.

Secondly, That receiving there spoken of, does not intend the receiving into
Fellowship, (for that was already done) but a holy reception in the bowels of
love, and tender-heartedness, that so with one mind and with one mouth thy
might glorify God, Chap. 15.6. whereto they are persuaded from the
consideration of God's bounty, and the grace of our Lord Jesus Christ extended
to them.

Wherefore concerning unbaptized persons (as the Apostle does not speak of
them, or intend them, in reference to Church Communion) I might now pass them
by, as being nothing concerned in those words of the Apostle aforementioned by
John Bunyan.

But since he so much boasts of their Communion with God, I will answer in the
Apostle's words, 1 Cor. 5.12. What have I to do to judge them that are without?
I shall leave them to the Judgment of God, to whom they must either stand or
fall, only advising all such to make their Calling and Election sure, 2 Pet.
1.10. not trusting to John Bunyan's words (who would sow pillows under their
arm-holes) but walk according to the Rule of the Holy Scripture; and then the
Church will have Fellowship with them: and God has promised what they shall
bind or loose on Earth, Matthew. 18. shall be bound or loosed in Heaven; God
himself has great respect to his Church.

But to return; If I should grant that God has Communion with many of them; is
not John Bunyan strangely stupefied, as to reason from thence, yea to account
it an Argument of so great solidity, that the Church ought therefore to have
Communion with them? Has not God Communion wi^h many, that the Church may not
have Communion with? The Apostle speaks, Romans 2.14. of some Gentiles, which
having not the Law, were a Law unto themselves, who did show the work of the
Law written in their hearts: With such persons surely God had Communion, for he
did communicate that knowledge to them by his holy Spirit; yet I suppose John
Bunyan, considering his own words, p. 72. (viz. That none were to he admitted
into Fellowship but such as were Circumcised, nothing else could give the
devoutest person that breathed a being of membership) will not say the Church
of the Jews ought to have had Communion with them (although they had Communion
with God) during their uncircumcision.

Secondly, God has Communion with Children, whose Angels behold the face of
our Heavenly Father, Matthew. 18.10. to whom pertains the Kingdom of Heaven,
Mark. 10.14. Such Christ received; yet the Church ought not to have Communion
with them before profession of Faith, etc.

So that this solid Argument proves of no force; God's thoughts are
unsearchable in reference to himself; but in relation to the Church he declares
his will, wherein he appears a God of Order, and not of Confusion, and so it is
ordained in the Churches. 1 Cor. 14.33, 40. whom although the Apostle exhorts,
Romans 15.1. to bear one another infirmities; he does not mean the denial of
Baptism, or any other necessary duty (as John Bunyan wickedly pretends).

But what infirmities then, says J. Bunyan?

I answer, Natural infirmities, and also their opinion in things indifferent,
which the Apostle was treating of, Romans 14. that either may be done, or may not
be done, without sin; concerning which the Apostle says, All things are
lawful, 1 Cor. 6.12. It is lawful to eat, and lawful to forbear, Romans 14.14.
but touching Baptism, it has already been proved a necessary duty, and cannot
be omitted by a Christian without sin.

But if so, John Bunyan tells you, That sinful infirmities must be born with.

How John Bunyan! must the Church of God bear with sin? must it not be
reproved? Is not this the ready way to make the House of God a Den of Thieves?
Matthew. 21.13.

But says John Bunyan, All such infirmities are laid upon Christ, etc.

I answer; That Christ bare the sin of the world, Joh. 1.29. upon his own body
on the tree, 1 Pet. 2.24. I confess; and also that by him all that believe are
justified from all things from which they could not be justified by the Law of
Moses, Act. 13.39. I grant; Christ being set forth as a Propitiation (through
Faith in his blood) for the remission of sins that are past, that God might
appear just, and the Justifier of him that believes in Jesus, Romans 3.25, 26.

But that the sinful Infirmities of Christians shall be so born by Christ, as
to be forgiven without Confession and forsaking, I do not believe; If we
confess our sins, says John, 1 John 1.10. He is faithful and just to forgive
us our sins; he that confesses and forsakes shall find mercy, Prove. 28.13.
But this bearing will not serve John Bunyan's turn, for. if there must be open
confession and forsaking, it is nothing to his purpose, it will not then
bolster up men in their disobedience.

Wherefore he is bold to affirm, That all your infirmities are fallen upon
Christ, yea, even errors in Circumstances, and errors in Substance, such
whereby the wisdom of Heaven is reproached, Christ bears and takes away.

If John Bunyan says true; here are large pillows to sow under your arm-holes;
those of old, were not so expert as Juhn Bunyan, although they made Lies their
Refuge, Isa. 28.17. yet their bed was shorter, than a man could stretch himself
on it; and the covering narrower, than that he could wrap himself in it, Isa.
28.20. But John Bunyan's is large enough; err in what you will, Christ has
born it; and the Church ought to bear with you, it seems; for there is no
error, but it is either in circumstance or substance. Well, be it what it will,
Although you reproach the wisdom of Heaven, it is (says he) born by Christ,
and must be born by your Brethren.

But sure his dawbing will appear to be with untempered mortar, Ezekiel. 13.10,
11. And if he may not be charged with that presumption, the Apostle tells you
was in some, Romans 6.1. Who would sin, that Grace may abound? yet I am sure
whilst he is pleading concerning his Fellowship without Baptism, he
countenanceth and encourages all sin, overthrows all Church Discipline; and
you may then guess what (if his Rule be observed) will become of the Church it
self, as further we will consider in his reprehension: Vain man (says he)
think not by the streightness of thy order, etc. that thy peace is maintained
with God.

Is not this the fruit of a stupefied head; otherwise, who would account, and
also call his Brethren, vain men: and that for streightness of Order?

Is not Order to be observed in the Churches, 1 Cor. 14.40? and can it be too
strictly observed? surely No; whilst orderly, it cannot be too straight; except
for John Bunyan who would not have it so, that his confused worship may come in
the place.

But then he will tell you, It is but outward and bodily conformity to outward
and shadowish Circumstances that he accounts vain.

But is not outward and bodily conformity, and that to such as he calls outward
and shadowish Circumstances, required in a Christian? He does not only so
account Baptism, but also breaking of Bread, the Supper of the Lord, for so he
says, page 64. Touching shadowish or figurative Circumstances, Christ has
ordained two in his Church, viz. Water Baptism, and the Supper of the Lord.

Now what Christian will call it vain, to conform to the Supper of the Lord
(which is so exactly required by Christ himself)? Surely none, or few men but
John Bunyan; and if conformity thereto be not vain, why must Baptism? which he
confesses to be of the same Ordination, page 64.

Well, the Conformity to Christ's Ordinances is not in vain; The way of the
Lord is strength to the upright, Prove. 10.19.

Yea, bodily and outward Conformity. I beseech you brethren (says Paul, Romans
12.1.) by the mercies of God, that you present your bodies a living Sacrifice;
Glorify God in your body, 1 Cor. 6.20. Yield the members of your bodies as
instruments of righteousness unto God, Romans 6.13.

But it may be John Bunyan will tell me, I mistake him, for that which he
accounts vain, is for persons to think thereby to maintain their peace with
God, which is obtained by Faith in the blood of his Cross.

To which I will answer; That although our peace with God is by Faith, yet it
is maintained by our obedience to Christ's Holy Ordinances, they are the things
that belong to our peace, that maintain and increase our peace with God, (I do
not say God's peace with us) for without them there cannot be a good Conscience
toward God, and then I am sure no peace with God continued.

In short; the sum of this Reason is not only safe, but blasphemous: First,
False; for it does not follow that we may have Communion with men, because God
has Communion with them.

Secondly, Blasphemous; For, besides what is said concerning Christ bearing all
sin, whether in Circumstance or Substance (which is apparently false) God is
hereby made the Author of sin; for in this Reason he urges, That the Church
ought to bear with the sinful infirmities of their Brethren; For those (he
says) are caused for want of Light: And how come they to want Light? he tells
you, page 94. It is God that creates Light, and he that withholds: So that
God not creating Light in their hearts, causes them to err, and to be guilty
of sinful infirmities.

Is not here verified what is written, God shall send them strong delusions to
believe a lie? Is not this according to the words of that idle Servant, Matthew.
25.24. who says of God, he knew him to be an hard man, reaping where thou have
not sown, and gathering where thou have not strawed? So says John Bunyan; who
without Repentance may expect the like sentence.

Reas. 5. I come now to his 5th Reason, p. 104. Because a failer in such a
Circumstance as Water, does not unchristian us: This must needs be granted, not
only from what was said before, but for that thousands of thousands that could
not consent thereto, are now with the innumerable company of Angels, etc.
wherefore what is said of eating, or the contrary, may as to this be said of
Water Baptism; neither if I am baptized, am I the better; neither if I be not,
am I the worse: not the better before God, nor the worse before Men: Whereupon
(after some plausible words, he concludes, page 106.) seeing the things wherein
we exceed each other, are such as neither make nor mar Christianity; let us
love one another, and walk together according to the glorious Rule above
specified, (meaning to have Church Communion with unbaptized persons.)

Answ. To love one another, I should readily consent, for we ought to love all
men: But for Church Communion I cannot, until I see it proved that we ought to
do so, which I am sure John Bunyan has not; for he has not yet proved it
lawful, much less expedient, but further from being necessary, which he
pretends. And surely this Reason cannot sway a wise man, to do that which is
not proved lawful; I say, this Reason which is grounded upon a false Position:
for although Baptism does not make a Christian, yet the want of it may mar a
Christian, and the neglect thereof unchristian men. For he that despises God
(although once honored) shall be lightly esteemed, 1 Samuel 2.30. A good
Conscience may be put away, 1 Timothy 1.19. that there may be need of the
formation of Christ in the heart again, Gal. 4.19.

John Bunyan's instance of the thousand thousands that did not consent to
Baptism, which are now (as he says) in Heaven, is no sufficient proof that it
ought to be, or that it may be despised now. I suppose he will confess there
are thousand thousands as much in Heaven as they, who did not believe that
Christ was then come in the flesh; but he that denies it now is Antichrist, 1 John 4.3. And notwithstanding John Bunyan's confidence, if he should now deny
Christ come in the flesh, it would unchristian him.

I might give many more instances in this case, but from hence you may perceive
how inconsiderate he is, to conclude that of Baptism, (from false grounds)
which Paul speaks of eating meats, which were lawful to be eaten, or not
eaten: Would any wise man oppose such indifferent things, to an Ordinance and
Institution of Christ Jesus? sure Obedience to express Commands, whatsoever we
are before men, makes us better before God.

Reas 6. I come now to his 6th Reason, p. 107. I am therefore for holding
Communion thus, because the Edification of Souls, in the Faith and Holiness of
the Gospel, is of greater concernment, than our agreeing in, or contesting for
the business of Water Baptism: That the Edification of the Soul is of the
greatest concern, is out of measure evident, etc.

Answ. John Bunyan's Position here stated, he endeavors by diverse Reasons to
prove, (viz. That the Edification of the Soul is of the greatest concern,)
which I here omit, because whilst he endeavors to prove that, he mistakes
the matter in question; for it is apparent that Baptism, and the rest of
Christ's Ordinances, are the means appointed for the Edification of the Souls
of men; and if so, the Argument is fallacious and must fall; which surely he is
himself conscious of, and therefore to prevent it, he says, page 109. Know
that the Edification of the Church of God depends not upon, neither is tied
to this or that Circumstance.

Much said, but little proved; wherefore in short I may answer, You have only
J. Bunyan's word for it, who, herein does not only exclude Baptism, but also
whatsoever he is pleased to call a Circumstance, whereof the Supper of the Lord
is one by his own confession, page 64. so that it also is excluded (by him)
from Church-Edification, contrary to what is declared of the Primitive Saints,
who walking in the fear of God, having Fellowship one with another, were
edified: yea, Paul accounts Church Discipline for the Edification of the
Church, 2 Cor. 13.10. And in truth all Gospel Ordinances are for Edification;
so that if we must press after that, it obliges us to press after the means
tending thereto.

But J. Bunyan seems to put a little gloss upon the matter, viz. When there is
in the hearts of the Godly different persuasions about it, then it becomes
them in the wisdom of God to take more care for their peace and unity, than to
widen their uncomfortable differences. Thus J. Bunyan would have the Churches
to be like Simeon and Levi, Brethren agreeing in iniquity; to bear with sin,
and to wink at the trangressions of Christ's Ordinances, (rather than to
disagree thereupon): contrary to the advice of the Apostle, who (as he
withstood Peter to the face, because he was to be blamed, Gal. 2.11.) directs,
That if any Brother walks disorderly (viz. in disobedience to Christ's
Ordinances) he must be withdrawn from, 2 Thessalonians. 3.6.

But John Bunyan, to persuade the Churches to strike hands in disobedience, and
to countetenance their doings therein; alleges, page 110, diverse instances of
unlawful things done of old, yet winked at, if not approved.

To all which (if it be so) sure the Apostle's words (Romans 6.1. What shall we
say thereto? shall we continue in sin that grace may abound? God forbid:) might
(to sober men) be a sufficient answer.

But that I might discharge my duty herein, I shall give (for the better
satisfaction of those concerned) a particular Answer thereto in order.

His first Instance is of Aaron, page 109. in these words, Although Aaron
transgressed the Law, because he eat not the Sin-Offering of the People, yet
seeing he could not do it with satisfaction to his own Conscience, Moses was
content that he left it undone, Levit. 10.16.20.

Answ. John Bunyan tells us, That Aaron transgressed the Law, because the Law
was against his Conscience, and that Moses was content therewith; but surely
then, Moses was not faithful in all things as a Servant, Heb. 3.5. For the same
Apostle tells us, Heb. 2.2. That the Law was so steadfast, that every
transgression and disobedience received a just recompense of reward: which must
needs be false if John Bunyan says true; for he says Aaron transgressed, yet
Moses was content: sure it was great presumption in him to tolerate what the
Law of God forbad: But the Text alleged, does not say Aaron transgressed the
Law; neither does it say, the performance of the Law was against his
Conscience, these are but John Bunyan's fancies: All that the Text says is,
That Moses was angry when he found the Sin-Offering burnt, and says, Wherefore
have ye not eaten it in the holy place? And thereto Aaron answers, It was
Offered by the People this day wherein such things have befaln me, that if I
had eaten, would it have been accepted? Which answer when Moses heard he was
content, for therein the Law was not broken, neither was the performance
thereof against Aaron's Conscience.

The sum therefore of the matter is this; God, who took great care for his
People, did Command that Aaron and his Sons should eat such parts of the
Offerings of the People as he directed, viz. it was their due by the Law of
God, so that they might eat thereof, what nature required, (they were not
enjoined to eat all, or so much) the rest, viz. what they left, was to be burnt.

And in the case before alleged, it seems Aaron eat none, but burnt all:
whereupon Moses apprehending it to be in contempt of God's Law (as Joshua
thought of the erection of the Altar, Josh. 22.) was angry with them, but yet
enquiring into the cause wherefore they did not eat it, Aaron tells him, That
it was the day wherein he lost his two Sons, ( verse. 2.) and therefore he could
not eat it, neither did he think it would be acceptable if he had; which when
Moses heard, he was content, knowing thereby that eating in general was not
denied by Aaron, or against his Conscience, as John Bunyan falsely pretends; but
that the occasion then required his forbearance: and therefore this is nothing
to the purpose in hand, it is no more than if a Christian (owning the Supper of
the Lord as a truth to be observed), should once at the Celebration thereof
(being it may be under some trouble or discontent) absent himself; or if upon
some special occasion Baptism should be deferred for some hours, who would find
fault with this? which was Aaron's case.

His second Instance is, page 110. concerning Eldad and Medad, Who (says he)
Joshua was so zealous against, because they Prophesied in the Camp, without
first going to the door of the Tabernacle as they were Commanded, that he
desired Moses to forbid them, Numb. 11.16, 26. But (says he) Moses calls his
zeal, envy; praying for more such Prophets: knowing although they failed in a
Circumstance, they were right in that which was better; for the Edification of
the People in the Camp was that which pleased Moses.

Answ. What will not People do when they endeavor to fight against the Laws of
Christ? If Moses did account Joshua's zeal envy, much more may it truly be said
of John Bunyan, that his zeal herein produces envy: I might in opposition to
this Instance allege, what Paul says of the false Apostles that preached
Christ out of envy; yet Paul rejoiced that Christ was preached: And would it
not be thought strange that any should collect from hence that their act was
lawful, because Paul rejoiced therein, when as many times good is produced by
evil acts?

But further, Eldad and Medad in their Prophesying did nothing contrary to Law,
they were not forbidden to Prophecy, nor that it should be done in the Camp,
but on the contrary, God's Spirit came upon them there, and thereby they were
induced to prophesy; and so it is nothing to the purpose for which it is
alleged by John Bunyan, unless he can show us any incited by God's Spirit to
neglect Baptism.

But if you say, They ought to have went to the door of the Tabernacle?

I answer, That it was not express duty to be performed on their parts, but for
the manifestation of God's selecting them to govern the People, which in a holy
modesty they eschewed.

But then in the next place, John Bunyan gives you a third Instance, page 110.
That in Hezekiah's time, although the People came to the Passover in an undue
manner, and did eat it otherwise than it was written, yet the wise King would
not forbid them, but rather admitted it, knowing that their Edification was of
greater Concern than to hold them to a Circumstance or two, 2 Chronicles. 30.13, 27.
Yea God himself did like the wisdom of the King, and healed, that is, forgave
the People at the Prayer of Hezekiah: And observe (says he) notwithstanding
this disorder as to Circumstances, the Feast was kept with great gladness, etc.

Answ. What now, John Bunyan, how great a labyrinth have thou brought us into
(if thy words be true) must that be admitted in the Church? yea, does God
himself like it, even that which is undue, yea contrary to what is written?
Sure we are left herein (if this be so) to every man's fancy; who is there that
will not pretend the Edification of the People in all their Concerns? and how
shall we control them? For, Quot homines tot sententiae, the Scripture must
not be our Judge, For that may be admitted, says John Bunyan, yea, well liked
by God, which is contrary to what is written: This he further confirms, page
101. For all things (says he) even Laws themselves must give place to the
Edification and Profit of God's People.

Surely John Bunyan does not esteem that his God was wise enough; when he made
Laws, as to foresee what would be for his Peoples profit and Edification.

But as he does herein deprave the wisdom of God; so he is contrary to himself.
For he says in another place, page 45. I believe that Jesus Christ by the word
of the Scriptures, will judge all men at the day of Doom. Now this cannot be,
if the Word of the Scriptures, and the Laws therein contained, must give place
to a pretended Edification of the People; would not that ( viz. to plead the
Edification of the People) if his words be true, be a good excuse at the day of
Doom?

But I hope no man will be so unwise as to believe him, who is not only so
contrary to himself, but to the holy Apostle, who desired the Godly (by the
Example of himself and the rest of the Apostles) to learn not so much as to
think above that which is written, 1 Cor. 4.6. and so much the rather, because
he knew that afterward there would arise such presumptuous persons as John
Bunyan, who would pretend they might do otherwise (even contrary to the written
Law of God) that good might come; Concerning whom Paul says, Romans 3.8. Their
damnation is just.

But perhaps you will say with John Bunyan, Was it not so in Hezekiah 's time?
Did they not keep the Passover otherwise than it was written, and yet allowed?

I answer, No: There was no allowance of any thing contrary to what was written
in the Law; wherefore, first, we must note concerning the time, there was a
limitation by the Law of God; as appears, Numb. 9.9, 10, 11. The Lord spoke
unto Moses saying: If any of you, or your posterity, be unclean, or in a
journey afar off, that he cannot keep the Passover in its appointed season,
they shall keep it on the fourteenth day of the second month at Even, etc.
which was the time that Hezekiah (taking Counsel by the Law of God) kept it, 2 Chronicles. 30.2, 3, 16. uncleanness and distance of place, not permitting the
observation thereof in the first month, which was the time at first appointed,
and that (although a Circumstance) so exactly, that God threatened death to the
man that should neglect the appointed season, Numb. 9.13. And it is apparent
what befell Jeroboam for his Error therein; 1 King. 12.23. Although he was as
ready as John Bunyan to plead the Edification and ease of the People for his
warrant, 2 King. 12.28.

But if now any say, Why did the King pray God to pardon, if there was not an
undue manner in the eating? And why is the Lord said to heal the People if they
did not offend?

To which I answer, First, That the observation of the Passover in respect to
the time when it was kept as aforesaid, was not undue: Nor, Secondly, any thing
that the King either Commanded, or Allowed, yet there was an undue receiving
the Passover otherwise than what was written: But how was that? the Text
declares, That there was an intrusion of many of the People who had not
cleansed themselves according to the Law, which although John Bunyan pretends
the King did allow, (knowing that their Edification was of greater concern than
to hold them to a Circumstance or two) the Scripture says the contrary, viz.
That Hezekiah did account it a sin (and not at all for Edification or Profit)
and therefore prayed earnestly to God for pardon (lest that therefore his anger
should break forth against them); unto whom the Lord was pleased graciously to
hearken, and healed them: From whence John Bunyan wickedly concludes that God
did like it; and thereupon urges it as a great Reason why now the Church
should bear with undue proceedings, contrary to what is written. But, well did
the Holy Ghost reprehend such, Romans 6.1. that because God was gracious in
pardoning, they would presumptuously sin that grace might abound, which ought
to be abhorred by all the Godly.

But methinks some will say, John Bunyan offers further in this matter, page
101. viz. When Christ's Disciples plucked the ears of Corn, and were charged by
the Pharisees with breach of the Sabbath, Matthew. 12.1, 6. Their Lord excuses
them, and rebukes their Adversaries; saying, Have ye not read what David did
when he was an hungered, and they that were with him, how he entered into the
House of God and did eat the Shewbread, which was not lawful for him to eat,
neither for them that were with him, but only for the Priests? Or, have you not
read in the Law, how that on the Sabbath Day, the Priests in the Temple,
profane the Sabbath and are blameless: Why blameless says John Bunyan?)
because they did it in order to the Edification of the People; From whence he
concludes, If Laws and Ordinances have been broken, and the breach of them born
with, when the profit and edification of the People came in competition, how
much more may we have Church Communion where no Law is transgressed thereby?

Answ. Yes surely; For where there is no Law, there is no Transgression; there
cannot be in that any sin.

But John Bunyan has forgot in his Conclusion the matter in hand, which is not
whether we may have Church Communion where no Law is transgressed: (which he
needed not have taken such pains to prove) but whether we may have
Church Communion with persons not obedient to Baptism, which before has been
often proved a Command, yea, a necessary Command, and confessed by himself to
belong to all Disciples, (and so also undoubtedly intended by him in this
Reason) according to the written Word, wherefore he pleads for doing
otherwise than it was written; and does tell you (but how truly you may judge)
Laws and Ordinances have been broken, and the breach of them born with, when
the profit of the People and their edification came in competition; which it
seems John Bunyan prefers before the honor of God: when he conceits there may
be Profit and Edification, he will break even Laws and Ordinances to carry on
his design; to whom verily it will one day be said, Who has required this at
your hand? Isa. 1.12. to break my Laws for your own profit? When you did
pretend to worship me, did not you serve your selves, Zech. 7.6. yea, although
it reached to the contempt of my Laws? You will, it seems, make them give place
(to use John Bunyan's own words) for the advancing of your selves.

Will not this (in a wise man's judgment) be hard to be answered, when the God
of Heaven shall plead in the defense of his holy Laws: the Disciples plucking
the ears of Corn will not justify it; for know, that was no sin upon the
account of any Law of God, they might eat, yea, take their food on the Sabbath
day, there was no illegality therein.

But if here you ask, Why Christ did not tell the Pharisees so?

I answer, That he knowing the hardness of their hearts, endeavored rather to
convince them, by the instances of such things as were allowed by themselves:
As Paul to the Athenians, Act. 17. alleges the sayings of their own Poets: So
does Christ here, yet not allowing any disobedience; no not in the Priests, who
John Bunyan is pleased to say were blameless, because they did it in order to
the Edification of the People.

But I will say they were blameless, because they did it in order to the Law of
God, Numb. 28.9. which required the Offerings to be made on the Sabbath day; so
that although the act considered simply, viz. the slaying the Offering, etc.
was a profanation of the Sabbath, yet in that it was the Offering-Sacrifice,
they were blameless, as aforesaid, because God (the great Lawgiver) required
it, as our Savior gives us the like instance of the Circumcising a man on the
Sabbath day, which in that it was God's Command to be done on the Eighth day,
was no breach of the Sabbath when it happened to be then done.

As for the instance of David, although I might say something in the case,
seeing our Savior does not justify it, but says it was unlawful, I shall
conclude that the like may be said of John Bunyan's Church Communion, that he
does and teaches that which is not lawful to be done; wherefore at his peril
it will be for teaching men to break Christ's Commands, Matthew. 5.19. although
Edification be his pretense.

Reas. 7. Wherein now leaving him, I come to his 7th Reason, viz. Therefore I
am for holding Communion thus, because Love, which above all things we are
commanded to put on, is of much more worth than to break about Baptism.

This is the substance of this Reason, although many words are used therein to
no purpose; wherefore I will in short answer, That I confess Love to be an
eminent duty; it would be too tedious for me to set forth the Encomiums
thereof, I wish heartily that it was more found amongst Saints; Concerning
whom, I pray God their Love may abound yet more and more.

But let me tell John Bunyan, Love has its boundaries, and marks of
demonstration^ wherefore herein I shall say with the Apostle, 1 John 5.2, 3. By
this we know that we love the Children of God, when we love God and keep its
Commandments; for this is the love of God, that we keep his Commandments.
Otherwise (whatsoever we pretend) we neither love God, nor the Children of God:
for as love to God, so love to the Children of God, is inconsistent with
disobedience to God's Commands.

Wherefore to John Bunyan's pretense, viz. That Love is of much more worth than
Baptism, and that we are Commanded above all things to put it on.

I must tell him, it is of more worth than Faith, 1 Cor. 13, 13. and if above
all things, thou above Faith to be put on, yet I suppose John Bunyan will not
allow in this case Church Communion without Faith, which may as well be urged
from this Reason; but herein, as in all, a Preacher of the Gospel, should learn
rightly to divide the Word of Truth; the greater is not only demonstrated, but
preserved many times by that which is lesser, as Life by food, etc.

Reas. 8. But John Bunyan in his 8th Reason, page 119. would have you know,
That for God's People to divide into parties, or shut each other from
Church Communion, though in greater Points, and higher pretenses than this of
Water Baptism, has heretofore been counted carnal, and the actors therein
Babish-Christians, etc.

Answ. I confess this looks more like an Argument of weight, than any
heretofore alleged; For, if this be true, he says something to the purpose:
for it must be granted, that what was in the Primitive Churches accounted
Carnal, must so be accounted now: But, Praise a fair day at night. The end
tries all things. I am sure that to shut out of Communion for the neglect of
Baptism was never accounted Carnal, for in those days, by John Bunyan's
Confession, page 91. Water Baptism went before Church Communion, and therefore
according to this Argument it ought to do so now.

But he says, That to shut out of Communion upon greater Points, and higher
pretenses than Water Baptism, was then reckoned Carnal.

But by John Bunyan's favor, it is untrue; The Apostle himself commanded to
withdraw from every Brother that walks disorderly, not according to their
traditions, 2 Thessalonians. 3.6. To shut such out of Communion it seems was not
Carnality, but according to the mind of God's holy Spirit; and those that deny
Baptism, are guilty of that disorder, as has been already proved; yea, it must
be so; for John Bunyan confesses, page 123. That Baptism is an holy Ordinance,
which to neglect and despise, is disorder and unholiness, and the persons
guilty thereof, therefore to be shuned.

But John Bunyan, to confirm his assertion, tells you, That Paul, Apollo,
Cephas, and Christ, were doubtless higher things than those about which we
contend; yet when they made divisions about them, they were sharply rebuked.

But as his Falsehood, so his Craft is discovered; For that division in Corinth,
was not about higher things than Baptism, neither did it extend to breach of
Communion. As for Paul, Apollo, Cephas, and Christ, they were neither of them
denied, there was no higher Points in Question, neither (as to their division)
are they charged with the denial of any Doctrine, or any practice in Worship.

But their case was thus; they were it seems puffed up with pride and strove
for superiority, wherein they took advantage by the eminency of their
Ministers, who had been conversant amongst them; As the Bishop of Rome at this
day says, I am of Cephas, and thereupon challenges the Primacy; so they said,
some were of Paul, some of Apollo, and some of Christ, which in truth the
Apostle sharply reprehends; but if either of them had been denied, and the
Church had called such a person to account for his denial, and (if persisting
therein) shut him out of Communion, this would not have been accounted Carnal
proceeding, although John Bunyan is pleased further to say, Let Paul, Cephas;
or Christ himself be the burden of thy song, yet the heart from whence they
flow is Carnal, etc.

I hope he does not mean that the heart is carnal, that obeys the Doctrine of
Paul, Cephas, or Christ, or that separateth from a person denying Paul, Cephas,
or Christ; this would be too great presumption, whereof when I would clear him
in my thoughts, (or, to prevent it) he appears guilty of great wickedness, and
impudence; for he is bold to say, page 120. Let the cry be never so loud,
Christ, Order, the Rule, the Command, or the like, Carnality is the bottom, and
they are but babies that do it. Here John Bunyan leaves out, Paul, Apollo, and
Cephas, and well he may, if it be but carnality and childishness to follow
Christ, Order, the Rule, or the Commands.

I wonder what John Bunyan would have us follow, or who would he have us
separate from, or what must we respect? if neither Christ, Order, the Rule, or
a command be any thing with him; what, must fancy hear the sway against all,
which many times is grossly stupefied; and verily it is so in John Bunyan,
otherwise he would not have spoken thus: And also further to add, That the
great division at Corinth was helped forward by Water Baptism, telling you the
Apostle intimates as much, when he says, Were ye baptized in the Name of Paul?

Who would have thought to have heard such unsound speeches, such perverse
words from one that acknowledges Baptism to be an holy Ordinance of Christ? Is
it likely divisions should be helped forward by an holy Ordinance? does Paul
intimate the same? nay, he does urge the contrary, even by the aforesaid words;
for when the Corinthians being puffed up with pride, and seeking for
superiority, one pretending to be of Paul, and another of Apollo: Paul seeks to
diswade them thencefrom, and to convince them of their folly: He propounds
these Questions; viz. Is Christ divided?
Was Paul Crucified for you? Or,
Were you baptized in the Name of Paul?


John Bunyan might as well have said, the division was helped forward by
Christ: There is as much to that purpose intimated in those words, Is Christ
divided? as in these, Were ye baptized in the Name of Paul? But the truth is,
Paul endeavored to put them in mind that there is but one Christ, that neither
himself, Apollo, or Cephas, were Crucified for them: And also one Baptism, they
were not baptized into the Name of any but Christ; wherefore he exhorts them to
leave off their folly and pride, and walk in love as they were commanded, but
not to slight Baptism, as John Bunyan (whose tongue has no bounds) is pleased
to say Paul did, making no matter at all thereof in respect to
Church Communion. But I wish he may be ashamed of his thus wresting the
Scriptures, and the intentions of the Apostle, who always spoke reverently
with an holy estimation of Baptism; not like John Bunyan, who in a little
Treatise both commends and depraves it, thereby rendering himself conspicuous
for his instability.

But if you ask why the Apostle spoke after that manner, saying, I thank God I
baptized none but Crispus and Gaius, etc.

Know, it was not because he made no matter thereof as to Church Communion, but
to take away the occasion of their contention, as he declares himself, lest any
should say, I baptized in my own Name.

And whereas John Bunyan seems to take advantage at those words, I know not
whether I baptized any other; And from thence concludes (contrary to the
Apostles thoughts) That he did not heed who were baptized by any body; as much
as if he should say, that he did not heed whether they were baptized or no.

I must answer; That I wonder any wise man should urge such a Conclusion from
Paul's words* especially John Bunyan, who confesses Baptism is an holy
Ordinance, and was obeyed by the Corinthians: and if so, Paul must needs know
they were all baptized, and then no matter by whom, viz. which of the Apostles:
But to take away that occasion of boasting concerning himself, he tells them he
did not know whether he baptized any but the persons aforenamed; which is no
strange thing for a Minister to be ignorant of; for unless he keep't a
Register, how should he remember it? There be some in our days that dare not
slight Baptism touching Church Communion, yet can say in this case, as Paul did.

Further; whereas it is alleged that Paul said, I was not sent to Baptize, but
to Preach.

Know, herein he did not slight Baptism, but placed it in its due station; That
Paul was sent to baptize, is evident; for he tells you whom he did baptize; and
if he had no Commission for it, then it may be truly said, he baptized in his
own Name: But he intends that he was not principally sent to Baptize, but to
Preach, as he says in another case, 1 Timothy 2.14. The Man was not deceived, but
the Woman: Whence you have the same terms, which must be understood, the Man
was not primarily deceived, but the Woman (as the Text says) was first in the
transgression.

In the next place John Bunyan begins to flatter, and tells you, He would not
teach men to break the least of God's Commands, and acknowledges therein
Baptism to be an holy Ordinance* page 123. A duty enjoined to such as receive
the Gospel, page 122. But it is the abuse thereof, he says, (wherein he
himself is apparently guilty) that he complains against; and therein forgets
himself, and says, (without any ground or truth) What is Baptism? Baptism is
nothing.

What, John Bunyan! A holy Ordinance, nothing! an enjoined Duty, nothing! Where
are we now?

He answers, page 124. That it is no strange thing, for God cried out against
his own Institutions when abused by the People, Isa. 1.11, 12. To what purpose
is the multitude of your Sacrifices, etc. says the Lord?

Reply. But is not this John Bunyan's blindness, or at least his crafty
endeavors to insinuate his own opinion? Did ever God cry out against his own
Institutions? against his own Appointments? No: verily the complaint was
against the People, that they performed such things contrary to God's
Institutions; and therefore it is not as J. Bunyan presumes to say, that the
Ordinances are nothing; but to what purpose are they? they are vain, and why
so? because not performed according to the Institution; wherefore the Lord
adds, Who has required these things at your hands?

It must be known that God appoints the manner of the performance as well as
the matter, yea, the qualifications of the persons performing it; whereof if
any be wanting, we swerve from God's Institution; wherein I will say of
Baptism, that although it is a necessary duty, yet if it be not accompanied
with such qualifications as God requires, it profits not, it is in vain. So
also may be said of Faith, which without works is dead, Jam. 2.20. yet verily
it would be strange presumption for a man to say in general, Faith is nothing;
yea, if those Israelites whom Isaiah speaks of, had walked honestly as to men
(which it seems they did not) and denied the offering Sacrifices, the
observation of the Sabbath, and the appointed Feast: I appeal to all sober
Christians whether therein they would have been blameless; No sure: God often
punishes for the neglect of those Institutions, and therefore I shall conclude
the answer to this Reason, with our Savior's words, Matthew. 23.23. These things
you ought to do, and not to leave the other undone.

I come now to his 9th Reason, page 125. which is this, viz. If we shall reject
visible Saints by calling Saints that have Communion with God, that have
received the Law at the hand of Christ, that are of holy Conversation amongst
men, they desiring to have Communion with us, as much as in us lies; we take
from them their privileges, and the blessings to which they are born of God.

Answ. Oh man full of all subtilty, how long will thou labor to deceive! Can a
man (considering what has been said) be a visible Saint, that denies Christ's
Holy Ordinances? Can we be assured that a man has Communion with God, who
rejects his Counsel? Can a man be said to receive the Law at the hands of
Christ, that denies his Institutions, and lives in disobedience to a Duty
enjoined? Can they truly desire Communion, that refuse to obey Baptism when
required? What Paul says to the Corinthians, and other Saints, is nothing to
our present purpose, for they were all baptized by your own confession: And
what you say afterward concerning the Supper is as little, unless you could
prove that unbaptized persons have right thereto, and ought to participate
thereof; which when you do, you may peradventure have a further answer.

Touching what you say further in this Reason, stuffed with Eighteen Fancies of
your own brain, I think a wise man will not judge me obliged to answer in
particular: Wherefore I will only say, That it seems like the design of Baalam,
who (of old) was intended to curse Israel; only herein appears a difference,
God met Baalam of old and forbade him, thereby restraining his purposed
designs. But it seems as if God has given this man over, to belch out the
fruit of his own imaginations, that in him might be verified the prediction of
our Savior, Matthew. 5.11. They shall speak all manner of evil against you
falsely for my Name's sake: Which to effect, he is bold to affirm, That
Christians have been the cause of all the Judgments we have felt, and do groan
under. It is no new thing, the Heathens of old were of the same mind, and
thereby raised the Primitive persecutions: and we see the Devil plays the
same Game now: whereto I shall only say in the words of Michael, Jud. 9. The
Lord rebuke thee.

I come now to his 10th and last Reason, page 128. Which is grounded partly
upon the thoughts of the World, and partly upon a supposed Condescension, so
far as to commit our Souls to the Ministry of unbaptized persons.

Whereto I shall answer; As to the first, We ought to obey God, rather than to
please men, Act. 4.19. And as to the second, I say, wh^^ we commit our Souls to
such persons, we (...) then have Communion with them: But at present I shall
offer John Bunyan's own words, page 133. It must be the prudence of every
Community, to preserve its own unity in peace and truth, and not to suffer such
confounded Doctrines, as eat out the bowels of a Church.

Wherefore John Bunyan and his Doctrine ought to be exploded, as a detected
Gangrene increasing unto more ungodliness, 2 Timothy 2.18. For which purpose let
us observe the Apostles advice, 1 Thessalonians. 5.21. Try all things, and hold fast
that which is good. The God of Heaven teach us by his Holy Spirit, to try those
things that differ, and to approve what is most excellent. Amen.

FINIS.
ERRATA.
Page 12. line 1. for the, read that. line 10, 11. f. Author says, r. Author's
faith. P. 16. l. 4. r. of Christ. P. 19. in the 2 last lines, from pass to,
ought all to be left out until thou come to line 18 of page 20. the Articles
about Justification, etc. P. 20. l. 19. r. concerning. P. 27. l. 24. f.
obstinay, r. obstinacy. P. 43. l. 5. f therein; I readily etc. r. wherein I
etc. P. 44. the quotations p. 122, 123. in l. 17. are to be applied to l. 13
and 14. P. 56. l. 13. r. instructi^^ l. ult. f. and 1. Luke. P. 63. l. 3. r.
cannot but wonder.

Books Printed for Francis Smith at the Elephant and Castle near the Royal
Exchange in Cornhil.
A New and Useful Concordance to the Bible, with the chief Acceptations, and
various Significations contained therein. Also marks to distinguish the
Commands, Promises and Threatenings; with a Collection of those
Scripture-Prophesies which relate to the Call of the Jews, and the Glory that
shall be in the latter days: To which is now added, near Nine Thousand
Scriptures, omitted in the former Edition, with the Addition also of the
Scripture-Similies and Synonimous Phrases Alphabetically digested; With the
Collection of the Names and Titles given to Jesus Christ, and the Appellation
given to the Church of God in the Scriptures. Recommended to the studious
Christian, by Dr. Owen.

A Treatise of Baptism; wherein that of Believers and that of Infants, is
examined by the Scriptures, with the History of both out of Antiquity, making
it appear, That Infants Baptism was not practiced for 300 years, nor enjoined
as necessary by the Popes Canons 400 years after Christ, with the fabulous
Traditions and Erroneous Grounds upon which, it with Gossips, Chrisoms,
Exorcisms, Consignations, Baptizing of Churches and Bells, and other Popish
Rites are founded: and that the famous Waldensian and old British Churches and
Christians witnessed against it; with the Examination of the stories of Thomas
Munster and John of Leyden.

Symptoms of Growth, and Decay in Godliness; in 80 signs of a Living and Dying
Christian, with the Causes of Decay, and Remedies for Recovery.

The Schollar's Companion: Or, a little Library, containing all the
Interpretations of Hebrew and Greek words in the Bible, both in Latin and
English in great variety, by means whereof the unlearned may easily attain unto
the knowledge of the Holy Scriptures in their Original Tongues; a Work very
useful for every useful Christian.

Truth's Champion; wherein are made plain these particulars: First, That Christ
died for all: Of his Power given out to all: Of Election: Of Predestination: Of
Baptism, etc. The Copy of which Book was found hid in an old Wall near
Colchester in Essex.

Scripture-Redemption, freed from Men's Restriction; being the substance of
several Conferences about the Death of our Dear Redeemer, and the Controversies
which are the Constant Concomitants of it.

The Mystery of Astronomy, made plain to the meanest Capacity, by an
Arithmetical Description of the Celestial and Terrestrial Globes, by way of
Questions and Answers; The Wonderful Works of God from the Earth his Footstool
to the Throne of Heaven; with Divine Observations on every part.

The Popish Labyrinth; wherein is made manifest, that the Papists are entangled
in the Fundamental Articles of their Faith, that the Church cannot Err: Written
in Dutch by that Holy and Learned man, Dr. Simon Episcopius. To which is added,
The Life and Death of the Author.


