THE CONDUCT AND CHARACTER Of Count NICHOLAS SERINI, Protestant Generalissimo
of the Auxiliaries in Hungary, The most Prudent and resolved Champion of
Christendom.

With his Parallels SCANDERBEG and TAMBERLAIN.

Interwoven with the principal Passages of the Christians and Turks Discipline
and Succ^ss, since the Infidels first Invasion of Europe, in the year 1313.

London, Printed for Sam. Speed, at the Rainbow in Fleet Street, 1664.

Imprimatur,

Ex AEd. Lambeth. Feb. 24. 1663. G. Stradling, S. T. P. Rev. in Christo Pat. D.
Gilb. Archiep. Cant. a Sac. Domestic.

TO All the Admirers of Count NICHOLAS SERINI, The Great Champion of
Christendom.
IT being as convenient to divert a discontented people in dangerous curiosity
with Foraign discourses, as ^t is necessary to spend their unquiet idleness
upon Foraign employments; there is nothing of more remark to offer the
speculative and the discoursive in this Juncture of Affairs, than the grand
concerns of Christendom, in reference to the general invasion ma^e upon it ^y
the Infidels, and the u^a^i^ou^ defense ma^aged for t^y Believers; among whom
the Ex^^ll^nt Count Serini seems to be the He^^^, upon whom Providence has
devol^^^ the ^ate of Europe, whos^ C^aracter and Portra^^^ure, though taken
with the co^siderable disad^a^tages of distance, common Fame, an^ var^^^s
prepossessions and apprehensions, yet upon the review of the (...) piec^
resulting from these twenty years partial Relations, seems to promise the
Ingenious and Inquisitive peruser, Th^se nine particulars, viz.

1. A Brief summary of the Turkish affairs, since their first appearance in the
world, Anno 1092. to this tim^.

2. An exact account of their several attempts upon Christendom.

3. A satisfactory recapitulation of their several successes against ours, and
ours against them, f^^ three (...) y^ars t^gether.

4. A ver^ seasona^le Discours^ o^ the (...) Pers^ns, who in ev^ry Ag^ we^e
^a^sed ^^ ^^eck their (...); (...) wi^h the ways and metho^s (...) for these
four Ages a^^ G^^^ra^io^s.

5. The part^^ular servi^^s o^ the Famou^ Serini's Ance^^ors, h^s Grandfather,
and Father, upon the same account.

6. An Historical Narrative of the incompa^a^l^ Cou^ts own bra^e undertakings
from July 16. 1663. when he first set out against the Mahumetans, to this
present.

7. Most useful observations of his great Prudence and Conduct in all his
exploits.

8. His Temper, Education, and ^^rtues, em^^ent in his Actions.

9 His great Parallel Scanderbeg.

Now not to flatter this little attempt for the worlds satisfaction, i^ that
great persons particular Emi^ences of Incli^ation or Action; I shall only
resu^e the foresaid particulars: And say, 1. ^ho would not have always before
him a br^e^ Survey of their original, progr^sse, and successes, that manage so
great a part of the world? 2. Who would not compare this dreadful i^^asion with
those that have gone before? And, 3. Observe by what sort of person^, by what
Policies, by what Counsels, methods and designs, that grand Invader has now
twenty six times since his first assault upon the Christian world, been forced
to his own Port? Moreover, 5, 6, 7. Seeing Serini is the great name that
upholds d^ooping Christianity (^ow the the a^^ination is broke in upon it, that
makes desolate) who would not know what he is, o^ whom des^ende^, what his
Ancesto^s have done for the same great cause? what his (...)? what his
cons^itution? what his Religion? what his hopes and virtues? In a word, what
manner of Hero he is, upon whose success or overthrow the Western world seems
to stand or fall? Besides that, the curious will here find History to ^ass
away the time; the Gentleman a great example to live by; the Noble man, great
Actions to imita^e; the ^oul^ier and Statesman, many rules (...) of Peace and
^ar to (...); the undertakers in that cause, (...) Commander to (...) under;
and the p^rp^exed (...) Gentl^man (...) Protestant to d^pend (...); Here you
may see what this great man is, and what all men should be; here is an exact
model of eminent and great Virtues, draw^ with as equal design for others
instruction, as his Renown; to e^noble those that Read his Actions, as well as
celebrate him that performed them; that Christe^dom may be pr^pled with
Serin^'s, and it is Champions grow with its dangers, which are now as
considerable as they have been these hundred years, the Grand Seignior
straining himself for an universal and complete Conquest this Spring,
threatening Europe with no less then three hundred thousand men, making the most
dreadful provisions of Ammunition and store, that ever were heard of; layi^g
the most dangerous plot, and co^triving the most terrible co^federacy against
us that ever was thought of, taking the most unhappy occasions and advantages
of divided interests and parties that ever was offered him; and offering the
greatest temptations (those of Liberty and Privilege) that Christendom can now
lie under, to revolt and Apos^asie: yet for our support, we ^ear every day that
our illustrious Personage goes on with success, has taken in the Upper and
Lower Zigeth, where his Ancestors laid their Bones; and (though deluded by
those of Five-K^rke, to the loss of many brave persons that fell under their
walls) laid that place in Ashes, bestowing the infinite Treasure of the Town
upon his deserving followers, whose Army now fills with persons of Resolution,
that aim at spoil or honor: And indeed upon his late Victories, his friends the
Hungarians and Imperialists are so resolved, and his enemies so awakened, that
he sees he must come to an engagement, and therefore he has dra^^ (...) to
prepare himself accor^^^gly. Our Great God, the cause and p^aye^s ^f
Christendom, the Si^s and Bla^phemies of Infidels, make ^is success as great as
his cause is goo^.

So prays O. C.

The Conduct and Character of Count Nicholas Serini.
IT is not a more general observation of the What Heroes were always ra^sed to
oppose the Turksinvasions, and ^ow they did it.
Physician, that in every Country Poisons grow up with their Antidote^, and
Distempers with their Remedies* than it is an approved Maxim of the Divine and
Politician, that in every Age the disturbers of the Church are poyzed with its
Champions; and no sooner appear the Boutefeus and incendiaries of an Age, than
they are matched with its Worthies an^ Heroes: for when the Turks (the poor
remains of the Ten T^^bes le^ Captive under Salmanass^^, an^ lost in the
Barbarism and desolation of Scythia) forced by their wants, (...). The Turks
original and growth*
and encouraged by their hopes, broke out of that sheath (as they call it) or
indeed Sword of Nations, upon the pleasure and plenty of Asia (as these cold
Countries, as fruitful in inhabitants, as they are barren in Provision, every
Age send forth some superfluous thousands to seek their Bread) and after some
vagaries under Tangrolipix his conduct, erected to themselves a Government,
both upon the Persians estate, whom they pretend to assist, and his enemies,
whom they over^hrew, to the ^error of weaker Princes, and the disturbance of
the most Potent Cutlum^ses, that noble Persian checked the encroachments, and
secured Their ch^^k and opposition.
their Government, by altering their Religion, dividing their opinions,
injealousing their Chieftains, betraying their weakness, Debauching their
Spirits, and buying off their Leaders, Anno 1121. the Barbaro^s multitude being
reduced by some Rules of Religion and Policy, to that Order and Discipline that
threa^^ed the neighbour-Powers, awaked the brave Emperor Diogenes, and the
resolute Pa^riarch Simon, to engage the Christian world, the one by solemn
Embassies, the other by devour Letters, against this common enemy, which in a
General Council at Claremont, Voted an unanimous assistance (upon Peter the
Hermits suggestions, and Pope Gregory's injunctions) for an Holy War, under
Robert Duke of Normandy, Baldwy^ Earl of Flanders, Henry King of England,
Godfrey Duke of Bulloyn (a War managed by five Kings of France, six Western
Emperors, eight Earls of Flanders and Brabant, six Knights of Rhodes and
Malta, five Kings of England; with an Oath, not to desist until Christendom
were delivered, to the loss of 36000 English, 45000 French, 32000 Italians, and
as many more of other Nations, for the space of two hundred years, viz. from
the year 1090. to the year 1290.) to relieve the Greek Church, recover the Land
of Promise, rescue the Holy S^pulchre, punish the Saracen Blasphemies, and
propagate the Christian truth; a design that stopped the growing Power of those
Barbarians, though it could not suppress it; because, neither their sins, nor
our repentance were yet ready for vengeance or relief, because our Armies were
debauched, our Leaders were unskilful, our Councils divided, our Commanders
unequal, our friends were false, our designs particular, our Emperors and
Popes ^ealous, the Clymate unsuitable, and the people perfidious, provoking at
once the wrath of heaven and the malice of enemies.

Neither had these wild invaders of mankind sooner tri^mpned over this
Christian opposition, than they were The settlement of the Ottomon Family.
stopped in their career by the revolutions of Egypt, the Revolts of Alepp^ and
Damas^us, the invasions of Tartary; and their own Mutinies, which trans^erred
the usurpation from the Zelz^ccian family, and Tangrolipix his line, to the
Oguzian and Ottoman, 1300. who though allied to the Emperor, famous for his
Victories, beloved by his people, and as capable of laying the foundation of an
August Empire, as any that sat upon that Throne, being invited by one party of
Christians to suppress another (for he was the first that was invited Their
first invasion o^ Europe stopped by M. Paleologus, and how.
to Europe, and that by the Catalonians) yet was matched by Michael Cos, and
Paleologus, who bought him before Nice, surprised him before Neapolis, diverted
him by Rebellion in his own Family, overcame him by Prayer and Devotion,
stopped up his correspondencies and supplies, perplexed him with Innovations in
Religion, with envy and fear, suggestion and distrust; tolled him on to great
streights, and softened his hardened people with the Luxury and Delicacy of
Europe.

Anno 1349. His rich Brother Orchades The second stopped by Asa^, and how.
succeeds him, who first strangled his relations, took Nice, Nicomedia,
Corusinia, Calliopolis, by his Silver, rather than his Steel, (for those places
were rather bought than Conquered) yet was matched by the Graecians Discipline
and Order, the Thracians wiles and Stratagems, Asans yeildings and Retreats,
until the short-sighted Barbarian was toyled further then he could fairly
retreat.

Anno 1364. Fierce Amurath surprised Their third att^mpt stopped by (...) (...)
how.
Rh^destium by three hundred soldiers, that got in under the notion of
Workmen; took in Adrianople, reduce^ Servia, threa^ed Bulgar^a and M^^^avia;
when by the Christian Practices, A^adi^ revolts, Asia is divided, and the
fierce man himself charmed by the Despots Daughter of By^anti^m.

Anno 1390. Wa^like Bajazet proceeds (...) undertaking blasted by Tamerlain.
in his Conquest of Servia without control, when it pleased God to raise
Tamerlain the great Chams Son-in-Law, who with 600000 Foot, and 300000 Horse
(that wrath of God, as he called himself, and not man) shook the Tu^kish
Empire, ^. Out-doing them in his Discipline (for he was the most complete
Soldier, for the Practical part of ranging and Disciplining an Army, in the
World.) 2. Shutting out of his Camp all their Spies, by building houses His
method.
out of it for all strangers, and keeping his men to their Quarters upon pain
of Death. 3. By unwearied Inrodes upon the enemies, whom he ty^ed with
surprises. 4. By gaining time to observe their methods and weaknesses. 5. By
delaying the War until the Tu^ks men and Treasure was spent. And 6. By his
tenderness toward those that yielded, and his cruelty toward those that
withstood him (for he would the first day of any Siege, hang out a White Flag,
to denote mercy to all upon ^urrender: The second, hang out a Red one, to
intimate favor toward all but the Chief: And the third, hang out his black
one, to signify the dismal condition of all.

Anno 1405. Resolute Mahomet made Wallachia Tributary, threatened Their fifth
exploit diverted by Musa, and how.
Transylvania; when lo, Musa marries the King of Wallachia's Daughter,
revolteth from his Master, embroyleth the Army, keeps correspondence with the
Christian Princes, betrayeth his Lords interest, and indangereth the Ottoman
Empire, putting Mahomet upon beginning a War, which he lived not to finish.

Anno 1422. Cruel Amurath setleth himself in the Empire of Greece, Their sixth
enterprise spoiled by brave Hu^iades, and ^ow.
and prepares for that of the whole world, when Mustapha Rebels in Adrianople,
and Servi^s in Caramania, and Vladislaus King of Hungary, with other
Christians, watchful upon these advantages, spoil Servia: Hu^iades, that brave
Soldier, defends Transylvania, drills on the enemy to a toil, where he fought
them three days with equal success, until his Reserves and the Christian
Captives turned the Scales, and he overthrew Abadin, Basta, Mesites, and
Amurath himself at Castron, leaving 79000 Turks dead upon the place, and at
last is made Governor of Hungary, with the unanimous consent of all the Estates
(a way now neglected) where by his moderation, and that persuasion he had that
every one might be saved in his own Religion, and that as God had made many
people, so he appointed, or at least allowed of many Religions, he cemented
their divided Interests, closed their great distances, raised their dismantled
Fortifications, maintained their just Privileges, and kept out their numerous
enemies, until Constantinople was taken, May 29. 1450. Peloponnesus was
undermined, Belgrade yeil'ed, and Trapezond submitted to the Musulmens
successes, which yet were poized by the irruptions of the 320000 Persians, by
the Confederacies of the Papacy and the Empire, the Apostasy of Vlados, the
attempts of the Venetians, the courage and resolution of the Great Master of
the Rhodes and the Empero^ Mathias, and the most dangerous Mutiny that ever was
among the Janissaries, who its expected will at last pull down this Empire.

Anno 1481. Bajazet the second Their irruption ^indered by the famous
Scanderbeg, and what particular way.
was left Master of the Eastern Empire, and fair for the Western; but Egypt and
Caramania revolt under Selimus, the Turkish Court differ about succession, and
the Emperor Ferdinand lays hold of these occasions to recover Podolia, and
strengthen Christendom, by a General Diet a^ Vienna, a General Council at
Constance, a General correspondence with Persia.

Anno 1520. Honest Selimus would have been contented with his Ancestors
Acquists and Dominions, but Ishmael di^^urbeth him at home, and ^aurus in
Egypt; and the C^^i^ians held Intelligence with both, to improve those defeats
which B^ave Scanderbeg had given, 1. By his vigilance, who slept not two hours
in a night. 2. By his activity, being always upon the enemy before they
expected, till he reduced Epirus. 3. By his vehemence, who fought alalways till
the blood gushed out at his Nostril^. 4. By his Interest, being made the Head
of the Christian League. 4. By his Intelligence, keeping many Turkish Officers
in Pay. 5. By his resolution against all over^ures of Peace, twice given
Mustapha, th^ice Amurath, and four times to Mahomet the second.

But Solomon the M^gnificent, Anno 1520 ^ppears in ^he greatest (...) and Power
of any (...) since Ottoman: And with him, rises one Gazelles, Governor of
Syria, that was The great invasion of Solomon the Magnificent, checked by the
u^^ted forces of Christendom
born to humble him by a Revolt: ^allerius, Master of the Rhodes, that was made
to weaken him by a ^lout resistance, whom yet he overcomes; and called in by
Lewis of Hungary, and Ferdinand of Bohemia, who quarrelled about the Crown of
Hungary, l^yeth Siege to Vienna, but in vain; while the Lord Will. Rogandorff,
and Charles the Emperor, with the united forces of Christendom, amounting to
150000 men, chasti^e his insolency by Land, and De Auria corrects his Barbarous
ou^^ages by Sea, and the Persian diverts him in his own Coun^ry, as all the
Princes of Christendom, under the Marquess of Brandenburgh (notwithstanding the
French treachery, for which their Ambassador was murdered at Alba Regalis)
conspire against him, and that with success, while Bajazet is by them hired to
Rebel, and the Janissaries to Mutiny: And Don John of Austria gives him that
^errible blow at Lepanto, as the Venetians did at Cyp^u^: Of the first whereof
he would say, i^ was but the findging of his Beard; of the second, he confesled
it was the cutting off of a Limb.

Anno 1566. Selimus was bounded and limited by the unquiet Persian; and upon
the peace wit^ him, though the French favored him, Czarneckic was corrupted by
him, and his way by his means opened into Europe; yet the Palatine withstands
him, the Marquess of Breda way-layeth him, the Ordnance and Guns of Europ^
galled him, spoil and plunder ruined him, and so great preparations for Europe
weakened him.

Anno 1574. Simple Amurath the third was disturbed by the Persians; perplexed
by his Janissaries, invaded by the Cossacks, Tartarians, and Persians;
distracted with Egypt and Damascus, both fallen off; Confederated against by
Venice, the Empire, Italy, Poland, Denmark, France, Spain, who And their ^ast
adventures deseated by the family of ^erin^.
maintain 223000 men under Averspergh, Sizeg, Teuffenbach, who tired him out
with a wary War, till he had lost three hundred thousand men in two years upon
the Borders of Christendom.

Anno 1603. Proud Mahomet the third of that name, makes a League with the
Wallachians and Moldavians, ove^throweth the Lords Palfi and Swartzenburgh,
takes Strigonium and Buda, passes the Danow; yet Mansfield meets him in the
Field, Retez divides his Council, a Count of the Empire disposet^ his
Janissaries to a Tumult, and Serinus, the noble Ancestor and Grandfather o^
Count Peter Serini, whose Character we now offer to the world, forbideth his
growing greatness: for on the sixth of August 1567. the successful Infidel
besieged the Fort Sigeth, wherein this great Captain Serini was Governor, who
made many bold Sallies upon the enemy, took many Prisoners, and at one time
caused three hundred Turks to be beheaded; which so far enraged the Infidel,
that he placed his Batteries, and attempts with greater fury then before,
whereupon Serini burnt the Suburbs called the New-Town, and Retired to the Old;
which the Turks assaulted, and were so bravely received, that in on^ Storm they
lost two thousand men; yet the second time they carried it, forced Serini to
the Castle, against which the enemy planted a Battery, and gave one furious
A^taque, but were beaten off with great loss.

While this passed, S^lyman d^ed of a Bloody Flux (^ept. 4.) but Mahomet Easha
labou^ing as much as might ^e to keep his death conce^led from the Turks,
caused the Corpse (E^balmed, and Gloriously clo^thed) to be exposed in a d^rk
place to the People, as sitting on his Thron^, and the Basha himself with all
the usual Ceremonies and Reverence, signifying some matter of Privacy with him.
At length the Basha went out of the Ten^, wiping his eyes as if he had been
crying; which gave the Officers occasion to enquire, why he wept? To whom he
replied, That, It gri^ved his heart to think how many brave Soldiers would be
suddenly put to the Sword: for (says he) Solomon has made a deep and des^erate
Oath, that if this place be no^ taken in two days, every Colonel that bears any
charge in the attempt shall ^ertainly be put to death. Hereupon the Janissaries
fell into a direct Rage, and gave a fu^ious Assaul^, but were ^epulsed with
exceeding great loss: they had however (...) f^^e to the Castle; and now the
Noble Defender o^ (...) ^eeing his fate ^efo^e his eyes, called the ^^all
remainder of his (...) about hi^^ and exho^te^ them to ^^nd by him, and resolve
to dye with him. Whereupon, he clothed h^^self ^n a Violet-coloured Velvet
Suit, took ^he Key of the Castle, and ^ome Gold in his Pocket, caused the ^ates
to be opened, and the great Guns to be drawn thither, and discharged among the
enemy; and in a Cloud of Smoke he issued forth with his men among the Turks,
and fought till he was shot in the head. This was the end of the Valiant
Serini. It was reckoned that 20000 Turks were slain before this Fort. No sooner
was Serin^ fallen, ^ut the (...) thronging about the Cor^^, (...) ^ff his head,
and (...) one day after which, they sent it with a scoff to Maximilian the
Emperor.

Anno 1612. Achmet succeeded to the pleasures and delights, rather then the
honor or improvement of the Empire, which was then thought at its height, and
ready to fall with its own weight: for its distractions were many, its old
establishments were neglected, the brethren were preserved alive, and the
Government was ^umultua^ily transferred from Mustapha to Osman, and from him,
being strangled, to the renowned Morat, who died before Babylon 1640, much
lamented, where he designed the extirpation of the unruly Janissaries, and being
asked who should be his Successor, said suddenly, Will there be any more
worlds when I am dead? and from Morat to his brother Ibrahim, who observed the
peace The great Turks eye upon Christendom these 20 ^ears.
made with Europe 1612. inviolably, had not his dear Sultaness and son been
taken by the Galleys of Malta, and he thereby provoked to threaten Christendom,
and attaque Candia and Da^matia with success, until the Janissaries discontent
depose him, anno 1648. and set up He changed his Name at his Coronation, to
gain reverence, and to engage fortune and success, complying with a Prophecy
of one named Mahomet's great Victories.
Ali Solomon, otherwise called Mahomet the fourth, the present Sultan in his
stead.

Who being according to the usual custom saluted by the Janissaries and the
Basha's, and applauded by the people, and crowned 1656. was guided and
instructed by his brave Mother, and able Vizier, a person of as great conduct
and success, as of good age and experience, who instilled to him those noble
Principles and Maxims that not only bear up the declining grandeur of Turkey,
but threaten Christendom, as he promised by his active Disposition, and
Masculine Genius to bear up the decaying spirits of that Empire, to awake their
former Valor and Prudence, so (notwithstanding he was severely exercised with
two dismal overthrows, the one at Foggia, the other at the The straigh^ of
Hellespont joining Europe to Asia, famous for Hero and Leander, Sestos and
Abydos, if not more for the two Castles built there, with the Grand S^igniors
own discretion, who laid the method of them, and was present when the^ were
begun and finished.
Darda^e^^oes) ^e surp^ized Vesp^in, made inroads to the Empire suppressed the
great ^u^ult in the year -- 56. (that made away 16 B^shaw's, one Vs^er, forcing
the Sul^ana and Mu^ti to the Seraglio) prosecuteth the War against the
Ven^tians in Dalmatia and Candia, reduces the revolt at D^mas^us, and pitching
upon the able Bashaw of Damascus for his prime Vizier at 24 years of age, who
now commands in Hungary, allayed and awed the mutinous Janissaries by his
severity and munificence, obliged the people by an impartial justice; and
though he was twice defeated by Moccenigo at He himself looking on.
the Port, and deprived by him of Lemnos and Tenedos, yet training his men up
to European services, he regained Tenedos while the Venetians were fetching
fresh water, reformed the sloth Epicutism and bribery that had debauched his
Court (denying himself the great example the ordinary use of those pleasures,
for whose excesses his Predecessors are so infamous) restored their lost
Discipline, frighted the Persian to a peace, made way to his present
Enterprises by inroads into Transy^vania, (against R^g^tski, who without his
pri^ity had engaged in the Polish War) which the ^mper^ur neither assi^^ing
effectually, nor yet deserting The f^^st occasion of this last d^eadful design
upon Christendom.
the Turk, observing his unde^handdealing, having settled A^afti in that
Principality, takes that occasion to prosecute his old design upon Hungary and
Austria, which (when he had suppressed) the Bashaw of Aleppo, and his pretended
Sultan, by the courage and prudence of the present Vizier, at whose presence
the Rebels submitted to mercy, made use of that success to work the Persian to
a firm peace, deseated Almeri^ d' Este, the Venetian General of Candia,
disguised his preparations for War under pretenses of peace, and leagued
himself to the Hollanders and the English, whose late Revolutions he so much
admired, that he said, if fame belie him not, That if he were to choose either
his God or his Religion, ^e would choose the King of Englands; he having as
clear an apprehension of the affairs of Europe by his ancient league with
France, as we our selves, and observing the animosities and interest since the
last Emperors election at Frankford, and the last Popes at Rome, in compliance
with the amusing designs of France, begins at Adrianople under the pretense of
retiring from the toil to the pleasures of Government: embodying his Asian
forces at Belgrade, and settling Moravia and Wallachia, he pursues (with 250000
men, besides his Tartarian hirelings) to Hungary, where exceeding the bounds
set them by the old League, they first caressed the Inhabitants with wonderful
civility, and then fomented their animosities against the Germans, (which upon
the account of Religion, Inclination, Customs and Government, has been
ancient, but now improved by Montecuculi's Commission to be Generalissimo over
their forces) allowing liberty of conscience, and a general fair usage in point
of Taxes, (his common bait to discontented and debauched Estates) until upon an
inconsiderate Engagement of Count Forga^z, (who with a party of 7000 was only
to observe their motion, and relieve such places as the Infidel should att^q^e)
the Infidel at once provoked and encouraged with a Victory in passing the
Dano^, defieth the Emperor by catching off 800 prisoners heads before the
Emperors Ambassador and Christe^^ome it self, by this Letter.

Mahomet, Son of the Emperor, The great Turks defiance to Christendom.
Son of God, thrice heavenly, and thrice known by the renowned Emperor of the
Turks, King of Greece, Macedonia and Moldavia; King in Sama^ia and Hungary;
King of Great and Lesser Egypt; King of all the Inhabitants of the Earth, and
the Earthly Paradise; Guardian of the Sepulcher of thy God; Lord of the Tree of
Life; Lord of all the Emperors of the world, from the East, even to the West:
King of all Kings, Grand Persecutor of the Christians, and all the Wicked, the
Joy of the Flourishing Tree, the Chieftain and Guardian of thy Crucified God,
Lord of the hope of thy Nation:

WE send Greeting to thee, Emperor Leopold: If thou will be our Friend, and
submit to our Domination, then we will that thy Greatness be Ample.

Since these times, thou have violated and shun^ed our friendship, without
having ever been offended either by War, or the fighting of God: thou have
taken secret Designs with other Kings, and other Confederates, in envy to
shake off our Yoke, in which thou have done imprudently. This is it for which
thou and thy people ought to live in fear, and to have no other hope but death;
for which cause thou have prepared thy self. But we tell thee, that we will go
forth and be thy Conqueror, and we will pursue thee from the East even to the
West, and will make thee know our Majesty; even to the utmost Confines of the
Earth, thou shall know our effects to thy great damage: of which we assure
thee, and will have thee to expect our Greatness; thy hope shall melt away,
which thou have in thy Cities and Fortresses. We resolve absolutely to beat
down, and raz^ all that appears any thing considerable to thine eyes: and
thou should not expect any other thing or friendship, and should not put
confidence in thy strong Walls; for we have set up a resolution to destroy thee
without remedy. It pleases us to forage Germany, and to leave it behind us,
to the memory of our Bloody Sword, to the end all these things may be manifest
to all. It pleases us to establish our Religion, and root out thy Crucified
God; and we fear no colors, neither can there be any succor for thee, that
thou may escape our hands. I^ pleases us also to condemn to the Chain thy
holy Priests, and to deliver to the Dogs, and other savage Beasts, the D^gs of
thy Women: Therefore thou shall do very wisely if thou renounce thy Religion,
otherways we do order and appoint that all be delivered to the fire. This which
is said, may sa^isfie thee; and thou may comprehend by this if thou will,
what our Will is, and the things concerning which we have discovered the
disposition of our suspicion toward thee.

And as was foreseen by Monte^u^uli, (who clapped 1000 Germans, and
proportionable provision into that place) besieged Newhause, or Newhausel, (a
frontier fortification built very regularly upon a level in a morass,
consisting of six great Bulwarks with Flankers, well stored with Cannon, and
two Gates within a stones cast of the River Neutre, and eight miles off Waeg)
entrenching himself a little below the lower Gate, mounting 100 Cannons,
raising two great Batteries; and after this Summons, (Viz.

I that through the Grace of God, and through the Miracles of our Prophet, who
is a son of both Worlds, and by whom there is happiness and Glory; I that am
the first of the Council, and General of the most mighty Emperor of the Turks,
that is the King of all Kings upon Earth. To you Adam Forgatz, that are the
chief among the Nobility of Hungary, do make known, that through the Command of
my Gracious Lord, I am come with his Forces before Newhausel, to reduce it to
his obedience; Wherefore if you shall deliver up the place to us, you shall
have liberty to march out with what belongs to you from the Highest to the
Lowest, and to what place you please; and he that will rather s^ay, shall keep
his Goods and Estate: but if you will not yield, we will take it by force, and
every man of ye from the Highest to the Lowest shall be put to the Sword. If
the Hungarian^ did but know the good I^tentio^s of the Mighty Emper^ur, the^
and their ^hildren would ^less God for the^. Peace be to the Obed^ent.) with
three fierce assaults, (wherein he fills the trenches wit^ men) on the 9th of
August, the 9th and 19th of September, in the dead of night, his men crying,
Alla, Alla, and the Bas^a's themselves leading, wherein he lost 40000 men, he
carried the Town upon very fair terms offered, viz. That the Garrison should
march out with Colors flying, Drums beating, Match lighted, and ^ullets in
their mouth, Bag and Baggage, with a Convoy nine miles off to Comorra, and the
inhabitants have Indemnity and liberty of Conscience, with the frank addition
of thirty Ducats a man to buy off the Hungarians.

And is there not an Hero prepared by Providence to att^que these i^solent
proceedings? Is there not a Champion in s^ore to check this insolent Invader?
Yes: for now that Great Ser^n^^ undertaking,
^aring ^^u^per has enlarged his Tyranny in Europe from Buda to
Constantinop^e; in Africa, from Velex to the Red sea; and in Asia, from the
Straights of Hellespont to Taurica Cherso^esus, and from Dernow he has tied up
the Persians, Tartarians, the E^hi^^^ans, and all his Eastern Neighbors: Now
he expects Christendom should either submit to his power, o^ ^e chea^ed by his
allurements of liberty of Conscience, the free exercise (...) all Religions, no
Taxes for six years, and then but fi^^ shillings yearly upon ^ach house; with
secu^ity of their ^^ws, Rights, Claims, Titles and Properties. Now the Germane
Em^ire yeild^ to him, France and other Counties are amuzed, Si^esia is wasted,
Mora^ia is made desolate, Vien^a is deserted, the whole Country overrun with
fire and sword; and in a word, the prosperous Infidel overbeareth all in his
way without resistance: It Is now that Fate balanceth his interests, and Count
Serini makes His first diversion to ^^rky.
an inroad into the Turkish Territories, (sparing nothing he could destroy, and
leaving nothing he could carry away) takes 300000 Rixdollers, defeats 3000
Turks, and cuts off the supplies designed for the League. This Count Serini
born for these ^^mes, rallied the German and Hungarian forces to some
considerable appearance for order and service; bestowed the Hus^ars in an
advantageous place to attaque the Moldavians and Wallachians; drew with
Montecuculi toward Newhausel, joined with Budiani and the Palatine of Hungary;
is made Generalissimo of the Hungarians and Croatians; mustereth 50000
Hungarians and Croats at Nath for the relief of Newhausel; conferreth with
Prince Gonzaga, the Counts Rothal and Balfi, fell upon the Turks Vanguard,
pursuing them to their Leaguer, relieves Newhausel, and prepares to second the
blow given to the Turks before it, but that in the interim it was delivered up,
and betrayed either for money or fear. The active Count Garisoneth Silesia,
guards the pass of Jalunca that leads thither, consulteth with Montecuculi
about Presburg; he reconciles and unites the Germans and Hungarians, and with
Count Budiani cuts off 1500 Turks near Caristad on His thir^ at Carlstad.
the frontiers of Styria by an Ambuscado, laying a bridge over the River Waeg
near Zulta, to cut off those enemies at Gran. Whence he went to Vienna, to the
Council of War held there by General Hohenlo; and being honored with the
Seigniory of Newhausel, cast himself into eminent and signal attempts upon the
enemy; whereof the first was some stratagems and surprises upon the common
enemy; the next day was a bridge of Boats over the Danube and Waeg, His fourth
upon the Danube.
which he passed over with a considerable strength, and laid them in a place of
advantage near the Turks Camp, sending out a party of 700 horse to His fifth by
a stratage^
alarm the enemies main body. Whereupon the Infidels drew out, pursued the
party till they fell upon the flank, kided 400, wounded many, and took Prisoner
one Bassa, and a Counselor to the grand Vizier, with great booty. After which,
the Count finding himself in danger to be oppressed with number, made his
re^reat under favor of his Cannon, and repassed the bridge with his booty in
safety.

His third undertaking was against His sixth action in Croatia.
the Infidel upon the borders of Croatia, where having done great execution
upon them, he presented the Emperor with 35 Ensigns of War, and a Bass^'^
son, who offers either 100000 Rixdollers, or 500 Chris^ians for his ransom;
disapp^inted the enemies design upon Schut, secured Schinta, and ^ut off one
of their Convoys of Janissaries, taking 50 Wagons, five whereof laden with
Christians. The Janissaries seeing the General coming up, fired upon them under
the protection of their Wagons; which the Count observing, made a little
retreat; and finding there was no good to be done on horseback, he commanded
his men to alight, and attaque them on foot* which they did; and after a sharp
encounter, they made themselves masters of the booty, released the Christians,
and put the Turks to the sword.

After which defeat, Count Serini His (...) in Croatia
joining with the Earls Cochory and Tekelly, disposed of their 15000 men and
his own, so that they might neither want fodder, nor burden the Country.

In the fourth place, the brave Count observing Abafti's design upon the
Mine-Towns, (whence the Hungarians have their Gold) and other frontier strong
holds, and hearing of Lewents and Novigrads surrendry on the 12 of November,
took in a Moo^ish place between Raab and Comorra, ten Camels, and as many Mules
laden with Trunks full of gold and silver, together with the Con^oy bound for
Constantinople: and on the 16 of October, the noble Count with a party of 4000
fell upon Zentgitsch Basha as he was marching in great security with a body of
7000 men, designing to lay waste these frontiers without any control. This
encounter fell out not far from Borlocks near Nadazitsch: above a 1000 of the
enemies were put to the sword, 150 Prisoners taken, and eight Standards, and
secured the passage for correspondence with Transylvania, cutting off designs
^ the ^arians ^isions Con^.
all provision about the Mine-Towns, Dotis and ^aab, that the enemy may of
necessity withdraw: and withal, he observes the Infidels design upon the
Bergstedts, and attends their motions, having lately surprised forty or fifty
Wagons of Provision and Timber bound for Newhausel, and put all the Conductors
to the sword; as did his brother Nicholas Serini, who upon the 15 of November
defeated a Turkish Convoy, slew 2000 of them upon the place, and took a very
rich booty, little inferior to that which our noble Count took at Lewents,
which his Heydukes surprised in their way to the Bergstedts and at Croatia,
where he set upon the invaders, and slew two thousand upon the place, taking
many persons of quality prisoners: But the most remarkable exploit of the
Counts, is, that whereof you His own account to the Emperor of a great V^ctory.
have an account in this express of November 16, to the Emperor.

Yesterday the enemy came toward us in a great Body, and in the open day
brought with them a Ship-Bridge to lay over the River Mur, near to Scotor^to,
appointing 3000 Tartars for the fitting of it. The little strength I had, I
disposed of here and there as I thought most for my Advantage, and kept Guard
my self with 300 Horse. About break of day, Notice was given me by a
Warning-Piece (according to direction) that 2000 of the Enemy were already over
the water; Whereupon I marched immediately to the Place, where I had the enemy
before ^e, and no Possibility of a Retreat. In this Strait ^e cha^g^d them, and
(by Go^s Assi^^a^ce) p^t them to a Rout. The first O^se* (...) hazardous; but
presently, a Co^^^r^ation seized them all, and they ^o^k their flight to the
River Mur; where encountering their Fell^^^* that were coming over to join with
them, they fell into such an Amazement and Confusion, that they could neither
get back no^ swim, no^ defend themselves by Resisting: and in fine, The Face of
the River was quite covered with Men and Horse: Of this Opportunity I made what
use I could, taking not so much as One Prisoner, so that betwixt Killing and
Drowning, not many of them escaped: Near one thousand of their Horse we took
coming out of the water. Upon this they s^nt for their Foot (being Quartered
not far off) and when they came ^ear, three hundred of my own Foot with two
Fieldpieces came up to me, with which we maintained our Ground till all my
Troops came up likewise from other parts; and when we had fought that whole
day, and into night, the enemy at last retreated, i^ great i^d^g^ation; but the
Turks (...) in a great Body so near as Canisia, will hardly let the Design
fall thus. If Providence had not Miraculously taken away their ordinary
Resolution, they had laid this Island in Blood, and entered S^iermark, even as
far as Gratz, without any Opposition. They were reported to be forty thousand
strong; but to my Judgment, they appeared not to be above ten thousand.

It is my humble Request to your Imperial Majesty that you will be pleased to
Order some further Provision of Men, Artillery, Ammunition, and other
Necessaries for these parts, or we must yet be ruined at last.

After which Remarkable Action, he met the enemy in Stiria, and in ^^s next
^ction in Stiria.
conjunction with the Earl Hohenlo, rescued the Captives, and slew 5000 upon
the place; observing upon St. Nicholas his day, a solemn thanksgiving for Gods
Providence toward him in his last deliverance, and ever since disposing of his
Heyducks and Hussars for surprises, ambushments, and other exploits, whereof
^hey give good account, particularly at ^eutra, whither they stole in Turkish
habits, and put hundreds to the Sword before the enemy could come up against
them; and in their way carried 20000 Rix-Dollars worth of Ammunition and
Cattle, from before His stratagem upon ^eutra.
Newhausel. The Noble Count not long after treating Hohenlo, and presenting him
with a rich Sable taken from a Basha, and both taking a solemn Oath to stand it
out until the last, and directing General Souches to enquarter himself in the
Mine-Towns, from whom he no sooner pa^red, then he took care to satisfy the
Nobility of Croatia about Quarters, and other depending controversies; and to
burn the Straw and Hay that belonged to the Boors who submitted to the Turks in
twelve miles compass; whence he is gone to Hohenlo, and Souch, who kept close
for a great design, entertains none to his Camp, but they who swear to li^e and
dye with him, with which resolute persons he has lately toyled 25000 Tartars
into an Ambush, routing and following them to a considerable His snare laid for
the Tartars,
execution, and by the way way-laying 130 Wagons and their Convoy, which they
have brought to their own Quarters; as his Heyducks surprised the Governor of
Newhausels Lady in her rich Attire of Cloth of Gold, her Face patched with
black Moons and Stars, and her Nails Guilt, for whom her Husband offers eight
thousand Rix-dollars, i. e. Twenty thousand pounds; together with all the
Prisoners he has in his custody. The Noble Counts main work is to burn up and
destroy the Provisions round about Turkish Quarters, thereby keeping them from
settling in Croatia; a work that strikes such terror into the In^idel, that he
sends his goods into Turk^, for he subdues and Garrisons the Fo^ts as he goes,
particularly Breniza, within The sev^ral (...) is he has ta^^^.
^ix Leagues of Canisia, whence he intends to ^ut off a Bridge of theirs that
cost ^00000 Rix-dollars the Buil^ing* and in^ercep^ (...) p^ssage between
G^eek-^^ssenbergh and Offen; in the mean ti^e he flesheth his men with Victory
and Booty. And although Clause^burghs revolt and Mutiny be of very ^ad
consequence (the Soldiers discharging their Officers for want of Pay, and
particularly the Commis^ary, notwithstanding the Officers made a stock to give
them a Rix-dollar a man) and the Noble Count was lately like to be surprised,
venturing abroad with sixteen Cavaliers, to discover a Pass; yet Fame Fame
speaks him still victorious How he was like to be taken.
and resolute: for though six Renegadoes promised to bring him prisoner to the
Vizier, and to that purpose surprised him and his sixteen And how since escaped.
with him, but an hundred Croates coming in, rescued the Noble General, put the
Infidels to the Sword, and took one upon whom neither Sword no^ Pi^^ol would do
exe^^tion; with (...) in his Pocker, The (...) action.
designed, is it was thought, for S^rini, who (...) of Christ^n (...) that
danger, and we hear from Presburgh* by letters dated Feb. 3.

That, The Arch Bishop, and ^^e Hungarian Chamber received certain Intelligence
Yesterday Morning, concerning Count S^rini 's Arrive with 35000 Men near the
Bridge of Esseck, with design to destroy the said Bridge, thereby to ^ut off
that Passage of Communication betwixt Offen and Greek-Weissenburg; but the
Turks apprehending S^rini 's purpose to be rather to pass over the Bridge, and
fall into their Quarters, set fire to it themselves: After which, the Count
bent his course toward Petz, a Place however not worthy the name of a ^ort,
had yet the Advantage of being Walled, and Moted, and lying very commodious for
Trading with Turkey, was Rich, and Populous. This ^own Count Serini Attaqued and
took with a considerable Treasure in it: whereupon Capan, and Pata^k rendered
themselves, and then the Fortress of Bergenetz, after a Battery of two Days and
two Nights submitted upon accord. The Turks he caused to be convoyed to his
Camp, but all the Tartars were put to the sword; and having dispatched here, he
went directly to Sigeth, of which he hopes to render an Account (with Gods
assistance) in Five days, if the Enemy show not themselves too obstinate in the
maintaining of the Place; his purpose is, to bring all the Turkish Prisoners
into his own Camp; to the end that no Discovery may be made of this Designs,
before they are ready to take effect. Count Bud^ani and the Vice General have
also taken Five-Kirk, wherein was very rich Prize, two thousand brave Horse,
and provisions both for man and beast, i^somuch that the Count sent back those
provisions that were ordered him for his own relief. And since from Raab, Feb.
2.

We have received Intelligence, that Count Serini since the taking of
Five-Kirk, has had a sharp and dangerous Encounter, according to these
particulars following.

Information was brought to Count Serini, that the Turks were drawing in a Body
toward him, whereupon he designed with his Right Wing to fetch a compass, and
attaque the Enemy in the Rear, giving Express order to the Dutch Troops not to
charge, before such a Signal given; but before the Count could bring his men
about, the Dutch Engaged, and the Sho^k was so Ru^^, ^^at the Turks had pierced
their Bo^y, a ^^illed ^^er four hundred of them upon the Pl^^^: Upon knowledge
whereof Count ^^rini was forced to hasten to their Relief, and to fight the
Turks upon Even Terms, whom at last be worsted, with the ^oss of near four
thousand of the Infidels ^lain. Rallying likewise, and thereby preserving the
Dutch Troops, that were before Routed.

Count Serini 's Birth and Education.
COunt Serini, who has promised and performed wonders, was born at
Serini-mark, Novem. 14. 1612. Son to that great Serini who promoted the thirty
years League; and Grandchild to a greater, who maintained as many years War
against him. Elaborated and pure blood fills those heroic Veins, habituated
for noble undertakings, and maturated for glory by a constant exercise and
practice of Prowess and Valor this 200 years. The busy Astrologer, who sees
nothing remarkable on earth, but he expects something corresponding with it in
heaven, observes, That at his birth, cir^a horam octavam pom. Mars and jupiter
were lodged in the same quarter; and thence concludes this Noble persons
warlike disposition and success, that he was born to save an Empire, and enjoy
a Kingdom: the first prediction (enough to credit a Stargazer) is made as
probable by his Conduct and Resolution, as the other will be rendered ridiculous
by his Integrity and Modesty. His father dying (they say) in his minority, left
him to a noble Uncles tuition, with his brother Count Peter, who bred him to
all ingenious and manlike accomplishments, improving and polishing his great
Nature by greater Arts, under the care of Barlini, for Grammar, Rhetorique, and
Moral Philosophy; under Skookius for Natural Philosophy and Divinity; under Van
Skinderlen for Mathematiques, especially the most Practical Part, of
Fortifications, Encamping, Navigation, wherein he excels; Endowments that
furnish and adorn him, that abate the roughness of his spirit to an amiable
complaisance, and limit the activeness of it to useful undertakings. His
Retirements did not threaten him more perverse, then his first appearance
abroad promised him noble and manlike: for as Gustavus Adolphus privately stole
abr^^ (...) ^^er other Princes to ^it himself (...) own Kingdom; so he in
Gustavus his service against the Empire injured himself to do noble Enterprises
for it.

This Heroes Temper is as renowned His Disposition.
as his Actions, his Constitution as high as his Performances; his
Understanding clear, distinct and solid; his Memory methodical, tenacious, and
ready; his Passions stirring, but regulated; quickening, but not disturbing his
Soul, raising him to the utmost of Virtue, but not beyond it. His sanguine
Complexion is allayed with a due temperament of Northern Melancholy, which
makes his wary Conduct as eminent as his great Spirit; the first temper
rendering him resolved, but not rash; the second cautious, but not useless: his
severe Nature complying rather with the strictness of his Virtues, then the
freedom and licenses of his Fortune, would be never tempted to the soft
di^ersions and enjoyments that youth allied to greatness is born to, from the
direct courses of Manhood and Virtue that an hero^ck Nature advanced by
honorable imp^ovements inclines to. His stature raised him to a just height^,
handsome rather then tall, neither me^g^^ nor co^pulent, but every way
^^oportionable. His Countenance is rather grave then grim; at once a^ing and
pleasing those that speak with him. His Eye is quick and discerning; his Hair
brown and lovely; his Gesture and G^te majestic, not out of affectation, but
Nature. His Body habituated to Labors, and a s^ranger to the Effeminate
Dalliances of a great Fortune, that soften those No^le Souls to Luxury and
excess, that are born for severer toyls and exercises. Indeed, this excellent
person seems to be made for greatness, though ^e were not born to it; to
deserve a Command, if he had not inherited it: for his Prudence is as great as
his His Pru^ence.
Power, and his Contrivances as well said as they are successively executed;
his acu^e and happy apprehension reaching as for a^^ is Au^ho^ity, and he
commanding not more different Nations in the field, then ^e does excellent
Notions in his cl^^er. None ^eeth the d^^k Int^i^ues of States more
perspi^u^^^: none has weighed the (...) of Europe more seriously; none
manageth the different humors of men to an accommodation and temper more
happily; invents and disposes means more advantagiously; finds out expe^ients
more ^appily; ass^yls emergent difficulties more p^o^p^^^usly; looks through
the di^^^nces of Actions and Agents unto events ^o^e thoroughly. He keeps twel^e
Pensioners in the Turkish Court and Camp, and foretold this invasion a year
before the Emperor could believe it. He said at Vienna that there would be no
Wars in Italy t^is year; he has proposed the proportion of forces the
respective States and Kingdoms can spare, and the Empire admit, together with
the most secure way of their admittance, viz. The Protestant assistance to be
disposed among the Papists, and the Papists among the Protestants, to avoid
jealousy, and secure the Austrian Interests. And it was he who had the chief
hand in these Rix-Constitutions following, first framed at the Council of War
at Vienna, and then confirmed at the Diet of Regenspurg, Viz.

1. That the Forces appertaining to the Ricks-Constitutions, shall as well in
as out of action stand subject, and engaged to every respective State which
levied and raised them; being nevertheless subject to his Imperial Majesty,
according to the Copy of Articles.

2. That the Ricks Army shall be under the Direction of his Imperial Majesty,
to be ordered and appointed by the Generalship, and Council of War.

3. This Ricks-Constitution now made against the Common Enemy, shall continue
so long, as the S^ates shall find it requisite, and after that time to revert.

4. To the maintaining of the said Army, every State is to see its own forces
being levied, and brought into the field, to be provided for in this
Expedition, according to the dire^^ion agreed upon.

5. Officers shall be appointed for provision for man and horse, and for
settling other requisite Injunctions and Orders.

6. For preventing contention among the Officers and Commanders about their
competency, provisional care shall be taken according to custom of War, and
certain particular agreements to be made.

7. The Artillery, and what belongs to it, shall be committed to such as are
experimentally skilled therein; and his Imperial Majesty's advice to be desired
thereupon.

8. All care and diligence shall be used for the (...) of a strict and frequent
intelligence upon all occasions of imminent danger; and for the speed^er
advance of the Public Work, all matters shall be handled by Deputies, except
such as ^re of extraordinary import, and th^se shall be referred to the Higher
Colleges, by them to be m^naged according to Justice and Equity.

La^^ly, it is resolved tha^ his Imperial Majesty be subma^ly request in the
name of the Electoral Princes, and other Princes and States, that the
Dispatches to Foreign Kings, Potentates and Republiques, may with all speed be
expedited for assistance: and to remove all obstructions to the perfection of
the work, it is judged requisite that every State a^^ Circuit take care
forthwith to provide all necessaries of Men, Moneys, Ammunition, etc. And to
this end that Meetings be appointed of the respective Circuits, to hasten the
business all that is possible; and that the proportion of the imposed Triple be
timely notified to every State and Circuit; and that they bring in their Horse
and Foot, answerable to the Rule of the Old Register, to be in the Field at the
end of March, if possible, or at furthest by the middle of April. And in case
any shall be ready to march sooner, they are at liberty so to do, and
sufficient caution is taken, by the direction of the Ri^ks Constitution, that
^orn, and other necessaries shall be ^ocured, and carried from Country to
Country through the respective Territories where they march, without paying of
Custom. And his Imperial Majesty is to be farther requested, that the heavy
Artillery with the Trayn may be with all speed advanced. And it is also ordered
how every State shall contribute to the maintaining of the Generalship, and
what course shall be taken concerning Refractories.

There is not a Nook, Corner, Pass, Bridge, or Avenue of Hungary, Croatia,
Silesia, Austria, or Stiria, etc. but he has observed: wherefore there is not
a week passes over his head, but the brave Count ensnares some Infidels,
drawing them who are strangers to the Countries into his toyls and ambushes;
cuts off their Convoys, attaques their Rear or Front, and makes them weary of
their lives. By this means he takes in the little towns that they neglect, and
fortifieth them to very great advantages: he lays waste their provisions,
cuts off their correspondence, way-layeth their Intelligences, and with 20000
men holds 250000 in play for six months together.

He has done wonders to accommodate the jealousies between his Country and his
Master: he admits few or no Germans to his service, to satisfy the Hungarians;
he admits no Hungarians without Oath, to secure the Empire. None more observant
of the Emperors commands, none more careful of his Countries interest; no
Commander obliges the people more, none jealouseth the Emperor less then the
brave Serini, at once a wonder, the peoples darling, and their Princes
Favorite; great in their respect that are below him, greater in their
affection that are above him; none more sensible than he of those particulars
wherein consists the strength of the Infidels, and the weakness of the
Christians; as first, he has proved one day at Table with Montecuculi, that
the Turk could not have pitched upon a more advantageous season for the
Invasion of Christendom, then these three years, these three hundred years; the
greatest Politicians now extant, as he observed, being more employed in
balancing the Interest of Europe upon the several late great alterations, than
in raising such banks that might stop this general inundation upon the face of
the Western world; decrepid Spain bestowing all its cares to save it self from
France, now rich and potent; France amuzing all the European Princes, that he
may seize on Spain; England and Denmark having much ado to keep its own peace;
the Emperor and all his Dominions being mortally engaged in fears, jealousies,
and suspi^ions; Poland and Muscovy irreconcileably at enmity, and the Paramount
Power of Rome, since the last Election in Frankford, and there much engaged by
the discontents of Italy, the faction of Portugal, and the revenge of France.
And after this discoursed, he advised the accommodation of these States, as the
first expedient against the common enemy. He said one day that a total
abstinence from Wine, though looked upon vulgarly as a less pertinent piece of
P^udence then really it is, is the most material instance of their Policy, now
extant; for as he observed, Order preserves their Disc^pline among a numberless
rabble, when the want of it dis^^^ereth our most civil and well-trained
Regi^ents: Wine enervates our Bodies, and effe^inates our Sou^s, while the want
of it strengthens and knitteth both theirs; besides that men are transported
by it beyond their own natures, to those researches and undertakings that
endanger a good Government, and will overth^ow a bad one. Wine discovers
secrets, unsetleth resolutions, disordereth M^rches, is unsuitable to heats and
labors; wherefore it is forbid likewise in his Camp.

It escaped not his Observation one day as he was marching toward Croatia,
that the Turks having nothing Hereditary, all honor, profit, and advantage
being bestowed on desert, and determining with life, without the least
partiality showed to Greatness of birth, or place, or policy considerable, not
only for restraining the Ambition of the unworthy that aspire to undeserved
honor and trust, but for encouraging all men to some useful employment, wherein
they may advance themselves and the Public, and be ready to appear one day in
the Field, and the other in the Shop; whereupon he has ever since encouraged
Soldiers of Fortune with his own countenance, and the Plunder of his
Victories, maintaining an Impartial parity throughout his Army, in relation to
every thing but desert, none appearing higher or lower than the rest, but by
the services they perform, and the places they fill up and discharge, guiding
his resolved handful with the two reins of Fear and Hope; Fear restraining the
careless, and Hope quickening the industrious; two reins, which whosoever has
the Art to handle, may guide the world whither he pleases: his Cowards dying
with reproach and damnation, while his Valiant followers live and see all
Offices and Commands in the Van of their brave Actions, and the joys of heaven
attending them in the Rear; so obliging the Covetous, the Am^itious, and the
Superstitious, where the meanest may be desert attain the highest happiness
which the greatest misseth without it.

One day a Kinsman of mine Frederick Van Holden, discoursing before him why
Eunuchs are chosen Commanders in chief by the Grand Seignio^, he said that that
might be thought a defect in that Government, by such as do not watily observe
that caution and circumspection are no less, if not more necessary in a
Commander, than a daring and an undaunted resolution in a Soldier; it being
one thing to execute, and another thing to direct; more Armies perishing by
want of Moderation and Prudence in the General, then of Valor in the
Soldiers; besides, as one observed standing by, That their unconcernment in
reference to Posterity, which they expect not, is a sure pledge of their
Faithfulness, they having no hopes beyond their own life, now famous by great
Commands: whence the Noble Count admits few married men to his Camp, that are
shackled with relations, and as one says, like fond Apes, chained to their own
homes and interests, but loose Reformades that fancy each place to ^e their own
habitation, because no place can afford courser meat, harder lodging, or worse
usage than they have at home: in a word, ^e has brought his Volunteers to this
great resolve, either to live bravely, or to dye honorably.

It was debated once at a Council of War, whether they should give Quarter or
no: where Serini was for giving Quarter, and inu^ing the Turks to a Commerce
and familia^i^y with more civil and knowing people, who might infect them with
some ingenuity and humanity; besides that they were under such daring
apprehensions of fate and death, that they could better dispense with the
danger of a slaughter than an Imprisonment. And despair in one case rendered
them resolute, while fear of their own hard usage in the other, made them
faint, and (as one observes) he that con^idereth that the Turk is not of so
poor an allay, as some Princes, who are undo^e by a Victory, if it cost too
dear, may see his design in a great part satisfied by the slaughter and loss of
his Soldiers; the too great increase of such Spirits, being all he has reason
to fear.

That great particular the Noble Serini in^ upon, is, to give the ^nfidel a
Battle, who (as he and others have observed) having suffered the (...) check,
^eth not on the same ground to receive another, but retu^neth home, as
unwilling to tempt his Fortune fu^ther that expedition; concluding wisely (says
my Author) that it is very unlikely for a discontended Army to perform what she
could not bring about when the Soldiery was in full plight; and that the cause
of the overthrow is to be searched into before an attempt (...) a second
Battle, though the Commander appear never so confident of ^cess; it suiting
with their intere^t both in honor and safety, to venture all rather then come
out of the Field with so great a reproach. Con^^deration (says he) below a
Supreme power, to whom security ought be more dear then any thing that carries
the countenance of a greater or lesser advantage.

The Infidels strength consisting in his Cavalry, the vigilant Count cuts off
their forage and Hay in all Quarters; and knowing the fewd between these and
the Infantry, bred either by Custom, Nature, or Art, for fear of combinations,
he increases it (by forcing them to encroach upon each others Quarters) to a
tumult very often, particularly upon the Borders of Croati^, where they drew up
the one against the other for the Litter, which the one claimed for their
Horses accommodation, and the other for their own.

It was one day discoursed at his Table, that it was to be feared England could
yield no ^uccor in this common distress of Christendom, because of its
discontents and divisions. Where, said a Noble person, is there more discontent
then in Turkey? And yet where more numerous supplies and levies? For, said he,
those who at home breed Sedition and tumults, being sent abroad, propagate
Honor and Dominion: the Pleurisy of a turbulent State, and the Spirits of
Rebellion cannot be better evaporated, then by opening the peoples ^eins in
some Foraign parts. He said, one day to one that related the King of France his
unconcernedness in the present distress of Europe, that if the Grand Seignior
once Di^ed at Vienna, he would Sup at Paris; and another time the Pope coming
in his way for whom he has no great kindness, he said, That Christianity had
long ere this obtained an universal Empire, had not the Pope a^pited to one in
Christendom; for his Holiness shall with ease make a com^ination against a
Christian Prince that he fears at hand, which all Europe cannot make against
the Mahumetan, whom he neglects at distance.

Although he has not, as Mithridates His Policy in entertaining several people
into his service*
and others had, an exact account of each Soldier that served him; yet he
observed most, taking good notice what Countries they were of; for he
entertains several people, who composed of several airs, cannot associate with
that ease as Armies made up of one Language (which like the Swisse, do not
seldom cry out Gelt, Gelt, when they have the Enemy in view) for which reason
he trusts very ^ew with strong Holds, (places he ^o^^i^^eth only upon the
Frontiers) which may be sold by a Comm^nder, who can make nothing of a Battle.
Yet although the Turk never makes Religion the c^use Eng^ging for R^l^gion
of his War, for fea^ of an universal Engagement: the pru^ent Coun^ unites all
his Forces by that obliging name, which awakens the assistance and service of
all that profess it: the poorest man, says one, taking himself so far
interested in the vindication of his Faith, that if he has nothing else to
venture, he will think it sacrilege to deny himself and all; laying aside the
pre^udice and ha^^ed they ^ear their neighbors, for this general conce^nment
equally comprehending their neighbors and themselves.

It Is looked on in that Country as the peculiar opinion of that brave person,
that there should never be I^m king (...) le^gue with the (...), or t^eaty.
any league with that barbarous Enemy, who is as devoid of faithfulness, as he
is of faith; and never tyeth himself up so straight by promise, or o^ligation,
but that he has ^^ill a ^^use to ^reep ^ut at: and in this (^aith my friend)
he is not a li^^le ^eh^l^ing to the manner of his (...), always fuller of
hyperbolical civilities, than real as^^rances; and to his Ministers of State,
whose he^ds must compound for his treachery: And ^o carry on a p^^p^tual War,
the ^e^etian But carrying (...) ^ (...) War, and sending the Jesuits among the
T^^^s to divide them,
should be assisted, who fights the Turk upon the greatest advantages
imaginable; and the Jesuits, with other active Priests, should turn the tide
of their policy (which has engaged Europe in so many Troubles and
Controversies) toward the In^^dels, and weaken them with as many Divisions as
we perish with, especially considering (as the smart Satyrist ^aith) that the
Musselmans profession is grown up to as high an earthly felicity, universality,
and consent, as the Papacy. Neither do they want as great antiquity for some of
their Tenets, the which if they once come to be washed over by the varnish of
Learning, the Musti may, assisted with his Masters force, turn his Holiness
out of Rome, as that Bishop did the Emperor. Much might be done, if a Jesuit
did but personate the grand Impo^or, now ^i^en from his grave, according to his
wor^; for he might possibly work so far upon the multitude, as to make them
fall soul among themselves; a breach in Religion being found the readiest way
The policy of entertaining the grand Seigniors younger brothers.
to let in that Ocean of C^lami^ies we see overfloweth the Kingdoms of the
Earth: and as much, if the younger brothers who are sure to be made a sacrifice
to the elder, were showed the way to secure themselves in Europe, whence they
might appear with an Army in Asia, at any time, to let loose those discontents
that are kept in only by force and power, watching The policy of an offensive
War.
all opportunities to break out to tumults and rebellion, to which may be added
an offensive War; it having been the great defect of Christandome hitherto, to
stand upon the defensive: whereas the great Turk seldom troubles himself with
Embassies, treaties, but appears always the first in the Field, enjoying this
advantage, that he makes other Countries the stage of War; and meeting with all
humors, divides those at home with certain hopes or fears attending the great
alteration he brings along with him, who would be united abroad in their
engagements against him: Besides that the Christian Princes spend more in
watching one another in time of peace, than would carry on a War against this
Infidel.

The confederates in Hungary have by common advice, wherein our Stopping
Printing and Controversies.
Count was not the least concerned, put a stop upon Printing and ^ice
controversies; this brave Soldier having as little kindness for curious Co^
web-spinners, as the Heroic Gustav^s had for subtle Metaphy ^itians;
observing, that the Barbarian finding Printing and over-fine learning the chief
^omenters of Divisions in Christendom, has hitherto excluded them his
Territories; and whilst we loose our choicest years in useless disquisitions,
these rude people appear more adapted to State-employments, and sooner
furnished with clear and solid reason drawn from prudent and lesse-er^ing
experience, and were never yet out-reached by the most politic and knowing
Princes or States of Christendom; the great Sultan suffering none to attain any
perfection but what he has use for. Idle valor being the Tool (says my
friend) as Learning and Knowledge are the operations of all civil Dissentions.

To say no more of State-prudence, our great Commanders Field-discretion His
Field-prudence.
is admirable: Not a man of his Soldiers knows where they go upon a Design
or Surprise, until they are upon the very place and enterprise: he hovers like
old Fabius upon hills, mountains, and narrow places, His surprises.
lest in place he might be swallowed up by the number, or tired with the
Importunities of the Turk, with whom he skirmishes, but dares not ^^ght;
trepans sometimes into corners, but never engages in open field. He marches
always with his men not above ^ix deep, that they may all be serviceable, and
come to His d^scipline.
play in their Tu^ns; inu^ing them likewise to long and hard Expeditions,
whereby he out goes and surprizeth the flow and great Body of the Infidels;
yet always refreshing and quickening them with abundant provision, and a great
example. He imboldneth His marches.
and preserves his ablest men, by providing for them a complete Armor which
he wears himself, and so makes that which otherwise would be a burden, an
honor to his pattern: To this he annexeth another excellent piece of Policy,
that he never charge the Enemy until they come within Pistol-shot, when he
gives order for the effectual discharge of that shot at hand, which would have
been lost at distance, directing his Soldiers always to aim at the legs.

He has moreover, as the great Gustavus before him, restored the neglected His
encamping.
way of encamping; whereby he is so secure, that being well entrenched, in
spig^t of his vast Enemies, he will fight for no man's pleasure but his own: No
seeming slight disorder of the Enemies shall deceive him, neither shall any
violence force him from his hold and resolution, to take all, and to give no
advantage: Neither is he less careful to dislodge the Enemies, whose round and
Half Moon way the provident General often incommodates, by forcing them to
narrow and close retirements, or charging in several places, and amusing the^
with distracted fears, and confused allarms, whereby the outside of their
circle falls foul upon the inside, and their first guards retreat back upon the
second, who can neither assist them, nor save themselves. Their Scaladoes are
as observable as His way of scaling and assaulting.
their Entrenchment, wherein it is a question whether he ^e more prudent in
designing, o^ his Soldiers prompt in executing; who climb as if they had Ayry
bodies, and strike as if they had Iron hands. At his approach before His
summons.
a Town, as that of Sigeth, etc. he hangs out a white Fl^g the first day, to
intimate f^ir terms upon present surrendry: he hangs out a green Flag the
second, and a black the third, signif^ing that they lie at his mercy: and (...)
^n^er a Running blind he draws before the place, giving orders immediately
for batteries, assaults, and storming, deeming di^atory wars of a use not
suitable to his little strength, and less succor, being not without some
correspondence His correspondence.
in every place he sets before; to which I add an excellent invention he has
found to secure his Artillery before any place by running ramparts of wall set
always before them: He never sat before any place above a week, and never
missed any he sat before.

He has been much distressed by the Emperors neglect, or the Empires His way
of composing mutinies.
necessities, to the danger of Mutinies among his Soldiers, and revolts: but
as soon as the men of Fortune complain^^, he had a (...) design upon a ^own o^
C^n^ey in hand* that would make all whole, and satisfy all expectations.

Having observed many Spies got into his Camp, as they who discovered How he
prevents Spies.
his adventure abroad with the 16 Cavaliers, he took this course to discover
them: He built a house upon wheels without the Camp, for all strangers that
arrived, who are there lodged, and treated, if they have any business to
communicate to him, whereby he prevents their sneaking into his Camp, and
discove^ing what is done there: Every evening the Watchword is given, and
every man repairs to his Quarters* and if any is found out of ^is Rank, or
gadding out of his Quarters, he dies without mercy: so that there is no safety
or shelter for Spies or Intelligencers about him: And if any strange persons
offer their service, he disposes of them so, that they may neither betray his
designs, nor hold intelligence with his Enemies; although he has those
Pensioners in the Turkish Court that give him copies of all their designs,
orders, decrees, together with His Cou^t^^fei^i^g the ^^z^ers seal.
an ingen^ou^ Counterfeit, that can write his Secretaries hand as exactly as
himself.

Our wary General observing the most rash Commanders of (...) Turks, always
attempts th^^; and one time taking notice of a distance between his Enemies
full of b^ia^s and thorns, he placed his brother Peter there in His ambush,
ambush with a choice B^igade, and then commande^ his Croatian Horse to charge
a young Bashaw; who draws out all his Soldiers in battel-array, and marches
through the Thickets securely, until Count Nicholas charging him in the Van,
his B^other sell upon his Rear and Flank out of the Ambush.

One day the noble General was His way of paying his Soldiers.
pressed for money by his Soldiers; when pretending he had lost a rich Plate,
he searched all their Tents, and brought out all their money, which was thrice
more than they demanded, saying, what they had was enough to live upon, and
more than they had was too much to loose: And when it was given out that Abafti
would spare his Land; to enjealous His dissembling of treason.
him and his, the provident Hero resigned his whole estate into the Emperors
hands, to stand or fall with his Interest. As careful was he not to take, as
not to give offense: For there being one day a list of Traitors presented to
him by a Renegado, he seeing through the Plot to divide him and his chief
Officers, burned the list, neither reading it himself, nor suffering others to
do so; and removed the Informer out of the way, lest by his fraudulent
discoveries he might give new occasion of sedition.

Count Peter Serini, whom we may ^oyn to his Brother, being complained to, as
he was in the Council of War, of a Soldier that had taken away 500 Rixdollars
from a Countryman; Count Nicholas asked him for his Evidence: he said he would
take his oath of it, but he had no witnesses of it; the Count bids him retire,
and sends for the company wherein that Soldier was, and bids them lay down
their Arms, and withdraw, His discovery of the^^.
for he had a design to put them upon, which they did cheerfully; whereupno
informing himself where his Soldiers Quarters was, he sent his Musket to his
Landlady, and upon that token required her to send him the money, which the
woman did; the General charge the Soldier with the money, who denies it,
until the Emperor produces the bag; whereat the appaled wretch fell at his
feet, and begged, and had mercy.

Being brought by the mistake of His strat^gem.
his Guides into a place of great disadvantage, wherein he was in danger to be
beset by Abafti on the one hand, and the Bassa of Buda on the other, which
caused great fear and astonishment among his Soldiers; he stood upon his guard
until night, and then setting light matches in the hedges, he ranged his men
in Battalia, and caused them to march fair and softly (while the young Bashaw
drew toward the hedges, which he thought were drawn up in Battle-ar^ay)
bringing them off without the ^osse of one man.

Having defeated a party of Turks, he clad 200 of his men one day in Turkish
habits, and gave them order to seize Neutra, where they got through all the
Guards till they came to the Castle, returning with spoil, and Prisoners. To
conclude, he has contrived many suspicious Letters to withdraw Abafti from the
Vizier, and the Vizier from him: He has drawn the Infidels by misunderstanding
from one part of the Country to another: He has pretended to treat with them
till he finishes his designs; he has fortified himself before their eyes.

Being advanced in power and command, His dis^reet modesty.
it may be expected by some, that he should no longer retain the modesty which
the shades of his privacy had accustomed him to, but now appear the great Atlas
of the Empire, and the Champion of Christendom: But though all things are
changed without him, yet is he not changed within; for he avoids all grandeur
to remove the Emperors jealousies, which may be provoked by his forwardness,
to his own and the public ruin, to enjoy the safety of privacy, and to
witness his prudent modesty, which inclined to learn the methods of Commanding
by the practice of obedience; for being of a well-composed temper, he affects
not to embroyl the Camp, and thence the Empire in Factions, the products of
impotent minds, which he knows would overthrow himself and the whole State;
he chooses to expect a sure, though delayed greatness, rather than by a
compendious way of Rivalry to attain a precocious power that grows up with
envy training about it, and ends in ruin.

Finding the Country abused by Malcontents, with incredible diligence His way
of obliging the Country.
he moves from place to place, and by excellent courage and conduct appears not
only worthy of their respect and love, but of their lives and fortunes; in all
places exciting the fearful by his example, encouraging the faithful with his
Countenance, openly owning the good service of the people, and dissembling
their failures. He so far prevails upon all that are not wholly debauched to
Infidelity, that he has got an Army that may protect his friend, though it
cannot meet the enemy, which is every day increased by such knowing persons as
refuse to be polluted any longer with the cheats and delusions of those men
that design the most horrid slavery, under the pretense of the largest freedom:
many Noblemen impove^ish themselves to supply him; and others more private,
break through innumerable dangers to fight under ^is Colors: Many great Ladies
part with the ornaments of their Sex to relieve him, and with their Husbands to
serve him: so general is the influence of his great name, his powerful
eloquence, his indefatigable industry, and his most obliging Converse.

But his prudence is no abatement of his courage and resolution; which His
courage and resolution.
is as much above dangers, as his wisdom is above snares; as he never provokes
dangers, so he never fears them: and though he cannot come off with conquest,
yet he terreats with honor: When fortune fails him in success, his own soul
never fails him in renown and glory; for to attempt a victory against an
incensed Enemy that had more companies than he had men, that threatened
Christendom, when all men were amazed, is an argument of such courage as would
have made that Senate of gallant persons, who were the most competent Judges of
valor, and never censured virtue by the success, but thanked their imprudent
Consul for not despairing of the Commonwealth, when he gathered up those
broken legions which his rashness had obtruded to an overthrow, to have
ordered a triumph for Serini's retreats, had his person been one of the
ornaments of that age, or could those generations have reckoned him for their
example. His Christianity inclines him always to Peace, his fortitude may force
his Adversaries to it; he may be betrayed, he can never be overcome. The
Empires fate may yield to the Infidel, his fears never; he wants not resolution
when he wants power, his great mind being his constitution: that a General
should adventure abroad with sixteen men, in a place thronged with his enemies,
was noble; but that he should defeat three hundred enemies, is admirable; being
to cut off the Infidels passage over the Danow, his men shrunk at the attempt,
till the renowned Chieftain with a Pike in his hand, taught the soldiers that
he could equally endure labors and despise dangers, and by a communication of
toiles encouraged them to resolutions beyond themselves: for he was the first
man that came on in that design, and the last that drew off.

His Spirit was above dangers, and His patience.
his patience equal with them; he durst do great things, but not greater than
he could suffer; the fate of Christendom affords him difficulties to exercise
his patience, and the God of Christendom gives him patience to weather out
those difficulties in the midst of the distractions and business of the Camp;
he enjoys a calm Serenity, and a solid mind full of its own greatness; this
virtue not usual with great personages, who are above the hardships of it,
makes him forget, what his own condition allows him to enjoy, while he is
wholly intent upon what the present exigences oblige him to endure: no Trials
of virtue greater than his, and none better born; he may lose his life, but not
his patience: he stands whole His diligence in viewing his works.
days by his Workmen in fortifying either Castles or Passes; he expects a whole
night his several Intelligencers and Spies; he sleeps not above four hours in
the night, disposing most of his time to Counsels, Debates, Expresses; and
replies so unweariedly, that it looks like an Improbability now, and will be a
very impossibility hereafter -- he can have the patience to follow a
Country-Fellow afoot five or six miles to observe a Passage, and to return home
without it: he has as much Passion as may quicken, but not transport his Soul:
he acts nothing when provoked, cooling his greatest passion in a private
entertainment, apart from all affairs: he never does that by a substitute,
which he can do himself, having observed that never was Empire gained but by a
man's self, and never lost but by another; he can still gain skill by a tedious
experience, and look on a daring and proud enemy, and yet not stir out of his
own resolution, until he has tried the strength, and skirmished with a
Forlorn of his enemies: he and his C^oates, as Gustavus and his Swedes, fight
best when they see their own Breath: His Harvest of Victory, is in a sharp Snow
and Frost, and hi^ followers have most life in the dead of Winter; he would do
nothing i^revocable in haste, neither express what he cannot recall, nor
attempt what he cannot amend (he says) he will never do in an instant, what an
age cannot recompense -- His Fears were little, his hopes were less; he
disposed of means, and trusted the end to Providence; and proportioned his
design, not to his expectation, but his enjoyments; and when his hope breaks,
his patience holds.

His mercy and tenderness were as eminent as his patience: that Valou^ His
mercy an^ tenderness
which is in others Leavened to vigor, was in him softened with Clemency; none
ever perished that he could save, he is sparing even of Infidels blood, and
prodigal of none; he gives li^e to the Barbarians sooner t^an they desire it;
while he engages them as Enemies, he forgets not they are men: He was never so
much concerned, as when the poor people who submitted to the Turk, for fear to
those that fall off for fear*
they should be proceeded against as Traitors; he admonishes often, corrects
seldom, but never revengeth; none being lost, that he has either skill or
power to save, but always with an eye to the common interest, never allowing
private Indulgence to increase the Public misery: i^ men are doubtful, he
satisfies them; if they waver, he confirms them; ^f they are false, he
winketh at them, and attempts all the methods of obliging, before he commenceth
that of destroying: Fire and Sword are his last Arguments. The first whereof,
like Vespasian, the del^ght of mankind, he would quench with his tears, the
second peirceth his own breast deeper than the bowels of any: His mercy is like
that of the most High, incircled His mercy.
with power, not the weakness of a low spirit, but the Debonaire of an Heroic
one. He never invironeth the enemy to a necessity of fighting, if he can give
them way to escape; a Golden Bridge was judged not too chargeable to be
bestowed upon a flying enemy: when men are obstinate, none more severe; when
yiedling, none more compassionate: whence thousands surrender themselves to his
mercy, when ten fall not by his Prowess; and he has well weighed those
Maxims, That they who are forced beyond their intention, fight beyond
expectation, whereas he that opens an enemy the way of escape, shuts that of
his courage.

Neither was he more merciful then he was obliging; his command His obliging
converts
was not more awful then his converse indearing: as the Prince of Aurange never
moved his H^t, but the King of Spain lost a Subject; so Serini never Nods, but
the Infidel loses a confident: his conduct wins Fortresses for his Imperial
Majesty, and his courage gains hearts; although it be the fate of Heroes never
to be understood, and of great men of a middle merit only to be feared, this
man has the honor to be equally loved and admired, and though he be a man of
that solid Virtue, of that real Worth, that he neglects an over-officious
compliance with the less beneficial humors of the rude multitude, yet as there
is not a Nobleman in Hungary but would serve him, so there is not a Peasant but
would die with him: When he was missing but the other day, upon a private
enterprise, What general amazement was upon the face of Hungary and Croatia!
what moans! what suspicions! what fears! what despondencies! as if the Genius
of the Empire was withdrawn: what prayers, what wishes, what Imprecations on
Fates and Stars! But when returned with Victory and Honor attending him, How
all met him as the support of Christendom! What Bone-fires lengthen out the
day! What acclamations disturb the rest of night, to the terror of the amazed
Infidel, and the spreading joy of the drooping Empire! So much has he obliged
his followers, that every man have taken an Oath to live and dye with him.

1. So prevalent is his fair and condescending language to them, being (...)
wry of reducing the discontented.
informed that a Noble and Valiant Person in his service upon some discontent,
practiced with his accomplices to betray him, he gave him no ill words, but
called him to him one day in his Pavilion, and said (as Fabius before him to
the discontented Morsian) Sir, I must confess there is not that notice taken of
you that your service does deserve; and hitherto I blame my Officers, who
be^^ow my Favors by adventure not desert: But hereafter it shall be your own
fault if you do not declare your mind to me, and let me freely understand your
occasion and requests; so shaming rather then provoking the malcontent
humors, he keeps together twenty thousand men in spite of the rich baits and
temptations of the Turkish Empire, and the necess^^ies of the German.

2. So powerful is his condescension to share with the common Soldiers in their
wants and in their dangers, in their distresses, and in their toiles, in the
worst as well as in the best fortune, who would not rather perish with this
General, than triumph with others! whose bed is as hard, Diet as course, Duties
as frequent, industry as indefatigable, sleep as short, as the meanest Footman;
the brave man so consecrating hardships, endearing necessities, hallowing
miseries, and making men in love with distresses.

3. So advantageous to his own and the public service, is his strict
observation of each man's desert and service: the Masters eye makes a fat Horse,
and the General's a good soldier: it was thought a competent reward for the
Gamesters pains at Olympus: that the Conqueror should have the honor to fight
before the Kings face; and it is judged now a competent encouragement for hard
services, that the deserving soldier ventures before Serini's countenance, who
never disinherits merit, knowing that neglect destroys more than the Sword;
and where there is one killed by the one, there are hundreds dead by the other.
In a word, never was any General more loving to his soldiers, never any more
beloved by them.

And indeed he has all the obliging His humility.
qualities in the world: for there is not a man more renowned in others esteem,
none more humble in his own; he has the method of raising a Glory out of
humility: so familiarly would he converse, that he would command men not to
speak to his Excellency, but to himself, so encouraging them to a freedom of
discourse and truth, which great men are seldom happy in; he could have
patience to hear the meanest in any thing wherein he by intelligence might
serve his Interest and design, conniving at the great heap of impertinencies,
wherein one concerning truth told by a Peasant lies. He heard all men's
opinions he could consult with, though he followed his own; willing to hearken
to, and resolved to pursue what is most rational: A Countriman of Stiria is his
Guide and Companion, with whom he can bestow a vacant hour with as much
satisfaction as with any Count in the Empire; protesting that he is the
honestest man he ever met with in the world. Those he finds below, he makes
equal to himself by converse and familiarity, not disdaining to teach his
meanest followers those things he finds them defective in, honoring and not
fearing worth in those that belong to him; he joins the familiarity of a friend
to the port and Parada of a General; showing himself civil, but not cheap;
condescending, but not prostistuted: for it is an observation there, that it
adds much to the Grand Seigniors power, that he never appears abroad but in
splendour and majesty, that improves The Policy of a compet^^t gra^de^ and State,
the former engaged opinion of the vulgar concerning, to something more then
humane; Whereas our less Majestic Princes become so cheap in Germany, by their
daily figging up and down the streets after their pleasures unattended, whilst
this graver Monarch enjoys them all under his own Roof, where none are
suffered but those that are dumb from their births, or are rendered so through
fear or use; no action or word breathed out of the Seraglio to the Emperors
disadvantage, but grows mortal to the divulger; not possible to be observed
among Christians, whose meats like Puppet-Plays are made the object of all
eyes, and their highest discourses (apt then to break out) the scorn of
strangers that blow them over the four corners of the earth with no small
addition, whilst their own subjects calculate a crooked nature from the
deformities of their bodies, evil gestures, or a too luxurious taking in of
their meat or Wine; it not being easy to show a man at a greater disadvantage,
then whilst he is taking his repast, the most certain symbol of mortality. He
is meek therefore, but reserved; familiar, but grave; debonaire, yet solemn:
besides he submits to Montecuculi, gives place to Hohenlo, lays his Crown and
Victories at his Masters feet, as more careful to deserve then to enjoy glory;
none ever more magnificent, none more modest; none shall out-go him in service,
all may in honor: his Prowess may shake the Ottoman Empire, his ambition shall
never endanger the German. Thus as his strength terrifieth all places he
marches through from revolts, so his affability wooeth them to obedience,
providing that when nothing but terror possesses his Camp, yet there should be
seen nothing but Love in his words, and Charity in his actions: for where he
sees the poor, His civility in his progress thorowout the Country.
he scatters his money; where the guilty, his indulgence; where the
deserving, his encouragement; where the weak and helpless, his defense and
protection; going about as the Sun, carrying in his looks and actions no less
Serenity then splendour in all about him, answering acclamations with blessings,
suffering no distasteful act to be performed by Soldiers, who must first be
masters of their peoples hearts, before they are possessed of their enemies
Camp: his soldiers shall not fight with friends and foes too, for he hands all
grievances to the people by the mediation of others who have less occasion to
make use of them; and by such amiable gestures, with the high price he seems in
public to set upon the Nations content, so great a love is kindled in the
hearts of the people, that all the evils that fall upon them are removed from
the principal cause, and attributed to such as are only instrumental in their
promotion; the just General always giving a favorable hearing to such as
complain of grievances (whereby he satisfies the people, and engages their
persons and Estates) and removes the oppressors to some distant employments,
where being further from the Camp and the enemy, severity may be more
necessary, at least not so dangerous as within hearing of the Infidel that
promises fairer usage; and by this even and constant procedure, an
uninterrupted success has been entailed to his command. Thus by claiming
nothing, the brave Count enjoys all; and by protecting no injustice, he
secures himself and the cause he has undertaken.

For his Justice is not the least Virtue His Justi^e.
that possesses his great soul; such a habit, that he will suffer the greatest
misery before he will do the least wrong; and when he is persuaded to take the
liberty of the Field, and not tie himself to the strictness of a Court, Let me,
says he, stand or fall, to mine own Conscience: the Laws are the measures of
his War and Peace; the Justice of his Army is as exact as that of his own
breast; the people fear his soldiers, and they the Law; he allows his
followers equity, but not indulgence; freedom, but not licentiousness; His
severe Discipline.
security against an enemy, but not against right: an Egg stolen is as fatal
to his Myrmidons as a Turk, a Chicken kills as sure as a Mahumetan; he can
contentedly sacrifice a man for the least injury to gain a Country, which fills
his Army as fast as his severe Discipline exhausts it; no follies follow him,
no perishing families curse him, no ravished Virgins meditate revenge on him,
no children starved for the bread he took out of their mouth; as busy as he
is, he sets five hours in the week to redress grievances, at once to indear his
Disciplined Army to the people, and make odious the rude Rabble of the Turk,
whose Barbarousness is as intolerable as their cause unjust, who provoke the
people to oppose them, if not to save Empire, yet to secure themselves: his
punishments are more severe than common, and more private than severe: it is
his usual saying, Advise me not only what is safe, but what is Just; not only
what is expedient, but what is lawful.

He is as Faithful as he is Just: Leave His faithfulness.
me, says he to them who persuade him to secure himself, to my Honor and
Justice, though I fall by them: he is as true to his Superiors as he would have
his inferiors to him; he will never leave his Master until he leaves himself.
A Messenger once came to him from the Grand Vizier with an overture of an
accommodation, and the Archdukedom of Austria to boot; he hangs up the
Messenger, saying, If he had come to threaten me as an enemy he had been safe,
but coming to solicit me to be a Traitor, he has his own reward.

To Abfti's Message about the Grand Seigniors esteem for him, the His repli^s
to those that would debauch him.
honest man replied, That he had rather be a Page under the Christian Emperor,
then a Prince under the Barbarous Usurper; and that if it pleased God the Grand
Seignior, who was now so prodigal of others, should within a twelve month beg
his own Dominion; although the Emperor does not supply him as he may expect,
although Hungary deserts him, although Abafti jugleth with him, although the
Papists envy him, although the jealousies in his Army distract him, although
others are set above him, although the Germans are baffled, and France
threatens, the Turk is generally submitted to, and the people as generally
indifferent; although he always wants Money, and sometimes Provision, and the
Infidel bestows Crowns upon his Favorites; yet the faithful Count is resolved
to weather out all the difficulties in pursuance of bare duty and Allegiance,
and to make Germany either his Triumph or his Grave; being the first that
undertook the hard service of decaying Germany, he will ^e the last that leaves
it; if he cannot live a Count of the Empire, he will dye a Martyr of it.

Neither is he less careful of others fealty and serviceableness than his His
care whom he employeth.
own, employing none but such as honor his judgment, and acquit themselves to
the world, as men of public and great spirits, who with himself had an uniform
and constant care of the common interest; he bestows not places on relations
or parties, but merit, knowing no kinsman but what is allied to him in Virtue
as well as Birth, owning no purchase of trust, but that by great dangers and
noble services; he bestows his Titles of honor, where God had bestowed the
Virtues; enduring not that Command and Authority should be tainted in the base
and unworthy: he loved to see a man by a great spirit filling a great place;
his choice pitched there where the personage was strong and comely, the speech
Masculine (for he said, No man did Wonders that could not speak well) the
converse unblemished, advice bold, performance quick, course steady,
undertakings noble, patience observable, and experience considerable; such as
being fixed in their duty to the Emperor, and settled in their sentiments of
Religion, may restore Christendom, and enlarge it as wide as the world.

His temperance and sob^iety is a great ornament to himself, and an His
temperance.
happy example to his followers; his Diet is as hard as his employment, his
meals for health, not excess; his constitution bears a larger diet then his
Virtue, and his hard service larger then his constitution, yet he eats but one
meal a day, and that as course and plain as can be: for he prevents his
soldiers Surfets, and inures them to be contented with the least Provision,
and not to exceed with the greatest. He is more sparing of his drink then meat,
drinking very moderately at meals, and seldom between; and more temperate in
his pleasures then either; as severely does he forbid himself all looseness, as
he His strictness.
punishes it in others: a woman is not seen in his Camp, nor dallied with in
his Chambers; his discourses are grave, chaste, and masculine, and his very
Idleness useful; not an hour of his was without its benefit, or deserved not
its commendation: His expenses were moderate, suited more to the occasions and
necessities of his present condition, than the magnificence and grandeur of his
former state. These are trivival particulars, but that there can be nothing
ordinary that has relation to this extraordinary person: the very shavings of
Gold are precious, and the most minute passages are considerable that concern
this Great Man.

The last and most considerable observable His Religion.
in him, and that which much imports the State of Christendom, is his Religion,
which he uses not as an Artifice of power, but as the Ornament and comfort of
his own Soul; not affecting a gaudy and magnifick Piety, or a pompous show of
Devotion, but exercising a real and solid Virtue as eminent as his Fortune:
Religion is his not only by Education but by choice; the issue of his own
Reason, rather then the custom of his Fathers; he endeavors that they where he
marches should understand Religion before they fight for it, finding that a
multitude that own no vaster understandings than might render them pliable to
labor and discipline, are the readiest to yield all awful obedience to such
Worship and Religious observances, as the Infidel is pleased to impress upon
their yet unsuborned imaginations, not so ea^^ly obtained (says my Author)
from knowing people, who have any skill to determine the truth or fal^ehood of
that which the Mahumetan Fire and Sword enjoins for an unquestionable Creed,
especially considering that the Turks offer a law confirmed by Angels, Ecstasies
and Miracles, so suitable to the highest taste of humane sensuality, and
obvious to a carnal apprehension.

He deplores much the u^e of Images in the Christian Churches, not The
advantages the Turk takes against us in point of Religion, observed.
only as a great stumbling block to the Jews and Turks, but upon a serious
consideration, that if a people once attain but an universal Prudence, the
deceit and weakness of such a carnal adoration must needs grow loathsome and
lie obvious to their observation and contempt, That shall (upon the opportunity
offered by this invasion) make it their full employment to find fault, and
fo^ent a change, by discoursing to the people the absurdities in their worship,
which is better prevented in one directed (as the Turks is) to the only
invisible and omnipotent Creator, whose Nature and power is so far remote from
the weak apprehension of men, as the sharpest reason is not able to batter a
faith built solely upon it. Moreover, the Turk does so please the Christian
with his honor to Christ, as he does the Jew by his respect to M^ses; that his
complying errors in the mean time go down glib through the wide swallow of that
ignorance that part of the world does now gape withal.

He promotes the observation of the Lords day as strictly as he observes the
Turks, injoyning that of their Friday for the ease of poor people and
servants, whom he has his eye upon as the supporters of the Empire, for the
honor of Christian Religion, for the advancement of love and confidence, by
converse with neighbors; for those weekly meetings do much civilize a Nation,
satisfying no less the minds of the zealous, then they moderate the factious
and disobedient, by the great ^liay received from the solemn devotions, the
humble prostrations and Ceremonies, that such are terrified into an obedience
to the Law, out of a future fear, that could not el^e be restrained by a
present secular danger, or after-hope; imagining a number of Possibilities to
hide that from men, which nothing can cover from the sight of God.

And therefore he has a peculia^ respect for a ^ober and prudent Clergy
(looking upon a contempt of them as the preface to the ^uine of Religion) whose
Austerity and Reverence in external Worship, makes way for Religion to enter
through the eye to the heart; wishing they were more at leisure for the
temporal concerns of Chri^tendom, to intend those more spiritual in that
Country, the same Councils are observed necessary for Princes in relation to
Religion, and the guiders of it, as Phaeton had in the conduct of the Suns
Horse; the Church being of that nature, that if it soar too high, it choaks
Virtue and Piety in the superfluous Ceremonies, which like too much Paint in
Rome, adulterate the face of Truth; but if she be kept too low, then it wants
Decency and Order, allays without which we can have no Uniformity in a
Religious Commerce. Since the mysteries of our Salvation cannot be presented to
us, but in Earthen Vessels, from whence if they did not retain some Tincture,
we could not so naturally own them in reference to us: Nay (says my friend)
Some Policies that concern Religion in reference to the Turk.
an indiscreet zeal does so far participate of the qualities of the Air
overheated, that it hatcheth the plague of Rebellion, where ever it is found,
pretending their Prince negligent in Reigion, or too Exorbitant in his
affection to court Minions, or an in fringer of Law, or obstr^cter of justice;
weapons of Sedition easily forged, if not f^und to lie ready before the Gates
of the best of Kings, which subtle men snatch up, and put into the hands of
such as they have formerly intoxicated with a desire of Reformation, who seldom
give over till they meet their own ruin or the States.

It is not the least remarakble particular, in reference to Religion, that it
were to be wished, that, As the Turkish Alcoran is expounded or read by none
but Priests, so the Christian Bible were read and explained with more Caution,
Care, and Reverence; and that Prayers to God were more frequent amongst us as
amongst them, then Sermons or exhortations to the people, ^cause by the first
they are humbled through the constant repetitions of their sins and wants, and
by the other puffed up with ostentation of their good parts; and men may take
occasions, as the Orators and Demagogues of old, to hint out of the Pulpit in
Gods name, such seeds of Sedition and Rebellion, as may inflame Kingdoms; or if
the Christian Ministers will take pains and Preach, it were to be wished that
the whole scope of their Sermons, as that of the Turkish discourses, were
Practical Piety, consisting of the honor due to God, obedience to Princes,
Justice, mutual Love, resolution and Patience; together with whatsoever things
are g^od, whatsoever things are honest, whatsoever things are pure, whatsoever
things are of good report, especially patience under all dispensations of
Providence, whereby men might be fixed against all temptations to Sedition, and
kept in a cheerful compliance with the severest Government; referring all
things below to Providence, as the Tu^ks do to Fate; and looking on nothing
worth st^iving for or against, but the happiness and misery of the other world.
He has enjoined as great an awfulness of the name of God, as that of the
Mahumetans, which is so great, that they dare not employ the Paper they find it
in to any base office, but leave it in a hole to the further disposure of the
owners providence: and therefore possibly not so likely as Christians (who
observe no such decency) to call it to witness an untruth; much to the
advantage of Governors there, as it might be here, did Law or Custom skrew the
peoples minds up to as high an esteem of it.

It Is usually discoursed in those parts, that all the evils that ever happened
to Germany, flowed from a defect in their Ecclesiastical policy, in that the
Ministers do not press Religion with that strictness it is capable of upon the
people, so that it may lay hold upon their Consciences, and bear them up by
serious apprehensions of the other world, against all the contingencies and
emergencies of this; although they might remit those austerities and severities
to the bodies of men (the fond inventions of the melancholy, and the reserved
part of the world) now the Turk is at hand with all the complacencies and And
it is not convement to force nature too much in small things, lest it break out
in greater; for the Turks being allowed lesser vanities, are not at leisure for
greater.
delights, with the greatest freedom humane nature is capable of, where men
have an uninterrupted license to attain the farthest extent of their ^esires,
so as they apprehend no felicity beyond the liberty to enjoy ^^is.

We ^ight learn from the Turk to be more constant to the principles of our
Religion than we are, and give (...) way to a refining by the agitation of
experiences drawn from a con^^uence of different events; it being an
observation with him, that the (...) allowance in things of that nature, opens
a gap to infinite pretentions that can never be satisfied until government be
overthrown.

The Turkish Emperor is thought so much happier than the Germane, because the
Mufti his circumcised Pope, and Meca his Infidel of Rome are both in his power:
The Mufti, though (...) with M^homets ^ind^e^s co^our ^hi^h is g^^en, and
^everen^^d (...) very much (...) yet is concluded by reason of State, and must
comply with the government otherwise; though he is not publicly punished, he
may be privately translated to another world, Of religious influence upon men's
spirits.
and his faults and he buried in a grave; for it has been long observable in
this Empire, that neither friends, money, sanctity, love of people, former
deserts, or any present need of the peoples accurate parts, were ever found
Antidotes sufficient to expel the poison of the Emperors jealousy, who
esteems no number of lives equivalent with his own safety, or the Nations.

Count Hohenlo usually says, that it is one defect in his Religion, that it
was presented with so much terror as did amuse and despirit men; whereas the
Turks was contrived with such hopes and encouragements as raise them in valor
and undertakings beyond the ordinary pitch of men. Whereupon Serini takes him
up, and undertakes to demonstrate to him, That no Religion in the world
ennobleth and raises men's spirits to an higher pitch than the Christian;
fortifying them against the greatest dangers, and exercising them with the
severest discipline,

Goes the German Ambassador coucheth the offenses that lie in the Turks way to
our Religion in four particulars (as he received them from the Grand Seignior
himself:) The first, That we eat our God in the Encharist. 2. That we make our
God in the Church. 3. That we divide our God in the Trinity: And 4. That we
deny him in our lives. The first two whereof (says young Kecherman the brave
Count's Chaplain) must be removed by a recantation: The third must be assoiled
by cautious, clear and wary expressions: The last must be reformed by doing
nothing unlawfully, by speaking nothing improperly, and by wearing nothing
undecently. There being but two ways to keep up the honor of Religion; either
to keep over curious men from p^ying and questioning the parts, and restraining
reason within it is own bounds; or to clear up the grounds out of it so as might
satisfy any rational man. He wishes there were a clear account extant of the
grounds of Christian Religion; for which purpose there was printed in Presburgh
Ludovicus Vives his Dialogue of the Truth of Christian Religion, Hugo Grotius,
and Du-Pless^s, all translated into several Languages.

These are some of this excellent personage his sentiments of Religion, with
reference to the present exigent; but his opinions are not so ^evere as his
practice; neither is he so (...) in that matter to others as he is to himself.
In^eed his piety is as ^p^ea^ing as his command; and there is no man within the
one, but mu^^ p^^^ake of the other: Yet his own ^epo^^ment His own ^emper.
is most rema^^a^le; all his ^nterp^^zes begin with Prayer, and some of them
with Psalms, which a^ once inspire his Soldiers, and bl^sse his undertakings.
He would gain the love of heaven, before he would ^epell the forces of hell:
(Never any man did nobly that conversed not with the gods) Before the last City
he took, as he was observing the situation of the place, and his advantages, a
Commander asked what he int^n^ed to do. To take the place (^aith he) within
four hou^s, but we must go to prayers first: and now (said ^e afterward) We
have a good Cause, God and good men's prayers assist us. He is not more careful
of his Christian ^^ties, than of his Christian (...) to all those persons and
things that (...) relation to God; make^ wa^, that sp^^e^ nothing in its
con^^sed fury, and ^n^^stinguis^ing ^^^olation, re^^^ence all sacred persons
and places, whe^eof he is as tender as he hopes their God is of him and his
great and good Cause.

This is that gallant man, that noble Gentleman, that zealous Christian, that
s^out Soldier, that able Sates-man, that excellent personage upon whom are the
eyes of Europe, as upon the great Champion of Christedome. This is he who fills
the wo^ld wi^h his Name, and Annals with his Actions; that shows the most
humble devotion enamelled in Heroic gallantry; the most generous soul in a
wel-proportioned body; that supports the drooping glory of Germany, and checks
the growing power of Turkey; that dares do more than all the Kings of the
Earth; that was born to relieve distressed Princes, to restore tottering
Empires, and hold up falling Crowns. This is he that tramples upon offered
Kingdoms, and looks on Scepters beneath him; that thinks it more Imperial to
preserve Monarchies, than to govern them; to die a faithful Subject, than to
live a feared King. This is he who put the Grand Seignior to a cold sweat, and
the Prime Vizier to a fit of an Ague; That shakes the Seraglio to the
demureness of a Mufti, and the Alcoran out of the Mufti's hand; that turns the
Turkish Moon to blood, and the heaven of their power to blackness and
darkness; that threatens Mahumetanis^ to a swound, like that of the Author of
it. This is he who has set bounds to the fears of Europe, and the hopes of
As^^; Who coops that ambition in a Province, that aims at a World: Who fills up
the Gap of Christendom with his great self, and singly undertakes the
despondencies of the West behind him, and the threatenings of the East before
him. This is he who does wonders, and is one whose actions strein the belief of
the present age, and will be impossible among Posterity; whom all admire, and
the generous may imitate, as he does Scanderbeg, if he imitates any, or be not
rather his own great ^ule, his own great example being suffi^ient to himself.

THE Life and Actions of GEORGE CASTRIOT (...) amed Scanderbeg, (...) other
Champion or (...).
WHen the succession of 8 Ottoman Princes, with their several Councels,
Enterprises and successes, had enlarged that growing Empi^e beyond the bounds
of Asia, so that it a^^i^ed under Amurath the second to a fif^h Monarchy, to
which it was making it is way through the ruin^ of some p^tty neigh^ou^
^errit^^i^^, when it pleased the most high (...) ^uleth in the Kingdoms (...)
who permitted there (...) punish our sins, (...) there is a God; and yet
checketh them, that they may know themselves to be but men) to raise up on^
George Castriot Prince of Epirus, better known by the name of Scanderbeg, to be
at once his Buckler to protect his People, and his Sword to avenge him of his
Enemies. This Prince (whose former Actions may be patterns to our present
Enterprises; while what he has done against that dreadful Infidel, is before
our eyes to direct us what we may do) was the valiant son of a weak Father,
John Castriot Prince of Epirus, but a vassal of Turkey, who in the great
invasion His birth and original.
upon Europe, 1422. being not able enough to oppose the Turk in his passage,
no^ honest enough to be trusted by him when he had passed him, ^ought his sad
Peace, more miserable than his neighbors honorable war, Bred up under the
Turk.
at the dearest rate of his four Children, whom he pledged to his barbarous
Master; who (notwithstanding the fairer concitions and usages promised)
circumcised the youths, and trought them up in the Musulman^s irreligious
Religion; and when their fathers death opened his way into the Kingdom,
poisoned the eldest three, reserving this youngests beauty for his lust, and
his valor for his service; wherein he acquitted himself so honorably, that he
gained not only the foresaid name of Scanderbeg, or Lord Alexander, for his
prudence and activity, but the great Trust of a Provincial Governor at 18
years of age, and of General at 21, for his resolution and success; in which
two commands he behaved himself so well, that (which is not ordinary) he was at
once great in Amuraths favor, and high in the peoples affection: This brave
Prince (this Moses saved by the Pharaoh of Adrianople, to overthrow himself)
having lived long enough under the Turk for his own honor, for the peoples
applause, his Masters service, and too long for his poo^ C^^^^reys ^isery, His
revol^ from the Turk.
leaves the d^lliances of the most rich Court, the favor of the most mighty
Prince, the hope of the greatest Empire, and the command of the most vast Army
in the world, and chooses most heroickly to suffer the hardship, then
threatened the people of God, whom he favored all along, and assisted with
secret intelligence to Huniades at the great battle of Moravia; at which
battle, or at the next under Canabiza, being not any longer safe among the
Turks, nor serviceable in that capacity to the Christians, he sled to them
after this manner.

When by his Instructions (as aforesaid) The manner of his turning to the
Christians in the Battle.
to Hunniades, the Turks were disordered, he with his Cozen Amesa and other
Epirots to whom he had unbosomed himself, to the number of 300, withdrew; and
having their eye upon the Bashaws Secretary who Commanded in chief in that
Fight, followed him in his Retreat, put all his Turks to the Sword, carried him
away with them to their Quarters, and there extorted from His inde^at^gab^e
indust^y in pur^^ing his ^ight, and recov^ring his kingdom
him an Order in the Bashaw's name to the Governor of Croia chie^ City of
Epirus, to deliver up that charge to Scanderbeg, who by virtue of it possessed
the Garrison, and sent the Governor with his family to Adria^ople the night
following, making way to 3000 Epirots, w^o resolved to live and ^ie with him
for their own and their Countries liberty in the same place: and putting all
the Turkish Soldiers and others to the Sword, except them, who to save their
lives, would save their souls too, and become Christians.

The Epirots having thus recovered their noble Prince, and he his ancicient
Kingdom, or at lea^^ the most considerable place in it: He no sooner invites,
than his people come in multitudes, that wanted only Leaders and discipline,
to be armed, to attend his person, his service, and therein their own safety
and liberty; and the muster at Croia amounts to 12000, who with their noble
Captain march to subdue such strong Holds held out for the Turks; as first to
Petrella, a place well fortified by nature, and as well furnished by the
Inha^itants, whither Scanderbeg sends by a subtle messenger the di^mal news of
the late defeat in Hungary, the weak and perplexed condition of Amurath the
Sultan thereupon, the sa^ fate of Croia, the un^nimous re^olt of the Epirots,
and at last the fair Conditions and Terms they and other Governors might have
i^ they yielded to Scanderbeg; which relation the Governor considers, and
finding it confirmed by the sad tidings the Turks that sled brought with them
out of all parts (for now all the Turks in Epirus were put to the Sword) he
yields up the place upon conditions. Such as would go with him (for most
stayed with Scanderbeg) might be conducted with all they had out of Epirus. In
like manner did he take Petra, Stellusa, and all the other holds of Epirus in
two months time (and time was precious with him) save Sfeligrade an
impregnable place; to the Governor whereof was offered the choice either of
perishing as they of Crioa did, and as the Governor of Stellusa was like to do
before his eyes (for Scanderbeg brought him thither in chains for terror, to
hang him before the gates.) Loath was the Governor to hazard himself, loath to
displease the people: he entertains the Princes Messenger civilly, and turns to
the people wi^ly, and asked them, What shall we an^wer these our Enemies?
Whereupon an high spi^ited So^l^ier draws his ^wo^d, and tells him that t^^t
w^^ their an^wer; that they would not i^it^^e others weaknesses, but their own
^^lour, and die willin^ly with them that dyed at Cro^^, With which answer,
applauded by all the Soldiers, the Governor dismissed the Trumpeter.
Scanderbeg smiled at the answer of the common Soldier, and said, He is
certainly a valiant Soldier, if his actions answer his words: but if my force
fail me not, I will make him happy among His re^ly to the saw^y soldier of
Stelluza.
the happy ghosts of them of Stellusa; and immediately they of Stellusa that
did relent were baptized before their faces, and they who persisted in their
wilfulness were hanged; but the resolved ^arrison of Sfeligrade holds out
notwithstanding. Wherefore Scanderbeg considering the season of the year,
withdrew to Croia, and left 3000 men under Moses Golemus, a most val^^nt
Captain, to keep the Turks in until he might more conveniently reinforce the
Siege. Thus that gallant man recovered his whole Kingdom of Epirus in two
mo^^^s time; during which (...) he (...) ^wo hou^^ (...) he, th^^ (...) his
(...) Spoils (...) S^^^^ies: ^o re^olved, that he fought with his Arm ba^e, and
that with such fier^enesse, that the blood oftentimes burst out of his lips.

But it was not enough to secure his own Dominions now rescued from the Turks,
who might again invade them, therefore he is beforehand with them, and makes
an incursion into the very heart of Macedonia, both to terrify his Enemies,
and enrich his Soldiers; for it was observed in those days, that the spoil of
Amurath's Dominions was the reviving of Scanderbeg.

Being three and thirty years old, he went to the City of Allessia, where he
made a League and Assi^nce with the Albanian Princes; which City was then under
the Dominion of the Venetians, and in it was held a Diet A Diet or Assembly
Held at Allessia, and assistance given to Scanderbeg.
of all the principal persons of the Country being assembled there at his
request, and among others there was Paul, and Nicholas Ducaginus, Peter
Spainus, Lech Dusmanius, Lech Zacharius, Aranith Conyno, afterward
Father-in-law to Scanderberg, Andrew Thopia, and the magnificent Rectors of the
Venetian State. At which ass^m^ly, Scanderbeg made an el^quent speech above an
hour in length which was very pleasing to all those which were present, who
having highly praised the wise advice of this Prince, every one put himself in
a posture to reach out a helping hand to restore him to the possession and
enjoyments of those Countries, Territories and Dominions which were unjustly
detained from him by the Turk. And he on his part ceased not to be active
every where to besiege, force, and const^ain those, which endeavored to
continue their obedience to the Turk. But as he with all eagerness pursued his
design of making himself Lord and Master of all Albania; ^^tel^igence was sent
him by a (...) he left at Andrip^lis with the Turks, that Alibeg Basha
(accompanied with sixty thousand Janiz^ries, Archers, and Musketeers, and
forty thousand Horse) advanced toward Alibeg B^sh^ marches against Scanderbeg.
him: where at he was not at all discourage^, al^hough at that time he was but
n^w^y (...) King of Albania, and hi^ Forces fa^ infe^iour in number. But wi^h
great chee^fulness of heart, as if he already held the victory assured, being
followed by fifteen thousand Albanians, and twelve thousand other Foot, he bent
his march toward that place, where he presumed he might encounter the Turks,
and made all possible diligence to advance his Army so nee^ that of Alibeg the
Turkish General, that they might be necessicated to fight; and charged them
with so great ^^ry and violence, as he soon ^ut them to a miserable rout. Every
one wondered how in so short a time so great an execution could be made, in
regard the Battle ^as^ed but from Sunrising until the third hour. In this
Battle were taken Four and Alibeg Basha defeated by Scanderbeg.
twenty colors, two thou and Turks were made prisoners, and two and twenty
thousand slain upon the place: of the Christians side a great number were
wounded, and about an hundred found dead. Alibeg General of the Turkish forces
saved himself, and returned into the City of Andrinop^is, called by these
barbarous people Hedrea Valdom, where Amura^h was, who had well-nigh caused him
to be put to death, reproaching him that his A^my was betrayed, as well as that
wherein Castriot dealt falsely with him* to whom this poor old man with cries
and sighs replied in these words, Vallahe et billahe benea: Verraim
herniguisterce, which signifies, O Sir! by the Grace of Almighty God, I confess
a^^ that thou say for the present. As if he meant, I have nourisht and
brought up a man, who now takes up Arms against me, and torments my soul. But
that which troubled this poor Turk most of all, was, that a peace being
concluded between him and the King of Hungary for ten years (by the mediation
and practice of George Despot of Servia and Rascia, which is the upper Mysia,
by the Turks called Segoria) and though respectively sworn to by them, upon the
holy Evangelist, and the Alcoran, yet he much doubted it would not be of any
long continuance, as in effect it was soon broken. And moreover he having newly
received this ^ude overthrow; there came sudden news that the King of
Caramania or Cilicia was preparing a strong and powerful Army, therewith
intending to invade the Turks of Natolia, called Great Turkey; which perplexed
him very much being thereby necessitated to go into Asia with the Relics of
his routed forces to secure that Country. And on the other side the Hungarian
threatening the same danger with the Caramanian and Albania^, it behoved him to
look about him. And hereupon he thinks fit to send an Ambassador to Scanderbeg,
presenting him Scanderbeg refuses a truce with Amurath.
rich gifts, endeavoring thereby to hinder the Albanians, who were, as yet, but
newly flesht as it were (with the Turkish blood) from advancing further, and
from irritating the Ottoman fury; desiring his friendship, and that he would
abstain from all enterprises that tended to his preju^ice. Amuraths letter
being read, ^ated from Andrinople the fifteenth of ^u^e, in the year of our
Lord 1444 five days after Airadin the Turks Ambassador was returned with an
answer bea^ing date the twelfth of July of the same year, wherein Scanderbeg
utterly refused the truce; which letter Airadin brought to the Turk as he was
a hunting, and by word of mouth delivered to him all the rest of Castriot's
deliberations; wherewith this poor Infidel was so ill sati^fied, that he could
not contain himself from crying out before his Basha's, in this sort, Senicq
guna scythan honuar; as if he would say, I think Scanderbeg is possessed by the
devil, that he so little regards my power and greatness. But Amurath being a
man experienced in affairs, knew well enough in case he should seem to be
discouraged, there needed nothing else to make all the rest Cowards; and
therefore to express his cheerfulness, he smiled, playing with his Beard, and
spoke again these words, Thou covetest, O unhappy man! thou covetest some
memorable death, believe me thou shall have it! we will assist, and without thy
command will be present at the obsequies of him who was nourisht by us, but now
become our utter enemy, and will accompany thy funeral-pompe to the grave, for
fear thou should complain in hell, that thou came not thither honorably
enough.

And however his countenance was composed, he had sad apprehensions to himself
aside, and thought no other matters, which occasioned him a long time to remain
in a musing doubtful posture; and at last understanding that Scanderbeg had
disbanded many of his forces, keeping the field only with some few
light horse, without any body of an Army, he sends for his Basha Ferise,
appointing Ferise Basha sent against Castriot, is by him defeated.
nine thousand chosen horse, encouraging them with large promises, in case they
could conquer the Albanians. Ferise discharged his duty with all diligence,
approaching secretly to the Frontiers of Macedonia. And though he marched
toward the Albanians, more like a Thief then a Warrior: yet he came not before
the news of his approach; Castriot being advertised thereof by a spy who came
to him from the Sultans Court, and so possessing himself of a Straight and
narrow Valley, calle^ Mocrea, the only p^ssage for the Turks; It served for a
bu^ying place for the most part of Ferises Army, who were so suriously charged
by the Albanians, that the Basha himself was forced to (...), leaving the best
part of his f^rce^ either dead in the field, or Prisoners. Ottoman finding
himself so rudely dealt withal by the Albanians, sends Mustapha his Basha with
five and twenty thousand men into Epire, expressly charging him to be wary, and
not entangle himself in the Ambushes of the Albanians, but Mustaphae Basha sent
against Castriot into Epire, is defeated.
only pillage and lay waste the Country. Scanderbeg advertised (by some horse
he had sent forth to that purpose) of the spoil Mustapha made throughout all
Epire, takes horse immediately, and being followed with three thousand horse
only, and four thousand other good soldiers, led them as privately as he
could between two valleys where the enemy was to pass, who as soon as they came
near the place, separated and dispersed themselves into several companies: the
Christians falling upon them in disorder, soon made their way to the Turks
Trenches, instantly gained them, and made so grear a slaughter that none
escaped, save only a few that followed the flying Mustapha, preserving their
lives by the sharpeness of their Spurs. So Scanderbeg recovered not only the
Pillage they had taken from him in Epire, but also all the spoils of the
Turks, who had no leisure to save their baggage, being so closely pursued by
Scanderbeg. But this overthrow did no^ discourage Amurath, who commanded
Mustapha to raise new Forces, for^idding him to spoil the enemies Country, or
engage in a Bat^le with Castriot, but only to hinder his advancing toward
them, which fell ou^ happily for this Christian Prince; for soon after he had a
War with the State of Venice, by reason of the succession of Lech Zachary,
which shall be declared hereafter, because I intend not here to make a
diversion, and to omit the happy success which Scanderbeg had against Mustapha
the Basha, who seeing the Christians warring among themselves very furiously,
thought during their disorders, to fish in their trou^led waters, and obtain
the fruit of a Victory, which he earnestly desired, and was very much hoped for
by him, whereupon he so much impor^unes Amurath, that he obtains order to begin
a new war with the Christians, in which he was no great gainer, for Scanderbeg
quitting Dadine, charged that Pagan Army so furiously, as that ten thousand of
them ^^l upon the place, fourscore and Mustapha defeat^d^th second ti^ by
Scanderbeg.
two were made prisoners, and fifteen Standards taken; on the Albanian side
scarce three hundred men were lost. If this signal victory much puffed up the
hea^ts of the Albanians, Amuraths (that plodding blade) was Amuraths first
voyage into Epire against Castriot.
the more dejected, who could not so well disgui^e his intended enterprise of
setting on foot a mighty and powerful Army against Castriot, but that it took
vent, and was discovered (by his nearest and greatest favorites) to Scanderbeg,
who hereupon slept not in secu^ity; but gave a general order to rai^e instantly
the forces of his whole Country, and to fortify and strengthen the Fortresses,
Cities and Garrisons throughout all Epire.

In the mean time the Great Turk transports all his Army into Europe by long
marches, computed by some to be an hundred and fifty thousand fighting men (to
wit) fourscore and ten thousand horse, and threescore thousand foot; other
reckon them but an hundred and twenty thousand in all, deducting twenty
thousand horse, and ten thousand foot.

In this Equipage he comes to besiege Alba and other Cities, upon which he
gained nothing but the ^iminishing of his forces, which though daily recruited
by the new supplies which came to them, yet so mouldred away, that the poor old
Ottoman ashamed of the loss of so many of his men, was constrained to retreat,
quit Epire, and in all haste mar^h away; whilst Scanderbeg with all might and
main pu^sued them, and gle^ned ^p and destroyed such a multitude, as the shame
thereof made the Great Turk at last so impatient, that he commanded the Basha
of Romania to stay Amurath forced to retreat, Castriot be^ieges Fetigrade.
behind with thirty thousand horse to secure the safe retreat of the resi^ue of
the Army. But Amurath had scarce taken up his Quarters in his own Country, when
news was brought him that Scanderbeg had laid Amuraths second voyage unto
Epire, and siege of Croye in ^ain.
siege to Sfetigrade, whereupon he determines to return by the same way he
came, and sends Sebalias to besiege Cr^y, and he and his Son Mahomet invaded
Epire about the end of April, and came himself in person before Croy, and held
it besieged above four months; in which time a very great number of his Forces
were lo^t. He endeavored to batter it with thirty pieces of Cannon, and other
warlike instruments and Engines, but could do little execution, the place being
very strong on all parts, and replenished with a lively fountain of water
within, and anot^er in the side of the hill behind a Rock. Nor must I forget to
tell yo^ that at the end of four months, a general assault was given by the
enemies, and maintained so furiously on each p^rt, that lasting but five hours,
four thousand men remained dead upon the place, although the Turks powe,
strength, and cunning, could not gain the place (as I have said) but after all
this, the said City rather lifted up her head against the Ottoman fury as
Victrix.

Nor will I not derogate from Vranocontes, but allow him all the honor due to
his great deserts; and as this Governor appointed by Scanderbeg to command
^roye, was ^igil^nt and dexterous to oppose Amurath; so his Prince was not
asleep in creating other employment for his Forces elsewhere; for as Ott^man
had given him a very hot Al^rm, Scan^erbeg with a party of his choice ^o^^e
falls so desperately upon the Enemies Tents at the said ^iege, as that Amurath
could not at that time compass his designs, no^ take the place, although he
dispatched away Seremet with four thousand ^o^se to repulse Scanderbeg; and
Mahomet likewise though in vain, pu^^^ed him with all possible speed,
conceiving so great a hatred against him, as that after the death of his
fat^er, he abated nothing of his pernicious and evil affection toward him.

And though death prevented the malicious designs of Amurath, yet it could not
make any alteration in the heart of his Son Mahomet the second (and not the
first, as by a mistake it slipped in this work) who took Constantinople, and
was thereby the more enraged against the Christians, then before. However, the
state of affairs at this time so di^^^cted him, that he was constrai^e^ to send
Amb^ssadors to desire a ^ruce, Mahomet ^^ second (...) a (...) with Castriot,
is (...).
which was refu^ed him, and ^n ^nswer was returned to Sang^as the Deputy, who
was sent to conclude the peace, that he should be gone pre^^n^^y: as for
Castriot, ^e would not make any peace or agreement with the I^f^^el, unless he
(...) him those Ci^ies which Amurath h^d unjustly ^surped. In the ^ean (...)
Mahomet retires, and was a long while be^o^e he could ^e^tle himself in his
Fathers D^minions, an^ therefore could not for that time ^o Castriot any great
harm. And Scanderbeg being willing to have an heir to George Castriots marriage.
succeed him (and being thereunto requested by his subjects) took to his lawful
Wi^e the most virtuous and fair daughter of Prince Aramth Conyno, called
Doneca; with whom he could not live long in quiet. For so soon as this new
Turk was settled in his Fathers Throne, he began to threaten Castriot our
Christian Prince, being not able to endu^e he should have such Dominion over
Cro^e and the rest of Epire. Nor did I here intend to have set down the
undertaking of Scanderbeg to assist Ferdinand the Son of Alphonso King of
Naples, had not the several Castriot r^l^ev^s Alphonso King of Naples so^.
Historians who have written thereon, omitted how he did redeem this poor King,
w^o was reduced to that misery and non plus, as that ^e was imprisoned in the
Town of Bar^, by the ^^ege which the Count Picevin had ^i^ to it, who made as
sure of him, as if he had been already entangled in his Net. But as soon as the
arrival of Scanderbeg was known, Duke John of Sore, and the Count Picevin
packed up their baggage, raised their siege, and in great haste marched thirty
miles from thence to avoid the fury of that Fleet, and those which accompanied
Scanderbeg, who had so good success in repul^ng Ferdinands enemies, that to him
alone ^elongs the hono^ of recovering of that Kings Crown. But the aff^^s of
hi^ (...) Kingdom wanting his direction, he was constrained to quit all, and to
return to Croye, near unto which place the Christians had erected an
inexpugnable Fort^ess (sufficient to hinder the passages of the Infidels) upon
an exceeding high Mountain, called Modrica, and having furnished it with
Victuals, Artillery, and Munition, made such opposition against the attempts of
the enemy, that it secured the Pass; whereupon M^homet ^^inting under so many
attempts Sinaim Sa^^a^ s^nt by Mahomet against Castriot, is de^^ated.
made upon him, dispatches away a famous Captain called Sinam, wi^h five and
twenty thousand Turkish Horse against Scanderbeg, to su^p^ise him on a sudd^in,
thinking the War of Naples from whence he was but lately returned, had made him
secure and careless. But Scanderbeg who always slept with his eyes open, had
opportunely, since his arrival, sent his Spies abroad, and renewed his
Intelligence with those near the Sultan, whereby he had timely notice to
prepare and to get the first into the field: But kept himself pri^ate and
close, expecting the advance of the San^jac Sinam, and then marched the whole
night toward him, during the ob^^urity whereof, and contrary to the knowledge
of his Adversary, with eight thousand fighting men Horse and Foor; ^e possessed
himself of the Mountain M^crea, and there resolutely expected Sinam, that being
the Avenue t^rough which he was of necessity to p^ss; and falling upon him
un^wares, defeated him with all his Army, where the slaughter was so great,
that two parts of three fell upon the place, and Ass^mb^g invading Epire, is
also discomsited.
all the Ensigns and Baggage became a Prey to the Christians: and all the
General could do was to s^ve himself in this desperate fight, by avoiding it
with extraordinary speed. And already Assambeg, or according to others,
Anusabeg was advanced already on this side of Ocride, accompanied with thirty
thousand fighting men; but Scanderbeg being accompanied only with four
thousand, encountered him in so opportune a place, that he soon vanquished
them: the Guards on each side of this Turkish General were s^^tten down to the
g^ou^d, his Horse hurt, and himself wounded in the right Arm with an Arrow,
knew no better way at last to (...) ^im^elf, then to make trial of a Christian
Clemency, as well as of the Mar^ia^ sury of ^n enemy. Be^o^e whom being
brought, together with ^ivers other Captains, the tears standing in his eyes,
and his hands lifted up to heaven, he spoke in this manner to Scanderbeg, That
being in the service of the great Turkish Emperor, his honor obliged him to
serve him faithfully, and therefore implored his mercy, favor and clemency;
whose speech took so well with Scanderbeg, that he pardoned them all, and gave
them their lievs, paying ten thousand Ducats for his own, and four thousand
Ducats for the ransom of the rest, which was performed accordingly. I know many
have accused Scanderbeg for being so easily persuaded by the Turk, and blame
him that he knew not how to use his advantage against the Sfetigradians, who
indeed surprised him at that time.

But here we are not upon the same terms, the Victory was already in
Scanderbeg's hands, whose humanity becomes so much the more to be admired, as
being exercised against a Capital enemy, whom we can seldom spare when he is
once intrapped. But he showed a far greater mildness toward the Venetians,
with whom (to his great regret) he had a sharp and hard War. But in regard it
would have been accounted a folly, and have proved a great disparagement A
difference between Castr^ot and the Venetians, appeared.
to lose a man's right for want of looking after it, he would not therefore seem
easily to quit the succession of that, which he pretended was fallen unto him by
the death of Lech Zachary, and wherein the Venetians opposed him, by reason of
an agreement made between them and the Lady Bosse, the mother of the deceased
party. Notwithstanding which, Scanderbeg claimed that there being no Will, he
ought to succeed Zachary (who was murdered by Lech Dulagin, the Son of the
Lord of Saint Paul) and seemed to have the best title as lawful heir to the
Estate. But after a great contestation, they resolved the sword should decide
the qu^rrel on both sides, wherewith he pressed them so hard (although he
abated very much of the rigor he exe^cised toward the Infidels and Turks) that
the Venetians had no other expedient, but to desire a Peace with him, which yet
they would not conclude but upon their own conditions, though they were reduced
to such extremity, as that if Scanderbeg had not condescended, they had in all
likelihood been destroyed: but he considering, That the virtue, valor, and
magnanimity of a valiant warrior, appears not in being cruel to an enemy, chose
rather to mitigate the appetite of revenge, by mildness and kind usage; and
therefore yielded freely to forgo that which of right belonged unto him,
although it was never his custom to quit any thing to I^fidels, as appeared
clea^ly in the encounter with the Tyrant Sebalie, who besieged Bellegrade,
where he defeated four an^ twenty thousand Turks, Several other of Castriot's
p^ow^ss^s against the (...).
took six thousand prisoners, and set at liberty four thousand Christians, who
were detained by the Bashaws, M^^se^, Assambeg, Isaac, and Sinambeg, and put to
death more than fifty thousand of his enemies: and almost as many more two
years after, under the command of the Bashaw Ballabam.

These and the like valorous exploits, pleased so well the most part of the
Christian Princes, that they were thereby provoked to take up Arms against
Mahomet; and Pope Pius piously moved, seeing the affections of this noble
Captain, to the utter extirpation of the Infidels, stirred up all Christian
Kings, Princes, and Potentates to Arm themselves against the Turk; and knowing
that there could not be an abler Captain Geo: Castriot created chief of the
Christian League against the Turk.
chosen to that purpose, then Scanderbeg, to curb and tame the Barbarians,
elected and named him the Captain of the League, with promise to make him King,
not only of all Albania or Epire, but also of Macedoni^: which ho^y
un^er^^^ing was interrupted by the death of ^ius, and Pope Paul the second;
although our Albanian King traveled since to Rome, to summon the Pope to join
in a design so profitable for the safety and enlargement of Christendom.
Finally, finding himself f^u^^rate of the succors he expected f^^m the Kings
and Princes on this ^^^e, he went to L^ssa upon the River of Cliro, to con^ult
of the Occurrences of the war with the Deputy Prove^dor of Ve^ice, where he was
seized on by a deadly Fever; and feeling himself stricken by death, he made
his will, and recommended his little son John, his Geo: Cast^iot created
Citizen of Venice.
wealth and Country, to the care of the State of Venice, who in remembrance and
gratitude for the advantageous peace he had freely granted them, created him
and his posterity (after they had casted lots) with an universal consent to be
Citizens of Venice. A few days after he departed hence to the other world in
the 63 d. year of his age, and four and twentieth of his Reign (for he began
his Reign the eight and twentieth day of November. in the year 1443. an^ dyed in
the year 1467.) his body was interred in the Church of Saint Nicholas in Lissa,
with great Pomp and Magnificence, Castriot's death and bu^ial.
whose bones rested enclosed in this place in peace, until Mahomet came into
Epire some four years after, to assault Scutari. So great a reverence (says
Paulus ^ovins) had the Turks themselves of this Heroic persons valor and
conduct, that after his death, having made themselves masters of all Epire, at
last seized upon his Sepulcher at Alesha; which having found, they worshipped
and adored it, pulling out his dead ^ones, which they carried about them,
thinking themselves invincible, and safe in battle, Several notable exploits
done by Castriot.
if at their going to fight they had the least piece of a relic of this
invincible Captain hung at their neck in gold or silver; and indeed his actions
are incredible. As that wild Savage Bull of an extraordinary fury and
greatness, committing a thousand spoils and murders in the Country of his
Sister Mamiza, whose ne^k he quite cut through with one ^low of his S^imiter on
horseback. That monstrous Boar of Apoville, which had wounded ^o many of King
Ferd^nana's Courtiers, which bea^ he ass^ulted in the same manner, and with
like dexte^i^y he cut off his head in the open Field before the King, as they
were a hunting. And it is also reported of him, that after the encamping of
Ballaban before Cr^ye, there being brought to him chained and fast bound
together, Jonima and Heder, the brother and Nephew of Ballaban, their sight
(putting him in remembrance of the cruelties acted through Ballaban's occasion,
upon the person of Moses and his companions) put him in such a vehement
passion of anger against them, that he had no patience to suffer others to fall
on them, but in great fury fell on them himself, and at one blow hewed them
both through the body with his Scimiter; which was a Damasked one, of an
excellent goodness, two of which he always wore in one Scabbard, both which
were often broken or spoiled in one B^ttel. And Mahomet having heard of the
excellency of such a sword which would cut asunder Ganders, Helmets, and other
strong Armor) as they were once in a T^eaty, sent to desire it for a present;
an^ the Sultan causing trial to be made thereof by the best Arms of the Court,
and the strongest, and no such miracles proceeding from it as was boasted of,
he thereupon caused it to be retu^n^^ to Scanderbeg, saying, That ^e g^ve him
no thanks for such a present, when he could buy as good and a better for his
money; and that he would no longer believe that which was reported of it. Put
Scanderbeg having made more extraordinary proofs thereof in the presence of the
Messenger, sent him word, That the virtue was not altogether in the Sword, but
in the Arm, which he reserved to himself, which he employed against his enemies.

And though I do not much value the Prodigies and observations, which many men
as it were adore at some Nativities; yet will I not conceal A prodigy which
happened at Castriot 's birth.
what was prognosticated of the glory that should accompany this famous person;
his Mother dreaming, as soon as he was conceived, that she had brought fo^th a
Serpent of that bigness, that it covered almost all Epire; and stretching out
its head upon the Dominions of the Turk, it swallowed them up with its bloody
throat, dipping his Tail in the Sea that looks toward the Christians, and
especially toward the confines of Venice. I know many will be apt to be
encouraged upon this relation, to slatter themselves with hopes upon the like
predictions; and others too superstitious, will endeavor to unfold the secrets
that lie hidden under the shadow of such a Dream: for my part, I shall
acknowledge, that by the effects, the advertisement which nature here gave, was
not altogether frivolous, whereby every one might know that this George
Castriot should be eminent in Arms and Warlike exploirs; a scourge to the
Turks, a successeful Captain, and a true Defender of the Christian Faith, ever
retaining an honorable esteem of the Venetian State. In a word, the experience
and progress of his whole life do manifestly verify this supernatural
Prophecy. From his youth he applied himself so much to the Bow, with other
military exercises, and acts of valor, that no Historian makes mention of his
equal; neither could any famous Captain ever compare with him in Warlike
exploits.

TAMBERLAIN, the great Scourge of the TURKS.
TO raise the drooping thoughts of Christendom, with seasonable discourses of
those several Champions who have in every age checked the growing power of the
Turk, though as threatening and terrible as at this time, we have at large
expressed the admired Carriage and Conduct of Count Serini, and in brief
recounted the known actions of Scanderbeg: and to make the number complete,
added here the exact account of great Tamberlain, who weakened the Grand
Seignior as much Eastward, as those brave persons have done Northward: a
Triumviri these, that are not to be paralleled, three Heroes that have out gone
Antiquity, and out-reached Pos^erity. The first an Heathen born, to punish
Infidelity; the second a papist, born to vindicate Christianity; The third a
Protestant, born as some think to reform the World. The first informs us how
Turkey may be perplexed by Divisions and Invasions: The other two have taught
us how it may be lessened by resolved Defeats and Oppositions. Here we may see
what may be done in Asia; there what may be done in Europe. Serini has
instructed the world what resolution and prudence; Scanderbeg, what
correspondences and activity; and Tamberlain, what number and cruelty may be
exercised against that overflowing power and people. Concerning which
Tamberlain, whether we consider the commencements which gave life to the
Sovereign Empire of this same furious rage of Tamberlain; or whether we delight
our selves by observing the means whereby he s^rued himself up unto the height
of Glory; We must needs confess, (although we were never so void of reason and
judgment) that it is scarce possible, less credible, that so despicable a
vessel should contain so great a stock of admirable Actions, and that thence a
branch should have sprung, which did subvert the Turkish Monarchy, and several
other Potentates, as the sequel of this present discourse will manifest. As to
his offspring, Historiographers do much vary about the truth of it. Some say
Tamberlains original where.
he came from the midst of the Parthians, a people very much redoubted in the
Romans times, though but s^enderly famous. Others say he was a Turk, a
S^ythian, a Zagatean, a Tartarian, because it is apparent he was born at
Samercand, which is adjacent unto the River Taxartes hard by the Country of
Zagatai. And as there is some difference concerning the place of his
offspring; so we shall meet with a far greater concerning his qualities and
extraction. Some deriving his descent from Cixges Cham, and make him to be Zain
Cham, the third Emperor, who usually is called Bachti. Others suppose him to
have been an inconsiderate person, of a base extraction, but who afterward
caused himself to be reputed to be the greatest and most powerful Prince of all
the East, in so Tamb. appellation of himself.
high a degree, as that he termed himself to be the wrath of God, and not a
man; in regard whereof, some do compare him to Hannibal, taking it for granted,
that the earth never bore a more fierce, o^stinate, and self-willed man, than
this same Tamberlain; and that none ever punished thefts and plunders in such a
manner as he did, although himself was the greatest thief and robber, and the
What Tamberl. was as to his actions and intellects.
most detestablest (as to his Actions) which ever any History did set forth or
could produce. And on the contrary, he was again so excellent a personage (as
to his Intellects) that by his audacity and assurance, he facilitated those
things which all others judged to be impossible. Morover he was so highly be
friended by Fortune, that he never at tempted any thing, but he came off with
credit: Nor did he ever wage War, but he remained Conqueror. However some do
scruple the meanness of his birth, not judging it possible that so
inconsiderable a man, as he is said to have been, should attain to such a pitch
of greatness, as to shake the Turkish Empire which was so long a settling. But
since I find, that the generality is of that opinion, it will not be
unbeseeming my joining with them therein; and to say that he was the Son of one
called Sangali, a man Tamb. Father and offspring.
who was none of the wealthiest in the world, insomuch as that Tamberlain was
constrained (in relation to his Fathers profession) to keep Cattle and Herds in
the Fields: but he had not long followed that Vocation, when as entering into a
certain Treaty Tamberl. from a shepherd becom^ a King.
and League with the rest of the shepherds of that Country, they chose him to
be their King, and did in^oll and list themselves under his command. Finally,
some others do conceive him to have been a poor Soldier, but a subtle and
circumspect m^n, who wanted no wit, being of a lively and quick spirit. To
which they add, that being got up on the top of a Stable-wall, whence he had a
mind to have stolen some horses, and perceiving that the owner had discovered
him, he flung himself down the wall, and in the fall hurt his thigh, by reason
whereof he ever since remained lame. However he performed gallant Actions; and
he was mightily praised for the equity, policy, and good discipline wherewith
he maintained his Army. So that had he not a little too much slackned the
reins of his Cruelty and Ambition, he doubtless had excelled all the Warriors
that ever were in the world; for no Chieftain had ever attained to the
practical part of ranging and disciplining an Army so exquisitely as he
Tamberlin ranged and disciplined his Army very well.
did. And should I relate the several good orders which he caused his soldiery
to observe, it would be an endless work; I shall only tell you in what manner
he prevented the coming No spies could ge^ i^^o Tamberl Camp undiscovered.
of any Spies into his Camp, and how they were presently discovered; for which
cause he ^uilt a house without his Camp for all strangers that arrived, who
were there lodged and treated, having any business to communicate unto him:
whereby he prevented their sneaking into his Camp, and their prying into, and
discovering what was done there. Every evening the Watchword was distributed,
and each man was to repair to his Quarters: And if any one was found out of his
Rank, or gadding abroad out of his Quarters, he died without mercy; so that
there was no shelter or safety for Spies.

I shall omit the several manners of repartitions of his Quarters, and under
what penalties he caused his Military orders to be observed, since the reader
may be better satisfied therein by several other Pens who have most amply
written concerning this famous Captains deeds, and shall proceed more
particularly to describe his life. Now by his robbings and thieveries he had so
well thrived on all sides, that at last he was not a little troubled, how to
preserve that which he had unjustly acquired. And therefore he took two
Puissant men among the Massagethians to be his Tamberl. associates.
Associates, viz. Chaidaren and Mirxeus, who being gained by the presents which
he gave them, came unto his relief with their Forces, and with this support, he
fell upon the Tartars, overcame them, and defeated Tamberlin defeats the
Tartars.
their Cavalry, which gained him such a repu^e, as that the inhabitants of
Samercand furnished him with Gold and Silver, and Forces to go through with his
undertakings. So likewise the King of the Massagethans made Tamberlain General
of all his Tamberlin General of the Massagetans.
Forces to his own ruin; for at the taking of Pogdatus a City in Tartary,
Tamberlain (on purpose to usurp his Kingdom) did cause a Fig to be given him,
and after his death married his widow. And immediately after made himself King
of Samercand, and of the Massagets; Harboring a design at that very time to
conquer the Empire of Asia; whereunto he was much solicited and egged on by
Chaidarus, who brought Myrxeus in disgrace with Tamberlain, to whom he had
reported some words which Myrxeus had too freely and unadvisedly spoken Mirxeus
disgraced and his death.
of Tamberlain, whilst he was only General of the Massagets, which cost Myrxeus
his life. Afterward he began a War against the Hircanians The Hircanians and
Caducians conquered by Tamb. as also the Arabians.
and Caducians, whom he conquered. And because the Arabians did ravage the
neighboring parts, and gave relief unto the Caducians, he thereupon took an
occasion to invade all the Nations which were subject to the Sultan of Persia,
of Baldacia, Damatia, and of Egypt. However, though he could not conquer them,
after he had well-nigh tired them out, he agreed a Peace with them,
conditionally, that they should furnish him with Forces to serve him in his
wars, and to pay him an Annual Tribute as a sign of their submission.

But whilst he was busied thus, tormenting some, and undermining others,
flattering himself with the vain hopes of the great Conquest he should make, he
was called home again by the troubles which were arisen in his own Country.
For the great King of Catay, who is one of The King of Catay wars upon Tamberl.
the nine Indian Hordes, and the Sovereign of all the Tartars, had made a
pretty spoil through all Tamberlain's Country, who in the beginning thought to
have thundered him out again: but finding with whom he had to deal,
apprehen^ing lest if he should exasperate the great Cham of Catay too much, it
might endanger his possessions, was constrained to come to a Treaty, and to
demand a Peace, which was granted him, conditionally that Tamberlain should do
him homage, and should pay a Tamberl. makes a peace with the King of Ca^ay.
yearly Tribute for the Messagetes Country which he held. N^r need we to doubt
but that Tamberlain might have withstood the great Tartar, but that he was loath
to diminish his Forces, with which he was resolved to wage War against the
Ottoman Family; being spurred on there unto by the great Ambition he had always
to undertake some considerable expedition or other against his Neighbors.
Wherefore being entered Cappadocia, he besieged the City of Sebasta, and fought
against it with so much dexterity, as that the Turks being Tamberl. wars
against the Tu^ks, t^kes Sebasta.
discouraged, and having lost all hopes of being relieved, had not the heart to
defend themselves against the Scythians, Persia^^ ^^d B^ctrians; who having
taken the Town, put all to the sword (...) they found in the place, ^o that it
is s^i^ there dyed that day above 120^00 souls, besides some persons of qu^lity
which were taken, and among^^ the rest the son of Bajazet, the first of that
Name, who by his Father had been put in the City of Sebasta, the better to
provide for Bajazet 's Soa^taken in Sebasta, and put to death.
the defense of it; but he had not long kept it, before Tamberlain made him
pass under the merciless cruelty of his most impious rage. After which he sent
Ambassadors unto Bajazet, commanding him to render unto all those whom he had
dispossessed, whatsoever he most unjustly detained from them (which was but a
mere pretense in Tamberlain to pick a quarrel with Tamberl. pretense to war
upon Bajazet.
Bajazet) as also to pay unto him vast and excessive Tributes. Nor will I here
venture to contest whether Tamberlain had just cause to war against Bajazet, as
being a Tyrant; for all the world knows this Tartar made use only of ^his
cloak or pretense the better to color and disguise his design against this
poor Turk; who Arrogant titles appropriated to Tamberl. and Bajazets names.
although he was called Temis Cuthlu, which in the Tartarian Language signifies
a Fortunate Iron, because he was not only happy in his enterprises, but as
vali^nt as his Sword; insomuch as that he made a great part of the world to
tremble: So on the other part Bajazet was ^irnamed Lelapa, which signifies a
Furious Wave, and Hiidin, which signifies Boisterous and Impetuous.
Notwithstanding Tamberlain did make him know, that his Fortunate sword did not
apprehend the being shaken or b^oken by the Turkish Waves and Thunder bolts;
but that to the contrary his name Lelapa was rather to be styled a Whirl-winde,
not by reason of Bajazet's virtue and A great def^ct in Bajazet.
valor, but because of his passion and hastiness, whereby those fortunate
enterprises were dissipated an confounded, which he might have carried on
gloriously, had he suffered reason to have been his guide. And it even fell out
so; for Bajazet returned a very smart answer unto Tamberlain, and unadvisedly
tainted the Tartars wives honor; which words cost him Tamberl. c^^asperated
against Bajazets answer by his wife.
dear. For as Tamberlain did not ear any good will to Bajazet at all, so his
Wife being en^aged at the indignities which were put upon her by the Turk, did
^o highly incense her Hu^b^nd, as that he was not to expect any Peace with his
Wife, unle^s he pursued the Turk wi^h Fire and Sword.

Wherefore Tamberlain assembled A war between Tamberl. and Bajazet.
a formidable Army of Tartarians, Seythia^s, Persians, Armenians, and
Bactrians, amoun^ing unto the number of 800000 fighting men, and passed through
the Provinces of Lydia and Phrygia, which ca^sed Bajazet to raise the siege of
Constantinople, and to march unto Asia, to hinder the M^ssagetan from coming
into his Country; resolving before Tamberlain should have time to proceed, he
would encounter him, and fight him in Armenia, or upon the banks of Euphrates,
and although they ^ought each other, yet they could not meet a long while,
Bajazets Council in the interim were of opinion, that he should do well to
treat with Tamberlain, seeing he was not strong enough to resist him, and would
not dispend his T^easury to raise new Forces. After which the Turk having
intelligence that Tamberlain marched into Bithynia, to besiege Pruse
(heretofore called Bruise) Tam^erl fights Bajazer, and kills a great ^^mber of
the Turks.
the chief City of the Country, and the Royal Seat, he resolved to fight him in
that place. And both Armies joined Battle in the Mount Stella (where Pompey
fought wi^h Mithridates in the year one thousand three hundred ninety and
seven) and the Turk chancing to be worried, there were above two hundred
thousand of them slain in the place, and an infinite number taken. Now Bajazet
perceiving the day was lost, began to acknowledge his error, when it was too
late; wherefore he resolved to repair the faults the best he could, and save
himself by flight, being mounted on a Mare, which was as swift as the wind. But
the misfortune of his disaster following him, he was pu^sued by the
Tamberlanists, who overtook him, by the fault which Bajazeth committed in
letting his Bajazeth taken prisoner.
Mare drink, who thereby became so heavy and replenished, as that she could not
make so much way as she did before; besides all which, this poor King was
troubled with the Gout, which had disabled his hands and his feet.

The Tamberlainists having seized on so rich a booty, as also on all the
Basha's, Beglerbegs, Aga's, and Sangea's of the King of Turkey; he was brought
unto Tamberlain, who taking him by the shoulders, said these words, Thou
disloyal Coward, thou art now my Slave, and thou shall receive the reward of
thy deserts. Bajazet being full of amazement, answered him, I pray you Sir,
kill me: but the Conqueror replied, Lets go, lets go, there is no man can save
thee. Whenas this miserable captive forgetting the miserable estate wherein he
was, returned harsh language unto his Conqueror, and with injurious Bajazeths
indiscretion in reproaching of ^ Tamberlain.
terms began to inveigh against Tamberlain, reproaching him with his base
extraction, and with his former profession of theevery. So that it was a wonder
this Zagathean did not cause him immediately to be slain; for on a less
occasion he caused his great friend Mirxe to be put to death, because he only
had adventured to say that the principality of Samercand was too well settled,
to fall into the hands of so inferior a fellow, and so inconsiderate a robber
as Tamberlain was; although these words were not spoken in his presence, nor
after he had attained to that dignity. But it seems he reserved the venting of
his choler upon Bajazet, because he would not put him to death before he had
observed all the formalities of Justice. And truly the Captive King had little
reason to rail at him, for immediately he caused him to be set upon a M^le, and
in a way of derision to be led through all the enemies Camp, and afterward
caused him to tied in Golden Chains, and to ^e put in a Cage, carry^ng him up
The indigniti^s and mis^ries of Bajazet.
and down wheresoever he went; and when he got upon Ho^seback, he caused him to
kneel down, setting his feet upon his neck and shoulders, making him his
footstool (as formerly Sophorus the King of the Persians did unto Valerinus the
Emperor of Rome) and fed him only with crumbs of bread and broken morsels,
which he fl^ng unto him just as if he had been a Dog. However Bajazets courage
could not hereby be abashed, as it appeared when Tamberlain caused that
Sultaness which the Turk loved The Sultaness Bajazeths wife serves Tamberlain
at table.
best (and who was taken with the Kings children and all Bajazets Concubines in
the Seraglio of Pruse or Bruise) and made her serve him at table. At which
sight, the miserable Captive flew out into howlings and roarings, reproaching
the Conquerors baseness and p^ide, in making so little esteem of the Kingly
race, for t^is Lady was the d^ughter of Eleazor King of Servia. Moreover these
conquests so pu^fed u^ this Tartars heart, as being not able to contain himself
within any compass, Tamberlains designs to conquer Europe, prevented by his
death.
he had designed to pass into Europe to Conquer it; but his death put a period
to all his ambitious enterprises, in the year of our Lord fourteen hundred and
three.

He died as he lived, with thoughts full of Conquests and victories; his
ambition is as wide as Europe, while his body is confined to a Grave-pit; his
success was great, and his mind greater; he attained much, he aimed at more; he
was born a beggar, but with a King in his belly; his temper was as rude as his
Country, his education as little as his hopes, and his Manners rough and unhewn
as his Calling. He was the most ambitious man that ever was heard of, and who
would by no means be rendered civil nor familiar. Whereof a certain Genua
Gentleman, who was one of his great favorites can give a testimony, who
essaying to break him of his rudeness and inhumanity wherewithal he treated
those which he had overcome, he answered him, How now thou Dog? do thou think
I am a man? I am the wrath of God, and the Tamberlains sense of himself.
ruin of mankind; nor have ^ca^ce any exceeded him in cruelty. Two examples
whereof I shall set before you: The first was when he caused The inhumane
^^u^lty of ^amb^^lain.
that most barbarous inhumanity to be exe^cised at Damas on the maidens and
young children, who came ou^ of the said City to meet him, clad in white, and
bearing Oli^e-branches in their hands for a token of Peace and submission; this
unworthy and cruel Tyrant set his Cavalry to Massacre and trample underfoot all
that flower of youth, and taking the City, he put all the inhabitants thereof
to the swo^^. The second was the impiety which he committed against the Spittle
of Lepers which was joining unto the City of Sebasta; where by reason of their
not communicating with the rest of the people, and so consequently were not in
a capacity to prejudice the Tartar, and whereby Tamberlains impiety against the
spittle of Lepers.
they might have promised themselves a privilege of security, yet he caused
them to be inhumanely Massacred, alleging, That they infected the Air. But for
all this I must not rob him of that honor which he acquired for his strict
observance of Justice, even against his own Soldiers, Tamberlain a great
observer of Justice.
who as soon as they were taken in any offense, were most severely punished;
which we may observe by the sentence which he caused to be inflicted upon one
of his Captains, who walking on the Coast of the Caspian Sea, three leagues
from Tamberlains Camp, and espying a very fair Maiden who went to draw water,
he ravished her, whereupon the said Maiden, together with her Father,
complaining to Tamberlain that she had been violated as she was going to fetch
water, by a disloyal and perfidious Tartar, and desiring him to do her Justice;
he returned her a most Kingly and gracious answer, that he would most severely
punish him: and so he did, for as the Tartarian Histories relate, he caused him
to be impaled, or spitted on a stake alive. Finally lest the Reader might be
mistaken, and might conceive, that in my description of this Tartarian Emperors
life, I was ignorant that he was called by another name besides Tamberlain; I
would therefore desire him to take notice, that I have called him Tamberlains
right name.
so, to follow the general denomination of him in this manner, that so all men
might know, of whom we do write these p^aises. For according to the Tartarian
appellation, he was called the great Tamirrham, although others baptize him
Timir Langue; and these latter, as far as I can conjecture (by the several
comparisons which I have observed) do come the nearest to the Truth; at least
do approach very nigh to the definition of the con^ition and qualities of the
said Tartar, whose true name was doubtless Tamir; and by reason he was lame,
they added the quality of Langue thereunto, which in the Tartarian language
signifies no other thing save a lameness; and so called him Tamir Langue.

Lame he was in his body, and crooked in his mind; weak in his Limbs, but
strong in his Spirit: Limping as he was he would have over-^un Europe, if he
had lived one year longer. The Turk was not a greater scourge to Christe^dom,
then he was to the Turk, whom when he had whipped sufficiently, Go^ dealt with
as he will wi^^ all the Instruments of his wrath, When the Child mends, burn
the Rod.

FINIS.
Since these Sheets past the Press, news came that it was Seges, not Zigeth
that Count Serini has lately taken.


