The CASE of Richard Radley Gent.
Now Prisoner in the KING'S BENCH.
THAT the now Lord Chief Justice Scroggs, being Lord of the several Manors of
Southweald, and Gostead in the County of Essex; his Lordship in 1672. (did upon
a pretended forfeiture) Wrongfully Seize into his Hand and Possession, a
certain Copyhold Message, and diverse Copyhold Lands, of 35 l. Yearly value,
held of the said several Manors; And which were then the Estates and
Inheritance of one Thomas Danwood, Uncle of the above mentioned Richard Radley.

That soon after his Lordship had so Seized the Premises, he Felled all the
Timber thereupon then growing, worth 100 l. And thenceforth received all the
Rents and Profits of the Premises; which his Lordship insisted to be absolutely
his own, and therefore would not restore the Possession thereof unto the said
Thomas Danwood, albeit, he several times in all humble and sitting manner,
besought his Lordship so to do. Whereupon the said Thomas Danwood, was enforced
to commence several Actions at Law, in Trespass and Ejectment against his
Lordships Under-Tennants of the Premises; Which being brought to Trial at
Chelmsford, the Summer Assizes 1675. The said Thomas Danwood, (upon full
Evidence on all sides,) obtained a Verdict against his Lordships pretended
Title; And (after a Writ of Error spent therein,) was in June 1676. put into
Possession of the Premises, by the then Sheriff, upon an Hab. Fact. Possession.
In the Prosecution of which Suits, the said Thomas Danwood was Necessitated to
expend 700 l. or thereabout; and being himself near Fourscore Years Old; He
desired his said Nephew Richard Radley to assist him in the Management of that
business; which he the said Radley (in an unfortunate hour to himself,) did
accordingly undertake, as conceiving himself bound in duty, to be helpful unto
his said Uncle, in what lawful ways he could, and otherwise then so did he the
said Radley never Act. And yet nevertheless, because he the said Radley did
appear on behalf of his said Uncle Danwood as aforesaid; His Lordship, (the now
Lord Chief Justice Scroggs) was pleased to conceive some causeless Displeasure
against him; which was so far taken notice of in the Neighborhood, (he the
said Radley, then dwelling at Brentwood, within a Mile of his Lordships House,
called Weld-Hall.) That when any difference happened between Radley and any
Neighbor; Radley was soon after informed against at Weld-Hall; As for Instance.

He the said Radley being necessitated to have a controversy with one Samuel
Whitehead of Brentwood aforesaid, Shoemaker; a person well known in the
Neighborhood, (as Radley doubts not to make appear by proof,) to be of such
Atheistical Principle, and Vicious conversation as rendered his Oath not fit to
be Credited in any concern, to the value of 5 s. He the said Whitehead to wreak
his Revenge on Radley; Did in May 1679. Inform the said Lord Chief Justice upon
Oath; That Rudley had Spoken certain Scandalous words against his Lordship,
(repeating the words in his Affidavit,) and told his Lordship also that one
Robert Ralet a Brick-Layer (who was a constant Workman in his Lordships
Service, as occasion required,) did hear the Words spoken, as well as he the
said Whitehead.

That the Lord Chief Justice going soon after to London; one Mr. Thomas White
an Attorney and Steward of his Lordships Courts, came to Radley, as from his
Lordship, willing him to attend his Lordship at London, to give him
satisfaction about an Affidavit made by Whitehead, of such words spoken by
Radley against his Lordship, as he the said Mr. White then said, he dared not
repeat; But Mr. White then told Radley, that Whitehead had informed his
Lordship, that Ralet also had heard the words Spoken by Radley; Hereupon Radley
enquired of Ralet what the words were which Whitehead had Sworn, and whether he
the said Ralet, had ever heard Radley Speak the same; whereto Ralet answered,
That he had Sworn to the Lord Chief Justice, that he never heard Radley Speak
the words Sworn by Whitehead, nor any other word concerning his Lordship; But
only, That Danwoods Cause was a good Cause, and that he (the said Radley) would
Seal it with his Blood.

Soon after this, Radley waited on his Lordship at London, (as he was
required,) where his Lordship making known to Radley, what words Whitehead had
Sworn against him; and Radley denying (as the truth was and is,) that he ever
Spoke those, or any such like words; and withal, giving his Lordship a true
account, what a Dangerous Fellow Whitehead was; and of the occasion why he thus
sought to execute his Malice on him the said Radley; His Lordship was pleased
to say, That there was another would testify the words besides Whitehead, but
that his Lordship would defer the further Examination of that matter, until his
being in the Country at Whitsontide: And so his Lordship dismissed Radley for
that time.

In Whitson week, all Parties attended his Lordship; and upon Examination of
the matter, his Lordship being convinced, that there was no reality in this
Accusation against Radley, (albeit, Ralet then varied from what he had formerly
informed Radley as aforesaid; and would seem to insist, that Radley said he
would Seal to the words informed by Whitehead with his Blood.) His Lordship was
pleased to declare, he would pass by this matter for that time; but willed
Radley to have a care, that no further Informations against him, come before
his Lordship; Or used Monitory expressions, to that Purpose.

Some difference afterward happening between Radley and Ralet about work,
wherein Radley Employed Ralet as his Bricklayer; Ralet informed the Lord Chief
Justice, that Radley would have hired him to knock the aforenamed William White
on the Head; Whereupon Radley was again sent for by the Lord Chief Justice, and
required to give Sureties for his Behavior, which he did accordingly; though
no color of truth in the said Information.

At Summer Assizes, in August 1679. Ralet Recovered 39 l. against Radley, in an
Action upon a Quantum Meruit for Building; and soon afterward, to wit, on the
Eighth of August 1679. aforesaid. Radley standing at his own door; and Ralet
being at Work over against Radley's House, and within hearing one of another;
Ralet said to Radley, There be Rods in Piss for you.

Whereupon Radley saying, Why are you and your Cobbler going to make new Oaths
against me?

Ralet thereupon demanded, What have you got to say to my Lord Chief Justice?

Radley thereunto replied, As far as I know, the Lord Chief Justice may be a
very worthy Gentleman; But for your part, you are a very Rascal.

That these were all, or the effect of all the words which passed between
Radley and Ralet at that time, which he proved by Diverse Persons of Credit then
present; And never but then had Radley any discourse with Ralet, after the
aforesaid Trial, between them at Summer Assizes, 1679. Neither was any thing of
this further taken notice of, (to Radleys knowledge,) until September following.

Radley went with his Uncle Danwood to wait upon the said Lord Chief Justice,
3. Sep. 1679
and demanded from his Lordship satisfaction, for the Timber his Lordship had
Felled from off Danwoods Land; and an account of the Rents and Profits his
Lordship had received; and to re-imburse Danwood the Costs he was by those
unnecessary Suits enforced to Expend; Which demand his Lordship seemed much
offended at; saying to Danwood, He owed him nothings; and again bidding him
come by it as well as he could. And for Redress herein, Danwood has now a
Petition depending before the Lords in Parliament.

The Lord Chief Justice has Oath made before him, (...) past.
by the aforesaid Ralet and one William Lewis, (a notorious Rogue, who for
Twelve Years before, had been kept at the Charge of the Parish.) That on the
Seventh day of August then last past; Radley Spoke unto Ralet these words
following, viz. If you expect to have your Money, Recovered of me at
Chelmsford; go to Weld-Hall, there is Money enough come in now for quitting of
Doctor Wakeman,

Radley was taken up by the Lord Chief Justice his Warrant, 5. Sep. past.
and carried to his Lordships House; where Radley entered into a Recognizance
of One Hundred Pound; with two Sureties in Fifty Pound a piece for Radleys
appearance in the Kings Bench, on the first day of Michaelmas Term 1679. At
which time he appeared in Court; and Retained Mr. Ward for his Clerk in the
Crown Office, who (by rule of Court,) was to appear for Radley, from time to
time; and to receive all Informations which should come in against him; to
which end Radley also gave Mr. Ward a general Warrant to appear; And thereupon
Radleys Bayl were discharged.

Radley had no notice to appear in all that time; And yet he being called on
the very last day of that Term, and not appearing; his Recognizance was
forthwith estreated into the Exchequer; whereof Radley being informed, he in
the beginning of Hillary Term last, moved the Court of Kings Bench; And upon
his offer to receive any information, and plead forthwith; the Court made a
Rule that the said Recognizance should be withdrawn.

An Information being exhibited againg Radley for the aforesaid words, supposed
to have been Spoken to Ralet; the same came on to be Tried at Chelmsford last
Assizes; to wit, on the 28th of March last, and Radley not being able to
prevail with any Council, to appear in his defense, against the Lord Chief
Justice Scroggs his Interest, (on whose behalf Sir George Jefferys appeared
most forward;)a Verdict then passed against Radley, who was thereupon Committed
to Goal, though he offered Unquestionable Bail for his Liberty.

At the Instance and Charge of the said Lord Chief Justice Scroggs, 14. July
last.
Radley is removed from Chelmsford by Ha. Cor. and on the Fifteenth of June
came over a Prisoner to the Kings Bench; Whereupon the then Sheriff of Essex
told Radley, that he would charge him in Execution for 200 l. upon his
aforesaid Recognizance; and also take his Sureties in Execution, until he would
pay the Sheriff his Fees; which Radley was fain to promise; and having not
paid the same, he is to this day required so to do; Albeit, for Security of
his Sureties, Radley has been enforced to obtain out of the Exchequer, a
quietus against the said Recognizance, which cost him 5 l. 10 s.

Radley was Sentenced in the Court of Kings Bench, 19: July last
to stand before each of the Courts at Westminster, one hour with a Paper on
his Breast, expressing his supposed Crime; And to do the like at Brentwood, at
the then next Assizes, and in the Affizes time, And was Fined 200 l. and
Committed in Execution until paid; And to find Sureties for the Behavior for
three Years.

Radley has stood at Westminster and Brentwood, according to his Sentence
aforesaid; But has not given Sureties for his Behavior, nor paid the 200 l.
But lies in Prison for Non-Payment; And for Relief therein, has preferred his
Petition, to the Right Honorable the House of Commons, in Parliament Assembld.


