The Ruin of Rome.

OR, An Exposition upon the whole REVELATION.

Wherein is plainly showed and proved, that the Popish Religion, together with
all the power and authority of Rome shall ebb and decay more and more
throughout all the Churches of Europe, and come to an utter overthrow even in
this life, before the end of the World.

Written especially for the comfort of Protestants, and the dancing of Pap^sts,
S^minary Priests, Jesu^tes, and all that cursed rabble.

Published by Arthur Dent, Preacher of the word of God at South-Shoobury in
Essex.

To which is added an Epitome of Reverend Mr. Brightman his Exposition upon the
Revelation.

LONDON, Printed by T. H. and I. Y. for Jo. Waterson, and are to be sold by
Charles Green at his shop in Ivy Lane. 1644.

TO THE RIGHT Honorable his very good Lord, ROBERT Lord RICH everlasting
consolation, and good hope through Grace.
TO be a father to the fatherless, is properly the virtue of the most high,
and therefore meet for those who bear his name and office upon earth. Among
whom (Right Honorable) seeing it has pleased his Majesty to count your
Lordship faithful, and to put you in so high a service, it shall (I assure my
self) be matter of rejoicing unto your Lordship, to take the Patronage of this
poor Orphane, which knows not whither to fly for succor, but to you, who
did so many ways commend your favor to his late deceased Father, that if he
had lived to the birth of this his last offspring it was his full purpose (as
many can witness) to have committed it unto your Lordships protection, as most
meet among many to take this Patronage upon you, that this young Infant
growing up under your roof, may in time effect that indeed, whereof it bears
the name, to be The ruin of Rome, To speak of the excellent parts thereof,
and of what hope it is like to be in the Church of Christ, I think needless,
and I fear the note of partiality: it shall speak for it self, (I doubt)
will commend to all posterity his worthy fathers memory. Now for my self
(right Honorable) being so straightly bound to this duty, in regard of my near
conjunction with my late Brother Master Dent, and great importunity of his
poor Widow, was the more willingly drawn hereunto in two respects. The one
to give some public testimony of my love toward him, and reverence of the
rare grace which we all (who enjoyed his sweet society) did continually in our
comfort behold in him. Whose learning his labors do show: whose diligence, yea
extreme and unwearied pains in his ministry publicly, privately, at home,
and abroad, for four and twenty years at least, all our Country can
testify. All which being adorned with so special humility, do make his name
the greater, and our loss the more grievous. I may not leave out this, which I
avow to be as certain, as it is singular, that besides all other his great
labors, he had (with the Apostle) a special care of all the Churches night
and day, by study and fervent Prayer, procuring the prosperity of Syon, and the
ruin of Rome. And to end with his blessed end, his life was not more
profitable to others, then his death is peaceable to himself; scarce a groan to
be heard, though his Fever must needs be violent which dispatched him in three
days. And having made a pithy confession of his Faith, this Faith said he,
have I Preached, this Faith have I lived in, this Faith I do live in, and this
Faith would I have sealed with my blood, if God had so thought it good, and
tell my brethren so; and drawing near his end, he said: I have fought the good
Fight, I have finished my course, I have kept the faith: and now is that Crown
of righteousness laid up for me, the which the Lord that righteous Judge
shall give me in that day; and so gave up his last breath with these words, I
have seen an end of all perfection, but thy Law is exceeding large.

The other respect (my special good Lord) for the which I am the more willing
to come thus upon the Stage (though my part be small, full suitable to my
ability) is, that I might be as the mouth of many, to publish to posterity,
what high account all that know the truth (among us at least) do make of your
Lordship, that I dare say not the loins only, but the souls of thousands do
bless you, and God for you: praying for a ri^h reward to be given you of the
Lord, and that with your ancient predecessor honorable N^hemiah, the Lord
would remember you herein, and wipe not out all the kindness you have showed
on the house of you God, and on the Ministers thereof. For in the zeal of God,
and uprightness of my heart, not to give titles unto men (which is not my
wont) but to provoke all of like honorable condition to follow your Godly
practice: this I say, that as your pure Religion is the Crown of your
nobility, so this is the Crown of your Religion, that besides your ordinary
presence in the public assemblies of the Church, your zeal to God, and lov^
to his people, has herein especially bin manifested to the world, in your
continual c^r^ to plant faithful Preachers in all those livings which have
been in your Lordships gift, or which by all your friends you could procure.
What is the worthy fruit thereof cannot indeed be valued, much less by me
now uttered: yet this I say with common consent of all found-hearted
Protestants, that if the true Prophets of God be the chariots and horsemen of
Israel, then may we refer to this honorable practice of your Lordship, and of
other like Christian Patrones (as to a chief means under God, and under the
Religious regiment of our gracious Sovereign) the safety of his Highness
person, this admirable tranquillity of the Realm, that notable ruin of Rome,
which is so worthily with us effected, and shall be assuredly elsewhere in due
time accomplished. And to say all in few words, to this may we refer the
safety of soul and body of many thousands in the Land, who though they do and
shall live by faith, yet does their righteousness far exceed the
righteousness of all Popish hypocrites both in duty to God, and to their dread
Sovereign our noble King.

Whereupon I may conclude, that I scarce think of any service more honorable
to God, and profitable to his Church, then this care to bring into the Lords
Temple such painful Laborers as both by life and Doctrine do faithfully
build up the same. Go on therefore (Right Honorable) and cease not to shine
out in this dark World with such light of good example: And withal rest upon
his word, who cannot lie, that you shall shine in the Kingdom of light, where
into shall enter no unclean thing: neither whatsoever works abomination or
lies, but they which are written in the Lambs Book of life. To which blessed
inheritance immortal, undefiled, and that fades not, that God of his mercy
would bring you, my hearts desire and prayer is, and shall be: and in the mean
season, that the years of your life being multiplied, your life may be full of
honor to God, profit to his Church, and comfort to your own soul.

Your Honors most deeply bound, Ezekiel Culverwell.

The Epistle to the Christian READER.
BEing often requested (Gentle Reader) and much importuned by sundry, both
learned, and godly, to publish that Doctrine of the Apocalypse, which diverse of
them with lively voice heard publickely delivered, I did at last, upon my most
mature deliberation, yield unto their reasonable request; I mean the reasons
of their request. Indeed I do ingeniously confess, that I am the unmeetest of
many, which this age, (God be thanked) does afford, to deal in a matter of so
great importance, or any wise to be employed in so great and honorable a
service as this is. But if I do industriously use my small talent, and be
found faithful in a little: I hope it shall have both cheerful and
comfortable acceptance with the Church of God. For this I presume will be
granted of all, that he which has but a little strength, and yet puts it
forth to the uttermost to do good withal, is more to be commended, then he
which has thrice his strength, and uses it not to the help and benefit of
others. And true it is indeed, that sundry worthy labors of diverse excellent
men upon the Apocalypse, are already extant: so as he may seem to power water
into the Sea, or go about to mend the Crows eyes, that will attempt to add
any thing to that which is already published. But know this (O Christian
Reader) that the Lords garden is so large and plentiful of all most sweet and
pleasant flowers, that where any one has gathered a Nosegay most fragrant and
delectable, another may come after, and gather another not to be contemned.
For the wisdom of God is such an undraineable Fountain and head-spring, that
where one has drawn much before, another may come happily, and draw as much
afterward: yea though thousand do succeed, yet can this fountain never be
drawn dry. Be it far from me to arrogate any thing to my self, above
others: for I am privy enough to mine own means, and do freely confess,
that in this work, I have received much light from others: and therefore do
not as a Judge, give sentence upon other men's works: but as one that would
furnish the same feast, bring in my dish among them. Or as one that in the same
cause would come in as a third or a fourth witness to testify and confirm
the same thing. And verily through the gracious assistance of Gods Spirit, my
simple purpose and endeavor is to give a lift to the uttermost of my power, to
further that which is already happily begun, and to provoke others of greater
gifts, to come after with their great lights and lanthornes in their hands, to
discry and discover whatsoever in this Prophecy is not yet fully seen into. I
am not ignorant that some would not have this book meddled withal, nor in any
wise to be expounded among the common people, because (say they) it is so dark
and hard to understand. But let all such leave their own opinions, and hearken
what the Holy Ghost says. Blessed is he that reads, and they that hear the
words of this Prophecy, etc. What can be said more? or more effectually to
stir us up to hear and read, and with all gladness to embrace this Book,
then to tell us, that in so doing we shall be blessed? For the things
contained in this book, be no trifles: they be not things only for a show to
moove wonderment, or to delight the curious mind of men: but such as indeed
do give true blessedness unto all those that are well instructed in them.
What thing is greater, then to be blessed for evermore? If we be not exceeding
dull, yea, even like stocks and stones, it must needs move us and stir us
up. For who will wittingly and willingly lose his own blessedness, or suffer
it to be taken from him, when as he may have it? If any will object that a man
may be blessed well enough without the knowledge of this book, and that there
be Books enough in the Scripture, to procure our blessedness without this.
And that thousands are now in Heaven, which never knew what this Book meant: I
answer, that all this does not take away the necessary use of this Book: for
the holy Ghost does pronounce a blessing upon the heads of those that Read and
Study this Book, not because a man cannot be saved without it: But because of
the great comfort which it ministereth unto us of this age, and has ministered
unto all the Churches since the Apostles times. For it is the Prophecy of this
age, and the Prophecy of all the ages since Christ: Wherein is fully showed
what shall be the estate and condition of the Church in the several Ages
thereof, unto the end of the World. For God according to his admirable wisdom
and mercy, has never from the beginning left his Church without a Prophecy,
for the great comfort thereof. For we know that immediately after the fall of
our first parents, God himself, for the great comfort of his Church did
foretell and fore-prophesie long before of that restoration which should be
made by the M^ssias his Son, according as it came to pass in the fullness of
time. Afterward he did foretell his people of Isael, Genesis 3 Genesis 15
of their great servitude, and intolerable bondage in Egypt, and also of the
end and full determination therefore, after four hundred and thirty years.
After all this he foretold by his servants the Prophets of the Captivity in
Babylon, and the full expiration thereof at the end and term of seventy
years. Jeremy 2^
And yet further for the comfort and consolation of his people, he foretold by
Daniel, Daniel 7 Ezech. 3
and Ezechiel, of the great afflictions and troubles which his Church should
endure by the Persecutions of the d^vided Greek Empire; (I mean Alexanders
Posterity, especially the Kings of Egypt, and Syria, which descended of
Ptolomeus and Seleucus, Daniel 8 Daniel 9 Daniel 1^
whom the Scripture calls the Kings of the North, and of the South) by the
space of 194. years, and of the precise determination thereof at the coming
of the M^ssias. (...) then what care God has had of his Church in all ages
before the coming of his son in the flesh, so to foretell both of the
affliction it self, and also of the just period and determination thereof. And
shall we not think that God has the like care now for his Church, which then
he had: or has he not as great and provident care for the good of his Church
since the promised Messiah was actually exhibited as before? Yes assuredly, and
much more too: for if his care and providence was so great for his Church being
in her ward-shippe and minority: then much more now being come to her
ripeness, and full age. If then it was less glorious, then much more now,
being far more glorious. Therefore now unto us he foretells by his servant
John what shall be the estate of the Church unto the end of the world: and
therefore Blessed is he that hears and reads this book: since it
foretells of the Churches affliction in this age by the whore of Babylon,
and of the full end and determination thereof. It shows justly and precisely
what the Church has suffered since the Apostles time in several ages, and
what it shall suffer: and also how all the enemies thereof shall shortly be
trodden under foot. What can be more joyful or comfortable to all the people
of God, then to know aforehand that Babylon shall fall: Rome shall down.
Antichrist the great persecutor of the Church shall be utterly confounded and
consumed in this world: notwithstanding all plots and policies, crafts and
devices to the contra^y; notwithstanding all forces and arm^es cunningly
contrived and raised up against the Church by Seminary Priests, Jesuits, Pope,
Cardi^all and King of Spain? For all these in this age do very busily bestirre
them, and ransacke all corners of their wits to repair the ruins of Rome, and
to make up the breaches which are made in the walls of Babylon their great
City. But alas, all in vain, for it shall fall: It shall fall, it shall as
Dagon before the presence of the Arc, do what they can, spite of their
hearts, maugre their beards, it shall without all hope of recovery: For has
the Lord spoken it, and shall it not come to pass? or any word of his ever
fall to the ground? Since therefore the Jesuits and Secular Pri^sts do so fiske
about, and croake in every corner, as greatly fearing the fall of their
Babylon, and the drying up of their Euphrates, it stands us all in hand to be
of resolute for Christ, as they are for Antichrist: and as studious to uphold
the Kingdom of God, as they are to uphold the kingdom of the devil. And for
this purpose it is very requisite and necessary, that all the Lords people
should be acquainted with this Book, and armed against them with the things
revealed in this Prophecy. For this book is a most precious Jewel which God
has bestowed upon his Church in this last age, and it is great pity that all
the servants of God are not better acquainted with it; especially in these
times; for now in this age is and shall be the very heat of the war, and
brunt of the battle betwixt Papists and Protestants, betwixt God and Belial:
betwixt the armies of Christ, and the armies of Antichrist. Now this Prophecy
lays all open, and plainly tells us what shall be the issue and success in
the day of battle: which side shall have the victory, and which side shall goo
down. And therefore very needful it is, that it should be expounded again
and again, and all the Lords people made thoroughly acquainted with it. For in
this age wherein we live, this Prophecy can never be enough opened and beaten
upon, that all good Protestants may be armed with it against future times,
even as it were with an armor of proof. Saint John plainly tells the
people of his time, even the Churches of Asia, that they should be blessed by
reading and studying this Book, because they should thereby be forewarned
and fore-armed against many eminent troubles and future dangers. For says he,
The time is at hand: that is to say, some things were even then to be
fulfilled, For some matters foretold in this book, did begin to be fulfilled,
even presently after they were showed unto John: for the Mystery of iniquity
did even then begin to work. The Church in the Apostles time had her
conflictes. The Ten great persecutions began even then to be raised up.
Heresies shortly after began to spring and sprout. Afterward by degrees, the
great Antichrist did aproach toward his cursed seat. And after all this, Saint
John foretells how he should take possession of his abominable and most
execrable seat and sea of Rome: How he should reign and rule for a time as
the Monarchy of the world: How he should prevail against the Church, and make
war against the Saints: How he should reign but a short time, and afterward
come tumbling down, as fast as ever he rose up, and decrease as fast as ever
he increased. Therefore Blessed is he (says S. John) that diligently reads
and peruseth this book, that thereby he may foresee all these things, and be
armed against them. For as the heathen man says, Levius laedit quicquid
previderis ante. Foreseeing dangers do least hurt. Now to apply all this to
our times I say they are twice happy that are studious and painful in
searching out the true sense and meaning of this Prophecy, that thereby they
may be strengthened against all the assaults of the Papists our professed
enemies, and the enemies of Gods Church, and stick fast to the everlasting
truth of God, knowing for a certainty that the sons of Belial shall not long
prevail. Apo. 9.11
The date of their reign is almost out, and the time draws on apace, wherein
both they and their King Abbadon shall be laid in the dust. But I will now
proceed to a new reason, to prove that this Book of the Revelation ought not
to be concealed: but openly preached and published to the whole Church of God
in this age. My reason is taken out of the 22. Chapter of this Book, verse 10.
in these words, Seal not the words of the Prophecy of this Book, for the
time is at hand. Here is a flat commandment from God, that this Book and
Doctrine of it may not be sealed up, that is to say, kept close from the
knowledge of Gods people: but it must lie always unsealed, that all men may
open it, read it and see what is in it: for it is a borrowed speech taken from
sealing of Letters. For we all know, that wooing Letters are sealed, none may
open them, or read them, but only those whom it does concern: but if they
be of purpose left unsealed, then any man may read them without danger: So
the Lord wills and commands that this Book of the Revelation should of
purpose be left unsealed, that all the people of God might read it, study it,
and know it. If any man doubt whether the Metaphor of sealing be thus taken in
the Scripture, let him read the places quoted in the Margent, and in all those
places he shall find it taken in this sense. Whereby it does evidently
appear, that the mind and meaning of God is, that this Book should be
proclaimed and published in all the Churches. And upon this ground, Esa. 29.11
Dan. 1^.9 Apoc 4 1. Apo. 10.4.
I hold that every Minister of the Gospel stands bound as much as in him
lies, to preach the Doctrine of the Apocalypse to his particular charge and
congregation: for every Minister of the Gospel must show unto his people all
the couns^ll of God, and keep back nothing: as Paul testifies that he did,
to the great comfort of his conscience. But the doctrine of the Revelation is a
part and parcel of the Counsel and Will of God: therefore it must not be
concealed or kept back from the knowledge of the people of God. And in these
days I think it not only meet and convenient that it should be so, but in
truth absolutely necessary.

But now me thinks I hear some men say, What? must this book of the
Apocalypse be preached and made known to the common people? alas, what should
they do with it? It is not for them to meddle with all: It is not for their
diet. I answer, and yet not I, but the holy Ghost: that this book must be made
known to all the servants of God. For Saint John calls it the Revelation of
Jesus Christ, which God gave him to show unto all his servants. It is plain
therefore, that all the servants of God both men and women, young and old, rich
and poor, must be made acquainted with this Book. Moreover, John is commanded
by the God of Heaven, to set down all the visions which the Angel showed him:
and to write them all in a book, and send them to the seven Churches of Asia:
that is, to people of all sorts, and conditions: And therefore this Book does
not only concern Preachers and deep Divines, but even all the Lords people
whatsoever: for it does minister great comfort and strength of faith to all the
people of God that live in this age. But here the Papists object that this
book is full of darkness and obscurity, and therefore not for the common
people to meddle withal: nay (say they) there are as many mysteries as words
in it, and therefore what should men trouble their heads about it. But no
marvel though the Papists say so much, for it is the wound of their Kingdom,
and the battery of their Babylon. As for others both learned and Godly, which
in this point are almost of the same mind, that they will not meddle with this
Book of the Revelation, I cannot but marvel at it. The modesty and humility
of some very rare and reverend men for learning, and great variety of gifts
(which notwithstanding scotch much at this Book) is greatly to be commended:
But if I were worthy to give them advice, I would wish them in this behalf to
change their mind, and to be of another resolution: for I dare avouch it,
that there is noth^ng in this Prophecy which study and diligence, with prayer
and humility, may not overcome. True it is indeed, that the shell is thick and
hard to break: but being broken the kirnell is most sweet and pleasant. If any
be discouraged with the darkness and obscurity of it, let him harken to these
reasons following. First it is called a Revelation, which is as much to say, as
an uncovering of things which did lie hid: if it be an uncovering, and
revealing of things, no doubt it may be known and seen into. For revealed
things are for us and our children. If it be a Revelation, how say some that it
cannot be understood? For it is contrary to the nature of a Revelation, to be
so dark that none can understand it. But shall we say that the holy Ghost
which is the spirit of truth has given a wrong name unto it? God forbid. For
if it hide matters, or set them forth that it cannot be understood, then it is
not rightly called a Revelation. If this Book be so mystical that it cannot
be understood: If the interpretation of it be uncertain: If the common people
cannot be taught to understand it: How then should the holy Ghost, Apoc. 1.3.
Apo. 12.7.
Blessed is he that reads the words of this Prophecy, etc. Let any man judge
that has common sense: Can any man be blessed by hearing and reading those
things which he understand^th not? I trow no. Then it follows that this
Book may be understood, and no doubt is understood of many, and might be
better understood of many more: if they would bend their wits and studies unto
it. Apoc. 22.10.
The h^ly Ghost, as is said before, wills and commands that the words of
this Prophecy should not be sealed up. Whereby it is evident that he would
have them read and made known to all. Then I reason thus: that which is open
and unsealed may be read and known: But this book is open and unsealed:
Therefore it may be read and known. If men say the matters of this Prophecy
are sealed and hid, and God say they be unsealed and open, whether shall we
believe men or God? If any will reply and say, we feel and find by
exper^ence, that the words of this book are hard to be understood: I answer
that the fault is in our selves, because we are so negligent in the search and
study thereof. For if we did with that humility, and reverend care that ought
to be in us, search after the things revealed in this book, we should find
that they be not sealed up, but lie open to be read and known. True it is
indeed, that if any man light upon some pe^ce, and take it by it self, he
shall find it very dark: But if he look upon the whole course of matters
through the book, and mark and observe diligently how things be iterated, he
shall find no such darkness as he fears, for there is a notable coherence
of matters, and course of times observed in this book, even from the first
Chapter unto the last, as God willing shall more fully and plainly appear in
the particular opening and interpretation thereof. One great objection against
this Prophecy is, that the Fathers profesie it is full of mysteries, and that
they could not understand it. If they could not understand it say some, how
shall we understand it? Is it not great arrogance for for us to say we
understand it better then they did. I answer noe: For a man of mean learning
in comparison, may now in these days more easily understand and expound this
book, than the learned doctor, and Fathers in ancient time. The reason is
this, we live in an age, wherein the most of the things Prophesied in this
book are fulfilled. Now the fulfilling of a Prophecy is the best exposition
of it. But as for the fathers, they lived in a time wherein many of these
things were not come to pass nor fulfilled, and therefore more hard for them
to interpret and understand, for these things in this prophecy which are not
yet fulfilled, are hardest for us of this age to understand and resolve of. But
when a Prophecy is fulfilled, it is an easy matter to say, this was the
meaning of the Prophet. Some things in this book were fulfilled before the
days of the Fathers, and some things in the days wherein they lived: and both
those they did clearly understand. Some things were fulfilled after their
days, as the rising and reigning of the great Antichrist: which they did not
so clearly see into. Hereupon it comes to pass that many things, which unto
them were very obscure, are unto us most clear and manifest, (...) being
already fulfilled: insomuch that all which are not wilfully blinded may see and
understand them, yea the most unlearned. Be not therefore discouraged (gentle
Reader) at the darkness and difficulty of this book. Do not prejudicially
resolve and set down with thy self, that the natural sense of this book
cannot be given, nor the tute meaning found out, but that we must be feign when
we have done all that we can, to rest in uncertain conjectures, some following
one sense, and some another, as seems most like and profitable. But no man
can say confidently and precisely, this is the meaning of the holy Ghost. Oh be
not of that mind good Christian brother: for if we have not an undoubted
certainety for the sense and meaning of this Prophecy, we are never the
nearer: and that is it which the Papists would drive us unto. But know for a
certainty, that the natural sense of this book, is to be found out, as well
as of other books of the Scripture. And that we might not be left to our
selves in the dark, and to our uncertain conjectures, and doubtful
interpretations, Behold the merciful goodness of God to his Church, who
himself does expound the darkest, and most mystical things in this Prophecy,
or at least so many of them, and so far, as the rest are thereby laid open and
made manifest. The Lord himself expounds some things in chap. 1. which give
clear light to the first vision. The Angel expounds diverse other things. In
the 17. Chapter which is the key of this Prophecy, the Angel does of purpose,
open and interpret all the greatest doubts of this book: as who is the whore
of Babylon? who is the Beast? what be his seven heads? what be his ten Horns?
what be the waters which the woman, that is, the Whore of Rome sits upon?
Moreover, for the better understanding of this Prophecy, we must note, that
the writings of Moses and the Prophets, unto which there be sundry allusions,
and from the which sundry things are drawn, do clear diverse things in this
Revelation. The knowledge of antiquities ministers much aid to the
understanding of this Prophecy. The knowledge of the Histories of the Church,
and the particular state thereof in diverse ages, brings great light. The
observation of the phrases and manner of speech, used by the old Prophets, does
help also not a little. The serious and deep weighing of all the
circumstances of the Text, and conferring one thing with another, the
consequents with the antecedents, and the antecedents with the consequents,
furthereth greatly for the bolting out of the true and natural sense. And
furthermore, as the spirit of God is the Author of the Prophecy, so the same
spirit is the best interpreter of it, and does open and reveal it to all such,
as using all other good means are earnest and humble suitors unto God, for the
illumination thereof: whereby they may all understand both this, and other the
mysteries of his will: which the Apostle says, God has revealed unto us by
his spirit: For the spirit searches all things, yea, the deep things of God.
To all this may be added the knowledge of Arts, Tongues, and the learned
writings and interpretations of sundry excellent men, which all do bring great
furtherance to the understanding of this Prophecy. Since then there be so many
helps for the opening and expounding of this Revelation, why should any be
discouraged from the reading and study thereof? But if any man demand a reason,
why Saint John writes this Revelation in such mystical and allegorical
manner: I answer, that there may be diverse reasons yielded hereof. First, that
the world being blinded might fulfill the things herein spec^fied. Secondly,
because John was to publish this Revelation in such manner and form as he had
received it from Jesus Christ, which was figurative and allegorical. Thirdly,
because it was much more wisdom to foretell the destruction of the Roman
Empire, which all that time bare the sway almost over all the world, under
covert and figurative speeches, then in plain terms, lest the Roman Princes
should rage more against the Christians, even in that respect. The like also
may be said: for Daniels dark manner of delivering his Prophecy. For if he
had uttered those things in plain terms, which he spoke darkely and
allegorically, it might have cost him his life. For the Heathen enemies would
never have endured to hear that all their Empyres glory and renown should
fall one after another, and one by another: and that the Jews were the only
holy people whom God did defend, and to whom in the end God would not only
give a quiet possession of their own Land and Kingdom, but also a Kingdom
everlasting, and that through their Messiah and great deliverer. But to grow to
a conclusion (gentle Reader) thou shall find in this poor travel: First, an
Exposition of the first thirteen Chapters unto the twentieth, reduced all to
one head, which is to prove the five points propounded: and last of all, the
three Chapters following briefly and plainly expounded. If any through
laziness will not, or through want of leisure cannot read over this short
travel: yet for his comfort, let him read chose things only which are written
upon the fourteenth Chapter. And thus (Christian Reader) hoping that thou will
not neglect that which may be for thine own good, I commend theee to God, and
to the word of his grace, which is able to build further, and to give thee an
inheritance among all them that are sanctified.

Thine in the Lord, Arthur Dent.

Upon the 14. Chapter of this Book These five points are handled.
FIrst, that Babylon in this Book of the Revelation is called Rome. Secondly,
that Rome shall fall, and how. Thirdly, that Rome shall fall finally, and come
to utter desolation in this life, before the last Judgment. Fourthly, by whom,
and when it shall be overthrown. Fifthly, the causes of the utter ruin and
overthrow thereof.
APOC. 18. verse 4. I heard a voice from Heaven say: Go out of he^ my People,
that ye be not partakers of her sins, and that ye receive not of her Plagues.

THE RVINE of Rome, or an Exposition upon the Revelation. Wherein is plainly
showed and proved, that the Popish Religion, together with all the power and
authority of Rome, shall ebb and decay still more and more, throughout all the
Churches of Europe and come to an utter overthrow, even in this life.
BEfore I enter into the exposition of this Prophecy, I think it not amiss
to handle six circumstantiall points, which may give some light to the whole
matter following, and they be these.

First, the instrument that writ this book.

Secondly, the time when he writ it.

Thirdly, the place where he received it.

Fourthly, the person to whom he writ it.

Fifthly, the end and use of his writing this Prophecy.

Lastly, the authority of it.

As touching the first, it is agreed upon amongst the soundest Divines, that
John the Apostle, or Evangelist; John the Disciple, whom Jesus loved, was the
Author and Instrument of penning this Prophecy: as he himself testifies,
Apo. 22.8. Apo. 1.19.
saying: I am John which saw these things and heard them. And he received a
commandment from Jesus Christ which has the keys of hell and death, that he
should write the things which he had seen and heard, and set them all down
together in a book. Now we all know that the testimony of John is of great
weight, Apo. 1.11.
though he be but a man: for he is such a man as is firmly to be believed in
all that he speaks. He is an Apostle, an Instrument of the holy Ghost, and so
guided by the Spirit of God, that he speaks and uttreth nothing that is his
own. He was well known and approved. For we must consider, that what an
Apostle did utter, he did utter it as the instrument of the Spirit, which
cannot err. For the Prophets and Apostles did not write the holy Scriptures as
they were men only, but as they were the immediate and certain instruments of
the holy Ghost, of purpose chosen and set apart to pen and publish the holy
books of God. This Saint Peter confirms saying: 2 Pe^. 1 Verse 21.
Prophecy came not in old time by the will of man, but holy men of God spoke
as they mere moved by the holy Ghost. The Apostle Paul also affirms the same
touching his Gospel, which says, Gal. 1.12.
He was not after man, neither received he it of man, but by the revelation
of Jesus Christ. Therefore when his our Apostle says, I am John which saw
these things, and heard them, he gives us to understand, that he was both an
eye and an care-witnesse. He brings not matters which he has heard by
uncertain report: he delivers this Book to the Churches: they which
received it at his hands did know him to be a most faithful servant of the
Lord, even a great Apostle, which delivers not any thing but that which he
had received of the Lord, and therefore he testifies, that he saw and heard
all the things which ^e has written in this book. Moreover he ^estifieth of
himself, that he was called and authority by Jesus Christ, to write this
Prophecy, and did nothing herein of his own brain. For says he, I John
heard behind me a great voice, as it had been of a trumpet, saying, I am Alpha
and Omega, the first and the last; and that which thou see write in a book
and send it unto the Churches. Here we see how John is called by Alpha and
Omega, that is, Jesus Christ to write this doctrine of the Apocalypse. But may
some man say, was not John called before? was he not one of the Lambs 12.
Apostles? had he not many years executed the office of the Apostleship? must he
now have a new calling, and a second calling? what needs he being an Apostle to
be called and authorized again? To this I answer, that this matter now in
hand was a new work, and therefore requires a new and special calling. It is
a strange revelation, and therefore requires a new authority to meddle in it.
For in this Prophecy God deals with John, as he did with the old Prophets.
For when he would foreshew unto any of them especial matters, he called them
by glorious visions, as we may read what a goodly vision Esaias had: what a
vision full of glory Ezechiel and Daniel had, even in majesty like unto this of
John. Thus then it is to be considered. John now is as one of the old
Prophets, to foreshew things to come: therefore the Lord appears unto him in
a vision, and calls him thereunto as he appeared unto them, and called them.
Let this then suffice for a reason of John's now calling to his new Work and
office. And thus much touching the first circumstance.

Now follows the second circumstance, which is the time when John received
this Prophecy, which is noted to be upon the Lords day. It is the day which
S. Paul to the Corinthians calls the first day of the week: in which the
Churches did meet for the holy exercises in Religion: which is also evident,
because he says they came together to break bread. Now the observation of a
seventh day is of divine institution, Acts 20.7.
even from the beginning. It is natural, moral, and perpetual: for God
blessed the seventh day, and sanctified it. We are therefore to think, that
although John now in his exile was absent in body from the Church assemblies,
yet he was present with them in spirit, commending them most earnestly unto God
in his holy prayers, and meditations: and therefore it is said, that he was
ravished in the Spirit upon the Lords day. So we read, that the like befell
unto Daniel, when he was prisoner in Babylon: the like befell unto Ezechiel,
who was taken by the Spirit in the visions of God, Act. 10.10
and carried to Jerusalem: the like to Peter, the like to Paul. But the
special reason of John's ravishment in the spirit at this time was, that
thereby he might be made more fit and capable to receive and understand all
those great mysteries and heavenly visions, which now should be showed unto
him. And withal let us observe, that all men are always most capable of
heavenly things, when they are most in the Spirit: For God does evermore most
reveal himself to such as are most in prayer, reading and meditation: and to
such as make greatest conscience to spend his Sabaoths Christianly, and
religiously, according to his great commandment. And let us always be sure of
this, that the more fervent and zealous we are in religious duties, the more
familier acquaintaince we shall find with God, and he will at all times be the
more open-harted unto us, and will hide nothing from us that may be for his
glory, and our good. For such as are much in heavenly contemplation, he does
reckon not amongst his servants, Ioh. 15.15
but amongst his dearest friends, to whom he will make known all things that he
has heard of his Father.

But now let us proceed to the third circumstance. The third circumstance is
the place where John received this Prophecy, and that is set down to be the
Isle of Pathmos, which (as the Geographers write) is a little desert Island
lying in the Aegean Sea, wherein it is reported that John the Apostle was
banished by the Emperor Domitian, about the year of our Lord 96. and there
received, and writ this Book of the Apocalypse: where note by the way, that
there is no place so obscure or vast, wherein a Godly mind may not aspire up
unto heaven, and receive a greater largnesse of supernatural things: for
Daniel in prison, Peter in a Tanners house, Paul in a broken ship received a
superabundant measure of grace more to be esteemed then all the Gold of India.
Some write, that this Isle of Pathmos, is accounted amongst the Islands called
Sporados, which lie over against Asia, and the City of Ephesus, and was in the
sight both of Europe, and Africa: so that it s^emed to be as it were a middle
seat or Holy chair, out of the which CHRIST preached by John from heaven to
the whole world. And indeed the counsels of God are wonderful, and his
goodness unspeakeable, which reveals so great mysteries to his faithful, as
it were out of the Romish prison, and Babylonicall captivity.

Moreover, John declares the cause of his coming into the same Island; for he
says, he was there for the word of God, and the Testimony of Jesus Christ:
that is, for the preaching and constant profession of the Gospel of Christ.

Histories do report, that John was apprehended in Asia, and by Soldiers led
to Rome, that he might plead his cause before the Emperor Domitian, who most
savagely and cruelly condemned the innocent, and caused him to be put into a
cauldron of hot boiling Oil, out of the which when he by miraculous providence
escaped without harm, he was carried and conveied into the Isle of Pathmos.

But immediately after John's banishment, God met well enough with this
persecuting Emperor Domitian. For in the fifteenth year of his reign he was
cruelly and most shamefully murdered by his own Servants. And thus much for
the third circumstance.

Now it follows to speak of the fourth circumstance, which is, the persons
to whom this prophecy is written, and that is set down in the first Chapter
and first verse, to be all the servants of God. As many therefore as be the
servants of God, must attend unto this book, hear it, read it, and remember
it, for to all such it is dedicated by the holy Ghost, to all such it
belongs, for all such it is written and recorded.

Some do falsely and foolishly imagine, that it was given only to John, and
that it might likewise be given to some special men, as to some great
Scholars or deep Divines, which could tell how to use it, and how to weild it.
But we see how grossly they err: for the holy Ghost says, it belongs to
all the Servants of God. And moreover, John is willed and commanded to write
all the things which he saw in sundry visions in a book together, Cha. 1.11.
and to send it to the seven Churches which is in Asia, bebecause the Lord
would have it remain in perfect record unto the use of the whole Church, both
that the Church might have the custody of this book, and also that it might
be a faithful witness unto the end of the world, that this book was written
and penned by John the Apostle, of whose truth and sincerity the church had
sufficient experience.

True it is indeed that there are but seven Churches named, but under these 7.
Churches all others are comprehended. It had bin an infinite matter to reckon
up all the particular Churches which were then in the world and to have opened
their several estates: therefore under these seven Churches of Asia, and their
particular and several estates, the state of the universal Church militant is
laid open. I conclude therefore that the whole doctrine of Saint John's
Revelation, appertains to the Universal Church of Christ throughout all the
World, and in all times and ages, since it was written and recorded. And that
as all Scripture is written for our instruction and comfort: Romans 15.4 2 Ti.
3.16
and as all Scripture given by divine inspiration, is profitable to teach and
convince etc. so this book of the Apocalypse is written for the special
comfort and instruction of the Church in these last days. And so I do
conclude this fourth point. The fifth circumstantiall point is, the end and use
of this prophecy, Chap. 1.1.
which is to publish and blaze abroad the things which must shortly come to
pass, that is, all things prophesied in this book, and to be fulfilled even
to the end of the World, and whereas he says, that these things must come to
pass, he does us to understand how great the stablenesse, and assuredness of
Gods determination is. For look what things are fore-appointed by Gods
determinate purpose, they are altogether unchangeable: for the Lord is God, and
he is not changed. And he says: My determination shall stand. Mal. 3.6. Esaias
45.1^ Ma. 24.35
And Christ says: Heaven and earth shall pass away, etc. It is therefore most
certain, that every particular thing contained in this prophecy, shall be
fulfilled in Gods appointed time. For GOD has disclosed these things to h^s
Son CHRIST, not to the end he should shut then up again in himself, but
that he should show them forth to the Godly, that the whole Church might fare
the better by them. It does then stand us all upon to enquire and search into
these things which must so shortly come to pass, that thereby we may be
strengthened and comforted against all future dangers. And Christ says: Behold
I come shortly. Blessed is he that keeps the words of the Prophecy, etc.
Apo. 22.7.
But how shall we keep them except we know them? And how shall we know them
except we read them, and studdy them? If therefore we mean be partakers of
this blessedness, we must not only esteem this book to be very profitable,
but absolutely necessary for all the servants of God to be exercised in. And if
ever there were any time wherein it behoved to set forth, to urge and to bear
in this Doctrine to all the people of God, then it is chiefly necessary to be
done in this our time. For this age of ours has in the Popes Kingdom many
sharp and quick wits, which commend with mavelous praises both the Pope and
the popish Church, and buzze into the ears of the common people, and unlearned
sort, many things clean contrary to the Doctrine of the Scriptures. The
Jesuits and Priests are grown exceeding crafty and cunning. The Papists are
rich, wealthy, and full of armor and munition, Popery seems to make a head
again, and the Papists look for a day. It stands us then upon which love
Christ and his Gospel, that we should be well appointed, and thoroughly armed
against them. And for this purpose the Revelation of Saint John is of great use
and necessity.

As I said before, so I say again, that it is the Prophecy of our time,
written to this special end, that by it we might be both forewarned and
fore-armed. If we do consider the whole matter of this book, we shall easily
find out the use and end of it: For the excellent matter of it does argue the
excellent end and use of it.

Now then, as concerning the general matter of this Book, here are to be
found very large and lively descriptions of the most glorious Person of Christ,
Chap. 1. Chap. 2. Chap. 3.
and all his excellent offices, both of King, Priest, and Prophet; and also
most notable descriptions of the Church, and of the Ministers of it: and of the
persecutions and afflictions, which it must of necessity pass through in the
World. Also of Gods merciful providence for his Church, and most vigilant care
over it in the midst of all extremities. Here are set before our eyes very
lively descriptions of the Churches deadly enemies; both of Satan himself, and
his three great instruments, the Roman Emperor, the Pope, and the Turk.

Here are set down all their cruel persecutions of the Church, and their utter
overthrow in the end. Here are described Hell, Death, the resurrection, and the
last judgment. Here also the very Kingdom of Heaven is at large described,
with all those great rewards, infinite glory, and endless felicity which
remain for all the faithful worshippers of God.

I conclude therefore, that for as much as this Prophecy is of such excellent
contents, therefore the use and necessity of it must needs be very great. And
for this cause John is willed and commanded by Alpha and Omega to write the
things which he had seen, the things that were, and the things that shall come
hereafter, By the things which he had seen, is meant that glorious vision
mentioned in the first Chapter, wherein Jesus Christ did appear unto him in
the midst of the seven golden Candlesticks, ^erse. 13.^4.15.16.
in most glorious manner, as is there described. And all this was in the Isle
of Pathmos, where John was first called and authorized to this work, and
therefore he is willed first of all, to record this vision which he had
already seen.

By the things that are, he means the present state of the seven Churches of
Asia, which were then the most flourishing Churches in the World, as they are
described in the second and third Chapters; and in them the estate of all other
Churches.

By the things that shall be, he means all the prophecy of this book, which
were to be fulfilled in their time, and all those strange accidents, which
should come to pass in process of time, and the several ages of the Church,
even unto the end of the world. Thus we see how John received a precise
commandment from the Son of God, to write things past, present, and to come,
that they might stand in record unto all posterities, from generation to
generation. Thus much touching the fifth circumstance, which is the end and use
of this book,

Now follows to speak of the last circumstantiall point, which is the
authority of this Prophecy, which is strongly confirmed from the Author of it,
which is JESUS CHRIST, and therefore it is called the Revelation of Jesus
Christ, which GOD gave unto him. And again it is written: I Jesus sent mine
Angel to testify these things in the Churches. Here we see plainly, Chap.
22.16.
that Jesus Christ the very Son of God, the Alpha and Omega, is the Author of
this book, for he subscribes his name unto it, and set his hand and seal unto
it. Needs therefore must the authority of it be very great, which comes from
so great a personage: for look what dignity and au^hority he is of, from whom
the book comes, of the same dignity and authority is the book it self.

Another strong argument to confirm the authority of this book, may be taken
from the protestation of Jesus Christ in these words; I protest unto every man
that hears the words of the Prophecy of this Book, Cha 22.18
if any man shall add unto those sayings, God shall add unto him the plagues
that are written in this Book. And if any shall diminish of the words of the
Book of this Prophecy, God shall take away his part out of the Book of life.

Here we see how Jesus Christ makes the authority to this Book equal to all
other the Oracle of God, to the which it is not lawful for any man to add or
detract under pain of condemnation. It makes much also for the authority of
this book, that S. John does so often repeat, reiterate, and inculcate his
own name; I John, I John, I John: I John the Apostle; I John the Evangelist; I
John the Divine, showing by all these repetitions, how needful a thing it was
that the faithful should be thoroughly instructed who he was, even one of the
Lambs twelve Apostles, and therefore to be void of all suspicion and doubt
concerning the authority of this book, and not once to imagine it to be any
invention of man, or feigned device, since it was penned by so great an Apostle.

Moreover, the authority of this Prophecy is confirmed by four reasons in the
last Chapter. The first is the affirmation of the Angel: who says, The words
are faithful and true. Chap. 22.6, 7, 8.
The second is the authority of the most high GOD himself in these words, The
Lord GOD of the holy Prophets sent his Angel to show unto his servants the
things which must shortly be fulfilled. The third is the testimony of Jesus,
ver. 6, 7.
who pronounces them blessed which keep the words of this Prophecy. For,
says he, Behold I come shortly: Blessed is he that keeps the words of this
Prophecy. The fourth and last is the witness of John, in these words: I am John
which heard and saw these things. Now it may be demanded, what is the cause
that here are so many things heaped up for the confirmation of the authority of
this Book. Surely we must think there is some special cause and reason of
it. For the Holy Ghost does not use to deal so much and so earnestly in a
matter, but upon great cause. We may easily gather what the cause is. The
Book painteth out the Whore of Babylon, and the whole Kingdom of the great
Antichrist, together with all Satan's cunning and fleight therein, and for this
cause Satan has labored especially to weaken the credit and authority of
this Book. He by some means in old time prevailed thus far, that even among
some Churches of true Christians, the authority and truth of it was doubted of.
The Holy Ghost did well foresee the practice of Satan, and therefore brings
the more reasons for the confirmation thereof. If the credit and authority of
this Book should never have been impugned, there needed not any such special
confirmation. But now (God be thanked) there is no question or controversy
concerning the authority of this Prophecy. It is received as authentical by
the common consent of all the Churches. Almost all the ancient Fathers do
acknowledge it to be canonical. The new Writers do with one voice give their
consent and approbation unto it. The Papists themselves do acknowledge it to
be the sacred and undoubted Word of God; though of all Scriptures they cannot
endure it should be meddled withal, because it cutteth them so near the bone.
Moreover, it may not be omited, that God is called the Lord God of the holy
Prophets, which proves that this Prophecy is of equal authority with the
Prophesies which were of old, in as much as the same God is the Author of it.
And this Book is to be held in the same account with the Books of Moses, and of
the Prophets, for all things contained in it shall as certainly be fulfilled in
their times, as theirs were. In Esaias, in Jeremy, in Ezechiel, in Daniel, and in
the rest we find many things, which the Lord showed by them long before they
came to pass. Even so there be many things fore-shewed and fore-prophesied in
this Book, which in their time shall be assuredly fulfilled. Nay, we see and
know that many things here foretold, are already fulfilled, and some things
are come to pass even in these our days. He that shall look into the times
that are past, since this Prophecy was given, shall find that all things have
fallen out agreeable to the Prophecy of this Book. And surely if there were
none other thing to persuade us touching the authority thereof, this might
suffice, that every thing has fallen out just and jumpe, as the Prophecy did
fore-shew. It is our great negligence, that we do not clearly see so much.
And I do humbly entreat all the people of God to look more diligently and
narrowly into it in all time to come. And thus much as concerning the
circumstances.

Now, as concerning the Book it self, it may very fitly be divided into three
visions, as it were into three general parts. The first vision is contained in
the three first Chapters. The second vision is contained in the next eight
Chapters following, from the fourth to the twelfth Chapter. And the last vision
is contained in all the Chapters following, from the twelfth to the end.

As concerning the first vision, my purpose is not to stand much upon it,
because it is plain and easy to understand, and because it contains no
Prophesies of things to come, but only opens the present state of the Church
at that time; and also because I have already touched the sum of it in
handling the circumstantiall points, I will therefore content my self with a
very brief opening and resolution of it, beginning at the first Chapter.

CHAP. I. The sum of the first Chapter.
THe first Chapter contains four principal things.

The Title of the Book. The salutation of the Churches. The manner of John's
calling to receive this Prophecy. The description of Christ, the person that
called him.
The Title of the Book is set down in these words: The Revelation of Jesus
Christ, which God gave him.

It contains three things: First, the Author of the Book, which is Jesus
Christ, receiving it from God the Father.

Secondly the end and use of this Book, Ver. 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8.
which is, to show unto all the Servants of God, the things which must shortly
be done.

Thirdly, the singular fruit and benefit which the Church shall receive by it,
in these words: Blessed is he that reads, and they that hear the words of
this Prophecy, etc.

The salutation is in these words, John to the seven Churches which are in
Asia, Grace be with you, and peace, etc. It contains a description of the
Trinity, or three Persons in the Godhead. The Father is described of his
eternity, namely, to be He which is, which was, and which is to come.

The Holy Ghost is described of his diverse gifts and operations, and therefore
is called the seven Spirits which are before the Throne, or which proceed from
the Throne: but S. John speaks here of the holy Ghost, according to the
vision showed him in the fifth Chapter, where Christ is said to have seven
eyes, which are the seven Spirits of God sent into all the world. Of the which
afterward.

Jesus Christ is described of his three great offices, of King, Priest and
Prophet, and also of his glorious power and eternity,

First, touching his Kingly office, he is called the Prince of the Kings of the
earth, that is, King of Kings, for he is King of Sion. He is a King to rule and
govern his Church. He must reign over the house of Judah for ever. He must
reign over all his enemies, and in the midst of his enemies, even till he
have trod them all under his feet. And this benefit we have by it, that we
are made Kings in him, in this life to reign over our corrupt affections, and
after this life to reign as crowned Kings for ever with him, in infinite
glory, and endless felicity.

Secondly, touching his Priesthood, Ver. 5.
he is said to love us, and wash us from our sins in his blood. For he is our
only high Priest, which by his own blood has once entered into the holy place,
and obtained eternal redemption for us. He only it is, Heb. 9.12
which through the eternal Spirit, offered himself without fault to God, to
purge our consciences from dead works to serve the living God: Heb. 9.14
So then by virtue of his Priesthood and sacrifice, we are reconciled unto God,
have free access unto the Throne of Grace, and are made Priests in him to
offer us spiritual sacrifices acceptable to GOD through him: Verse 6.
For he has made us Kings and Priests unto God even his Father.

Thirdly, Ve^se 5.
concerning his Prophetical Office, he is called that faithful witness:

For He is said to Pilate: John 18.37.
For this cause was I borne, and for this cause came I into the World, that I
might bear witness unto the Truth. And the Apostle says. He witnesses
under Pontius Pilate a good confession. Tim. 9.13
So then Jesus Christ is one of those three great witnesses which bear record
in Heaven. Jesus Christ is the Prince of Prophets, even that great Prophet that
should come into the world, through whom all the counsels of God are revealed
to us: He is that only begotten Son, which is come down from the bosom of
his Father, and has made known unto us whatsoever he has received of his
Father.

He both by his Doctrine, Life, and Miracles has borne witness unto the
truth, and by the virtue of his Prophetical Office, the whole will of God is
made known unto us. For GOD has sent him as the great Prophet to instruct the
world in Righteousness, and has revealed himself to us in him; and therefore
he is called the Image of GOD, the brightness of his Glory, Col. 1.15. Heb.
1.3.
and the engraven form of His Person. And therefore He said to Philip: He
that has seen Me, has seen my Father also. John 14.7
And if you had known Me, you should have known my Father also.

Mat. 11.^7.
And again, No man knows the Father, but the Son, and he to whom the Son
will reveal him. Thus we see that Jesus Christ is that faithful witness, and
Prince of Prophets, in whom the will of God, and all the counsels of the Father
are revealed unto us.

The manner of John's calling to receive this Prophecy, is set down in these
words; I John even your brother, Ver. 9, 10, 11.
and companion in tribulation and in the Kingdom and patience of Jesus Christ,
was in the I Will of Pathmos for the Word of God, and for the witnessing of Jesus
Christ: And I was ravished in the Spirit on the Lords day, and heard behind me
a great voice, as it had been of a Trumpet, saying: I am Alpha and Omega, that
first and that last; and that which thou see, write in a book, and send it
unto the seven Churches which are in Asia, etc.

Now out of these three verses five things are to be observed:

First, that John is commanded by the voice of Christ, which he heard behind
him as loud as a Trumpet, to write and record the visions which he saw, and
being so written and recorded, to commend them to all the Churches, for the
common benefit and use thereof. So that herein John does nothing of himself,
nothing of his own brain, but all things by special warrant and authority
from Jesus Christ, and that Alpha and Omega, which does call him, and authorize
him to this great business which now he is set about.

Secondly, John's ravishment in spirit, to the end he might be made more capable
of all these heavenly visions which were showed unto him.

Thirdly, his great humiliation, whereby also he was fitted to receive and
understand these great mysteries. For God will guide the meek in judgment,
and teach the humble his ways; Psalm. 25.
yea, his secrets are with them that fear him. Therefore although John was a
great Apostle, and has seen wonderful visions, yet he is not thereby puffed up
with pride and conceit of himself, but in the greatest humiliation of his
soul calls himself a brother and companion of all the faithful, Ver. 9.
but specially of such as patiently suffer for Jesus Christ and his Kingdom.

Fourthly, the time when John was called, which was the Lords day.

Fifthly and lastly, the place where he was called, which was the I Will of
Pathmos, as formerly has been showed.

The description of Christ, the Person that called John to this new office, is
set down in the next five Verses following, wherein the excellent glory of
Christ's Person is described: First, Ver. 13, 14, 15, 16.
from the place where Christ did appear unto him. Secondly, from the several
parts and members of his royal Person.

Thirdly, from his provident care over his true Ministers, and all his
faithful people.

Touching the place where Christ in a vision did appear to John, he says, it
was in the midst of the seven golden Candlestickes. For says he, I turned
back to see the voice that spoke with me, and when I was turned, I saw seven
golden Candlestickes, and in the midst of the seven Candlestickes one like
the Son of man, etc. The seven golden Candlesticks are interpreted by Christ
himself in the last Verse of the Chapter, to be the seven Churches. The
Churches are said to be of gold, because Christ delights in them as we do in
gold; he valueth every true member thereof as we do gold; for every believer
is all glorious within; every true Christian is very fair and beautiful;
every regenerate man is as gold, even as most pure gold.

It is said afterward, that Christ walks in the midst of the seven golden
Candlestickes: Ver. 11.13.
that is, He is always present with His Church, to feed it, govern it,
defend it, and comfort it. The Prophet says that Christ has seven eyes which
go through the whole world; whereby is signified his watchful providence for
his Church; for he is always looking out for the good of it, to defend and
protect it against all adversary power. Which thing was figured in the Rams
skins, wherewithal the Arc was covered, to defend it against all violence of
wind and weather. Even so the merciful protection of Christ, as it were the
continall covering of his Church.

As touching the parts and members of his royal Person, he is described of his
head, and hair, of his face, of his eyes, of his voice, of his feet, of his
garments, and of his girdle.

As concerning his head and hair, they are said to be as white as wool, and
in snow, which signifies his great wisdom and knowledge, to perform all
things in his Church, for wisdom and knowledge for the most part do accompany
white heads, and gray hairs.

His face shines as the Sun in his strength: Which signifies that Christ is
the same to his Church, that the Sun is to the World. For as the Sun
lightneth the whole World with his brightness, so Christ with the brightness
of his face enlightneth his whole Church.

His eyes are like a flame of fire: that is, exceeding bright, and piercing
into all places, yea the very heart of men, for nothing is hid from his sight,
with whom we have to do. He has Eagles eyes to foresee all dangers intended
and plotted against his Church, that he may in due time prevent them.

His voice is compared to the sound of many waters, because it should sound
throughout all the World by the preaching of the Gospel. Waters is expounded
Chapter 17. verse 15. of multitudes, nations, and tongues. Christ's voice
therefore is like many Waters, because his voice should go through many
Countries and Kingdoms.

His feet are compared to fine brass; to signify both the perfection of all
his ways, and also his mighty power to tread down all his enemies.

He is clothed with a garment down to the ground, to signify that he walked
as King and Priest in the midst of the 7. golden Candlesticks. For Kings and
Priest in old time did wear long garments, especially in the execution of
their offices.

He is girded about the paps with a golden girdle: For as Kings and Priests did
gird their garments close unto them, lest otherwise they might be hindered in
the execution of their offices, so Christ girdeth himself close to his
business; for he is no idle beholder of the state of his Church, but one that
continually works out the good thereof.

Concerning his provident care over his faithful Ministers, he is said to
carry them in his right hand; for he had in his right hand seven stars: Ver.
16. Ver. 10.
that is, the Ministers of the Churches.

As Christ says: The seven stars are the Angels; that is, the Ministers of
the seven Churches. Ministers are compared to Stars, because they should
shine as bright Stars in this dark world, both by life and doctrine.

Christ is said to hold them in his right hand, because he always defended
them against the malice and fury of the World, which of all others is most
outragiously bent against them, and their favorites.

But let men take heed of over-bold presuming to pull the Stars out of Christ's
right hand, lest they smart for it. The world is very busy this way, they
think to wring them out of his hands: but alas poor souls, they are not able,
he holds too fast, who can pull them out of his right hand? If they continue
bold, and busy this way, they may hap at last take a Bear by the tooth, and
peradventure pull an old house over their heads.

Another reason why CHRIST is said to hold the seven Stars in his right hand,
is because he works by them, and their ministry, as an artificer with his
tool in his right hand. The things which Christ has done by these instruments
are glorious and admirable. For by the Ministry of the Gospel he has
converted many sinners, and saved many souls, then the which nothing can be
more honorable and wonderful: and therefore the Word of GOD which is the
Ministers weapon, is compared to a sharp two edged sword, which came out of
CHRIST'S mouth. Now unto all this may be added that Christ says; He was dead,
but now alive, because he dyed, and rose again. And also that he says; He had
the keys of Hell and Death: that is, authority and power over Hell and
damnation. For he has absolute power over Hell and damnation. For he has
absolute power to open and shut, bind and loose, and therefore it is written,
He has the key of David, which opens and no man shuts, and shuts and
no man opens. All this sets forth the great power and glory of Christ's
Person, and all aymeth at this mark and end, to commend unto us the authority
of this Book, because it comes from a person of so great dignity and
excellency. Last of all, it remains to show how John was affected with this
vision, wherein Christ did so gloriously appear unto him: for he says, When I
saw him I fell at his feet as dead. Wherein he shows how greatly he was
amazed and daunted with the sight of Christ's most glorious personage. He was
stricken with such an astonishment and fear, that there was almost no life or
spirit left in him, and all this was to humble him and to strike him down even
to the ground, in as much as by it, he finds his own weakness and
imperfection; not capable of such a sight, so far as to endure it. It was no
doubt profitable, or rather necessary that this holy Servant of God should thus
be humbled and made fit to receive this Revelation with the greater reverence
from his great Lord and Master. And also it makes much for our profit, as
appears in that every part of this vision is rehearsed in the Epistles to the
Churches. But to conclude, John being thus humbled and cast down in himself,
is comforted and raised up by Christ, who laid his right hand on him, and
willed him to fear nothing: For says He, I am the first and the last, and am
alive, but I was dead, behold, I am alive for evermore. In which words He does
greatly cheer up John's heart, and tells him plainly, that this might and
terror of his person is bent only against the wicked enemies of His Church,
nothing at all against the friends thereof: but contrariwise, that all this
power and glory, might and Majesty is wholly and altogether for the good of his
Church. Wherein we may all clearly see and know to our great comfort that the
same Arm of God which casts down the wicked, raises up the Godly; the same
power which wounds them, heals us; the same hand which destroys them,
saves us; the same might and Majesty which hurts them, helps us. For
whatsoever is in GOD, is wholly for his, and wholly against those that are none
of His. And thus much concerning the first Chapter, shall suffice.

Chapter 2. and 3.
I Have thought good to handle these two Chapters together, and in a general
and compendious manner to set down the most special matters contained in them
both; not meaning to insist upon every particular, both because these two
Chapters are plain and easy to understand, and also because they have been
sufficiently beaten upon by many. These two Chapters do generally contain
seven Epistles, written to the seven Churches of Asia; wherein the present
estate of the Churches of Asia is very lively described, and in them the estate
of all other Churches then militant upon the face of the earth. Every one of
these seven Epistles contains four things.

First, an Exordium or entrance into the matters. Secondly, a general
proposition. Thirdly, a narration. Lastly, a conclusion.
The Exordium or entrance of every Epistle contains two things; namely, the
person to whom the Epistle is written, and the Person from whom the Epistle is
written.

The proposition is one and the same in all these Epistles, contained in these
words: I know thy works.

The narration contains the matter of each Epistle, and consists of
commendations, and discommendations; of admonitions, reprehensions, threats and
promises.

The conclusion of every Epistle is one and the same; in these words, Let him
that has an ear hear what the Spirit says unto the Churches.

First, concerning the person to whom these Epistles are sent, he is named in
the beginning of every Epistle, To be the Angel of such and such a Church. By
this word Angel, he means not the invisible spirits which we call the Angels
of heaven, for the things attributed to these Angels, can in no wise agree to
the invisible Spirits, as to the Angels of several Churches, to be neither hot
nor cold, to leave their first love, to repent and amend, and sundry such like
attributes through all these Epistles. But by the word Angel, he means the
Minister or Pastor of every Church: which therefore is called an Angel, because
he is the Minister of GOD, as the word signifies: As also because every
faithful Minister ought to be received and regarded as an Angel of God, as
the Apostle witnesses of the Galathians, that they received him as an Angel
of God, yea as Christ Jesus. And he gives many admonitions in his Epistles to
this effect; for he would have all faithful and painful Ministers to be
greatly reverenced and had in double honor; to be acknowledged and had in
singular love for their works sake; to be cared for, to be made much of, and to
want nothing: For indeed, a good Minister is a Jewel of price. A good Minister
is a friend in Court, which we say is better then penny in purse. A good
Minister is like a candle, which spends it self to give light to others. A
good Minister is like a Cock, which by the clapping of his wings awaketh
himself, and by his crowing awaketh others. For a good Minister by his private
studies, prayers and meditations, awaketh himself, and by his public
preaching awaketh others. The Scriptures affirms a good Minister to be the
very glory of Christ. And again, that a good Minister is a singular blessing of
God: 2 Cor. 8.23. Jer. 3.14.
For the Lord himself faith; I will take you one of a City, and two of a
Tribe, and will bring you to Sion: and I will give you a Pastor, according to
my heart, which shall feed you with knowledge and understanding. Now then if a
good Minister be so great a blessing of God, and so peerless a Pearl, how
great is the sin of those which contemn them, and tread their Ministry under
foot, as vile and nothing worth? Our Lord Jesus says of all such: He that
despises you despises me. Luke 10.16.
Let those scoffers and scorners therefore take heed how they despise Christ,
for assuredly he will not long put it up at their hands.

If any man demand a reason, why all these Epistles are specially sent and
directed to the Angels, or Pastors of the Churches, seeing John before, chap.
1.11. is commanded to write them to the Churches of Asia: I answer, that he
writing to the Pastor, excludes not the Churches, but in them, or under them,
he writes to the whole Churches, as plainly it appears in the conclusion of
every Epistle, when he says: Let him that has an ear, hear what the Spirit
says to the Churches. Then that which is spoken to the Angel of the Church,
spoken to the Church. The reason why the speech is specially directed to the
Pastor of every Church, is because the good or bad estate of the Church, for
the most part depends upon the Ministers. For commonly we see it comes to
pass; Such a Pastor, such a People: Such a Shepherd, such Sheep: Such a
Husbandman, such husbandry. And as the Prophet says, Hos. 4.9.
Like Priest, like People. For we may observe in all these Epistles, that where
the Minister is commended, the people are commended; and where the Minister is
discommended, the people are discommended also: So that they stand and fall,
sink and swim together. As concerning the Person from whom these Epistles
are sent, it is Jesus Christ, who is very gloriously described of his diverse
qualities in the entrance of every one of these Epistles: First, in the
Epistles to the Church of Ephesus, it is said: These things says he that
holds the seven Stars in his right hand, and which walks in the midst of
the seven Candlestickes. Secondly, in the Epistle to the Church of Smyrna:
These things says he, that is first and last, which was dead, and is alive.
Thirdly, to the Church of Pergamus: Thus says he, which has a sharp sword
with two edges. Fourthly, to Thyatira: These things says the Son of God, who
has eyes like a flame of fire, and his feet like fine brass. Fifthly, to the
Church of Sardis: These things says he that has the seven Spirits of God, and
seven Stars. Sixthly, to the Church of Philadelphia, it is thus said of Christ:
These things says he that is holy and true, which has the key of David, which
opens, and no man shuts, and shuts and no man opens. Lastly, to
Laodicea, it is thus said: These things says Amen, the faithful and true
witness, the beginning of the Creatures.

Now then, we do plainly see how gloriously Jesus Christ is described of his
several properties in every one of these Epistles, and what honorable and
magnificent titles are given unto him; and to all this end, to move attention,
and to work in us a reverence of so great a Personage, that we might more
seriously regard, and deeply ponder the things which proceed from so great a
Majesty: For we see and know by common experience that almost every man's words
are heeded and regarded according to the opinion and reverence which is had of
his Person. Since then that every one of these Epistles, fronted with this great
authority: Thus says the Son of God: Thus says Christ: Thus says Alpha and
Omega; therefore we ought to give diligent heed to the things herein contained.
So like wise we read in the Hebrews, that after the Holy Ghost had very
notably described the Person of Christ, and extolled him far above the Angels
and all other creatures, he gives the use of it in the beginning of the second
Chapter, saying, Therefore we ought to give more diligent heed to his doctrine.
And thus much concerning the Exordium or entrance of these seven Epistles,
touching the person to whom, and the Person from whom these Epistles are sent.
Now it follows to speak a word or two of the general proposition contained
in these words: I know thy works. We read in all these Epistles, how the Son
of God praises some of the Churches, and dispraises others; commends some
Pastors, and discommends others. Now he that will praise or dispraise, must
especially look to this, that he be upon a good ground; and therefore Jesus
Christ before he enters into any praising or dispraysing, commending or
reproving, does first protest that he knows their works, and is privy to all
their particular actions, yea, their very thoughts, and therefore cannot err
or be deceived in his censures. True it is indeed, that men may err in their
opinions and censures of others, because they know not men's hearts, and with
what affections things are carried. Men, I say, may praise or dispraise too
much or too little. But Jesus Christ whose eyes are a flame of fire, and which
searches the reins, cannot fail one jot, nor err a hairs breadth, as we
say, either in commending or discommending, and therefore he stops their
mouths at the first dash, so as they can have nothing to reply, when he says,
I know thy works; I know well enough what thou art, and what thou have been, I
am not deceived in thee, I know thy sitting down and rising up, and am
accustomed to all thy ways: And this briefly of the proportion. The narration
(as is aforesaid) contained in the matter of the Epistles, consisting of
praises and dispraises, admonitions, reprehensions, threats and promises.

Touching the first, we find that some Churches are highly commended, others
wholly discommended; others partly commended, partly discommended. As for
example, The Pastor and people of Smyrna and Philadelphia, are generally
commended for all things, and discommended for nothing, there is no fault found
with them; that is no gross fault as in others; for they were not without
common corruptions and infirmities. The Minister of Smyrna was a very rare and
excellent man, although a poor man to the world ward: For Christ says thus
unto him, Apo. 2.9.
I know thy poverty, but thou art rich; that is, rich in grace, and the
manifold gifts of the Spirit. Thou have done great service to the Church. Thou
have employed thy gifts to the good of many. Thou take great pains in the
Ministry, and art greatly blessed in thy labors; for thou have an excellent
flock, a notable good people, and therefore I cannot but greatly commend both
thee and them. The Minister of Philadelphia was also a very worthy and notable
man.

For although his gifts were not so great as some others, yet was he very
painful and faithful in a little; of whom it is said, Thou have a little
strength, and have kept my word, and have not denied my name: that is, thou art
very constant in the profession and practice of Christian Religion; and
thereupon Christ promised to bless his labors: For says he, I will make
them of the synagogue of Satan which call themselves Jews, and are not, but
do lie: Behold I say, I will make them that they shall come and worship before
thy feet, and shall know that I have loved thee. Here we do plainly see how
Christ promises to bless this man's Ministry, for his painfulnesse and
diligence, although he was not of the greatest gifts: For men of greatest gifts
are not always most blessed in their labors: For God does commonly work the
greatest things by weak means, that all glory might redound unto him, and no
flesh might boast in his sight. For otherwise if men of greatest gifts should
always be most blessed in their labors, and win most souls unto God, then
we would be ready to ascribe that to men, and their gifts, which is proper to
God, and so his praise and glory should be somewhat ecclipsed. Thus we see what
excellent men the Ministers of Smyrna and Philadelphia were, and what excellent
people they had in their charges. But on the contrary, the Pastor and the
people of Sardis and Laodicea, are discommended for all things, and commended
for nothing. Indeed the Minister of Sardis had a great name for learning, and
other good gifts, but he was grown very idle and negligent, and did little good
with his gifts: Of whom it is said, Thou have a name that thou live, but thou
art dead: That is, there was no spirit in him, no life of grace, his gifts
waxed rusty for want of use, he was fallen asleep; he was fallen away from the
grace of God, he was nothing the man which he had been. Therefore he is
admonished to awake and strengthen the things which remain, which were ready
to dye.

The Minister of Laodicea, and the people also, were grown lukewarm, neither
hot nor cold, they were become careless and secure, not caring greatly which
end went forward in GODS matters, so they might enjoy the present profits and
pleasures of this life.

Concerning the Pastors and people of Ephesus, Pergamus and Thyatyra, they are
partly commended, and partly discommended. These three were reasonable good
Ministers, and had many good parts in them, and took pains in their charges,
although there be some faults found with them. For the Minister of Ephesus is
commended for six things, for labor, for patience, for zeal, for wisdom, for
sincerity, and for courage; but discommended for leaving his first love; that
is, for revolting, or somewhat going back, or rather indeed, for cooling in
the love and zeal of God. The Minister of Pergamus, and people also are
greatly commended for their constant profession of the truth in the midst of
manifold troubles, and the very heat of persecution. For the rage of the
enemies grew so fierce against the profession and professors of the Gospel,
that Antipas the Pastor of Pergamus (as some suppose) was put to death: For
Christ says thus of his Church: Thou dwell where Satan's throne is, and yet
thou keep my name, Apo. 2.13
and have not denied my faith even in those days when Antipas my faithful
martyr was slain among you, where Satan dwells.

But yet notwithstanding this Church is found fault withal for some few
things, that is two gross faults; the one for suffering the doctrine of Balaam
to be broched there by the instruments of Satan; the other that they maintained
the doctrine of Nicolaitans. The doctrine of Balaam did uphold the lawfulness
of eating things sacrificed to Idols, Apo. 2.14
and of committing fornication; for he taught Balac the King of Moab, thus, to
put a stumbling block before the children of Israel. The doctrine of the
Nicolaitans did uphold the common use of women, that is, that women might be
made common. These two most gross and absurd doctrines were suffered and
maintained in the Church of Pergamus. As concerning the Church of Thyatira,
they are greatly commended for their love and service to the Church; for their
faith, patience, and manifold works, an^ especially for their constant
proceeding i^ Religion and Godliness, and that with increase: Apo. 2.19.
For of this Church it is said, I kno^ thy love and service, and faith, and thy
patience, and thy works, and that they are more a^ the last then at the first:
But this Church i^ discommended for suffering the wicked woman Jezabel, (that
is, a false Prophetess, who was craftily crept into this Church) to teach and
seduce the people of God in that congregation, teaching the same false doctrine
that Balaam did at Pergamus; which was, Apo. 2.10.
that it was lawful to commit fornication, and to eat meats sacrificed unto
Idols: Hitherto concerning the praises and dispraises of the Churches. Now
follows to speak of the admonitions.

First the Church of Ephesus having fallen from their first love, is admonished
to remember from whence they were fallen, to repent, and to do their first
works. Also the Church of Smyrna is admonished and exhorted to stand fast in
the midst of those persecutions and troubles, which should be raised up against
it by the Emperor Trajanus, and continue for the space often year: They are
therefore exhorted and encouraged by our Lord Jesus, not to fear the things
which they should suffer; for although the Devil and his Instruments should
have scope to persecute and imprison them for ten days; that is, ten years,
according to the Prophetical account; yet if they had continued faithful to
the death, they should have had the Crown of life. The Church of Pergamus
suffering and maintaining the doctrine of Balaam, and the Nicolaitans, is
admonished to repent and amend. The Church of Thyatyra, which suffered the
false doctrine of Jezabel is admonished to look to her self, and to hold fast
the truth of Religion. Sardis being dull and dead, is admonished to awake and
strengthen the things which remain that were ready to dye. Philadelphia is
admonished to hold that which they had, that no man take their Crown. Laodicea
being neither hot nor cold, but lukewarm, is admonished to be zealous and
amend. And although they thought their state good enough, being puffed up with
conceitednesse, yet they are charged to be poor, naked, and blind, and
thereupon counseled and admonished to buy spiritual Gold, that they may be
rich: and spiritual garments to hide their nakedness, and spiritual
eye salve to anoint their eyes that they may see.

Concerning reprehensions, Ephesus is reproved for going backward: Pergamus and
Thyatyra for suffering and maintaining corrupt doctrine, as formerly has been
showed. Sardis for dullness, deafness, and unsoundnesse in their manner of
worshipping God. Laodicea for luke-warmenesse and conceitednesse.

Touching threats, Ephesus is threatened, that except they repent and do their
first works, their Candlestick should be removed out of his place; that is,
the Church should be translated to some other place, but not destroyed: For God
does remove, but not destroy his Candlesticks. Pergamus is threatened, that
unless they did speedily repent, Jesus Christ should come shortly and fight
against them with the sword of his mouth. Thyatyra is threatened, that except
they repent them of their works, they should be cast into a bed of affliction,
and all their favorites should be slain with death. Sardis is threatened, that
if they did not watch and awake, CHRIST would come suddenly upon them as a
Thief, and they should not know what hour he would come.

Concerning promises, they be very great and large; for everlasting joy, and
the very fullness of glory is promised to all that fight the good fight of
faith, and overcome in the spiritual battle against the flesh, the world and
the Devil. Ephesus is promised, that if they fight it out courageously and
constantly to the end, they should eat of the tree of life, which is in the
midst of the paradise of God.

Smyrna is promised in like case, that they should not be hurt of the second
death. Pergamus likewise is promised to eat of the Manna that is hid, and to
have the white stone of victory given them. Thyatira is promised to have power
given them to rule over Nations, and to be lightened with heavenly brightness,
like the morning Star. Sardis is promised to be clothed with white array; that
is, with heavenly glory, and to have their name continued in the book of life.
Philadelphia is promised to have a pillar made in the Temple of God; that is, a
firm and unmovable place of eternal glory. Laodicea is promised to sup with
Christ, and to sit with him upon his throne for evermore. Thus we see what
great and precious promises are made to all Churches that fight and overcome in
this their spiritual battle and conflict.

Concerning the conclusion, it is one and the same to all these seven Churches.
Wherein they are exhorted, that such as have ears to hear, should hear,
ponder, and consider all the aforesaid praises, and dispraises, admonitions,,
reprehensions, threats, and promises. And it is therefore said, such as have
ears, because they are very few to be found that have circumcised and
sanctified ears, to hear and understand heavenly things. This is proper to
the elect, this is but to whom it is given. And thus briefly and generally we
see what was the present state of every one of the Churches of Asia, unto which
this Prophecy was to be sent: so that by them we may see in what estate the
universal Church militant was at that time. For as some of these seven as yet
stood firm, and others had much declined, so was it with all other Churches.

Hitherto concerning the first vision, containing generally the inscription of
this book: John's salutation to the Churches. John's new calling: The excellency
of Christ which called him: And the present estate of the Church. Now we are to
proceed to the second vision, contained in the next eight Chapters to the
twelve, wherein is showed, what should be the future estate of the Church in
all ages, even unto the end of the world.

CHAP. 4.
THe principal thing contained in this fourth Chapter, is a description of the
person of God, the author of this book, who is most gloriously described of
that excellent glory that is in himself, and of his royal throne which he
sits upon, and of his goodly retinue, and troops of Saints and Angels
attending about his most glorious throne. Whereunto is added the diverse
qualities, both of Angels and Saints, both in themselves and their own
natures: as also in their manner of praising and worshipping of God. This is
the general sum and sense of this Chapter.

But for the better clearing and more full opening of, I will come to the words
of the text and open them as they lie in order.

After this I looked, and behold a door was open in Heaven, and the first
voice I heard, Verse 1.
was as it were of a Trumpet, talking with me, saying: Come up hither, and I
will show thee the things which must be done hereafter. These words (After
this) have relation to the first vision spoken of before, as if he should say,
after I had received the former vision, concerning the present estate of the
Church, now I had another vision concerning the future estate thereof; and
therefore he says, a door was opened in Heaven, that he might come in and see
all these things which should be revealed to him. For the opening of the door
in Heaven does here signify the unlocking of heavenly things unto John, or his
entrance into them: for so the word door is taken 2. Cor. 3.12. Apoc. 3.8.
After the opening of the door, he is called up with a loud voice, like a
Trumpet, saying, Come up hither: for although the door was opened, yet durst
he not enter in till he was called and commanded to come in. For in these cases
he does not presume in any thing as of himself, without special warrant and
direction: As the Scripture says: No man takes this honor unto himself,
Heb. 5.4.
but he that is called of God, as Aaron was. The voice that calls him, is
like a Trumpet that is loud and shrill, that he might be stirred up more
diligently to attend unto the contemplation of these great secrets which should
be revealed unto him. This voice commands him to come up hither: which
shows that John was rapt up in the Spirit unto the Heavens to see this
vision. This voice promises to show him things which must be done hereafter:
that is, that he should be made acquainted with the future estate of the
Church, as already he was with the present estate thereof.

And immediately I was ravished in the Spirit, Verse 2.
and behold, a Throne was set in Heaven, and one sat upon the Throne. Upon
this sudden and extraordinary calling by so heavenly and loud a voice, John
was forthwith ravished in Spirit. For as the Prophet Ezechiel was by the spirit
in the visions of God, carried from Caldea to Jerusalem: So this holy Apostle
is carried by the Spirit in the visions of God into Heaven, and by the same
Spirit is made fit and capable of all these heavenly visions which should be
showed him. So that in all this we do plainly and clearly see, that John has
(as it were) a further calling and admittance from Heaven, to to behold and see
these wonderful secrets which now are to be imparted unto him.

Behold a Throne, etc. Here begins the description of the most high and
glorious majesty of God, who is described after the manner of earthly Kings and
Judges sitting upon their thrones and judgment seats. For he is King of Zion,
and Judge of all the world.

And he that sat, was to look upon like unto a Jasper stone, Verse 3.
and a Sardine, and there was a Rainebow round about the Throne like an
Emeraud. God for his admirable glory and beauty, is here compared to two most
precious stones. The one which is the Jasper, being of a perfect green color,
as Philosopers write: the other, which is the Sardine, being of a most bright
red color: Nothing can sufficiently resemble the glory of God, being infinite:
but these things being the most precious under the Sun, do after a sort shadow
it unto us.

There was a Rainbow round about the Throne, which may signify, that Gods
Throne in glory and beauty does far excel all other Thrones of mortal
Princes; yea, even that of Solomon, which was of most pure Ivory, or rather it
may signify, that although God in himself is most glorious and admirable, yet
he keeps promise and covenant with the sons of men. For the Rainebow was a
sign of his covenant, as appears Genesis 9. and assuredly God will be mindful
of his covenant to a thousand generations. This Rainbow is said to be like an
Emeraud, which is always of a fresh green color, signifying that Gods
covenant of grace and mercy toward his Church, is always fresh and green,
and his goodness toward his people perpetual and unchangeable.

Moreover, God is described of his glorious retinue, and heavenly company about
him. For it is said: Verse 4.
Round about the throne were 24. seats, and upon the seats 24. Elders: which
signify the whole Church, both militant and triumphant, both of Jews and
Gentiles; and are therefore called 24. because the Church of the Jews grew out
of 12. Patriarchs: and the Church of the Gentiles out of 12. Apostles. And as
the glory and pomp of mortal Kings is set out by their troops and trains of
nobles, and other excellent personages: So the glory of God (which in it self
can receive no increase) is to our capacity commended and set forth by his
goodly companies of Saints and Angels. These 24. Elders are clothed in white
raiment, which signifies their righteousness, as it is expounded, Chapter 19.
verse 8. not inherent, but imputative: For they having no righteousness of
their own. Christ's righteousness is imputed unto them through faith, and
through faith is made theirs. For Abraham believed, and it was imputed unto him
for righteousness.

These 24. Elders had on their head Crowns of gold, which signify their
victories over the world: for all the elect overcome the world through faith,
as S. John teaches; and not the world only, but even the flesh and the Devil
also: And therefore the crown and garland of victory belongs unto them as
most valiant conquerors,

Verse 5.
Moreover it is said, that out of the throne proceed lightnings, and thundering,
and voices, which signify his terror and fearful power in the preaching of
the Law: for the preaching of the Law, is as it were a voice of lightning and
thundering. The powerful preaching of the law, is the very thundering of hell,
and lightning of the wrath of God upon all impenitent sinners: and therefore at
the delivery of the Law, there were lightnings and thundrings, and Mount Sinai
it self did tremble and shake.

Further it is said, there were seven lamps of fire burning before the throne,
which are the seven Spirits of God. These seven lamps which are interpreted to
be the seven spirits of God, do signify the preaching of the Gospel, and the
manifold graces and gifts of the Spirit, which are given to the Church by the
means thereof. For the Gospel gives a cheerful and comfortable light,
being the Ministry of the Spirit, as the Apostle says, and therefore is
resembled to seven Lamps. So then from the throne, that is, from the presence
of God, proceeds both Law and Gospel, and the Ministry of them both for the
saving of souls. And all this makes much for the setting forth of Gods glory
and Majesty, being the mark here aimed at.

And before the throne there was a Sea of glass like unto Crystal: Verse 6.


This Sea of glass is the world, which is fitly compared to a Sea, because it
is full of storms, tempests, and waves, that are continually raised up in it.

It is full of rocks, upon which many dash, and make shipwreck.

It is compared to a Sea of Glass, for the brittlenesse, changes, and
uncertainety of all things in the world.

It is said to be before the Throne like Crystal, because the all-seeing God
does as clearly behold from his Throne all the thoughts, words, and works of
the sons of men, and all other particular actions of all his creatures under
the Sun, as we behold our face in a Crystal. For all things are naked, and
as it were laid out in an anatomy unto his eyes, with whom we have to do.

Moreover it is said, that in the midst of the throne, Verse 6.
and round about the throne, were four Beasts full of eyes before and behind.
These four beasts do signify the Angels of Heaven, the invisible and elect
Angels, as it is expounded, Ezech. 10. verse 20. where the Prophet in a vision
sees four beasts, as it were bearing up and drawing Gods Chariot of triumph.
And at the 20. verse he says expressly, that he at last understood they were
the Cherubins: The first and tenth Chapter of Ezechiel being thoroughly looked
into, do make this plain. The reason why the Angels are called by the name of
Beasts, is, because in the next verse they are compared to beasts for their
qualities of certain beasts. They are named four in number, being otherwise
innumerable, because they are likened to four several beasts.

The Angels are said to have eyes before and behind, for their great vigilance
over the Church, and every member thereof: and because they are endued with
knowledge of things past and things to come: and last of all, because they see
and discern almost all actions under the Sun, upward and downward, backward
and forward.

And the first beast was like a Lion, Ver. 7,
the second like a Calfe, etc. Here the Angels are compared to four several
beasts: to a Lion for strength and courage: to a Calfe or an Ox, for service
and use: to a Beast having the face of a man, for wisdom: to an Eagle, for
swiftness and readiness to execute the will of God. And moreover, because the
Eagles soar aloft, and fly a very high pitch, we are given to understand, that
the heavenly Spirits are much in celestial contemplation, and do receive the
knowledge of hid secrets and counsels, for they are much aloft about the Throne
of God, and many high and deep secrets are opened unto them.

And the four beasts had each of them six wings about him, Verse 8.
and they were full of eyes within, etc. This makes it very plain, that by
these Beasts are understood the six Angels, because he ascribes unto every
one of them six wings a piece. For the Angels are described with wings, both
in the first and tenth of Ezechiel before mentioned: and also in the sixth
Chapter of the Prophecy of Isaias, where the Seraphins are said to have six
wings a piece; two to cover their faces: two to cover their feet: and two to
fly withal. And they have two wings to cover their faces withal, because
they are not able to endure the unconceiveable brightness and glory of God,
for he dwells in unapproachable light. They have two wings to cover their
feet withal, because mortal then are not able to look upon the brightness
that is in Heaven. For we read that many have been astonished and dazzled with
the glory and brightness of Angels, so glorious creatures are they. They have
two wings to fly withal, to note their prompt obedience and readiness to
execute the commandments of God, as formerly was showed. Moreover, the Angels
are said to have wings, and to fly swiftly: because God by them does speedily
dispatch many purposes, actions and services here below: and for this cause the
Scripture affirms, that he rides upon the Cherubins: that he dwells
between the Cherubins: and that he makes the Clouds his Chariots, and
walks upon the wings of the wind. For as earthly Kings are in their
progresses carried in their most sumptuous coaches, drawn by the most
excellent Coach-horses, to dispatch great businesses, and many weighty affairs
within their dominions: so the Visions in Ezechiel do show that the immortal
King is carried most swiftly in his Chariot of triumph, drawn by the
Cherubins, as it were by beasts, to direct and overruled all actions under the
Sun. Moreover, these Angels are said to be full of eyes within, Verse 8.
to note not only their fullness of knowledge, but also their inward sight
into all heavenly things; yea, even such as are most secret and hid: for they
are of all other creatures most inward with God. None of his Children know so
much of his counsel as they. Furthermore the Angels are here said to praise
God uncessantly, Verse 8.
day and night, saying; Holy, holy, holy, Lord God Almighty, which was, which
is, and which is to come: where we may clearly see, that the Angels praise and
worship God in a burning zeal without weariness. For they are not as men,,
which through their great corruption, are full of dullness and weariness in
Gods worship; but they do always serve him with infatigable desires, and
therefore are called Seraphins, because they burn in the zeal of God; and
Cherubins, because their delight is to approach near unto him, and to be
always about his Throne; yea even in his chamber of presence. They do double
and treble this word (holy) and warble much upon it, because they know full
well, that he is righteous in all his ways, and holy in all his works, and
that all his proceedings and judgments are even then weighed in the balance
of Justice and equity, when to man's sense and the judgment of reason, they
seem nothing less. For his judgments are as a great depth which man's reason
cannot sound. Further, we see that when these beasts, that is, the Angels,
gave glory and honor and thanks to God, etc. the 24. Elders also fell down
before him, and worshipped him that lives for evermore. Where we may see, that
both Saints and Angels, do jointly praise and magnify God, and him alone,
Even that GOD that lives for evermore, even that GOD which was, which is, and
which is to come: that is, the eternal and everlasting God. For the Scripture
says: Praise him, O ye Saints, and praise him, O ye Angels that excel in
strength. And the 24. Elders cast their Crowns before the Throne, saying, Thou
art worthy, O Lord, to receive glory and honor, etc. Wherein we see, that all
the Elect do empty themselves of all worthiness to have any glory,
acknowledging that their Crowns of glory are Gods free gift, and that the
praise thereof belongs only to him and nothing to themselves. And this in
very deed is the right manner of worshipping God, frankly to ascribe all glory
to him, and all shame to our selves, to give all to him to whom all is due, and
nothing to our selves, which have nothing; for nothing can be given or taken
out of nothing.

Now then, to conclude and wind up this 4. Chapter, we do clearly see the
sum and drift of all is, that Heaven door was opened unto John, and that he
was let in, and called up into the Chamber of presence by a very loud voice,
there to take notice of the future estate of the Church: and that the person
which thus called him up was the very immortal God himself, who is so
gloriously described of his Throne, his troops and trains of Saints and
Angels, as we have heard. And all this is to commend and set forth the
authority of this book, whose Author is so excellent, yea, super-excellent.

CHAP. V.
AFter this Vision containing the glory of the divine Majesty was showed unto
John, that he might know from what fountain this Prophecy was derived, now in
this fifth Chapter is taught and showed by what means and by whose mediation,
the knowledge of such hidden mysteries were revealed unto the Church; namely,
by the means and mediation of Jesus Christ, in whom only the counsels and
secrets of God the Father are opened, and made known unto men. For he is the
great Prophet and Doctor of the Church, which is come down from the bosom of
his Father, and has made known unto us whatsoever he has received of his
Father, as he himself testifies. And the Church is commanded by a voice from
Heaven to hear him, and him alone.

This fifth Chapter contains three things, generally, Ver. 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6,
7.
First, a description of the book, which was in the right hand of God.

Secondly, a description of Jesus Christ, which receives it at the hand of his
Father and opens it.

Thirdly, a description of those most glorious praises which are given to
Christ by the Angels, Saints, and all the creatures in Heaven and earth.

I saw in the right hand of him that sat upon the throne, a book written
within, Verse 1.
and on the back side, sealed with seven seals. By this book here
mentioned, is meant this present book of the Apocalypse, or Revelation, as it
shall plainly appear in the next chapter, when we come to the opening of the
seven seals thereof. For the things which fall out upon the opening of the
several seals, do plainly declare, that all is meant of the particular
matters contained in this present book.

This book is said to be in the right hand of him that sits upon the throne,
because all the secrets revealed in it, come from the counsel and decree of
the most high God, and are ordered by his mere direction and providence.

It is called a written book, to show that the things contained in it, are so
firmly decreed in the counsel of God, that none of them shall fail, but come
to pass, and be fulfilled ^n their season. They are such as we may write of,
as we use to say: and therefore for the cer^ainty of them, they are here said
to be writ^en in a book.

This book is said to be written within and without, for the multitude and
variety of matters contained in it. For there were both many and great things
which should fall out in the World from the time that John received the
Prophecy, unto the end of the World.

This book is sealed with seven seals, that is to say, perfectly sealed,
because the things contained herein, are counsels and secrets, only known to
God, till it pleased hi^ to reveal them to his Church by his Son. The elect
Angels knew nothing of the things written in this book, before the seals were
opened.

Verse 2.
And I saw a strong Angel, which proclaimed with a loud voice; Who is worthy to
open the book, and to loose the seals thereof. Here is Proclamation made to
all creatures, that if there were any manner of persons in Heaven or earth,
among men or Angels, that would take upon them to open and expound this book,
that they should com^ forth and show themselves, and be very willingly and
gladly heard. Verse 3.
But alas, the next verse does show, that none in heaven o^ earth was able to
open the book and expoun^ it: whereupon John wept very much, because no man
was found worthy to open and interpret this book.

The cause of John's weeping and lamenting, was for fear the Church should be
deprived of such profitable and excellent things as he knew were contained in
this book. Such was his love to the Church: such was his zeal and care for
the people of God. An example worthy of all imitation to mourn and weep for
the conc^^ling of the book of God, and to rejoice in the opening of it. But
Papists and Atheists are of a contrary mind, for they rejoice in the
concealing and keeping close of the Scriptures, and are much grieved with the
opening and revealing thereof; because thereby their hypocrisy and villainy is
detected and discarded.

Upon this, one of the Elders said unto John: Verse 5.
Weep not: Behold, the Lion which is of the Tribe of Judah, the root of
David, has obtained to open the book, and to loose the seals thereof. Here we
see how John is comforted and cheered up by one of the Elders, being now very
pensive and sad; and is willed to pluck up a good heart, and to be of good
cheer, for he could tell him good news; to wit, of one that could open and
expound this book, and all the secrets in it; and that is Jesus Christ, the
great revealer of secrets, and only expounder of all riddles, and hidden
mysteries, as before has been spoken.

Jesus Christ is here said to be of the Tribe of Judah, because he is lineally
descended of that Tribe, according to the flesh, and his humane nature.

He is compared unto a Lion, by allusion unto Jacobs words in his last will and
testament, concerning Judah, namely, that he should couch as a Lion, and as a
Lioness, and none should stir him. He is fitly compared to a Lion, for his
great and admirable power and strength, for he reigns and must reign over
all his enemies, and in the midst of all his enemies, till he has troade all
his enemies under his feet. He is called the root of David, both here, and
also in the 22. Chapter of this Book, verse 16. because he sprung out of
David, the Son of Ishai, as a branch out of his root, as the Prophet did
foretell, that A rod should come forth of the stock of Ishai, and a graft
should grow out of his roots. And the Apostle says, that Christ was made of
the seed of David, according to the flesh.

Then says John, I beheld, and lo, Verse 6.
in the midst of the throne, and of the four beasts, and of the Elders,
stood a Lamb, as though he had been killed, which had seven horns, and seven
eyes, which are the seven Spirits of God sent into all the world. Here John
takes a view and sight of Jesus Christ, from the very midst of the throne,
and of the four beasts, and the Elders. Christ does not appear about the
throne, as do the Saints and Angels, which are but ministers and ministering
Spirits: but in the very midst of the Throne, and the four beasts, etc.
because he is God everlasting, coequall and coeternall with the Father; in whom
(as the Apostle says) dwells all the fullness of the Godhead bodily or
essentially. And here afterward the same worship and honor is ascribed unto
him both by the Saints and Angels, which before is ascribed unto God the Father.

Christ is here compared to a Lamb, for his innocence; for the Scripture
says, He was a sheep dumb before his shearer. He is the Lamb of God that
takes away the sins of the world. He is the Lamb slain from the beginning
of the world: He is compared to a Lion, for his great and incomparable strength
in conquering Hell, Death, and damnation, and all infernal power. And to a
Lamb, because he has dispatched all this upon the Cross, by the sacrifice of
himself once offered: for he did never more lively show forth his Lyon-like
power, then when he was as a Lamb slain and sacrificed upon the Cross.

This Lamb Christ is here said to have seven horns, which signify his
manifold power, or fulness of power, or perfect power, according as this
metaphor or borrowed speech of horn is usually so taken in all the Scriptures.
This Lamb also is said to have seven eyes, which are interpreted to be the
seven spirits of God: that is, the manifold graces and gifts of the Spirit,
which he gives unto his Church. Now then to conclude this point, for as much as
the number of seven in this book is a number of perfection and always notes
perfection, therefore by Christ's seven horns, and seven eyes, we may, and that
soundly understand his perfect power, and his perfect sight and knowledge in
all things. For his seven eyes are so taken in the third Chapter of the
Prophecy of Zachary, where it is said a Upon one stone shall be seven eyes.
Meaning, that Jesus Christ, the corner stone of the Church, should be full of
eyes, to look out for the good of his Church, and to give light to all others:
for he is the life and light of the World.

And he came and took the book out of the right hand of him that sat upon
the throne. Ver. 7.
Here Jesus Christ takes the book out of his Fathers hand, purposing both to
open it, and expound it: For he is the only expounder of the law, and the best
interpreter of his Fathers will.

Hereupon it is said, that the four beasts, Verse 8.
and 24. Elders fell down before the Lamb, to testify their thankfulness,
and inward joy and rejoicing, that the Son of God would take upon him this
office, which none other would or could perform.

Moreover, by their falling down and worshipping him, they do plainly
testify, that he is God over all, to be blessed for ever. For otherwise the
Angels of Heaven, both Cherubins and Seraphins, would not thus fall down and
worship him, ascribing unto him both deity and divine honor.

Consider then how great he is, of whom it is said: Let all the Angels of God
worship him. Psalm. 97.7.


Moreover, these Angels and Saints are said to have every one Harpes and golden
Vials, Verse 8.
full of Odours, which are the prayers of the Saints.

These Harpes do signify the sweet consent and harmony both of men and
Angels, in sounding forth the praises of the Lamb: for herein the whole Church
both militant and triumphant do accord and tune together, as many harpers
harping upon their harpes; Apo. 14.2.
as is written also in another place.

Hereby also they do plainly testify that inward peace and spiritual joy,
which all the faithful have through Christ, which is more sweet and
delightsome to the soul, then any music is unto the ears.

The Vialls full of Odours, are expounded to be the prayers of the Saints,
which are therefore compared to odours, because they smell sweet in the
nostrils of God, and are more fragrant then any nosegay or perfume whatsoever:
for he takes great pleasure in the prayers of his people; especially when they
came out of golden vials, that is, sanctified hearts and consciences: for every
sanctified heart is a golden heart in the sight of God; and every regenerate
conscience is a Jewel of price, guilt with gold, and enameled with pearl. For
this cause the holy man David wishes earnestly, that his heart might be so
renewed and cleansed inwardly, that his prayer might be directed as incense in
Gods sight, Psalm. 14.1.
and the lifting up of his hands as a sweet smelling sacrifice.

Furthermore, these Saints and Angels do sing a new song. That is, they do sing
to the praises of the Lamb with renewed affections, and unwearied desires.
Their inward joy continues always fresh and green as the Bay Tree: They
never wither or wax weary of the service of God: Their song is evermore new,
and therefore evermore delightsome. For the more new any thing is, the more
pleasant and delactable: for men are not affected with old, but altogether with
new things.

Now then, Jesus Christ having taken this book into his hand to open and
expound, is applauded unto by the general consent and voices of the whole
Church: for say they, Thou art worthy to take the book, and to open the seals
thereof. Wherein they do all with common consent, give their voices unto
Christ, acknowledging him to be the only fit person in Heaven or earth, to
take upon him the function of opening a book so closed, so clasped, so shut,
so sealed; and they do yield a reason of their proceedings, because (say they)
thou wast killed, and have redeemed us unto God by thy blood, out of every
kindred, and tongue, and people, and nation. Meaning hereby, that he was put to
death, to pay the price of our redemption, in whom all believers, both Jews
and Gentiles are saved. Their reason then is this: he that has died, and risen
again, and is now exalted far above all principalities and powers, etc. is
the most fit instrument to open and interpret this book: but thou O Christ the
Lamb of God, art such an one; therefore thou of all others art most meet to
take the matter upon thee, and to enter into this business. Further, they
amplify their reason thus: Verse 10.
that he has made us of slaves and servants, Kings: and of profane persons,
Priests unto the most high God. And last of all, that we shall reign upon the
earth. Not meaning hereby, that we shall reign as earthly Kings, or only
enjoy an earthly Kingdom. For out of all doubt the Saints shall reign with
Christ in the Heavens for evermore. But here is mention made of reigning in
the earth, because after this life Gods Children shall have the fruition and
inheritance both of Heaven and earth; that is to say, that new Heaven and new
Earth, 2 Pet. 3.12
wherein dwells righteousness: for the Heavens and the earth being
redintegrated and purged from corruption, shall be the portion of the Saints,
and the habitation of the Elect for evermore.

After all this, Ver. 11.
John hears the voice of innumerable Angels besides the four Beasts. That
is, the Cherubines and Seraphins, or chief Angels; that is, Angels deputed to
chief offices, round about the throne, which all with a loud voice do
acknowledge the Lamb which was killed, Ver. 12.
to be worthy of all honor, glory, and praise, etc. And not only these
innumerable Angels, being 20. thousand times ten thousand, but also all other
creatures both in Heaven and Earth: As the Sun, Moon, and Stars, the fishes
in the Sea, and the beasts in the earth, do all in their kind sing the same
song, acknowledging all honor and glory, praise and power, to belong unto him
that sits upon the throne, Ver. 13.
and unto the Lamb for evermore. For although the creature is as yet subject
to the bondage of corruption, and therefore groneth and travelleth in pain,
waiting when the Sons of God shall be revealed, yet it stands in assured
expectation of restitution to liberty and incorruption; and therefore here all
the creatures do praise the Lamb for that restoration which they had so
lovingly and wishly looked for. And the four beasts said Amen. That is, they
do subscribe to those praises which the creature yields to their Creator. And
not only the Angels do subscribe and consent unto it, but the four and twenty
Elders also, that fall down and worshp him that lives for evermore. So that
the Lamb is praised and worshipped of all hands, both of men and Angels; and
all other creatures as God everlasting, and blessed for evermore.

CHAP. VI.
IN the fourth Chapter we have heard the description of God the Father, which
holds the sealed book in his right hand. In the fifth Chapter we have also
had the description of Jesus Christ, the opener and interpreter of this seven
sealed Book. Now in this sixth Chapter we are to understand of the mattter and
contents of this Book, and of the strange accidents and events which followed
upon the opening of every several Scale.

For in this Chapter six of the Seals are opened by the Son of God, and the
Mysteries thereof disclosed unto John, that he might declare them to the
Church, for the comfort and instruction thereof.

This Chapter contains six principal things, arising from the several
opening of the six seals, and they are these: The spreading of the Gospel.
Great persecutions following thereupon. Famine. Pestilence. Complaints of the
Martyrs. Ver. 1.2.3.4. etc.
Fearful revenge upon the world, for shedding the blood of Gods Saints.


After, Verse 1.
I beheld when the Lamb had opened one of the seals, and I heard one of the
four beasts say as it were the noise of thunder, Come and see. Now after all
these former matters, John did very intentively fix his eyes upon the Lamb,
being now about to open and unclaspe the first Seal of the book; and all on
the sudden he was admonished and stirred up by one of ^he Cherubins, that he
should draw near and come up, and take knowledge of these great and important
matters, which were now to be revealed unto him. And to the end that he might
be thoroughly awaked, and stirred up to attention in so weighty matters, it is
said, that the voice of the Angel which spoke unto him, was like the voice of
a thunder: So that thereby John was thoroughly rouzed, fitted and prepared, to
receive these heavenly visions.

verse 2.
Therefore I beheld, and lo, there was a white horse, and he that sat on him
had a bow, and a Crown was given unto him, and he went forth conquering, that
he might overcome. John keeping his eye steady upon the Lamb, having now
opened the first seal, does in a vision see a white horse, etc.

By this white Horse, is meant the Ministry of the Word of God, and the first
preaching of the Gospel by Christ and his Apostles, and the successors in the
Primitive Church. The white horse is taken in this sense in the nineteenth
Chapter of this Prophecy; where our Lord Jesus being upon this white Horse,
beats down all his enemies before him: For who is able to resist his word,
and the ministry of it.

In the first Chapter of the Prophecy of Zachary, our Lord Jesus purposing to
build up his Church, being in a very ruinous estate after the captivity, is
brought in by the Prophet on horseback, both for the reedifying of his
Church, and also for the punishment of the Babilonians, his enemies, and the
enemies of his people. In the 45. Psalm the Church the Spouse says thus to
her beloved Husband Christ: Gird thy sword upon thy thigh, Psalm. 45.
O thou mighty one, the sword of thy glory and comely beauty, and with thy
comely beauty ride on prosperously for the business of truth and of meek
righteousness, etc.

Now in all these places of the Scripture, we do plainly see, that when Christ
goes about either to preach his Gospel, or build up his Church, or to be
revenged on the enemies thereof, he is brought in on horseback.

And this does strongly confirm and warrant this exposition, seeing it is not
any imagined sense, or new device of man's brain, but such a sense as other
places of Scripture will very fully bear out.

Moreover, if we do seriously consider, and deeply weigh the purpose and
intendment of the holy Ghost in all this, it will not a little help and
further this exposition. For the chief scope and drift of all is, to describe
the state of the Church from the Apostles time to the end of the World. For
this Prophecy serves to show unto John the things that must shortly come to
pass.

Now, we all know by blessed experience, that the first estate of the Church
did consist in the preaching of the Gospel by Christ and his Apostles: and
therefore this must needs be understood of that time and estate of the Church.
For Jesus Christ is he that sits upon this white horse, that is, by the
Ministry of his Gospel he conquereth and subdueth the Nations under him.

There may be three reasons alleged why this Horse is said to be of a white
color. First, because the Doctrine of the Gospel which was preached by Christ
and his Apostles, was pure and sincere, being without all spots and blots of
error and heresy. For the white color in the Scripture does signify purity,
sincerity, innocence, joy, glory, and beauty.

Secondly, because the doctrine of Christ and his Apostles, was full of joy and
comfort: As it is said of Samaria, after Philip had set the Gospel abroach
there, that there was great joy in that City.

Thirdly, because the Ministry of Christ and his Apostles, was very glorious
and beautiful, as it written: How beautiful are the feet of them which bring
the glad tidings of peace! etc. And again, with thy comely beauty ride on
prosperously, Psalm. 45.
for the business of truth, etc.

If any man demand a reason of Christ's sitting on horseback, and riding forth
on horseback: I answer, that it does fitly represent that mavelous
swiftness wherewith the light of the Gospel should be carried and spread, not
only throughout all Judea, Samaria, and Galile, but also throughout all the
Kingdoms of the world. For it is not a wonder, to consider how swiftly, and as
it were on horseback, and also how far over the heathen nations, within a few
years after Christ's ascension, the doctrine of the Gospel was preached, and
of multitudes embraced? He rode forth indeed prosperously and swiftly upon this
white Horse, even the Ministry of the Gospel, for the business of truth, and
of meek righteousness; and his right hand wrought fearful things, as says
the Psalmist.

Moreover, it is here said, that Jesus Christ has a bow in his hand. And in
the 25. Psalm. from whence it seems all these phrases and speeches are
borrowed, he is said to have sharp arrows in his hand, whereby he pierces
the heart of his enemies.

Now his bow and arrows do signify the piercing power of the Gospel,
whereby the World has been subdued unto Christ. For, all the arrows of the
Gospel which Christ shoots out of his bow, which is even the tongue of his
Ministers, do stick in the hearts of men; yea they pierce into all the secret
places of the soul. For the Ministry of the Gospel is lively, and mighty in
operation, sharper then any two-edged sword, and enters through, Heb. 4.
even unto the dividing asunder of the soul and the spirit, of the joints and
the marrow, and is a discerner of the thoughts, and the intents of the heart,

Here is yet further mention made of a Crown which was given unto Christ, and
that he went forth conquering that he might overcome,

This Crown signifies the victory which he gets over the World with his
bow and arrows. For the Psalmist says: By thy sharp arrows in the hearts of
the Kings enemies, the people shall fall under thee.

We read in the second of the Acts of the Apostles, that 3000. of the Kings
enemies were at once shot through with this bow and these arrows, and did fall
under him. We read of many other, at other times, and in other places. For the
Apostle says plainly, 2. Cor. 10.
that the weapons of our warrefare are not carnal, but spiritual, mighty
through God to cast down holds, casting down the imaginations, and every high
thing that is exalted against the knowledge of God, and bringing into captivity
every thought to the obedience of Christ.

Thus we see how Christ and his Apostles and all their true successors, riding
upon this white Horse, which is the Ministry of the Gospel, have gone over all
the world conquering and overcomming.

I am not ignorant that some do expound this otherwise: but my purpose is not
to meddle with other men's opinions and judgments, but to set down that which
God has given to me to see, and which in mine own conscience and persuasion,
I suppose to be the truth; referring all to the judgment of the Church, and
such therein as are endued with the Spirit of God. For, the spirit of the
Prophet is subject to the Prophets. And be it known unto all men, that my
chief endeavors throughout this whole book, shall be to seek the sense that
is, and not the sense that is not: to meddle only with truth, and let falsehood
go.

And when He had opened the second Seal, I heard the second Beast say, Ver. 3.
Come and see. As before at the opening of the first seal, so now again at
the opening of the second seal, John is called upon by another Angel to give
attention: and so afterward at the opening of the third and fourth seal.
Wherein we may observe the heaviness and drowsinesse of man's nature in all
heavenly things, which is evermore ready to sink and fall asleep, except it be
awaked by many means, and stirred up by special grace.

Ver. 4.
And there went out another horse that was red, and power was given to him that
salt thereon, to take peace from the earth, and that they should kill one
another: and there was given unto him a great sword. This red Horse
represents the cruel persecution and bloody Wars, which followed the
preaching of the Gospel. For the red color in the Scripture does note blood,
cruelty, and Wars. The rider upon this Horse is the Devil himself: for who
but he, and his instruments delight in blood, persecution, and wars? He has
power given him to take peace from the earth (for he could have no power,
except it were given him:) and to this purpose a great sword was given him, to
murder and kill withal.

And all this is to be understood of the state of the Church under the ten
great persecutions, raised up against it by the persecuting Emperors,
Domitian, Trajanus, Nero, Antonius, Decius, Dioclesian, Maxentius, Licinius,
and other cruel tyrants, even until the time of Constantine the Great.
Stories do report, that these cruel persecutors did in a most savage and
horrible manner, torture, torment, and shed the blood of innumerable multitudes
of Gods people. So that as the first estate of the Church, under the preaching
of the Gospel, was joyful and peaceable: So this second estate of the Church,
under such outrageous persecutions, was troublesome and tragical; and yet for
all that, in the midst of all these swords, blood and flames of persecution,
the Church did still prevail and increase. For the blood of the Martyrs is the
seed of the Gospel. And the Church often times being sown in blood, yet
springs up, and grows in blood. And as for the cruel and blood-sucking
Emperors, which could not endure the light of the Gospel, but strove by
tyranny to suppress it; the just God which takes vengeance of all iniquity,
and especially of the persecution of his children, was even with them well
enough: for he gave them over, some to be slain in the wars, some to be
tortured with horrible diseases, some to be poisoned, some to be murdered, and
some to murder themselves. Thus did God the avenger show himself from Heaven,
as the Stories report, and pay home to the full these blood-suckers of his
Church, making them examples of his Wrath, and spectacles of his vengeance to
all Nations.

verse 5.
And when he had opened the third seal, I heard the third beast say, Come and
see. Then I beheld, and lo a black horse, and he that sat on him, had
balances in his hand, etc. By the black horse, famine, and dearth is
signified; for the black color, is a mournful and sad color: and what makes
men more pensive and sad then famine, and extreme hunger? For it is a thing
untolerable: and therefore the holy Ghost says: They be better that are killed
with the sword, Lam. 4.9.
then they that dye of famine. He that sits on this horse, has a balance
in his hand, which signifies great penury and scarsity of all things, but
especially of victual: insomuch, that men must be pittanced and stinted in
their victuals, and their bread and drink must be delivered out by weight and
measure, as it fares in strait and sore siedges of Cities, when victuals wax
scarce. This is it that God threatens in Levit. 26. and Ezec. 4.5. That he
would break the staff of bread, verse 6.
and that ten women should bake in one oven, and deliver bread by measure.

Now to declare the grievousnesse of this famine, a voice comes from the
Throne and from the Angels, that a measure of wheat should be for a penny, and
three measures of barley for a penny: the measure here spoken of, is a Chenix,
which some Writers say, was so much as would serve a man for bread-corne for
one day: And the Roman penny under Domitian, was always seven pence of our
money. And at that time the laboring man did work for a penny a day, which
would do little more then buy him bread-corne How then should his wife and
children do? Whereas it is said: Wine and Oil hurt thou not. I take that it
should rather be translated, In Wine and oil thou shall not do unjustly: as
the word will bear it. And the sense is, that in the state of corn and
victual, they shall deal conscionably and mercifully, not selling at the
highest, but rather at the lowest rate now in the times of extreme scarcity.

Now all this is to be understood of that most grievous famine which we read to
have been about the year of our Lord, 316. and sundry times afterward. And all
this for the contempt of the Gospel preached by Christ and his Apostles upon
the white horse; and the murdering of Gods Saints, by him upon the red Horse,
and his instruments. So grievous and fearful a thing is the contempt of the
Gospel, and the persecuting of the Saints. And God did most justly cause the
world to smart for it, and make them with sorrow enough to feel the punishment
of the Gospel rejected.

Ver. 7.
And when he had opened the fourth seal, I heard the voice of the fourth Beast
say: Come and see.

Ver. 8.
And I looked, and behold a pale horse, and his name that sat on him was Death,
and hell followed after him, etc.

This pale Horse signifies the pestilence and other contagious diseases, which
God most justly brought upon the world for the contempt of the Gospel, and the
murdering, of Christ and his Apostles. And as I noted before out of the
Scriptures, that when God comes either in mercy or judgment, he is said to
come on Horseback, to note his expedition and swiftness, both in the one and
the other: so, as before, Christ is upon the white Horse, the Devil upon the
red Horse, famine upon the black Horse: so here death and hell are said to be
upon the pale Horse: for pestilence and death makes men look pale: but being
dead, he says Hell followed. For assuredly Hell does always follow the death
of the body, excepting those only whom Christ has delivered from hell and
damnation by the power of his death.

Thus then it is; the red Horse with blood, the black Horse with famine, the
pale Horse with pestilence, have power given over the fourth part of men to
murder, kill, and slay; as all Stories do show, that for the rejecting of
Christ and his Church and his Gospel, these plagues were carried as it were on
horseback, over a great part of the world. Now as touching this famine and
pestilence which fell out upon the opening of the third and fourth seals, they
are to be referred unto those times especially, wherein the Hunnes, Goths and
Vandals, and other barbarous Nations which were the wasters of the world, did
waste and decay the Roman Empire both far and near. Whereupon grew this
famine, scarsitie, and pestilence, and strange diseases here spoken of about
some 300. years after Christ, and somewhat more.

And when he had opened the fifth Seal, I saw under the Altar, the souls of
them that were killed for the word of God, and for the testimony which they
maintained, etc. Here is discovered the state of the Martyrs after this life,
and the condition of the spirits of all just and perfect men. For whereas it
might be demanded, what became of all those heaps and multitudes of men which
were slain for the testimony of Jesus in the ten persecutions: it is here
answered, That they were under the Altar. John in a vision sees them under the
Altar. That is, under the merciful protection of Christ in Heaven, who for
them and for us all, was made both Altar, Priest, and Sacrifice. This Altar,
Christ, is afterward called the golden Altar, which is before the Throne of
God. Chap. 8.3.
So then it is clear, that the souls of the Martyrs were with Christ in
glory. For he says to his disciples: Where I am, there shall you be also. Joh.
14.3.
And in another place he says: John 12.32.
If I were lift up from the earth, I should draw all men unto me, that is, all
believers. Then it follows, that the souls of these just and righteous men
were in Paradise, and in Abraham's bosom, which is the very Port and Haven of
salvation. For although the persecuting Emperors, and other tyrants of the
earth, had power to kill their bodies, yet had they no power over their souls,
as our Lord Jesus affirms.

And they cried with a loud voice, saying: How long, Lord, holy and true, verse
10.
do not thou judge and avenge our blood on them that dwell upon the earth?
Here we see plainly, that the souls of the Martyrs do very vehemently cry
for vengeance upon these cruel Tyrants which shed their blood. Moreover, they
cry for it speedily, and seem to be impatient of delay. But it is to be
observed, that they do not this in any hatred, or private desire of revenge, in
respect of any wrong or cruelty showed to them; but in a very love and burning
zeal of the Kingdom and glory of Christ, and whatsoever desire they have, it
is wholly to that end. Wherefore they are here under a figure brought in crying
for vengeance, rather to express what judgment of God tarrieth for the cruel
persecuters, then to show what mind they bear toward them. For it is indeed
their cause that cries for vengeance. And as Abels blood; so their blood
cries aloud in the ears of the Lord of Hoasts for revenge.

Moreover, we may not imagine or gather out of this loud crying of the Martyrs
in Heaven, that they have any disturbance, impatience, disquietnesse, or any
coffeehouse there. But this they do in a fervent desire of that fullness of
glory, which they assuredly hope for and look for in consummation of all
things, when both their souls and bodies shall be joined together.

Ver. 11.
And long white robes were given unto every one; and it was said unto them, That
they should rest for a little season, until their fellow servants and their
brethren which should be killed, even as they were, were fulfilled. These white
robes do signify that honor, glory, and dignity, whereunto not only the
Martyrs, but also all other faithful believers are advanced in the chambers of
peace: for so white Robes are to be understood in sundry other places of this
book. And this does plainly prove, that the martyrs were now in glory with
Christ.

Now, as concerning the answer to their complaint and cry, it was this, That
they should be content, and have patience for a little season, (for the time
remaining, to the end of the World, was but as a day with God, and as a moment
in comparison of eternity:) and the reason of the delay is yielded, which is
this; that there were numbers of others, their brethren in the World, which
should be martyred and slain for the truth, as well as they, under the great
Antichrist of Rome, and the bloody Turk, at and upon the opening of the
seventh seal. And therefore in consideration that the most wise God had decreed
and fore-determined with himself in most secret and hid counsel, to bring
multitudes of others to glory by the same way and means that themselves were
brought, that therefore in the mean time, being so short a time, they should
rest satisfied and contented. And here by the way, we see what stays the
coming of Christ unto judgment; namely this, that the number of the Martyrs
and Saints, and al such as he has chosen unto life, are not yet accomplished.

And behold when he opened the sixth Seal, and lo, there was a great
Earthquake, ver. 2.13.14.
and the Sun was as black as sacke-cloth of hair, and the Moon was like
blood.

And the stars of Heaven fell unto the earth, as a fig tree casts her
green figs, when it is shaken of a mighty wind.

And Heaven departed away as a scrole when it is rolled, and every Mountain
and I Will were moved out of their place.

Upon the opening of the sixth Seal, very doleful and fearful things do
follow: As earthquakes, the darkning of the Sun, the obscurity of the Moon,
the falling of the Stars, the rolling together of the Heavens, the remooving
of mountains and Isles out of their places, the howlings and horrors of Kings,
Captains, and other Potentates of the earth, which are all things very
terrible and fearful to behold: and all these do represent and figure out
unto us the most fearful tokens of Gods high displeasure and most heavy
indignation against the wicked World. Very grievous things fell out upon the
opening of the second, third, and fourth seals: but they are far more
grievous which follow upon the opening of this sixth seal: for this sixth Seal
contains an aggravation and increase of all the former judgments. For now
after the cry of the Martyrs for vengeance, God the avenger of the blood of the
Righteous does show himself from Heaven, and declare his wrath in more
fearful manner then before, even to the great astonishment of all the
creatures in Heaven and Earth. So horrible a thing is the shedding of the blood
of the Christians. For now we see plainly, that God hears the cries of his
Martyrs, and comes as a Giant, or an armed man, to take vengeance of all
their enemies, For, Psalm. 116.15.
Precious in the sight of the Lord is the death of his Saints: and he is much
moved with the cry of their blood, as here we see. And therefore now
threatens to hold a general Assize, wherein he will make inquisition after
blood, and arraigne and condemn all such as are found guilty thereof:
according as the persecuting Emperors and many others did find and feel by
woeful experience. For, if God be angry but a little, who may endure it.

Now although the Stories do report, that in those days, which was above 300.
years after Christ, there were many great and fearful Earthquakes in diverse
nations and Cities of the World: yet it is apparent, that the Earthquake here
spoken of, cannot be taken literally, nor any of the rest here mentioned. For
there was never any time, neither is it mentioned in any Chronicle, that ever
the Sun was as black as sack cloth of hair; or the Moon turned into blood;
or the Stars fell from Heaven; or the Heavens rolled together like a scrole;
or that Mountains and Islands were moved out of their places. Therefore of
necessity all this must be understood metaphorically; that is, that God did in
so strange and fearful a manner manifest his wrath from Heaven by tumults,
commotions, seditions, and alterations of Kingdoms, as if these things of the
Sun, Moon, and Stars, had been visibly represented to the eye. An
earthquake in this book, and other books also of the Scriptures, does by a
borrowed speech signify commotions of Commonwealths, troubles, tumults,
uprores, and great alterations of States and Kingdoms. The darkning of the
Sun, Moon, and Stars, and rolling together of the Heavens, do by a
metaphor in the Scripture, signify the wrath of God; which they being not able
to endure, are said here to blush at, to cover themselves, to hide themselves,
to be ashamed of themselves, to remove out of their places, no more to do their
office, etc. For as birds do hide themselves, and thrust their heads into
bushes, when the Eagle comes abroad: And as all Beasts of the Forest do
tremble and couch in their dens, when the Lion roareth: And as the subject
does hide himself, and dare not show his head, with whom the King is
displeased; So here it is said, that the whole earth does tremble, and all the
celestial creatures are amazed and confounded with beholding the angry face of
God against the world, in so much that they do as it were draw a canopy over
them, hide themselves under a cloud, and surcease to do their offices.

The darkning of the Sun and Moon, is taken in this sense in the second or
Joel, and also in the second Chapter of the Acts of the Apostles. For there God
promising and foretelling, that in the last days he would abundantly power
forth of his Spirit upon all flesh (which is to be understood of the plentiful
preaching of the Gospel in the Apostles time, and the abundance of grace that
was given with the same) adds, that for the contempt of so great grace and
mercy, he would show wonders in Heaven above, and tokens in the earth beneath.
Blood and fire, and the vapor of smoke; the Sun shall be turned into
darkness, and the Moon into blood, before that great and notable day of the
Lord come. The meaning of the Prophet is, as Peter also does expound it, Acts 2.
that God from Heaven will show such apparent signs of his wrath against the
World, that men should be no less amazed, then if the whole order of nature
were inverted. And this was performed, when as the Jews for the contempt of
Christ and his Gospel, were most miserably destroyed by the Romans.

Even so here, under the opening of the sixth seal God does threaten, That for
the murdering of his Son Christ, and his Apostles, and innumerable
Christians, he would bring strange judgments and extraordinary calamities upon
the world, according as all stories do show, that those times were full of
bloodsheds, commotions, famine, pestilence, and miseries of all sorts. I am not
ignorant, that the darkning of the Sun and Moon, and the falling of the
Stars from Heaven, are sometimes in this book put for the obscurity and
corruption of pure doctrine, and the falling away of the Pastors of the Church
from their sincerity and zeal. But in this place the circumstances will not
bear that sense: First, because here the darkning of the Sun and Moon, etc.
is joined with an Earthquake, the rolling together of the Heavens, and the
moving of Mountains and Islands out of their places; which argues a most
horrible confusion, of all things. Secondly, because afterward in the eight
chap. he does of purpose speak of the corrupting of pure doctrine, and the
falling away of the Ministers, referring it to that Chapter, as his proper
place. Thirdly, because the Kings and Captains of the earth here immediately
mentioned, would never have been cast into any such perplexities and horrors
upon any corruption of doctrine and the ministry, as here we read of. For
commonly men are not any whit touched or moved with that, or such like things.
Last of all, because the scope and drift of the holy Ghost, under the opening
of this sixth Seal, is to describe corporal, not spiritual; visible, not
invisible judgments. For he does orderly and of purpose handle them in the
next Chapter.

Now, whereas it is said in the last three verses, that the Kings of the earth,
and the chief Captains, Ver. 15.16.17.
and the mighty men, and every bondman, and every freeman hid themselves in
dens, and amongst the rocks of the mountains, and said to the rocks and
mountains, Fall on us, etc. the sense and meaning of all is this, that these
visible judgments should be so horrible and extraordinary, that all sorts of
men then living upon the face of the earth, should even wish themselves buried
quick, or that they might run into a mouse-hole, or awger hole, to hide
themselves from the wrath of the Lamb. For being both outwardly terrified with
the sensible judgments, and inwardly griped and tormented with the fury of
their own consciences, they are at no hand able to endure it.

CHAP. VII.
THis Chapter does wholly appertain unto the opening of the sixth Seal. It
shows generally, how God in the midst of all the broils which happened under
the opening of the sixth seal, yet did preserve his own Church, and mercifully
provide for his own people.

This seventh Chapter may very fitly be divided into three parts.

First, it shows, that as God did most fearfully punish the World with
visible and sensible Judgments, as we have heard before: So now he would set
upon them with invisible and spiritual plagues, which are of all other most
grievous and intolerable.

Secondly, it shows the state and condition of the Church militant here in
earth, as before was showed under the opening of the fifth Seal, Verse 2, 3, 4,
etc.
the state of the Church triumphant in the Heavens; namely, that it is sealed
and set in safety from all dangers.

Thirdly, it shows the blessed and happy estate of all Gods elect, and their
fervent praises and zealous worship of God, who thus mercifully did provide for
their security in the midst of greatest perils and extremities. Ver. 10, 11,
etc.


And after that, I saw four Angels stand on the four corners of the earth,
Verse 1.
holding the four winds of the earth, that the winds should not blow on the
earth, neither on the sea neither on any green tree. These four Angels are
Angels of darkness, or four devils; which is proved by this reason, that they
hold the 4. winds from blowing on the Earth: that is, stop the course of the
Gospel, which is a spiritual plague.

They are said to stand upon the four corners of the Earth, because power was
given them to plague, not some one or two Countries, but the Universal World,
both East, West, North, and South.

The blowing of the winds does very fitly represent the preaching of the
Gospel, and that heavenly inspiration and breathing of the Holy Ghost which
goes with it. Wind is so taken, Joh. 3. where our Lord Jesus says, The wind
blows where it lists, etc. So is every man that is borne of the Spirit. And
again in the fourth of the Cantic. in these words; Arise, O North, and come O
South, and blow on my garden, that the spices thereof may flow out. Where it
plainly appears, that the Church craveth the inspiration of the Spirit, that
her fruits may abound: For what can be meant by these winds which she wishes
to blow upon her garden, but the breathings of Gods Spirit and Word? It
follows then, that if the blowing of the winds in the Scriptures do signify
the breathing of Gods grace, and holy Spirit, that the stopping of the winds by
a reason of the contraries, does here signify the stopping of the same, and
the deprivation of all heavenly blessings. So that it is clear, that a
spiritual plague is here represented, which also is the more apparent,
because here is such a special proviso and care had for the Churches safety,
that it might not be infected with this spiritual contagion. Now all this does
plainly fore-prophesie, not only the stopping of the course of the Gospel:
but even the utter taking of it away from the World, for their great contempt
thereof, and the horrible murdering and massacring of all the true professors
of it: according as it came to pass afterward in the prevailing first of
Heresies, and afterward of the Popish and Mahometish Religion, as in the two
next Chapters following shall plainly appear.

And I saw another Angel come up from the East, Ver. 2.3.
which had the Seal of the living God, and he cried with a loud voice to the
four Angels, to whom power was given to hurt the earth and sea, saying: Hurt
ye not the earth, neither the sea, neither the trees, till we have sealed the
servants of God in their foreheads. This Angel is Jesus Christ, who by the
Prophet is called the Angel of the covenant. That Angels do represent and
sustain ^he person of Christ their head, is so common and usual a thing in
the Scriptures, that I s^^ll not need to stay in it.

That this Angel is Christ, it does ^^^nely appear by the things here
^^^ibuted unto him, which can agree to ^o ^^her. First, in that he has the
Seal of ^^e living God (which is the Spirit of adoption) to set upon all the
elect, for he is the ^^ely keeper of this great Seal, and ^^is privy Seal. He
only has authority to set it upon whom he will.

Secondly, because he is said to come up from the East: that he is the only Sun
of righteousness, which arises upon his Church every morning, and with his
bright beams expels all darkness from it: According to that of Zacharias
in his prophetical song: Through the tender mercy of our God, Luke 1.70.
the day spring from on high has visited us.

Thirdly, because he holds a sovereignty and command over the Div^ls: for he
charge them here to stay their hands from doing any hurt, till he had
provided for his elect.

Whereas it is said, verse 2.
that power was given to these Devils to hurt the earth, the Sea and trees:
that is, the number of Reprobates, we may note, that the devils have no
absolute Power, but only by permission: as appears in this, that they could
neither ^ouch Job, nor enter into the heard of Swine without license. Job 1.


Whereas it is said, Verse 3.
^ill we have sealed the servants of our God in their foreheads, it does
plainly show that the punishment of the wicked are deferred till provision be
made for the Elect. The flood came not upon the old World, till Noah and his
family were received into the Arc. The Angels destroyed not Sodom, till Lot
was set in safety. The plaguing Angel spared the first borne of Egypt, till
the posts of the Israelites houses were sprinkled with the blood of the
Paschall Lamb. Ezec. 9.
The six Angels sent to destroy Jerusalem, are charged to stay the execution,
till the servants of God were marked in their foreheads.

All these examples do manifestly declare what tender care the Lord in all ages
has had of his own people, that they might be delivered and set in safety in
the midst of all extremities. Even so here we see that God is very careful,
that his own children might not be infected with those damnable heresies which
now already upon the stopping of the course of the Gospel began to be hatched,
and afterward did spring and grow up in the Church, both thick and threefold.

Verse 4.
And I heard the number of them that were sealed, and there were sealed an
hundred forty and four thousand of all the Tribes of the children of Israel:
Of the Tribe of Judah were sealed twelve thousand, etc. Now John hears the
number of them that were sealed; and he reckons up the whole Church militant,
consisting both of the Jews and Gentiles: He says, that of the Church of the
Jews there were sealed 144000. Wherein he puts a certain number for an
uncertain, and a definite number therewithal also for an indefinite; for his
meaning is not that there were just so many, and neither more nor less sealed:
but this number does arise of 12. times 12. in that he says, of every Tribe
twelve thousand: for twelve times 12. thousand, make an hundred forty and four
thousand. Neither yet may we think, that of every Tribe there were an equal
number sealed, not more nor less of one Tribe then another, but this number of
twelve, is used as the perfect and full number; in as much as the Church of the
Jews was founded upon the twelve Patriarchs: unto which our Savior had
respect, when for to gather the dispersed and lost sheep of the house of
Israel, he chose twelve Apostles.

Now here we are to observe, that notwithstanding the horrible persecutions
and calamities which fell out upon the opening of four of the Seals, yet God
had his Church even of the Jews, which in the judgment of reason, a man would
have thought long ere now, had been utterly extinct and abolished. But the
Apostle says: Romans 11.
God has not cast off his people which he had chosen: that is, utterly cast
them off.

It is therefore a most sure and certain position in divinity, that God has
always his; that is, in all ages, in all times, in all places, in all
Countries, even in the midst of all troubles and flames of perscution, yet God
has his hid and invisible Church even upon the face of the earth. As it was in
the days of Elias. As was in Christ's time, 1 Kin. 19.18.
when the Shepherd was smitten, and the sheep scattered. And as it was in the
days of the great Antichrist, as afterward we shall see.

Moreover, it is to be observed, that in the enumeration of the 12. Tribes, the
Tribe of Dan is left out, and the Tribe of Levi taken in. The cause of the
omission and skipping of the Tribe of Dan, was their continuance in Idolatry
from the time of the Judges, (at what time they first fell into it) even unto
the Captivity. This Tribe is also omitted in the Catalogue of the Tribes
mentioned 1. Chr. chap. 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7. Then the reason of this omission, is
first their unworthiness: And secondly, that there might be a place and roomth
for the Tribe of Levi to be taken in; which in this Catalogue for singular
reason, and a special mystery might not be omitted. For, although the Tribe of
Levi had no portion or inheritance amongst the other Tribes in the earthly
Canaan; and now the Priesthood being transferred unto Christ, the Holy Ghost
does expressly affirm, that the Tribe of Levi, as well as others, has his part
and portion in the heavenly inheritance, and the celestial Canaan.

Ver. 9.10.
After these things, I beheld, and lo a great multitude which no man can
number, of all Nations, and Kindreds, and people, and tongues, stood before the
Throne, and before the Lamb, clothed with long white Robes, and Palms in
their hands; and they cried with a loud voice, saying, Salvation comes of
God, etc. This is to be understood of the Church of the Gentiles, and they are
said to be an innumerable multitude of all Countries and Nations. For although
the Church of God in respect of the Reprobates is very small, and as an
handful upon the face of the earth; yet in it self simply considered, it is
very great and large: for even out of Adams cursed race, God has chosen many
thousands to life. And here still we are to observe the great goodness and
mercy of God, that notwithstanding former persecutions, and the great
blindness which afterward did invade the Church in the prevailing errors and
heresies: yet John hears and sees such an huge number sealed up to salvtion,
through Christ, both of the Jews and Gentiles.

The Church of the Gentiles exceeding in number the Church of the Jews, are
here said to have long white Robes, in token of their purity and innocence; and
Palms in their hands, in sign of their victory over the world, flesh, and the
devil. For Palms in ancient time were ensigns and badges of victory.

After this, is set down how the whole Church of the Gentiles do praise and
worship God freely, Ver. 10, 11, 12.
acknowledging salvation to be only of him through Christ. And all the Angels
of Heaven do applaud, subscribe, and say Amen to the same, as we have heard
before in the fourth Chapter.

The four beasts are here mentioned again, whereby is meant the Angels, both
because they are said to have wings, Chapter 4. which agrees to none but
Angels, Esaias 6. and also because they are expressly named and interpreted to
be the Cherubins, Ezec. 10.

If any man muse why the Angels should be called Beasts, let him be resolved
with these four reasons. First, because they are compared to beasts before, as
the Lion, Calfe, Ezec. 1.
etc. Secondly, because Ezechiel called them so, in as much as they draw Gods
Chariot of triumph. Thirdly, because the Prophet Zachary compares them to red,
speckled, Zach. 1.8.
and white Horses. Fourthly, because the same Prophet calls them Gods
Coach-horses, and the multitudes and societies of them, he calls Gods
Chariots, which came out of two mountains of brass: that is, they went forth
at his decree (which stands as fast, and unremoveable as a Mountain of
Brass) to comfort and deliver his Church out of the captivity of Babylon, and
also to succor and help the remnant which were left behind in Judea. Now in
the Prophets, these Chariots and Chariothorses are said to carry the Almighty
most swiftly throughout all the world. And therefore in Zachary it is said of
the Angels: Zac. 1.10.
These are they which go through the whole world. In Ezechiel it is said, that
the beasts ran, Eze. 1.14. verse 7.
and returned like lightning. And again, that they sparkled like the
appearance of bright brass: and the wheels of Gods Chariots were moved with
inconceiveable swiftness, even as fast as the Angels did fly. Let these
reasons and Scriptures then satisfy us touching this, that the Angels are
called beasts. After all this, one of the 24. Elders asks John what they
were, and from whence they came, Ver. 13.
which were thus arraied in long white Robes. Which question is asked of the
Elder, not as being ignorant thereof; but to stir up John, being ignorant, to
enquire of the matter, that he might instruct him therein. And therefore when
John confessed his ignorance, desiring to be instructed therein, the Elder
tells him the whole matter; namely, that they were such as were come out of
great tribulation. Verse 14.
For none can enter into life, but through many afflictions, as the Apostle
says. After this again, the militant and visible Church is described and set
forth, not according to their present state, but according to that which is to
come; Ver. 15.16.
for they are here spoken of, as if they were already in the possession of
Heaven, and that for the infallible certainty and assurance thereof. Therefore
the Apostle says, that even already they do sit together in heavenly places.
Verse 16.17.
And here they are said to be in the presence of the Throne of God, etc. to
hunger and thirst no more, etc. to have all tears wiped from their eyes, and
to be led by the Lamb unto the Fountains of living waters. All which does
very plainly and plentifully express that infinite glory and endless
felicity which is prepared for all the true and faithful worshippers of God.
Many good lessons and observations might be gathered out of all this: But I do
of purpose omit them, because in this work I do chiefly and almost altogether
aim at interpretation, therein also studying brevity, soundness, and
plainness.

CHAP. VIII.
WE have heard out of the seventh Chapter, how the devils and their
instruments, the Roman Emperors, did stop the course of the Gospel, Now in
this Chapter we are to hear the woeful effects of the stopping thereof, which
was the springing up, and prevailing of manifold errors and heresies in the
World. So that the principal scope and drift of this Chapter is to show, that
God for the contempt of his Gospel, and great indignities offered to the true
professors thereof, did give up the World to blindness, to error, to
superstition and heresy: and as the Apostle says, Because they received not
the love of the truth, 2. These. 2.
therefore God sent them strong delusions, that they should believe in lies.
For as before we have heard how the world was most fearfully punished with
external plagues and judgments: So here we are to understand how the same
was punished with judgments spiritual and internal, as formerly has been
said upon the stopping of the four winds. For although that spiritual plague
was very great, yet these spiritual plagues which follow upon the opening of
the seventh seal, are far greater. For now we are to hear and understand, not
only of the errors and heresies, whereby a way and passage was made by
degrees, as it were by certain stairs, for Antichrist to climb up into his
cursed chair, and to take possession thereof; but also we are to understand of
his very tyranny and Kingdom it self; and also of the Kingdom of the Turk,
and the last judgment. For the things contained under the opening of the
seventh Seal, do reach unto the end of the world. For the book sealed with
seven seals, contains all the whole matters which were to be revealed.

This Chapter contains four principal things as it were the four parts
thereof.

ver. 1.2.3.4.5, 6, etc.
First, the reverent attention and silence, with admiration which was in the
Church at and upon the coming forth of this most horrible vengeance.

Secondly, before the execution of these most execrable plagues, the Church is
remembered and set in safety with all her Children, by her great Mediator Christ
Jesus.

Thirdly, the execution of this vengeance, which comes forth at the blowing
of the seven trumpets by seven Angels.

Fourthly, the vengeance it self contained in the prevailing of error and
heresy: the falling away of the Pastors of the Church, and the universal
darkness that followed thereupon.

And when he had opened the seventh Seal, there was silence in Heaven above
half an hour. By Heaven in this place he means not the Kingdom of glory
after this life: but by Heaven is meant the Church here upon earth: as it is
so taken, Chap. 12. Verse 1. and Chap. 14. Verse 2. There may be three reasons
yielded, why the Church is called Heaven.

First, 1. Joh. 5.1.
because the birth thereof is from Heaven: for it is borne of God.

Secondly, because the inheritance thereof is from Heaven, and therefore is
called, Col. 1.12. Phil. 3.20.
The inheritance of the Saints.

Thirdly, because the conversation thereof is in Heaven, as the Apostle says.

To this may be added, that our Lord Jesus in his Gospel does so often call
his visible Church the Kingdom of Heaven by a Trope, Mat. 13.
because CHRIST begins his reign in the faithful therein, whom afterward
he translateth actually into the very Kingdom of glory. By silence here is
meant the great attention of the Church, because great things were now at hand.
For now upon the opening of the seventh Seal, far greater matters are
threatened then any before: and therefore the Church does listen unto them in
deep silence, and as it were in horror and trembling through admiration: for
now there appear such dreadful judgments of God, to be executed upon the
earth, that all the heavenly company are astonished and amazed to behold it,
and do as it were quake and tremble to think upon it. For as when heavy news
comes down from the Prince to be proclaimed in open markets, all good
subjects do listen and give ear with silence and trembling: so it fares in
this case. By half an hour, he means that short time, wherein the minds of
the godly were prepared, fitted and disposed, wisely to consider of these
matters, and to make good use of them. I know right well, that this Verse is
far otherwise interpreted of some: but I take this to be most sound, and
simple, and best agreeing to all that follows: for the next Verse is joined
unto this by a conjunction copulative, to note a coherence of the matter, and
to draw the sense together: for he says, And I saw seven Angels, which stood
before God, verse 2.
and to them were given seven Trumpets.

These seven Trumpets signify that God would proceed against the World in
fearful hostility, and come against it as an open enemy unto battle,
proclaiming open war against it, as it were with sound of Trumpet and Drum,
setting up the flag of defiance against it. And hereupon grows this silence
and trembling in the Church, which only moved with the signs of Gods wrath,
when as all others sit still in security, as the Prophet Zachary says in a
like case.

To stand in this place, signifies to administer, as it is said of the Priests
and Levites, that they stand before God, and before the Altar, that is,
minister. So here the Angels do stand before God, as ready to administer and
execute these Judgments. For they are ministering spirits, and here they do
sound the alarm at the commandment of God. These Angels are popounded as
seven in number, because it pleased God at once to power down his wrath upon
the rebellious World, but at diverse times, and by piece-meale. Whether these
were good or bad Angels, it is not material to dispute, seeing God executes
his judgments, both by the one and the other. 2 Sa. 24.16


Moreover, it is specially to be observed, that the blowing of these seven
Trumpets, do all belong to the opening of the seventh seal, are as it were the
seven parts thereof; for the things which fall out upon the blowing of these
seven Trumpets, do reach even unto the last Judgment, as the Angel swears,
Chap. 10.6.7.

Then another Angel came, and stood before the Altar, ver. 3.
having a golden Censor, and much odours was given unto him, that he should
offer with the prayers of all Saints upon the golden Altars, which is before
the throne. We heard before, that when the course of the Gospel was stopped by
the devil and his instruments, yet God was very careful for the safety and
sealing up of his own servants: so likewise we are now to hear of the like
care and providence: for now, that errors and heresies were to be sown in the
World, whereby many were corrupted; and that He himself from Heaven does
proclaim open enmity against the despisers of his Gospel, by giving them up
to blindness and error; he does double his care and providence to all his
faithful worshippers. For here we do plainly see, that the Church has a
mediator, and that he which keeps Israel, neither slumbereth nor sleeps.
And therefore when the wrath of God does most of all break forth upon the
world for the contempt of his graces, yet the Church is remembered, and set in
safety with all her Children. For her prayers come up before God, and are
accepted through the mediator. And this is the sense and drift of this third
verse.

By this Angel is meant Jesus Christ, the Angel of the covenant, as we have
heard before, who is not an Angel by nature, but by office.

It is manifest that in the old law there was a golden Altar, and a golden
Censor, on which the Priest did burn sweet incense before the Lord; which did
figure the mediation of Christ, in whom the prayers of the Saints are accepted.

Now here the holy Ghost alludeth to that sacrificing Priesthood of the old
Testament, where incense was offered at the Altar, which now is the sweet
savor of the death of Christ, through whom both we and all our sacrifices are
seasoned and sweetened.

Who therefore is this Angel but Christ? What are the sweet odours with the
which the prayers of all Saints come before God, but the most sweet mediation
of the Lord Jesus? What is meant by the smoke of the odours which with the
prayers of the Saints went up before God out of the Angels hand? Surely the
sweet incense of Christ mediation, wherewith our prayers are spiced and
perfumed, that they might be as sweet incense of Christ's mediation, wherewith
our prayers are spiced and perfumed, that they might be as sweet smelling
sacrifices in the Nostrils of God. For as water cast into a fire, raises a
smoke: so the tears of the faithful besprinkled in their prayers, make them
as sweet incense, acceptable to God through Christ. The sum of all is this,
that in the midst of all these heresies, and those hellish troubles which
should be raised up by the Pope and his Clergy, the Turk and his armies, as in
the next Chapter we shall see, the elect have their prayers heard for their
preservation by the merits of CHRIST.

verse 5.
And the Angel took the Censor, and filled it with the fire of the Altar, and
cast it into the earth, and there were voices, and Trumpets, thundrings, and
lightnings, and earthquakes. Here we see how Jesus Christ takes the Censor,
and fills it with the fire of the Altar; that is, the graces and gifts of the
Spirit: for so the fire of the Altas is taken in Esaias.

In this sense it is said, that our Lord Jesus should baptize with fire and the
holy Ghost; that is, the gifts and graces of the holy Ghost. In this sense also
the holy Ghost did rest upon the Disciples, in the likeness of cloven tongues
like fire, whereupon they were all filled with gifts and graces.

The holy Ghost is compared to fire, because he burns out our dross, purges
the hearts of the faithful, and sets them on fire with the burning love and
zeal of Gods glory. So then it follows, that as before there was provision
had for the safety of the Church by her Mediator, so here many heavenly gifts
and graces are bestowed upon her. For Christ casts this fire of the Altar
upon the earth; that is, upon his dwelling in the earth.

Hereupon it is said, that there were voices, and thundrings, etc. that is, all
manner of broils, tumults, uprores, slaughters, and divisions. For after the
Gospel was sounded forth in the Church by the power of the holy Ghost, the
devil is disturbed, and the World molested. And hence spring all these broils
and tumults, thundering and lightning: and we must look for such stirs after
the preaching of the Gospel, whilst there is a world and a devil.

Therefore our Lord JESUS says, he came not to bring peace into the Earth,
Mat. 10.34.
but fire and Sword, and to set a man at variance against his Father, and
likewise the Daughter against her mother, etc. For divisions and civil
dissensions do always follow the preaching of the Gospel; which thing is not
yet simply in the nature of the Gospel of peace, but accidently through the
frowardness and corruption of man's nature, which will not yield unto it, but
most stubbornely rebelleth against it.

Then the seven Angels which had the seven Trumpets, verse 6.
prepared themselves to blow. Now begins this open war to be proclaimed
against the World, for their great ungodliness and rebellion against the truth.

So the first Angel blew the Trumpet, verse 7.
and there was Hail and Fire mingled with blood, and they were cast into the
earth, and the third part of trees was burnt, and all green grass was burnt.
It were absurd to imagine that any thing in this Verse is to be taken
literally; seeing in the literal Sense there was never any such matter.
Therefore, of necessity it must be expounded mystically, and allegorically.
Therefore, by this Hayle and Fire mingled with blood, is meant Errors and
Heresies. For, as Hayle does beat down Corn, and destroy the fruits of the
Earth; Fire does consume, and blood does corrupt and putrify: So false
doctrine and Heresy does annoy, consume and corrupt the souls of men. For, it
is said, that all these things mingled together, were cast upon the earth: that
is, the inhabitants of the earth, and the third part of the trees, that is, the
numbers of men or a very great part of the World was corrupted. For trees, in
the Scripture signify men: and all green grass was burnt: that is, Esa. 61.
the fresh fruits of grace did wither apace and dry up: for as error and
heresy did prevail, so truth and godliness did decay. All this has relation
to the Heresies of Sabellius, Manicheus, Marcion, Fotinus, Paulus Samosatenus,
Nestorius, Novatus, Diodorus, Apolinaris, Pelagius, and many others which about
this time, being four hundred years after Christ, began to spring up and grow
apace.

And the second Angel blew the Trumpet, and as it were a great Mountain
burning with fire was cast into the Sea, and the third part of the Sea became
blood, etc. Upon the blowing of the second Trumpet by the second Angel, here
appears a great Mountain burning with fire, whereby is meant some great and
notable heresies, as that of Arrius, which troubled and wasted the Church for
the space of three hundred years, being greatly favored of sundry Emperors
and other great Potentates in the Earth, by means wherereof, it continued and
overspred so long. Also this may be referred to other great and notable
Arch-heresies: as that of Donatus, Macedonius, Eutycheus, Valentinus, and such
like: which all are here compared to a mountain for their hugeness and
greatness, and to a burning Mountain, because the Church was almost burnt up
thereby. For this word Mountain, is sometimes in the Scripture put for any let
or hinderance to true Religion, as is error and heresy. Zach. 4.7. Luke 3.5.

Therefore it is said, that it was cast into the Sea, that is, these great
heresies are cast upon the World in Gods wrath and heavy indignation: for the
Sea is put for the World: Chapter 4. Verse 6. Chapter 13. Verse 1. Chapter 12
Verse last: for as the Sea is full of Rocks, sands, sirts, waves, storms, and
tempests: so it fares with this present evil world.

Moreover it is said, that the third part of the Sea became blood: that is, all
Europe, or some great part of the World was corrupted and infected with these
great heresies. And he says in the next verse, that the third part of the
ships were destroyed: that is, ver. 9.
a great number of mariners and ship-masters, as well as landmen were infected
with these heresies, and dyed of them, and in them.

Then the third Angel blew the Trumpet, and there fell a great Star from
Heaven, verse 10.
burning like a Torch, and it fell into the third part of the Rivers, and into
the Fountains of waters. Stars in this book are put for the Ministers of
the Gospel, as we have heard out of the first Chapter, and the reasons why
Then follows, that the falling of this Star from Heaven, does most fitly
signify and set forth the declining and fall of the Pastors of the Church, and
their corrupting of the true Doctrine: which is meant by the fresh Rivers, and
pure Fountains into which it fell. This Star has his name of the elect: For
it is called Wormwood: because through the fall of it, the sweet waters into
which it fell, were turned into bitterness, and men dyed of them: that is, the
doctrine was corrupted, which turned to the destruction of many.

ver. 12.
And the fourth Angel blew the Trumpet, and the third part of the Sun was
smitten, and the third part of the Moon, and the third part of the Stars, so
that the third part of them was darkened, etc. This darkning of the Sun,
Moon, and Stars, does signify that great darkness which was brought upon
the Church by such teachers as did daily more and more degenerate.

Three things are generally to be observed in the blowing of these first four
Trumpets. First, that the plagues here mentioned, are specially to be
understood of spiritual plagues.

Secondly, that there is a progression from lesser to greater in these plagues.

Thirdly, that in every one there is mentioned but a third part destroyed;
which plainly shows, that although the Church was greatly annoyed and pestred
with these errors and heresies, yet it was not destroyed and brought to utter
desolation: for the full setting up of Antichrist was not yet come. All these
errors and heresies which were cast upon the World, and did spring and grow
apace in all places, did (as it were) make way for Antichrist, and (as it were
by stirrops) hoist and help him up into his cursed Chair.

By the Stories of the Church, and course of times, it seems that the holy
Ghost points at those manifold heresies which sprung up in the Church after
the first three hundred years, especially after the death of Constantine the
Great, who procured peace to the Church, destroyed idolatry, and set up true
Religion in his days.

Now after his reign, and the reign of Theodosius that good Emperor,
Constantius, Julianus, Arcadius, Honorius, and many other wicked Emperors
succeeded; by whose means all things in the Church grew worse and worse; yet
this one thing is to be observed, that all truth of Religion was not utterly
extinct and put out, till the full loosing of Satan, which was a thousand
years after Christ, as we shall plainly see when we come to the 20. Chapter,
concerning the binding of Satan for a thousand years. For sure it is, that the
maine principles and grounds of Religion, continued in the Church till this
full loosing of Satan; which was about the time of Silvester the second, that
Monster, as afterward we shall hear.

But now in the mean time, we see what heresies sprung up, what corruption
grew and increased more and more, what darkness began to overspread a third
part of the world: and these things grew worse and worse, even till by these
means the great Antichrist came to be possessed of his cursed seat and Sea of
Rome, which was about some 600. years after Christ.

And I beheld, and heard one Angel flying in the midst of Heaven, ver. 13.
saying with a loud voice: Woe, Woe, Woe to the Inhabitants of the earth,
because of the sounds to come of the three Angels which were yet to blow the
trumpets. Because the judgments which were to be executed hereafter, upon the
blowing of the next three Trumpets, were far more dreadful and horrible than
any were before, therefore here is a special Angel or Messenger of God, sent
of purpose to give warning thereof, and to proclaim openly in the Church three
fearful woes, which should come upon the inhabitants of the earth; that is,
all earthly minded men, as wordlings, Papists, and Atheists, at such time as
the next three Angels should blow the Trumpets.

The first of these three great woes, is to be understood of the Papacy. The
second of Turcisme. The third of the last Judgment. As if he should have said:
Woe unto the world, because of Popery. Woe unto the world, because of Turcisme.
Woe unto the world, because of the last Judgment. Woe unto the world for
Popery, because thereby men should be punished in their souls. Woe unto the
World for Turcisme, because thereby thousands should be murdered in their
bodies by the Turkish Armies. Woe unto the world, because of the last
Judgment, for thereby all worldlings should be plagued both in body and soul
in hell fire for evermore.

Since then these three last plagues which were to come upon the world, are more
fearful and terrible than any of the other four, no marvel though here is
sent of purpose a special messenger to give intelligence thereof, that every
man might look to himself, seeing such great dangers were at hand. And for
this cause also it is said before, that there was silence in the Church for the
space of half an hour.

CHAP. IX.
THe principal scope and drift of this Chapter, is to paint out both the Pope
and his Clergy, and also the Kingdom of the Turk, and his cruel Armies. For
having already set down how a way and passage was made for the Pope to climb
up into his cursed Chair, by the prevailing of heresies, the falling away of
the Pastors of the Church, and the great over-spreading of darkness and
ignorance: now he comes to describe the Pope in his full height and greatest
exaltation, being now universal Bishop, and in full possession of his Seat and
Sea of Rome, which was about some six hundred years after CHRIST, as formerly
has been showed. At wat time Pope Boniface obtained of the Emperor Phocas,
that murderer, which slew his Master Mauritius the Emperor, that the Bishop of
Rome should be called the Universal bishop, and the Church of Rome, the Head
of all Churches.

This ninth Chapter may very fitly be divided into two parts: In the first 12.
verses.
The first is a lively description of the Pope himself, his Kingdom and his
Clergy. The second is a description of the Kingdom of the Turk, and his most
savage Armies: so that this Chapter is a full opening of the first two great
woes mentioned before, concerning the Papacy and Turcisme.

And the fifth Angel blew the Trumpet and I saw a Star which fell from Heaven,
verse 2.
and to him was given the key of the bottomless pit. Warning was given before,
that when this fifth Angel should blow the Trumpet, a most fearful woe
should come upon the World, surpassing all that went before, which is the
setting up of Antichrist in his pride; that man of sin, that son of
perdition.

The Pope is here compared to a Star, as well as other godly Ministers in
this book, because the Bishops of Rome at the first were godly and excellent
men; for amongst the first thirty of them, there were some Martyrs. But it is
here said, that now this Star was fallen from Heaven unto the Earth; that
is, the Bishops of Rome were greatly degenerated and fallen clean away from
heavenly things to earthly: for they declined from time to time, and grew worse
and worse, so far as to become the great Antichrist.

But some man may say, Why may not this Star falling from Heaven upon the
earth, be understood of other Pastors falling from the truth, as well as the
Pope, as it is taken in the former Chapter, and in the twelfth Chapter, and the
fourth verse? I answer, that the circumstances will not here bear it.
Therefore to persuade every honest man's conscience, that this must needs be
understood of the Pope in his pride, let us give ear to these three reasons
following.

First, we are to consider, that the maine drift of the holy Ghost in the
opening of the seven Seals, and blowing of the seven Trumpets, is to lay out
the state of the Church in all ages, till the coming of Christ. Further, we
are diligently to observe, that the things contained under the opening of the
seventh Seal (whereof the blowing of the seven Trumpets are as it were parts,
and do all belong unto it) do stretch even to the end of the world, so as there
is no strange accident, or any woeful condition of the Church in any age, but
it is set forth under the opening of these Scales, and blowing of these
Trumpets. But the Papacy was a state of the Church, and that most woeful and
lamentable, therefore it is described under the opening of the Seals, and
blowing of these Trumpets. But it is not described under the opening of any
other Seal, or blowing of any other Trumpet: Therefore of necessity it must be
referred to this seventh Seal, and the fifth Trumpet: And this is my first
reason. If any man object, that the Pope and his Kingdom are most lively
described in the Chapters from the twelfth to the last: I answer, that all
those Chapters belong to a new vision, wherein some things propounded under the
opening of the seven Seals are more fully opened and expounded. But this I
say, that in the second vision, the whole estate of the Church in every age is
laid open, even until the last judgment: and therefore when the seventh Angel
here does blow the seventh Trumpet, immediately follows the last Judgment:
as appears, chap. 10. verse. 6. and chap. 11. verse. 15.16.

My second reason is drawn from the course and consideration of times: for the
great prevailing of errors and heresies mentioned before, which made way for
Antichrist, was from the first 300. years, until the 600. year, and so
forward. But now immediately upon this great increase of error and darkness,
comes the description of a special Star fallen from Heaven at this time,
which was about 600. years after Christ; and therefore it must needs be
understood of the Pope. And this is my second reason.

My third and last reason is drawn from the description of the Pope and his
Clergy, in the first leven verses of this Chapter. For he is so lively
described and painted out in particulars, that all men that know him, or ever
heard of him, must needs say it is he. For this description here set down by
the holy Ghost, can fitly agree to none other.

The Papists themselves do confess, that this Star here mentioned, must
needs be understood of some Arch-heretike and full wisely, forsooth, they apply
it to Luther and Calvin. But we affirm, that it is to be understood of the
Pope: For was there ever any such Arch-heretike as he which opposes and
exalts himself against all that is called God, and against all imperial
powers, as the Apostle says? But now let us proceed to the description of him.

First, he is said to have the key of the bottomless pit, which agrees well
to the Pope: for he has power given him to open hell gates, to let in
thousands thither: but no power to open Heaven gates, to let in any thither:
for he furthereth many to hell, none to Heaven. He does indeed falsely
challenge to himself the Keys of the Kingdom of Heaven, to let in, and shut
out at his pleasure. But here we see the holy Ghost does attribute no such
power unto him, but only tells us, that his power and jurisdiction is in
hell, and over hell, and as for Heaven, he has nothing to do with it. It were
needless to show how this Metaphor of keys is taken for power and
jurisdiction in the Scriptures, as has been proved before, Chap. 1. verse. 18.
and as needless to prove that by the bottomless pit, is here meant hell, as
appears Chap. 11. verse. 7. Chap 20. verse. 1.

And he opened the bottomless pit, and there arose the smoke of the pit, as
the smoke of a great furnace, and the Sun and the Air were darkened by the
smoke of the pit. Here we see how the Pope opens hell gates with his Key, and
a most horrible, gross and stinking smoke ascends up into the air presently
upon it, insomuch that both the Sun and the Air were darkened with it. Which
all is to be understood of that spiritual darkness, ignorance, superstition
and Idolatry, wherewith the whole Church was overspread, after the great
Antichrist came to the possession of his cursed Chair, and was in his pride
and height, ruling and reigning over the Kings of the earth. For then indeed
the Sun was darkened and eclipsed; that is, the light of the Gospel was
almost clean put out. For that which is spoken here of the darkening of the
air and the Sun, is to be understood of a greater and more general
darkness, than that which was mentioned in the former Chapter, wherein but a
third part of the World was darkened. But now the Antichrist invadeth the
Church, all is overspread with gross and palpable darkness, all is as dark
as Pitch: no man can see where he is, or which way he goes. For the whole air
is filled with this thick smoke, which came out of hell pit.

And there came out of the smoke Locusts upon the earth, and unto them was
given power, as the Scorpions of the earth have power. By these Locusts is
meant the Popes Clergy, as Abbots, Monks, Friars, Priests, Shavelings, and
such like vermin; which are therefore compared to Locusts, because they wast
and destroy the Church, even as Locusts destroy the fruits of the earth. For
both Historiographers and Travelers do affirm, that whole fields of green
Corn new come up, have been wasted and eaten up in one night as bare as the
earth, by swarms of Locusts in the East-countries. For in those parts of the
World, multitudes of this little vermin are to be found: even so the Popish
Clergy consumes and devoureth all green things in the Church.

Moreover; it is to be noted, that these Locusts came out of the smoke of the
pit; that is, they were bred out of it: for Monks, Friars, Priests, and such
like Caterpillars, were bred of ignorance, error, heresy, superstition, and
the very smoke of hell: for from hell they came, and to hell they will. They
are descended of the black horse of hell, and thither they will return.

Moreover, it is said, that power was given them to sting like Scorpions. For
whom have they not stung with their most venomous stings? I mean their
damnable errors, and divellish devices. Whom have they not wounded with their
corrupt doctrine and divellish authority? They are the forest soule-stingers
that ever the World had, who have left their venomous stings in the souls of
thousand thousands, where with they have been poisoned and stung to death.

And it was commanded them that they should not hurt the grass of the earth,
verse 4.
neither any green thing, neither any tree, but only those which have not the
Seal of God in their foreheads. It may be demanded, what became of the Church
when as the whole earth was full of these crawling and stinging Locusts. This
question is now here answered: to wit, that these Locusts are charged and
commanded, that they should not hurt any of the Elect: for this Woe and this
plague extends no further than to the inhabitants of the earth, as we heard
before. Their power is limited only to the Reprobate, they have nothing to do
with Gods chosen people. And here again we see what great care God has for
his in the midst of the greatest dangers, as has been twice noted before,
Chap. 7. Chap. 8. For now Antichrist reigning in his full pride, yet his Elect
are preserved in the midst of these Scorpion-locusts, flying about their ears
like swarms of Hornets, not one of them is stung to death. Christ's little
flock is always defended, and set in safety.

And to them was command, verse 5.
that they should not hurt them, but that they should be vexed five months,
and that their pain should be as the pain that comes of a Scorpion when he
has stung a man. Some write, that such as are stung of a Scorpion do not die
forthwith, but have a lingering pain, wherewith they are miserably vexed three
or four days before they dye of it. Now unto this lingering pain is this
spiritual stinging compared: for these Locusts are commanded of God, that they
should not kill the very Reprobates outright, and at once, but torment them
with a lingering death for the space of 5. months, that is, 500. years: for so
long did the Papacy continue in his height and pride, full strength and virtue,
and so long did the Pope and his Clergy sting men with lingering and
Scorpion-like pain.

verse 6.
Therefore in those days shall men seek death and shall not find it, and
shall desire to dye, and death shall fly from them. This verse does show, that
all Papists being thus stung and tormented in their consciences with this
lingering pain of Popish doctrine, shall wish themselves out of the world, and
buried quick, that they might be rid of their spiritual stinging, and hellish
torments which they had in their conscience. For the Popish doctrine has no
sound comfort in it, it leaves men in desperation, in sickness, and upon
their deathbeds. For alas, what comfort can a poor distressed conscience have
in Popes pardons, Indulgences, Masses, Dirges, Merits, Works, Pilgrimages,
Purgatory, Crosses, Crucifixes, Agnus Dei's, and such like trash and trumpery?
These, alas, are too weak remedies for any spiritual diseases: they are not
sufficient to procure pardon at Gods hand for any sin. Alas, the poor blind
Papists did know and feel that they were vile sinners: they knew they must
come to judgment: they knew that the reward of sin was death, even the
second death: they knew all this full well, and therefore had horrible
convulsions in their consciences, and knew not how to wind out of them. For
the doctrine of free justification in the blood of Christ, was hid from them,
they knew it not: and therefore all assurance of Gods favor, all peace of
conscience, and all joy in the holy Ghost was utterly taken from them; and
therefore many of them dyed in most desperate and uncomfortable manner. And for
this cause it is here said, that they sought death, and desired to be rid out
of the world one way or another: for a tormented conscience who can bear it?
it is a kind of hell torment.

And the form of the Locusts was like unto Horses prepared unto battle, verse
7.8.
and one their heads were as it were Crowns like unto gold, and their faces
were like the faces of men.

And they had hair as the hair of women: and their teeth were as the teeth of
Lions.

Hitherto we have heard of the pedigree and poisoned stings of these vile
Locusts, and how they vexed the Inhabitants of the earth all the time of the
great Antichrist. Now we are to understand of their form and likeness: For
the Spirit of God does here paint them out in their colors, that all men may
discern them, and beware of them. First, it is said that they were like unto
horses prepared unto battle: that is, they were as strong and fierce as barred
horses, to rush and run upon all such as should but once mute or mutter
against them, or their Authority: Moreover, they have Crowns of gold upon
their heads, which shows and signifies, that they were the Conquerours of
the Earth, and Lords of the World, and who but they? for in those days no man,
nay no Lord or King durst quitch against a Monk, a Friar, or a pild Priest:
for if any did, they were sure to smart for it. They had also faces like the
faces of men; that is, they set fair faces upon matters, and pretended great
devotion in Religion, flattering the people, and making them believe that they
could give them pardon of all their sins, and bring them to Heaven, when as
in very truth, for their bellies, and for their gain, they did cunningly
smooth with the Nobles, the rich and the mighty, setting fair faces upon their
proceedings; and as Saint Peter says, Through covetousness with fained words,
2 Pet. 2.3
they made merchandise of men's souls, and did closely wind themselves into
the hearts of the simple people, by their fawning insinuations, being in very
deed nost notable flatterers and hypocrites. They had hair as the hair of
women, that is, they were altogether effeminate, being given to delicacy, lust
and wantonness; they were drowned in whoredom and all kind of beastliness,
being a shole of most filthy villains. Their teeth were as the teeth of Lions,
to catch and snatch at all they could come by. They devoured all the fat
morsels every where, they got the Church Livings into their hands: they first
made impropriations: they incroached upon temporal men's lands: they swallowed
up all every where. If we look upon the Abbeyes, Priories, and Nunneries, we
may easily judge what teeth they had. Moreover, it is said they had
Habbergions, like to the Habbergions of Iron; that is, they were so strongly
armed with the defense and countenance of the Pope, that no Secular power durst
once quitch against them. Their wings were like the sound of Chariots, when
many Horses run unto battle: that is, with flattering noise and terrible
threatenings, they strove to uphold their Kingdom. Also in Churches and
Pulpits, they make a roaring noise, and take on terribly to maintain their
abominable Idolatry, They had tails like unto Scorpions; and there were
stings in their tails. For with their poisoned Doctrine and stinging
authority, like Adders and Snakes they stung many to death. Moreover, power was
given them to hurt men five months, that is, all the time of Antichrists
reign, as before has been showed.

ver. 10.11.
They have a King over them, which is the Angel of the bottomless pit, whose
name in Hebrew is Abbadon, and in Greek he is named Apollyon; that is,
destroying. As the Fowls have a King over them, which is the Eagle; and the
Beasts, the Lion; and mortal Men some Chief Governor, under whose protection
and subjection they live: so here these hellish Locusts are said to have a
King over them, which is the Angel of the bottomless pit: that is, the Devil
or the Pope, which you will, under whose Ensign they fight, and under whose
defense they live. Their Kings name in Hebrew is called Abbadon, and in Greek
Apollyon. The words are both of one signification, that is, destroying: for
both the Devil himself, and his Vicar the Pope, are destroyers and wasters of
the Church of God.

One woe is past, and behold yet two woes come after this. We have heard at
large what this first Woe is, namely, the plage of the world, by the Pope and
his Clergy. Now we are to hear of the second woe, which is the most huge and
murdering army of the Turks: wherein the third part of men were slain. Some
do expound this second woe of the kingdom of Antichrist and his armies; but
that it is not so, may appear by these reasons following.

First, the Angel denouncing woe, woe, woe, denounces three several woes,
and therefore it is said: One woe is past, and behold yet two woes come after
this. It follows then that this is a distinct and several woe from the
former and therefore cannot be the same.

Secondly, this woe contains specially a bodily slaughter of the third part
of the world, and of the wicked reprobates: but the first woe was specially a
plague of men's souls, as we have heard, and therefore this cannot be the same
with the first.

Thirdly, we are to understand, that this book describes all the greatest
calamities and plagues tha^ should come upon the world in any age after Christ,
and therefore we may justly think, that the kingdom of the Tu^ks is not left
out, seeing it was one of the greatest plagues that ever came upon the world.
But the kingdom of the Turks is described in no other part of this Revelation,
and therefore must of necessity be here described.

ver. 13.14.
Then the sixth Angel blew the Trumpet, and I heard a voice from the four
corners of the golden Altar, which is before God,

Saying to the sixth Angel which had the Trumpet, loose the four Angels which
are bound in the great river Euphrates.

Now we are come to the description of the Second woe, which follows upon the
blowing of the sixth Trumpet, by the sixth Trumpet by the sixth Angel. And first
of all he says; He heard a voice from the four corners of the golden Altar.
By the golden Altar, is meant Christ, as before has been showed, with the
reasons thereof. From this Altar the voice comes to the Angel which blew the
sixth Trumpet, Chap. 8.3.
that we might know it is the voice of the mighty God, and the commandment of
our Lord Jesus. The voice commands the sixth Angel to loose the four
Angels which are bound in the great River Euphrates. By these four Angels,
which are thus bound at Euphrates, is meant many Devils or Angels of
darkness, as we have heard before, Chapter 7, Verse 1. Their binding
signifies their restraint, by which they were held back from doing that
mischief which they desired to do. Their loosing signifies, that power was
given them to perform that which they wished.

They are said to be four in number, because they should raise an horrible
plague in the four corners of the Earth, both East, West, North, and South.
The sense is, that the Devils have yet farther and greater scope given them to
plague and destroy the inhabitants of the Earth. These Devils had exceeding
great power in the Kingdom of Antichrist, but they are unsatiable in
mischief, and so after a sort lie still bound till they have their desire. The
place where they lie bound, is Euphrates, wherein is a mystery: for Euphrates
literally taken; is a great River, which ran so night the City Babylon in
Chaldea, that it was a mighty defense unto it, so that the City could not be
taken, until they that laid siedge unto it, cut out trenches, and derived the
waters another way. Now for the mystery, it is this: Rome in this book is
called Babylon, by a metaphor, and after the same manner, the great River
Euphrates, as we shall see afterward, chapter 16. signifies the power, wealth, and
authority which that City Rome, even this Western Babel, has to defend it
self. Then it follows, that in this power, authority and strength of Rome,
the Devils lie bound, for they waited through the power of Rome, to work yet
far greater mischief, and therefore are said to be bound, so long as they were
restrained. The mischief which they plotted and purposed to bring to pass by
the Authority and power of Rome, was the hatching and bringing forth of the
Mahometish Religion, which in very deed did spring from the darkness of Rome,
as from his proper root and original cause.

The Devils did foresee, that out of the superstitions and Idolatries of
Rome, defended by their great power and authority, Mahometish Religion, might
very well be framed, and therefore not being content to plague the West part of
the World with Popery and Idolatry, they do greedily desire also to plague the
East part of the World with the false Religion of Mahomet. They are not
satisfied with plagueing and poisoning all Europe with abominable Idolatries,
except also they plague and infect all Asia and Africa with the Turks most
execrable Religion: so insatiable are the devils in working mischief. Now in
the mean time they think themselves too much straightned, bound and tied up
in Rome and Romish Religion, except they may be loosed; and proceed further to
overspread the whole World with all impieties, and horrible abominations. A man
would think that when the Devil had prevailed so far, as to place
Antichrist in his cursed Chair, and to breed the swarms of Locusts out of the
smoke of Hell, they might have been satisfied: for then, as we may say, hell
seemed to be broke loose. But yet all this cannot satisfy the unsatiable
Devil but they will have the Religion of Mahomet established to poison and
plague all the East parts of the World in their souls: and also they will have
the most huge, cruel, and savage Armies of the Turks raised up, to murder
and massacre millions of men in their bodies, in the West part of the World, as
presently we shall hear. Now till all this be effected, they are said to lie
bound at Rome. But here we see, that this sixth Angel has a precise
commandment from JESUS CHRIST, to loose these Devils which lay bound at the
great River Euphrates, that they might plague the whole World far and near,
at their pleasure: so now all the Devils of hell are let loose, and let us
hear what follows.

ver. 15.
And the four Angels were loosed, which were prepared at an hour, at a day, at
a month, and at a year, to slay the third part of men. Now the Devils being
loosed and unbound by a special commandment from Christ, were in a readiness
to execute their mischief. This ascending by degrees from a short time unto
longer and longer; From an hour to a day, etc. does signify, that as the
Devils were pressed, and at hand at an hours warning, as we say, to put in
practice whatsoever they had plotted; so they were as forward to continue the
same, From as hour to a day, from a day to a month, and from a month to a
year, that is, from time to time, until the date of their commission was out:
for their time was limited, and their commission bounded, as afterward we
shall see. And this is our comfort, that both the Papacy is limited to five
months, and the Turcisme to hours, days, months, and years. The diverse power
is limited, though it greiveth them full sore: They cannot do what they list,
they cannot continue as long as they would.

After the number of Horsemen of war were twenty thousand times ten
thousand, ver. 16.
for I heard the number of them. Now, upon the loosing of these Devils, here
follows the description of a most horrible plague which they raised up; and
it is a huge army, a murdering army, an army in number exceeding great; for he
says, They were twenty thousand times ten thousand; that is, two hundred
millions, or two hundred thousand thousands. But we may not think that this
Army was ever all at one time, or in any one age, but here are the armies of
many ages reckoned up, and the full plague of many years set forth. How could
Saint John number such an Army, may some man say? He answers this doubt, and
says, He heard the number of them. He did not number them; but the number was
told him.

Moreover, it is to be noted, that as this Army did exceed in number, so also
in terror and strength, and therefore they are said to be all horsemen. For an
Army of horsemen are both more strong and more terrible, than any army of
footmen.

And thus I saw the horses in a vision, ver. 17.
and them that sat on them, having fiery Habergions and of Jacinth, and of
Brimstone, and the heads of the Horses were as the heads of Lions, and out of
their mouths went forth fire and smoke, and Brimstone. Here is the description
of the horsemen and horses, as they appeared to John in a vision. First,
touching the horsemen, it is said that they were very well armed with
Habbergions; that is, Coats of Male, Corslets, or Curets, and that of a fiery
color, and of the color of Jacinth; that is of smoke, as appears in the
last clause of this verse, and also of the color of Brimstone. For as
horsemen in complete armor were wont to wear in their Breast-plates and
Targets certain ensigns and colors, whereby they might be made terrible to
their enemies: So these Turkish warriors and horsemen do hold out their
colors of fire, smoke, and Brimstone, as it were flagges of defiance against
the whole world, threatening present death to all that should with-stand them,
or as if they meant to spit fire and flame at them, or to choke them with
smoke and Brimstone, and then burn them up with fire and Brimstone. All this
their colors and ensigns in their Breast plates and Habbergions did portend.
Now, as concerning Horses, no doubt they were as fierce as the Horsemen. They
wear great Lances, they had heads like Lions; that is, they were full of
stomach and fierceness, ver. 18.
and out of their mouths went forth fire, and smoke, and Brimstone: that is,
they had the same colors and ensigns upon them that riders had.

Of these three was the third part of men killed, that is, of the fire, and of
the smoke, and of the Brimstone which came out of their mouths. Here is set
down the great slaughters and massacres which these martial horsemen and
Turkish armies made thorowout the most part of Europe. For he says, the third
part of men, that is, great numbers in Europe were slain by the fire, the
smoke, and the Brimstone, which came out of their mouths: that is, by their
bloody cruelty, and barbarous immanity, some being murdered in their bodies by
cruel death, and others violently drawn to the wicked Religion of Mahomet.
For partly by external violence, and partly by a subtle show of Religion and
devotion, they destroyed thousands both in their Souls and bodies. And
therefore it is said, Their power is in their mouths, ver. 19.
and in their tails, For their tails were like unto Serpents, and had heads
wherewith they hurt. But for the better understanding of these things, I think
it not amiss a little to open and lay forth the rising up, and increasing of
the power of the Turk.

About the year of our Lord 591. was Mahomet borne in a certain Village of
Arrabia, called Itrarix, for so Histories do report. This Mahomet by fraud and
coozenage grew into great credit and fame among the seditious Arabians and
Egyptians, insomuch that they made him a Captain over them, to war against
the Persians.

After this, he married a rich wife, and by that means he won the hearts of
many with gifts. In the days of Heraclius the Emperor, which was in the year
of our Lord 623. he grew to be very mighty. After this he fained himself to be
a Prophet, and said that he had visions and revelations, and talked with
Angels. And so by the help of Sergius a Monk, he framed a new worship and
Religion, a patched part out of the old Testament, partly from the Papists, and
partly from the Heathen. He reigned nine years, and so dyed.

After him succeeded in the Kingdom of the Sarazens Ebubezar, who reigned two
years. Haumar who reigned twelve years. Muhavias, who reigned twenty four
years. All these made great war against the Persians, and sundry other
Nations, and overcame them, and set up the Religion of Mahomet amongst them,
and so the Kingdom of the Sarazens grew mighty: but in process of time the
Kingdom of the Turks grew great, and the Kingdom of the Sarazens diminished.
Within a short time after this, the Tartarians, a barbarous people, waxed
strong and made war against the Turks, and prevailed greatly for a time. But
about the year of our Lord 1300. the Empire of the Tartarians was
over-throwne, and the Empire of the Turks did flourish more than ever before:
for now came the greatest monsters, and most Savage and cruel tyrants of all.
The first of them was Ottomanus. The second Bajazethes. The third Amurathes.
These made bloody wars against the Christians. I mean the Papists in Europe,
and enlarged the Turks dominions very far.

They did from time to time so cruelly murder and massacre the inhabitants of
the West, with their huge and bloody armies; that at last both the Pope, the
Emperor, the King of Hungary, the King of Polonia, the King of France, the
Duke of Burgundy, and the Duke of Venice, and almost all the Potentates in
Europe, did join together to make war against the Turks, so huge leave huge
armies, but yet could not prevail; so strong were the Turks, so huge and
dreadful were their armies: Then we see that verified which here was foretold,
to wit, That the monstrous armies of the Turks with their horses and
horsemen, should slay the third part of men: that is, the Idolaters in Europe,
by heaps and Infinite numbers. To set down the particular battles betwixt the
Turks and the Christians in Europe, and their horrible bloodshedding, would
require a volume: but this which I have brifely set down, may serve to give
some light unto it, and may suffice for the understanding of this Text. Now it
is said in the next verse, That notwithstanding this heavy hand of God which
was upon the Papists in Europe, and these fearful Judgments and massacres,
they repented not of their Idolatries, but waxed worse and worse: for no
Judgments, no plagues can make the wicked any whit the better, as we see in
the examples of Pharaoh and Saul, ver. 20.
And here it is said, That the remnant of men which were killed by these
plagues, repented not of the works of their hands, that they should not
worship devils and Idols of gold and silver, and of brass, and of stone, and
of wood which neither can see nor hear, nor go, Also they repented not of
their murder, and of their sorcery, neither of their fornication, nor of
theft. ver. 21.
And thus we see how the Devils which were bound at Euphrates, being let loose
upon the World, in the wrath and just judgment of God, did fearfully plague
both the Turks, in their Souls, and the Papists in their bodies. The one with
false Religion, the other with bloody swords: and so was the desire of the
Devil fully satisfied.

CHAP. X.
HAving opened and expounded the two first Woes which fell out upon the blowing
of the fifth and sixth Trumpet, containing the two great plagues of Popery and
Turcisme, wherewith the World was punished many hundred years: now in this
Chapter we are to hear of good news, and great comfort, after so much sorrow.
For here Jesus Christ comes down from heaven to deliver his poor afflicted
Church, and to be revenged of all his cruel enemies. For now before the third
and last woe, containing the greatest plague of all upon the World, which is,
the last Judgment: wherein the wicked shallbe tormented in hell fire for ever,
both in body and soul, I say, before the blowing of the seventh Trumpet, by
the seventh Angel, of which we shall hear in the next Chapter. Now in the
mean time is showed in this Chapter, what care God had for his little flock,
which no doubt were hid in those days, and did not appear and yet were
scattered in corners, even in the midst of the darkness of Popery, and the
most furious and hellish rage of the Turkish armies. And therefore the
principal scope and drift of this Chapter, is to show how the Gospel should
be preached in many Kingdoms, now after this general darkness, for the
discovering and overthrow, both of Popery and Turcisme, and to show what should
fall out in the Church now in the middle time, before the seventh and last
Trumpet blow: for then comes the last Judgment, as the Angel swears in
this Chapter, verse, 6, 7.

This Chapter does contain four principal parts.

The first is a description of Christ and his glory. ver. 1.


The second shows how the Gospel should be preached, ver. 2.
in many Nations and Kingdoms, by the Ministers of this last age, whereby all
adversary power should be overthrown.

The third is a watchword, ver. 6.7.
given to the World by Christ, that when the seventh Angel should blow the
Trumpet, the World should end.

The last does show, ver. 9.10.11.
how all faithful Preachers being called and authorized by Christ, should
travel and take pains in the study of Gods Book, and afterward should
publish the knowledge thereof far and near.

And I saw another mighty Angel come down from Heaven, clothed with a cloud,
ver. 1.
and the Rainebow upon his head, and his face was as Sun, and his feet as
pillars of brass. This Angel of might is Christ, as appears by the
description of him, and by all the consequents following: Mat. 24.
for he is said to be clothed with a Cloud, which signifies his great glory
and Majesty: For he shall come in the clouds of heaven to judge the world; that
is, with great pomp and glory. The Rainbow was upon his head, which
signifies the covenant of peace with his Church, as before, Chap. 4. verse 3.
His face was as the Sun, which signifies comfort and deliverance to his
Church, and the dispelling of all the smoke of the bottomless Pit, as the
Sun Scatters and drives away the thick mists.

His feet are pillars of brass, which signifies that he should tread down
all his enemies under his feet, 1 Cor. 19.
both Pope and Turk: For he must reign till he have destroyed them all. The
Pope along time kept all the Kings of Europe in awe. The Locusts were of great
power. The Turks prevailed exceedingly. But what are they all to this mighty
and glorious Angel Christ? What is their power to withstand him? What can
Abaddon the King of the Locusts do against this mighty King of Sion? What can
the Turks most terrible Horses and Horsemen do against this Angel which
sits upon the white Horse? Alas, alas, they are able to do nothing. They
must all be trodden down under his feet of brass.

ver. 2.
And he had in his hand a little book open, and He put his right foot upon the
Sea, and his left upon the earth. This little Book signifies the Bible.

It is called little in respect of the great and huge volumes of Popish books,
though in it self it be large.

It is said to be open, that all men might look into it, because it had been
shut a long time before, even during all the time of the darkning of the Sun
and Air, by the smoke which came out of the bottomless pit. But although it
was long shut up in the time of Popery, and lay buried in a strange tongue: yet
now it is opened, and publicly preached unto all the servants of God. And all
this no doubt is to be understood of Luthers time, and all the times ever since
the Gospel was spread abroad after the great darkness. For some hundred
years ago it was hard to find an English Bible, but now God be thanked,
there are thousands to be found in the hands of Gods people. And therefore the
things here Prophesied of, are fulfilled in our days: for we live under the
opening of the seventh Seal, and the blowing of the sixth Trumpet, and the
pouring forth of the sixth Vial, as here does partly appear, and shall, God
willing, be made more manifest when we come to the sixteenth Chapter. Now we
are diligently to observe, that as the opening of this Book, and the preaching
of the Gospel by Luther and his successors, has dispersed the former
darkness, and beaten down Popery; so also has it driven back the Turk, and
taken from us all fear of him, which in former ages was the terror of the
World; for since men have looked into this book, repented of their Idolatry,
and turned unto God with all their hearts, the Turk and his power has not
been feared, especially in these parts where the Gospel is preached.

For God in his merciful providence toward his Church, has diverted his
power another way, and set him a work else where. So that if men cannot be
brought to believe, that God raised him up as a scourge for Idolaters, and a
plague for Idolatry and other soul sins, according to the words in the
former Chap. where it is said, They repented not of the works of their hands,
etc. yet when they see, that at the opening of the Book of God, and forsaking
Idolatry, the fear of him is removed, let them believe it. What can be more
plain, than that this open Book in the hand of the Angel, has delivered us
from the Pope, and from the Turk? A most happy opening of this blessed book.

More it is said, that he put his right foot upon the Sea, and his left on the
Earth. The setting of Christ's right foot upon the Sea, signifies that he is
ruler of the Sea, and stands as firmly upon the Sea, as upon the Land. The
setting of his left foot upon the Earth, does signify, that he is Lord of the
Earth, and true heir to all things in it.

And cried with a loud voice, verse 3.
as when a Lion roareth, and when he had cried, seven thunders utterd their
voices. This crying with a loud voice, like the roaring of a Lion, does
signify the manifestation of the wrath of Christ, against all his enemies: for
now he begins to roar against them, as a Lion when he is hungry, roareth
for his prey. Therefore now both the Scorpion, Locusts, and the fierce Horses
and horsemen are like to go to the pot.

By the seven thunders which uttered their voices, is meant those perfect and
exquisite judgments which now were to be inflicted both upon the Kingdom of
the Pope and the Turk. We have heard before, that seven is a perfect number in
this book: and that thunder is put for the thundering of Gods wrath, and all
such broiles and plagues as follow thereupon, and this is the reason of this
interpretation.

verse 4.
And when the seven thunders had uttered their voices, I was about to write, but
I heard a voice from Heaven, saying unto me: Seal up these things which the
seven thunders have spoken, and write them not. It should seem these seven
thunders did so speak, as they might be understood, for John was about to
write the things which they spoke, thinking that they were uttered for that end
and purpose, that he should deliver them in writing to the Churches. But he
receives a commandment to the contrary, for he is willed not to write them,
but to conceal them until the appointed time.

But some man may say; Why were they uttered, seeing they must be concealed,
and kep^ close? I answer, it was not in vain: for first, though the
particulars be not expressed what the thunders speak: yet here we are taught,
that there remain most fearful Judgments against all the oppressors of the
Church, which Christ has thundered out with terror against them. And when the
time determined is come, they shall be seen and understood: but in the mean
time, they be sealed up and kept close according to that of Job. Why should not
the times be hid of the Almighty, so as they which know him, should not
perceive the times appointed of him? and that of Daniel. These things are
Sealed up until the time determined.

And the Angel which I saw stand upon the sea and upon the earth, lifted up
his hand to heaven. verse 5.


And swear by him that lives for evermore, ver. 6.
which created heaven, and the things that therein are; and the earth, and the
things that therein are, and the sea, and the things that therein are, that
time should be no more.

But in the days of the voice of the seventh Angel, ver. 7.
when he shall begin to blow the trumpet, even the ministry of God shall be
finished, as he has declared unto his servants the Prophets.

The sum of these three verses is, that Christ gives warning of the last
judgment, that men might awake and look out in time. Amo. 6 1.
And because men for the most part are careless and secure, putting the evil
day far from them, as the Prophet speaks, therefore here Christ binds it
with a solemn oath, and solemn gestures thereunto annexed, as was the lifting
up of the hand in ancient time Genesis, 14.22. The thing that our Lord Jesus
disposes, is, that time shall be no more; that is, Time as it is now, or the
state of things as they be now: but he tells us flatly, that as six Angels
have already blown their Trumpets, so when the seventh Angel should blow, the
Mystery of God shall be finished: that is, the time of punishing the wicked,
and rewarding the godly, should come, which is therefore called a Mystery,
because the world understands it not: They think there is no such matter.

Mal. 3.14.
They imagine there is no reward for the just, or punishment for the wicked, as
the Prophet says: But the holy Ghost says, Verily there is a reward for the
righteous: Psa. 58.18
doubtless there is a God which judges the Earth. And here it is said, that
God has declared it to his servants the Prophets.

And the voice which I heard from Heaven spoke unto me agine, verse 8.
and said, go and take the little book which is open in the hand of the
Angel, which stands upon the Sea, and upon the Earth.

So I went unto the Angel, and said unto him, give me the little book. v^rse
9.
And he said unto me, take it, and eat it up, and it shall make thy belly
bitter, but it shall be in thy mouth, as sweet as honey.

Then I took the little book out of the Angels hand, and eat it up, ver. 10.
and it was in my mouth as sweet as honey: but when I had eaten it, my belly was
bitter.

And he said unto me, verse 11.
Thou must prophecy again among the people, and nations, and tongues, and to
many Kings.

The brief sense of these four verses is, that the Preachers of the Gospel
being called, allowed, and authorized by Christ unto their ministry, should
study the Scriptures with great diligence, even until they had eaten up the
book of God, and they should preach and publish unto all nations and Kingdoms
that truth of God, and doctrine of the Gospel, which now a long time had lien
hid in the reign of Antichrist. It is to be observed, that John in this place
represents the person of all the ministers of the Gospel, which should be
raised up in these last days, for the overthrow of Antichrist, and the
restoration of true Religion: for John himself did not live to these times.

Further it is to be noted, that all godly Students and zealous Ministers do
eat up the book of God by reading, study, prayer, and meditation, and they
find it sweet in their mouth, that is, they find and feel great joy and
comfort in the study and meditation thereof, especially when God reveals
thereby great and hid secrets unto them, and gives them to understand the
mysteries of the Gospel, and counsels of his will, which are locked up from
the wise and prudent of this world. This I say, is sweeter unto their mouth
than honey, and the honey comb. Concerning their phrase of eating up the Book,
look Ezekiel. 2.9. for here the holy Ghost alludeth thereunto.

This book being so sweet in the mouth, yet being eaten and digested, is
better in the belly.

There may be three reasons yielded of this bitterness:

First, because it being once taken down into our soul by godly meditation,
does mortify our corrupt nature, and bring under our lust, and therefore
seems bitter to flesh and blood.

Secondly, because afflictions and trialls do always necessarily follow the
sound digestion of the Gospel.

Thirdly, because the doctrine of the Gospel being swallowed by the ministers
thereof, must not be kept to themselves, as it were closed up in their stomachs,
but they must out with it again, as if it were some loathsome and bitter
thing, which must needs be cast up again: And for this cause it is said in the
last verse, that they must prophecy again among the people, and nations, and
tongues, and many Kings. Now blessed be the name of the Lord our God, who has
given us to live in this age, wherein we do with our eyes behold and see the
fulfilling of all these things: let us therefore praise God for this great
work which we see wrought in our days and let us still more and more magnify
this little Book, which will utterly destroy Popery, and bring down the proud
Antichrist, do all that fight for him what they can.

CHAP. XI.
WE have heard that the little Book should be opened, and the Gospel preached
and published to many nations and Kingdoms, after the great darkness of
Popery, and that this was done by Luther, Melancthon, Calvin, Peter Virit,
Peter Martyr, Bullinger, Bucer; and all their faithful successors unto this
day. Now in this Chapter we are to understand the effect and good success of
their preaching and publishing the Gospel, which was, that the Church should
be restored, reformed, and built up thereby, which a long time had been wasted
and oppressed by the tyranny of Antichrist, and that many should embrace this
Gospel, forsake their Idolatries, and turn unto God with all their hearts,
yea, whole Nations and Kingdoms in Europe should be converted to the faith, as
we see this day, God be praised. So then the principal drift of this Chapter
is, to show those things which yet remain to be fulfilled under the blowing of
the sixth Trumpet, which is the preaching and prevailing of the Gospel, even
unto the worlds end: and also the things which follow upon the blowing of the
seventh trumpet, which is the resurrection and last judgment.

This Chapter contains six principal things, as it were six parts thereof.

First, it shows how the true Church should be gathered together, ver. 1.2.
and built up by the preaching of the Gospel, and all the wicked refused and
cast out.

ver. 3.4.5.6.
Secondly, it describes the builders; that is, all the faithful Ministers
which had, and should resist Antichrist.

Thirdly, ver. 7.8.
it shows how Antichrist should persecute the Preachers and Professors of the
Gospel unto death, and murder them by heaps.

Fourthly, it shows that Papists, Atheists and wicked worldlings, ver. 9.10.
should rejoice in the death of Gods people, and not vouchsafe them so much as
the honor of burial, but sends gifts one to another for joy that they were
rid out of the Earth.

Fifthly, it shows that notwithstanding the rage and fury of the World, ver.
11.12.13.
in persecuting them to death, God should not only receive their souls to
glory, but also raise up others endued with the same spirit, which should
preach, profess, and witness the same truth constantly and continually, even
unto the end of the World.

Lastly, it shows, ver. 14. etc.
that after the preaching of the Gospel some good time in this last age, the
seventh Angel should blow the trumpet, and the world should end.

And there was given unto me a reed like unto a rod, and the Angel stood by
saying, Arise, verse 1.
and measure the Temple of God, and the Alar, and them that worship therein.
Here Jesus Christ gives a reed unto John like unto a rod, and hereupon he is
commanded by an Angel to go about the measuring of the Temple, the Altar, etc.

By this measuring with a reed like a rod, is signified the restoring and
building up of Gods house, which now was greatly ruinated, and run into decay
through the long prevailing of Popery. Measuring with a reed, is taken for the
building up of Gods Church, after the decayed estate thereof, both in Ezekiel,
Zachary, and this Prophecy. John in the persons of all faithful Ministers,
has this measuring rod given him, because the Church was to be restored and
built up by the Ministers and Ministry of the Gospel.

The thing to be measured is the Temple, the Altar, and them that worship
therein.

This is an allusion to the legal worship, whereby our spiritual worship is
represented. For by the material Temple, is meant the spiritual Temple, or
Church of God. By the Altar of stone, is meant the spiritual worship. By them
that worship therein with carnal sacrifices, is meant all the true members of
the Church, which worship God in spirit and truth.

Now then, both the Church, the true worship and worshippers, were all to be
measured, repaired, and built up by Ministry of the Word, which all were
decayed and almost laid waste, by the Popes tyranny.

But the Court which is without the Temple cast out and measure it not, verse 2.
for it is given to the Gentiles: and the holy City shall they tread under
their foot two and forty months. John is here forbidden to measure and build
up the Court which is without the Temple. Whereby is meant all Heretics;
Hypocrites, worldlings, and all such as have a place in the Church, but are not
of the Church. This phrase of speech is taken from the old shadowish worship as
the rest before. For in the Temple of Jerusalem there was an outward Court
which was common to all good and bad: the holy place which was proper to the
Priests and Levites: and the holy of holiest, or most holy place, where none
might come but the high Priest only.

Here is a reason added why the Lord God refuses all Papists and Hypocrites,
and all such as belong to the outward Court only, and it is this: that this
outward Court is given unto the Gentiles, that is, to all false Christians and
counterfeits in religion, which are members of the visible Church, but have
nothing to do with the invisible.

These are compared to Gentiles in two respects: First, in regard of
profaneness, for they are as profane as the Heathen. Secondly, in respect of
persecuting the truth: for Hypocrites and Atheists are as forward in
persecuting the people of God as the Heathen Emperors, which persecuted the
Church by the space of 300. years. All comes in this, that when the Church
should be gathered and built by the preaching of the Gospel, God would have
all Papists, Atheists, and Hypocrites shut out.

Moreover, here is the second reason yielded, why the outward Court should be
cast out, and not measured; to wit, because they should tread the holy City
under foot, forty and two months: that is, they should persecute the Church
all the time of Antichrists reign, For forty two months in this Verse: and
1260. days in the next Verse: and three days and a half Verse 9. and time,
times, and half a time, in the twelfe Chapter, the foureteenth Verse, and
1260. days, the twelfe Chapter, the sixth verse, do signify all one thing,
which is the short reign of Antichrist; for these months, these days, and
these times, do every one of them make three years and an half, For who
knows not that forty two months make just three years and an half, and
that 1260. days, makes even so much also: and by time he means a year,
bytimes, two year, and by half a time, half a year. Now the reason why
Antichrists reign is numbered by days, months and half times, and all
amounting but to three years and a half, is to note the short continuance
thereof, for the comfort of the Church, as appears more fully and plainly in
sundry places of this Prophecy, where it is set down in plain words, that
Antichrist should reign but a short time; for what is five or six hundred
years in comparison of eternity.

But here the Papists do show themselves most sottish and ridiculous, in that
they would gather from hence, that the Pope is not Antichrist: for (say they)
Antichrist shall reign but three years and an half, but the Pope has
reigned many years, therefore the Pope is not Antichrist.

Now to answer the proposition of their argument taken from this place. First
it may be answered that this place is not to be understood literally, but
mystically: as many other things in this book.

Secondly, here is a certain number put for an uncertain, a definite number
for an indefinite, which also is usual in this book, as we heard before
concerning the sealing of the Tribes, of every Tribe 12000. which makes
144000. Now no man is so mad as to think there were just so many sealed, and
neither more, nor less.

Thirdly, here is an allusion to Daniels weeks, and other prophetical
computations, wherein sometimes a day is put for a year, a weke for seven
years, as in Daniels sevens, and a month for thirty years. So then I
conclude that it is extreme folly to interpret this place literally. The
curious and frivolous interpretations of this place, and such like in this
book, by some writers, I do of purpose omit, as matters untrue, unsound, and
unjudiciall: for I only in this book seek the sense that is, and not the sense
which is not, as has been said before.

verse 3.
But I will give power unto my two witnesses, and they shall prophecy 1260.
days clothed in sackcloth. Having set down how Antichrist and his company,
being those Gentiles which possess the outward Court, should tread down the
holy City, that is, the true Church of God for a short time, now he comes to
show, that even in the height and pride of the Popes power and government, yet
the Church was not utterly extinct, God did never utterly forsake it, but in
all ages, and at all times, God raised up one or other to withstand all Popish
proceedings, which is here meant by the two witnesses. For assuredly these two
witnesses do not signify Enoch and Elias, as the Papists and some others do
dream; but they signify all the faithful Preachers and Professors of the
truth, which in all ages both former and later have opposed themselves against
the Pope, his Clergy, his doctrine, his religion, and all his abominable
proceedings.

They are called witnesses, because they should bear witness unto the truth.

They are said two in number, for three reasons:

First, because they were very few in those days when Popery did so generally
prevail; for two is the smallest number.

Secondly, because the law of God does admit of no less number in
witnesse-bearing, as it is written; In the mouth of two or three witnesses
shall every word stand.

Thirdly, it is an allusion to Zorobabel, and Jehoshua; which were the two
restorers and builders of the Temple after the captivity: Hag. 2.5.
Christ says here, that he will give power to his two witnesses: for no man
has any power in heavenly things, except it be given him from above: and
especially to stand fast to the truth in the heat of persecutions and troubles.

It is said, that these two witnesses shall prophecy: that is, preach,
declare, and speak. For so Prophecy is taken in the former chapter and last
verse: so also in other places of the Scripture.

The time of their prophesying, being 1260 days, has been expounded before.

These two witnesses are clothed in sackcloath, which signifies that they
should lead a sorrowful life here in this world. For in old time when men did
fast and mourn, they did use to put on sackloath. It follows then that these
faithful Preachers and witnesses of the truth, did not spend their days in
mirth, jollity, and worldly pomp and bravery, as did the Popes Clergy, and
pompous Prelates of Antichrist.

Now if any man will demand how this may appear, that there have been always
some raised up of God, to write, preach, declare, and speak against the whore
of Babylon, even then when she was aloft and reigned as the Queen and Lady of
the world: I answer, that Histories are very plentiful in this point; which at
large do show, that in all countries and kingdoms of Europe, there were ever
some stirred up to impugn and resist the whore of Babylon: As, In England.
Robert Grosted, Bishop of Lincoln. An. dom. 1293. An. 1400.
John Wickliffe, supported by Edw. the 3. and diverse of the Nobility in England.
In Germany.
Taulerus a Preacher. An. 1354, 1356. 1357. 1359. 1359. 1360.
Franciscus Petrarcha. Johannes de rupe scissa. Conradus Hager. Gerhardus
Rhidor. Petrus de Corbona. Johannes de Poliaco. 1420.
John Zisca.
In Bohemia.
John Husse. An. dom. 1414. 1416. 1370.
Jerome of Prague. Mathias Parisiensis.
In Spain.
An. 1250.
Arnoldus de nova villa.
In Italy.
An. 1500.
Jerome Savanarola, a Monk. Silvester, a Friar.
In France.
An. 1160. An. 1252. An. 1290. An. 1290.
Waldas, of whom came the Waldenses, or poor men of Lions in France.
Guilielmus de sancto amore. Robertus Gallus. Laurentius.
In Ireland.
An. 1362.
Armachanus, an Archbishop.
In Suevia.
An. 1240.
Many Preachers at once.
In Grecia.
An. 1230.
All the Churches of Grecia renounced the Church of Rome for their abominable
Idolatry.


It were too tedious to recite all, which the Stories do report to have
withstood both Pope and Popery, even when it did most of all bear the sway:
these may suffice for the understanding of the Text. As for those which have
been raised up since the decay and fall of Popery, I mean since Luthers time,
they are so many, and so well known, that I need say nothing.

These are two Olive trees, and two Candlesticks standing before the God of the
earth. verse. 4.
Here the two witnesses are compared to two Olive trees, because that as the
Olive tree does drop down his oil and fatness, so the faithful Ministers
do drop down upon the Church the sweet oil of the Spirit, which is all
heavenly and spiritual graces, as the Metaphor of oil is often so taken in
the Scriptures.

They are also compared to two Candlesticks, because that as the candlestick
bears up the candle set upon it, so the Ministers of the Gospel bear up and
hold forth the light of Gods word, even in the greatest darkness.

These candlesticks are said to stand before the God of the Earth: because God
bears rule, not only in heaven, but in earth also, even then when all things
in the earth seem to be most troubled, and the Church militant under greatest
persecutions, as now it was.

And if any will hurt them, ver. 3.
fire proceeds out of their mouths, and shall devour their enemies: for if
any will hurt them, so must he be killed.

verse. 6.
These have power to shut heaven that it rain not in the days of their
prophesying, and have power over waters to turn them into blood, and to smite
the Earth with all manner of plagues, as often as they will.

Here is showed, that if any despise the simplicity of these two winesses, and
offer them wrong because of their baseness and contempt in the world, that
there is a fire comes out of their mouth, that is, the fiery and mighty power
of the word of God, uttered out of their mouths, which overthrows and
overturneth their enemies; nay, as fire it consumes them to ashes: for the
Ministers of the Gospel are armed with ready vengeance against all
disobedience. 1 Cor. 10.
Therefore they be stark mad, and know not what they do, which oppose
themselves against the true Ministers of Christ. For the sword which they fight
with, slaieth the reprobates in their souls, though not in their bodies: for
the ministry of the word is the savor of death to all unbeleevers.

That which is here spoken of shutting the heavens that it rain not, and
turning the waters into blood, 1 King. 17.
is an allusion to Elias and Moses: whereof the one by his prayer shut the
Heavens; the other by his rod turned the waters into blood. Now the faithful
Ministers of the Gospel are compared to these two, not because they should
work such outward miracles as they did, but because they should be furnished
with spiritual power, which is far greater. For most sure it is, that the
invisible and spiritual power, where with the Ministers of the Gospel are
armed, is very great and glorious, though the world see it not, nor know it
not. For the Apostle says, The weapons of our warfare are not carnal, but
spiritual, 2 Cor. 10.6.
mighty through God to cast down holds, casting down the imaginations, and
every high thing that is exalted against the knowledge of God, etc.

And when they have finished their testimony, ver. 7.
the beast that comes out of the bottomless pit, shall make war against
them, and kill them. Here is set down the greater cruelty and bloody tyranny
which Antichrist should use against these faithful witnesses of our Lord
Jesus. For although they overcome him with the spiritual sword, which is the
fire that comes out of their mouths: yet for a time power was given to this
Beast that comes out of the bottomless pit; that is, the Pope and his
adherents to murder Gods Saints with the material sword: but yet note that
Antichrist can do nothing, till the two witnesses have finished their
testimony; such is Gods care and providence for all his faithful servants.

And their corpse shall lie in the streets of the great City, which spiritually
is called Sodom, and Egypt, where our Lord also was crucified. By the great
City, here is meant Rome; and yet not the City only of Rome, but all the
Roman Empire, power, and jurisdictions, as afterward shall be made manifest.
Now the corpse and dead carcasses, which were murdered and massacred in all
Nations by Antichrists tyranny, are here said to lie in the streets of Rome,
that is, to be cast forth into the open fields, as not worthy the honor of
burial, in all places, countries, and kingdoms within the Roman Empire or
jurisdiction of Rome, as we read to have been in England, Scotland, France,
Ireland, Germany, and Spain. And as the Holy Ghost says, The dead bodies of
thy servants have they given to be meat to the fowls of the heaven; and the
flesh of thy Saints unto the beasts of the earth.

Moreover, it is to be observed, that Rome is here compared spiritually, or by
a trope, to Sodom and Egypt. To Sodom for filthiness; for what City ever was,
or is more filthy than Rome, Chap. 12.
the mother of whoredoms and abominations of the earth. And to Egypt for
Idolatry, and keeping Gods people in spiritual bondage.

Last of all, it is here said, That our Lord Jesus was crucified at Rome; which
may seem strange, since all men know, that Christ was crucified at Jerusalem.
But to answer this doubt, we are to understand, that in respect of the place,
our Lord Jesus was crucified at Jerusalem: but if we respect the power and
Authority that put him to death, he was crucified at Rome: for Christ was put
to death by a Roman Judge, by Roman laws, by Roman authority, by a kind of
death proper only to the Romans, and in a place which then was within the
Roman Empire: And for this cause is here said, that Christ was crucified at
Rome.

And they of the people, and kindreds, and tongues, ver. 9.
and Gentiles, shall see their corpse three days and a half, and shall not
suffer their corpse to be put in the grave. Hitherto we have heard of the rage
of Antichrist against the two witnesses: Now further we are to understand of
the malice and fury of all his adherents, that is, all Papists, Atheists, and
the rest of the blind people, and seduced multitude, which did allow the Popes
cruelty in shedding the blood of the Martyrs; and they do testify the
allowance and approbation of the Popes fact, and also their own malice and
madness against them in this; that they will not vouchsafe them the honor of
burial, but cast out their dead bodies as carrion, or as the dead bodies of
Dogs or Swine: thereby showing that they esteemed them no beter than so. Nay,
we read that their hellish rage and madness was so great and outrageous, that
they wreaked their malice upon the dead bones and carcasses of Gods Saints and
Martyrs. For their bloody and most malicious minds could not be satisfied,
except they dug up the bodies of Gods witnesses out of their graves, and
burnt them to ashes.

Whereas it is said, They shall see their corpse: the meaning is, that all the
blind people within the Roman Empire should be eyewitnesses of these things,
and not only so, but even great Agents also in the slaughter of Gods people.

By three days and a half, which is half a week, he means all the time of
Antichrists reign, and tyrannical government, as before has been showed. For
these three days and a half, being in prophetical computation three years
and a half, signify the same things that the two and forty months, and a
thousand two hundred and threescore days before.

And they that dwell upon the Earth shall rejoice over them and be glad, verse.
10.
and shall send gifts one to another: for these two Prophets vexed them that
dwelt on the Earth. Here we see how the inhabitants of the Earth, that is, the
seduced multitude and blind people in the time of ignorance, do greatly
insult and triumph over the death of the Lords witnesses; and they do express
their joy by sending gifts and presents one to another, as if they had received
some great benefits, or had heard the most joyful news in the world. And the
reason is added, because they vexed and tormented them; meaning thereby, that
the preaching of the truth, and the reproving of their errors, Idolatries, and
manifold impieties, was a dagger, and a corsey unto them, they could at no hand
endure it, for the preaching of the Gospel is the torment of the World, and
the Preachers the tormenters. These few Preachers thundering against their
superstitions, and abominable service of Antichrist, did vex every vein in
their heart, and inwardly so wound and lance their consciences, that they could
have no rest till they had rid them out of the world. But now having dispatched
them, and made riddance of them, they are very crank and jocund.

verse. 11.
But after three days and a half, the spirit of life coming from God, shall
enter into them, and they shall stand upon their feet, and great fear shall
come upon them which saw them. Notwithstanding the rage and savage fury of the
Pope and his followers, yet here is showed, that they could not prevail as
they desired: for within three days and a half, that is, when the date of
Antichrists reign was expired, and the time come that Popery must be disclosed
by the light of the Gospel breaking forth, there follows a great alteration:
For these two Prophets or witnesses are raised up again: For he says, the
Spirit of life which came from God, shall enter into them, and they shall stand
upon their feet.

This may seem somewhat strange: but it is not to be understood, that they
should be raised up bodily in their persons, till the last resurrection: but
that God would raise up others endued with the same spirit, which should
mightily defend both the doctrine, cause, and quarrel, which their
Predecessors had maintained, and sealed with their blood: in whom they should
after a sort revive, and live again, even as Elias did revive, and as it were
live again in John Baptist, who is said to be endued with the power and the
spirit of Elias, as it was foretold by the Prophet, and as our Savior himself
does avouch. Now blessed be God, that we live in these days, wherein we see
with our eyes all these things fulfilled. For when the Pope and his Clergy had
murdered Gerbardus, Dulcimus Navarrensis, Waldus, Nicholaus Orem, John Picus,
John Zisca, Visilus Groningensis, Armerias, Wickliffe, Husse, Jerome of Prague,
and many Preachers in Suevia, and one hundred holy Christians in the Country of
Alsatia, and many other Countries, and of all conditions of men: yet for all
that, spite of their hearts, God raised up others in their stead, as Luther,
Calvin, Zuinglius, Peter Martyr, Peter Viret, Melancthon, Bucer, Bullinger, and
their successors, yea the thousands of excellent Ministers and Preachers which
are dispersed over all Europe at this day: in whom all the former witnesses do
revive, and as it were stand upon their feet again. And now a great fear is
come upon the Pope and his Clergy, and all his favorites; for they did never
so much as dream of such an alteration: but this is the Lords doing, and it is
mavelous in our eyes.

And they shall hear a great voice from him, saying unto them: verse. 12.
Come up hither: and they shall ascend up to Heaven in a Cloud, and their
enemies shall see them. Here the Lords witnesses, whom Antichrist had murdered,
and called, and taken up into heaven, that they may be crowned with glory and
immortality, having in the earth fought so excellent a fight of faith as they
had: for even as Christ their head was taken up in a cloud to the Heavens, even
so his faithful members are here taken up in a cloud to reign with him for
ever. Moreover, it is here said, that their enemies shall see them ascending
up: they shall as it were ascend up in their fight: for from the fire and
faggot, swords and spears of their enemies, they went directly unto God, and
the very consciences of their persecutors did witness so much; nay some of
them being in horrible convulsions of conscience, did not stick to utter it,
avouching the innocence of Gods Martyrs: as sometimes Pilate, and the Centurion
did of Christ. But though they had not been justified by their enemies, yet
are here justified by a great testimony: for the voice from Heaven, the voice
of God does justify them, and clear them, accounting them worthy to be
called up from the Earth to Heaven, and received to eternal glory. For
howsoever the Pope and his Clergy condemned them for Heretics and
Schismatickes: yet here they are justified and cleared by a voice from Heaven,
which is more than the voices, suffrages, and approbations of all men in the
World.

And the same hour there shall be a great earthquake, and the tenth part of
the City shall fall, and in the earthquake shall be slain in number seven
thousand, and the remnant were sore feared, and gave glory to the God of
Heaven. As he has showed before that the world was very joyful and jocond,
when they had made dispatch of Gods witnesses: but afterward full of fear and
terror, when they saw what followed: So here in this Verse is showed, that at
the same hour, that is, about the same time when they have persecuted the
Saints, and see thousands of others raised up in their stead, and as it were
out of their blood, that there should immediately follow a great earthquake:
that is, horrible commotions, seditions, tumults, and open wars among the
Kingdoms and Nations of the world, and amongst all people which should live
after the breaking forth of the light of the Gospel; as this day we see with
our eyes: For who now in these days does not see and feel this Earthquake?
Who knows not what stirs there have been, and are every where about
Religion? Who is ignorant that all the wars, seditions, treacheries,
treasons, and rebellions that are this day in Europe betwixt one Kingdom and
another, are especially concerning the matter of Religion? But mark what
follows: Behold the effect of this Earthquake; It is said, that the tenth
part of the City shall fall. By the City here he means the great City of
Rome, mentioned before, verse. 8. which is therefore called the great City,
because it was the chief city of the Roman Empire, and the very seat of
Antichrist. Now then, the sense and meaning of the holy Ghost is, that when
there once begins to be an earthquake, that is, broils, contentions,
alterations, questions, and disputations about religion; and that the Popish
doctrine, which had so long prevailed in the world, should be called in
question; yea, openly preached against, convicted, and condemned, that then
Rome shall begin to fall, and Romish religion to suffer a great eclipse; yea,
the tenth part, that is, some part of the city of Rome; I mean, the doctrine
and authority of Rome, shall be overthrown. Now this falling of the tenth part
of Rome was fulfilled within some few years after the broaching of the Gospel
by Luther and his immediate successors; but since it is gone back many degrees,
and hereafter it shall still ebb and consume away by degrees, even till it come
to nothing: as, God willing, shall be plainly proved hereafter.

Moreover, here is set down another effect of this earthquake; which is, that
thereby shall be slain in number seven thousand, that is, many thousands; for
the number of seven is a perfect and universal number, as formerly has been
declared. But the sense of this clause is, that all such as will not yield to
the Gospel after matters once come in question, and the light thereof breaks
forth, but continue still in their blindness and hardness, standing out
sturdily against the truth, shall feel the heavy judgment of God upon them,
and come to miserable and wretched ends; as did here in England, Stephen
Gardener, bloody Bonner, and many other such open persecuters in other nations
and countries, as the book of Martyrs does plentifully witness.

Last of all, it is said, that the rest were terrified, and gave glory to the
God of heaven: that is, the elect of God seeing these horrible judgments upon
the persecuters of the Gospel, and having their eyes opened through these
contentions and broils about religion, should repent of their former
idolatries, blindness, and ignorance, should yield to the truth, and give
glory to the God of heaven, Chap. 9.
as at this day we see thousands do, God be thanked. We heard before in the
time of the Turks murdering army, when the third part of men were slain, that
the rest repented not of their idolatry. But now (God be praised for it) many
do repent every day, and turn from dumb idols to serve the living God. And
therefore, although the times wherein we live be sinful and troublesome, yet
are they golden times and days, in comparison of former ages, wherein
Antichrist did reign and rule over all. Moreover, from this place may plainly
and strongly be concluded, that the Gospel shall prevail more and more in all
the kingdoms of Europe, even until the end of the world. For here we see it
foretold and prophesied, that in the very last age of the world, and even as
it were a little before the blowing of the seventh trumpet, which presently
hereupon is sounded, as in the next verses appears, many should repent, and
give glory to God.

The second woe is past, behold, Verse. 14, 15.
the third woe will come anon. And the seventh Angel blew the trumpet, and
there were great voices in heaven, saying, The kingdoms of this world are our
Lords, and his Christ's, and he shall reign for evermore. Now comes the third,
the last, and the greatest woe, which is the woe of eternal death upon all the
ungodly, both in their souls and bodies for ever in the last judgment. The
second woe was Turcisme: and this third woe is the last judgment. For it now
follows, that the seventh Angel blows the last trumpet; as our Lord Jesus
swear before, that when the seventh Angel should blow the trumpet, there would
be no more time. Chap. 10.6.
Therefore when we see all things fulfilled which do belong unto the sixth
trumpet, it remains that we should every hour expect and look for the blowing
of the seventh trumpet, and the end of the world: For the holy Ghost tells
us, that when the kingdom of the Pope and the Turk shall fall, and the Gospel
be preached in many nations and kingdoms, that then the third woe will come
anon, that is, the last judgment follows presently upon it. Now at the
blowing of this seventh trumpet there were great voices in heaven, saying, The
kingdoms of this world are our Lords, and his Christ's, and he shall reign
for evermore.

These voices in heaven are triumphing voices of Gods elect, who do
exceedingly rejoice and triumph, that the kingdom of Satan and Antichrist is
overthrown, and that the kingdom of God and of Christ is set up, and shall
stand for evermore. For now all adversary power being overthrown, Christ does
deliver up a peaceable kingdom to his Father, as it is written, Then shall be
the end, 1 Cor. 1.15, 24.
when he has delivered up his peaceable kingdom to God the Father: For he
must reign over the Church militant, till he have trod down all his enemies
under his feet; and when the Son of God has subdued all things to himself,
then shall he be subject to his Father, as he is the Mediator of the Church,
and yet reign with his Church triumphant for evermore.

Then the four and twenty elders which sat before God on their seats, fell
upon their faces, Verse 16.
and worshipped God.

Saying, We give thee thanks, Verse 17.
O Lord God Almighty, which art, which wast, and which art to come: for thou
have received thy great might, and have obtained thy kingdom.

These four and twenty elders do signify all the elect, both of Jews and
Gentiles, Chapt. 4.
as we have heard before; which all in most suppliant manner do worship the
only everlasting God, even in the Church triumphant, and do greatly rejoice,
and give all praise and glory unto him, because now he has received the
kingdom, the power, and the glory, both Pope, and Turk, and Emperor, and all
his enemies being subdued under his feet.

Verse 18.
And the Gentiles were angry, and thy wrath is come, and the time of the dead,
that they should be judged, and that thou should give reward unto thy
servants the Prophets, and to the saints, and to them that fear thy name, and
to small and great, and should destroy them which destroy the earth. Now he
mentions the wrath and vengeance which is to be powered forth upon all the
wicked at the last day, and also the reward of the godly. For whereas he says,
The Gentiles were angry, and thy wrath is come, and the time of the dead, that
they should be judged; the sense and meaning is, that all the profane enemies
of the Church, which had their time in which they were angry with Gods people,
and in their wrath did afflict and vex them very sore, should now be judged
and condemned in Gods wrath: for now the day of his wrath and vengeance is
come, wherein he will destroy them that destroyed the earth, and seemed to
carry all before them; and where also he will give a full recompense of reward
to all his faithful worshippers, both small and great, both preachers and
professors of his Gospel.

Then the Temple of God was opened in heaven, Verse 19.
and there was seen in the Temple the ark of his covenant, and there were
lightnings, and voices, and thundrings, and earthquakes, and much hail. This
is a further amplification of that which is set down in this former verse. For
now he says, that the Temple of God should be opened in heaven: that is, an
open door and passage should be made through Christ, for all the elect to enter
into Gods everlasting kingdom, and reign with him and his Angels for
evermore. By the arc of the Covenant, is meant Christ, who is said here to be
seen in the Temple, or kingdom of glory, because through his mediation only
(in whom the covenant of peace is established with his Church) the twenty four
elders are made partakers of their crowns, and enter in with him and his
Angels into the everlasting Temple made without hands, and eternal in the
heavens. But on the contrary, here is said, that there were lightnings,
thundrings, etc. that is, most horrible vengeance and wrath powered down upon
all reprobates in hellfire for evermore. For when it shall be said to all the
faithful, Come ye blessed, etc. then also shall it be said unto all
unbeleevers: Go ye cursed into hellfire, etc.

Now for warrant of this exposition of the last verse, that the Temple in
heaven is to be understood of the kingdom of glory, look chapter 15. verse 5,
6, 8. chapt. 16. verse 1. The reason hereof is, that as the doors of the Temple
of Jerusalem being set open, Gods people entered in and worshipped: so the
everlasting gates of the new Jerusalem, and celestial Temple being set open by
Christ, all the elect do enter in, and worship God without weariness, even as
the Angels, for evermore.

That the ark of the covenant is taken for Christ, see 2 Samuel 6.2. Psalm. 78.
verse. 61, 62. This ark of the covenant, that is, Christ, is here seen in the
Temple, because Christ has already taken possession of heaven as Mediator and
Head of the Church, and now does set open the kingdom of heaven to all
believers, that through him they may have free access thereunto, as it is
written, that through him only we have an entrance unto the Father. Ephesians. 2.28.


That by thundrings, lightnings, earthquakes, hail, is meant that horrible
vengeance and wrath which is powered forth upon all the ungodly, see Psalm. 11.
verse 6. Let this briefly suffice to satisfy the conscience of the reader. And
thus much concerning the second vision contained in these eight chapters going
before: wherein we have heard all things expounded that do belong unto the
opening of the seven seals, and the blowing of the seven trumpets, that is,
all notable things which were to fall out from the Apostles times unto the end
of the whole world.

CHAP. XII.
NOw having finished the second vision, we are come unto the third, contained
in all the chapters following, even unto the end of this book. Wherein diverse
things which were obscurely and darkly set down in the former vision, are more
plainly and fully opened and expounded: so that this third vision is as it were
a Commentary or more clear exposition of sundry things contained in the second
vision. Chap. 6.
But especially of the persecuting Roman Empire mentioned in the opening of the
second seal, and also of the Papacy mentioned at the blowing of the first
trumpet. Chapt. 9.
But the general sum of this third vision is a lively painting out of the
malignant Church, and the great upholders thereof, the Devil, the Roman
Emperor, and the Pope. It shows also the rising and falling of the Roman
Empire, and the rising and falling of the Papacy. It shows also the utter
overthrow of both together, with the eternal condemnation of the Devil which
set them all awork to fight against the Church. Last of all, it shows the
eternal felicity of the Church, and the unconceivable happiness of all Gods
chosen in the heavens for evermore. The principal drift of this twelfth
chapter is to set forth the nature of the true, visible, and militant Church
here on earth, whose head is Christ Jesus: and also the false malignant Church,
whose head is the Devil; together with the continual enmity and war which is
always betwixt them.

This chapter may very fitly be divided into five parts:

The first is a description of the Church.

The second is a description of the Devil, the Churches enemy.

The third contains the Churches battle with the Devil, and her victory.

The fourth shows the joy and triumphs of the godly in the Churches victory
over Satan.

The fifth and last shows the fury and malice of Satan, who, although he was
foiled in battle by the Church, yet would not give over, but continued
persecuting the Church in her members, and making war against the remnant of
her seed.

And there appeared a great wonder in heaven: Verse 1.
A woman clothed with the Sun, and the Moon was under her feet, and upon her
head a crown of twelve stars. First, the holy Ghost calls the matters of this
chapter a great wonder, to stir us up to attention; for men are much moved with
wonders: and a wonder indeed it is in the literal sense, to see a woman
clothed with the Sun, etc. but a far greater wonder in the spiritual sense, as
we shall hear; and the greatest wonder of all, that a poor weak woman should
encounter with a great red Dragon, and overcome him. It is said to be a wonder
in heaven, because the Church here in vision appears not upon the earth, but
in heaven, in as much as her birth is from heaven, her inheritance in heaven,
and her conversation in heaven.

The Church is here compared to a woman, as in the 45. Psalm, and the whole
book of the Canticles, and that for three reasons.

First, as a woman is weak and feeble, and in law can do nothing of her self
without her husband; so we of our selves are weak and feeble, and in matters
of Gods law and worship, can do nothing without our husband Christ, as he
says, Without me ye can do nothing.

Secondly, as a woman through the company of her husband is fruitful, and
brings forth children: so the Church by her conjunction with Christ and his
word, does bring forth many children unto God.

Thirdly, as the love and affection of a woman is to her husband, as Genesis,
chapter 2. verse 16. so the love and affection of the Church is altogether to
Christ, and Christ to her.

This woman is clothed with the Sun: that is, the Church is clothed with
Christ the Sun of righteousness, Mal. 4.2.
as the Prophet speaks.

The Moon was under her feet. Whereby is meant, that the Church treads under
her feet all worldly things, which are compared to the Moon for their often
changes, waxings, wainings, and increasings, decreasings, continual mutations,
and uncertainties. The Church treads all transitory things under her feet:
that is, she makes light account of them, she regards them not in
comparison of heavenly things: For he that is clothed with the Sun, cares
little for the light of the Moon.

She has upon her head a crown of twelve stars: which signifies that the
Church is adorned and beautified with the doctrine of the twelve Apostles; that
is, the doctrine of the Gospel, as it were with a crown of gold, of pearl, and
precious stones. For the doctrine of the Gospel is the crown of the Church.

And she was with child, Verse 2.
and cried traveling in birth, and was pained ready to be delivered. The
Church is said to be with child after she has conceived the immortal seed of
the Word by the ministry of the Gospel, as the Apostle says: 2 Cor. 4.15.
In Christ Jesus I have begotten you through the Gospel: And to the Galatians,
O ye little children, of whom I travel in birth again till Christ be formed
in you.

It is not only said, that this woman wa^ with child; but also, that she was
very nee^ her time, ready to bring forth, and to be delivered, and that she
cries in travel. Now the child which she brings forth is Christ Jesus, Gal.
5.19.
as appears in the fifth verse, for there it is said of him, that he should
rule all nations with a rod of iron.

Now although Christ was born but of one member of the Church, which is the
Virgin Mary: yet may it be said, that the whole Church, which was before his
coming, did even travel with pain to bring him forth, because they had,
through faith in the promises, a longing and fervent desire and expectation of
his coming. For from the first promise made to Adam, and afterward renewed to
Abraham and his posterity, the Church stood in a continual expectation of the
promised Messiah, looking wishly every day when he should be actually
exhibited to the world. For which cause here she is said to cry, traveling in
birth. And not unfitly also may the Church be said to cry traveling in birth,
when, through many persecutions and afflictions, she brings forth children
unto God by the ministry of the Word. For the Church brings forth no
children at ease, but with hard travel, and much ado, having so few friends to
help her, and so many enemies against her, as anon we shall hear.

And there appeared another wonder in heaven: Verses 3.4.
For behold, a great red Dragon having seven heads, and ten horns, and seven
crowns upon his head.

And his tail drew the third part of the stars of heaven, and cast them to the
earth. And the Dragon stood before the woman, which was ready to be delivered.

Now we are come to the description of the Churches great and capital enemy,
which is the Devil: who, because he studieth and labors continually to
impeach the good estate of the Church in heavenly things, to deject her from
her dignity, and dispossess her of her inheritance, therefore here in a vision
he is said to appear in heaven: for he meddleth with the Church in and about
heavenly things, practicing to pull her out of heaven, from whence she came,
and whither she must return, even to cast her into hell and condemnation with
himself, if it were possible. The Devil is compared to a Dragon, for his fury
and felnesse; to a great Dragon, for his power and might; and a red Dragon, for
his bloody cruelty, malice, and madness against Christ and all hi^ members.

His seven heads signify his manifold sleights and subtilties, wherein he is a
craftsmaster.

His ten horns signify his dreadful power. For who knows not that he is
stronger then any other creature, having not lost his strength by his fall, but
remains as strong as an Angel of light.

His seven crowns upon his heads do signify his manifold victories over the
world. For he has from time to time, and from age to age got so many conquests
of the world, through his sleights and power, that now he is the god of the
world, as the Apostle says, and reigns as king over them.

The Dragon has a monstrous tail both for length and strength: for it is so
long that it reaches up to heaven, and so strong, that it brusheth down many
stars from thence. That is, the Devil through ambition and covetousness, and
other fleshly lusts, does pull down many ministers, which shined in doctrine
and life as the stars of heaven, even unto the earth, where they have lost
their brightness and glory, and shine as much as the Moon in a mist.

Moreover, it is said, Verse 4.
that the Dragon stood before the woman in travel, to devour the child as
soon as it was born. Wherein we are to observe the malice and fury of Satan,
in that he watches so narrowly to devour the blessed Seed, even the Savior of
the world, so soon as he was born. And for this cause he stirred up Herod the
king subtly to seek him out by the wise men, that he might kill him: and
afterward most cruelly practiced the same, by murdering so many innocents. But
this is always a general truth, Matthew. 2.
that Satan seeks to smother not only Christ, but every member of his in the
cradle; yea, to blast them in the bud, before ever they come to fruit or flower.

So she brought forth a man-child, Verse 5.
which should rule all nations with a rod of iron, and that her child was taken
up to God and his throne. Notwithstanding the malice and watchfulness of
Satan, yet the Church brings forth Christ, which should rule and overrule all
nations with a rod of iron; that is, the scepter of his Word, as it is in the
second Psalm: and with the rod of his mouth, as the Prophet speaks.

Isa. 11.4.
Moreover, it is said, that this child was taken up unto God and his throne.
That is, Christ by his resurrection did take possession of his chair of estate
in despite of Herod, Pontius Pilate, the Priests, the Pharisees, and all other
his enemies, which sought to keep him down: and now he being ascended unto
heaven, does draw all his members unto him, in despite of the Devil and all
his imps.

Verse 6.
And the woman fled into the wilderness, where she has a place prepared of
God, that they should feed her there a thousand two hundred and threescore
days. Now after the woman's child was set in safety, here is showed what became
of the woman her self: to wit, that she was so sore pursued by the Scribes
and Pharisees, and by the Priests and Elders, that she was fain to fly into
the wilderness. The natural sense and meaning of this place is, that when the
Church began to grow after Christ's ascension, and the number of the Disciples
to increase exceedingly, as we read in the second of the Acts, Satan did so
greatly malign it, and began to be in such a rage, that he would have eaten
them up all at a bit, and rooted them out at once, that so the woman might have
no more being in the earth. And therefore we read, Acts 8. that after the
stoning of Stephen, there was such a persecution raised up against the Church
by the high Priests, the Princes of the Jews, the Pharisees, and all that
cursed crew, that all the Apostles and Disciples of Christ were scattered and
dispersed here and there in the heathen countries, and amongst the heathen
people, which here are called the wilderness, that is to say, a ground
untilled, desolate and barren of all fruits of godliness.

But now may some man say, How shall the Church do in the wilderness? how
shall she live? how shall she be sustained? There is no tilling, no sowing, no
planting, there grows no corn, there is nothing to be had either for food or
raiment. Here it is answered, that God prepared a place for her, where she
should be fed; God took up an inn for her: she wanted neither food nor raiment
in her persecutions and troubles. Which teaches, that God does always provide
for his own, even in great miseries, scarcities, famines, banishments and
persecutions; as sometimes he did for Elias in the time of dearth, and for the
children of Israel in the wilderness.

The time wherein the Church was fed in the wilderness, was a thousand two
hundred and threescore days: that is, during the time of her persecutions, as
before has been showed, chap. 11. verse 2.

Verse. 7, 8.
And there was a battle in heaven, Michael and his Angels fought against the
Dragon, and the Dragon and his angels fought.

But they prevailed not, neither was their place found any more in heaven.

Now we are come to the third part of this chapter, which is the battle
betwixt Christ and the Devil. For whereas the Dragon could not smother Christ
in the cradle, as he endeavored, and so deprive the Church of all her
happiness for ever; now he proclaims open war, both against Christ and all
his members, plotting and purposing to oppugn the very salvation of the
Church, though it be founded in Christ. Wherein he shows both his impudency
and furious madness. Michael here signifies Christ, as in Daniel, chap. 10.
verse 13. This name is given to Christ in Daniel, because he is the first of
the chief Princes; that is, he is the head of the Angels, Col. 1.16.
who are chief Princes, as the Apostle affirms.

That Christ has his Angels joined with him, is not to note any weakness or
want of strength in Christ alone to overcome his enemies, but to show, that as
Christ effects great wonders in the world; so for the most part he does it by
instruments and means: as sometimes Angels, sometimes men. But here specially
it means the Apostles, and their successors: yea, and at this day all
Christian kings, princes, and potentates of the earth, and all others, which
take part with Christ against the Devil and his instruments.

Well, here we see that these two Generals and grand Captains, Michael and the
Dragon, do muster both their armies, join battle, and fight a pitched field,
the event and success whereof is this, that the Dragon and his Angels go
down. O blessed success may we say! For if the Devil had prevailed, it had
been woe to us: since this battle was about, and concerning the very salvation
of mankind by Christ's death and resurrection. We know how the Devil set upon
Christ alone to tempt him unto sin, that so he might overthrow the work of
our redemption, supposing in this combat or monomachie to have got the day: but
he prevailed not. Afterward, how strongly did he oppugn him by his Angels; I
mean, the Scribes and Pharisees, the high Priests and Elders of the people;
yea, all the Devils in hell, and his whole infernal army, not only in
murdering and crucifying his natural body, but also in using all forcible and
cunning means to keep him down, that he might never rise up again; as the
great stone upon his tomb, the sealing of it, the watch set to keep it? For the
Devil knew right well, that if Christ rose again, he should lose the field:
For the resurrection of Christ is our actual justification, And Christ was
mightily declared to be the Son of God by his resurrection from the dead.
Romans 4.25.
Well, do the Dragon and his angels what they can, yet Christ is risen again,
and has spoiled principalities and powers; yea, all the infernal army, and
has made a show of them openly, and has led them all in triumph upon his
cross: so that we see in this first and greatest battle, the Devil has the
foil. And it is further said, that this Devil and all his angels were cast
out of heaven, and their place was no more found: which is not to be understood
of their first casting out of heaven immediately after their creation: for at
that time they were no Devils, nor enemies to the Church, but Angels of light;
but now since their fall, and since they were Devils: they are said to be cast
out of heaven, not because they ever came in heaven since they were Devils, but
because they can no longer impeach the Church touching her blessed estate in
heaven. They are without all hope to dispossess her of her inheritance; for
that is ratified and made sure unto her in the death and resurrection of
Christ. And for this cause it is said, that the Devil has no more to do in
heaven; that is, he cannot for his heart overthrow the salvation of Gods
children. Romans 8.33.
For who can lay any thing to the charge of Gods chosen? It is God that
justifies, who shall condemn? It is Christ which is dead, yea, or rather,
which is risen again, etc. True it is indeed, that this battle is said to be
in heaven, that is, about heavenly things; yea, about the highest points of
heaven, which is salvation or damnation: for the Devil upon this very point
has from the beginning mightily wrestled and struggled with the Church, and
does even until this day: but blessed be God that he cannot, nor shall not
prevail against any one of Gods elect. For our Lord Jesus says, I give unto
them eternal life, John 10.28.
and they shall never perish, neither shall any take them out of my hand: my
Father which gave them me is greater then all. Neither shall any pluck them
out of my hand. Again, All that the Father gives me shall come unto me. And
this is the Fathers will which has sent me, that of all which he has given
me I should lose nothing, but should raise it up again at the last day.

Now further we are to observe, that as Christ in his own person has once
prevailed in the main battle against the Devil, so his Church militant shall
likewise always prevail through him: For it is written, The gates of hell
shall not prevail against it. Mat. 16.


Verse 9.
And the great Dragon, that old serpent called the Devil and Satan, was cast
out, which deceived all the world: He was even cast into the earth, and his
Angels were cast out with him. Now, because the devil cannot overthrow the
salvation of Gods elect, he is said to be cast out of heaven into the earth:
that is amongst earthly and carnal men, that he may exercise his tyranny, and
wreak his malice upon them. For he has power given him to tyrannize over them
at his pleasure, and the Apostle says, Ephesians. 2.
he works in the children of disobedience, and takes him captive to do his
will.

Then I heard a loud voice in heaven, saying, Verse 10.
Now is salvation, and strength, and the kingdom of our God, and the power of
his Christ: for the accuser of our brethren is cast down, which accused them
before God day and night. Here is the triumphant song of victory, which all the
Saints and Angels do sing unto God, praising and magnifying his power, and the
power of his Son Christ, for overcoming the Dragon, and giving the victory to
the Church through Christ. For now with great joy and loud voices they sing and
say, that the Churches salvation is sealed and made sure unto her for ever. It
can never be shaken. The devil is foiled and cast down into the earth.

These songs of joy after great victories are of great antiquity in the Church;
as we read of the children of Israel after the overthrow of Pharaoh and his
army in the red sea: of Deborah after the great victory over Sisera; of the
women that sung after the victory of Goliath by David.

The Devil is called the accusey of the brethren for two causes: First,
because he accuses Gods elect of much sin, and calls for justice against
them day and night at Gods hands, that they might be condemned upon such
articles as he is able to prove against them: for he knowing right well that
the Judge of all the world is a just God, and must needs deal uprightly, does
daily urge him to do justice unto sinners, being willingly ignorant that all
Gods people, though sinners, are cleared and discharged in Christ.

Another reason is, because of the calumniations, reproaches and slanders which
in all ages, at all times, and in all places and countries he has always
unjustly raised up against the true worshippers of God.

Verse 11.
But they overcame him by the blood of the Lamb, and by the word of their
testimony, and they loved not their lives unto the death. Here is showed, that
the Churches victory over Satan and hell is not through any power or might of
her own, but by the blood of the Lamb, and the word of the testimony; that is,
the word of God, which they witness, profess, love, and stick unto even unto
death.

Verse 12.
Therefore rejoice ye heavens, and ye that dwell in them; Woe to the inhabitants
of the earth, and of the sea: for the Devil is come down unto you, which has
great wrath, knowing that he has but a short time. Here again the Saints and
Angels, and all the blessed company of heaven are called upon, and exhorted to
rejoice, because the Devil and his angels are cast out, and the elect have the
victory over him through the blood of the Lamb; and because the salvation of
the Church is sealed up, and God only reigns through Christ. Which all are
matters of so great moment, that not only the Church militant is stirred up to
rejoice herein, but even the Church triumphant also, that is, the spirits of
just and perfect men. But on the contrary, here is fearful woe denounced
against the inhabitants of the earth, and of the sea; that is, all Papists,
Atheists, worldlings, and reprobates. For since he cannot have his will of the
Church, yet he will have his will, and wreak his malice upon them, by hardening
their hearts, and blinding their eyes, and making them his slaves and vassals,
to fight for his kingdom against Christ, against his Church, against all
goodness, and all good men. Therefore is added, why the Devil is in such a
rage with the world, and comes upon them in so great wrath and fury; to wit,
because he has but a short time: that is, because his kingdom draws to an
end, therefore he does so bestir him.

Verse 13.
And when the Dragon saw that he was cast unto the earth, he persecuted the
woman which had brought forth the man child. Now the Devil seeing himself
cast out of heaven, so as he cannot impeach the salvation of the Church, he
raises up horrible persecutions against her by his instruments here in the
earth, laboring to root her out if it were possible: for being overcome of the
head, he does now with might and main set upon the body, and what horrible
storms he has in all ages, specially in these last days, raised up, and daily
does raise up against the Church, both the Scriptures and all Church-stories do
abundantly declare.

Verse 14.
But to the woman were given two wings of a great Eagle, that she might fly
into the wilderness into her place, where she is nourished for a time, and
times, and half a time, from the presence of the Serpent. These two wings do
signify all the ways and means of evasion which God gave to his Church, when
he delivered her from the hands of her pursuers and persecuters: and also her
swift flight from them and all their malicious practices. For although the
Church cannot absolutely fly from the presence of the Devil with her Eagles
wings, being so unspeakably swift as he is; yet after a sort she is said to
fly from him and his presence, when the power of the tyrants and persecuters
which he raised up, cannot overtake her, to murder and kill her. But as
touching her flight to the wilderness, and her lodging and nourishment there
by Gods providence, in the midst of all penury and extremity, we have
sufficiently heard before in the sixth verse, and therefore here I surcease to
speak any further of it. As concerning the space and continuance of her
nourishment in the wildrenesse, which is here set down to be a time, and
times, and half a time; it is the same with the thousand two hundred and
threescore days mentioned in the sixth verse; and the twenty four months
mentioned chap. 11. verse 2. and the three days and an half, mentioned chap.
11. verse 6. as before has been showed.

And the Serpent cast out of his mouth water after the woman like a flood,
Verse 15.
that he might cause her to be carried away of the flood. Now the Church being
secretly hid, and nourished by Gods providence in the wilderness, so as the
Devil and his instruments cannot find her out or come at her, he takes
another course, and casts about another way to annoy her; and that is, by
casting a flood of water after her to drown her withal: whereby is meant the
innumerable lies, reproaches and slanders, which he raised up by sundry
heretics against her in all ages; as the Arrians, Donatists, Papists, and such
like, and all to bring her into the hatred of Princes, Potentates, and all that
were in love with her, that since otherwise he could not prevail against her,
yet at least he might utterly sink her in this gulf of reproaches.

Verse 16.
But the earth holp the woman, and the earth opened her mouth, and swallowed up
the flood which the Dragon had cast out of his mouth. The same God which first
delivered the Church from the violence and fury of Satan, and afterward cast
him out of heaven, and gave her victory over him; and after that again
miraculously hid her, and preserved her in the wilderness, does not now at a
dead lift forsake her, nor suffer her to be drowned in this flood of
reproaches, and unjust calumniations, which the Dragon cast up after her; but
causes the earth to help her, and to swallow up the flood: That is, he uses
all creatures in the earth to help his Church: and not only so, but also he
stirs up many earthly and carnal men to defend the Church and to take part
with her against her enemies, as sometimes he did Cyrus, Ebedmelech,
Nebuzaradan, Gamaliel, and sundry others, whose power and policy he used for
the good of his Church, and for the drying up of that flood of reproaches,
which Satan has in all ages cast up against her. And, God be thanked, we see
at this day, that this flood of slanders and calumnies, which Papists and
Atheists cast out against the Church and her particular members, do dry up
daily, and shall dry up more and more, being drunk in by the earth. And the
Church does stand still unmovable, and shall stand and continue even unto the
end of the world.

Then the Dragon was wroth with the woman, Verse 17.
and went and made war with the remnant of her seed, which kept the
commandments of God, and have the testimony of Jesus Christ. Here we see there
is no end of the Devils malice; he is infatigable in mischief: though he have
never so many foiles, yet he will never give over, but begin again. For whereas
he could not prevail against the woman, to cast her out of heaven by
impeaching her election and salvation in Christ, nor yet root her out of the
earth by persecutions, being hid in the wilderness, and locked up in the
privy chamber of Gods providence, as sometimes young Joash was locked up in
the Priests chamber from the fury of Athalia: 2 King. 11.2.
now he goes another way to work, and sets upon her in her seed and
posterity, which remain in the earth unto this day. So that now, since he cannot
do what mischief he would against the Church, yet will he do what he can:
seeing he cannot wound her in her head, yet will he bite and pinch at her heel,
Genesis 3.15.
as it is written, that he should bruise her heel. And as it is the malice of
Satan against the Church; so is the rage and fury of all his members, even all
the wicked and ungodly, against the true worshippers of God. They are restless
in malice and mischief: if they cannot vex them one way, they will try
another: if they cannot touch them in their lives, yet will they molest them in
their goods and good name: if they cannot do what they would, yet will they do
what they can: they will never give over: if they can spite them in the least
thing that is, they shall be sure of it. For they are as full of venom as a
toad, and as full of malice to Christ as an egg is full of meat.

And I stood on the sea sand. Verse 18.


Now John affirms that he stood upon the sea sand to behold the Beast which
rises out of the sea in the next chapter, or else because the Greek word may
be of the third person, which is, He stood; that is, (...).
the Dragon stood; it may bear this sense, That the Devil stood upon the sea
sand, as it were working and framing out of the sea his chief instrument, which
is the Beast, now following to be spoken of.

CHAP. XIII.
We have heard in the former chapter the description of the Church, and of her
arch-enemy the Devil, and of the battle betwixt them, with the success
thereof. Now in this chapter we are to hear of the Dragons two great
instruments, whereby he fights against the woman: that is, the Roman Empire,
and the Papacy. For by these two, as it were his two hands, he has in all
ages, from the Apostles time to this day, most cruelly assailed and afflicted
the Church. Therefore the main drift of this chapter is to describe at large
these two beasts, together with all their beastly proceedings. So that this
chapter may fitly be divided into two principal parts.

The first is a description of the Roman Monarchy, when it was at the highest
pitch, unto the 11. verse.

The second is a description of the Papacy, when it was in his pride and
exaltation, in all the verses following unto the end of this chapter.

In the first of these two maine branches the Roman Empire is diversely
described:

Verse 1.
First, the pedigree thereof.

Verse 2.
Secondly, of her 7. several governments.

Verse 3.
Thirdly, of her great and outstretched power.

Fourthly, of her victories.

Fifthly, of her blasphemies.

Sixthly, of her fury, rapine, and pride.

After this is set down the wound which was made in the Empire, with the curing
of the same.

Lastly is set down the great and admirable power and authority of the Roman
Empire, Ver. 4.5. etc.
which ruled over a great part of the world, and had many nations subject unto
it, especially when the Popes were the heads thereof.

In the second main part is the Papacy very lively described.

First, from the pedigree thereof, Verse 11.
which is of the earth.

Secondly, from the Civil and Ecclesiastical power thereof, which is
pretended to come from Christ, although in truth it is of the Devil.

After this is set down, Ver. 12, 13.
that the Papacy should be as mighty, and perform as much in the service of the
Dragon, against God, as ever the Empire of the Heathen could do, both by
authority, and force, and especially by lying wonders.

Then it is showed that as the Papacy did in substance of matter set up, Verse
14.
and restore again the old Roman tyranny to be worshipped and wondered at; so
has it framed an Hierarchy or Ecclesiastical government, Verse 15.
after the very form and president of the ancient Roman tyranny; which is
indeed so like it, that it is called the lively image thereof: and he has by
his Clergy and their jurisdiction, Verse. 16, 17.
put such life and spirit into this Image, that it spoke with authority and
power in all countries and kingdoms; in so much, that whosoever would not
submit himself thereunto, and both profess and practice Popery, and yield
himself wholly to the Papacy, he should die for it.

Last of all, is described and discovered from the numerative letters of the
name of the second Beast, both who he was, and from whence he shall spring.

Verse 8.
And I saw a beast rise out of the sea, having seven heads and ten horns, and
upon his horns were ten crowns, and upon his heads the name of blasphemy.
First, we are to understand that a beast in the Scripture does signify a
Kingdom, or Monarchy; and that not in respect of the civil power thereof,
which is of God, as it is written, Romans 13.
There is no power but of God: but in respect of the tyranny, cruelty,
ambition, pride, and other such like beastly qualities thereof, which are of
the Devil: and therefore this beast is said to ascend out of the bottomless
pit, chap. 17. ver. 8.

This word beast is thus taken in the seventh of Daniel, where the three great
Monarchies of the Babylonians, Medes, and Persians, and of the Grecians, are
compared for their pride, Dan. 7.17.
rapine and cruelty, to a lion, a bear, and a leopard. The Angel in that
chapter says expressly, that these beasts were Kings, that is, Kingly
Governments or Dominions.

By the beast in this place is meant the Roman Monarchy, not in regard of the
civil power thereof, but especially in respect of the tyranny of it, in
oppressing the Church.

By the sea here is meant the troublesome state of the nations; as it is taken,
chapt. 4. ver. 6. and chap. 2. ver. 1. For from the boiling and broyling estate
of the former kingdoms and heathen nations, which were as a raging sea, did the
Roman Empire spring up, as all stories do witness. And the Prophet Daniel does
flatly teach, Dan. 10.11.
that through the division of the Greek Empire, which fell out in the
successors of Alexander the Great, especially betwixt his two Captains,
Ptolomeus and Seleucus, this Roman Monarchy by degrees made a head, til at last
it came to this pitch, which now we shall hear of.

By the seven heads of this beast, are meant the seven several governments of
the Roman Empire. First, by Kings. Secondly, by Consuls. Thirdly, by Decemviri.
Fourthly, by Dictators. Fifthly, by Triumviri. Sixthly, Chap, 17.9.
by Emperors. And lastly, by Popes, as hereafter shall more plainly appear.

By the ten horns of this beast is meant the great power and large dominion of
the Roman Empire; or, Chap. 17.1.
as the Angel himself does expound it, thereby is meant ten kings, that is,
many kingdoms which should be subject to the Roman Monarchy, and wherein in
very deed the power and strength of the Empire did consist. For by these Horns
the Roman Empire did not only push down other Nations: but especially dosse
against the Church, and as it were cruelly gore the sides thereof.

Now then we see that the Roman Emperors, both in horns and heads, were like
their father the Devil, or the Dragon.

By the ten crowns upon his ten horns, are meant his great and manifold
victories over other countries and kingdoms.

The horns of the beast are said to be crowned, and not his heads, because the
Roman Empire has always more prevailed by power then by policy, by strength
then by subtilty. But the Dragon has his heads crowned, and not his horns,
because he has always done more hurt by policy, then power; by subtilty, then
strength. One thing in all this is greatly to be heeded, that the holy Ghost in
this chapter does specially speak of the Roman Monarchy, as the Popes were
heads thereof; or as it was under the dominion of the Popes in their pride,
when as the Emperors were almost trodden under foot; and not simply and solely
as the Emperors were heads thereof.

Moreover, it is said, that upon the seven heads of this beast was written the
name of blasphemy. For, besides the blasphemies of Caligula, Nero, Domitian,
Dioclesian, Julianus, and the other old heathenish and persecuting Emperors,
which have arrogated unto themselves divine honor, we shall anon hear of the
surpassing blasphemies of the Popes against God and all goodness. Verss 4, 5.


And the beast which I saw was like a Leopard, and his feet like a Bears, Verse
2.
and his mouth as the mouth of a Lion, and the Dragon gave him his power, and
his throne, and great authority. Here the Roman Empire is described of the
likelihood of qualities which it had with the other three Empires going before
it. For first, it is compared to a Leopard for swiftness to prey upon others;
and also for fierceness and subtilty, as did the Greek Monarchy. Secondly, it
is compared to a Bear for rapine and ravening, as the Monarchy of the Medes
and Persians. Thirdly, it is compared to a Lion for pride and insolency, as the
Monarchy of the Chaldeans. So then, by this description it is very clear, that
this beast signifies the Roman Monarchy, because it contains in it the whole
power of the other three Empires: and is here described as a compound of diverse
beasts, yea, as a very monster of monsters, having the body of a leopard, the
feet of a bear, and the mouth of a lion.

Moreover, it is said that the Dragon gave his power, and his throne, and great
authority. Which plainly shows, that the power and authority of the Roman
Empire is of the Devil, Chap. 17.8.
in respect of the evil quality thereof; that is, fraud, rapine, and
oppression. In which respect it is said to ascend out of the bottomless pit,
as was declared before. But the substance of it, and the government it self was
of God. Romans 13.2.
For the powers that be are ordained of God, as says the Apostle.

Verse 3.
And I saw one of his heads, as it were wounded unto death: but his deadly wound
was healed, and all the world wondered, and followed the beast. Here John, in a
vision, sees one of the seven heads of the beast almost wounded unto death.
There be diverse and differing opinions of the learned touching this wound of
the Empire, both when it should be, and how, and by whom. Some understand it
of the death of Julius Caesar: some of Nero: some of the oppression of the
Goths and Vandals: some of the great prevailing of John Husse, and Jerome of
Prague, in the greatest part of Bohemia. But to let all these pass, if we do
wisely consider and weigh with our selves, that by a beast in this place, is
not meant any lawful administration of government, but a tyrannical power in
persecuting the Church, we shall find that a head of the beast was then
wounded, when Constantine the Great slew Maxentius and Licinius the two last
persecuting Emperors, set up true Religion, and brought peace to the Churches.
For hereby the Roman Empire was greatly wounded, as touching the tyranny of it.
The holy Ghost does not set down which of the seven heads were thus wounded,
but in general says, one of them. Now it is very probable that he means
the sixth head: For we do not read of any such wound in the former five which
were past. Neither can it be understood of the seventh head, which was the
Papacy, because it received no such wound as yet. It follows then that the
wound was in the sixth head; that is, in the Empire. But we read of no Emperor
that did so wound the beast, as did Constantine the Great. And therefore it is
very probable, nay, an hundred to one, that the holy Ghost here points at him.

But it follows, that his deadly wound was healed, to wit, by these wicked
Emperors which succeeded Constantine, as Constantius, Julianus, Valentius, and
others, which afresh did set up Idolatry, and persecuted the Church. Now upon
the healing of this wound, it is said, that all the world wondered, and followed
the beast: that is, many nations, or the greatest part of the world, did submit
themselves to the Roman tyranny. For sure it is, some kingdoms were never
subject to the Empire of Rome, as some part of Asia, and some part of Africa.

Verse 4.
And they worshipped the Dragon, which gave power unto the beast, and they
worshipped the beast, saying, Who is like unto the beast? who is able to war
with him? Now is showed how all the subjects of the Roman Empire did worship
the Dragon: that is, they maintained that worship which he liked and loved;
that is, the worship of idols, which the Apostle calls the worship of Devils.
1 Cor. 10.20, 21.
And it is said also, they worshipped the Beast: that is, they did all with one
accord submit themselves both to the religion and authority of the beast: that
is, to the Popes, as they were the seventh head of the Empire: For, as I said
before, so I say again, the holy Ghost here speaks of the Empire, when it
was in the greatest glory and exaltation; yea, when all the world wondered and
followed the beast; yea, when all admired the great and large dominion of the
Roman Empire, and said within themselves, Who is like unto the beast? who is
able to make war with him? Now the Empire of Rome was never so great and
powerful, as when the Popes were heads thereof; I mean, when they executed the
whole Civil jurisdiction of the Empire, besides their Ecclesiastical power,
which now did both meet in one. For now the Papacy was aloft, and the Roman
Empire joined with it: so that the eyes of the world were dazzled with the pomp
and magnificence thereof, and they said, What is like unto it? Or who is
comparable to the Pope, the seventh head thereof? for then the blind world
thought that the power of the Pope was not only above all things in this
world, but also did reach even to heaven and hell. For they imagined that the
Pope might carry to heaven whom he would, and whom he would he might cast down
to hell: And therefore who could war with the beast? And thus we see the
reason of their wonderment, and of their speech. All stories, and experience it
self do show, that there was never any power in the world so wondered at, as the
usurped power and majesty of the Pope, after he came to be the head of the
Roman Monarchy. For then the world supposed that he had power even as God: and
that he might depose and set up Kings and Emperors at his pleasure. Then it is
clear, that under the dominion of the Popes, Rome has been in her highest
exaltation and glory: For the Papacy was the seventh head of the beast, whereby
the Whore of Babylon was supported in her most magnificall pomp and pride.

Verse 5.
And there was given unto him a mouth that spoke great things and blasphemies,
and power was given unto him to do forty two months.

And he opened his mouth unto blasphemy against God, to blaspheme his Name,
Verse 6.
and his Tabernacle, and them that dwell in heaven.

Here are set down the proud and blasphemous speeches both of the old and new
Roman Empire, and of the old and new Roman Emperors. For this beast (as I said
before) comprehends all the Roman Empire, both under the heathen Emperors and
the Popes. Touching the great things and blasphemies which the old persecuting
Emperors have belched out against the God of heaven, it would require a volume
to set them down in particulars: I will therefore only mention two or three
for examples sake: As first, that of Caius Caligula, which would have his image
set up in Temples to be worshipped as God, and that the people should swear by
his name. Nero also did openly blaspheme the Name of Christ, and required
divine honor to be given unto him. Domitian commanded that he should be
called God and Lord. Many others required the like things: and so all the world
wondered and worshipped this blasphemous beast. Now as the sixth head, which was
the old Empire of Rome, was full of the names of blasphemy; so the seventh
head, which is the new Empire under the dominion of the Popes, which he here
chiefly speaks of, did most of all blaspheme. For the Pope did challenge to
himself all power both in heaven and earth: he would be worshipped as God: he
usurped authority over the Word of God: he did take upon him to forgive sins:
he did most blasphemously incroach upon all the offices of Christ, as King,
Priest, and Prophet: he has commanded the Angels: he has erected blasphemous
images, and caused pictures to be made of the Godhead: he boasts and cracketh
great things of his papal power, of Peter's keys, of Peter's chair, of Peter's
succession, of his miracles, of his two swords, and of his manifold
prerogatives royal. One of the Popes poisoned his god: another cast his god
into the fire: another would eat his peacock in despite of God. Some of them
counted the religion of Christ a tale or fable, some drank to the Devil, some
said they could do as much as God. It were infinite to set down all their
blasphemies: for it is said of the whore of Babylon, that she was full of the
names of blasphemy. Let this suffice for the understanding of this text, that
as the old heathenish Emperors did blaspheme, so the Popes, being heads of the
Empire, did most of all blaspheme. And as it is here said, they did not only
blaspheme the Name of God, but also did open their black and blasphemous
mouths against his tabernacle; that is, his Church, calling it a company of
heretics, schismatics, apostates, and such like; and also against them that
dwell in heaven; that is, the spirits of just and perfect men which are in
heaven, as Luther, Calvin, Melancthon, and such like.

Moreover, it is to be noted, that this mouth was given unto this monstrous
beast, thus to blaspheme and speak great things. But this is to be understood,
that it was given in the wrath and just judgment of God upon the world, to
plague them withal, because they regarded not the knowledge of the truth. But
it is added, that this power of the beast thus to work his actions was limited
to 42 months; so that although he rule and rage for a time, yet shall he not
long continue.

And it was given unto him to make war with the Saints, and to overcome them;
Verse 7.
and power was given unto him over every kindred, and tongue, and nation.

Verse 8.
Therefore all that dwell upon the earth shall worship him, whose names are not
written in the book of life of the Lamb which was slain from the beginning of
the world.

These two verses do set forth the great power which was given to this beast,
both in fighting against Gods people, and also overcoming of them, and
murdering of them by heaps. As we read of thousands murdered in the first ten
persecutions, and ten thousands by the Popes, since they came to exercise the
civil authority and jurisdiction of the Roman Empire, and that in all
countries and kingdoms of Europe; as it is here said, that power was given unto
him over every kindred, and tongue, and nation. And it is added, that all that
dwell upon the earth, that is, all the subjects of the Roman Monarchy, shall
worship the beast, and make a God of him; as we read they have done. And the
chief motive thereof was his blasphemous mouth, boasting and threatening great
things if any did withstand him: and also his mighty power and authority,
whereby he bare down all before him. For if any did mutine against him, he
was sure to smart for it. And thus through his tyrannical power he subdued
all nations under him, and made them stoup, and fall down and worship him. But
it follows, that for all this, none of Gods elect did worship him, or submit
themselves to his religion and authority, but only those that dwell upon the
earth; that is, earthly men: as Papists, Atheists, and Reprobates, and all such
whose names are not written in the book of life. Christ is called the Lamb
slain from the beginning of the world, because the saving power of his death
was from the beginning of all believers, although he was not actually exhibited
until the fullness of time.

If any man have an ear let him hear. Verse. 9, 10.
If any lead into captivity, he shall go into captivity: if any kill with a
sword, he must be killed by a sword. Here is the patience and the faith of the
Saints. Here is showed, that the things spoken of this great beast are very
secret and mystical, and can be understood of none but those only whose ears
and eyes God opens to hear, and see, and understand, that is, the very elect
of God: as for all papists, and worldlings, their ears and eyes are sealed and
shut up, they cannot understand them, but do still worship the beast,
ascribing unto him divine power and honor.

In the tenth verse the judgment and vengeance of God is denounced against the
Roman Monarchy, both former and later; which, as it has long oppressed the
Church with cruel bondage, and drawn thousands into perpetual captivity; so
it self also should be cast down, with all the adherents thereof, both in this
life, and that which is to come. For, as the Roman Empire did tyrannize over
the world, and led millions into spiritual captivity and bondage: so here it
is avouched, that according to the just law of quittance, it should be brought
to the same lore. And as this beast had murdered many by the sword, so he
himself must be murdered by the sword also; as the Apostle says, 2 These. 1.6.
God is just, and therefore will recompense tribulation to them that trouble
his Church. Now all this seems unto me to be a clear prophecy of the fall
and final destruction of the Roman Empire, which indeed, considering the pitch
that it was at, may seem a thing strange and incredible: and therefore the holy
Ghost stirs us up to attention in the 9th verse, as to a thing of great
wonderment and admiration: for if the Roman Monarchy fall, the Papacy must of
necessity fall with it. For the Roman Empire is that beast which bears up the
whore of Babylon, as appears in the seventeenth chapter of this Prophecy,
where we shall (God willing) plainly and at large hear of the joint
destruction of them both together.

It is added: Here is the patience and the faith of the saints. That is, here
is required great patience of all Gods children, to wait and tarry till the
performance and accomplishment of those things, and also faith and full
assurance to believe that they shall in Gods appointed time come to pass. For
few do believe these things, and therefore wait not with patience for the
accomplishment thereof.

And I beheld another beast coming out of the earth which had two horns like a
lamb, Verse 11.
but he spoke like the dragon. Having described the first beast, which is the
Roman Empire; now the holy Ghost comes to describe the second beast, which is
the Papacy, or the kingdom of the great Antichrist: for although he be
described before in regard of his Monarchy, that is, the civil jurisdiction
which he exercised, as he was the seventh head of the beast, and head of the
Empire; yet here he is described after another sort, that is, according to this
ecclesiastical authority: and therefore he is called another beast, or a beast
differing from the former, in that he exercises another power, beside the
power of the heathen Emperors of Rome, which is his spiritual jurisdiction, in
which respect he is called the false prophet.

The second beast rises out of the earth, as the former rose out of the sea:
then it appears, that Antichrist is, by his breed, a son of the earth,
obscurely born, and by little and little creeping up out of his abject estate,
as did the Turk. It is here most truly said, that the kingdom of Antichrist
arises out of the earth, and is the very breed of the earth; for assuredly it
never came from heaven. It was first hatched out of covetousness, ambition,
pride, murders, treasons, poisoning, sorceries, enchantments, and such like.
For all stories do show, that from these roots the Papacy grew to his exceeding
height and altitude.

This second beast has two horns like the Lamb; Whereby is meant his Civil and
Ecclesiastical power, or his Kingdom and Priesthood, which he falsely pretended
to come from the Lamb: and therefore he gives in his arms two keys, and has
two swords carried before him. So Boniface the eighth showed himself one day in
apparel as a Pope, and the next day in armor as the Emperor; and the two horns
in the Popes Mitre are signs hereof. But the holy Ghost here tells us, that
these two horns are not the horns of the Lamb, but only like the horns of the
Lamb: for he received not his power from the Lamb Christ, but from the Devil,
that is, the Dragon with ten horns. Then thus it is, The Papacy is the seventh
head of the first beast, that is, the Empire; and yet a beast by it self, with
two horns like the Lamb, in respect of his joint power and authority, both
Ecclesiastical and Civil, in which respect he is called even the Eighth: and
one of the seven, chap. 17.11.

Although this second beast have two horns like the Lamb, yet he spoke like
the Dragon, that is, all his words and works, practices and proceedings, laws
and decrees are for the Dragon, of whom he has his power, and throne, and
great authority. So that whatsoever he pretends in religion, and matters of
Gods worship, as though he would be like the Lamb; yet assuredly he is
altogether for the Dragon and the Devil, he is assured unto them, as all
experience does manifestly witness.

Verse 12.
And he did all that the first beast could do before him: and he caused the
earth, and them that dwell therein to worship the first beast, whose deadly
wound was healed. Here is showed, that this second beast was as mighty and
strong as the first beast, and could do as much as he, even in his presence.
Whereby is noted the great power and authority of the Papacy, in performing as
much in the service of the Dragon against God and his Church, as ever the
Empire of the heathen, and those wicked Emperors could do: yea, he did much
more against Christ and his religion, then ever the persecuting Emperors could
do, even then when they were at their highest pitch. And all this he did in
his presence that is, in the sight and open view of the whole Empire, or whole
world.

And he caused the earth, and them that dwell therein, that is, all Papists and
worldlings, to worship the first beast, that is, to receive the worship and
religion of the old Roman tyranny, which set up and maintained idolatry: so
then, although the power in the Papacy came under the name of Christ, yet in
truth it was the same with the power of the persecuting Empire; for the heathen
Emperors condemned the true worship of God, and set up false worship, even the
worship of Devils, which is idolatry, and so do the Popes also. So then we see
that this second beast is all for the first beast, that is, he levyeth all his
power and authority to set up the worship and religion of the old Roman
tyrants; and to force all men by cruel laws and decrees to receive and
embrace the same. So this second beast is nothing better then the first; nay,
in truth, a great deal worse.

And he did great wonders, Ver. 13, 14.
so that he made fire to come down from heaven on the earth, in the sight of
men,

And deceives them that dwell on the earth, by the signs which were permitted
him to do in the sight of the beast, saying to them that dwell on the earth,
that they should make the image of the beast which had the wound of a sword,
and did live.

These two verses contain two special things: the one is, the false and
fained miracles of Antichrist: the other is the cursed effect thereof.

To the first, which is the wonders and miracles which Antichrist should work,
it is here said, that he should make fire to come down from heaven, as Elias
did: The meaning whereof is not, that the Pope could indeed cause fire to come
down from heaven, as Elias did: but, in the opinion of the blind world, they
seemed to have as great power as Elias had: For, partly by counterfeit
miracles, and partly by some strange things done by the power of Satan, the
seduced world has verily believed, that the Pope and his Clergy had as great
power to work miracles as ever had Elias.

Touching the second thing, which is the effect of these wonders: It is here
said, that the inhabitants of the earth, that is, Papists and worldlings, were
grossly deceived and deluded by them, even by those lying wonders, which were
permitted him to do in the sight of the beast, that is, in the face and open
view of the Empire: According as the Apostle foretold, 2 These. 2.
that the coming of Antichrist should be by the effectual working of Satan,
with all power, and signs, and lying wonders, and in all deceiveablenesse of
unrighteousness among them that perish, etc. But concerning the Popish
counterfeit signs and wonders, it is needless to write, being so well known
unto all men as they are, and so common and notorious in all stories.

Saying to them that dwell on the earth, Verse 14.
that they should make the image of the beast, which had the wound of a sword,
and did live. Now Antichrist, having gotten the world under him by his
counterfeit miracles, does lay his commandment on them, to make the image of
the beast. Now what is here meant by the image of the beast, is somewhat hard
to discuss: some think, that by the image of the beast, which had the wound of
the sword, and did live, is meant the repairing and the restoring of the
decayed estate of the Empire, by the Popes, to his full strength and virtue.
We do read that the estate of the Empire under Nero, Otho, Galba, and
Vitellius, was weak and feeble, in comparison of that which was before under
Augustus, Tiberius, and Claudius. We do read also that the Goths and Vandals
made horrible rents and dissipations in the Roman Empire. We do further read,
that the Empire was divided and rent in pieces, so that there was the Emperor
of the East, and the Emperor of the West: yea, at last the Empire of the West
fell quite down: so that for the space of 300 years and more, there was no
Emperor of the West, till the Bishop of Rome, Leo the third made Charles the
great, the king of France, Emperor. Then was the Empire of the West again
erected, and in time grew to as great a height under the dominion of the Popes
as before; yea, far greater. Now, I say, some do take this restoring of the
decayed estate of the Empire, by the Popes, to his former strength and power,
to be the making of the image of the beast which had the wound of a sword, and
did live. But for my own part, I cannot be of that opinion; and my reason is,
that the restoring of the decayed estate of the Empire to his former condition
was the setting up of the beast himself; for the Empire is the beast, and not
the image of the beast; for we must needs grant, that the beast and the image
of the beast are two several things. But the Popes, in recovering the Empire
to his pristine estate, set up the beast again: and therefore not the image of
the beast. Therefore the image of the beast cannot be understood of the
restoration of the decayed estate of the Empire. Besides this, it is here
said, that the inhabitants of the earth had a great hand in the making this
image. But the inhabitants of the earth bare small sway in the recovering and
erection of the Empire: (For therein the Popes were all in all, after it came
into their hand.) Therefore this cannot be understood of the Empire, but of
some other things: let us then diligently search out what may be the true
meaning of this place. It must needs be granted, that by the beast which had
the wound of a sword and did live, is meant the recovered estate of the Empire,
as before, ver. 12. And by the image thereof, I understand the form of
government: for an image does signify a likeness, a similitude, a figure or
form of a thing. And as in all civil and ecclesiastical regiments there is
both a substance and a form, a matter and a manner; so here, having before set
down, that Antichrist had erected the substance and matter of the Roman
tyranny; now he shows, that he would also set up the image and form of the
same. For before, ver. 12. it is said, that Antichrist, this second beast,
caused the world to worship the first beast, that is, to receive and embrace
the laws, worship, and religion of the old heathenish Roman tyrants, as before
has been showed: and now here is added, that he did not content himself with
causing the inhabitants of the earth to worship the old beast in the substance
of his religion; but also he lays commandments upon them, to make his
image, that is, to erect an external form of Ecclesiastical government,
after the very pattern and form of the government of the old Empire; yea, so
like it, that it is called the very image of the same. For, as the form of
government under the old Emperors was cruel and tyrannical, and altogether
bent against the Church; so the form of Ecclesiastical government under the
Popes was cruel and tyrannical, and altogether bent against the Church; and
therefore here it is called the image of it: for it is as like it as it can
look. Then it follows, that Antichrist has set up that external form of
worship, which the idolatrous Romans of old used, and that he has renewed the
persecuting Empire, not only in substance of matter, but also in form of
government: and therefore I conclude, that the Popish Church policy and
external regiment is the very image of the beast.

Here the inhabitants of the earth are said to make the image of the beast,
because they gave their consent to the making of it: for indeed the Popes
themselves were the chief agents and doers of it.

Verse 15.
And it was permitted unto him to give a spirit unto the image of the beast, so
that the image of the beast should speak, and should cause, that as many as
would not worship the image of the beast, should be killed. Here is showed,
that this image of the beast was not a dead image, but a living image: for
Antichrist put a spirit into it; that is, life, and power, and great authority;
insomuch that this image could speak, and not only speak, but speak with great
authority and terror: so as whosoever would not worship this image, that is,
submit himself to the Popish Hierarchy should be put to death. But may some
man say, How did this image speak? I answer, by the Popes Clergy. For the
Romish rabble of Cardinals, Abbots, Monks, Priests, Friars, and all that cursed
corporation were the very breath, life, and spirit of this image: I mean, that
the life-bloud of their external regiment did lie in the execution thereof by
the Clergy, as it were in certain arteries and veins. For what was their
outward form of government without this cruel execution of their stinging
Clergymen, but as a dead image without life? But when Antichrist had once
consecrated and erected his Romish Priesthood, then did he put life into his
image, which before he had caused to be made and erected. Then we do plainly
see, that the Popish Hierarchy is not a bare resemblance of the old Roman
policy, to stand as a picture on a wall, but has a spirit put into it by the
false prophet, and speaks with such power and terror in all kingdoms, that
it causes all to be put to death that will not submit themselves unto it, and
fall down and worship the beast. Who knows not this, that as many in the
countries as would not embrace Popery, and the old Roman tyranny, the Popish
Clergy, their Inquisitors, and other Officers did condemn them in their Courts
as heretics, schismatics, and delivered them over, being condemned, to the
secular power to be put to death?

Verse. 16, 17.
And he made all, both small and great, rich and poor, bond and free, to receive
a mark in their right hand, or in their foreheads.

And that no man might buy or sell, save he that had the mark, or the name of
the beast, or the number of his name.

Antichrist is not content to murder and massacre in all countries which will
not worship the image of the beast; that is, stoup to his government and
authority: but he will go yet a step further, and will have all sorts of people
brought in bondage unto him, as his marked servants. For as men use to set a
brand upon their sheep and other cattle, and to ear-marke them, that it might
openly and manifestly appear to whom they appertain: so does Antichrist, this
Romish beast, cause all men in all kingdoms to carry in open view his mark or
brand, whereby all men see that they do appertain unto him.

It is here said, that all the vassals of Antichrist, of what degree, estate or
condition soever, must receive this mark in their right hand, or in their
forehead; that is, they must openly profess and practice the worship and
religion of the beast: For the forehead is put for the profession, and the
right hand for the action; so that in one of them at the least, every man must
openly declare, that he acknowledges the Pope of Rome to be lord of his faith.

Moreover it is added, That no man might buy or sell, save he that had the
mark, or the name of the beast, or the number of his name: the meaning is,
that no man might traffic in the world, or have any doings amongst men; nay,
he might not be suffered to live, except he had the mark of the beast in his
forehead, or in his right hand, that is, unless he did profess and practice
the worship, the religion, laws, decrees of the Pope. For the mark of the
beast is put for his worship, religion, laws, decrees, regiments, and policy.

Moreover, the Popes vassals have not only his mark upon them, whereby they may
be known, but also the name of the beast; for they must be named after him,
even as children bear the name of their fathers, and must be called of the
Pope, or Papa, Papists. And not only so, but also they have another privy mark
upon them, and that is the number of his name, which is Latinos, or professors
of the Latin religion, Latin kingdom, and Italian Church, as shall by and by
appear.

Now then, to grow to conclusion, and to make a brief recapitulation of all
things here spoken concerning the second beast, which is Antichrist: Let us
consider what increasings and proceedings he has made, as it were by degrees.

First, although he has two horns like the Lamb, that is, Civil and
Ecclesiastical power; yet he speaks like the Dragon, that is, he bends
all his power and authority, words and works for the Devil.

Secondly, he does as much as the first beast could do in the service of the
Dragon.

Thirdly, he causes the first beast to be worshipped; that is, established the
substance of his religion.

Fourthly, he makes the image of the beast; that is, adds a form to the
substance.

Fifthly, he puts life into his image by his Clergy.

Sixthly, he will have his image worshipped and yielded unto on pain of death.

Lastly, he will have all men of all conditions to wear his livery, and to
receive his mark, as it were his hired and covenant servants.

Here is wisdom: Verse 1^.
Let him that has wit count the number of the beast, for it is the number of a
man, and his number is six hundred threescore and six. Now last of all, the
holy Ghost tells us that it is a very high point of wisdom and understanding
to count the number of the beast, and requires a sharp and pregnant wit; and
withal, tells us, that it is the number of a man; that is, such as a man
endued with Gods Spirit may find out. Then we are encouraged to search into
it, since it is within the compass of man's reach. It is no impossible thing. If
therefore we could find out his name, we would desire no more, then the field
were won, for his name would discover him, and descry him to all the world, and
quite stop the mouths of the Papists, so as they should never have any thing
more to say. For if Saint John had said expressly and in plain terms, that
the Popes of Rome are this second beast, and the very Antichrist himself, then
the Papists had been put to perpetual silence, all matters quasht, and all
controversies ended betwixt them and us for ever. But here the holy Ghost does
not tell us his name plainly, but mystically, as many other things in this
book, that the worldlings which should fulfill them might be blinded, whilst
the eyes of Gods elect are opened to see into the truth of all these matters.
Well, to come to the point: S. John does only here set down the numerative
letters of the beasts name. He wrote in Greek, and he only sets down
three Greek letters or characters; which in Greek numeration make six hundred
sixty six. Now further, we are to note, the numerative letters of the Greek
word Lateinos do make just this number. And yet further, we are to observe as a
very special thing, that Irenaeus, Irendi. contra haeres.
an ancient Father of the Church, who lived very near unto the Apostles times,
mentions this word Lateinos, as the name of the beast: And moreover
affirms, that it was a common received opinion in his time, and before, that
the beast should so be called.

Now then let us consider how this fitteth. First, we know that the numerative
letters of Lateinos do justly fit Saint John's Greek numerative letters.
Secondly, we know that Antichrist is the head of the Latin Church, or Latin
Empire; and therefore this very Lateinos. For here we do not enquire after the
name of any particular man, but about the name of a kingdom; for the beast is
a kingdom, and a succession of men. Now Italy in old time was called Latinum,
and the Italians Latini, which notes of what Country the beast should come.
Moreover, the beasts name, or name of the Roman Empire is Lateinos, because the
Empire, both under the heathen tyrants, and the Popes especially, had all their
religion, service, prayers, laws, decrees, writings, and translations in
Latin: all was in Latin, Latin; the Pope preferred his Latin translation of
the Bible before the Hebrew and Greek originals. Thus then it is, Saint John
tells us flatly, the number of the beast is six hundred sixty six. Irenaeus
says, that Lateinos is his name, which contains just the number: Therefore
here we have his name, here he is found. For if his name be Lateinos, we need
search no further, we know who it is, we know who is meant: for is not the
Pope Lateinos? are not the succession of them Latini? are they not the heads of
the Latin Church, and Latin Empire? have they not all their worship and
service in Latin? are they not Latins? for what is the name of the Roman
Empire but Lateinos? and what is the name of the Popish Hierarchy but Lateinos?
True it is indeed which the Papists say, that many names may be invented, whose
letters make this number: but the Spirit of God speaks not of fained names,
for thereof can come nothing but uncertainty: but he wills us to count the
number of his name, which then the beast had that is, Lateinos. I do thus then
conclude; The beast is a kingdom, and the Papacy is the kingdom of the
Latins: Therefore the Papacy is the beast.

The Papacy is Lateinos, and contains the number of the beast: For what other
Monarchy can be showed since the Revelation was given, whose numerative letters
contain this foresaid number? assuredly none. And therefore out of all doubt
Saint John points at the Roman Empire, and Monarchy of the Popes. For
Lateinos does both contain the number of the beast, according to Saint John's
computation, and also his name, which is the Latin Empire, or Roman Empire.
And thus have we heard the description of these two huge and monstrous beasts,
the sea-beast, and the land beast; which both from the Apostles time hitherto
have indeed played the beast against Christ and his Church, and still do play
the beasts, and will never cease playing the beasts, till their horns and
hoofes, heads and bodies be clean cut off, which will be shortly, as we shall
hear anon.

CHAP XIIII.
We have heard in the former chapter the description of the two great and
dreadful beasts. We have heard how mightily they have prevailed now many
years, and reigned as Monarchs of the earth. Now in this chapter we are to hear
the fall and ruin of them both. So that the main drift and scope of this
chapter, and all the chapters following until the twentieth chapter, is to
show, that both the Roman Empire and the Papacy shall ebb as fast as ever they
did flow, shall wain as fast as ever they did wax, shall decrease as fast as
ever they did increase, and fall down as fast as ever they did rise up, even
until they come to utter ruin and desolation.

This chapter contains seven principal things.

Verse 1. Ver. 2, 3, 4, 5.
First, it shows that God had his Church upon the earth, even then when it
seemed to be utterly extinct by the prevailing of the two outrageous beasts.

Verse. 6, 7.
Secondly, it shows that the poor persecuted Church did syncerely and
zealously worship God even in the fire and flames of afflictions.

Verse 8.
Thirdly, it shows that the Gospel shall be preached with great success in
these last days throughout many kingdoms.

Ver. 9, 10, 11.
Fourthly, it shows that Rome shall fall down at the preaching of the Gospel.

Fifthly, Verse. 12, 13.
it shows that all Papists shall be condemned, and cast into hell fire for
ever.

Sixthly, it shows that it shall go well with Gods elect, which having refused
the worship of the beast, do live and die in the Lord.

Lastly, it describes the day of judgment, Verse 14 etc.
wherein all, both good and bad, shall have according to their deserts.

Then I looked, Verse 1.
and behold a Lamb stood on the mount Sion, and with him an hundred and forty
and four thousand, having his Fathers name written in their foreheads. Now at
the last the holy Ghost brings in Jesus Christ upon the theater of the world,
as it were to play his part in this tragedy, and to help the poor weak woman,
which we heard of before, against the Dragon, and the two monstrous beasts,
which would have torn her in pieces, and utterly devoured her, if this Lamb
Jesus Christ had not stepped in and rescued her. Well, now comes in our Lord
Jesus, and begins to stir in these matters, and to take upon him the
protection and defense of the poor helpless woman, against both the Dragon,
and the Dragons two great instruments. But some may say, What is a poor lamb
to encounter with a dragon, with a lion, with a leopard, and a bear? I answer,
that although Christ be a lamb to his church, even the Lamb of God that takes
away the sins of the world, and the Lamb that was a slain Sacrifice from the
beginning for the redemption of his elect: yet to all his enemies he is a most
strong and terrible lion, even the Lion of the tribe of Juda, as he is called
before. Chap. 5.5.
Now this most terrible Lion, even the Lord of hosts, the Lord mighty in
ba^tell, comes forth to protect and defend his Church against all her enemies,
who is of such infinite might and puissance, that neither the old dragon, nor
his young imps, not all the cursed hel-hounds that bark, and bite, and take
their part, shall ever be able to stand in his hands: For, rage they never so
much he shall hamper them all well enough. For though he has given them the
reine a long time, and let them alone, and suffered them to play the tyrants
with the woman his spouse; yet now he will no longer put it up at their hands,
but will up, and maintain the woman's cause, and bear her out against them all:
nay, he will make ready his bow, that he may shoot off, and make his arrows
drunk in the blood of her and his enemies, and will whet his glittering sword,
that he may sheath it in the heart of Antichrist and all his adherents.
Therefore now let both the great beasts and their fire look to themselves; for
here comes in one that will knock them all down, and lay them in the dust, that
they shall never rise up again. For this cause now at length S. John in a
vision sees a Lamb stand upon mount Sion, that is, Christ present with the
Church: For mount Sion was an ancient figure of the Church; as it is written,
Mount Sion, lying northward, is fair in situation, Psalm. 48.2.
it is the joy of the whole earth, and the city of the great King. And again,
The law shall go forth of Sion, Mich. 5.2.
and the word of the Lord from Jerusalem.

Moreover, Saint John sees here with the Lamb an hundred forty and four
thousand: that is, the particular members of the Church, putting a certain
number for an uncertain, and specially alluding to the sealing of the twelve
tribes of Israel, as before has been showed. For it might be demanded, where
the Church was when all the world wondered, and followed the first beast? And
also when all, Chap. 7, 4.
both small and great, rich and poor received the mark of the second beast?
Saint John answers, that even then, in the midst of the heat of persecutions,
God had his hid and invisible Church, whom Jesus Christ did protect and
preserve even in the very flames of persecutions, being always present with
them, and amongst them, as he said to his disciples, a little before his bodily
departure from them: Lo, I am with you even unto the end of the world. And
here he is said to stand upon mount Sion with his hundred forty and four
thousand. And it is added, that this number of Gods faithful elect children
had his Fathers name written in their foreheads: that is, they did profess and
practice the doctrine and religion of God their Father only, utterly renouncing
and abhorring the worship and religion of the beast. For the Fathers name in
this place is set opposite to the mark of the beast; to signify, that as the
worshippers of Antichrist received his mark; so the true worshippers of God
received his brand, which is his Spirit, and the fruits thereof, whereby they
were perfectly discerned from those which had the beasts mark. So then, it
clearly appears from this place, that God preserved many thousands of his
true worshippers, even in the days of the great Antichrist, when there seemed
to be very few or none remaining upon the earth, as it was in the days of
Elias. In vain therefore do the Papists ask us where our Church was before
Luthers time, since the holy Apostle here stops their mouth, and tells us
plainly, that Christ had his little flock in the wilderness, even then, when
it was in greatest streights, and as we say, driven to the walls. And therefore
visibility is no sound note of the Church, as the Papists do most ignorantly
dispute. For it is a fond and absurd kind of reasoning, to say there is no
Church at all, because it does not visibly appear: as if a man should reason,
that there is no moon in the heavens, because sometimes there is none seen, as
in the change.

And I heard a voice from heaven as the sound of many waters, and as the sound
of a great thunder: Verse 2.
and I heard the voice of harpers harping with their harps. Here is set forth
how his company of true worshippers do magnify and praise God for his great
mercies toward them. First, John hears a voice from heaven, that is, an
heavenly voice, or the voice of the Church praising and glorifying God. For we
have heard before, Chap. 8.1.
that Heaven in this book is sometimes put for the Church upon the earth, and
the reasons thereof. Wheresoever therefore the Church is assembled to hear the
word, and to pray, and give thanks, there is a voice from heaven, or an
heavenly voice. Now this voice is compared to three things: first, to the sound
of many waters. Secondly, to the sound of a great thunder. Thirdly, to the
voice of harpers harping with their harps. It is likened to many waters,
because it proceeds from sundry sorts of people, of sundry nations,
countries, and kingdoms, as the word waters is taken afterward in this
Prophecy. Chap. 17.1. Chap. 17.25.
It is compared to thunder, because the prayers and invocations of the true
Church are as loud in the ears of God as any thunder-crack. It is compared to
harpers harping with their harpes, both because their spiritual worship and
service is as sweet unto God as any music unto men; as also, because all Gods
faithful people do tune together among themselves, and in their worship, as
the strings of a wel-tuned instrument of music, or as many musicians playing
together, which make a sweet harmony, and most melodious ditty.

Verse 3.
And they sang as it were a new song before the throne, and before the four
beasts, and the Elders, and no man could learn that song, but the hundred
forty and four thousand which were brought from the earth. Now it shows how
this holy society of the faithful do continue their praying and glorifying of
God; they are not weary of well doing, but hold on constantly in the course of
Gods worship, having new songs of thanksgiving in their mouths, and serving
God daily with renewed affections, as men inflamed with the zeal of Gods
glory: and all this they do perform before the throne, before the four
beasts, and the Elders; that is, in the presence of God and his Angels, and his
holy congregation. And no man could learn that song but the hundred forty and
four thousand; that is, none of the reprobates and ungodly worldlings could
inwardly feel and understand this spiritual worship, but only the elect, to
whom it is given to understand the secrets of God, and the mysteries of his
Sons kingdom.

These are they which are not defiled with women, Verse 4.
for they are virgins: these follow the Lamb wheresoever he goes: these are
bought from men, being the first fruits unto God, and to the Lamb.

And in their mouths was found no guil; Verse 5.
for they are without spot before the throne of God.

This holy company are not defiled with women, that is, with gross and diverse
sins, or rather with idolatrous pollutions: For they are virgins, that is,
chaste worshippers of God, which are not polluted with the defilements of
Antichrist. These follow the Lamb Christ whithersoever he goes. They hear his
voice, they profess his worship, and obey his doctrine; they abhor Antichrist,
they follow not the beast, nor receive his mark. They are bought from men, and
bought from the earth, as it is said before; that is, they are redeemed and
bought with a price from the currupt lump of mankind, and cursed race of Adam,
that they might be the first fruits unto God, and to the Lamb, that is, wholly
consecrated to his worship, and to serve him in righteousness and true
holiness all the days of their life. In their mouths was found no guile;
that is, they do declare their innocence and uprightness both in their words
and works, as those which Christ has chosen out of this world, and bought with
a price through his blood, in whom they are without spot or speck before God.

Verse 6.
Then I saw another Angel fly in the midst of heaven, having an everlasting
Gospel to preach unto them that dwell on the earth, and to every nation, and
kindred, and tongue, and people.

Saying with a loud voice, Fear God, Verse 7.
and give glory to him: for the hour of his judgment is come, and worship him
that made heaven, and earth, and the sea, and the fountains of waters.

Hitherto the holy Ghost has taught us how the Church was preserved under the
tyranny of Antichrist, and greatest waves of persecutions, and that even then
they did purely and faithfully worship the true God. Now he proceeds to
foreshew the ruin and downfall of Antichrist, and plainly to prophecy the
utter decay of the kingdom of Babel. This doctrine therefore we are to
hearken unto with great attention and cheerfulness, because it does so much
concern our good, and the good of the whole Church; also because we live in
the days wherein we see it is in part fulfilled.

First therefore we are to understand what is meant by this Angel here
mentioned, to wit, not any celestial Angel, or invisible spirit, as it is
sundry times taken before: but by this Angel, and the two Angels following, are
meant all the faithful ministers of the Gospel, which should be raised up in
these last days, for the overthrow of Rome, and the delivering of the Church
from under the captivity of Antichrist: which may plainly appear by this that
is said; this Angel preaches the everlasting Gospel unto them that dwell on
the earth, which cannot properly agree to the celestial spirits. We have heard
out of the tenth chapter, that Jesus Christ did open the little book, which is
the Bible, and did give authority to his faithful ministers to go preach and
publish the doctrine thereof to many nations, Chap. 10.11.
countries, and kingdoms: now unto that agrees this which is here spoken of,
and is a further opening and declaring of that which is there set down. For as
there Jesus Christ comes down from heaven, and opens the little book, which
had been long shut up under the darkness of Popery, and the smoke which came
out of the bottomless pit: so here Christ Jesus raised up his faithful
ministers and preachers to publish and proclaim the doctrine of the Gospel,
which had long lain hidden under outrageous persecutions of the two monstrous
and most hideous beasts. To this also agrees that which is written in the
eighteenth chapter of this book, where Saint John sees an Angel come down from
heaven, having great power, so that the earth was lightened with his glory. By
which Angel is meant all the preachers of this age. And the Angel is said to
have great power: for what is more powerful then the ministry of the word?
And moreover it is said, that the earth was lightened with his glory, that is,
with the brightness of the preaching of the Gospel, whereby the darkness of
Popery was dispersed and driven away, and Babylon falls upon it, as there you
may read, and as here we shall see the like effect by and by.

Moreover, it is here said, that this Angel flies in the midst of heaven:
that is, very swiftly carries this everlasting Gospel through all the Church.
For when Gods appointed time was come, wherein he would go about the
overthrow of Popery, he caused his everlasting Gospel to be set abroach, and
to spread over many kingdoms and nations, as we see this day. Now because
those kingdoms where God would have the knowledge of his Gospel divulged were
many and great, therefore here is expedition required: and this Angel does
carry it not standing but flying. And all this we see perfectly fulfilled with
our eyes, when God raised up Luther, Zuinglius, Melancthon, Peter Viret, Calvin,
Bucer, Bullinger, Peter Martyr, and all their worthy successors unto this day,
which have spread the everlasting Gospel very far, and carried it very swiftly
over England, Scotland, Germany, Denmark, Polonia, Swevia, Russia, and many
parts of France and Flanders. Another reason why this Angel is said to fly in
the midst of heaven, is, because no power of man shall ever be able to stay
the course of this everlasting Gospel which this Angel carries abroad, no more
then men are able to stop the course of the Sun in the heavens, or a cloud in
the sky. For this Angel flies in the midst of heaven, far above the reach of
the beast, and all kings and potentates that stand for the kingdom of the
beast. Therefore let them do all what they can, they shall never be able to
stop the course of the Gospel: for it is called the arm of God, and his very
arm holds it forth to the world; and who is able to bend it in, or to turn
it backward?

There be three reasons why the Gospel is called everlasting.

First, because it is in his own nature everlasting, as it is written, 1 Pet.
1.25.
The word of the Lord endures for ever.

Secondly, because it puts us in possession of everlasting things; as it is
written, Thy word, O Lord, Psalm. 119.
endures for ever in heaven.

Thirdly, and principally, because as it was long before Antichrist was
hatched, so it shall continue when he and his kingdom is dead and rotten.

Saying with a loud voice, Fear God, Verse 7.
and give glory unto him, etc. Here is set down the doctrine which this Angel
preaches with a loud voice, that is, with great zeal. The sum whereof is
this, Fear God, and give glory unto him, and worship him that made heaven and
earth, etc. The sense is, that the true and everliving God should only be
feared and worshipped, and all glory should be given unto him alone through
Christ, and none to Antichrist, none to Cardinals and Legates, none to Angels,
none to Saints, none to images, roodes, crosses and crucifixes. Here then is
set down an abridgement of the doctrine of this everlasting Gospel; namely,
that men should only fear God, and worship him, and give all glory to him
alone; and not to any creature. And the reason is yielded, because the hour of
his judgment is come, that is, the time of the manifestation of the Gospel, or
laws of the most high God: for so the word Judgment is often taken in the
Scriptures. Here are we to observe one special thing, to wit, that the Gospel
which this Angel flies withal, contains the brief sum of all the doctrine
which Luther, Calvin, Peter Martyr, and the rest have taught out of Gods Word,
and agrees in all points with it. For what other thing did they all preach,
teach, and write, but that men should turn from idols to the living God? from
fearing, glorifying and worshipping creatures, to fear, worship, and glorify
God alone which has made all things? What other thing do all the preachers of
this age publish and proclaim in all their Sermons, but this, Fear God, and
give glory only to him? Is not this the Epitome and short sum of all the
doctrine of the Preachers of England, Scotland, Germany, France, Denmark, and
all the rest? and therefore I conclude, that this Angel must needs be
understood of the Preachers of this last age, which now these fourscore years
have sounded the trumpet of the Gospel against all the inventions of Popery.
And, blessed be God, we see these things fall out in our days, and are
eyewitnesses of the fulfilling of them.

And there followed another Angel, saying, Verse 8.
It is fallen, it is fallen, Babylon that great city: for she gave to all
nations to drink the wine of the wrath of her fornication. Here is set down the
blessed effect of the preaching of this everlasting Gospel, which is the
downfall of Babylon. For as when the clear Sun arises upon the earth, the
thick mists and clouds are dispersed: even so when the bright beams of the
Gospel do shine forth unto the world, Babylon, that dark kingdom vanishes
away incontinently. And, as it is written in the eighteenth chapter: so soon as
the earth was lightened with the glory of this everlasting Gospel, Babylon
immediately falls. Therefore now before I go any further, my purpose, through
the assistance of God, Five maine points.
is to prove these five points out of this verse, and that which follows unto
the twentieth chapter, to wit;

First, that Babylon here signifies Rome.

Secondly, that Rome shall fall, and how.

Thirdly, that Rome shall fall finally, and come to utter desolation in this
life.

Fourthly, by whom, and when it shall be overthrown.

Lastly, the causes of the utter ruin and overthrow thereof.

How Rome is to be taken.
But before I go about to prove that Babylon here is Rome, I would have it
carefully observed what is meant by Rome, viz. not the topography of Rome, that
is, so much ground only as is compassed within the walls of that city, but the
regiment, government, and prerogative that is claimed by virtue of that
Monarchy whereof Rome is the head. By Rome is meant the power and authority of
Rome: or to speak plainly, by Rome is meant the Roman Monarchy. Further, we are
here to observe the reason why the holy Ghost calls Rome Babylon; for Rome
literally and properly taken, is not Babylon, in as much as they were two
diverse cities, one in Italy, the other in Chaldea: but Rome is called Babylon
mystically, figuratively, and, as the holy Ghost speaks, spiritually, and by
a kind of allusion: Chap. 11.8. A reason why Rome is called Babylon.
For as the old Eastern Babylon did a long time oppress the Church of the
Jews; so Rome, this Western Babylon, has long oppressed the Church of the
Christians: As the Eastern Babylon did many years hold down the people of God
in miserable bondage and servitude; so the Western Babylon did a long time keep
the Christian Church in spiritual thraldom and misery. In which respects Rome
is spiritually compared to Sodom and Egypt: to Sodom for filthiness, and to
Egypt for idolatry, and keeping Gods Church in spiritual bondage and slavery.
And thus we see the reason why Rome is called Babylon, which is not simply and
properly, but after a sort, that is, by a phrase of speech, or Trope, which
they call a Metonymie, or changing of names, when that is given to one thing
which is proper to another, for the likeness of quality that it has with it,
or adjoined unto it.

Now, having showed the reason why Rome is called Babylon, and what is meant by
Rome, we are to proceed to the first point; which is to prove, that Babylon in
this place signifies Rome; which, although it be granted of all sound Divines,
and avouched in the writings of the best learned, both new and old, so as it
shall need no great proof; yet will I add three or four reasons out of this
book, to make it more plain and apparent. First therefore, I do thus reason out
of the seventeenth chapter and last verse, Babylon is that great city which
reigns over the kings of the earth: But there was no other city which did
reign over the kings of the earth when John wrote this book, but only Rome:
Therefore Rome is Babylon. For as for Jerusalem, it was at that time made an
heap of stones. The first proposition is avouched by the Angel of God,
expounding unto John what is meant by the great whore, whose damnation he had
showed him before; and by the woman which sat upon a scarlet colored beast.
The woman which thou saw, Chap. 17.18.
says the Angel to Saint John, is that great city which reigns over the
kings of the earth: that is to say, Rome, or the Romish synagogue and malignant
Church. For the Angel could not speak more plainly, except he should have
named Rome, then to say thus; The woman, the great whore of Babylon is the
great city which reigns over the kings of the earth. For if one should say,
The great city of England; every man knows that thereby is meant London: if
one should say, The great city of France; every one knows that thereby is
meant Paris: so when the Angel says, The great city which reigns over the
kings of the earth: all that lived in those times knew that thereby was meant
Rome: Babylon is Rome.
for Rome was the chief city of the Monarchy, and is put in this book for the
whole Monarchy, and the religion thereof, as has been said before.

My second reason is this: Chap. 17.
Babylon is the mother of whoredoms, and abominations of the earth. Babylon is
that great whore, with whom have committed fornication the Kings of the earth,
and the inhabitants of the earth made drunk with the wine of her fornication:

But Rome, and none but Rome is such a one: Therefore Rome is Babylon.

My third argument is this: Babylon is that city which has had seven several
governments: But only Rome has had seven several kinds of government:
Therefore Rome is Babylon.

The proposition is proved from the words of the Angel, expounding unto John
what is meant by the seven heads of the scarlet colored beast whereupon the
woman sat. The seven heads (says he) are seven kings; Chap. 17.9.
that is, seven orders or states of kingly government; for seven kings in this
place are not put for seven several men which were kings as some do take it:
but for seven several governments, Dan. 7.17.
as it is taken in Daniel, The four great beasts, says the Angel there, are
four Kings, that is, four kingdoms, governments, or monarchies, as all men
know. So here, by seven kings is meant the seven several regiments of Rome;
that is to say, by Kings, Consuls, Decemviri, Dictators, Triumviri, Emperors,
and Popes, whereof the first five were then fallen when John wrote, one was,
that is, the Empire, and one was to come, that is the Papacy.

My last argument is this: Babylon is that city which is situate upon seven
hills: but only Rome of all cities in the world is situated upon seven hills,
therefore Rome is Babylon.

The proposition is avouched by the Angel, which says in the seventeenth
chapter, that the seven heads of the scarlet colored beast are seven mountains
whereon the woman sits, that is, seven hills whereon the city of Rome is
situated, whose names are these: Capitolinus, Palatinus, Aventinus, Exquilinus,
Celius, Viminalis, and Quirinalis, as all Poets and Historiographers do
testify. One says thus of Rome.

Virg. Geor.
Septem quae una sibi muro circumdedit arces. Another thus: Septem urbs alta
jugis toti quae praesidet orbi. Propert.


Another called Rome (...), the city with seven heads, that is, seven hills. It
is clear then by these reasons, that Babylon in this place signifies Rome. As
for the exposition of the Papists, which affirms that Babylon here signifies
the universal society of the wicked, it is fond and ridiculous: For the holy
Ghost says, Chap. 18.7.
Babylon is that city which reigns over the kings of the earth. But to say
that the universal society of all the wicked reigns over the kings of the
earth, is absurd and ridiculous. Therefore to say that Babylon is the
universal society of the wicked, is absurd and ridiculous. The distinction of
the Jesuits here is also as frivolous as their expositions; for they say, If
Babylon be Rome, then it must be understood of Rome under the heathen Emperors:
but not under the Popes. But the Angel says, The woman, that is, the whore of
Babylon, or Antichrist, sits upon seven mountains: Ergo, she sits at
Rome, and Rome is the seat of Antichrist, and consequently, Rome under the
Popes is Babylon. Moreover, we may reason thus against the Popish dictinction;
That which was Babylon under the heathen Emperors, is the same which is here
prophesied to be the chief city and seat of Antichrist: But Rome was then
Babylon: Ergo Rome is now Babylon; for Rome is that city which the Angel says
should be the seat of Antichrist: And this book does show, that the great
Antichrist should reign in the same city where the heathen Emperors had
reigned: and therefore it stands firm, That Rome under the Popes is Babylon.

This being then granted, that Babylon here is Rome; it follows, that Rome
shall fall: for the holy Ghost says, Babylon is fallen, speaking in the
present tense, as the manner of the Scripture is in prophesying of things to
come. For whatsoever God has determined to come to pass, is, as it were
already done, because of the certainty of it: and for this cause also the word
is doubled: It is fallen, Rome shall fall.
it is fallen. We see then most clearly, that almost 1500 years before Rome
began to fall, the certain fall thereof was foretold. This place it self is
clear enough to prove my second point, which is, That Rome shall fall. But my
purpose is to reduce and gather all the five chapters following to certain
heads, to prove the main points which I have propounded: first then I reason
thus to prove the second point, that Rome shall fall: That city and kingdom
which has the seven vials of Gods wrath emptied and powered down upon it,
cannot stand, but must needs fall: But Rome is that city, which has the seven
vials of Gods wrath powered down upon it: Therefore Rome cannot stand long, but
must needs fall. The proposition is manifest, and not to be denied. The
assumption is proved throughout all the sixteenth chapter, and especially in
the tenth and second verses; in the tenth verse the vials of Gods wrath are
expressly said to be powered down upon the throne of the beast: and in the
second verse of that chapter it is avouched, that the second vial was powered
down upon the men which had the mark of the beast, and upon them which
worshipped her image. How then can the throne of the beast hold out? or how can
they which have received the beasts mark stand up long? For there is a great
emphasis or vehemence in the manner of speech. For he does not simply say, the
wrath of God; Chap. 15.17.
but the fullness of Gods wrath: he does not say, should be a little sprinkled;
but powered down as it were by pail-fuls upon the kingdom of the beast. How then
can the kingdom of the beast stand, which has so many great Ordnance, and so
many double Canons discharged and shot off against it? Surely it must needs
fall.

Chap. 17.8.
My second reason is this: The beast that was, and is not, and yet is, shall go
into perdition: But Rome is the beast that was, and is not, and yet is:
Therefore Rome shall go into perdition. The assumption is set down chap. 17.
ver. 8. For the Roman Monarchy was great in the days of Julius Caesar,
Augustus, Claudius, Tiberius; and therefore it is said, that it was. But in the
reign of Nero, Otho, Galba, and Vitellius, it was greatly decayed, and
therefore it is said, It is not; meaning, so great as it had been: and yet in
some sort it was; and therefore it is said, And yet is. Now this beast shall
go into perdition. Therefore the Roman Monarchy shall be destroyed, and
consequently, the Papacy: for the Roman Empire holds up the Papacy, as it is
written, that the woman or whore of Babylon sits upon the scarlet colored
beast, which had seven heads and ten horns, that is, the Roman Monarchy which
bears up the whore, and bears up the Papacy: but the holy Ghost says, this
beast, that is, the Roman Empire, shall go into perdition. Then it follows,
that the Papacy shall follow after: for if the beast that she sits upon, and
which bears her, fall under her, then she must needs fall together with him.
But we see, God be thanked, that the Roman Monarchy is in a manner quite
fallen; therefore the Papacy cannot stand long.

My third argument is this: Verse 11.
The beast that was, and is not, being even the eighth, and is one of the
seven, shall go into destruction, But Rome is the beast that was, and is not,
being the eighth, and one of the seven: Therefore Rome shall go into
destruction. The assumption is set down chap. 17. ver. 11. For the Papacy or
dominion of the Popes is the seventh head of the beast in respect of their
civil power, and yet a beast by themselves, that is, an eighth in respect of
their ecclesiastical power. Now the Angel says flatly, they shall both go
together into destruction, that is, both the Empire and the Papacy. For as the
dominion of the Popes goes down, so also their worship and religion goes down
with it: and for this cause it is expressly set down in the nineteenth
chapter, that the beast and the false Prophet, that is, Chap. 19.2^
the Roman Empire and the Papacy were both destroyed together. Since then the
holy Ghost has spoken it twice for failing, that Rome shall go into perdition,
and shall go into destruction; I take it to be a very sound consequence, that
Rome shall fall, and shall be destroyed. But how shall it fall, may some man
say? Or wherein shall it fall? I answer, that it shall fall in the credit and
estimation of her doctrine, How Rome shall fall.
it shall fall in wealth and riches, it shall fall in power and authority. And
in all these it shall fall by degrees, as it did rise up by degrees: it shall
not fall at once, as it did not rise up at once.

Chap. 16.12.
This is set down in the sixteenth chapter, where the fall of Rome is compared
to the drying up of the river Euphrates, which was dried up by degrees: Thus it
is, Euphrates was a great river which did run very near unto the old Babylon in
Chaldea, and it was the wall and fortification of the city; in so much, that
Cyrus and Darius, the kings of the Medes and Persians, laying siege against it,
could not take it, till by policy they dug water trenches, and turned the
waters another way, and so dried them up, that the holy Ghost says, The way
was prepared for them to pass over. Now, as this Euphrates was the strength
and fortification of old Babylon: so the honor, wealth, riches, power and
authority of Rome is the very fortification of it. Chap. 16.12.
But the punishing Angel is commanded to power down the vial of wrath upon this
Euphrates; that is, upon all that upholdeth or fortifieth Rome, and forthwith
it dried up; that is, all the credit, power, riches, and authority of Rome did
diminish daily, does diminish, and shall diminish by degrees unto the end of
the world. For the utter destruction of Rome is not yet come, but it is greatly
decayed from that it was fourscore years ago: and if it continue decaying
eighteen years more, as assuredly it shall, then will it be brought to a low
ebb. Since Luthers time we know how the Popes Euphrates has dried up; but
there is yet much water left, and it is yet too deep for the kings of the earth
to pass over and take it. But it shall ebb so low, that the kings of Europe
shall easily pass over and take it, as we shall hear anon. But in the mean
time we see that it falls, and that it is in falling, and the work of God
goes forward every day. For now in this age, God be thanked, many Kings and
Princes, with great multitudes of their subjects have their eyes opened to
behold, that the Romish religion is abominable; and that the Papacy is the very
kingdom of the great Antichrist. And whereas before they worshipped the beast,
The kings of the earth in this age renounce the Pope.
now they hold up their hands only to the God of heaven, and glorify him in
his Son Jesus Christ. Now we see that many laws are made in sundry kingdoms
and provinces to abolish that usurped power of the Bishop of Rome: Many acts,
edicts, and injunctions are set forth in sundry nations and kingdoms of Europe
to destroy, root out, and deface all monuments of idolatry and superstition,
which Antichrist had erected in all kingdoms.

Now the Popes which were honored as gods in the earth, are counted and
adjudged as the most vile and abominable creatures that live upon the earth.
Does not all this experimentally show that Babylon is fallen, and that Babylon
does fall by degrees? It is very palpable, we need no further proof for this
second point. But here we are further to observe, that the Jesuits,
perceiving the great decay of Rome, and the continual drying of their
Euphrates, do bestir them to stop the leake, The Jesuits bestir them, and why.
that it might not dry up altogether. Even as when men let out the waters of
great fish ponds, so as the water waxes low, we see the fishes skip and
plunge, and take on wonderfully: So the Jesuits, perceiving the waters of
their Romish Euphrates to empaire and dry up daily, do mightily take on,
digging and searching every day to open the springs, and to find out some fresh
fountains to maintain their great fish pond, and to keep the waters deep
enough, that there may be no safe passage over for the kings of the earth to
come and take their great Babylon. All this does appear out of the 16th chapter
of this Prophecy: where S. John in a vision sees three unclean spirits like
frogs, Chap. 16.13.
coming out of the mouth of the Dragon, and out of the mouth of the beast, and
out of the mouth of the false Prophet. By which frogs the holy Ghost means
the Jesuits and seminary Priests, The Jesuits compared to frogs, and why.
which are compared to frogs for three reasons: First, that as frogs delight in
filthy lakes and puddles; so the Jesuits delight in the filthy puddles of
idolatry and superstition. Secondly, as frogs make a great croaking in their
marish grounds; so the Jesuits make a great croaking in kings Courts, in
Noblemens houses, and Gentlemen's houses and almost every where, where they can
get any entertainment, croaking and cracking of the Popes supremacy, the Popes
holiness, the Popes blessing, the Popes keys, the Popes power, Peter's chair,
Peter's successors, Christ's vicar, and many good morrows, I know not what.
Thirdly, as frogs are all of one nature and quality, delighting in croaking and
living in puddles: so the Jesuits are all of one mind and disposition in
evil, croaking every where to maintain their Euphrates, and living daily in
whoredom, Sodomitry, and all kind of outrageous beastliness. But that I may
more fully persuade the conscience of the reader, that by these frogs are meant
the Jesuits and seminary Priests; let us seriously weigh that which goes
before, and that which follows after in this text, and we shall discern it to
be very clear and apparent. First, it is said, Chap. 16.10.
verse 10. that when the fifth Angel powered out his vial of Gods wrath upon
the throne of the beast, by and by his kingdom waxed dark: that is, the
majesty, power, pomp, credit, and estimation of Antichrist began to be
diminished, obscured, and to suffer a great eclipse: which thing was fulfilled
shortly after Luthers preaching. And presently it follows, that they gnawed
their tongues for sorrow: that is, they were full of fury and rage, barking and
grinning like mad dogs, or rather like hel-hounds, against all such as set the
Gospel abroach, whereby their Babylon began to shake. For at the first, when
the Gospel began to peep forth, they did despise it, as a thing which they
could easily suppress; but within a short time they found, that neither by
excommunication, wherewith in former times they had, even as it were with
lightning and thunder, caused kings and nations to tremble; neither by force of
wars and bloody slaughters, neither by any skill in learning, nor by
treacheries they could any thing prevail, but that the Gospel did still more
and more lay open their filthiness and shame; then did they become, and so do
they continue unto this day, even as madmen in sorrow and rage, which the holy
Ghost expresses, in saying, Chap. 16.11.
that they gnawed their tongues for sorrow, and blasphemed God, etc. whereby it
is evident, that the beast, and all that received his mark, are full of fiery
hatred and malice, and cannot tell which way to be revenged. For the more they
strive, the more they lose. Feign would they have Popery restored to his
ancient credit and dignity, and they devise what they can to bring it about;
but it will not be. For their kingdom waxes darker and darker, weaker and
weaker: and that is a dagger unto them, and a grief of all grief, which
makes them gnaw their tongues, and gnash their teeth for sorrow. Chap. 16.11.
But yet for all this, they repented not of their works, (says Saint John) and
therefore God is more incensed against them, and causes the sixth Angel to
power out another vial upon the great river Euphrates, and the water thereof
dried up: as we have heard. Now then observe carefully, Note this.
and note it diligently, that the frogs came forth upon the darkning of the
kingdom of the beast, and the drying up of their Euphrates. For, who knows
not, the Pope and his accomplices, perceiving the weakening and diminishing of
their kingdom, have sent out these Jesuits and seminary Priests into all parts
of Europe, to repair the ruins of Rome, if it were possible? and this is one
circumstantiall reason to prove these three frogs to be understood of the
Jesuits. But let us proceed to open the whole description of the holy Ghost,
that it may yet more plainly appear: First, Chap. 16.13.
these frogs are called unclean spirits, because they are the very limbs of the
Devil, full of all filthiness and uncleanness. Secondly, they are called
spirits, because they come out of the mouth of the Dragon, the beast, and the
false prophet. Thirdly, they are called three in number, being in truth nearer
three thousand, because they proceed out of three several mouths, the Dragon,
the beast, and the false prophet: that is, the Devil, the Roman Empire, and
the Papacy: three horrible monsters, three terrible bug bears, which with one
consent conspire together against the Gospel, to uphold their Babylon, and to
stop the leak of their Euphrates. Now these three frogs are said to come out of
the mouth of the Dragon, the beast, and the false prophet, because they come
with the very mind and message of the Pope, and the Roman Empire, and so
consequently, with the very mind and spirit of the Dragon. For they are the
very breath of the Pope, and the spirits of the Devils, as like him, as if they
had been spit out of his mouth. They are sent on the Devils errand, and the
Popes embassage into all countries and kingdoms, and are taught their lesson
what they shall say, and instructed what they shall do, and what courses they
shall take with men, both kings, Nobles, and the meaner sort: and for this
cause the holy Ghost says, they came out of the very mouth, the very heart,
and the very bowels of the Pope, and of the Devil. And although these Jesuits
and seminary Priests are called of the favorites, Catholic Doctors, The holy
Ghost calls the Jesuits the spirits of Devils. Chap. 16.14.
holy Fathers, etc. yet the holy Ghost says flatly, they are the spirits of
Devils, working false and fained miracles, and with great efficacy of error,
deluding and deceiving the simple and blind multitude. We see then, that the
holy Ghost in all this description does plainly note out the Jesuits and
seminary Priests: for to whom can these things here spoken of agree, but only
to them? And do not we which live in these days sensibly see and discern the
fulfilling of all these things? Surely we cannot but see and feel them,
unless we be wilfully blind, and do of purpose blindfold and hoodwink our
selves. But the holy Ghost goes yer further, and does more fully, and as it
were demonstratively point them out unto us, describing them by their office,
which is, to go unto the kings of the earth, Verse 14.
and of the whole world, to gather them to the battle of that great day of God
almighty. Who is ignorant that the Jesuits and seminary Priests are sent out
to all Kings and Nobles of the whole world, that favor them and their
proceedings? Are they not croaking in corners thick and threefold in all parts
of this land? Are they not practicing of treacheries and treasons against our
most gracious King and the whole state? Are they not plotting the destruction
and subversion of this Church and commonwealth? Nay, as the holy Ghost says,
the chief end of their coming abroad is to solicit and gather the kings of
the earth unto battle against God, against Christ, and against all true
professors of religion. The battle betwixt them is here called, The battle of
the great day of God almighty, that is, that battle wherein the Almighty God
will have the day, and go away with the victory. For it follows, The
Jesuits by their crafty persuasions shall bring the popish kings and their
armies to a place where they shall be destroyed.
that the Jesuits and seminary Priests did prevail with the seduced kings of
the earth so far, as to gather them together to a place, which in Hebrew is
called Armageddon, that is to say, a place where they shall be destroyed, and
that with such an horrible slaughter, that the place shall take a name thereof.
For it was an usual thing among the Hebrews to call the place where any famous
thing fell out by a name which did report the same to all posterity, as,
Kibroth Hataavah, Numb. 11.
the graves of Concupiscence; Hamon Gog, Ezekiel. 39.
the multitude of Gog; and diverse such like. And so here Armageddon, the
destruction of an army, because the kings of the earth and their armies which
shall fight against the Church at the instigation of the Jesuits, shall come
to a place, where they shall have a notable overthrow. This word Armageddon may
fitly be derived of two Hebrew words, that is to say, Cherem, which signifies
destruction, and Gedudh, which signifies an army; that is, the destruction of
an army: or as some say, and that very judicially, it may come of Genermah
Gidnon, which signifies the subtilty of destruction; because the blind Kings
and Nobles of the earth shall, by the subtilty and crafty persuasions of the
Jesuits and seminary priests, be intised to fight against the Protestants in a
place where they shall have a famous foyl. Some derive Armageddon of Har, which
in Hebrew signifies a Mountain, and Megiddo, which is the place where the
godly king Josias was slain: and so this place should be called Armageddon,
the Mountain of Megiddo, for the slaughter of kings that shall be there. To the
which the Prophet Zecharie alludeth, Zech. 12.11.
saying, In that day there shall be a great mourning in Jerusalem, as the
mourning of Hadadrimmon, in the valley of Megiddo. Well, we do see that all
these significations and derivations of Armageddon, come to one thing in
effect; which is, that the great armies which assemble themselves in battle
against the Lord, shall be destroyed: and therefore it is not much material to
dispute which is the more likely signification of the word. But this let us
observe for our comfort, that whenever we shall see the Kings and Captains,
Nobles and Potentates of the earth, being solicited by the Jesuits, Priests,
and the false Prophet, to levy great armies, and make great powers to fight
against the Gospel, and the true professors thereof, for the maintenance of
great Babylon, they shall not prevail, but be utterly overthrown and
destroyed; as in part we see fulfilled in the year of our Lord 1588, when the
great and invincible Armado of the Spaniards, as they thought, which was long
in preparing against us, and at last, by the instigation of the Jesuits,
brought upon us, came to Armageddon, as we know, GOD be praised. And in all
time to come, in the like case, let them look for the like success. Well, now
to grow to some conclusions of this point; we do plainly see that Rome falls,
their kingdom waxes dark, their Euphrates dries up, and they espy it. The
Dragon, the Beast, and the false Prophet send out their frogs into all
countries and kingdoms, hoping to prevent it by the help of the kings of the
earth, and especially the king of Spain: but alas all in vain, for they must
come to Armageddon when they have done all that they can. For God fights from
heaven against them, God brings them down, and no power of man is able to
uphold them.

But now let us proceed to prove the third maine point; which is, that Rome
shall fall finally, and come to utter desolation. For all sound Divines are
persuaded of the fall of Babylon, and do grant that it falls, and is in
falling: but all are not so thoroughly persuaded of the final fall thereof in
this life. Therefore now I will prove by manifest Scripture that Rome shall
fall finally. Rome shall fall finally.
First, if the things be deeply considered, and narrowly looked into, which S.
John says shall fall out upon the pouring forth of the seventh vial of Gods
wrath by the seventh Angel, they do fully portend a deadly downfall and utter
overthrow of Rome: For the seventh vial is not powered upon the earth, or sea,
or fountains of waters, or on the Sun, Chap. 16.17.
as the first four vials were, which signified some particular judgment; but
it was powered forth into the very air, which signifies the universality of it,
and contains the most general and most grievous judgment and vengeance of
Almighty God upon the whole body of the kingdom of Antichrist, a little before
the last day.

The text says, that upon the pouring forth of this vial, Verse 17.
there was a loud voice heard out of the Temple of heaven from the throne: that
is, from the very presence of God, saying, It is done, it is dispatched, the
utter overthrow of Rome is fully concluded of, and all things finished which
belong to the pouring forth of the seven vials, which contain the seven last
plagues, wherein the whole wrath of God is fulfilled, as appears chap. 15. As
before it is said, Babylon is fallen, Chap. 15.1.
because it should certainly fall: so here God himself says, It is done,
because it shall certainly be done. For whatsoever God has determined to be
done, is as it were already done, because it shall most certainly be effected.
Since then the Lord has pronounced this of Rome, there remains nothing but a
daily accomplishment of it: and let all the Papists know for a certainty, that
they must go to their geere, they must come to their payment, there is no way
of evasion.

For, has the Lord spoken it, and shall it not come to pass? Now upon this
that God says, It is done, follows presently, that there were voices and
thundrings, Chap. 15.18.
and lightnings, and there was a great earthquake, such as was not since men
were upon the earth, even so mighty an earthquake. Chap. 6.12.
What is meant by thundrings, lightnings, and earthquakes in this book, I have
before showed: to wit, commotions, seditions, tumults, uprores, and alterations
of states, kingdoms, and commonwealths: and then the meaning of this place
is, that there shall be horrible shakings, concussions, tumults, and great
alteration of state in all the kingdoms which are subject to Antichrist, none
of them shall escape. For this seventh vial of Gods wrath upon the kingdom of
the beast, is compared to a most horrible and blustering tempest, raised up in
the whole air, that is, in all places of Antichrists dominions. And it is
specially to be noted, as a thing of great moment, that the holy Ghost says,
there was never such an earthquake as this since the world began, and since
men were upon the earth. For assuredly, so soon as the seventh Angel powers
forth his vial, the kingdom of Popery shall go down amain, which shall not
be long before the end of the world, as all circumstances here do show. After
all this, Saint John tells us the effect of this thundering, lightning, and
extraordinary earthquake; which is, Chapt. 16.19.
that the great city was divided into three parts; that is, there shall be a
most horrible rent and division in the city of Rome, and throughout all the
Popes dominions.

What this rent and division is, and how it shall be, I cannot determine, being
a thing to come, as all the rest comprehended under the pouring forth of the
seventh vial: But this I am sure of, that Rome shall go down; and there shall
be such tumults, uprores, rents, divisions, disputations, and concussions in
Rome, and throughout all the Romish jurisdiction, as never were heard of, nor
read of since the world began: For Saint John adds, Verse 59.
that Babylon came in remembrance before God, to give unto her the cup of the
wine of the fierceness of his wrath: that is, God does now at length call to
mind all the wrongs done to his people, and all the righteous blood shed for
the space of seven or eight hundred years by the whore of Babylon, that he may
be fully revenged; and execute the fierceness of his wrath both upon her and
her whole kingdom: yea, and that in such terrible and wrathful manner, that
there shall be no place of refuge, no place to fly into for succor: for Saint
John says, Verse 20.
Every I Will fled away, and the mountains were not found: Meaning that the
Papists in that day shall have neither mountain nor Island to fly unto.

And last of all the holy Ghost says, that there fell a great hail like
talents out of heaven upon the Idolaters; Chap. 16.21.
insomuch, that they blasphemed God, because of the plague of the hail: for the
plague thereof was exceeding great. A talent was about the weight of threescore
pound, as some write. Then it follows, that this hail of Gods wrath upon the
Papists shall be most terrible and fearful, and beat them down to the ground,
as it were an hail of mil-stones, or plough-irons. Now when this hail of
talents comes, as assuredly come it shall, then shall the kingdom of Popery
be beaten to dust and powder: and therefore no marvel though the Idolaters,
seeing all this, be in a most horrible rage, and blaspheme God, Verse 21.
as Saint John says, because of this exceeding and most extraordinary plague,
which shall then come upon them. But now to conclude, and wind up all together:
for as much as this last vial is powered into the air (God says, It is done)
an extraordinary earthquake follows, the great city of Rome is rent,
Babylon called into question, and fearful hailstones of wrath powered down upon
the Idolaters; I do conclude, that Rome shall fall finally, and come to utter
destruction in this life.

Now let us proceed to further proof. In the eighteenth chapter of this book
the whore of Babylon says in heart: I sit, being a Queen, and am no widow,
Chap. 18.8, 9. Isa. 47.
and shall see no sorrow. Therefore shall her plagues come at one day, death,
and sorrow, and famine, and she shall be burnt with fire; for that God which
condemns her is a strong Lord.

First, here Rome is described as she was in the height and top of her pride
and security, when she held the dominion of the kings of the earth, and
boasted that she was the head of the Catholic Church, carrying her self very
insolently above all kings and Emperors, treading upon their necks, and making
them attend at her gates barefoot in the midst of winter, as the stories
report. Yea, and that she was no widow; that is, no solitary or desolate
person, but one that had many lovers which were strong to defend her, so as she
should feel no want, nor see any sorrow. But the time will come, and draws on
apace, wherein she shall be thoroughly punished for her haughtiness, and
intolerable pride and security: For the holy Ghost says, her plagues shall
come in one day; that is, suddenly, shortly, and speedily, even death, sorrow,
and famine, and she shall be burnt with fire; for that God which condemns
her is a strong Lord. If this be not plain enough to prove an utter overthrow
of Rome, I know not what can be plain enough. For if death, famine, and fire
will not pull her down, I know not what shall pull her down. But Saint John
says flatly, that God himself, who is a strong Lord, will oppose himself
against Rome, and condemn her. Who can uphold her? Can the king of Spain? can
the Cardinals? can the Emperor? can all the Dukes of Italy, and all the
potentates of the earth that take part with her? No, no, they are all too
weak. For if God take against a man, Job 23.
who can reclaim him, says the holy Ghost? For he does whatsoever he will.
And again, God is wise in heart, and mighty in strength; who ever hardened his
heart against him and prospered? If God call not back his anger, the most proud
hearts are bowed under him. And God says in Ezekiel. 22. Can thy hands be strong,
or can thy heart endure in the day that I shall have to do with thee? Then it
follows, that though Babylon fit as a Queen, and all her lovers take part
with her, yet because the strong Lord is against her, therefore she shall come
to utter destruction.

Some of good judgment in the truth have gathered from this place, that the
very city of Rome shall be burnt with fire, which assuredly may well be: but
this I am sure of, that the phrase of burning with fire does in the Prophets
always signify an utter destruction and desolation of a city or a kingdom;
Amos 5.6.
and therefore it follows, that Rome shall be utterly destroyed.

But behold yet a stronger and plainer proof. For Saint John says, Chap.
17.21.
A mighty Angel took up a stone like a great millstone, and cast it into the
sea, saying, With such a violence shall that great city Babylon be cast down,
and shall be found no more. All men know, that old Babylon in Chaldea was
destroyed by the Medes and Persians long before Saint John wrote this book; and
therefore that is not here meant: but the new Babylon, which is Rome, as before
has been proved. The phrases of speech, and the signs which the Prophets used
to declare the destruction and desolation of old Babylon, are here alluded unto
the destruction of Rome. For we read in the Prophecy of Jeremie, that the
Prophet having written in a book all the evil that should come upon Babel, for
holding Gods people so long in most miserable captivity, Jer. 51.61.
said to Serajah, When thou come unto Babel, thou shall read all these
words, and when thou have made an end of reading this book, thou shall bind a
stone to it, and cast it into the midst of Euphrates, and shall say, Thus
shall Babel be drowned, and shall not rise up from the evil that I will bring
upon her, although they weary themselves. Now let us consider how this agrees
with the same which is here set down, and we shall find, that all things are
here set down with greater force to express, as it were, a deeper vengeance,
and a more heavy (and unrecoverable destruction.) First, there is a man; here
is a mighty Angel: there the man takes up a stone; here the Angel takes up a
great stone like a mil-stone: there the stone is cast into the river; here into
the deep sea. All these circumstances being applied to Rome, do greatly
aggravate the matter, and very plainly show, that it shall fall without all
hope of recovery. Rome shall fall without all hope of recovery.
For the Lord declares by this forcible sign of casting a mil-stone into the
sea, that the city and kingdom of Antichrist shall be cast deep down into
perdition, and shall lie overwhelmed and drowned in the same for ever.

For if old Babylon was utterly destroyed, and came to a final desolation in
this life; much more shall Rome, as the holy Ghost disputes: But old Babylon
came to utter ruin and desolation in this life, as both Isaiah and Jeremiah do
witness: Therefore new Babylon, that is, Rome, shall come to utter
destruction: and, as the holy Ghost here says, shall be found no more, or
shall fall without all hope of recovery.

Stories do report, that Rome has been sundry times destroyed by the Goths
and Vandals, and others: yea, once fired and quite burnt up; but afterward
built and raised up again by the Emperors: But here the holy Ghost says
expressly, that it shall have a final fall, and an unrecoverable destruction.
For can a mil-stone cast into the bottom of the sea ever be got up again? No,
no, it is impossible. Therefore let the Jesuits and seminary Priests do what
they can, they shall never set up Rome again, they shall never restore her to
her former state and dignity; they shall never repair her credit again. Let
the Pope, and Cardinals, and the King of Spain, and all the world, and all the
Devils in hell join together, they shall never get up this millstone out of the
bottom of the sea. For the Angel has cast it in with such a violence, that no
power of man shall ever fetch it out again.

True it is indeed, that the Jesuits bestir them, and the seminary Priests and
Papists do work apace in all lands, and adventure themselves in most desperate
manner to recover again the credit of Popery, and to set up again the dignity
and the power of the Pope, and the glory of their Church and city, and their
bold enterprises do make many even to doubt that they will again one day
prevail: But assuredly we are to make full reckoning, that although here and
there they may support for a time some ruinous parts of their rotten frame; yet
do what they can, it shall in the end down upon their heads, and come to utter
desolation.

Indeed, Rome stands yet, and Popery is not quite fallen down. But they are
disclosed, their credit is cracked, their power decays; and so this thing is
begun, and the time draws on when it shall be fully accomplished. He that
had beheld the power, the pomp, the riches and estimation of the Church of Rome
about some fourscore years past, and looks upon it now, shall see a
wonderful alteration. It seemed then to be without all danger of shaking: for
the Emperor, and the Kings of the earth stood forth with all their force and
might, power and policy to uphold it: but, God be thanked, we see how it is
already come down, and shall come down every day more and more, whosoever says
nay to it.

But behold, yet more and more plain proof for the utter desolation of Rome.
For Saint John describes the eternal desolation thereof, by denial of those
things which are in cities inhabited; First, he says, there shall be no more
any voice of harpers, Chap. 18.22.
musicians, pipers and trumpeters heard in Rome, that is, all music shall
surcease, which argues an utter desolation: For what inhabited cities are
without music?

Secondly, he says, There shall be no craftsmen of what trade soever found in
Rome, which argues an utter desolation: For what flourishing city is without
artificers?

Thirdly, he says, No light of a candle shall any more shine in Rome, which
argues an utter desolation: For what inhabited city is without candles?

Fourthly, he says, No sound of a mil-stone shall be heard in Rome, which does
argue an utter desolation: For what city is without mils to grind their corn?

Lastly, he says, The voice of the bridegroom and of the bride shall be heard
no more in Rome, which argues an utter desolation: For what city is without
bride and bridegroom? and without marriage for procreation sake? Then I
conclude from all this, that Rome shall fall finally, and come to utter
destruction.

But behold yet a more plain and pregnant proof, drawn from the pitiful
mournings and most woeful lamentations of the kings of the earth, the merchants
and the mariners, who all do jointly lament and mourn for the destruction and
desolation of Rome, crying, Alas, alas, Chap. 18.10.
that great city Babylon, that mighty city: for in one hour is thy judgment
come: in one hour so great riches are come to desolation, in one hour she is
made desolate. What can be more plainly and fully spoken to prove an utter
desolation of Rome? What can be more required then to have it set down in
express terms, as here we see? For now the holy Ghost uses no figure, no
hardness, no circumlocution, no obscurity; but tells us plainly, and thrice
for failing, that Babylon, that is Rome, is made desolate, is to come to
desolation.

Moreover, it is said that the kings, V. 10, 15, 18.
merchants and mariners shall stand afar off for fear of her torment, and
they shall weep and wail when they shall see the smoke of her burning;
signifying that the torment and plague of Rome shall be so great, that kings,
for all their might, shall not dare to come nigh to rescue her: no, not the
king of Spain with all his great might and power; he shall be fain to stand
afar off, or rather utterly to forsake her, weeping and wailing as well as
others, for her most fearful and unrecoverable destruction.

But we are to observe in all this, that the holy Ghost uses a figure or kind
of speech, which they call a Prosopopoeia, or faining of a person, whereby the
Popish kings being dead and rotten, are brought in lamenting and bewailing the
fall of Babylon, as if they were alive again: or else it may be understood of
Cardinals and Legates, which are even as kings upon the earth. But it cannot be
understood of Christian kings, for they shall be the instruments of God to pull
down great Babylon, as we shall hear anon.

Furthermore, let us consider the causes of this great lamentation for the
deadly downfall of Babylon, by the Popish kings, merchants, and mariners.
First, the kings, they mourn and lament, Verse 9.
says Saint John, because they had committed fornication with the great whore
of Babylon, and lived in pleasure with her: that is, they have lived long with
her in abominable idolatry, and pleased her that way, and therefore she gave
them dispensations to live in wantonness and all carnal pleasures, and even
to do what they list, spending their days in sensuality, and all kind of
fleshly delights.

Secondly, the merchants do weep and wail, V. 12, 13, 14.
because no man buyeth their ware any more. These merchants are not named, but
they may easily be known by their wares, which the holy Ghost describes, to
wit, that they be the Popish merchants, the shaven merchants, who are here
brought in mourning and lamenting for the loss of their gain. The Monks,
Friars, and Priests cannot have that utterance of their wares that in times
past they have had; their wares are now out of request: their markets wax
dead, and they have cold takings. When these fellows pass by the great
Monasteries and Abbeyes, and see them made ruinous heaps, and withal remember
the fat revenues, the good cheer, the pleasure and delight which sometimes they
have had in those places, it cuts their hearts, and makes them shake their
heads at it, saying, Alas, alas, Verse 16.
that great city that was clothed in fine linen, and purple, and scarlet, and
gilded with gold, and precious stones and pearls; for in one hour so great
riches are come to desolation. Mark then, that the ruin of their great city,
with all the pomp, pleasure and riches thereof, is that which does yet stick in
their stomachs.

Thirdly, the mariners do greatly mourn and lament for the loss of their
profit and commodity. For while Rome had dominion over the kingdoms, and the
Pope ruled over all, even us God upon the earth, there was nothing but trudging
over the seas to Rome out of all Lands, and again from thence: there was
carrying and recarrying; insomuch, that multitudes of mariners and ship-masters
were continually set on work, and gained greatly thereby. No marvel then
though these mariners are brought in amongst other friends of Rome, bewailing
her destruction, even with dust upon their heads, weeping, and crying, and
saying, Alas, alas, that great city wherein were made rich all that had ships
on the sea by her costlinesse: For in one hour she is made desolate. Thus we
see how the kings, and merchants, and mariners shall bewail the utter ruin
and great desolation of Rome, for the loss of their pleasure, their gain, and
their profit!

Moreover, we are to observe, that that which is spoken by the old Prophets,
Isaiah and Jeremiah, as touching the utter desolation of old Babel, is applied
by Saint John no new Babel, which is Rome. Touching the Eastern Babylon, the
Prophet says thus: Babel, the glory of kingdoms, Isa. 13.19.
the beauty and pride of the Chaldeans, shall be as the destruction of God in
Sodom and Gomorrah. It shall not be inhabited for ever, neither shall the
Arabian pitch his tent there, neither shall the shepherds make their folds
there. But Ziim shall lodge there, and their houses shall be full of Ohim:
Ostriches shall dwell there, and the Satyrs shall dance there: that is,
fairies, hobgoblins, night-spirits, and such like; whereby is signified the
utter desolation of old Babylon. Chap. 18.2.
Now Saint John applies all this to Rome, saying, Babylon, that great city, is
become the habitation of Devils, and the hold of all soul spirits, and a cage
of every unclean and hateful bird: Noting hereby both the filthiness of Rome,
and also her utter desolation.

But now let us proceed to our last and greatest argument, to prove the final
fall and utter destruction of Rome and all Romish power and authority. In the
nineteenth chapter of this Prophecy our Lord Jesus is described sitting upon
his white horse, which is the ministry of the Gospel, as has before been
proved, and is most gloriously brought in by Saint John, as grand Captain and
General of the field, fighting with all his army against Antichrist and his
soldiers. S. John gives him goodly names and titles, Chap. 19.12, 13, 14, etc.
calling him the Word of God, the King of kings, and the Lord of lords: and
says, that he has a Name written that no man knew but himself; which is his
infinite glory and majesty.

And moreover, that his eyes were as a flame of fire, and on his head many
crowns, and a sharp sword in his mouth, and clothed with his warlike garment
dipped in blood, and all his heavenly soldiers followed him upon white horses:
meaning thereby all Christian kings, dukes, lords, nobles, captains, preachers
and professors of true religion.

This grand Captain, with all these worthy soldiers, says Saint John, shall
muster together, and prepare themselves to fight against the beast, and the
false prophet, and all their forces; and at last he sees them join battle.
Verse 19.
I saw (says Saint John) the beast, and the kings of the earth, and their
armies gathered together to make battle against him that sat upon the white
horse, and against his army. Now all this is to be understood of the battles
betwixt the Papists and the Protestants in these last days. But, may some man
say, Who shall have the victory? What is the success? What is the issue? let
us hear of that. The holy Ghost answers, The Protestants shall have the day.
that the beast and the false prophet were taken, foiled, and overcome; using a
warlike phrase, because in the wars they use to take their greatest Captains
and Commanders alive, and to put them to their ransomes. The like unto this we
have in the seventh chapter, where Saint John tells us, that when the Popish
kings and potentates shall make war against Christ and his Gospel, they shall
have the like success unto this. For, says he, These have one mind, Chapter
17.13, 14.
and shall give their power and authority unto the beast, they shall fight with
the Lamb, and the Lamb shall overcome them: for he is the Lord of lords, and
King of kings.

But, may some man say, When the Leaders and Commanders of the Popish armies
shall be taken captives and set at their ransomes, what shall become of the
inferior Captains and soldiers? The holy Ghost answers, that the remnant
were slain with the sword of him that sits upon the horse: that is, they
were put to the sword, and all the fowls were filled full with their flesh.
And for this cause Saint John says, Chap. 19.21.
that he saw an Angel stand in the Sun, who cried with a loud voice, saying to
all the fowls that did fly by the midst of heaven, Come and gather your
selves together unto the supper of the great God.

Now, to make this plain: We know, that they which proclaim any matter, seek
some market-crosse, or high place to stand in, where they may be heard: so this
Angel, which proclaims the victory against Antichrist, before any stroke be
stricken, because of the certainty of it, stands in the Sun, as it were in
the theater and midst of the world, as in a place most fit for the purpose,
that he may be heard throughout all the earth. Now this proclamation is
directed to all the fowls of the air, to bid them to a supper, which is here
called the supper of the great God. But it may be demanded, What cheer shall
they have? The holy Ghost answers, Verse 18.
that they shall eat the flesh of Kings, and the flesh of great Captains, and
the flesh of mighty men, and the flesh of horses, and of hors-men, and the
flesh of all freemen, and bondmen, and of small and great.

This we know, that when men are slain in great numbers in the wars, their
bodies lie scattered as meat for the fowls of the air. And therefore here all
fowls are invited and bidden to a great supper made them by the great God,
whose hand is in all this; their cheer and their dainties are reckoned up to be
the flesh of Kings and Captains, etc. Now out of this may be strongly
concluded, that hereafter in all time to come, when the armies of the Pope,
which is the beast; the armies of the king of Spain, who has given his power
and authority unto the beast, and is his great upholder; when the armies of the
Cardinal, his great confederate; when the armies of the Leaguers, his great
adherents; yea, when all these, and all other Popish armies shall join and
band themselves together against the Christian kings, and defenders of the
Gospel, they shall have a notable overthrow; insomuch that their dead carcasses
shall even cover the earth, and the fowls of the air shall come to their great
supper, which the Lord of hosts will make ready for them. For assuredly, and
out of doubt, they that live, shall see the fulfilling of all this, and shall
see the Popish armies go down by heaps in all countries and kingdoms, and be
made meat for the fowls of the air. The Popish armies shall go down by heaps.
Chap. 16.6. Chap. 13.10.
For the holy Ghost says, They shall come to Armageddon; that is, the place
where their armies shall be destroyed. And again, If any lead into captivity,
he shall go into captivity: If any kill with a sword, he must be killed with a
sword. For as the Popish forces have in former times taken captive the people
of God, and cruelly murdered them: so now the time draws on apace, wherein
themselves shall be taken and put to the sword.

And therefore now at last I conclude, that Rome shall fall finally, and come
to utter destruction in this life. For as Rome did rise up by degrees in this
life, so Rome shall fall by degrees in this life: as Rome grew up to her full
height and highest pitch in this life, so it shall come to her lowest ebb and
greatest declination in this life: I mean, before the coming of Christ unto
judgment. For the falling down of hail like talents upon the kingdom of the
beast, shall be in this life: The extraordinary earthquake upon the dominions
of Antichrist shall be in this life: Rome shall be utterly destroyed in this
life.
The coming of the Popish armies to Armageddon shall be in this life: The
mourning of the kings, merchants, and mariners for the overthrow of Babylon
shall be in this life: The great battle betwixt the beast and him that sits
upon the white horse, shall be in this life, before the day of judgment: The
pouring forth of all the seven vials of Gods wrath upon the kingdom of the
beast shall be even in this life. For it were an absurd thing to say, any of
these things shall be after this life; or to say that these things shall not be
till the very coming of Christ; for they are all things to be effected here in
this earth: and the holy Ghost does describe them as things to be done upon the
face of the earth: for otherwise we could have small comfort in any of these
things, if they should not be done here in earth, or if they should all be
deferred till the very coming of Christ, and in the mean time Antichrist shall
prevail.

But it will be objected, that S. Paul says, The Lord shall consume Antichrist
with the spirit of his mouth and abolish him with the brightness of his
coming: 2 These. 2.
Therefore before his coming he shall not be utterly abolished. True it is
indeed, An objection answered.
he shall not utterly be cut off in all his members, till the very coming of
Christ: For there will be some Papists remaining in all countries, even unto
the end; there be some, nay, many, that will carry the beasts mark even until
the last day. But the holy Ghost in this Prophecy speaks of the revolting
and falling away of kingdoms and countries from the Sea of Rome; whereby it
shall come to pass, that it shall be exceedingly weakened, and brought so low,
that the kings of the earth shall easily take it; or, as the holy Ghost
speaks, Chap. 16.26.
shall easily pass over, their Euphrates being dried up, and enter their
Babylon. But then, will some man say, Shall there be no Pope at all a little
before the coming of Christ? I answer, and not I, but the holy Ghost for me;
he shall be a poor Pope, a naked Pope, Chap. 17.16. The Pope shall be brought
very low. 2 Samuel 3.
a desolate Pope, a Pope whose flesh shall be torn, whose flesh shall wither,
as we shall hear anon: He shall be such a Pope, as Ishbosheth was a King, when
Abner and all Israel fell away from him. He shall be such a Pope as the king of
Portugal is a king.

But it will be objected, How know you this? are you a prophet? can you
foretell of things to come? I answer, Saint John was a Prophet, and endued
with a Prophetical spirit in this matter of his visions and revelations; and I
speak no more then Saint John has set down. And therefore I hope I speak
within my compass: for I do but relate Saint John's words, and explain them in
such measure as I am able.

This Prophecy does plainly declare, that Babylon shall fall, Rome shall come
down, the Pope shall never be esteemed again: and I do believe it to be so; I
believe God, I believe his word, I believe all that is spoken in Scripture, and
I do endeavor to persuade others also. For since the holy Ghost has so plainly
and so fully foretold it, why should we not believe it? why are we so slow to
believe all that is written in the Scriptures? Has God spoken it, and shall it
not come to pass? shall any jot of his word fail? shall we think he jesteth
with us, when he does so often and so seriously tell us of the down fall of
Rome? Surely, surely, the cause why men are not fully persuaded of the final
fall of Rome, is, because they do not diligently peruse this book of the
Apocalypse. But let them be studious and diligent in this book, and they shall
be out of all doubt, that Rome is the great whore of Babylon, that the Pope is
Antichrist, and the Papacy the beast.

But now, me thinks, I hear some men say, How is it like that Popery shall
fall down more and more here among us, since it has so many friends, backers
and upholders, and seems to gather strength, and make an head again? I
answer, that all is but a lightning before death. I answer, that all is but the
stopping of a water-brook, or making a dam overthwart it, which will cause it
to swell more, and to break over with great violence. I answer, that all is no
more then is foretold, that the Jesuits shall come forth like frogs out of
their puddles and marish grounds, and keep a croaking for a time, till they
have croaked their own destruction and many others. For they shall never set
Popery here in England, to stand and continue, do what they can. I must needs
confess, that our sins being so horrible and outrageous as they are, and being
grown to such an height and ripeness, do deserve some fearful vengeance, and
that God has a just controversy against us, as sometimes he had against
Israel, Hos. 4.
because there was no mercy, nor truth, nor knowledge of God in the land: but
swearing, lying, killing, stealing, and whoring, and blood touches blood, and
therefore says God, The land shall mourn, etc. But yet I hope for his covenant
sake, for his great mercies sake, for his names sake, for his glory sake, and
for his Churches sake, he will be gracious and favorable unto us, and not
bring upon us that vengeance which our sins have deserved: or at least wise
though he correct us, as indeed he has just cause, and we may justly fear it;
yet he will do it in mercy for our amendment, and not in wrath to our
destruction, as he says by his Prophet: I will not utterly destroy thee, Jer.
30.11. and 46.28. and 10.24.
but I will correct thee by judgment, and not utterly cut thee off. But
howsoever it shall please the most wise God to deal with us, yet this I say,
and am persuaded of, that Popery shall never be established again in this
kingdom: my reason is, because the everlasting Gospel carried abroad by the
Angel that flies in the midst of heaven, shall spread still more and more
throughout all the kingdoms of Europe, as appears, chap. 14. v. 6. for
otherwise how shall Rome fall? how shall the Jews ever be converted? Romans
11.24.
how shall fire come down from heaven, and devour both Gog and Magog, Chap. 19.
as the holy Ghost fore-telleth shall come to pass, and as we shall hear more
anon? Moreover, S. John tells us plainly, Chap. 10.1.
that in these last days the Gospel shall be preached to many people, and
nations, and tongues, and to many kings. And further he says, that in this
age wherein we live, many shall renounce idolatry, repent, and give glory to
the God of heaven. But some man may say, How prove you that this kingdom is
one of them which Saint John speaks of, and which he means, wherein the
Gospel shall be preached unto the end of the world? I answer, that it is proved
out of the seventeenth chapter of this Prophecy, where the holy Ghost tells
us flatly, that those ten kingdoms of Europe which had a long time been the
ten horns and strength of the beast, Chap. 19.13.
and being of one mind, had given their power and authority unto the beast,
should now in these last days rise up against the whore of Babylon, Verse 16.
make war against her, hate her, and make her desolate.

But this kingdom is one of those ten horns, and one of those ten kingdoms
which a long time had given her power and authority to the beast. Therefore as
this kingdom has happily begun to hate the whore, and to make her desolate
and naked; so undoubtedly she shall continue unto the end of the world. England
and other kingdoms which have forsaken the beast, shall so continue unto the end
of the world.
For if this kingdom, and other kingdoms which now hate the whore, do not
continue, how shall she be made desolate and naked, etc.? Then it should seem,
the beast shall revive and recover himself again, and so St. John shall be
found a false Prophet. But God is true, and all men are liars; and St. John
shall be found a true Prophet: and therefore these kingdoms of Europe which
have begun to hate the whore, shall continue, and never give her over, till (as
the holy Ghost says) they have eaten her flesh, and burnt her with fire; that
is, till they have utterly devoured her. But here it will be objected, that in
the latter days iniquity shall have the upper hand. I answer, first, that I
find no such place of Scripture. But this I find, that our Lord Jesus
fore-telleth his disciples, that very shortly after his death and resurrection,
many seducers and false teachers should arise, which should deceive many, and
draw them away from the love of the Gospel: and, says he, Mat. 24.12.
because iniquity shall be increased, the love of many shall be cold. But this
speech of our Savior does not properly concern our times: but yet it must
needs be granted, that the wicked shall wax worse and worse, and the world
shall not amend, but still be worse and worse, and grow to a greater height and
ripeness of sin, as appears in this Prophecy. Yet for all this, we must
note withal, that the number of true believers in those last days shall be
very many, Chapter 11.1, 11, 13.
as this book does also teach. But it may be objected, How can this gear stand
together, that in the last days there shall be multitudes and millions of
reprobates, and most wicked and abominable persons, and yet withal, a great
increase of true believers? I answer, that the world will be always like it
self, impious and unbeleeving. But the Church shall purely worship God, and
that with daily increasing even unto the end. But now, me thinks, I hear
some man say, What likelihood is there of all this which you write touching the
overthrow of Rome? Do we not see, that Rome is yet strong? Does not Italy,
Spain, the greatest part of France, and Netherland, and Germany stand for her
defense? Has not the whore still many and great bearers and upholders? What
likelihood is there then that ever she shall be brought so low as you speak of?
I answer, that in this case we must not ask the question, We may not say, What
likelihood is there of this?
What likelihood? We must not consult with flesh and blood: we must not take
counsel of humane reason: For God is mavelous in his devices, and when he
has once decreed and determined of any future event, he will compass it by
means far surpassing all humane reach and capacity; yea, by such plots and
devices, as man's wit could never have once dreamed of. For he has all means
in heaven and earth in his hands, and is admirable in all his proceedings: and
therefore we may not ask this question, What likelihood, or how can it be, or
how can it possibly come to pass? What likelihood was there an hundred years
past, when Rome was in her delight, and all the kingdoms of Europe stood for
her, that ever she should have been forsaken of so many of her old friends, as
at this day she is? What likelihood was there, that when the Pope could command
the Emperor, and all the Kings of Europe, and their kingdoms, that ever he
should have been brought so low as at this day he is, God be thanked? What
likelihood was there that ever poor Martin Luther should stand out with the
everlasting Gospel in his mouth against the Pope, Emperor, and as it were, the
whole world, and yet die in his bed in a good old age? What likelihood was
there that King Henry the eighth, of famous memory, should renounce Rome,
oppose himsefe against the Pope, and suppress the Abbeye^, Priories, and
Monasteries in this kingdom, and take their lands and livings into his own
hands? Therefore I conclude, that when God has decreed the utter overthrow of
Rome, we must not ask this question, How can it be? or which way shall it be
brought about? For the Scriptures do teach, that God in all ages has done the
greatest exploits, either by himself alone without means, or else by weak
means, or contrary to all means.

2 Chronicles. 20.
By himself, without means, he overthrew the Moabites, Amorites, and them of
Mount Seir, which made war against good king Jehosaphat.

Exodus 14.
By himself he destroyed Pharaoh and his army in the red sea.

Josh 6.
By himself he overthrew Jericho that great city.

2 King. 19.
By himself he slew the huge army of the Assyrians that made war against
Ezekias.

2 Chro. 14.
By himself he smote the great and dreadful army of the Ethiopians before Asa,
and before Judah.

2 King 6.
By himself he smote the Syrians, which besieged Dothan, the city where the
Prophet Elisha was.

Judge. 7.
By weak means he overthrew the innumerable army of the Midianites, even by
Gideons three hundred.

By weak means he slew a garrison of the Philistims, 1 Samuel 14.
even by Jonathan and his armor-bearer.

By weak means he overthrew the kings of Sodom, and thereabouts, Genesis 1^.
even by Abraham and his family.

He overthrew Goliath by David: 1 Samuel 17. Judge. 4. Judge. 6.
Sisera by Jael: Abimelech by a woman.

Contrary to means, he saved the three children Dan. 3.
from burning, being in the fire.

Contrary to means, Jonas 2.
he saved Jonas from drowning, being cast into the sea.

Contrary to means, Dan. 6.
he preserved Daniel from devouring, being cast into the lions den.

Contrary to means, Exodus 14.
he kept the Israelites from drowning being in the bottom of the sea.

Contrary to means and all expectation, Josh. 1^.
he caused the Sun to stand still at noon day, whilst he overthrew the five
kings of Canaan by Joshua.

Therefore I conclude, that forasmuch as God in a^l ages has effected the most
strange and admirable things, The (...) overthrow of Rome concluded of.
either by himself without means, or by very weak means, or contrary to all
means, therefore it is in vain to ask this question, How, or by what means
shall Rome be destroyed? For it is enough for us to know that it shall be
destroyed, and come to utter desolation. And in my judgment the holy Ghost has
so often and plainly affirmed this, that no man should any more make any doubt
of it, or once call it into question. For what can be more plain, Chapt. 14.8.
Chapt. 16.2. Chapt. 17.8. Chap. 17.11. Chap. 18.21. Chap. 18.8.
then to say, Rome is fallen: Rome shall fall. Great hailstones like talents
shall fall upon it. It shall go to perdition. It shall fall to destruction. It
shall be cast down like a great mil-stone into the bottom of the sea. It
shall be burnt with fire. Chap. 17.16. Chap. 18.22.
It shall be made desolate and naked. It shall be without inhabitants. All the
Popish sort, Chap. 18.9.
both high and low, shall with great mourning and lamenting bewail the
desolation thereof. Chap. 16.16.
Their armies shall come to Armageddon. Chap. 19.28.
The beast and the false prophet shall be taken, and their Captains and
soldiers slain by infinite heaps, and their carcasses made meat for the
fowls of the air? If all this be not plain enough, I cannot tell what can be
plain enough. True it is indeed, the holy Ghost does not name Rome; but it is
apparent by the circumstances, that all these places must needs be understood
of Rome, of Romish power, and of the ^omish armies. For there can no other
sound sense be given of them, as all divine writers and interpreters do
affirm, both new and old. And therefore I conclude, that Saint John in this
prophecy could not speak more plainly, except he should have named Rome; for
he names Babylon; he names the great city which then reigned over the kings
of the earth; he names the city situate upon seven hills; he names the city
which had seven several governments: And therefore out of all doubt he means
Rome. Well then, since it is so, that Rome, and all Romish power and authority
shall fall flat down, and come to utter destruction and desolation in this
life, let all men take heed how they join with Rome, how they join with the
Romish Church, and how they receive the beasts mark: for assuredly they shall
all be destroyed together, both in this life and that which is to come, as we
shall hear by and by.

Let all the wise men therefore, and all such as have any care of their
salvation, follow the wholesome counsel and advice of the holy Ghost, which
says, Chap. 18.4, 5.
Go out of her my people, that ye be not partakers of her sins, and that ye
receive not of her plagues: for her sins are come up to heaven, and God has
remembered her iniquities. Our only wisdom then will be to separate our selves
from the whore of Babylon, that is, from the Church of Rome, and to join our
selves with all speed unto the Church of God; that is, the Church of the
Protestants; for this shall stand and flourish, the other shall fall down and
perish.

But what then, shall we be sorry for the fall of Babylon, Gods people are to
rejoice in the overthrow of Rome. Chap. 18.20.
and the ruin of Rome? No, no, the holy Ghost counsels us greatly to
rejoice in her destruction and overthrow, saying, O heavens rejoice over her,
and ye holy Apostles and Prophets, because God has given you judgment on her.
We are therefore to be so far from mourning and lamenting for the desolation
of Rome, the kings, merchants, mariners, and other her friends, as that it
ought to be the very joy and rejoicing of our hearts: For Saint John says,
that not only the holy Angels, Prophets, Apostles and Martyrs shall rejoice at
the destruction of Rome; but also all the Saints, and all the whole body of the
Church. And therefore he says, that after the utter overthrow of Rome, Chap.
19.1, 2.
He heard a great voice of a great multitude in heaven, saying, Hallelujah,
that is, praise ye the Lord; for he has condemned the great whore, which did
corrupt the earth with her fornication, and has avenged the blood of his
servants shed by her hand. And again, says Saint John, they said, Hallelujah,
Hallelujah, Hallelujah, thrice together, thereby expressing the great joy and
thanksgiving for the destruction and overthrow of the great whore: and even so
ought all that love God, that love the Church, and that love the truth, greatly
to rejoice in the destruction of Rome, because this monster shall no longer
oppress the Israel of God. And sure it is, that the more zealous and godly
that a man is, the more he will rejoice at the destruction of Popery: for a
man cannot love God and his Church, that does not laugh in the destruction of
that Antichristian and bloody kingdom. Let no man here say, This is cruelty,
this is want of charity, and want of pity, to laugh in the destruction of any,
or to rejoice at other men's harms. But the most wise God says, Chap. 8.6.
Reward her even as she rewarded you, and give her double according to her
works; and in the cup that she has filled to you, fill her the double. In as
much as she glorified her self, and lived in pleasure, so much give ye to
her torment and sorrow. And therefore I affirm, that no man ought to be moved
with any compassion or pity for the overthrow of Rome: But herein that saying
of the Prophet is true: Psalm. 137.9.
Blessed is he that takes and dasheth her children against the stones. And
again, Bend thy bow, Jer. 50.14.
shoot at her, s^are no arrows: for she has sinned against the Lord.
Moreover we are to observe, that forasmuch as the Lord wills and commands
all men to reward Rome as she has rewarded us, and to give her double
according to her works, therefore we ought every one of us, as much as in him
lies, and as his calling will bear, to do his uttermost to pull down Rome;
the Magistrate by the sword, the Minister by the word, and the people by their
prayers. For even Christian Kings and Princes, and all the Nobles of the earth
must not be negligent to fight against Rome: For herein that saying is true,
Jer. 48.10.
Cursed is he that does the work of the Lord negligently, and cursed is he
that keeps back his sword from blood. For this cause I do, upon my knees,
night and day most humbly and instantly entreat the God of heaven, that as he
has put into the heart of our most gracious and excellent King to hate the
whore of Babylon, and to be his greatest instrument in the whole world for the
weakening and overturning of Rome, and the defense of his most glorious Gospel
(which is his crown and glory in all the Churches, and his great renown in all
Christian kingdoms) so he may constantly continue, and never cease drawing
out the sword of justice, till he have utterly rooted out of his dominions all
the cursed crew of Popish Jebusites, and all such as have received the beasts
mark, and especially the Jesuits and seminary Priests, which are the Devils
brokers, the Popes agents, and the King of Spaines factors in all kingdoms.
Here also I do most humbly, even upon my knees, with dropping eyes, yea, if it
were possible, with tears of blood, beseech and entreat the learned and
reverend Fathers of our Church, that they would bend all their power and
authority, with all their might and maine against the Romish strumpet; and the
rather, because in these days she seems to make a head again, having so many
and great favorers, that she and her accomplices dare perk with their nebs, and
very boldly and confidently prate of a toleration.

Here also I do most humbly and earnestly entreat all my learned and godly
brethren, the Ministers and Preachers of this Church of England, that in all
their public teachings and private proceedings, they would make strong
opposition against Rome, and Romish religion. And I beseech the God of gods,
that we may all join together with united forces, to march on valiantly against
the armies of Antichrist, and to spread the everlasting Gospel far and near, to
the utter overturning and beating down of this western Babylon; and that
howsoever we may amongst our selves differ in judgment in some things; yet
that there might be no breach of love, nor alienation of affection amongst us,
but that we may all go together hand in hand, and arm in arm to preach Gods
everlasting truth, and to set our selves against the common adversaries. For if
that we will not set our selves against them, yet they will be sure to set
themselves against us. And thus much concerning the third main point, which is
the final fall and destruction of Rome, even in this world.

Now it follows to speak of the fourth main point; which is, By whom, and
when Rome shall be overthrown. But for the better understanding of this point,
concerning the persons that shall overthrow Rome, we are to observe, that
Saint John describes the whore of Babylon sitting upon a scarlet colored
beast, Chap. 17.4.
having seven heads and ten horns, whereby is meant the Roman Monarchy, as has
been showed before. After this the Angel expounds unto John, what the heads
and horns of the beast mean, and says, that the ten horns are ten kings, Verse
12.
or kingdoms, which yet have not received a kingdom, but shall receive power
as kings at an hour with the beast.

The sense is, that these ten kingdoms had not received such power and
authority under the Emperors, as they should under the Popes, for there was
great difference in these kingdoms under the Popes, from that which they had
been under the Emperors. For they received far greater power, and they carried
another mind toward the Papacy, then the nations did before toward the Empire:
for they did submit themselves to the Papacy for conscience and love, even as
to the holy Church, which they never did to the Empire.

And this is the reason why the holy Ghost says, They had not received a
kingdom, but should receive power as kings at an hour with the beast. Which
is not to be understood simply, but after a sort; for they had received
kingdoms under the Emperors, but not in such sort as afterward they did under
the Popes. For the Roman Monarchy under the dominion of the Popes was in his
greatest height and altitude, and the Kings of Europe grew up together with the
Papacy in power, might, and dominion. And Saint John adds, Chap. 17.13.
that these ten kings or kingdoms were all of one mind, and did give their
power and authority unto the beast: that is, they did with might and main
labor to uphold the Babylonicall strumpet. But the Angel tells John flatly,
that the ten horns, that is, the ten kingdoms of the Empire, which before had
given their names, their power, and authority to the beast, to uphold her and
defend her, should now in these last days all change their minds, and turn
against her. For, says the Angel to John, Chap. 17.36.
The ten horns which thou saw upon the beast, are they which shall hate the
whore, and make her desolate, and naked, and shall eat up her flesh, and burn
her with fire. Here then it does plainly appear, who they be that shall
overthrow Rome, and by whom it shall be destroyed: to wit, by the ten kings of
Europe, or kingdoms of Europe, which some very learned do reckon up to be
these, England, Scotland, Germany, France, Spain, Denmark, Sweveland, Poland,
Russia, and Hungary. If the holy Ghost by the ten horns do not mean a definite
number, that is, just ten: yet assuredly he means all the kingdoms of Europe,
and whatsoever else did once uphold the beast.
Saint John's words are plain, that these kingdoms which took part with the
beast, shall take against her, and pull her down: But we know, that all the
kingdoms of Europe did take part with her: Therefore it follows, that all
the kingdoms of Europe shall take against her. And therefore it is very
probable, that in time It is probable that France, Spain, and Italy shall
forsake the whore.
France, Spain, and Italy shall turn against the beast. We know that the rest
of the kingdoms are already turned against the beast, and the beast has lost
seven of his horns, the eighth, which is France, begins to be somewhat
loose, and to shake a little, which if it fall off, the rest will follow after
apace. The reason why the kingdoms which were subject to the Roman Empire are
compared to horns, is, because that as horns are the strength and defense of a
beast, wherewith also he pusheth down other creatures; so the strength and
defense of the Roman Empire and the Papacy was in the kingdoms which were
subject unto them, and took part with them; whereby also they did mightily push
at other nations and kingdoms.

Moreover, we are to observe, that whereas Saint John says, the same horns
which did uphold and defend the whore, shall pull her down; it is not to be
understood of the same men, but of their successors in the same kingdoms. For
the king of England, Scotland, Denmark, Polonia, and other countries, which
gave their power and authority unto the beast, are dead and gone. And if we
respect the persons of men, those which succeed them now in these kingdoms,
and pull down the whore, are other persons; but because they succeed, and
govern in these kingdoms, they are said to be those ten horns of the beast.
Then thus it is; these ten kings which now hate the harlot, are called the ten
horns of the beast, not because they be any defense and strength unto him, but
because they sit upon the same thrones of their ancesters, which did uphold and
maintain him. But this one thing is very clear and apparent out of the
interpretation of the Angel, that the same kingdoms which have maintained
Popery, shall put it down, as we see already fulfilled in England, Scotland,
Denmark, and the rest which have embraced the Gospel. And it is very likely,
that the other kingdoms which as yet have not embraced the Gospel, shall in
Gods good time embrace it. For this seems unto me to be a very good argument,
taken from the words of the interpreting Angel: Those ten kingdoms which have
upheld Rome, shall pull down Rome: But France, Spain, and Italy have upheld,
and do uphold Rome: Therefore France, Spain, and Italy shall pull down Rome.
To this may be added for confirmation, Chap. 14.6.
that the everlasting Gospel shall be preached in these last days to every
nation, and kindred, and tongue, and people. Which I understand of all the
nations of Europe which were subject to the Roman Empire and the Papacy.

And further, that the holy Ghost says, that the preachers of the Gospel from
Luthers time, shall publish Gods truth among people, and nations, and tongues,
and many kings: which I understand as before.

I am not ignorant that some good Divines make it doubtful whether Rome shall
be overthrown by the kings of Europe only, or by the Turk also, and the kings
of the east. For mine own part, I dare not resolutely determine of it, being a
thing to come, but the event shall declare, and they that live shall one day
see it. It may be the Turk and the Eastern Princes may have some hand in this
business: for the Roman Monarchy did stretch far that way when it was in his
highest elevation. But that which is alleged of the drying up of the waters of
Euphrates, Chap. 16.11.
that the way of the kings of the East might be prepared, proves nothing;
because it is an allusion to Darius and Cyrus, which were kings of the East,
and took old Babylon, by drying up the waters of Euphrates, and leading over
their armies, as we have heard before. I do thus then resolve and conclude,
that the Turk and the Eastern kings may happily have some stroke in this
work: The kings of Europe shall overthrow Rome.
but it seems most probable unto me, that the kings of Europe shall be the
greatest agents in this action. For the words are plain, that the kings of the
earth which sometimes were subject to that monstrous beast, should now at last
shake off the yoke of her servitude, and withdraw the obedience of their
subjects from her, and shall hate and abhor the harlot of Rome, and should make
her desolate, by withdrawing their subjects from her obedience; and naked, by
spoiling her of her treasures; and shall eat her flesh, Chap. 17.1.
and tear her in pieces, for very hatred; and burn her with fire, that is,
bring her to utter destruction.

So that she which before at her pleasure might command all princes to begin
war, to cease from war, to defend her quarrels, and to annoy her enemies, now
is glad to flatter a few seduced Princes to take her part, that she be not
utterly forsaken of all men whatsoever: Or else to practice by treason and
treachery, suborning the Jesuits, those rogues and vagabonds, to stir up
tumults amongst the people, and to trouble godly estates and commonwealths that
despise her dominion; but assuredly without all hope ever to recover her
ancient tyranny. But here it may be objected, that the preaching of the Gospel
is the greatest and strongest means to overthrow Babylon. And therefore how
can it be done by the Christian Princes? I answer, that it is true indeed, that
of all other means, the Gospel is the strongest; but the thing is this: First,
the Gospel being set abroach, shall detect and discover the whore of Rome, and
all her abominable doctrine and filthiness, which the Christian Princes
espying, shall renounce her, make war upon her, and slay in the field
thousand thousands of her soldiers, as we heard before. And hitherto
concerning the persons that shall overthrow Rome.

Now it follows to speak of the time when it shall be destroyed: which of all
the rest is a thing most hard to be decided. For the holy Ghost says, Job 24.1.
Why should not the times be hid of the Almighty; so as those which know him,
should not fore see the times appointed of him? Dan. 12.9.
And again, the words are closed and sealed up, until the time determined.
And again, Acts 1.7.
It is not for you to know the times or the seasons which the Father has put
into his own power. Yet even in this point I will, by Gods assistance, set
down so much as is revealed, and so much as God has given me to see. First, I
do confess, that God in his word has set down a just period, and precise
determination of all the greatest afflictions and persecutions that ever came
to his Church before the coming of his Son in the flesh, for the comfort
thereof; as that of Egypt, after the expiration of four hundred and thirty
years: that of Babylon, after the date of seventy years: Dan. 8.
that of the Medes and Persians, after the determination of an hundred and
thirty years: that of Alexanders state, Dan. 11.
after six years: that of Magog and Egypt, after 249 years. So likewise that of
Christ's death and resurrection after seventy sevens, or seventy weeks, which
make 490. years, Dan. 9.42.
as the Angel Gabriel foretold unto the Prophet Daniel. But concerning the just
period and precise determinations of the persecutions of the Church since
Christ, by the Roman Empire and the Papacy, we find not the like set down: and
hereof there may be two reasons yielded. First, because the Church of the Jews
was not under so clear and precious promises as we are, therefore it was
needful, for the better strengthening of their hope, and comfort in
afflictions, that they should know the very time determined: but because the
Church of the Christians lives under most clear and comfortable promises of
deliverance, therefore God according to his deep wisdom would have our faith
exercised in an assured expectation of the accomplishment thereof, though the
precise time be concealed. Another reason may be this: the utter overthrow of
Rome falls out to be but a little before the coming of Christ to judgment,
as appears in this Prophecy. Now then, if we knew the day or year certainly
when Rome should fall finally, it would give us too much light unto the
knowledge of the last day, which God in great wisdom has of purpose hid from
the knowledge of all men, yea, and of Angels. I know right well, that a certain
learned Writer does precisely determine the utter destruction of Rome to fall
out in the year of our Lord 1639. Napier in Apoc. 14. page 183.
But by the favor of so excellent a man be it spoken, I see no sufficient
ground thereof. But touching this matter, of the time of Romes final fall, I
will deliver mine opinion, and my reasons, submitting my self to the judgment
of the learned: for I would be loath in this or any other thing to go beyond my
compass, or pass the bounds of modesty and humility, and therefore do refer
all to be tried by the shekel of the sanctuary.

I do therefore thus judge, that the utter overthrow of Rome shall be in this
age, I mean within the age of man: my reason is this: We in this age live
under the opening of the seventh seal, the blowing of the sixth trumpet, and
the pouring forth of the sixth vial. For the first, it is manifest, because
the opening of the seventh seal contains all things that shall fall out to
the end of the world: as has been proved and showed before. For the blowing of
the sixth trumpet, that is also plain, because under the blowing thereof the
little Book was opened, Chap. ^^.
and the Gospel preached, as we see in this age. Chap. 10.2, 10, 11.
For the pouring down of the sixth vial of Gods wrath, that also is most
clear, because thereupon the great river Euphrates dries up, and the Jesuits
are sent out to solicit the kings of the earth to battle against the Church,
as we see fulfilled in these our days. Then I reason thus; Chap. 14 6, 8.
Rome must fall down finally in that age wherein the little Book is opened,
and the everlasting Gospel preached: But in this age the little Book is opened,
and the everlasting Gospel preached: Therefore in this age Rome must fall down
finally. And again, I reason thus: Chap. 16.16.
Rome must fall down finally in that age wherein the river Euphrates, that is,
the fortification of Rome dries up, and the Jesuits are sent forth to stop
the leak thereof: But all this falls our in this age, as we see with our
eyes: Therefore in this age Rome shall fall down finally. It is very probable
that Rome shall fall finally in this age.
The reason of the proposition is, for in this age the Popish armies shall come
to Armageddon.

Moreover, this I say, and not I, but the Lord, when the seventh Angel blows
the seventh trumpet, then comes the end of the world: But the sixth Angel has
sounded the sixth trumpet long ago, as appears by the effects: Therefore it
cannot be long ere the seventh Angel blow: But Rome must fall down finally
before the seventh Angel blow, as has been showed before: Therefore the utter
fall of Rome cannot be long deferred.

I do not determine either of day, month, or year, because it is not revealed.
But I ghess at an age, because the holy Ghost points us unto an agent.

If any man see further I will easily yield unto him, and thank God for light.
But all these things I set down for the comfort of Gods Church, not desiring
to understand above that which is meet to understand: but to understand
according to sobriety.

Now it rests to speak of the last main point, which is the causes of Romes
utter ruin and overthrow: which first of all are set down four several times
for failing, Chap. 14.8. Chap. 18.3. Chap. 19.3. Chap. 17.2.
to be because she made all nations drunk with the wine of the wrath of her
fornication.

They which outwardly make others drunk, or commit fornication with others, are
worthy to be severely punished.

How much sorer punishment are they worthy of which do the same spiritually?
and therefore woe be to Rome.

Another cause of the destruction of Rome, Chap. 16.6. Chap. 18.24. The causes
of Romes utter downfall.
is, for that she has shed the blood of all the Prophets, Martyrs, and Saints,
as it is written, In thee was found the blood of the Prophets, and of the
Saints, and of all that were slain upon the earth. What is he worthy to have
that is a most cruel bloud-sucker? nay, what is he worthy to have that shall
murder a kings children? yea, that shall murder his eldest son, and heir
apparent to the crown?

But Rome has murdered thousands of the King of heavens children: yea, Rome
has murdered the great heir of heaven and earth, I mean, the very Son of
God: Chap. 11.8.
(for Christ was put to death by the Roman power and authority, and by a Roman
Judge, as before has been showed:) Therefore let all men judge what Rome is
worthy to have. Moreover, Saint John tells us, Chap. 18.23.
that Rome with her enchantments has deceived all nations. Then let the matter
be referred to the judgment of any indifferent man, to determine and set down
what punishment sorcerers and inchanters are worthy of; especially spiritual
sorcerers and inchanters. Besides all this, the holy Ghost says, Chap. 18.^.
that Rome is the habitation of Devils, and the hold of all foul spirits, and
a cage of every unclean and hateful bird. What think you is like to come of
an habitation of Devils? What trow ye will be the end of a shoale of foul
fiends, and a company of most ugly monstrous hel-cats? What is like to become
of a cage of howlets, ravens and vultures; yea, a nest of vipers, toads,
snakes, adders, cockatrices, and all the most stinging serpents, and venomous
vermin in the world? What will be the end of pild Priests, filthy Friars,
mangy Monks, rogning Jesuits? Are not these a cage of unclean birds? What do
they study? what do they plot? what do they practice every day, but seditions,
perjuries, murders, conspiracies, treacheries, and all manner of villainies? If
I had no other reasons to persuade me that Rome shall fall, and come to a
miserable end, yet this only would make me so to think, that these villainous
Jesuits do teach and conclude in their cursed conventicles, that it is not
only lawful, but also meritorious, to murder any Christian Prince that is not
of their catholic religion: Oh monstrous villains! O most hideous hel-hounds!
have not these monsters suborned diverse desperate caitifs to embrue their hands
in the blood of Christian Princes? How many have been their plots? How
desperate have been their practices to murder and poison our late Queen
Elisabeth, the French King, and our most gracious and late Sovereign King
James, and other Christian Princes? But can such proceedings prosper? can such
courses be blessed? can a man be established by iniquity? No, no, let them know
for a certainty, that God will cross and curse all such divelish proceedings,
as hitherto he has done, his most holy name be praised. But if any man list
to know more of the practices and proceedings of Jesuits, let him read M.
Doctor Sutcliffe his answer to Parsons Ward-word, a book worthy to be read and
known of all men. But now to grow to a conclusion of this point, and to wind up
together all the reasons and causes of Romes ruin; thus I do determine, that
forasmuch as Rome is the great whore, Chapt. 1.17.2.
with whom have committed fornication the kings of the earth: forasmuch as Rome
has made all nations drunk with the wine of her fornication: forasmuch as Rome
has deceived all nations with her enchantments: forasmuch as Rome is a den of
devils, and a cage of unclean birds: forasmuch as Rome has shed the blood of
the Apostles, Number. 14.24.
Martyrs, and Saints: forasmuch as Rome has murdered the Son of God;
therefore it shall at last come to most miserable destruction, being that
Chittim which in the end must needs perish; for what punishment, what pain,
what torture what torment can be enough for this damnable whore, which has
committed such execrable and most outrageous villainies? Be it therefore known
unto all men by these presents, that Rome for all her monstrous and prodigious
sins, shall fall still more and more, and come to a fearful destruction, even
in this life. But some man may say, What shall become of Rome, and of all her
friends after this life? Chapter 14.9, 10, 11.
Saint John answers, that if any man worship the beast and his image, and
receive his mark in his forehead, or on his hand, the same shall drink of the
wine of the wrath of God, and he shall be tormented in fire and brimstone
before the holy Angels, and before the Lamb. And the smoke of their torment
shall ascend, and they shall have no rest day nor night which worship the
beast, etc. Here is sentence of eternal damnation passed upon all the friends
of Rome. O that all Papists would consider this in time, and think with
themselves, what a woeful thing it is to be a Papist, for they and their
kingdom must go down in this life, and in the life to come they must be
tormented in hellfire for ever. For Saint John says flatly, that all Papists
shall be cast into the great wine press of the wrath of God, Chap. 14.20.
where they shall be strained and tried till blood come out of the wine press,
unto the horses bridles, by the space of a thousand and six hundred furlongs.
And again he says, Chap. 19.20.
that the beast and the false prophet were taken alive, and cast into a lake of
fire burning with brimstone. Let all men therefore take heed how they join with
the Papists, for we see what shall be their end, both in this life and the
life to come. Therefore let all Gods people come out of Babylon, and hasten out
of Sodom, lest they be wound up in their judgments. Let all wise men practice
the policy of the Gibeonites, who when they saw that Joshua did so mightily
prevail against the Canaanites, and beat down all before him, did very
politickly provide for their own safety, and by subtle means enter into
league with Joshua and the Israel of God. So let all that have any care of
their own salvation, speedily forsake Babylon, which otherwise will fall upon
their heads; and fly to Zion, which shall stand fast for evermore. And thus
having reduced all the five following Chapters, to prove these foresaid points,
I will proceed unto the twentieth Chapter: for there is almost nothing of any
moment or difficulty in the 15, 16, 17, 18, and 19 Chapters, but it has been
already opened and expounded.

CHAP. XX.
SAint John having in the former Chapters plainly and plentifully set down the
utter overthrow both of the beast and false prophet, that is, the Roman Empire
and the Papacy, does now in this Chapter set forth the condemnation of the
Dragon, their grand Captain, which set them all on work. For there has as yet
been no motion of him, which has been the beginner and raiser up of the rest,
and the great worker of all mischief; therefore now comes his judgment and
condemnation. Now because he has been a more general worker, and his
mischief has extended larger then the kingdom of Antichrist, therefore in
this twentieth chapter there is an history of him set forth by it self: First,
how he seduced the nations before the coming of Christ: afterward, how Christ
at his coming binds him by the light of his Gospel from seducing the nations,
and so holds him shut up for the space of a thousand years, in which the
Church did greatly flourish, and many were raised up unto the spiritual life.
But when the thousand years were expired, Satan was let loose, and went forth
again to seduce, and by the great Antichrist and the Turk, gathered innumerable
multitudes into his armies to fight against the Church, which armies are called
Gog and Magog.

But they are all overcome and destroyed, and that old Serpent himself is
caught, and together with his instruments, the beast and the false prophet, is
cast into hellfire, to be tormented for ever. And this is the sum and
principal drift of this Chapter.

It contains five principal things, as it were five parts thereof.

The first is the binding and chaining up of Satan by our Lord Jesus, Verses 1,
2, 3.
for the space of a thousand years.

Ver. 4, 5, 6.
The second is, the flourishing of the Church during the time of Satan's
captivity.

Verses 7, 8, 9.
The third is the loosing of Satan after the thousand years expired, and the
woeful effects thereof.

Verse 10.
The fourth is, the casting of the Devil into a lake of fire and brimstone,
where the beast and false prophet were.

Verse. 11, etc.
The fifth is a glorious description of the last judgment, wherein every man
shall be judged according to his works.

The TEXT.
Verse 1.
ANd I saw an Angel come down from heaven, having the key of the bottomless
pit, and a great chain in his hand.

Verse 2.
And he took the dragon, that old serpent, which is the Devil and Satan, and
bound him a thousand years.

Verse 3.
And cast him into the bottomless pit, and he shut him up, and sealed the door
upon him, that he should deceive the people no more till the thousand years
were fulfilled: so after that he must be loosed for a little season.

This Angel here spoken of, is our Lord Jesus, who is therefore said to have
the key of the bottomless pit, because he has power and authority over hell
and death, as we have heard before.

By the chain in his hand is meant the doctrine of the Gospel.

The time when Satan was thus taken and bound, was when Christ first preached
the Gospel, and his Apostles after him, to all nations.

The cause why he was bound and chained up, was for that he had a long time
seduced all nations, and reigned as king and lord over the Gentiles, and
greatly seduced the Jews also.

The time of his imprisonment is set down to be a thousand years; that is, all
the time from the preaching of Christ and his Apostles, until Gregory the
seventh, and other monstrous Popes, which did let Satan loose again. Which
space of time is ghessed by the learned, to be a thousand years, or
thereabouts. But here it is to be observed, that this binding of Satan is not
to be taken simply and absolutely, as though Satan was so bound and chained up
for this thousand years, that he could not seduce at all, or do no mischief at
all after the preaching of the Gospel by Christ and his Apostles, I say, this
is not to be taken simply, but after a sort; that is, that he could not so
generally and universally seduce all nations, as he had in former time, before
the coming of Christ. For otherwise, it is well known, that even after Christ's
time, he did greatly persecute the Church, bring in many errors and heresies,
and harden and blind many men's hearts: but yet all this was nothing, in
comparison of that which he had wrought in former ages, when he was even as it
were the god of the world, and the Gentiles worshipped him as god, as the
Apostle teaches, 1 Cor. 10.
That all the worship of the heathen nations was the worship of Devils. And
again, Acts 14.16.
That God in times past suffered all the Gentiles to walk in their own ways:
And then was Satan a great prince indeed. But now comes a chain for him: For
Christ preaches the Gospel, and sends forth his Disciples with power, and
thereupon says, Luke 18.10.
I saw Satan fall down like lightning: For the preaching of the Gospel beats
down the kingdom of Satan and sin.

Moreover, it is to be noted, that notwithstanding all Satan's power and might,
craft, and subtilty, yet this Angel which has the key of the bottomless pit,
does apprehend him, and shut him up, and seal the door upon him: that he
cannot get abroad to seduce so generally as in former time.

But Saint John says, that after a thousand years, he must be loosed for a
little season; that is, the time wherein the great Antichrist should bear the
sway: which was some four or five hundred years. For the Gospel did prevail in
some measure in the world, a thousand years after Christ, and the principles
and grounds of true religion continued in the Church until the first loosing
of Satan, though with many blots, corruptions, and abuses. For after the first
600 years, the clear sincerity of the truth was much dimmed with errors and
heresies; but yet the main grounds did remain till the full expiration of the
thousand years. Now we know that the Gospel has been preached in these last
days above threescore years. Therefore it follows, that the strength of
Popery continued not much above five hundred years; which here the holy Ghost
for our comfort calls a little season: of which we have heard before, Chap.
11.2.
and therefore I do here omit it.

And I saw seats, and them that sat upon them, Verse 4.
and judgment was given unto them: and I saw the souls of them that were
beheaded for the witness of Jesus, and for the word of God, and which did not
worship the beast, neither his image, neither had taken his mark upon their
foreheads, or on their hands, and they lived and reigned with Christ a thousand
year.

Verse 5.
But the rest of the dead men shall not live again until the thousand years be
finished: this is the first resurrection.

Verse 6.
Blessed and holy is he that has part in the first resurrection: for on such
the second death has no power; but they shall be the Priests of God, and of
Christ and shall reign with him a thousand years.

Here now is set forth the estate of the Church militant, for the space of the
thousand years wherein Satan was chained up. For it is said here, that the
Church did grow and flourish; yea, and greatly exercise her power and authority
during the time. And therefore Saint John says, that he saw seats, and they
sat upon them, and judgment was given unto them. Whereby he means, that
the Apostles and their successors had their chairs, seats, and consistories,
wherein they did both preach the word, and execute the Churches censures; as
the Scribes and Pharisees before did sit in the chair of Moses: and I take it,
the latter part of the fourth verse is to be referred to the first clause, to
wit, that the Church did live and reign with Christ a thousand years: Which
is not to be understood of the Church triumphant, as some do take it and all
the rest of the fourth verse; but of the flourishing estate of the Church
militant during the time of Satan's captivity: for all the faithful do after a
sort live and reign with Christ, even here in the earth, when they overcome
the world by faith, and subdue Satan and sin by the power of grace.

Now where it is said, that John saw the souls of them that were beheaded for
the witness of Jesus, etc. It is to be understood of those, which in the time
of the persecuting Empire, and growing of the Papacy, were slain for the
truth. For the second beast, which is the dominion of Popes, reigned not in
those thousand years, in the which Satan was bound, but yet did grow by degrees
toward their height, and used great tyranny against the servants of God before
Satan's full loosing.

The Chiliasts or Millinaries do fondly gather from this Scripture, that after
the overthow of Antichrist, the Lord Jesus would come and reign with the
faithful here a thousand years upon the earth, and that in this time that
Christ did so reign as a great and glorious King upon the earth, his subjects
should enjoy all manner of earthly pleasures and delights. This foolish error is
confuted by the words that follow in the text, as we shall see afterward.

Whereas he says, The rest of the dead shall not live again: It is to be
understood of such as were spiritually dead, that is, such as despised the
Gospel which was preached those thousand years, and were not thereby revived
and quickened unto eternal life; but did still remain as men dead in sins and
trespasses.

Therefore the meaning of Saint John is, that as in the thousand years many
that heard Christ and his Apostles, and their successors, were raised up from
the death of sin to the life of righteousness; so many others were not
quickened by their doctrine, but still dwelt in their sins, whom he calls
the rest of the dead: and he says, These shall not live again; meaning the
life of God, or the life of grace. And whereas he adds, until the thousand
years be finished, he means never, or not at all, for so the word until is
often taken in the Scriptures: and it is sure, that after the expiration of the
thousand years, they did not live the life of God, and the life of the Spirit.
For then the Devil was let loose upon the world, to work his pleasure, and to
seduce with all efficacy of error and iniquity.

Whereas it is said, This is the first resurrection; he means the rising
from sin, to the life of righteousness, which was in the thousand years of
the Gospels preaching, and therefore he adds, that he is blessed that has
part in the first resurrection, etc. and says, that all such shall reign with
Christ a thousand years. Which is meant of the reign of the faithful even
upon earth for the space of the thousand years in which Satan was bound: but
yet excludes not their eternal glory in the heavens.

And when the thousand years are expired, Verse. 7.8.
Satan shall be loosed out of his prison.

And shall go out to deceive the people which are in the four corners of the
earth, even Gog and Magog, to gather them together to battle, whose number is
as the sand of the sea.

Verse 9.
And they went up unto the plain of the earth, and they compassed the tents of
the Saints about, and the beloved city: But fire came down from God out of
heaven, and devoured them.

Now Saint John tells us, that after the determination of a thousand years,
Satan shall be let loose upon the world, for their unthankfullnesse, and
contempt of the Gospel, to seduce and deceive, even as much as ever he did. No
marvel therefore, that the two great and monstrous Heresies of Popery and
Mahometry, did now begin mightily to grow and increase in the world. For what
other thing can be looked for after this setting loose of Satan?

But we are to observe, that as Satan was bound by degrees, through the
Ministry of Christ, and his Apostles, and in their immediate successors; so
also he was loosed by degrees, by the prevailing of Heresies, till the great
Antichrist was hatched, and brought into the possession of his cursed Chair.
For Satan was not fully loosed, till the year of our Lord 998. At what time
Silvester the second came to be Pope, who was in league with the Devil.
Stories do report that at his death he called for the Cardinals, and confessed
that he had familiarity with the Devil, and how he had given himself unto
him body and soul, so that he might come to the Papal dignity.

After him succeeded sundry other Popes, which were notorious monsters, some of
them murderers, some poysoners, some sorcerers, some conjurers; by whom the
Devil was fully loosed, all light of the Gospel and ^rue religion being in a
manner clean put out, and most abominable idolatry, and all manner of villainy
spreading over the face of the earth, and hereof Saint John says, that Satan
being fully loosed, he went forth to deceive the people which were in the
four corners of the ^arth, even Gog and Magog, etc. This seducing by Satan
here spoken of, is the same with that which is spoken chap. 13. only this
ex^epted, that this of Gog and Magog is more general. We read there, how all
nations, ^indreds and tongues were made to worship ^he image of the beast, and
to receive his mark; but that is to be extended no further ^hen to those
kingdoms which were subject ^o the Papacy.

But here, by these armies of Gog and Ma^og, are understood all the chief
enemies ^f the Church in these last days, since the loosing of Satan, both
open and secret, both Turk and Pope; for the Turk is an open enemy, the Pope a
more close enemy: Gog signifies covered, Magog uncovered, whereby is noted the
Turk: For the Pope comes covered under the name of Christ, and Christ's Vicar,
Peter's successor, etc. But the Turk comes uncovered, for he openly denies
and impugneth Christ.

Moreover, the names of Gog and Magog are here set down, to note of what
countries these chief enemies should spring; to wit, out of Scythia, Syria,
Arabia, Italy, and Spain; for Magog was the son of Japheth, Genesis 10. ver. 2.
of whom came the Scythians. Gog was the name of a great Captain in the lesser
Asia, which built a city, and named it after his own name, Gogkartah; that is
the city of Gog: and it is put in the Prophecy of Ezekiel for the whole region
of the lesser Asia, and Syria; whereby the Prophet did foretell, that the
great enemies of the Church should arise out of those coasts. And in very truth
they did; for out of Egypt, Scythia, Syria, and the lesser Asia did spring up
Ptolomeus, Seleucus, Antigonus, Cassander, and the rest of Alexanders
successors, which vexed and oppressed the Jews by the space of 294. years,
even until the coming of the Messiah, at what time the divided Greek Empire
was overthrown, and translated to the Romans.

Furthermore, it is to be noted, that the Prophet Ezekiel says, That Gog is
the chief Prince of Mesech and Tubal: By Mesech he means Arabia; and by
Tubal, Italy and Spain: noting thereby the countries and kingdoms from whence
the great persecuters of the Church, from the return out of the captivity of
Babylon until the coming of the Messiah, should arise: for assuredly their
enemies were collected of diverse nations but served chiefly under the Princes
of Asia the lesser, of Syria, and of Scythia. Now then to conclude, Gog and
Magog in Ezekiel, are put for the Princes of those countries which were the
chief Captains in gathering great and mighty armies unto battle against the
children of Israel, after they were come out of the captivity of Babylon. And
the Prophet there, in one sum, under the armies of Gog and Magog
comprehends all the enemies that fought against them from time to time, after
the captivity, unto the coming of Christ. And now for the application of this
unto the enemies of the Church under the Gospel, we must first note, that
through this book, the figures and phrases of speech are taken out of the Law
and the Prophets. Now therefore, when the Lord would set forth in one sum all
the enemies of the Church, which Satan mustereth after the time of his loosing
out of prison, before the coming of Christ to judgment; there is no one place
more fit to set forth all these armies, then those armies of Gog and Magog: and
therefore the names, even Gog and Magog are here brought in, to set forth these
huge armies of the Turk, and of the Pope, and of all the enemies of the Church
in these last days, which should gather themselves to battle, being in number
as the sand of the sea, as Saint John says, yea, did cover the whole face of
the earth with their multitudes, and compass the tents of the Saints about,
and the beloved city: that is, did make war against the Church and people of
God, which, in comparison of them, were but as a few tents, or some little
city. But mark what follows, and consider the issue of the battle: The holy
Ghost says expressly, that fire came down from God out of heaven, and
devoured them: which does plainly show, that the armies of Gog and Magog,
though never so huge, shall be destroyed by the fire of Gods wrath.

Now from this I gather, that as the armies of the Pope shall go down still
more and more, as formerly has been showed, and as experience in many years
good success, both in Ireland, Netherland, and against Spain also, has partly
proved (Gods most holy Name be praised:) so also the armies of the Turk shall
be overthrown, so far forth as they fight against the true Church; or at least
be so kept back, that they shall not be able to compass the tents of the
Saints, as we see and feel this day, God be thanked.

And the Devil that deceived them, Verse 10.
was cast into a lake of fire and brimstone, where the beast and false prophet
are and shall be tormented, even day and night for evermore. Here is set down
the Devils doom; to wit, that he shall be cast down into the infernal pit, as
well worthy, both for his seducing all nations, and stirring up the armies of
Gog and Magog against the Church, even to roo^ it up, if it were possible.

Therefore Saint John tells us, that forasmuch as he is the author of all
mischief, and he that has set all the rest a work, therefore both he and his
instruments, the beast and the false Prophet, Gog and Magog, shall all drink of
the same cup of Gods eternal wrath, and be all thrown down together into one
close prison, which is that gaping gulf, and infernal lake that burns with
fire and brimstone for ever.

Lo then what shall be the end of the Devil, the Turk, the Pope, the Emperor,
the King of Spain, the Cardinals, and all other the Devils instruments, which
here on earth have persecuted the Church, and compassed the tents of the
Saints, and the beloved city.

Now after all this, in the five last verses, Saint John enters into a lively
and clear description of the last judgment; first, noting the terror and
majesty of the Judge himself, Verse 11.
in this, that from his face both heaven and earth fled away: that is, no
creature shall be able to endure his angry countenance in that day: and yet
withal setting down the purity and uprightness of his judgment, and
judgment seat, calling it a white Throne. And after this, the general citing
and personal appearing of all men before him, of what degree estate, or
condition soever: For both death and hell, Verse 13.
sea and grave did deliver up their dead, and all without exception came to
judgment, and the books of their consciences were opened (for every man's work
is engraven upon his conscience, as it were in letters of brass, or with the
point of a diamond, as the Prophet speaks, Jer. 17.2. Verse 12.
) And they were judged of those things which were written in the books,
according to their works, and according to the testimony of their own
consciences. Verse 14.
And death and hell, that is, all the heirs of death and hell, even all the
society of reprobates, both Papists, Atheists, and all unbeleevers, yea,
whosoever were not found written in the book of life, Verse 15.
were cast into the lake of fire, which is the second death. Now here I would
have it diligently observed, that the holy Ghost has three several times in
this book described the last judgment; to wit, in the latter end of the
eleventh chapter, in the latter end of the fourteenth chapter, and now in the
latter end of this chapter. And moreover, I would have the order and causes of
these descriptions well weighed: For in the eleventh chapter, having before
described the kingdom of the Pope and the Turk, with their overthrow, and also
the preaching and prevailing of the Gospel in these last days, he comes to
describe the last judgment: In the fourteenth chapter, having set down, that
the everlasting Gospel should be plentifully preached in this last age, and
the overthrow of Babylon immediately following, forthwith he proceeds to the
description of the last day: In this chapter, having before concluded of the
utter overthrow of Rome, and of the beast and false prophet, of Gog and Magog,
and all adversary power, at length he proceeds to this description of Christ's
second coming, which we have heard of. And out of all this I do gather, that
the utter overthrow of the Pope, and all his adherents shall be in this life, a
little before the coming of Christ to judgment.

CHAP. XXI.
AS we have heard before the utter overthrow of the beast, and the false
prophet, and all their adherents; and also of the everlasting condemnation of
the Dragon, that old Serpent, which set them all awork: So now in this chapter
we are to hear of that most happy and blessed estate which the faithful shall
dwell in for evermore: so that the maine drift of this chapter is most fully to
describe that infinite glory and endless felicity to the which all the 144000,
that is, all the elect of God shall be advanced, when both the beast, and all
that have received his mark, shall be cast down into the infernal lake.

This chapter may very fitly be divided into four parts.

The first is, Verse 1.
a description of the renovation of the world, and the restoration of the
creature.

The second is, Ver. 2, 3, 4.
a laying forth of the most glorious estate of the Church, when it shall be
freed from all misery.

The third is, Verse. 5, 6, 7, 8.
a protestation from God himself concerning the renovation of all things, the
felicity of the elect, and the endless pain and torment of all reprobates.

The fourth is, Ver. 9, 10.11, 12, 13, 14, etc.
a lively description of the very kingdom of God, and the unspeakable joys of
heaven under the figure of a great city, called the holy Jerusalem: which city
is here most gloriously described in her walls, gates, foundations, streets,
height, length, breadth, brightness, matter, form, persons, and inhabitants.

The TEXT.
Verse 1.
AND I saw a new heaven and a new earth, for the first heaven and the first
earth were passed away, and there was no more sea.

Verse 2.
And I John saw the holy city new Jerusalem come down from God out of heaven,
prepared as a bride trimmed for her husband.

Verse 3.
And I heard a great voice out of heaven, saying, Behold, the Tabernacle of God
is with men, and he will dwell with them, and they shall be his people, and
God himself shall be their God.

Verse 4.
And God shall wipe away all tears from their eyes, and there shall be no more
death, neither sorrow, neither crying, neither shall there be any more pain:
For the first things are passed.

By a new heaven and a new earth, is meant the renewed estate of heaven and
earth after this life, in their quality, not in their substance. For we do
believe according to the Scripture, that this visible heaven, and this visible
earth shall continue for ever, as touching their matter and substance; but
shall be greatly altered and changed in condition and quality: 1 Pet. 3.
For Saint Peter says, We look for new heavens, and a new earth, according to
his promise, wherein dwells righteousness; that is, such heavens, and such
an earth, as is free from all corruption and sin. Which thing also the Apostle
Saint Paul does plainly teach, saying, Romans 8.19.
that the creature does fervently expect, when the sons of God shall be
revealed: that is, when Gods children shall be made known to be as they are,
the very heirs of infinite glory, which in this life does not appear. And he
yielded two reasons of this desire of the creature; one is, because in the
mean time it is subject to vanity and corruption: the other is, that then it
shall be free from both. And for this cause the Apostle says, that the
creature groaneth with us and earnestly desires and longs after that day
wherein it shall be set free from the bondage of corruption, Romans 8.
and redintegrated and restored to that pristine estate wherein it was before
the fall. But whether this is to be understood of heaven and earth only, or of
heaven and earth with their adjuncts and particular creatures, I will not here
go about to discuss: howbeit, I do greatly incline to their opinion, which
hold, that heaven and earth, with all their furniture, being redintegrated and
restored to their first estate, shall remain for ever, to set forth the glory
of the Creator, and for that use of glorified men which now the Angels have of
them.

Chap. 4.6. Chap. 8.8. Chap. 13.2.
Now whereas Saint John added, that there shall be no more sea: He means that
there shall be no more any troublesome and confused estate of this world, no
more broils, waves, tempests, and storms, as it falls out in this life: For
the word sea is so taken twice or thrice before.

By the holy city, new Jerusalem, he means the Church triumphant, which
therefore it is said to come down from God out of heaven, Verse 2.
because it has all his newness and holiness from God, and from heaven,
whereby it is now prepared and made ready to be married unto Christ, even as a
Bride tricked and trimmed up for her Husband. And for this cause Saint John
hears a voice from heaven, Verse 3.
saying, Behold, the Tabernacle of God is with men, and he will dwell with
them, and they shall be his people, and he will be their God: Meaning thereby,
that Jesus Christ will keep house with his glorified Spouse, and be at bed and
board with her for ever in the heavens, at what time she shall be freed from
all tears, Verse 4.
woe, and misery, as the next verse declares, yielding also a reason hereof,
which is, that the first things are passed; that is, the state wherein the
world is now, being subject to many afflictions, temptations, vanities, and
corruptions.

And he that sat upon the Throne said, Verse 5.
Behold, I make all things new. And he said unto me, Write: for these words
are faithful and true.

And he said unto me, It is done: Verse 6.
I am Alpha and Omega, the beginning and the end. I will give to him that is
athirst, of the well of the water of life freely.

He that overcomes shall inherit all things, Verse 7.
and I will be his God, and he shall be my Son.

But the fearful, and unbeleeving, Verse 8.
and the abominable, and murderers, and whoremongers, and sorcerers, and
idolaters, and liars, shall have their parts in the lake which burns with
fire and brimstone, which is the second death.

Here the omnipotent God, which sits upon the most glorious throne, does
protest, that he will make all things new; that is, restore the world to that
excellent estate wherein it was before Adams fall; and his elect to a state and
condition far more excellent in heaven: for the greater certainty and
assurance of it, wills and commands John to write it, Verse 5.
and record it as a thing most certain and infallible, and to set it down as
a thing already done. For things to come, which are decreed in the council of
God, are as certain as if they were past: for God cannot err, alter, nor
change, and therefore he says, I am Alpha and Omega, the first and the last,
the unchangeable and immutable God: Verse 6.
And adds, that he will give freely to every one that is athirst of the well
of the water of life; that is, without all regard of our deserts, he will give
to every one, that earnestly seeks after heaven and heavenly things, his fill
thereof. And moreover, Verse 7.
that whosoever overcomes in the spiritual battle shall have the full
fruition of all good things, both in this life and the life to come, as having
special right and interest therein through Christ, God being his Father, and
he his Son and heir. But on the contrary, he wills it to be written and
recorded as a thing most certain and sure, that all reprobates, all atheists,
worldlings, and all unbeleevers shall have their part and portion in the lake
which burns with sure and brimstone for ever. Verse 8.


And there came unto me one of the seven Angels which had the seven vials full
of the seven plagues, and talked with me, Verse 9.
saying, I will show thee the Bride, the Lambs Wife.

And he carried me away in the spirit to a great and high mountain, Verse 10.
and showed me that great city, that holy Jerusalem, descending out of heaven
from God.

Having the glory of God, Verse 11.
and her shining was like unto a stone most precious, as a jasper stone, clear
as crystal.

Here one of the Angels mentioned in the sixteenth chapter, which had a vial
full of Gods wrath, talks with S. John, and tells him, that he will show
him the Bride, the Lambs Wife; that is, the triumphant Church in her glorified
estate, being united and married unto Christ in the kingdom of glory. And
therefore Saint John says, that this Angel carried him away in the spirit to a
great and high mountain, and showed him that great city, holy Jerusalem, etc.

We read in the seventeenth chapter, that when this Angel showed John the whore
of Babylon, he carried him away into the wilderness in the spirit: because
the whore of Babylon should make the Church barren and desolate, as the
wilderness. But now that he is to show him the Spouse of Christ in her glory,
and to describe the everlasting Jerusalem, he carries him in the spirit unto
a very high mountain, that he might take a sight of it, as Moses was carried
up to the top of mount Nebo, that from thence he might take a view of the holy
land. Which teaches, that none can take a right view of heaven and heavenly
things, but only such as fly an high pitch, and mount far above this earth in
holy affections, and heavenly contemplation.

Moreover, Saint John tells us, that as soon as he took a sight of this new
Jerusalem (far passing all Sinai's sights) forthwith he espied in it the
very glory of God. If he had said, he had espied the glory of an Angel, it
had been more: But that he espyeth the very glory of God, it is most of all.
For who can conceive or express what the glory of God is, being infinite? The
Apostle says, that God dwells in unaccessible light, or such light as none
can approach unto.

Then this is one word for all touching the beauty and super-excellency of the
new Jerusalem, that it comprehends in it the very glory of God: but yet for
amplifications sake, it is compared to a Jasper stone, for never-fading
greenness: and to a Crystal stone, for bright shining and glittering for ever.

And had a great wall and high, Verse 12.
and had twelve gates, and at the gates twelve Angels, and the names written,
which are the twelve tribes of the cheldren of Israel.

On the East Side there were three gates, Verse 13.
and on the North-side three gates, on the South Side three gates, and on the
West Side three gates.

And the wall of the city had twelve foundations, Verse 14.
and in them the names of the Lambs twelve Apostles.

Now Saint John proceeds to the description of the wall and gates of this great
city. This we all know, that a strong wall serves for the defense and safety
of a city, and for the security of such as dwell in it: ^or if it be so high
that none can scale it, and ^o thick that none can batter it, then it is in^eed
impregnable, and the citizens in great ^ecurity: But the wall of heaven is so
high, ^s none can scale it, as it is set down in this welfth verse; and so
thick, that no double cannon can pierce it, as appears verse 17. therefore
all the inhabitants of this new Jerusalem are out of all fear of danger.

Moreover, this city has twelve gates, to signify an hard access for
enemies to break in: and an easy passage for the citizens themselves to go in
and out: And at those twelve gates twelve Angels, at every gate an Angel, as it
were a porter, to see that none be let in but the true citizens, and free
denizens, and such as have to do there, which are here named to be the twelve
Tribes of Israel; that is, all the elect of God, both of the Jews and Gentiles.

Moreover, it is said, that there were three gates on every side of the city,
both East, West, North, and South, to note, that out of all quarters of the
earth the redeemed should be gathered; Matthew. 8.
and as our Savior says, Many shall come from the East, and the West, the
North, and South, and sit down with Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob in the kingdom of
God. So that it is not material what country or nation a man is of, whether
English, Scottish, French, or Spanish, so he be a believer; for then he shall
be sure to be let in at one gate or another, either at the Eastgate, or the
West-gate, the North-gate, or the South-gate. Moreover, the wall of the city
has twelve foundations; that is to say, it is surely founded: And in every
gate the name of an Apostle, so that all the gates had the names of the Lambs
twelve Apostles, to signify, that the ground and foundation of this city is
laid upon the doctrine of the Apostles and Prophets, Ephesians. 2.
Jesus Christ himself being the chief cornerstone.

And he that talked with me had a golden reed to measure the city withal,
Verse 15.
and the gates thereof and the wall thereof.

And the city lay foure-square, Verse 16.
and the length is as large as the breadth of it: and he measured the city with
the reed, twelve thousand furlongs, and the length, and the breadth, and the
height of it are equal.

And he measured the wall thereof an hundred forty and four cubits, by the
measure of man, Verse 17.
that is, of the Angel.

Now St. John tells us, that the Angel which talked with him had a golden
reed, to measure both the city, and the gates and the walls thereof. Measuring
with reeds was a thing of great use in ancient time, as we read in the
Prophecy of Ezekiel and Zachary, and as we have heard in the eleventh chapter.
But because all things belonging to this celestial Jerusalem are
super-excellent and glorious; therefore the very measuring rod and reed is of
pure gold. This great and glorious city is said to lie apiece, to note
unto us, that it stands fast and unmovable; for round things are easily
rolled and moved this way or that way, hither and thither: but square things
are not apt to roll or move. This everlasting Jerusalem therefore lies
foure-square, because it can never be moved, but stands fast for ever; as the
Apostle says, Seeing we receive a kingdom which cannot be shaken, Heb. 12.28.
let us have grace whereby we may so serve God, that we may please him with
reverence and fear.

The Angel with his golden measuring rod measures the square sides of the
city, both in length, breadth, height and depth of it, and finds each of them
to be 12000 furlongs, which after eight furlongs to the mile, makes in our
account 1500 miles, and so the whole square of this great city comes to 6000
miles, which is a goodly compass, and notes unto us the great largeness of
Gods kingdom, and that there is roomth enough for all the inhabitants thereof:
yea, most pleasant and commodious rooms, as our Lord Jesus says, In my Fathers
house are many dwelling places; John 1.4.
if it were not so, I would have told you, for I go to prepare a place for you.

After this he measures the thickness of the wall, and finds it to be an
hundred and forty and four cubits thick, which after our common account of
two cubits to a yard, amount to seventy and two yards, which is a jolly
thickness, even so thick as no cannon can pierce, and therefore altogether
inexpugnable, as has been said before.

And the building of the wall of it was of Jasper, Verse 18.
and the city was pure gold, like unto clear glass.

And the foundations of the wall of the city were garnished with all manner of
precious stone: Verse 19.
The first foundation was of Jasper, the second of Sapphire, the third of
Chalcedony, the fourth of an Emerald,

The fifth of a Sardonix, the sixth of a Sardius, Verse 20.
the seventh of a Crysolite, the eighth of a Beryl, the ninth of a Topaze, the
tenth of a Chrysophrasus, the eleventh of a Jacinct, the twelfth of an Amethyst.

And the twelve gates were twelve pearls, Verse 21.
and every gate is of one pearl, and the street of the city is pure gold, as
shining glass.

As we have heard of the form of this goodly city; so now we are to hear of
the matter of it, that is to say, of what stuff it is made. First, Saint John
tells us, that the whole city is of most pure and glittering gold, like unto
glass: and that the wall was of Jasper, most green and flourishing; and also,
that the very foundation of the wall was beautified and adorned with twelve
sundry kinds of precious stones, which he reckons up. We count it a great
matter here below, to compass and close in our houses with a wall of brick,
and none can do it but men of place: but alas, what is that to this wall? What
is brick to precious stones, and pibbles to pearl? But Saint John adds, that
the gates were of pearl, and the streets of the city of pure gold; Oh how
brave, how beautiful, how glorious, how glittering, how gorgeous, how
admirable a city is this! for if the gates be of pearl, and the streets of
gold, then what are the inner rooms, what are the dining chambers, and what are
the lodging rooms? But here we may not grossly imagine, that the kingdom of
God is of such metal and matter indeed, as is here described. But the holy
Ghost would give us some taste of it, and after a sort shadow out unto us under
these things, which are in most precious account amongst men, what the glory
and excellency of the immortal kingdom is. For otherwise, there is no
comparison betwixt gold, pearl, and precious stones, and those heavenly,
invisible, and immortal things which we look for, and hope for through
Christ: which in very deed are so great, so glorious, and so unconceivable,
that gold, pearl, and precious stones are scant so much as any show, shadow, or
resemblance thereof.

And I saw no Temple therein, Verse 22.
for the Lord God Almighty and the Lamb are the Temple of it.

And this city had no need of the Sun, Verse 23.
neither of the Moon to shine in it: for the glory of God did light it, and
the Lamb is the light of it.

And the people which are saved shall walk in the light of it, Verse 24.
and the kings of the earth shall bring their honor and glory unto it.

And the gates of it shall not be shut by day: Verse 25.
for there shall be no night there.

And the glory and honor of the Gentiles shall be brought unto it. Verse 26.


And there shall enter into it no unclean thing, Verse 27.
neither whatsoever works abominations or lies: but they which are written in
the Lambs book of life.

In this new Jerusalem there is no Temple, as was in the old Jerusalem; for
there shall be no need of any, no need of doctrine, of sacraments, of prayer in
the old Temple, wherein the law was taught, sacraments administered, sacrifices
offered, and many other rites and ceremonies observed.

But Saint John says, that now God and Christ shall be all in all. They shall
be the Temple of the most holy city. And all the elect shall fully know them,
and dwell with them for ever.

And as the city has no need of any Temple; so has it no need of any light,
either of Sun or Moon: for the glory of God, and the brightness of the Lamb
do light it for ever: whose incomprehensible brightness does as far excel
the brightness of the Sun and Moon, as they do excel a little candle at
noone day. But it may be demanded, Who shall dwell in this so glorious a city,
and in this so great a light? Saint John answers, that the people that are
saved shall walk in it: that is, all the Israel of God, all true believers,
which are happy that ever they were born, that they may come to the possession
of such a kingdom as is here described: For Saint John says, that the
resplendent brightness of this city is so great, that even the kings of the
earth shall bring their glory and honor unto it: And also, that the glory and
honor of the Gentiles shall be brought unto it.

Oh how unspeakable is the glory of this city, that kings shall throw down
their crowns and scepters before it; accounting all their pomp and glory but
as dust, in respect of it! For the magnificence and pomp of all the Potentates
of the earth shall here be laid down. And albeit none of the Kings and Nobles
of the Gentiles might be admitted into the old Jerusalem, yet all the Gentiles
that believe shall be admitted into this new Jerusalem, and made free denizens
thereof for ever. And although the gates of this city always stand open both
night and day, as not fearing any danger of enemies: yet no unclean thing shall
enter into it, but only they which are written in the Lambs book of life.
Thus we see how gloriously the holy Ghost has described unto us this city of
the Saints, and habitation of the just for evermore. He needs must be a very
block, that is not moved with the consideration of this endless felicity: For
this city is described unto us in so glorious and admirable a manner, to bring
us into love with it, and to work in us an unquenchable thirst and desire after
it. Oh therefore let us spend many thoughts upon it; let us enter into deep
meditations of the inestimable glory of it; let us long till we come to the
fingring and possession of it, even as the heir longs till he come to the
possession of his lands; let us think every day ten, and every year twenty,
till we be in possession; let us with the Apostle, 2 Cor. 5.2.
sigh and groan, desiring to be clothed with our house which is from heaven:
Let us in the mean time cast away all things that may hinder us in our
Christian course; let us shake off every burden, and run with patience the
race that is set before us; let us, as they which prove masteries, abstain
from all lets and hindrances: and since we strive so exceedingly for a
corruptible crown; how much more ought we for an uncorruptible? For what
pains, what cost, what labor can be enough for a kingdom? Let us therefore
strive and strain to get into this golden city, where streets, walls, and
gates, and all is gold, all is pearl; yea, where pearl is but as mire and
dirt, and nothing worth. Oh what fools are they which deprive themselves
willingly of this endless glory, for a few stinking lusts! Oh what mad men are
they which bereave themselves of a room in this city of pearl, for a few
carnal pleasures and delights! Oh what bedlams and straught beasts are they
which shut themselves out of these everlasting habitations for a little
transitory pelse! Oh what intolerable sots and sops are all such as will
willingly be barred out of this palace of infinite pleasure, for the short
fruition of worldly lucre and trash! Let us therefore, in all time to come,
make more reckoning of heaven, and less reckoning of the earth; let us mind
heavenly things, and despise earthly things; let us press hard unto the things
that are before, and forget the things that are behind; let us strive hard for
the price of the high calling of God, and contemn even the glory of this world.

CHAP. XXII.
IN this chapter Saint John proceeds yet more largely to describe the blessed
estate of all Gods Saints in the kingdom of glory; and the principal scope and
drift of this chapter is yet more to enlarge the joys of Gods people after
this life, and to ratify the authority of this prophecy.

This chapter contains four principal parts.

Ve. 1, 2, 3, 4, 5.
The first is an amplification of the joys of Gods kingdom.

Verse. 6, 7, 8, 9. 16, 19.
The second is a confirmation of the authority of this book.

Ve. 9, 10, etc.
The third is an exhortation both to spread abroad the knowledge of this book:
and also for every man to prepare himself for the coming of Christ unto
judgment.

The fourth is a fervent desire of the Church for the second appearing of
Christ.

The TEXT.
Verse 1.
ANd he showed me a pure river of the water of life, clear as Crystal,
proceeding out of the Throne of God, and of the Lamb.

In the midst of the street of it, Verse 2.
and of either side of the river was the tree of life, which bare twelve manner
of fruits, and gave fruit every month: and the leaves of the tree serve to
heal the nations with.

And there shall be no more curse, Verse 3.
but the throne of God, and of the Lamb shall be in it, and his servants shall
serve him.

And they shall see his face, Verse 4.
and his name shall be in their foreheads.

And there shall be no night there, Verse 5.
and they need no candle, neither light of the Sun: for the Lord God gives
them light, and they shall reign for evermore.

The Angel does yet further show unto John a pure river of the water of life:
Whereby is signified the overflowing abundance of good things which the
righteous shall enjoy in the kingdom of glory.

This river is said to proceed out of the throne of God and of the Lamb;
because God in Christ is the original of all this life and happiness.

Further it is added, that in the midst of the golden street of this new
Jerusalem, and of both sides the river, there was the tree of life: Which
represents Christ now in his heavenly Paradise, as in former time was
represented Christ in the earthly Paradise: and also that eternal and blessed
life which our first parents should enjoy, if they did continue in the
obedience of God.

This tree stands not in an out-corner of the city, but in the very midst
of the street, and of both sides of the river, that all the citizens of the new
Jerusalem might have free access unto it, and taste of the most dainty fruits
thereof in great variety: for it bears twelve manner of fruits, that is, in
Christ all variety of pleasure, and endless light is to be found.

This tree bears fruit every month, as well in winter as in summer: for here
every month is autumn. The sense is, that in Christ the new and fresh fruits
of immortal joy (without any satiety or loathing) are for ever to be found.

The leaves of this tree are very medicinable and sanative; for they serve to
heal the nations with: that is, to preserve them from all diseases and
griefs: which argues a most blessed life, not subject to sickness, or any
other infirmity. For Christ is our never failing Physician, which in this life
heals all our spiritual diseases and infirmities, and after this life will
preserve us in perpetual health and happiness.

There shall be no more curse: that is, in the heavenly Paradise we shall no
more be subject to any curse, as Adam was in the earthly Paradise: which also
argues the perfection of happiness after this life; and yet for further
amplification of this most glorious estate, it is said, that the throne of God,
and of Christ shall be erected in the midst of this golden street, and all
his chosen people shall there accompany him, dwell with him, be always about
him; yea, and serve him without weariness for ever; yea, all his faithful
worshippers shall come so near his throne, that they shall see his very face,
and be ravished with his glory, having his Image, his Name, his Wisdom, and
Mercy imprinted in their foreheads: yea, his unconceiveable light and glory
shall be so resplendent, that there shall be neither night, nor need of candle:
but in his glittering and most glorious chamber of presence shall all his elect
reign and triumph with him for evermore in infinite felicity, and the very
fruition of eternal delectation, where shall be mirth without measure, and
solace without sorrow, as the Prophet says, In thy presence is the fullness of
joy, and at thy right hand there is pleasure for evermore.

Verse 6.
And he said unto me, These words are faithful and true, and the Lord God of
the holy Prophets sent his Angel to show unto his servants the things which
must shortly be fulfilled.

Verse 7.
Behold, I come shortly: Blessed is he that keeps the words of the Prophecy
of this book.

Verse 8.
And I am John, which saw and heard these things, and when I had heard and seen,
I fell down to worship before the feet of the Angel which showed me these
things.

Verse 9.
But he said unto me, See thou do it not, for I am thy fellow servants, and of
thy brethren the Prophets, and of them which keep the words of this book:
worship God.

In these four verses are four principal reasons brought to confirm and
ratify the authority of this book.

The first of them is the affirmation of the Angel.

The second is the authority of the most high God.

The third is the testimony of Jesus, pronouncing them blessed which keep this
Prophecy.

The fourth is the testimony of Saint John, who heard and saw these things. But
because in the Epistle to the Reader I have more at large handled this
Argument, and these same verses; therefore here I do of purpose relinquish
them: and that also of John's adoration, and the Angels refusal, being things
most manifest and easy to understand.

And he said unto me, Verse 10.
Seal not the words of the Prophecy of this book, for the time is at hand.

He that is unjust, let him be unjust still; Verse 11.
and he which is filthy, let him be filthy still; and he that is righteous,
let him be righteous still; and he that is holy, let him be holy still.

And behold I come shortly, Verse 12.
and my reward is with me, to give every man according as his work shall be.

I am Alpha and Omega, Verse 13.
the beginning and the end, the first and the last.

Blessed are they that do his commandments, Verse 14.
that their right may be in the tree of life, and may enter in through the gates
into the city.

For without shall be dogs, and enchanters, Verse 15.
and whoremongers, and murderers, and idolaters, and whosoever loves or
makes lies.

Here is first an exhortation, to publish and proclaim the knowledge of this
book to all people, and in no wise to conceal it, or keep it close, as
formerly has been showed in the Epistle.

Here is a further admonition, that they which are unrighteous, should be
unrighteous still, etc. Which is no allowance or encouragement granted unto
wicked men to continue in their evil ways, but is rather a terrible threat,
if we take all the words together in this and the next verse; as if he should
say, If men will needs continue in their filthiness, yet certainly Christ will
come shortly, and reward them according to their works.

Or else it may be a phrase of speech, which they call an ironicall concession;
as in another place the holy Ghost says to the young man, Eccles. 11. 1 Kin.
22.15. Matthew. 6.45.
Walk in the ways of thine own heart, and in the sight of thine eyes: but
know, that for all these things God will bring thee unto judgment: So likewise
in other places.

After this, here is blessedness pronounced upon all such as keep the
commandments of God, as it is said, that their right is in the tree of life;
not meaning thereby, that their keeping of the commandments is the cause of
their right in Christ, but only an effect or consequence. For our good works
do not go before, as causes of our justification; but follow after, as
declarations of the same. For by doing we are not made just in the sight of
God, but only declared to be just in the sight of men.

And as for the keeping the commandments, we do it not in such perfection as
Gods justice requires, but in such measure as his mercy accepts through
Christ. And here the holy Ghost says, that all they which have a right in
Christ, which is the Tree of life, and endeavor to keep the commandments,
shall enter in through the gates into the new Jerusalem: But on the contrary,
all the rout of reprobates, whom he calls dogs, enchanters, whoremongers,
etc. shall be utterly shut out, as having nothing to do in the everlasting
city, their portion being allotted in the infernal lake.

I Jesus have sent mine Angel to testify unto you these things. Verse 16.
I am the root and generation of David, and the bright morning Star.

And the Spirit and the Bride say Come. Verse 17.
And let him that hears, say, Come. And let him that is athirst come. And let
whosoever will take of the water of life freely.

For I protest unto every man that hears the Verse 18.
words of the Prophecy of this book, If any man shall add unto these things,
God shall add unto him the plagues that are written in this book.

Verse 19.
And if any man shall diminish of the words of the book of this Prophecy, God,
shall take away his part out of the book of life, and out of the holy city, and
from those things which are written in the book of life.

Verse 20.
He which testifies these things, says, Surely I come quickly. Amen. Even so
come Lord Jesus.

Verse 21.
The grace of our Lord Jesus Christ be with you all, Amen.

The authority of this book is here again ratified from the person of him who
is the Author of it, that is, Jesus Christ, who is, here called, The root and
generation of David: both because he is descended of the house of David
according to the flesh: and also because the eternal kingdom which all the
Prophets did foretell, should spring out of the house of David, was indeed and
in truth established in Christ, who is our true David, and our righteous
branch, and as it is here said, the bright morning Star, which has most
gloriously risen upon the world, to dispell all darkness, and to bring the
great and everlasting light.

Moreover, here is great protestation made in the 18 and 19 verses, of great
plagues to be inflicted upon all such as shall add any thing unto this book,
or take away any thing from it. Which also makes greatly for the confirmation
of the authority of this book. For that, to the which nothing may be added, and
from the which nothing may be taken away, must needs be absolute and perfect:
But this book is such a one: Therefore this book is absolute and perfect, being
a part of Gods everlasting truth.

Last of all, here is set down the fervent desire of the Bride after the
Bridegroom; for she being inflamed with the Spirit, desires him to come and
make up the match betwixt them, that she may be joined to him in marriage,
celebrate the solemnization, and live together with him in the eternal
triumph: which is the sense of these words, The Spirit and the Bride say, Come.
And let him that hears, say, Come. For it is proper and peculiar only to the
Bride to hear, wait, and long for the coming of Christ. And let him that is
athirst, come. That is, all such as thirst after righteousness, may truly
say, Come, sweet Jesus. For they are allowed freely to drink of the water of
life. The plain meaning of all this is, that the Church being directed by the
holy Ghost, most vehemently prays and longs for the coming of Christ, that
she may have her topfull happiness, and full fruition of all those
super-excellent things which are provided and purchased for her through him.
And therefore to satisfy her desire, Jesus Christ the heavenly Bridegroom
says, I come shortly. To the which the Bride says, Amen, Amen. Even so be it.
Come Lord Jesus, come quickly, and make an end of these sinful and conflicting
days, that all thy daer ones may have and enjoy their long looked for
happiness and felicity in the heavens for ever and ever.

FINIS.
An Epitome of Mr. Brightman his Exposition upon the REVELATION. Showing, or
Prophesying what shall befall Germany, Scotland, Holland, and the Churches
adhering to them. Likewise what shall befall England, and the HIERARCHY
therein.
LEarned Mr. Brightman in his Book of the exposition on the Revelations,
seriously considering and resolving himself, that the 7 Epistles Saint John
wrote to the 7 Churches in Asia, were also written and directed to the 7
succeeding Churches among the Gentiles, of which those 7 were a type or
counterpane (omitting for brevity what he says concerning the other 4
Churches) we present you with a brief of what he more immediately applies to
our selves.

In general, he says, that there was a terrible storm to be expected, and it
would be such an horrible tempest, that it would terribly shake the Christian
Churches.

First, for Germany, there was the bitterest scourge for it that ever had
fallen upon it, and that it was to come shortly: Germany should be like a house
that is robbed by furious, mad and cruel spoylers, that would have no mercy of
neither Sex nor Age; and the coming thereof should be sudden and unexpected,
like a thief in the night; which we may see he truly foretold, it being
fulfilled in our years, and the inhabitants thereof have found it by sad
experience: let England take warning, considering what he said, was the cause
that would bring all this misery; because, says he, they took no care for a
full and through Reformation, therefore by the just judgment of God, they
should loose their Citizens and Inhabitants; and they with other Churches
should come to nothing, and shortly it would appear; he calls Germany by the
name of Sardis.

Secondly, for Scotland and Holland, and the other Churches adhering to them;
(typified by godly Philadelphia) he says, tha^ they shall shut and none shall
open, and they shall open and none shall shut; a Virgin Church, chaste, not so
defiled with Rome* superstitions as others; and speaks of a Covenant and
Society they should be joined in and bids them not to be perplexed nor
discouraged at what the world spitefully prateth of them, as if he had heard
men in our times call them Traitors, Rebels, Seditious, and bids them not
regard the scoffs of the wicked, who will despise them, because they are
godly, little, lowly, and weak in visible power, in comparison of their
enemies: For, says he, no enemy shall be able to provaile against them, and
they shall set up a token of victory shortly; and every one shall be compelled
to say, that they are dearly beloved of God, they shall be seen to prosper so
exceedingly, and so marvelously promoted and advanced beyond all men's
expectation; and when that storm and horrible tempest shall come upon the
Christian Churches, these Churches shall stand fast like a pillar, and be
preserved from wasting, when the other Churches which did not take care for a
full Reformation, as they did, shall by the just judgment of God, come, as it
were, to nothing; there shall be, says he, such a miserable hurly burly of all
things, that there shall scarce be the form of a Church perceived, but only
with holy Philadelphia. Though their enemies whet their blasphemous tongues
against heaven and God himself, they shall not carry it away scotfree, let
them clatter as much as they will, no endeavors of their adversaries shall be
wanting by slandring, railing, and all despitefull wrongs to bolt up this
door; others shall with force and arms strive to stop it up, as if they would
break this Church all to pieces; but Christ will faithfully perform his word
to them, if they keep covenant with him, and their enemies shall lose all their
toil and sweat, and get nothing but shame and reproach: the praise of this
Churches courage shall be so much the greater, because being but little, and
her adversaries so potent, she yields not, nor stoops not for all their proud
threats, nor forsakes the truth, as terrified with the vain fears of men: And
their enemies should boast and flourish, as if they alone were the people of
God, creaking and cracking of nothing so much as the good of the Church; but
they do but deceive themselves and the world with glozing and goodly words,
when they reject Christ's government, and stick to the abrogated Ceremonies of
the Law, and of Rome, and thrusting a worship on Christ he has not appointed,
whereby they make themselves the Synagogue of Satan, and not a Congregation of
Saints; notable and famous at last shall the triumph of the Church be over
Papists and Popery; hitherto they have fought against them with quils and ink,
but the time shall come ere long when they shall quite be rooted out with
weapons, and that with the help of this Church; and let the experiences of
this Church stablish their minds against all future fears: And for her reward
she shall remain to see the restoring of the new Church, wherein the new
Jerusalem shall come down from heaven, and be joined with it in covenant and
society, and enjoy the same felicity, then men shall acknowledge that her
Reformation was right, and not a device of men's brains, as contentious bablers
now affirm; when they shall see the same ordinances to flourish in the new
Jerusalem, then Christ shall arise with triumph, and deface his enemies, and
give triumph to his Spouse: Here therefore, O holy Philadelphia, thou art
little and lowly, but God shall exalt thee, regard not the scoffs of the
wicked, who shall by this means pull woeful plagues upon themselves, but they
shall bring thee a Crown of glory, and the end of thy welfare is coming
shortly.

3. For England, whose counterpane he takes to be Laodicea, tearming it,
lukewarm, vainglorious Laodicea, concerning it, he says, he that gathers
the tears of his children into his bottle, knows right well, that I could
never with dry eyes take a survey of this Laodiceas lamentable condition, but I
powered out tears and sighs from the bottom of my heart, when I beheld Christ's
loathing of us, and were it not that out of duty, as a watchman, I dare not
betray the salvation of this Church, by not giving warning, I would have held
my peace; but my hope is that those which love the truth will hearken and
accept, and think, as the truth is, I envy no man's person, honor or
greatness: Yet when I perceived that these 7 Churches were propounded for a
type of all the Churches among the Gentiles, and withal, saw the order, time
and mavelous agreeing of all things together, I durst not perfidiously bury
the truth in silence.

In that Christ says of this Church, I know thy works, that thou art neither
hot nor cold; he observes, that Christ makes mention of no one good thing
that it has, the worst of all the 7 (although there were many faithful in it)
yet not any so past hope in regard of the outward form and government; which
comes to pass not so much through its own default, as by means of the faulty
government of the Angels, who have so ordered and governed it, that it was
tempered and blended together of strange contraries, a Hoch-pot, not so cold
that we would be all Romish, and cleaving to Idolatry and superstition
altogether; nor yet so hot that we pursue and admit of a through Ref^rmation;
abstaining from grosser sins, well given in Religion, and will serve God so far
as they may keep the estimation of prudent men moderate in Religion, just
Statists or Protestants of State, which are known commonly to be lukewarm
professors. This mediocrity, says he, is worst of all, which indeed is
honored of the world, because it has a certain show of moderation and
peaceablenesse; but Christ prefers a blind Papist, or no Religion at all
before this hotch-potch lukewarmnesse. And also whose outward government, and
regiment in the Church, is for the most part Antichristian and Romish,
tempering pure doctrine and Romish regiment together, broaching again monstrous
opinions heretofore hissed out; and through this government they have so filled
the Church with such a corrupt Clergy like themselves, to serve their own
turn, ignorant drones, profane Priests, Sir John Lack-Latines to say prayers,
being so corrupt in their admissions to Church Livings, that any stark fool
or arrant knave, may fulfill their conditions for admittance, whereby they have
filled and pestred the Church and Ministry with abundance of this kind of
vermin and vile-varlots: And though they love riches and honor so dearly, that
they content themselves with the loss of a full Reformation; yet that they
might not seem to prefer any thing before the truth and good of the Church,
they do with swelling words blazon the happiness of this Church thus governed
as it is; therefore the Holy Ghost brings in this Angel boasting himself in
vainglory, I am rich, etc. Pastors of other Churches are poor and of no
preferment, but our Bishops have lordly titles and revenews, the Peers of the
Realm, equal to the greatest Earls in wealth, attendance, Palaces,
stateliness, and all worldly pomp; so also the next ranks, Deanes,
Archdeacons, Prebends, etc. how mighty, massy and pursie are they grown with
wealth and boast thereof; does not this amplify the honor of our Church, to
have our brave silken Ministers to glister and jet through the streets with
troops like Noblemen, so by this means to drive away contempt from the
Ministry? no, says he, this has brought it, and this miserable
lukewarmnesse; what do you tell them of the Primitive times, as if they were
children still in blankets and swaddling bands? the Church is now grown up to
peace and riches, then it was poor and in persecution, their rules then not
fit for us now; but he demonstrates that such kind of dignities beseems not
the Ministers of the Gospel: Thou art therefore for all this a beggarly wretch,
O thou English Angel, and Christ shall take a great pleasure in casting away
and spewing out this Angel, and his punishment shall be very dreadful: the
land of Canaan once spewed out the inhabitants, and they were utterly
overthrown: and shall their punishment be less or lighter whom Christ shall
vomit out?

Therefore from these words, I would thou were either cold or hot, says he, I
would thou were either all Romish, or admit of a through Reformation: blaming
those Angels only, and those that cleave to them, Priests and Laity; who being
bewitched with ambition and covetousness, do scornfully reject this holy
Reformation, not enduring the remedy, but accounting that worse then the
disease: this Churches disease, therefore, is more desperate.

Therefore he says in plain terms, that the Bishops, which he calls no
better then Lord-beggars, because their riches and honors (for the most part)
they get by fawning, flattering, bribing, being ambitious to get under great
men, and so creep into the Court for preferment. But (says he) both they and
their whole lukewarm Hierarchy shall quite be overthrown, and never
recover their dignity again: and at their overthrow, they shall endanger the
people, by reason of their consenting to them; Yet the people shall escape
overthrowing; but it is to be feared, the people shall feel some adversity:
But God will not suffer the Hierarchy to escape; for they seeking honors and
riches, and not those things which are Christ's, shall have reproachful
judgments; few or none shall sigh or sob for them; but they and their Priests
shall be vile before the people, and men shall read the reports concerning them
with delight: and they shall be cast out, and spued up as vomit out of a
corrupted stomach, that no man will be willing to take up again, from these
words, Therefore because thou art lukewarm, and neither hot nor cold: It
shall come to pass that I will spew thee out of my mouth. For thou say, I am
rich and increased with goods, and have need of nothing, and know not how
thou art wretched, and miserable, and poor, and blind, and naked. Therefore,
says he, purge out thy Romish leven, dote not on thy riches and honors, but
mind his things and honor, who for thy sake became poor and contemptible;
set up faithful Ministers in every Congregation; repent thee of the injury
done to thy faithful watchmen, casting them into prison, and out of their
livings, who have reproved thy superstition, and contended for this
Reformation. We have need of zeal, Princes, Peers, Angels, People, earnestly
to bend our selves with all our power to turn away this evil that hangs
over our heads, by seeking a full Reformation: for as yet we hang by Geometry,
as it were between heaven and hell, the steam of the Romish foggy lake does
deadly annoy us: let us therefore, says he, mark what has been said, and not
like dogs, gnash and gnaw our teeth at the stone that is cast at us, but
tremble at the dreadful hand that cast it, and hearken to these wholesome
warnings with all speed.

The whole state of this Church of Laodicea is worthy of serious consideration,
as Mr. Brightman applies it to England, in this and diverse Chapters; for he
speaks of our times, as if he were now living.

And further he says in his Epistle, and elsewhere in his Commentary, that
many are the miseries the Christian Churches must suffe: for there will be a
long and doleful Tragedy, which will overthrow with scourges, slaughters,
death and ruin: and that the Sword of the Lord shall be made drunk in their
blood, except they receive warning and amend. But yet, says he, Be of good
comfort Germany, France and Britany, and all you Christian Churches: this is
the last Act: for after this Theater and long Tragedy is past, there will
succeed in the room thereof happy days, with abundance of peace and all good
things. And it is his judgment (if I may not say his Prophecy) comparing one
Scripture with another, and times with times, That before the year 1650. the
Jews shall be called, the Whore of Romes nose shall be slit, and she stripped of
all her glorious garments and attire, her power and sinews cut, and the Pope
himself shall run out of Rome into Avignon, or in Bononia, or thereabout, one
of his own Cities, and the City of Rome shall be burnt with fire.

And that the King of Spain, and the King of Polony, and some other Kings shall
bewail her, and would feign help her, but dare not, because they shall be
afraid of their own safety, lest they be devoured or scorched with the same
fire. And further, he says, that the Emperor of Germany shall destroy Rome, if
he set to the work, it being most proper for him; but if he did not, some
other shortly will have the praise of that victory: Therefore, says he, you
godly Princes take the matter in hand, and set to this work, it shall not be a
thing of so great trouble as you think for, fear not the huge armies that
will come to help her: If you think the Spaniard, or the Frenchman, or any
other King will raise mighty forces against you to defend her, as being Romes
friends; these are altogether vain fears, scare-crowes, goblins, bug-beares
for simple people: for her friends shall stand afar off with waiting,
testifying their love, sighing and sobbing, but taking no pains, nor striking
a stroke to deliver their Whore, being now an old withered harlot, but crying,
Alas, alas that great City. And again, he further says: And you the rest of
the Christian Princes, you need do nothing, only be valiant, and of a good
courage in dispatching your work for the Lord, and matters shall prosper as
happily as you desire; and understand at length by what way you may procure to
your selves honor and tranquillity, so quietness and joy to the whole Christian
world: Therefore draw your swords against Rome, for you shall prevail. And
says he, within 45 years after Rome is destroyed, the Pope once more
gathering all his friends together to try his last chance, shall then be
utterly overthrown, being about the year 1686. which will be the longest time
he can continue. But Rome being destroyed, and the Jews called, there will be
then to the end, a most happy tranquillity, and things very great indeed, and to
be admired: the joy will be so much, that it will be strange and unexpected:
for in the place of former troubles there will be perpetual peace, and then
Kings and Queens will be nursing fathers and nursing mothers unto the Christian
Churches.

Then the great Turk shall be 40 years on the decaying hand, and lose many
Countries, but in the year 1696. he also shall be utterly overthrown: and
then Christ shall reign with his Ordinances chief in the world. They that
please to examine these quotations in the Margent, by Master Brightmans Book
on the Revelations, which which he wrote above 40 years ago, they shall find
the composer hereof has endeavored as near as he could, to render the Author
in his own words, including much in so little room.

Yet not to forget that he says further of England and Ireland, Although
Christ be angry with us by reason we are so far from a perfect Reformation, and
they which labor to bring in the Popish ceremonies hated of God, to endanger
the overthrow of our Kingdom; yet he says, Christ has begun his Kingdom (at
that time he wrote) which was in the days of blessed Q. Elizabeth, who happily
begun and proceeded in the work of Reformation, according to the time and
those days she lived in; the finishing whereof will be required of this
Generation; otherwise expect God has a sad controversy with this Land. But
Christ has begun his Kingdom both in England and Ireland, to reign evermore:
and the enemies shall endeavor many enterprises, yet they shall vanish like
smoke, and they shall never prevail to overthrow Christ his Kingdom begun
here: for they will never want Christian Princes to maintain his Truth begun,
which he says begun from the year 1558. For the seventh Angel blew his
Trumpet for this time, and says he would reign evermore. He further says,
that ere long, before the year 1650. the fourth Angel shall power out his
Violl upon the Sun; which Sun he interprets the holy Scriptures, which
illustrate the minds of men as the beams of the Sun do the eyes of the body.
This Violl being powered on them, shall give them greater force and edge, more
vehemently to scorch the man of sin: so that he shall gnash and rage aginst
this Sun, which has so discovered his ugly hew to the world: and it shall not
only burn and vex him, and those of his household, but also hypocrites, and
all others who are not endued with true godliness; That they shall even boil
with envy and strife, and all bitterness of mind, like the men of Atlas,
which curse the Sun, because it parcheth them with too much heat.

And lastly, he says (for the better understanding of what he means) that
the City of Rome is not limited to that City, but extends as far as the Pope
has any dominion: So that the City of Rome is in destroying, if any of her
dominions be in destroying, as he interprets the Holy Ghosts meaning. But the
Pope is to be quite and fully overthrown at the year 1686. Therefore by
computation Rome must be in destroying at 1641. in some of his Dominions.

So I conclude this brief Relation (of what Mr. Brightman largely insists
upon, showing his grounds in his Book, why he affirms these things) with
Christ's counsel to this Church of Laodicea.

I counsel thee to b^y of me gold tried in the fire, that thou may be rich,
and white raiment that thou may be clothed, and that the shame of thy
nakedness do not appear; and anoint thine eyes with eyesalve, that thou
may see. FINIS.
LONDON: Printed for Richard Harper. 1644.


