THE NUPTIALS OF Britain's Genius and Fame. A Pindaric Poem ON THE PEACE.

By Mr. DENNIS.

Neque Te ut Miretur Turba Labores. Hor. Centum potiore signis Munere donat.
Hor. LONDON, Printed for R. Parker, at the Unicorn under the Piazza of the
Royal Exchange in Cornhil; Sam. Briscoe, at the corner of Charles-street,
Covent Garden; and are to be sold by R. Baldwin in VVarwick-lane. 1697.

THE NUPTIALS OF Britain's Genius and Fame. A Pindaric Poem on the PEACE.
I.
WHat Divine Rapture shakes my Soul?
What Fury rages in my Blood,
And drives about the stormy flood?
What makes my sparkling Eye Balls roll?
See, see the Goddess of the Lyre
Descending in Tempestuous fire;
Hence ye Profane, be gone, retire;
She leaves not Heaven for you:
But for the few, the chosen few,
Who to her Sacred Rites belong.
Approach ye awful train,
And while I sing a matchless strain,
Which your Great Mistress deigns to inspire,
Attend the Eternal Song.
II.
Now, now she rowls about my Breast*
And now ascending in a flame,
To my astonished Soul imparts immortal light,
And now with insupportable Delight,
She shakes my sinking frame:
And lo! the Clouds are from my Fancy driven,
Which eclipsed the Child of Heaven:
Which kept me from discerning Fate,
And viewing a sublimer state;
I see, I see, unbody'd Beings clear;
And lo the Gods majestic forms appear!
III.
Oh Transports of too Turbulent a Joy,
Which Ravishing my soul my life destroy!
Eternal glories upon whom I gaze,
Who drown with your Empyreal blaze,
The glaring Sun's Meridian Rays;
Ye who can force to Mortals give
To wvie Eternity, yet Live;
Help, help me Gods to undergo;
This stormy pleasure lightning in my mind,
A fiercer bliss than Fate designed
That living man should know!
IV.
And Thou, Majestic God, and Thou!
On whose sublime, yet lovely brow
Such dreadful graces shine,
With whom I see assembled now
Ten thousand of thy bright celestial line;
Thou, to whose guardianship divine,
Fate and great Jove, Britannia did consign;
Who do thy daring Sons inspire
With such a furious all-commanding fire:
Thy Godhead through my Breast infuse,
And add thy Towering spirit to the Muse:
For who, O awful God, but he
Whom thou inspir'st can sing of Thee?
And celebrate with Godlike Flame
Thy Nuptials with eternal Fame?
V.
And thou, Jove's Darling Child, Ethereal Fame,
Who brightest shin'st to mortal Eyes,
Of all the glories of the Skies;
Whose potent charms can all the Gods inflame,
And Men, resembling Gods, enslave;
For from the Love of Thee is seen to flow
Whatever is Great, and Beautiful and Brave,
In Heaven above and Earth below:
For whom the Aspiring Warrior fights,
For whom the Godlike Poet writes,
With not a Mortal flame;
For whom the Sovereign of the Gods formed this stupendous frame.
While to thy Lovers glorious Arms
Thou yield'st thy never-dying Charms,
(For Age, which makes all human forms decline,
Fresh force and luster adds to thine)
Be present to me, who thy Spousals sing;
Each accent through thy Golden Trump resound,
Spread it the Universe around,
And raise my Name on thy Empyreal wing.
VI.
The Bridegroom now, with Godlike state.
On whom a thousand shining Virtues wait;
And after him the Imperial Bride,
Ten thousand dazzling glories by her side,
And all the Loves and Graces in her Train
That warm the world with genial fire,
And have force to infuse desire
Through Land, and Air and Main.
Thither direct their wondrous way,
Where Phoebus with the harmonious Sisters stands,
Phoebus, the God of Glory and the Day,
To join them in eternal bands;
And as the Amazing pomp draws nigh,
The flaming Ruler of the Sky
Redoubling all his Rays,
And shaking his illustrious Temples, says.
VII.
O all y' assembled powers, who here
In pomp becoming this great hour appear;
Than which even I behold no nobler sight,
Even I, the sacred source of Light,
The worlds Refulgent Eye;
Who at one boundless view can see
What is, and what has been, and what shall be,
In Earth, and Air, and Sky;
Ere we to Britain's losty Genius join,
The Eldest born of Jove's Imperial line,
Say, who the Honor has obtaind,
What God, or Goddess is by Fate ordained,
To give the Empyreal Maid, to crown the Lovers flame,
And to the glorious God, consign the eternal Dame!
VIII.
He ends, the rest stand mute a while,
But now with a transporting smile,
A Goddess stepping forth, before him stands;
The gentle Olive branching in her hands;
And as with charming pleasure in her face,
And in her mien inimitable grace;
In sweet harmonious sounds she speaks,
With transport all their ravished Souls she takes,
The very God of sacred Rage, with blissful Rapture shakes.
Hear me, she says, Ye powers assembled Hear;
Hear me, ye Heavens, and thou Earth give ear,
When many Rival Gods of late
For this Celestial Beauty strove,
It was the sovereign will of Jove
That I should end the fierce debate,
And what is the will of Jove is Fate.
To Britain's Genius then, for he
Of all those Rival Powers has done the most for me,
I give the Empyreal Maid, and crown the Lovers flame,
And to the glorious God consign the Eternal Dame.
IX.
She says, and that Celestial voice
Makes the attending World rejoice;
That potent voice serenes the Ethereal Sky,
Lo, through the boundless space the driving Meteors fly,
And poised upon their airy wings the listening Tempests lie.
That mighty voice on Earth below,
Makes raging Discord cease;
And makes all wondering Nature know
The charming power of Peace.
Transported Seraphs stop the harmonious Spheres,
And all to that melodious voice incline their ravish dears.
X.
Why then approach, illustrious pair,
Approach bright Fame, Celestial Fair,
(The Days Resulgent God replys;)
Desire of Gods and Men draw nigh:
Before the assembled Nations of the Skys;
Thus in Eternal Golden Bands I tie,
The Ravished Bridegroom to the Bride,
No Fate, nor length of days your union shall divide.
XI.
He says, through all the Assembled powers
The extatick Joy of Gods appears,
To the gay movement of the dancing hours:
The Seraphs now reform the Spheres,
The subjects of the Main record
The Triumphs of the Ocean's Lord;
And to the Music of the Sky
The Tritons on their chorded Shells reply.
And now while Plenty and the God of Wine,
The Ambrosial Marriage Feast prepare;
The Harmonious Muses raise their voice divine,
And ravish Sea and Land, and Heaven and Air.
XII.
And thus they sing, thrice happy God,
Whom great Apollo joins to Fame!
See Jove consenting, with a nod,
That shakes this universal frame.
For ever in thy glorious arms
His fairest, best beloved must lie;
That Darling Daughter, that has Charms
To please his own eternal Eye.
Fair Peace, the softest of the Ethereal line,
Peace gives her to thee with that charming voice,
That makes the listening world rejoice,
For the worlds happiness depends on thine.
XIII.
Tune, Tune Celestial Harmony,
To that blessed voice tune eve'ry joyful string;
And Discord bound in Golden Chains,
TO exalt thy Triumphs, bring.
Let her in German and in Belgian Plains
From frantic Fury cease,
And heightning each great Masters noble strains,
Proclaim the power of Peace.
FINIS.

