THE CASE OF Mr. FRANCIS JENKES. BRING An Impartial Relation of his
Imprisonment in the Gate House, with the Occasion of it, and the Means used for
his Enlargment.

AMSTERDAM, Printed in the Year, 1677.

THE CASE OF Mr. FRANCIS JENKES, etc.
MR. Jenkes, having been a Trader for many years, and observing the daily decay
of Trade in the City, occasioned by such mischiefs, as lay not in the industry
of its Inhabitants, but only in the power of the Government to redress; and
that did require a more speedy redress than a Parliament Prorogued for 15
Months could afford; after having in vain solicited the Lord Mayor for a
Common Council, that might consider of a Petition about Trade; out of a hearty
zeal for the good of the City, as well as encouraged by the consent and desire
of many sober City-zens, the Liberty reserved to the Lord Mayor, Aldermen, and
Common Council, by the Statute of the 13th. of this King concerning Petitions,
the Votes of a majority of the Temporal Lords at the last Session, together
with the unanswerable Reasons given in their Protestation, did at the Folk-moot
(or Common Hall) holden the 24th. of June last past, in the Guild Hall of
London, thus diver himself.

Mr. Common Sergeant.
IT seems a vain thing for this Court to be serious about the choice of
Magistrates and Officers for the well Government of this City, except they
first take care to remedy those many Mischiefs and Grievances, which the City
now groans under, and which seem so to threaten the ruin and destruction of
the whole, that if there be not some speedy redress, there will be little need
of Magistrates, and Officers, for there will be no City or People left here to
be Governed.

London has once already been burned to ashes, and firing is now become such a
Trade, that not only London, the Borough of Southv^ark, and the places
adjoining, but all the Cities, Buroughs, Towns Corporate, and places of
principal Trade throughout the whole Kingdom, are perpetually in danger; so
that no rational or considerate man amongst us can promise himself, his Wife,
his Children, or Estate one nights security, but they may all be devoured in
the consuming flames, except some speedy and effectual course be taken.

But this is not all; For were our Houses secure from fire, yet such is the
general decay of Trade, as if not remedied, must unavoidably bring the whole
City to poverty and ruin; and it is conceived, that this is very much
occasioned by the French, who have laid such great Impositions upon our Woollen
Cloth, Stuffs and other Manufactures, that we have almost lost our Trade with
France, they have spoild our Trade with Holland, Flanders and Germany, by a
destructive War. They have ruined our Trade at home, and beggared many
thousands of our honest and industrious Weavers, and other English Manufactors
and Traders, by the vast quantity of their silks, and other unnecessary
Commodities imported hither: so that upon an exact balance of the Trade
between us and them taken, it has been demonstrated that this City and Kingdom
does lose Eleven hundred thousand pounds every year. By means whereof, they who
in Queen Elizabeth's time might not be suffered to build Men of War, are now
grown so powerful at Sea, as to be able to beat both Dutch and Spaniard, and
have made themselves in a manner sole Masters of the Mediterranean Sea: And
they are grown so ^^esumptuous as daily to injure and affront our English
Merchants, and sometimes in his Majesty's own Ports. Their Privateers daily
take our Merchants Ships, plunder others, strip, imprison and torment our
Seamen to the great discouragement of our English Navigation, and almost ruin
of the Merchant.

I shall instance but in one thing more, but that is worse than all the rest,
That is the just apprehension that is upon the minds of good men, of danger to
his Majesty's Person, and the Protostant Religion.

I had not spoken this at this time and place, but having the honor to serve
this City in Common Council, I have endeavored at several times to bring these
things before that Court, but could not. In the end of the last Common Council
I did desire my Lord Mayor that a Common Council might speedily be held to hear
and consider of a Petition about Trade, subscribed by a great number of
Citizens of good quality, and his Lordship did then promise that a
Common Council should speedily be held: But it is a good time since, and there
have been many Fires and Losses, but no Common Council. Wherefore, methinks
it does become the wisdom and gravity of this Court not to admit of any longer
delay in a matter wherein their All is concerned. And I do humbly move (and I
conceive it is not only my sense but the sense of the far greater part of this
Court) that some Members of this Court may accompany the Sheriffs and Mr Common
Sergeant before we proceed to any other matter, to wait upon my Lord Mayor, and
the Court of Aldermen, to desire that a Common Council might speedily be held,
humbly to Petition his Majesty, That for the quieting and satisfying the minds
of his liege People, and for remedy of the many mischiefs and grievances we now
groan under, He would graciously be pleased (according to the Statutes of the
4th. and 36th. of Edw. 3.) timely to Call a New Parliament.


Scarcely were the words, A New Parliament, pronounced, but the greatest part
of the Assembly cried out, Well moved! Well moved! And though none spoke up
formally to the Sheriffs, yet several amongst them spoke enough to show a high
approbation of what had been said, and not one word was spoken in
contradiction: which when the Common Sergeant saw, to prevent (as is conceived)
others speaking to the same matter, he spoke to this purpose.

That what had been moved, seemed to be the general sense of the whole Court,
and since the Gentleman that made the motion, was pleased to join him with the
Sheriffs, and that he must offer his opinion in the matter; It was this, That
it was not so proper to carry up that message before they did proceed to their
Elections; as first to determine their Election, and then carry up an account
of these and that together. But many in the Court did insist upon the motion
and desired a message might be sent up immediately. Whereupon one of the
Sheriffs spoke, and did acknowledge That what had been said by the Gentleman
that spoke first was true, but that he was an Old Citizen, and had long known
Common Halls, and he did believe that the proper Work of the Day was the
Election of Officers, and therefore he did desire that the Court would proceed,
and not to carry up the Message till after that was done. To which one replied;
That according to his utmost understanding that Court was one of the
antientest, greatest and most powerful Courts of the City, and although the
customary business of this day were the choice of Officers, yet that Court had
cognizance of any thing whatever that did relate to the good of the City, and
therefore it was conceived, that nothing was more proper at that time than this
which concerned the preservation of the City from utter ruin.

Upon which the other Sheriff directing his discourse to the Assembly, said,
That what the Gentleman had moved there was true, and not unknown to most of
the persons there present; but that he was of his Brothers opinion, (...) it
was fit first to go on to the work of the day, and not to carry up that message
till after the Election. Many persons being still dissatisfied, and calling for
a present message to be sent up, the Gentleman, who first moved the business
made it his request, that since there seemed a difference touching the
circumstance of time, that they would proceed to Election, and carry up the
Message with the persons Elected, as the Sheriffs desired; to which the common
Hall unanimously agreed. Upon which, silence being made, the common Hall
proceeded to election of Sheriffs, and made their Election, and sent up an
account thereof to the Lord Mayor and Aldermen by the Sheriffs and common
Sergeant, as is usual in such cases. The Lord Mayor and Aldermen presently came
down and took their seats in the Court of Hustings according to custom; upon
which the common Sergeant came forth to the front of the Court, and declared
the Names of the persons Elected, and immediately gave back. Thereupon the
common Hall called out for an Answer to their Message; upon which the common
Sergeant steping forward again in the presence of the Lord Mayor, Aldermen and
Sheriffs, said. That he had acquainted his Lordship and the Aldermen with their
request, and that his Lordship had commanded him to declare unto them, that he
would be ready to join with them in that, or any other thing for the good of
the City. And with that the Lord Mayor and Aldermen, etc. left the Court of
Hustings, and dismissed the Assembly.

After Dinner, the grave Recorder, Sir John Hovvel, out of a great pretense of
Loyalty, but indeed a personal Grudge against Mr. Jenkes, conveyed the news to
White Hall, where with his usual strain of Retorick, he made such a dismal
representation of the matter, and was so powerful in his Eloquence, as to
occasion both the Sheriffs and some other of the City Officers to be sent
(...), who were examined by t^^ Lord Ch^^ Justice Rainsford, in the presence of
the King, the Lord Chancellor, the Lord Treasurer, Duke Lauderdale, and other
Lord.

The Sheriffs (...) others made Affidavits, but a Copy of them could never be
obtained. Upon the (...), Mr. Jenkes was summoned by a Messenger to appear at
the Council Board the next day. Accompanied with many of his Friends, he
attended in the Lobby, near the Council Chamber, according to his summons, and
after some time was called in, but his Friends pressing to follow him (as is
usual on such occasions) were kept out, and not one suffered to go in with him.
The King sitting in Council, the Lord Chancellor, D. Lauderdale, and other
Lords about him, The Clerk read an Affidavit made by the two Sheriffs, the
common Crier, and one John Green an Attorney; the Substance whereof was,

That Fr. Jenkes, at a Common Hall in London, the 24th. of June last past, did
complain of Grievances, an did desire that before they went upon any other
business, certain Members of that Court might accompany the Sheriffs and the
Common-Sergeant to vvait upon the Lord Mayor, then in the Chamber, to desire
that a Common Council might be called to Petition his Majesty, in the Name of
the City, to Call a New Parliament.

The Affidavit being read, the Council Board proceeded to this effect.

Lord Chancellor. Sir, What say you to this matter?


Mr. Jenkes. I desire to know if this be all you have to charge against me?


A Lord. Then you make little of this: You will find it to be enough.


Lord Chancellor. Sir, Did you move for a Common Council to Petition for a
New Parliament?


Mr. Jenkes. Is it any Crime to Petition for a New P^rliament?

(...) which his ^^^^ship not thinking fit to give any (...) proceeded.


Lord ^^^^^llour Answer to the matter in charge.


Mr Jenkes. W^^^ the liberty of his Majesty and this ^oard, I will.


The King. Go^.


Mr Jenkes. May it please your Majesty* Of all the Subjects you have,


A Lord (interrupting him) Answer to the matter.


Mr. Jenkes. If his Majesty will be pleased to hear me, I hope you will


The King. Let him go on.


Mr. Jenkes. May it please your Majesty, Of all the Subjects you have, none are
more Loyal than your City of London, and in the City, none more loyal than my
self, and no man there did more desire, and in my circumstances act more in
order to your Majesty's Restoration than my self: And I do desy any Citizen or
other, whomsoever, to say I have forfeited my loyalty by any one individial act


The King interrupting him, Sir, you are not Lord Mayor, and I am very well
satisfied with the loyalty of the City, and that it needs no such Vouchers.

Lord Chan^^llour Speak to the matter.


Mr. Jenkes. May it please your Majesty, Being summoned to a Court of Common
Hall in London, which is a Court that consists of the main Body of the City.


Lord Chancellor interruping him, Sir, you are under a double mistake, for
first, it was not a Court; and next, it did not consist of the main Body of the
City of London.


Mr. Jenkes. With your Lordships leave, it was a Court which does consist of
all the Livery of the City of L^^don, which, if I understand any thing, is the
main Body of the City of London. And every member of that Court has freedom to
propose and debate any such matter or thing as he believes is for the service
of his Majesty, and the good of the City; and no man can use more understanding
than God has given him. And I assure your Lordship, what I then moved, was
according to the utmost of my understanding for his Majesty's service, and the
good of the City. And (my Lord) if I were under a mistake, I had the fortune to
have good Company, for what I moved, was approved by the whole Court.


The King. It was not so.


Secretary. We have a deposition to the contrary.


M. Jenkes. It was so.


Other Lords. It was not so.


Mr. Jenkes. May it please your Majesty, If you have a hundred depositions to
the contrary, if the matter of fact were so, it was so, and I do affirm, it was
approved by the whole Court.


A Lord. How came you to be a Privy Counselor?


Mr. Jenkes. I never had any such ambitious thought in my head.


A Lord. How came you then to meddle with matters of State?


Mr. Jenkes. I thought any of his Majesty's subjects, in an humble manner,
might Petition his Majesty for a Remedy of any Grievance whatsoever.


A Lord. Do you think any one may Petition for a Parliament?


Mr. Jenkes. I believe they may.


The King. I know whose Scholar you are, and I Will take care that none such as
you shall have to do with the Government.


Several Lords. What was it you moved? What was it you moved?


M. Jenkes. My Lords, What I spoke was not in a Corner, but openly in the faces
of a Multitude, and therefore cannot want a Witness to attest it.


A Lord. Just now it was a Court, and now it is a Multitude.


Mr. Jenkes. We Citizens pretend not to place our words so exactly inform, but
that there may besome mistake in them but I think my expression was no great
absurdity, for though it were a Court, yet the Persons there were so numerous,
that it may not be very improper to term them a Multitude. Yet, if I have
failed in due expression, I beg his Majesty's pardon. I know somewhat of the
Customs of the City of London, and the Powers and Privileges of the Courts
there, and somewhat also of the Laws of England, but what the Powers and Customs
of this Court are, I know not, and therefore shall desire to say little, lest I
should unwillingly offend.


Lord Chancellor. Sir, Pray tell us, who advised you in this matter?


The King. Who advised you?


Mr. Jenkes. What I then proposed, was consented to by the whole Court, and so
became their Act, as I said before.


Lord Chancellor, and Others. Answer directly to the Question, or declare you
will not.


Mr. Jenkes. Since I see your Majesty and the Lords are angry, tho I am not
sensible that I have given you any just cause for it, I must not say, I did it
without advice, lest you should be more angry, and to name any particular
Person (if there were such) would be a mean and unworthy thing, therefore I
desire to be excused all farther answer to such questions; since the Law does
provide, that no man be put to answer to his own prejudice.


The King. We will take that for an answer.


Lord Chancellor. Since you name the Law, by the Law you shall be tried.


Mr. Jenkes. I thank you, and this Board*


Lord Chancellor. You may withdraw.


He immediately withdrew, and the room being cleared of all his friends and
other company, then the Messenger, was kept there for the space of an hour and
an half, and af^^^ (...) ^^ing called in any more, was by a Warrant of the
Council, sent to the Prison of the Gate House, within the Liberties of
Westminster. Soon after his commitment, he demanded of the Keeper a Copy of the
Warrant, by which he was was committed, as he might, and by Law ought to have.
The Keeper gave him a promise of it, but delaying the performance for two
days, Mr. Jenkes resolutely demanded it of him as his duty, but could not yet
obtain it* Sometime after the Keeper sent him one voluntarily, by his man, with
this excuse, That before he had positive order to deny him one, and now had to
give it him.

The Copy of the Warrant.
WHereas it appears to his Majesty in Council, by the examination of Sir Thomas
Gold, Sir John Shorter* Knights, Sheriffs of the City of London, John Wells
Common-Gryer of the said City, and John Green one of the Attorneys of the Lord
Mayors Court, taken upon Oath before the Lord chief Justice Raynsford, That
Francis Jenkes of the said City, Linnen-Draper, did on the 24th. of this
instant June, at a Common Hall then assembled at the Guild Hall of t^^ said
City for choosing Officers for the ensuing Year, in a w^^ seditious and
mutinous manner, openly move and stir' the persons th^n present, That before
they did go on to the choice of new Officers, (which was the only occasion
of that Assembly) they should go to the Lord Mayor, and desire him to call a
Common-Counsel, that might make an address to his Majesty, in the Name of the
City, to call A New Parliament* And whereas the said Francis Jenkes, being
now called in and heard before his Majesty in Council, was so far from
denying or exic^^ating his offense. That be did in a presumptuous and arrogant
manner, endeavor to justify the same.

These are therefore to command you, to take into your custody, the Body of the
said Francis Jenkes, herevvith sent you, and him to Keep safely, until he shall
be delivered by due course of Law, for which this shall be your Warrant.

Dated at the Council Chamber in White Hall this 28th. Day of June, 1676. To
the Keeper of the Gate House Westminster, or his Deputy. Lindsey, Peterborow,
C. Craven, G. Carter, Lauderdale, Northampton, Carbery, W. Maynerd, Tho.
Chicheley, Danby, Anglesey, Arlington, Bathe, J. Williamson, R. Carr, Finch,
Ormond, Bridgwater, Hen. Coventry, J. Ernle. Robert Sowtwell.


NExt day being the. 29th. of June, diverse of Mr. Je^kes Friends waited upon
Mr. Secretary Williamson and desired to become Bail for him; but Mr. Secretary
refused to take any Bail, but told them, if they did mind him of it upon
Wednesday morning, he would move it at the Council. But Mr. Jnkes beleiving
that to be (as it proved) but a delay, ordered some of his friends to wait upon
the Lords Chief Justice Raynsford, and moved him for an Habeas Corpus ad
Subjiciend, and Recipiend. etc. which accordingly was done; but his Lordship,
denied to grant it. Alleading no other reason, but that it was Vacation; though
his Lordship could not but know that Writ to be the Subjects Right at all
times, as well out of Term, as in Term, and Mr, Jenkes friends were ready to
offer him multitudes of Presidents when it had been granted out of Term both
anciently and since his Majesty's Restoration.

Mr. Jenkes resolving to leave no legal course, to attain his liberty
untryed, upon Friday the 30th. Of June at a General Seal, did, by his Counsel
move the Lord Chancellor for an Habeas Corpus; at first his Lordship did seem
much surprised and did refuse to hear his Counsel, but after a little pause,
his Lordship bid Mr. Jenkes Counsel to move it again the next Seal, and ordered
the Seal to be put off from Tvvesday the 4th. until Thursday the 6th. of July.

Upon Wednesday the 5th. of July, Mr. Jenkes friend waited upon Mr. Secreatary
Willamson, and desired him according to his promise to move in Council that
Mr. Jenkes might be Bayled; but he said, he had spoake with the King and could
do nothing without a Petition, so upon Thursday the sixth of July, being a
Public Seal, Mr. Jenkes Counsel did again move the Lord Chancellor
(according to his Lordships order) and asserted the Authority of the Lord Cook,
who is most clear in the Case, 2. part. Instututes fol. 53. Speaking of the
Writ of Habeas corpus in the Kings Beach, (...), The like Writ is to be
granted (...) of the Chancery (...) (as in the Kings Bench) or in the Vacation,
(...) the Court of Chancery, is, Officina Justitiae, and is ever ^p^^ed, and
never Adjourned: So as the Subject being wrongfully ^^prisoned, may have
justice for the liberty of his person ^^^^ell in the Vacation time as in Term.

And in the 4th. Instit. fol. 88. Speaking of the Court of ^^^^cery, he says,
And this Court is the rather alvvayes (...), for that if a man be wrongfully
Imprisoned in the Vacation, the Lord Chancellor may grant an Habeas Corpus,
(...) ^o him justice, according to Law. And, ^ide 4. Instit, (...). 182.190.

Thus the Lord Cook.

Mr. Jenkes Counsel did likewise oss^^ a President or two, but the Lord
Chancellor, making light of the Lord Cooks opinion, saying, The Lord Cook was
not Infallible; And ^^^g^^ng all that Mr. Jenkes Counsel offered, overruled
the matter, denying to grant the Writ.

On Tuesday morning July 11th. at the Quarter Sessions holden for the liberty
of Westminster, Mr. Jenkes being still a prisoner in the Gate House, within
that liberty, did move by his Counsel to be bayled, where this was the
substance of what passed as it was taken by a by-stander.

Court. We have no such Name in our Calendar, and we sitting here by a limited
Commssion, can take no notice of any person that is not in our Calendar.


Council. Every keeper of a Prison either in County or Franchise ought, by the
statute of 3. H. ^. cap. 3. to certify the names of every Prisoner in their
Custody at the next general Jail-delivery there to be Kalendered before the
Justice of Jail-delivery that the partys may be delivered according to Law,
upon pain of 100 l. For every defalt there recorded, and I demand that this
defalt of the Jailer may be recorded according to that statute, and that you
would as you, may* command him to Calendar him now.


The statute was read.

Court. We are no general Jail-delivery for we cannot Try several felons but
they must be tried at the general Jail-delivery for the County.


Counsel. You are a general Jail-delivery for all offenses within the
Cognizance of your Franchise, and therefore unless the Fact for which he is
Committed be such as is above your Cognizance he ought to be Tried here, and if
it be such a Fact, he ought notwithstanding to be Kalendered here, that you may
send him to the County Goal where he may be tried.


Jailer. I never did Calendar any man that was committed by the Council Table


Counsel. The neglect has not taken away your duty, and as often as you have
ommitted to do so, so often you have deserved to be fined, and I do again demand
of this Court that this default of yours may be recorded.


The Court inclined to the Jailer, and would not record his default, whereupon
the Counsel proceeded.

Counsel. Since you exclude him from the benefit of your present Commission, I
apply my self to you, without respect to that, as you are Justices of peace in
general, and as such, you have power to bail any man bailable by Law, except in
some particular cases where you are restrained by statute.


Court. By whom is he committed.


Counsel. By the Council Board.


Court. Do you believe the Council Board can commit to prison.


Counsel. I admit it.


Court. We don't know for what offense he is committed.


Counsel. I have here a Copy of the Commitment and desire it may be read.

But the Jailer refusing to own it for a true Copy, tho given by himself, and
the Court requiring a nicer proof, that it was a true Copy, than could at that
time be made, they ^^^erd the Counsel to attend in the afternoon, and in the
(...) time the Jailer to give a true Copy. In the after^oon the Counsel
appearing, the Court called to him, and asked him what he had to say.


Counsel. I have now a Copy given and signed by the Jailer for a true Copy, and
desire it may be read.

The Jailer who was to prove it a true Copy, upon the Counsels coming into
Court, took an occasion to slink away and the Court (as if it had been by
design) were ready to take hold of that opportunity to evade the business, but
Mr. Jenkes friends fetched him back, and he Swearing it to be a true Copy, it
was read.


Court. What is it you demand?


Counsel. What I did before: that there being nothing in this warrant for which
he is not Bailable by Law, I demand that he may be Bailed.


Court. You have taken a wrong course in coming to us.


Counfel I presume he applies himself properly to you, for he being a Prisoner
within your Liberty, you are the most proper persons to bayl him: As Justices
of the Peace you have power to bayl any man within your Jurisdiction, bayl-able
by Law, and where you may bayl by the Law, you ought to do so, and I demand it
for Mr. Jenkes.


Court. Where do you find such power given to Justices of the Peace?


Counsel. By the same Statute, of H. 7. that I oited against the Jailer, the
enacting part whereof says, That the Justices of the Peace, in every Shire,
City or Town, or two of them at the least, whereof one to be of the Quorum,
have authority and power to let any suck prisoner or persons, Mainpernable by
the Law, that have been Imprisoned within their several Counties, City or
Town, to bail or mainprize, unto their next General Sessions, or unto the next
Jail-delivery, of the same Goales of every Shire, City or Town as well
within Franchises as without, where any Goales be, or hereafter shall be,
etc.

The whole Statute was read, and the Court taking bo^ of the preamble, said.


Court. This statute was made for the prevention of bailing Felons not bailable
by Law, and enables us only to bail Felons bailable by Law.


Counsel. The Preamble of the Act recites that mischief occasinoned by the
Statute of 1. R. 3 But the Enacting part Repeales that Act and gives you a
general power of letting any persons mainpernable by the Law to bail, and I Am
sure no statutes made for the liberty of the subject ought to receive such a
strait Construction.


Court. Do you consider by whom he is committed? the Privy Council.


Counsel. I do, and think that alters not the case.


Court. He is committed by a superior Court and we who are an Inferior one
cannot bail him.


Counsel. It is not the Court that commits but the Fact for which the party is
committed ought to direct you in Bail. The Statute of H. 7. has no such
exception in it, nor has any other since put any such restraint upon you.


Court. Would you have us Bail him after the Lord Chancellor and the Lord
Chief Justice have refused to grant a Habeas Corpus?


Counsel. They did not deny the Habeas Corpus because he was not Bailable by
Law, but because the Course of their Courts in their opinions would not admit
it, but however, if you ought to Bail him, as by the Statute I think you ought,
their refusal does not lesten your duty.

Then the Court put him several cases that did not at all reach the present
case, as they seemed to think themselves by their faint urging them.


Court. We doubt very much that any inferior Court can Bail a man Committed by
a Super^^^^ one.


Counsel. Scruples and fears do nor (...) Law: (...) ^^out was once made in the
Kings Benef^^ the great case of S^lden and others, but the Law was for the
^^sone^ bef^^^ that time, and was sufficiently settled then, and (...) from
that in reason.


(...) (...), for that was upon a Habeas corpus out of the Kings Bench.


Counsel. That is but a circumstanciall difference. The Habeas corpus from that
Court is only to remove the prisoner and the cause before them, that Justice
may be done to him, Mr. Jenkes is already within your Jurisdicton, and the
statute gives you Authority to Bail him, and your Authority makes it your duty,
and I rely upon that.


Court. We considerd upon it at Dinner, and do belive it a rare case and fit to
be advised upon, and we will advise. Why did you not move yesterday when my
Lord Chief Justice was in Town? Now there are no Judges in Town to advise with.


Counsel. That we did not come yesterday was no design, for he is not so fond
of a Goal; and if it be an indiscretion, yet that is no sufficient reason to
detain a man in prison, however if you have power (which you ought to know) you
have it as well when they are not in Town as when they are. Is he Bailable by
Law or not?


Court. There is nothing in the Warrant for which he is not Bailable by Law.


Counsel. For what reason then do you deny him?


Court. We do not deny him, but we will advise because he is Committed by a
superior Court.


Counsel. No man ought to be imprisoned for any misdemeanour before Conviction
without Bail, and it is against the Petition of Right, that any man Bailable by
Law should be detained in Goal without it. I don't know how by such denials as
this the being Committed by a superior Cou^^^h^^ g^ow (...) a reason, but at
present I think the Petition of Right spoils it for being a good one.


Court. You can give us no President of any one being Bailed by Justices at the
Sessions, who was comm^tted by the Council Board.


Counsel. I believe it is a rare case that a man should be forced to apply
himself to such, but I think I ca^ furnish you with an instance, and that is
of one Cannon a Quaker who was committed by the Privy ^ounsell about Christmas
last, and was Bailed at the Sessions of the Old Baily. A pert By-stander, no
ways concerned, suggested to the Court, and the Court repeated after him.


Court. He was committed to Newgate Prison, and was Kalendered there.


Counsel. If you stick to the reason of being committed by a Superior Court,
that is no answer; but if it must be an answer, Mr. Jenkes is committed to the
Prison of this Liberty and ought to have been Kalendero here, and then I do
again demand that the Jailer be fined.


Court. We think it a rare case and fit to be advised upon, and our Commission
we here sit by, directs us to do so in difficult cases.


Counsel. I told you before, I have nothing to do with the Commission you hear
sit by, and your selves excluded me from it, but apply my-self to you as
Justices of Peace merely, and as such, you ought to take upon you the knowledge
of your Office.


Court. In the great case of Seldom, that you Cited, the Judges took two Terms
to advise.


Counsel. You very well know what Opinion was had of their doing so. Will you
advise upon it to Night with the Kings Counsel, and I Will attend you to morrow
morning?


Court. We think fit to advise with the Judges about it till next Sessions.


(...) (...) can easily interpret wi^^ such advili^^ (...). (...) say you apply
your self to us as Justices of (...), then you may come to any two of us a
fort^ight hence or more and perhaps we may advise in the mean


^ounsel. I believe it will be a difficult matter to get any two of you
together upon this occasion.


Mr. Jenkes. finding all these common Doors to Liberty shut against him, did by
advise betake himself to another method, not less legal then the former, tho
the Power, granted by the Statutes, to Justices of Peace and the constant
issuing of the Writ of Habeas Corpus upon demand (both more easy Courses) have
occasioned it to be of more seldom use.


Justice Filzherbert in his Natura Brevium (an Author and a Book of Justly
venerable Authority in our Law) in h^s Chapter of Mainprise declars, That If a
man be taken by the Kings Commission and kept in Prison for Felony or
Misdemeanors, be may by his friends put in sureties in the Chancery, that he
will appear before the Justice, etc. And be of good behavior, etc. And that
body for body, and thereupon he shall have a Writ out of the Chancery unto the
Sheriff or unto the Constable of the Castle where he is Imprisoned, to set him
at liberty if he be Imprisoned for that cause and for no other.

Which words seem plainly to declare the Writ of Mainprise to be the subjects
right, and not to leave a discretional power to the Officers of Chancery in
granting it. But the scarcity of Presidents being the great Objection against
the Habeas Corpus out of Chancery, Mr. Jenkes resolved to offend no more in
that kind, and therefore caused a search to be made in the Rolls in the Tower
for the Writs of Mainprise, where a multitude of them was found and many in the
case of a Commitment by the Kings command. A Copy of one and a Note of several
others were taken out, to Back the Authority of Fitzherbert. With this
provision, on Monday July 17th. four of Mr. Jenkes friends, substancial
Merchants, attended with a Counsel went to the Lord Chancelour, and tho upon
tender of themselves as Bayl for him, they might have demanded their Writ of
Mamprise, as the Subjects right without other formality, yet they addressed
themselves to him in a more respectfull manner by way of Petition, thus.

To the right honorable Henry Lord Finch, Baron of Daventrey and Lord High
Chancellor of England.

The humble Petition of A. B. C. D. of London Merchants, friends to Francis
Jenkes now Prisoner in the Gate House of Westminster, shows: That the said
Fr. Jenkes was Committed to the said Prison by virtue of a Warrant, a true Copy
whereof is here unto annexed, for a fact Bayl-able by Law, for which, and no
other cause, he yet remains there a Prisoner: And that in this and all other
cases of like nature, your Petitioners are advised upon putting in Bayl in the
Court of Chancery, according to the ancient course and usage thereof, a W^rit
of Mainprise ought to Issue under the Great Seal, to be directed to the Sheriff
or Keeper of the Prison where such prisoner stands Committed, to deliver the
prisoner so Committed.

That your Petitioners being men of good Estates (as shall if your Lordship
require, be made out to your Lordship) do desire and are ready to become Bayl
for the said Fr. Jenkes, according to the course of the Chancery, and according
to the Law.

The Petitioners therefore pray, That your Lordship would accept of Bayl
accordingly, and that thereupon your Lordship would order a Writ to be made
forthwith, to be directed to the Keeper of the Gate House, for the discharg of
the said Fr. Jenkes.

And your Petitioners shall always pray, etc.

The petition being sent in to, and read by his Lordship, was returned by the
Secretary with this answer, That his ^ordship did very well approve of the
(...) but since Mr. (...) committed by the Council P^^^^ he thought fit (...)
Petitioned (...) should Bayl him. But Mr. Jenkes friends not being satisfied
with that answer, pressed to speak to his Lordship, and were by his Lordships
order called in, who coming toward them, spoke to this effect.

Lord Chief Justice. Who Is It that puts you upon these improper methods.


Counsel. We presume this address to your Lordship to be a proper course in
our case and is such as we have prsident for.


Lord Chief Justice. Are you a Lawyer?


Counsel Yes, my Lord.


Lord Chief Justice. Have you read Fitzheberts Brevium? Look in his Writ, de
homine replegiando.


Counsel. We have nothing to do with that Writ, but it is by Fitzherbert that
we are directed to this course, in his Chapter of Mainprise, where he says
(what is before Citied) and we are confirmed in his opinion by ampltiude of
Presidents out of the close Rolls in the Tower, I have the Copy of one here,
and the number and Roll of many more.


The president shown to his Lordship was this.

Ex Roll. claus. de Anno Regni Regis Ed. 3. xi. part prima membra, 28.
Rex Senescallo and Marescallo Hospitij nostri, De deliberand. Ric^ Monyvvord a
prisona.
salutem. Cum Rich Monyvvord in prisona Mariscallcae nostiae per preceptum
nostium, pro quibusdam transgressionibus and contemptibus nobis factis ut
dicitur detentus, existat sub custodia Jamtoris nostri, ac Williel. Stury
Chivaleir, Tho. Pride de Comitat. Salop, Oliverius de Bordeaux de Com. Berkes,
Andreus Aubray, Johannes Pisselan, and Petrus Fan de London, coram nobis in
Cancellaria no stra, personaliter Constituti manuceperunt predictum Richard
viz. qui libet little corpus pro corpore habere coram nobis, vel Justitiariis
nostris, aut Conscilio nostro, quandocunque and ubicun que volucrimus, ad
mandatum nostrum ad stand. rect. de transgressionibus, and cont^mptibus and
aliis excessibus quibuscunque, unde indictatus vel rettatus est, and quod been
and fideliter erga nos, and Populum nostrum, de cetero se geret, vobis
mandamus, quod prefatum Ricard. a Pri^ona praedicta, si ea occasion, and non
alia, detineatur, in eadem deliber ari faciatis, per manucaptionem supradictam.

Test Rege apud Westmonast. decimo nono die Martij, P. istm. Regem. Convenit
cu^ Recardo Laur. Halsted Deput. Algernon May, Militis.

The Note of the Number and Roll of several Writs of Mainprise upon Surety put
into Chancery, shown to his Lordship, was this.

II. Ed. 3. pt. 1. To the Constable of the Tower, to Deliver John Brice. II.
Ed. 3. pt. 1. mem. 29. To the Constable of ^he Tower, to deliver Bernard Pouch
II. Ed. 3. pt 1. mem. 28 To the Constable of the Tower, to deliver Henry
Compton Test 26 Martij Eodem Rot. 23. To the ^onstable of the T^wer, to
deliver John de Wesenham. Test 18 Aprilis. 4^ Ed 3. pt. 1. mem. 6. Custod
Forest. For delivery of several persons committed for Hunting in Forests, Since
the Stat. 28 Ed. 3. Cap. 9. Eodem Rot. mem 10. The like Test 20 Aug. Eodem
Rot. mem. 17. The like. ^odem Rot. mem. 25 The (...) Will. de Clark 3. Rich. 2.
mem. 3. To the Sheriff of London, to deliver Nich. de Svvederton and Joh. Deye.
Test 5. December. Eodem Rot. mem 22. To the Justices of North Wales (...)
deliver Lloyd.
Lord Chancellor. One President of discretion is worth a thousand of these
Presidents.

His Lordship read the President, and observing it to bear Test the 19th. day
of March, which could never be in Term, asked, When it was returnable? And
said, It must be returnable in some Court at Westminster.


Counsel. This President has no Return, neither does the Nature of the Writ in
this Case require one, for it is only a Mandate to the Jailer, to set him at
Liberty upon Surcties, first taken in Chancery, for his appearance before the
Justices, which Justices, and the time of his appearance, I suppose are to be
named in the Recognizance.


Lord Chancellor. Whether there ought to be a Return is the Question; Besides,
this is a Writ directed immediately to the Marshal of the Household, and is a
disserent Case.


Counsel. With submission to your Lordship, it makes no disserence who is the
Jailer, and those I have given your Lordship the Number and Roll of, are to
several Goalers.


Then Fitzharberts Not. Brevium was shown to his Lordship, and upon reading the
words there, If a man be Imprisoned by the Kings Commission, etc. His Lordship
said, that it was intended of one Imprisoned by virtue of a Commission out of
Chancery.

Counsel. I humbly presume, that is not the sense of the Book; the Presidents I
have shown your Lordship seem to Interpret it, and are upon other Comments; and
Fitzharbert in his Abridgment Tit. Mainprize pl. 23. cites a Book Case, that
shows this to have been a course in the Chancery, but we submit it to your
Lordships Judgment.


Lord Chancellor A little submission in a proper Place will do, but he has a
mind to come out with a high hand


Counsel. He has a mind to be discharged by (...) Warrant for his Commitment
directs.


Lord Chancellor. I am not to control any Act o^ the Privy Council,


Counsel. At the last motion for a Habeas Corpus, your Lordship was pleased to
say, That though that was not a proper method for Mr. Jenkes to obtain his
Liberty by, ye^ there was one; and upon that encouragement from your Lordship
search has been made, and this Course we have now taken found to have been the
ancient Course, and we did presume the same that your Lordship meant.


Lord Chancellor. You have used a great deal of industry to miss the right
way. Your Presidents of Edward the 3d. and Richard the second, since three
hundred year old, I Will consider off till next Term. Upon which Answer Mr.
Jenkes his Friends withdrew.


Now the plenty of Presidents proved as great a fault, as want of them did
before, and their Age, which uses to add to their Authority and give them a
greater respect, made them contemned: Such always is the Success where, Stat
pro Ratione, Voluntas. In the Afternoon, the Secretary that first carried in
the Petition, came to Mr. Jenkes in a dissembled confusion, and told him that
he had committed a mistake in returning the Petition, That his Lordship had
asked him for it, Note, That he returned it by his Lordships Order.
and would be very angry with him if he had it not; That he had left his
Lordship looking over some Papers and taken that opportunity of coming for it,
and desired that he might have it to preserve him from his Lordships
displeasure. Tho the Mornings action gave Mr. Jenkes a great deal of reason to
suspect the Secretary's tale to be a mere contrivance, and easy to surmise the
Truth, yet he took no notice of what had men passed, but sent the Petition,
which was then in some of his Friends hands, that evening to him. Upon the
second thoughts which his Lordship bestowed upon the matter of the Petition, he
was better reconciled to it, and proved better than his word in considering the
Presidents; for, in stead of pausing on them till the next Term, he was pleased
to carry them and the Petition to the Privy Council the next ^^^^nesday, where,
tho all the particulars are not known, upon ^^edible Information this was the
substance of what passed. His Lordship acquainted the Board of the Address that
had been made to him, and moved that the Petition might be there read. After it
was read, his Lordship told them that it had some appearance of Law, and
desired that the Attorney General might give his opinion. Mr. Attorney told
him, If it were Law, his Lordship ought to grant it, if it were not Law, then
to deny it; If it were of such difficulty as he could not satisfy himself, That
then he should advise with the Judges. His Lordship then moved for an Order of
Council for his direction in the matter, to which some of the Lords replied,
That they were a Court of State and not of Law, and that it did belong to him
as Lord Chancellor to inform them in matters of Law. Thereupon his Lordship
claping his hands on his breast, said, I thank God I have Courage enough to
serve his Majesty.

About the latter end of July some of Mr. Jenkes his Friends attended his
Lordship again, and offered him Bail insisting upon the Writ of Mainprize as
the Subjects Right, alleging to his Lordship the hazzards that his Health, his
Family, and his Trade were exposed to by his confinement, His Lordship asked
them why they had not petitioned the King and Council, and told them if Mr.
Jenkes thought it better to lie in Prison and Complain, than Petition and be
Bayled, he might do as he pleased.

They told him they had tendered Bayl to Mr. Secretary Williamson, who promised
them to move the King and Council in it, but when they reminded him of it upon
the next Council Day, he was pleased to excuse himself. His Lorshdip told them
he never heard they had tendered Bayl, but the Writ of Mainprize was forgotten
in all his Answers.

They then told him, that the General Report was, that the King and Council had
referred it to his Lordship, but his Lordship would take no notice of that
likewise, but said, the King would advise with the Judges when they came to
Town. His Lordship withdrew from them, and they left word with his Secretary,
That Mr. Jenkes looked upon himself to be his Lordships Prisoner.

On the (...) of August, Mr. Jenkes's Friends went again to my Lord
Chancellours, but his Secretary told them his Lordship could not be spoken
with. They prevailed with his Secretary to go up to him and remind his Lordship
of his last Answer of advising with the Judges, and tell him that several of
the Judges had been in Town, and they did now desire his Lordships Resolution.

The Secretary at his Return told them, that as soon as he began to mention the
business, his Lordship fell into a fit of the Stone, but when that was over, he
would mention it unto him. About two hours after they returned, and the
Secretary being absent, another of his Lordships servants came to them and told
them that his Lordship was not well, and could not be spoken with, but had
ordered him to tell them, That Mr. Jenkes might advise with his Counsel what
was fit to be done for he was none of his Counsel, and if he would Petition the
King and Council he might, and that that was his Answer.

On the 11th. of August, being the last Council day that was to be before the
3d. of October, Mr. Jenkes thought fit again to tender Bayl to the Council, and
that the Lord Chancellor who disowned all knowledge of his doing so before,
and the whole Council might know of it, he sent this Letter by his Bayl to the
Lord Privy Seal, then President of the Council, which was publicly read.

My Lord
Have been imprisoned since the 28th of June, to my (...) great loss charge
and prejudice of my health. I have ^^^herto been denied Bayl, Habeas Corpus and
the Writ of Mainprise, which I am informed, were never before denied to any of
his Majestys subjects in the like case; and this only for moving in a lawful
Court, and in a quiet and peacable manner, that which I did believe to be for
his Majestyes service, and the good of the City and Kingdom and the
preservation of the Protestant Religion, and which I conceive I can make appear
to be according to the Laws and Statutes of this Realm, if I am publicly
called thereto. Wherefore, I do not beg a discharge, for I desire nothing more
then to clear my innocence by a public trial; but since Mr. Murrel, and
others, committed to this prison for matters of a far other nature, are daily
bayled out, my humble request to your Lordship is, that you would be pleased to
move his Majesty, that I as well as any other of his Majestys subjects, may
enjoy the benefit of the Laws, and that the Writ of Mainprise may be granted to
me, or that my Bayl, which now attend, may be taken. Your Lordship will very
much oblige.

Your Lordships humble-Servant, FRANCIS JENKES.


This Letter was by some improved into a Petition; and when they had given it
that name, (tho that was the only thing wanting to please the Lord Chancellor,
yet it could not procure the acceptance of Bayl, but the method proposed by his
Lordship proved as ineffectuall as those that were demanded of him. The Lord
Chancellours resolutions being sufficiently discovered, Mr. Jen^es friends
forbore all farther solicitation of his Lordship, and made fresh application
to the Lord Chief Justice Rainssord, on August 18th, then just returned from
the Circuit. The time of Sessions at the Old Bailey drawing on, They caused two
Writs of Habeas Corpus to be made (the common course of removing prisoners from
one Goal to another) one, ad deliberandum, directed to the Keeper of the
Gate House; the other adrecipiendum, directed to the Sheriffs of London, and
desired his Lordship to sign them, that Mr. Jenkes might be removed and brought
to trial; for that the keeper of the Gate House not Kalendering any State
prisoner (as he called him) at the Sessions for Westminster, he might lie there
all his life time without trial, which no Subject ought to do. His Lordship
excused himself upon his late return to Town which had not yet afforded him
leisure to advise; and sent them to the Attorney General to know whether he
were ready for a Trial, before he would give them any answer. Mr. Attorney upon
their coming to him very worthily told them that he had no order in it, but
that he would not oppose the granting of those Writs; adding God forbid but
that the Law should have its due course. They returned to the Lord Chief
Justice with this answer and offered to make Oath that it was Mr. Attorneyes
answer, but he would give credit to nothing but a note under Mr. Attorneys own
hand. They told him it was hard that a man shouldly in prison who was willing
to bring himself upon trial, that Writts of this nature were every day granted
and did presume could not reasonably be denied. His Lordship answered he would
know whether ^r. Attorney were ready for a (...) ^hey replied that ^^^y did not
know when Mr. Attorney would be ready, and (...) Mr. Jenkes must stay for his
Trial till then, they then mo^^ed his Lordship as they had done formerly, that
he would ^rant a Habeas Corpus to bring him before his Lordship, and that he
would accept of substantial Citizens for Bayl, who should render him whenever
Mr. Attorney should call for him, alleging that such Writs had been frequently
granted by the Lord Chief Justice Keeling, and one of the now Justices of the
Kings Bench.

His Lordship returned, that he did not doubt the Security they should offer
him, but he had never granted such a Writ, and he knew not upon what Authority
others had done it; and in short, refused to grant either that, or the other
Writs.

After all these Denials of Right, Mr. Jenkes resolved to sit still, with the
satisfaction, that his ill success was not imputable to the Injustice of his
Cause, but to the Pleasure or Fear of those that had the Power of making it
otherwise: and with patience to expect till the Term should set open the Prison
doors, which will not brook the denial of a Habeas Corpus, tho a long Vacation
must.

No further Address was therefore made to either of their Lordships, but
themselves, after they had taken the pleasure of denying him, were pleased to
condescend to Intercede for him. For, as we received by very credible
information, the Lord Chief Justice went to the Lord Chancellor; and told him,
that the Writs demanded of ^i^ were according to Law, and could not be denied,
and that he had only taken time till he had acquainted his Lordship with it.

The Lord Chancellor directed him to the Lord Treasurer for further advice,
who sent him to the King. As soon as his Majesty understood that what was
demanded was the Subjects Right, he immediately commanded that the Laws should
have their due Course, which their Lordships had stopped.(...)


