THE REVERSE: OR, THE Tables Turned.

A POEM Written in Answer, Paragraph by Paragraph, to a late Scurrilous and
Malicious Medly of Rhimes called the Foreigners.

Non ita sunt dissimili Argumento, sed tamen
Dissimili Oratione sunt factae and Stylo.
Ter. Andr. LONDON, Printed and Sold by John Nutt near Stationers Hall. 1700.

THE AUTHOR TO THE READER.
THE Person who gives being to the trouble I am now putting my self to, is so
well known for a Malecontent, and his Writings of so little Repute, that I
should take no manner of notice of him, had he not been appointed the Mouth of
a Party which would level their own with Crowned Heads, and bring down those
who have any seeming advantage over 'em. But since he is not content to be
uninterrupted at his Calves Head Feast, to write against the Commissioners of
the Victualing Office, at the same time when he had starved without their
Assistance, to buz about Maladministration in those of the Admiralty, when he
could prove nothing like it, but must needs arrogate to himself miserable
Reflections on the best constituted Government in the World, and strike at the
Person of his Sovereign in those he has been pleased to Honor with his
Favors; I could not but think it my Duty to give him the Correction which was
due to him, though it falls short of what he deserves. As for the Method I have
taken; the Reason which induced me to Print his wretched Rhimes Line for Line
was, because I would give some advantage to my Own which follow His Paragraph
by Paragraph; and would expose those ridiculous Reflections to a Second
Perusal, which have found too much favor at First. I intend it not so much for
an Answer, as to put him in a more Methodical way when he shall write again;
and to show him what a dull Animal of a Malignant he is. I might indeed have
Reflected upon his Incongruities, pointed at the several escapes he has made
from the confinement of Sense, and examined his Expressions and lamentable
turns of Thought; But I forbore Particulars, to make him a General Block-head,
and if I have done that, I have gained my aim.

THE REVERSE: OR, THE Tables Turned.
Foreigners.
LONG time had Israel been disused from Rest,
Long had they been by Tyrants sore Oppressed:
Kings of all sorts they ignorantly craved,
And grew more stupid as they were enslaved;
Yet want of Grace they impiously disowned,
And still like Slaves beneath the Burden groaned.
With Languid Eyes their Race of Kings they view,
The Bad too many, and the Good too few.
Some Robbed their Houses, and Destroyed their Lives,
Ravished their Daughters, and Debauched their Wives;
Profaned the Altars with polluted Loves,
And Worshipped Idols in the Woods and Groves.
Reverse.
Israel had still, if Israel had been true,
Enjoyed sweet Rest, and kept soft Peace in view;
Her Kings made awful, and their Subjects feared,
And Those slept safe, while These had waked and steered.
But Fears, Distrusts, and Jealousies arose,
And Impious Israelites were Israel's Foes;
As Faction at her Monarchs hissed aloud,
Shaking her Snaky Locks amidst the Crowd.
Thence grew a Scene of undistinguished Crimes,
And nothing looked like Guilt in guilty Times,
Whilst Murmuring Fiends on Tyrants laid their ills,
And in their stead obeyed their Tyrant Wills.
Foreigners.
To Foreign Nations next they have Recourse,
Striving to mend, they made their State much worse.
They first from Hebron all their Plagues did bring,
Crammed in the single Person of a King,
From whose Base Loins Ten thousand Evils flow,
Which by Succession they must undergo.
Yet Sense of native Freedom still remains,
They fret and grumble underneath their Chains;
Incensed, enraged, their Passion does arise,
Till at his Palace-Gate their Monarch dies.
This Glorious Feat was by the Father's done,
Whose Children next Deposed his Tyrant Son;
Made Him, like Cain, a Murderous Wanderer,
Both of His Crimes, and of His Fortunes share.
Reverse.
Her Queen deceased, and Virgin Sovereign dead,
Without the Pledges of the Nuptial Bed,
A Neighboring Land the vacant Throne supplied,
And lent with Tears, what she would have kept with Pride,
Blessed Israel with a Monarch Wise and Good,
Made here is, by Choice, by Providence, and Blood.
But Wealth nor Peace could Consecrate his Reign,
Her Childrens Blessing was her Childrens Pain;
Who in requital to the Race h' had run,
Returned his Goodness with a Martyred Son.
Cursed be the Pen that dares such Worth defame,
And give that Murderous Fact a Glorious Name,
Which deaf to Pity scatters it is Applause,
On what must Damn the Praiser with the Cause.
Foreigners.
But still resolved to split on Foreign Shelves,
Rather than venture once to trust themselves,
To Foreign Courts and Councils do resort,
To find a King their Freedom to support.
Of one for mighty Actions famed they are told,
Profoundly Wise, and desperately Bold,
Skillful in War, successful still in Fight,
Had vanquished Hosts, and Armies put to Flight;
And when the Storms of War and Battles cease,
Knew well to steer the Ship of State in Peace.
Him they approve approaching to their Sight,
Loved by the Gods, of Mankind the Delight.
The numerous Tribes resort to see him Land,
Cover the Beach, and blacken all the Strand:
With loud Huzza's they welcome him on Shore,
And for their Blessing do the Gods implore.
The Sanhedrim convened, at length debate
The sad Condition of their drooping State,
And sinking Church just ready now to drown,
And with one Shout they do the Hero Crown.
Reverse.
The Father Martyred, and the Son Mislead
By Counsels of a Land to which he fled,
As taught to Govern he forgot to Rule,
And held the Reins not Temperate or Cool.
What Method should misguided Israel choose?
To trust Herself was even Herself to lose.
Slow to correct, though eager to complain,
She could not regulate a faulty Reign.
When on Her injured side a Hero stood,
Foreign in Birth, but Native in his Blood;
And dared the Dangers of the Winds and Seas,
Vent'ring his Own to purchase Israel's Ease.
And just was Israel's Joy to see him Land,
And view Deliverance dawning from his Hand,
Just was the Gift she gave him in return,
For Death despised, and Hardships nobly Born,
For Wealth deserted, and for Succors brought,
Swift as Our Hopes, and daring as His Thought,
While the good Prince with Pious Sorrow grieved,
And mourned His Fate, whose Kingdoms He relieved.
Foreigners.
Ah happy Israel! had there never come
Into his Councils crafty Knaves at Home;
In Combination with a Foreign Brood,
Sworn Foes to Israel's Rights, and Israel's Good;
Who impiously foment intestine Iars,
Exhaust our Treasure, and prolong our Wars;
Make Israel's People to themselves a Prey,
Mislead their King, and steal His Heart away:
United Interests thus they do divide,
The State declines by Avarice and Pride;
Like Beasts of Prey they Ravage all the Land,
Acquire Preferments, and Usurp Command:
The Foreign Inmates the Housekeepers spoil,
And drain the moisture of our fruitful Soil.
Reverse.
Yet there were some who shared the Warriour's Aid,
That murmured at the Gift themselves had made,
That high in Trusts and Pensions from the State
Thought their Rewards too small, and His too great;
As Israel's Sovereign warmed 'em in his Breast,
And nursed the Vip'rous Tyrants of his Rest.
Amongst the Chief was S -- r's haughty Mind,
A Sloven Inhospitable kind,
Preferred by Kings, yet never to Monarch true,
A murmuring, cunning, miserable Jew,
Who in return to Royal Bounty, sheds
His venomed Insolence on Royal Heads,
Opposing Courts, that he by Courts may rise,
As he puts on the Patriot in Disguise.
Foreigners.
If to our Monarch there are Honors due,
Yet what with Gibeonites have we to do?
When Foreign States employ 'em for their Food,
To Draw their Water, and to Hew their Wood.
What Mushroom Honors does our Soil afford!
One day a Beggar, and the next a Lord.
What dastard Souls do Jewish Nobles wear!
The Commons such Affronts could never bear.
Let no Historian the sad Story tell
Of thy base Sons, Oh servile Israel!
But thou my Muse, more generous and brave,
Shall their black Crimes from dark Oblivion save;
To future Ages shall their Sins disclose,
And brand with infamy thy Nations Foes.
Reverse.
If Judah's Sons are false, and Gibeon's just,
Gibeon has right to share in Judah's Trust;
And served abroad whom she at home revered.
By Gods approved of, and to Men endeared.
Monarchs are Fountains whence all Honors flow,
(And Fountains where they please their Streams bestow)
And if all Titles issue from the Throne,
Sure they may give, since what they give's their Own.
But Malice other kinds of Doctrine spreads,
And makes the Crown precarious on their Heads.
Forbid it Heaven such Notions have a place
Amidst the Registers of Jewish Race,
Whose Pillory'd Printer blackens the designs,
And whose whipped Author stains the very Lines.
Foreigners.
A Country lies due East from Judah's Shore,
Where stormy Winds and noisy Billows roar;
A Land much differing from all other Soils,
Forced from the Sea, and buttress'd up with Piles.
No marble Quarries bind the spungy Ground,
But Loads of Sand and Cockle-shells are found:
Its Natives void of Honesty and Grace,
A Boorish, rude, and an inhumane Race;
From Nature's Excrement their Life is drawn,
Are born in Bogs and nourished up from Spawn.
Their hard-smoak'd Beef is their continual Meat,
Which they with Rusk, their luscious Manna, eat;
Such Food with their chill stomach best agrees,
They sing Hosannah to a Mare's-milk Cheese.
To supplicate no God, their lips will move,
Who speaks in Thunder like Almighty Jove,
But watery Deities they do invoke,
Who from the Marshes most Divinely croak.
Their Land as if ashamed their Crimes to see,
Dives down beneath the surface of the Sea,
Neptune, the God who does the Seas command,
Never stands on Tip-toe to discry their Land?
But seated on the Billow of the Sea,
With Ease their humble Marshes does survey.
These are the Vermin do our State molest;
Eclipse our Glory, and disturb our Rest.
Reverse.
A Sect of People seemingly precise,
Nor East, nor West, nor South, distinctly lies,
All Points of Wind the Murmuring Sinners share,
And Whine, and Rail, and Plot in every Air.
No God they will suffer, and no King obey.
But would the People by the People sway;
Cursing their Kings, as if by Kings undone;
Yet wishing for Five hundred stead of One.
With these a Senseless, starving Scribler joined,
Poor in his Purse, and restless in his Mind;
Yet proud of Parts he knew not how to show,
Turned out of Place, and despicably Low,
Whilst he to others Places laying Claim,
Lost what they had of Salary, and of Shame.
St -- ns caressed him, and Plain-dealing O --
Fed him to Write his Anabaptist Notes.
A kind Assistance in a Lucky Time,
Which made him Preach as well as he could Rhyme:
Such T -- n was, an Evidential Scribe,
Fit for the Toil of one of O -- s his Tribe,
Who Lashed like him, like him could Snarl and Rail,
And show his Malice, 'cause he showed his Tail.
Oh may the Calves-head Rioters, our Foes,
Still use his Rhimes, his lamentable Prose,
That Faction may be quieted and ceased,
Praised by so cursed a Poet, and a Priest.
Foreigners.
BENTIR in the Inglorious Roll the first,
Bentir to this and future Ages cursed,
Of mean Descent, yet insolently Proud,
Shunned by the Great, and hated by the Crowd;
Who neither Blood nor Parentage can boast,
And what he got the Jewish Nation lost:
By lavish Grants whole Provinces he gains,
Made forfeit by the Jewish People's Pains;
Till angry Sanhedrims such Grants resume,
And from the Peacock take each borrowed Plume.
Why should the Gibeonites our Land engross,
And aggrandize their Fortunes with our Loss?
Let them in foreign States proudly command,
They have no Portion in the Promised Land,
Which immemorably has been decreed,
To be the Birthright of the Jewish Seed.
How ill does Bentir in the Head appear
Of Warriors who do Jewish Ensigns bear,
By such we are grown even Scandalous in War.
Our Fathers Trophies wore, and often could tell
How by their Swords the mighty Thousands fell;
What mighty Deeds our Grandfathers had done,
What Battles fought, What Wreaths of Honor won:
Through the extended Orb they purchased Fame,
The Nations trembling at their Awful Name:
Reverse.
But, how can Factious Tempers be subdued,
When Israel's Rabbi's think such Tempers good?
When her Highpriests sit insolent in State,
And grumble at the Powers that made 'em great,
Though from Agrippa's Bounty they are raised,
To wear that Vest which they before disprais'd;
When even Hallastir's Gratitude is shown,
In wishing for the Fall of Israel's Throne.
A Man well Skilled in Moses Sacred Laws,
And too much learned for such senseless Cause,
Deserving Love for what he truly knows,
And Hate for the Example which he shows,
As His Heart laughs at what his Hands have took,
And loathes the Shepherd though he grasps the Crook.
Next Levi's Son, a Napthalite appears,
Of goodly Words, but thoughtless in his Fears,
Still dreading the Excess of Regal Power,
False, Discontented, Arrogant, and Sour.
A Courtier once, for Israel's Service fit,
Till Grants refused envenomed all his Wit;
Made him oppose the finding Means and Ways,
And turned the Stream of Flattery to Dispraise,
As he would have the Subjects Wrongs redressed,
And lost the Golden Key which Locked his Breast.
Reverse.
Such wondrous Heroes our Forefathers were,
When we, base Bouls! but Pigmies are in War:
By Foreign Chieftains we approve in Skill*
We learn how to entrench, not how to kill:
For all our Charge are good Proficients made
In using both the Pick-ax and the Spade.
But in what Field have we a Conquest wrought?
In Ten Years War what Battle have we fought?
Reverse.
Distrusts like theirs our fretful Fathers seized,
And urged a Rebel War to make 'em eased.
But Faith reposed in Him our Wishes chose
Made us subdue another sort of Foes;
Instead of Natives, Philistines we slew,
And made the Iebusite adore the Jew,
When Boyn with Purple Torrents swelled its Flood,
And Ahgrim swam, like Golgotha, in Blood.
Foreigners.
If we a Foreign Slave may use in War,
Yet why in Council should that Slave appear?
If we with Jewish Treasure make him great,
Must it be done to undermine the State?
Where are the Ancient Sages of Renown?
No Magi left fit to advise the Crown?
Must we by Foreign Council be undone?
Unhappy Israel, who such Measures takes,
And seeks for Statesmen in the Bogs and Lakes;
Who speak the Language of most abject Slaves,
Under the Conduct of our Jewish Knaves.
Our Hebrew's Murdered in their hoarser Throats;
How ill their Tongues agree with Jewish Notes!
Their untuned Prattle does our Sense confound,
Which in our Princely Palaces does sound;
The self-same Language the old Serpent spoke
When misbelieving Eve the Apple took:
Of our first Mother why are we ashamed,
When by the self-same Rhetoric we are damned.
Reverse.
Yet those who Saved and Counseled us in War,
Must not in Peace at Council Board appear,
But in return for Conquest take Disgrace,
And Naturalized, not have a Natives Place.
Oh! Israel, let it not in Gath be known,
Nor let thy Gratitude reach Askalon,
Publish it not, least Heathens know thy shame,
And Philistin's deride thy Sacred Name!
Bentir has for thy Rights and Houours stood,
And made an Israelite, sought Isreal's good,
Dispelled the Tempests gathering from a far,
And next Agrippa hushed the Din of War.
Yet for the Language is the Man dispis'd,
Whilst he that has no Thoughts is adored and prized.
Beast, as thou art, impertinent in wrong,
Thou need'st no Eve to Damn thee but thy Tongue;
Thy cankered Malice, and thy fester'd Thoughts
Can turn the purest Virtues into Faults:
Whose rising Honors, and whose towering Fame,
Soar high in Merit, as thou sink'st in Shame.
Foreigners.
But Bentir not content with such Command,
To canton out the Jewish Nation's Land:
He does extend to other Coasts his Pride,
And other Kingdoms into Parts Divide,
Unhappy Hiram! dismal is thy Song,
Though born to Empire, thou are ever Young!
Ever in Nonage, can no right transfer:
But who made Bentir thy Executor?
What mighty Power does Israel's Land afford?
What Power has made the famous Bentir Lord?
The Peoples Voice, and Sanhedrim's Accord.
Are not the Rights of People still the same?
Did they e're differ in or Place or Name?
Have not Mankind on equal Terms still stood,
Without Distinction, since the mighty Flood?
And have not Hiram's Subjects a free Choice
To choose a King by their united Voice?
If Israel's People could a Monarch choose,
A living King at the same time refuse;
That Hiram's People, shall it ever be said,
Have not the Right of Choice when he is Dead?
When no Successor to the Crown's in fight,
The Crown is certainly the Peoples Right.
Reverse.
But Envy's not contented to Profane
Agrippa's Friend, but dares his Master's Reign,
Under the Subject, it reviles the Prince,
And calls the truest Service an Offense.
Would Heaven that Hiram's Sickness would abate,
And he himself leave Heirs to Sidons State;
That Peace restored might have no other Face,
And War be known no more to Mortal Race.
But since our hopes are in appearance lost,
And Fate has Israel's Vows and Sidon's crossed.
Since the good Prince nor Herbs, nor Art can save,
And he must Childless yield to Nature's Grave.
What nobler Act could humane Mind perform,
Than to prevent and hush the growing Storm,
Which from two fierce Pretenders else would rise
With Arms in hand disputing for the Prize;
As each had equal share in Sidon's Reign,
And each had Sidon's Blood in every Vein.
What has he got, or what his Wisdom wrought,
But only Peace, and Peace was all he sought?
Egypt and Syria both as Brethren share,
Could Syria think her Lot divided fair,
And since they are both Successors to the Throne,
Give Egypt what is her Part, and like her own.
Foreigners.
If Kings are made the People to Enthral,
We had much better have no King at all:
But Kings appointed for the Common Good,
Always as Guardians to the People stood.
And Heaven allows the People sure a Power
To choose such Kings as shall not them Devour:
They know full well what best will serve themselves,
How to avoid the dangerous Rocks and Shelves.
Reverse.
If Kings are made the Product of our Choice,
And owe their Grandeur to the Peoples Voice,
Whence is their Right Divine, and whence is given
A Sacred Power, unless their Voice is Heaven.
God first appointed Kings, and God ordained
That should be fixed which He alone sustained,
Well knowing from his Providential Mind,
That Israel could not choose, since she was Blind.
Foreigners.
Unthinking Israel! ah! henceforth beware
How you entrust this Faithless Wanderer.
He who another Kingdom can divide,
May set your Constitution soon aside,
And over your Liberties in Triumph ride.
Support your Rightful Monarch and his Crown,
But pull this Proud, this Croaking Mortal down.
Reverse.
Let her indeed beware, and truly dread
The Mischiefs which are falling on her Head,
Whilst she permits Audacious Slaves, to dare
That Providence, that made Her Kings its Care;
And lets a Servile Wretch for Servile Ends
Traduce Her Monarch, and Defame his Friends.
Foreigners.
Proceed, my Muse, the Story next relate
Of Keppech, the imperious Chit of State,
Mounted to Grandeur by the usual Course,
Of Whoring, Pimping, or a Crime that is worse;
Of Foreign Birth, and undescended too,
Yet he like Bentir mighty Feats can do.
He robs our Treasure, to augment his State,
And Jewish Nobles on his Fortunes wait
Our ravished Honors on his Shoulder wears,
The Titles from our Ancient Rolls he tears.
Reverse.
Amongst 'em shines a Youth a goodly Port,
Keppech the glorious Pride of Israel's Court,
By Nature formed for Grandeur, and designed
For Honors, the Rewards of such a Mind.
Noble his Birth, though Foreign is his Blood,
(For other Lands can show a Noble Flood)
His Temper Courteous, though his Station Great,
As every Word flows affable and sweet,
And since Agrippa's placed him near his Heart,
It needs must be the effect of true Desert.
Foreigners.
Was ever a prudent People thus befooled?
By Upstart Foreigners thus basely gulled?
Ye Jewish Nobles boast no more your Race,
Or Sacred Badges did your Father's Grace!
In vain is Blood, or Parentages, when
Ribbons and Garters can ennoble Men.
To Chivalry you need have no recourse,
The gaudy Trappings makes the Ass a Horse.
No more, no more, your ancient Honors own.
By slavish Gibeonites you are outdone:
Or else your ancient Courage reassume,
And to assert your Honors once presume;
From off their Heads your ravished Laurels tear,
And let them know what Jewish Nobles are.
Reverse.
And thou Great Prince, from whose Auspicious Reign
We Triumph o'et the Land, and Rule the Main;
From whose Example we should Discords cease,
And learn to live in what thou gav'st us, Peace.
Instead of these, wom Commonwealth Debates
Would render Enemies to Israel's States,
Part with thy treacherous JOCKNEY from thy side,
Nor let thy Bounty more support his Pride;
Let HEBRON'S PRIEST from thy Embraces torn,
Preach Anarchy where Anarchy was born,
Whilst from thy Righteous Throne we take our Laws,
And fear the Sovereign as we love the Cause;
As we the Blessings of thy Scepter share,
And truly know what Jewish Monarchs are
FINIS.

