Further Advice TO A PAINTER. OR, Directions to dravv the Late Engagement Aug.
11th. 1673.

Hor. de art Poet. -- Pictoribus atque Poetis,
Quidlibet audiendi semper fuit aequa potestas.
LONDON, Printed for R. Vaughan in the Little Old Baily, 1673.

Another Advice to a PAINTER; OR, Directions how to draw the Late Engagement,
August 11th. 1673.
PAinter, prepare thy Pencill yet once more,
And taking Prospect from the Belgian Shore,
Draw me Two Royal Fleets, conjoined in one,
Ready to part that Stake that is to be won;
Cover the Sea, and all their Squadrons draw
In such thick Forests as the Sun never saw:
Thence back into the Land casting thy Eye,
Draw all the Beacons flaming in the Sky;
And, if thou can, draw the confused Roar
Of People running to defend their shore:
Paint all that Fear and Consternation can
Raise in the Visage of despairing Man,
And let the Figures a proportion hold
With Mothers loosing Sons, and Misers Gold.
But e're these Colors in the life thou lay,
Turn thy designing Face another way;
Look from the South-West Coast there creeps along
An Adverse Fleet, as numerous and as strong;
Wary, yet Bold, who long concealed had lain
Fenced in by Sands, the Citadels o'th Main;
But grieved to see their Country thus oppressed,
Like Lions roused, come rampant from their rest,
Stretching for strength; And as along they stand,
Refresh their men, and check their fears on Land;
Who heartned thus, on Board in Clusters crou'd
To have a share in their defense grown proud,
Vowing to chase these Objects of their fear,
And make them for their Insolence pay dear:
" Cowards will turn if you too hard pursue;
" Then think what Courage in Despair will do.
Now Painter close the Scenes, and show thy Skill,
Teaching thy Pencil some hid Arts to kill;
Look how the Royal Fleets stand both prepared
To act so much more than the Assailors dared;
That lest they should in Courage seem behind,
Rather then wave the Fight, they will lose the Wind.
But least the Blood and Horror thou must paint,
In such a dismal Fight, should make thee faint,
Spread some few dashes over like a Cloak,
And hide these Cruel Scenes in Fire and Smoke:
Only be kind to every Gust that blew,
And then some Brave Commander set in view.
First draw D'Estrees appointed to receive
The Charge that Furious Bankaert came to give;
Bankaert who led the Zealand Force that day,
Who used to be the first that forced their way;
But with that glory they must now dispense,
The White Flag carried so much Innocence,
That maugre all opposure it could find,
D'Estrees it is said charged through and Gained the Wind;
There bravely daring his Proud Foe he stays,
And all the Terror of the Fight surveys;
" Thus Hawks by hovering over their heads would fright
" The hardy Bustard which they doubt to strike.
Yet Estivall by Partial Canon fell,
And proved not like his Ship Invincible,
Bevilly, Sepville, Dailly, many more,
Gave all the marks undaunted courage wore:
But see what it is to fight against Thick-skin'd Dutch,
They seemed not to have received the smallest touch:
" Thus Fellons marked with a cold Brand, will shout,
" Clap their mouth to it, and quickly bite it out.
The Prince could not the like advantage find,
For subtle Ruyter kept too close the Wind;
Ruyter, who long his Countries Guard has bin,
Piecing their Lyon's tail with his Fox-skin,
The Fabius of the Holland Commonwealth,
Hovering in clouds and charging foes by stealth;
Who making Victory his only aim,
Judges aright, Advantage is no shame;
Therefore for it with settled courage waits,
Then acts his part, and leaves the rest to fates.
So now his Canon on the Prince he plyes,
Who briskly fights, though seemingly he flies;
And whilst De Ruyter presses in his wake,
Against so much odds such fierce returns does make,
As all the Assailors fury does Out-doe;
For who dare Charge the Prince and Sovereign too.
" The wary on advantage fight secure,
" But he is brave dare their assaults endure;
The Prince does more, he turns and Canon vyes,
And with his louder Roarings rends the Skves;
Piercing the Winds, De Ruyter's sides he galls;
But here the brave La Neve untimely falls;
And Reeves greedy of Honor, does obtain
It, at no less a rate, but much more pain.
Mean while the Prince is so encompas'd round,
That Echoes subalternately rebound
From either side, Nor is his Stern-chace free,
" Glory and Danger still Companions be.
As a Fierce Lioness pressed to a bay,
Surrounded by the Hunters every way,
Eager to save her Young she knows hard by,
And fears to danger may exposed ly,
Does with her Horrid Roarings fill the Air,
Making her Tail and Sides the Consort bear,
With Love and with Disdain Enraged grows,
And at one Onsett Horse and Man o'rethrow's
Whatever dares Oppose her Fury, dies,
And through all Hazards to their aid she flies.
So the Brave PRINCE having amazed his Foe,
And knowing well the Care that Generals owe
To their whole Fleet, whose Safety does depend
On Vigilance, looks out whom to defend;
And first does down to Valiant Chicheley steer,
Hard set by Two Vice-Admirals and a Rear;
Soon clearing him, he forward takes his way,
Where all the Stress of this Great Battle lay,
Where Right to Worlds, rather than to the Flag,
Seemed hard disputed between Trump and Spragg.
" Oh Painter! could thou find a Secret art
" To draw this Fight to the life in every part,
" To separate the Fire from the Smoke,
" And clear those Clouds which do great Actions choke,
" The famed Apelles should thy Vassal be,
" And Angelo, his Pencill yield to thee.
All that have heard from the loud voice of Fame,
Of Mighty Trumps and Spragg's once greater Name,
Been told the Several Hazards they have run;
The Battails One has lost, and the other won;
Both bravely, both with utmost Valor done;
Cannot but think when they were once engaged,
The Elements themselves must seem enraged;
" As Friends, turned Rivalls in a Female suit,
" Make Jealousy from Kindness spread its root;
" Rivalls in Honor the same course pursue,
" And love that Glory which they would undo.
Thus Spragg and Trump with Equal Souls Endowed,
Thought each to the others Glory seemed a cloud:
Both Hearts of proof, but with this difference, Spragg
Could only act, Trump can both act and brag.
Draw them then, Painter, as they did Engage
In Flames their Thirsty Honor to assuage,
Draw Bullets making through each others side,
Harbors, where Shallops might in safety ride:
Till Trump at last a furious Chain-shot flings,
Gives Spragg the Check, and cuts away his wings;
But make him still the Battle to renew,
By changing Ship, and forcing Trump to it too.
But Painter, now th'unlucky Pencill burn,
Or in unhappy sables let it mourn,
Cursed be those shot so fatally did range.
To force brave Spragg unto a second Change:
And Trump himself, if he is to Honor true,
Will Execrate that hand the Bullet threw;
Which led by fate did through the St. George fly,
And made an Admiral in a Cock-Boat dye.
Trump Ignorant of his Rival's Fate, still plyes
To burn the unwing'd Ship, or make it Prize,
Briskly he does on its Defendants bear,
But found, alas! that OSSORY was there;
He knew his Courage, and from Fame had learned
How Brave he was, and yet how unconcerned:
Thought it no blemish if Retreat he made
Before that Valor, Honor only swayed.
Yet e're he parts the Henrietta Yatch
The last Effects was of his Fury taught;
This little Vessel full of Spirit, Gay
Without, as any Lady of the May;
Within Decked with a Valiant Soul, whose Heart
Could not admit him from his Adm'ral part;
His Love adventring past his Strength, is drencht,
And in the briny Wave his Passion quenched.
Poor Triumph! where the odds so mighty were;
Yet Amsterdam shall make it a Man of War,
Kill all were saved, but never tell how the rest
Strove to revenge so small a thing oppressed.
Kempthorne who in all Fights has Wonders wrought,
Sends a large Ship to Neptune for a draught;
Whilst Washbourn thinking that did not suffice
To his Libation adds a Sacrifice*
But who can every single Action tell,
Each strove in Fight each other to excel;
And though describing it exceed all Art,
Yet Haward, Courtney, Iennings, felt the smart.
In short, these did what ever Men could do,
But wished in vain Others had done so too.
Mean while the Prince again renew's the Fight,
And holds it on till the approaching Night:
And now afresh were Acts of Horror done,
Till the Dutch, tired with the declining Sun,
Did by a swift Retreat to their own Coast
Confess they had but little cause to boast,
Acknowledging the sum of all their gain,
Was Two Brave Captains and Three Admirals slain.
But when they hear how Spragg and Reeves are gone,
They Will think our Valor still by theirs Outdone.
Now Painter do but draw some few strokes more,
But change thy Fancy from the Sea to Shore,
Draw me a City Coffee-House, and there
Let all the tattling crowd in rounds appear,
Venting according to each several Vein,
The Malice or the Whimsey of their Brain;
Let one accuse our Courage, the other show
How thus it might be done, or so, or so:
Whilst yet so Dull and Ignorant they be,
Except in Paint, they never saw Ship nor Sea;
But if those Mad-brain'd Fools appear in sight,
Who yet dare argue that the Dutch will not fight,
And of their Folly will not convicted be,
Draw me an Act to send them all to Sea.
FINIS

