The Case of Edmond Prideaux Esquire
THAT the Borough of Taunton is an Ancient Borough by Prescription, and time
out of mind has sent two Burgesses to Sit in Parliament, which have been
chosen by the Housekeepers thereof not receiving Relief.

That in pursuance of a Writ under the Great Seal of England, a Precept Issued
from the Sheriff of the County of Somerset, directed to the Mayor of the said
Borough for the Election of two Burgesses to Serve for the said Borough in this
present Parliament.

That after the date of the said Writ, and before the time of Election, several
Briberies, Threats and Promises, and other Illegal Practices were used to
procure Votes for Sir John Cutler, and to deter others from Voting for Edmond
Prideaux Esquire and John Trenchard Esquire particularly several Notorious Riots being
committed in the said Borough, those that promised to Vote for Sir John Cutler
were discharged without any punishment; and some that would have Voted for the
said Mr. Prideaux and Mr. Trenchard were committed to Goal without Bail or
Mainprise, upon a pretended Burglary: whereas it appeared plainly on their
Trial, that no Burglary was committed, but only to keep them from Voting for
the said Mr. Prideaux and Mr. Trenchard; and they were offered a Discharge if
they would give their Votes for Sir John Cutler.

That William Turner, then Mayor of the said Borough, did declare before the
said Election, That he was resolved to Return Sir John Cutler, although he had
not the Majority of Voices of the Electors.

That the said Mayor combining with the Friends and Agents of Sir John Cutler,
did Erect a Booth in an unusual part of the said Borough, where they
endeavored to shut out such of the Inhabitants as came to Vote for the said
Mr. Prideaux and Mr. Trenchard, and admitted many of the Voters for Sir John
Cutler who behaved themselves very rudely and insolently at the time of
Election.

That the Mayor admitted no Clerk to take the Poll on the behalf of the said
Mr. Prideaux and Mr. Trenchard, and has ever since denied them a Copy thereof.

That the better to color their intended design, several Strangers were
brought in by the Friends and Agents of the said Sir John Cutler in a
tumultuous manner; whereupon the said Mayor did shut up the Poll, and refused
to take the Names of such as were ready to Vote for the said Mr. Prideaux and
Mr. Trenchard; 231 of which were afterward Polled for the said Mr. Prideaux
and Mr. Trenchard in the presence of Five Members of this Honorable House.

That notwithstanding all the said Practices, the said Mr. Prideaux and Mr.
Trenchard had about Fifty more Voices on the Poll than the said Sir John
Cutler; but the said Mayor nevertheless did unjustly Return Sir John Cutler,
together with the said Mr. Trenchard, although the said Mr. Prideaux and Mr.
Trenchard were duly Elected Burgesses of the said Borough.


