

PEL^^^^ICIDIVM OR THE CHRISTIAN ADVISER AGAINST Self-Murder.

Together with A Guide, and the Pilgrims Pass To the Land of the Living.

In Three Books.

Soles occidere and redire possunt. Senec.

LONDON.

Printed for (...) (...) and are to be sold at the Sign of the George in (...)
(...) 1653.

PELLICANICINIUM.
SInce All the World is Folly, well may one
Be the Hieroglyphick, not alone.
As unprun'd Trees, Men all abroad express
In strange Wild growths A Wilderness;
In which alone does dwell each friendless Man.
Each amongst the rest's A Pelican.
This, That about the Neast flame, hidden, brings;
To take The Foul, with singed wings.
Whose Piety, to save her Young from Fire,
Makes her a Prey to sharp Desire.
This Pelican owns none, that so unclean,
Do Her, Self-Death's Example, mean.
Yet has she heard within her lonely Place
As she to her Young did put the Case,
The shreiking News, that from New Troy did cry,
Self-murder! which did cause her fly
From Wilderness of Beasts to That of Men;
Where each House seems A Dragon's Den.
With stretched Pineons she her Flight does take,
Leaves Young, does not her Young forsake.
And to that Forest of hewn Trees, squared stone,
Where Thousands dwell, yet live Alone;
She comes; And on a sacred Mountain's Head
Takes stand; and then the Round does tread.
Erst dedicated was that Place to Paul,
Not for his cruel Deeds, when Saul.
But for such Acts, his Courage did discuss
With Beasts in Fight at Ephesus.
Upon that lofty, seeming, Ruin she
Does all about Destruction see.
There mounted high, as on a Tower she stands,
To 'th' Desert sings Divine Commands.
To That forsaken Place with opening Wings
Pointing her Beak to her Breast, she sings
This uncouth Note. Why, changed Mortals? Why,
With horrid Deeds thus blast ye Sky?
How are your Voices changed too, by done Wrong?
Now Groans, now Cries bear Parts in Song.
And what, so tunable, was, Sweet before,
Now bears the Burden, does deplore.
Were once your Hands too smooth, your Face too fair?
Must Faith be traffic for Despair?
Ah Troynovant! Thy too unhappy state
May justly fear from Heaven Troy's Fate,
Which naught can hinder, but such ^louds from Eyes
Of Penitence, as drown Sin's Cries.
Who made The World? Who turns the starry Ball?
Is not The Allmighty Head of All?
What Is Pleasure made, is ord'red by His Will.
His Hests were Laws; And must be still
It Is not Inferior Wit of things below,
Can cause by wisdom Ought to grow,
His Creatures All are; All from Him derive.
Without Him there is Naught can thrive.
Let Him but turn his Back, to Self leave all.
In The dark they reel, to ruin fall.
And but His Way Most High can Not be found.
His Walk is Not like Paths on ground.
What Blindness then possessed bewitched sight,
That needs it must forsake The Right?
What unknown God do you adore in vain?
What Idols set you up in brain?
Are Those Thy Gods that did from Egypt free?
Or what do call thy Liberty?
Or what Religion is it, that you coin;
When All Sins with Devotion join?
Is Heaven not just? or does forget to pay
The Debt, you scoar'd but yesterday?
Dispute it not! Nor cast with recklesse Mind
Approaching Judgments so behind!
Hark! How the Night-Ravens croak! Strange sights appear!
When Seasons alter, Judgment's near.
When Self-Destruction does among you rage,
Soon Public Fury may engage.
O stand not out Apostates! least you burn
To common Ashes in One Urne.
Return to Life! as I to Death for Young return!
The Prooeme.
SInce Adam's Fall his Posterity became Partakers, not Only of his Sin, but
his Sorrow. I will greatly multiply thy Sorrow, and thy Conception. In sorrow
shall thou bring forth etc. said God to Eve Genesis 3. 16. Grief is antienter than
the Eldest Son of the World. And by production of Time as Sin increased Sorrow
had the bigger growth. The Days of the Years of my Pilgrimage are an hundred
and thirty Years. Few, and Evil have the Days of the Years of my Life been,
and have not attained unto the Days of the Years of the Life of my Fathers in
the days of their Pilgrimage: So Jacob to Pharaoh. Gen: 47. 9. Every Day was
in new Labor; and every Minute a step onward in Pilgrimage.

Life then is a Long Journey on Foot; And the further we go, the wearier we
are. It is Fabled of Jupiter that being wearied with the brabbles of Pleasure
and Sorrow, he linkt them together with an Adamantine Chain, that the One
should not part from the Other. Invicem cedunt Dolor, ac Voluptas,
Says the Poet* Grief hangs at the Skirt of Pleasure, Sorrow is her close
Attendant.

Why make men then such a Wonder at the Miseries of the world? As if they had
not heard of them? Why are some so dejected at usual, and unavoydable Burdens?
groaning, and crying out under them? yea, and many times thinking to throw them
off, overthrow themselves.

And whence the Source of All This, but that they have laid by, as useless,
the Reason of Men; and cast off, or forgotten the Religion of Christians. For
as their Reason may be sufficiently informed by the Many Experiments in This
World of the Instability, and Violence of the same, which may render Notions
enough to convince the Understanding; Religion likewise might in the Soundness
of it is Principles, and by the strength of it is Superstructures so evidence by
Faith the Certainty of Hope, and Assurance of Future Enjoyment of Celestial
Things, that Our Souls (being as it were transanimated by Divine Contemplation)
should not only despise the Calamities of This World, as Trifles; But rather
rejoice in the Blessing to suffer Crosses, and Afflictions Here, especially to
be accounted worthy thereof in A Good Cause; These being Nothing in their
Greatest Bulk and Number, compared with the Unspeakable Rejoycings of Hereafter.

It is want of Faith, that makes us fall Below our Reasons, and to subject Our
selves to a Lower Kind of sense, than Bruites. So Geat is the Punishment of God
for Our Aversion, and Turning Our backs upon Him, that instead of Being near
the Degree of the Angels, As He created us, He leaves Us, infatuated, to fall
into a grosser sense, than Beasts.

How else can it possibly come to pass, that Any Distress should so overpower
Us, to destroy Our own Lives? As if we had proclaimed war against Our selves?
which even Nature by Instinct, and it is own secret Impulse does dictate to
preserve. Cor est primum Vivens et ultimum moriens, The Heart is readiest to
welcome Life at First, and most loath to part with it at Last by the Adhaesion
of Nature, which is a Lecture of Self-preservation unto All. How much more are
we to listen to, and obey The Divine Law, putting so strict an Obligation upon
Us, when It commands, Thou shall not Kill? This considered, I cannot, but stand
Amazed at the Steam of so much Humane Blood, running in streams, and the open
Veins daily bleeding of so many Christians, as is continually shed: But mine
Ears do tingle, to hear so many sad Relations, as even since March last
concerning Several Persons of diverse Rank, and Quality, inhabiting within and
about so Eminent a City, as late-fam'd London, that have made away, and
Murd'red Themselves.

It is a Grievous Thing to consider; Especially, if we have a Right
Apprehension of God; or a Belief, that there is a Hell.

Hence arose The Occasion of This Poem; Wherein The Author's Christian
Compassion moved him rather for Others Good to put Pen to Paper, than any
Overweening Opinion of himself, intimately Acquainted with his own
Imperfections, or any Vain Glory to seek The Press, to write Something upon so
Deplorable a Subject; Lest the Frequency of such Actions might in time arrogate
a Kind of Legitimation by Custom, or plead Authority from some latepublisht
Paradoxes, That Self-homicide was Lawful.

It is not denied but that the Temptations of Satan are subtle, frequent, and,
without God's Grace, almost irresistible. But so Great a Sin as This (From
which Good Lord deliver Us) is a direct Giving Our selves over to The Devil,
and a Denying the Power of Godliness; Yea, a Resolution in a desperate
Madness to throw our selves headlong into Perdition.

Whence These Horrid Actions more, than heretofore proceed, let us take a
Considerate View. Whether the Last Times be come upon us, so long foretold,
that Satan is let loose; Or That The Cup of Our Wickedness is almost
brim-full; Or that Our Apostasy, and Our other heinous Sins, as it were a
Violent Multitude, do rage, and make an Uproare in Our Consciences; Or that the
Sacriledg, and Blasphemy, (what shall I say of the Perjury of the Time?) show
not ^he Removal of The Candlestick, and lay us not open to the Immediate wrath
of The Lord, I leave it for Second Thoughts, and poizing Understandings.

But This sure must needs be apprehended, that such Things coming to pass, are
A sign of threatened, if not apparent Derelection, and God Forsaking us, when
the Heavens in their Wonders, and Men upon Themselves do Thus declare God's
Judgments; And it is to be feared, that Our Hypocrisy, Malice, and
Uncharitableness, as to raise an Audacious Heap to Heaven, Our Rebellion
against God's Ordinances are none of the meanest hastners of These
Thunderbolts, being, may I say, the Whetstones of Divine Vengance.

It were therefore much to be desired, That Every Man did lay his Hand upon his
Heart, examine himself diligently, and make inspection, and search into Every
Corner of the Same, to find out, and remove, what is Unclean among Us. Lest,
if not warned by the Gentleness of the Lord's preparatory Punishments we be
swallowed up in the Abyss of our Abominations, and perish utterly under the
Intolerable weight of his Heavy Displeasure, and Irresistible, consuming
Judgments.

The Author chose rather the Quickness of Verse, than more prolixe Prose (with
God's Blessing first implored) to disenchaunt the Possessed; following
Divinely-inspired David's Example to quiet Saul with the Melody of the Harp,
who was troubled with such a Spirit, that left him Not, until his
Armor-bearer having refused to obey his dire Commands, saw Him First act His
Desperate Resolve upon His Own Sword, and, provoked by His Example made the
Like concluding Scene to the Same Tragedy. Dereliction rode Before,
Self-Execution poasted After* Saul the First Homicide, we read of in Holy Writ
(Cain only feared to dye.) His Armourbearer His Second; And wise, yea crafty
Achitophel halter'd his Policy to make a Third. Saul possessed with a Devil* in
his Heart, Achitophel in his Head. How great a Care is to be had to prevent
both.

To the Discontented.
AS in a Glass you may behold
Your Face, your Figure in this Mold.
And, though it may in Some Lines miss,
As like as Many'a Copy it is.
This only Difference is between
The outward Draught, and-This within.
The Painter limbs with curious Art
The Face, the Breast, but This the Heart,
The horrid Fancies of the Brain,
The furious Blood in every Vein
Are here deciphered by course Hand
For lowest Minds to Understand,
Expect not therefore Lofty Verse!
Here Launcets prick, not Lances pierce.
It so becomes thy Wounded Mind
By what is sharp a Cure to find.
And yet Here is a Lenitive,
A Cordia'll Venom forth to drive.
Refuse not Then so good Advise,
As points from Hell to Paradise.
So have I seen A Lighthouse stand
In sable Night with burning Hand
Directing from Wracke's Shelf, Rock, shore
The sailing Pilot blind Before;
By which, escaping Danger's Tort,
He well arrives at Safetie's Port.
So may Thou too; If Thou seek'st Grace
And up to Heavenward Eye do place.
It Is weak'ned Faith does make thee reel,
As Storm turns ore th'unballast Keele.
Sail gently Then unto Thy Self!
And think each Passion is a Shelfe!
And every Melancholy Fit
A Rocke's to shipwreck Soul, and Wit!
Compare thy Self with All Beneath;
Thou liv'st then, Others scarcely breath.
And cast not up thy Sums of Loss,
Without The Counters of The Cross.
Then What Before perplexed thy Heart
Will prove A Buckler, not A Dart.
As Not, to the Desperate.
WHo speaks to Thee, that scorn'st Thy Self and All?
That look not for a Place to stand, but fall,
Thy rolling Eyes, and ghastly Face do tell,
Within Thee's That, which Some doubt, Local Hell.
Then why do poast? And ride each stage so fast?
To seek for that, which Thou at Home there have?
If Hellish Rage be better, than Heaven's Bliss,
Take Such thy Choice! And live, where Torment is!
Be lost Forever! Who does Willful die,
Sall find Erelasting Deafness to his Cry.
And does deserve it from High Justice Hand,
Whose Living Deafness would not Understand
Embrace thy Horror!-Yet, as Curious look,
Not on, but in this Thee-concerning Book!
In which, if, by God's Grace, thou chance to find
The Right, the Best way to reduce thy Mind;
Thank Heaven, not Him, that busi'ed thus his Brain,
To show thee, There lives Bliss, and here dwells Pain.
There Horror, and Eternity shake hands;
Darkness, and Fire with whips observe Commands
Of Tophet's Tyrant, forcing them to obey,
That scorned, and would not listen in their Day.
So Sin's Rebellion's punished; and Sought Evil
With Easines does find a Meeting Devil.
Yet stop thy Foot!-And try but one Lord's Prayer!
It may blow Satan up into the Air.
And lead Us not into Temptation, Say!
But, Lord, deliver Us from Evil pray,
And He that holds the Kingdom pulls the Chain
Or frighted Satan boundeth up again;
Where let him dwell in Storms, but not in thee,
Who should to the Holy Ghost a Temple be.
O could thou think, what Joys thou now do wave!
Thou would despise Earth's Pains Such Joys to have!
THE TABLE OF THE FIRST BOOK.
Sect. Page 1. ACcost. 1 2. Induction. 2 3. Lovers. 2 4. Great Spirits. 2 5.
Melancholic. 3 6. Jealous. 3 7. The frighted Child 4 8. The Debaucht Prentice
4 9. The unfortunate Merchant 5 10. The bloody Murderer 5 11. The curious
Zelot 5 12. The Tender-Conscienc't Despairer. 6 13. A horrid, yet true story
of one that hanged himself, upon his Knees, with a Bible on a stool open before
him, and a paper to signify that he had repented 7 14. One that will not plead
to save his Goods. 8 15. A desperate malefactor. 8 16. A Wench with child. 9
17. A despairing Client. 9
Instruction.
18. From the Frame of Nature. 10 19. From Man's Creation, and Redemption. 10
20. Self Preservation from Instinct. 11 21. Examples of Self-preservation. 12
22. Self-Homicide against Nature. 12 23. Reason against Self-murder. 13 1. From
Justice. 2. From comparative value 3. From Courage. 4. From the Immortality of
the Soul. 5. From Experiment. 14 6. From the offices of the Senses. 7. From
shame of the Fact. 8. From Injustice. 15 9. From the manner of the Duel. 15
10. From particular Interest Of Parents, Husbands and Wives, Children, Friends
etc. 11. From public interest Of Country, Supreme Magistrate, The Church,
etc. 12. From the Law of Nature. 16
24. Arguments from Religion 16 25. The Cause of desperate Actions. 17 26.
Lamentation for the Church. 18 27. Expostulation with the Atheist. 18 28. With
the Universarian 19 29. Invitation to the Direction. 21 30. The Direction. 21
31. An Orthodox Divine the best Instructor. 22 32. Persuasion by Assumption,
and Religious Reason. 23 33. Comparatives in Law, and Gospel. 26 34.
Supposition of satisfaction. 27 35. Consolation. 28 36. Satan's Craft and
Policy. 29 37. Encouragement against Temptation. 29 38. Advance of Resolution.
30 39. Prevention. 30 40. Summary Fortification. 31
THE SECOND BOOK.
Page THe Manuduction, 35
Canto 1.
The Den of Idleness. 36 Perspective 1. 38 Moral 1. 39 Prospect 1. 40
Consolatory Essay 1. 41
Canto 2.
The Grotto of Repentance. 44 Perspective 2. 47 Moral 2. 51 Prospect 2. 52
Consolatory Essay 2. 53
Canto 3.
The Wilderness of Tribulation. 58 Perspective 3. 60 Moral 3. 63 Prospect 3.
66 Consolatory Essay 3. 67
Canto 4.
The fruitful Vale of Tears. 70 Perspective 4. 72 Moral 4 78 Prospect 4. 80
Consolatory Essay 4. 80
Canto 5.
The Cell of Humility. 84 Perspective 5. 86 Moral 5. 95 Prospect 5. 90
Consolatory Essay 5. 91
Canto 6.
The House of Prayer. 94 Perspective 6. 106 Moral 6. 125 Prospect 6. 126
Consolatory Essay 6. 127
THE THIRD BOOK.
The Encouragement Canto 7.
The Mount of Faith. 140 Perspective 7. 143 Moral 7. 162 Prospect 7. 163
Consolatory Essay 7. 164
Canto 8.
The Camp of Resolution. 168 Perspective 8. 172 Moral 8. 185 Prospect 8. 188
Consolatory Essay 8. 189
Canto 9.
The Lodge of Patience, 194 Perspective 9. 199 Moral 9. 218 Prospect 9. 221
Consolatory Essay 9. 222
Canto 10.
The Ruins of Mortification. 227 Perspective 10. 231 Moral 10. 246 Prospect
10. 247 Consolatory Essay 10 248
Canto 11.
The Farm of Self-Resignation. 252 Perspective 11. 256 Moral 11. 282 Prospect
11. 283 Consolatory Essay 11. 284
Canto 12.
The holy Hill of Contemplation. 286 Perspective 12 303 Moral 12. 311 Prospect
12. 314 Consolatory Essay 12. 315


As Cat sad, despr'ate Maid Feind tempes to Tree
From Steep, to gaping deep, as Tiger Man bent see
As Eagle, Book, Grace, Gospel puttes in Hand
Instruction pulles from Fire, (as Angel him,) yt Brand.
F. Barlow fecit.

THE CHRISTIAN ADVISER AGAINST SELF-HOMICIDE, OR SELF-MURDER. BOOK I.
SECT. I. Accoast.
STay, Desperate Souls! Let Us have a word or two!
Examine Well, what you but Once can do!
Can any Fiend allure with such a Call,
That you must post, and run into the Fall!
Or is your Conscience cozened with false Hope,
That Heaven is t'ane by Water, Knives, or Rope?
For no man sure seeks Hell; Nor sets his Will
On Purpose to bring forth the Fruits of Ill.
Man was, and is betrayed with specious Show;
And meets with Loss in seeking More to know.
SECT. II. Induction.
SMooth-handed Pleasure beckens Most awry;
And has a Wanton Witchcraft in the Eye.
Unwieldy Wealth (that is stiff, and pursie grown)
A Hoard's, that He, that has, yet does not own;
Or Others vainer Breath, wherewith some build
Castles in Air, their Names with it to gild.
These are Hell's usual Cordage (Traps and Gins)
Wherewith Men twist the Cables of their Sins;
With which they to destruction tie so fast,
As if unto th'Abysse they had Anchor cast.
SECT. III. Lovers.
OR is it some whining calm of Love, that is crossed,
That has your Hearts into the Hazard tossed?
Is there No Remedy for what you loose,
But, Woodcock like to cure it with a Noose?
Is Nature plundered that she'as lost her Store?
What can not find amongst all All to please, One more?
Why sneak ye else alone? Why sigh? Why pine?
Why set up Idols on each sainted Shrine?
So tempt ye Heaven; And with your frantic Fits
Endanger loss of Life, as well as Wits.
SECT. IV. Great Spirits.
COme ye stiff Hearts, that know not how to bend!
That All would borrow, but would Never lend!
Has strong Affliction pressed ye to the Ground?
And left ye Speechless, as you had lately swoun'd?
Can dire Resolves help? Or Stabs cure a Wound?
Have ye lost All Things? And 'bove Those your Fame?
Life was before. Let it outlive A Name.
Impatient Fingers of Minds overhot,
Open not Skains, but run them All a knot.
Unrulie Prisoners, fettered, strive in vain;
And more do hurt themselves, the more they strain.
SECT. V. Melancholic.
BUt, cloudie Natures, swallow'ing stupid Folly,
Like Pills, wrapped up in pleasing Melancholy!
Forbear your Dumps! And let in Reasons Light!
Else you may hasten; or forestall your Night,
Be sociable Creatures! as First made.
Occasion shunned, does Sad Events evade.
Be well employed! For Idleness has been
Porter, and Executioner to Sin
SECT. VI. Jealous.
ANd, Why so Jaundic't are ye Man? or Wife?
Your Local Hell does weary, shorten Life.
Think ye that Jealousy, Ill got, Worse born,
Must have Death drive it through the Suretie-Horn?
Whose narrow passage is the only way
For foolish Hopes to seek by Night the Day?
Shall thou, cause the other happens on a Shelf,
Needs therefore madly cast away thy Self?
SECT. VII. The Frighted Child.
Who Is there? The woeful Child of Parents Rage.
Whither art going to prevent thine Age?
What Stepmother has frighted thee to do
That, when thou come at, thou will tremble too?
Beware of Haste! Thy Steps do lead to Hell;
Where Rage, where Horror do for ever dwell.
Storms last not Always. Have a Care, mad Child!
Thou think to escape the Worst, and art beguiled.
Thy Parents Wrath may sooner be appeased,
Than everlasting Torments can be eased.
SECT. VIII. The Debaucht Prentice.
WHy Prentice buy'st That Cord? Thy look bewrayes,
There Is something in thee, that thy Self betrays.
Has thy lewd recklesse Youth summed Tavern-Scores?
Or have exchanged thy Masters Wares for Whores?
Do fear thy Parents Bond? Thy Credits Loss?
All these? And have thou yet another Cross?
Then Wrath on All sides haunts thee, and the Maid,
Or Masters Daughter, thou have ill betrayed.
And wud'st thou bind up all within that String?
Life is of higher Price, then any Thing.
There Is Hope to cure all These. There Is None in Death.
For There thou stranglest Hope in stifling Breath.
Because thou have injured Others, must Thou still
Increase thy doing Wrong to lessen Ill?
Bethink thee then! And make not more thy Curse!
Since Ill to Ill is Step from Step to Worse.
For there is no Price that can this Reckoning pay.
Turn back! Repent! Thy Score may waste away.
SECT. IX. The unfortunate Merchant.
SEek not that poison, Merchant, for thy Taste!
Must thou be lost 'cause Ships away are cast?
Can fear a Prison, whence there may be Bail?
And flee'st from that into a Hopeless Goal?
Wu'd any Mad Man seek the Sergeant's Hand?
On Such an action too, as ere shall stand?
Losses may be regained, but this can never.
This is a Loss but Once, but Loss for ever.
SECT. X. The Bloody Murderer.
BUt whom behold I There with Hands so red,
And Face so pale, as if he were half dead?
Lay down that Dagger! Mercies endless Store
Cain's Fact exceeds; or Judas Sale; or More.
SECT. XI. The curious Zealot.
AH! What say Thou, that break'st asunder Text?
And seekst out Scruples, that thou may be vexed?
And look for such Decrees of God, as Fate?
Poring to know whom He Would predestinate?
Those Characters are legible to'th' Wise
In The Book of God, as saving Mysteries.
Do well; and be accepted. Can not see?
Thou want Faith. Thou want Humility.
No Wonder Then; Though Desperation make
Thee ready Fuel for the Brimstone Lake.
SECT. XII. The tender Conscienc't Despairer.
WHat ayl'st poor Tender Conscience, late misled?
Why, That was ^tone, He gave Thee; 'Twas not Bread.
Said He? (Too vile to live to spend Gods store,
Thou do but heap up Sin with spending more.
Thou tread'st on groaning Earth, and robb'st the Good
By wrongful eating up the Godly's Food.)
Have Thou less Right unto the Creature, than,
For whom All was at first created, Man?
Or has the Serpent changed his former Cheat
To' a Contrary as false. Thou must not Eat?
He meant not Thee. God made Thee Living Heir
Of The Earth; unnaturalize not by Despair!
Can be a Burden to the silent Earth?
And were not to thy Mother before thy Birth?
Deluding Satan see, thy Soul wu'd Press.
He takes advantage of thy heavy Dress;
And leads to Mischief by the Wilderness.
He Is now turned Saint to turn Thee from thy Joy
To'a dark Labyrinth the better to destroy.
Shines not the Sun on All? The Bad? The Good?
Bears not Earth equally for all her Food?
'Twixt Good and Bad what difference makes the Main?
Or what Distinction Winds? or falling Rain?
No Eurthen thou unto the Earth can be.
Unload thy Sin. The Burden is on Thee.
SECT. XIII. A horrid, yet true Story of one that hanged himself, upon his
Knees, with a Bible on a Stool open before him, and a Paper to signify that he
had repented.
What Story have I heard? What rueful Tale?
What monstrous Match, of Piety and Bale?
Even to Beliefs Abortion? That a Crime,
So big, should bear Religion out of Time?
Can any Christian make his Will of's Mind
Before, so black a Deed to leave Behind,
To show, his Act spawned not from Discontent,
But that he was Prepared, did Repent?
And, that of Death he need not be afraid,
The Sacred Book was open, and before him laid.
Mad Zeal to Blindness he makes double Pairs
In Kneeling Posture Hanging joins to Prayers!
What greater Sin cu'd Satan ere devise,
Than put Devotion into Bloudshot Eyes!
Are Cursed Fruits produced by Blessed Trees?
How comes else Blasphemy upon its Knees?
Where Gods Church is, must there Hells Chapel be?
Religion, Witchcraft, and Idolatry?
What Juggling Cozenage This? To gild Damnation?
It Is a strange Tenet sure? What? Damned Salvation?
I did repent said thou? Thou did resolve
The greatest Sin to act, that could involve.
For, could have cleared by Sorrow thy past Score,
Thou in This One have done them Millions over.
The Pardon of all Those This does prevent.
To much One Such. Who shall for This repent?
Nay; Who is it can? Such Actors past their Scenes,
When off the Stage have lost their Time and Means.
For, as the Tree does fall, so must it lie,
Until the mighty Judge does come to try.
Then, as our Deeds have been or Good, or Ill,
He will our Measures with our own Corn fill.
Blessed They shall reign, that did obey's Commands.
Hells Zelot! Who required This at thy Hands?
Religion, if ye make a Pedlars Trusse,
From such Gear in it Good Lord deliver us.
SECT. XIV. One that will not plead to save his Goods.
IS That a Christian stands at the Bar,
That will not be to's Wife or Child a Scar?
Why did ought then unjust? Offenses be
The greatest stains unto a Family.
Speak Mute! Pull off thy vain Pretenses Hoods!
Wu't cast thy Self away to save they Goods.
For ought thou Know the Jewries tender Heart,
Or Judges Wisdom way may find to start.
Wu't Thou upon thy Life commit a Rape?
And block the Door, by which thou might escape?
SECT. XV. A Desperate Malefactor.
COndemned Malefactor, why such strife
Within thy struggling Breast to shorten Life?
Thou have not many days. Make use of Those!
Wu't thou turn Hangman to preserve thy Clothes?
Yea, rather then the People see thy Day,
Thou will prevent, and make thy self away.
There may be yet Reprieve. At worst, thy Death,
Repenting paid, will give thee Heavenly Breath.
SECT. XVI. A Wench with Child.
ANd Why that Physic, Wench? Have loosed thy Shoe?
Wu't to Adultery add Close Murder too?
What though thou have broke thy Leg? thy Credit's lame?
By breaking Neck do think to cure the same?
More salvage then a Tygresse! brutish! wild!
Have neither Mercy on thy Self? nor Child?
By Covering Sin, and seeking Shame to hide
How many might have lived, that foully died.
Blind Wounds, than open ones, more long endure;
And often prove Mortal, that might else have Cure.
SECT. XVII. A Despairing Client.
WElcome from Westminster! If I may say.
What? wu't not answer? Have not gained the Day?
The Trial went against thee by thy Look.
How comes this Penknife in thy Sleeve, I took?
Thou do not mean for Loss of Land, or Pelf,
To draw, and enter Judgment against thy Self?
Let too hot Passion take some cooling Air!
And raise a Title unto Heaven by Prayer!
Wu't spoil a good Cause by thy loud Despair.
Come all the Rest of much Distorted minds!
Come! Bring your Griefs, like Loads of several kinds!
And let me show you, where is your Rest! your Balm!
The last to be your Cure, the first you Calm.
SECT. XVIII. Instruction from the frame of Nature.
SPell first in Nature's Book, Gods bigger Print,
And read his Glory in his Creatures in it.
As first he gave joynt-Being unto All.
One does another to his Duty call.
The Sun provokes the Plants to flower, and seed.
Heats living Creatures in their Kinds to breed.
He gilds the Day, and lends Moon silver Light;
While she directs the Tides, and rules the Night,
Attended by the Stars with twinkling bright.
Man only is above their Influence;
Except his Vegetation, and his Sense.
Those are his grosser Parts. But else his Stature
Is tall as Angels by' Intellectual Nature.
SECT. XIX. From Man's Creation, and Redemption.
THe World for Man, Man like Himself He made;
And Man shall last, when all the World shall vade.
Wherefore the Universe, so great, we see,
Is summed in Man, in his Epitome.
The World, and every Creature in the same
Were made to glorify the Makers Name.
God, though Man fell from his first blessed State,
By'th' Word in's Son to Bliss did Renovate.
His standing in the Gap Heavens Justice staid.
His Sponsion The Execution then delaid.
So fell not Man, as Angels did. Their Fall
Had none to interpose, was past recall.
Then by th'oreshadowing of the Holy Ghost
The Virgin did concelve Him, saved the Lost.
So took He Humane Nature; and did dye,
That he Gods Wrath for Man might satisfy.
Sufficient for the whole World was his Death.
Efficient only unto such as breath,
And live by Faith in Him. With Him Man rose.
He then to Heaven Man's Mediator goes.
So Man depends on Him; or should. For He
To the Father must Man's Intercessor be.
Who rob Him of such Office, or deny
His Power, shall find Him Judge. He comes to try.
No Stars then such Intelligencers be,
As Dreams have made them from Astrology.
All keep their Courses; and in Order move;
As if each Part with The Other were in Love.
SECT. XX. Self-Preservation from Instinct.
ALl by Instinct Self-preservation seek;
Even savage Creatures to their own are meek.
By Bears are Cubs lickt. With Whelps Lions play.
On others Panthers; not their own Kind prey.
Tygres do others, Themselves never slay.
Hares leave their Forms. Deer rouse; and flee from Hounds.
These lodge; Those squat; Both run for covert Grounds,
And all, these labor for, is Life to save
From those, whose greedy Mouths it soon wu'd have.
SECT. XXI. Examples of Self-preservation.
THe wary Carp, scared by the ravenous Pike,
Darts under Banks, and into Mud does strike.
The frighted Fowl, that sees the Falcon nigh,
Steals up on Wing, with Speed away does fly:
The Dog-sprung Patridge from the Hawk does go;
And drops in Thicks; or shelter in a Row.
The Nightingale over Thorn sits tender Breast;
Lest Danger should surprise her at her Rest;
And, watching sings away Nights silent Hours,
Else her the Sloemorm unperceived devours.
Some, that but Plants are, seem quick Sensitives,
Do shrink from Touch, as if to save their Lives.
The Marigold does open with the Sun,
And shuts against hurtful Dewes, when Day is done.
The Daisie does the like, that closes leaves;
Least any Hurt it from the Night receives.
SECT. XXII. Self-Homicide against Nature.
SElf-Preservation is to All a Law,
Which Nature has impressed Life's Length to draw.
How comes it then, that Man should only find
Self-Murder out, against even Naturies kind?
Self-Murder! Why, my Hair affrighted stands;
My Knees do Knock; and Tremblings seize my Hands.
After amazement I examine, Who
It Is dares Such Deeds, as Well as it is, can do?
If Men? Sure Reason might their Madness bind.
For That gives better Light to Every Mind.
SECT. XXIII. Reason against Self-Murder.
1.
Have but One Building? And That stately? fair?
Wu't ruin That, which thou can not repair?
And That not Thine too? But for Use, in Trust?
And think, to fire That House, was lent thee, Just?
2.
Take All Things! Weigh Them in the Scale with Life!
And muster All, that move within thee Strife!
So Prizelesse That, That is so Rich a Gemme,
As That outweighs the Numerous Weight of Them.
3.
Besides; What Cowardice it is to dye,
Meerelie for Fear of Facing Misery;
Which, if thou stand'st, does Wheel about, does fly,
And leaves thee Great by Such thy Victory.
For no Man's Wretched, but Who thinks him so
More might be happy, if themselves they would know.
Opinion it is, that much does Bedlam fill,
Where Men are tortured by their own cross Will.
We make our own Hobgoblins in our Heads;
One Foot Frights The Other then, Wheres'ere it treads.
The Fears of Death do cause us often to dye.
So leap we into Graves, when Tombs we fly.
Mistaking Creatures, Men themselves condemn;
And make a Bedlam of their Bethelem.
As what for Labors destined, late Abuse
Has named All Bridewells, where they whips do use
4.
Or think, The Spirit is Mortal? That it dies
When chilling Death does Mortal flesh Surprise?
Were so Man were no better, than a Hog;
Than Lion, dead, better's a living Dog.
The laden Ass, with burden pressed down,
Goes into streams To drink, but not To drown.
5.
Mark! Who has tried Self-homicide; and come
By happy Help into Life's loathed Room.
How gladly they survive The Despe'rate Act!
And with Sad shame behold Their hideous Fact!
For Nature still abhorres to be Unsluc't;
And from it is Being to Not to Be reduced.
6.
Why stands Sentrie The discerning Eye,
And often acts at distance the quick Spy?
Why does The Ear with care bestow It Is sense,
T'import the News, and give Intelligence?
Why is The Taste so quick? The Smelling nice?
And, against what is ill, give Larum in a trice?
Why is The Touch so tender, 'voiding Pain,
The Warning piece to make Retreat amain?
These Cinque Ports are, as with their Fire in pan,
Against Danger set to guard The Isle of Man.
For Life's dear Safety All, as one, conspire
In Preservation of the Self entire.
How Keeps He Faith with These, that is so Unjust,
By Violence of's Hands betraying Trust?
7.
Why seek'st A Corner? Is The Deed so base?
Thou sham'st to Common Judgment put the Case?
That sure is very foul, that All condemn;
And thy Self too. Why else avoydest Them?
Even Malefactors, new condemned At Bar,
That scarce cu'd speak Before, Then Pleaders are,
To gain the Judge's Favor for Reprieve,
For A Prolonger, that their Snast may Live.
And wu't thou throw the Taper in the Fire?
And cause, what might Long shine at once expire?
8.
Wu't thou Keep 'Sizes in thy self? Act All?
Be Judge? Be Jury? Party Criminal?
Accuser? Jayler? (All unfit to do)
And must thou be the cursed Hangman too?
Blind Judge! thou know not Nature's statute Law;
That bids thee Save; And thou say, Hang, and Draw.
Thy Jury^s pact, of Passions all a-flame.
Thou Art not the Party, but some other Name.
For thou art not thy self. Nor is thy Crime
Such, as thou think it at the present time.
The Accuser is suborned; the Jayler's mad;
A Prison making, where none ought be had;
Mistaking thy free Chamber, that is thy Hall,
Of Judgment too, thy Golgotha, and All.
The Hangman has no Warrant; Nor the Shreife;
Where All is thus against Law, what needs Repreife.
9.
What Combat's this? Where fight not Two, but One?
Who gives the Wound, must fall. Flesh Killed by Bone.
A strange Encounter! Where there none to part,
The Rebel Hand dies with it is Blow at Heart.
10.
But Hark! thy Parents call! thy Friends! thy Wife!
They bid thee, Spare, what is not thine Own, thy Life.
If Not for love, yet Hold thy hand for shame!
Blot not Posterity, nor brand thy Name!
Prevent not Future Issue! For thy Deed,
(As much as in thee lies) makes Mankind bleed.
Yea; Should All into Such a Pit be hurled,
A Sudden Fun'erall Soon would Sweep the World;
As Waters Fury Once did All engage,
Thou would bring Death to All by Human Rage.
The Diff'erence Only; What was there one Flood,
Thou fain Would change to many streams of Blood.
11.
Thy Country and the Magistrate Supreme
Do claim thee as a Branch of the Common Stream.
For there is a Public Right in Every Man,
That Life He neither may dispose; nor can.
12.
Can make a Law, than Natures, more to bind?
And null Her Statute that at first was signed?
Then did thou make thy self. If not, Submit!
Who Is not Above that Law, is Under it.
A Law is made to punish an Offense;
And not Authority for Violence.
A Law's the Rule of Justice, Bond, whereby
To knit, No Force to break Society.
The end of Laws is This; That Men increase
By Justice among Themselves so, that mild Peace
May bless their Fellowship; Which should be so,
As if they were holy, and no change might know.
The right Lawmakers Sacred Priests appear
Of Justice; Each to Here Is A Minister
How comes it Then, that Thou do so assume.
To break what is holy? Or how dare presume?
SECT. XXIV. Arguments from Religion.
BUt Where Is Religion all this while? Yea, Where?
Had God been in thy Thoughts, thou had not been there.
There in grim darkness, out of Sight of Heaven,
Self durst not Self attempt Life to have bereaven.
Religion is the Bank, the Quickrow Bound,
That pens the Waters, and divides the Ground.
By this the Vineyard's fenc't from Fox and bore.
That Watch to Spoil It Is Beauty, and It Is store.
Nor has the Roaring Lion there the Power
To Rend with Paws, or with his Jaws devour.
And though his Fury compasses about
Earth, Sea, and Air, yet is he there shut out.
Gods Church is Noah's Ark; Which maugre Rage
Does act yet Safely on the bill'owie Stage.
SECT. XXV. The Cause of Desperate Actions.
NO marvail then, when Her strong Pale is down,
Like Ship-sprung Planks, the waves break in and drown
How cu'd Such Fury else, such dire Events
Lay hold on Christians in their Discontents!
This is that Black Eclipse, that baneful Cause,
That not alone portends such Ills, but draws.
When holy Worship does become a crime;
And Weeds spring up, and overgrow the Time.
When every Humonr Vents it is purulence;
And Scripture's made a Nose of wax of Sense.
When Poison fills the Market, sells for Food;
How can the People's Nourishment be good!
When humane Fancies for their Judgments go,
And down Opinion does Religion throw.
When All Is our own, and Nothing's due to God,
As if w'had banished Him from Our Abode.
When Malice out of Hearts has sulphur'd love,
And the fell Serpent has devoured the Dove.
When there is Delight in Evil; and Men run;
As in Contempt, with Back upon the Sun.
When Noughts left Christian, but the only Name,
As if in Ashes Men wu'd seek a Flame.
When Christ's High Ordinances Men reject,
And make's Commandments of none Effect.
When Men deny the Power of Godliness,
And dare most horrid Blasphemies express.
When Christians question Scripture, War against God,
As if they did defy his dreadful Rod.
When in such Wickedness Men dare to boast,
Resist and dare deny the Holy Ghost.
When --
I must not write ought more; Lest then,
My trembling Hand should drop my sinking Pen;
Struck looking Backward, see raised Babels Brick;
Or Forward, see removed the Candlestick.
SECT. XXVI. Lamentation for the Church.
THen mourn, Thou Virgin, desolate, in brine!
Bewail the Miseries, that now are Thine!
Behold the Children dash themselves against Stones!
And madly strive, who first shall break their Bones.
Sit down in mourning in thy Sackcloth Shell!
And let thy Groans be as each Back-rung Bell!
Fire, Fires's within their Hearts! Of Envy! Hate!
As Wickedness were Fuel unto Fate.
And each seems act so much the Wretched Elf,
First to destroy Another, then Himself.
SECT. XXVII. Expostulation with the Atheist.
WHat Enyo guides? What cursed Erinnis drives!
Men to throw headlong into Hell their Lives?
Is there no God? Say Atheist! Is there none?
Thy Conscience needs must tell thee, There is One.
The Heavens declare his Glory; Earth his Power;
His Wisdom All; His Providence each Flower.
No Herb that peeps in Woods, or shows in Fields,
But Argument sufficient against Thee yields.
Who made the Universe? Some Power Above,
From Whom comes Life? By whom all Things do move,
And, if A God. Is not that Trine-One He,
Whom the Athenians thought unknown to be?
That God, whom they false worshipped thou must know.
Thy Baptism bound thee t'own Him, and Self owe.
Be else Apostate! Stand! Stand out the Trial!
And Thou at last shall find Him by Denial.
Delude thy Self! And mock at horrid Hell,
As, 'twere A Tale, that Policy did tell!
There Is such a Place. For of it Thou do smell
Thy Brimstone-Oaths, and thy diseased Fire
Thy lustful Flames in curses that expire,
Show there s A Hell; And likely not far off;
For Part of it was in thy graceless, Scoff.
SECT. XXVIII. With the Universarian.
BUt worse than Atheist! If there worse can be,
For Thou Religion make Blasphemy.
Thou Universal-Grace-Man, that do place,
The rankest Poison in, Best Balsame, Grace!
To purge the Sins of all the World Christ di'd.
A Truth. And yet it ought to be denied,
As thou do rend the Text; and wu'dst infer,
As if that Satan were Interpreter.
Mark with what Subtilty the Devil tryes!
With such large Spectacles to abuse thine Eyes!
Mark Consequences! If for All He di'd,
He then for All most fully satisfied;
And if he satisfied for All, forepast, to come,
No Debt is due; And if No Debt, No Doom.
What may Thou then not do? in Sin abound.
Thou can not fail. For Scripture is thy Ground.
Why should deny a Lust? Or hold thy Hand
From Murder, when it with thy Ends does stand?
Say Naboths Death was Just! Condemn his Wit!
For Ahab offered Fair. The Ground laid Fit.
Hold Iezabel for Wise! Make good Her Fast!
But Mark his Curse! And read her End at last!
Christ di'd for All. For All the World Christ di'd;
For whom soever Believes he satisfied;
For whom soever Believes in Him; His Will does do;
All Those the Privilege belongs to.
He would have All be saved. But ye would not.
He said, and wept. O There! O There Is the Blot!
What! What shall we Then say! Shall Sin take Place!
Shall We continue still in Sin, that Grace
May more abound! Say as S. Paul then did!
God forbid.
O tell! How shall We that are Dead to Sin,
(Abusing Grace) Shall we yet live Therein?
Know Ye not that All, All so prized as We,
Which into Jesus Christ Baptized be,
Into His Death have been Baptized? We then
With Him by Baptism int' His Death (for Men)
Are buried, that as Christ was raised from Dead
By the Glory of the Father, We (so led)
Should Walk in Newness of our Life, (and be,
As He, that is so dead from Sin, is) free.
SECT. XXIX. Invitation to the Direction.
BUt (O distressed Souls) leave These! Come near!
And I will point where Heaven does bright appear.
As Those that sink down Fathoms in a Well,
At dining time to one another tell:
See not (though Noon it is, yet dark here) far
From this our Depth we may behold a Star!
SECT. XXX. The Direction.
FIrst prostrate fall! Then humbly upward rise
On bended Knees! And mount thy dewed Eyes?
Strike! Srike thy Breast! Till thou have new fi'rd thy Heart
With Holy Zeal! And, earnest, strain each Part
With Penitence! Get Faith to sharpen sight!
Now, steadfast, look through Heaven! Behold the Light!
Behold the Lamb of God in Glory sit
At's Fathers Right Hand! See Him from thy Pit!
Behold Him There thy Mediator! See!
What is it can now so much discomfort thee?
But, if thy too weak Eye cannot long thus look,
Behold His Picture in the Holy Book!
There read him closed within the Virgins Womb!
That He to Fold might fetch the strayed Sheep home.
Observe Him combating the Devil Twice!
By Active, Passive, doubled Victories!
In Desert foiled him, spoiled him On the Cross;
For Human gain, and wu't Thou make it Loss?
Observe his Miracles! And thou shall find,
He cured the Deaf, the Dumb, the Lame, the Blind.
Read on! And 'twixt times pray, as thou do read!
And praise too! That He Life gave to the Dead.
But, lest these Things thou may not understand
Receive a Pescue from a Holy Hand!
Choose such as did in Persecution stand!
For, who in Trial left the Truth, can He
Be well conceived to be a Guide for Thee?
SECT. XXXI. An Orthodox Divine the Best Instructor.
HE will unlock the Treasures of Salvation,
From Genesis unto the Revelation.
He Will show Thee the Original of All,
What is Pure Truth, and what is Apocryphal.
H'as no new Lights to Lead Thee up and down.
Nor fancies Revelations in his Crown.
He Will preach to Thee for Gods sake, Not for Ends,
Nor takes he Pains, that marres, His labor mends.
He point blank damns none. But instructs All,
To shun the Way, wherein the Desperate fall.
He lops presumptuous Growths; Lest bearing Top
Too much, from High they down do Headlong drop,
(O how lies Man, if out of the Line of Grace,
Too open to the Enemy in every place!)
He dares not take Religion for A Cloak;
Nor cry up Dunghil-Steam for Altar-Smoak.
He dares not meddle with the Holy Things
Without Commission whence he Warrant brings;
Nor will he turn Apostate for Men's Hands.
No: Might he have a Dean and Chapters Lands.
He knows well, How the Apostleship was given;
And how 'twas left, as 'twas received from Heaven.
T'Apostles, and to the Angel of each Church;
Whose Office was to feed; Not Kill; Not Lurch.
He knows, It was derived by single Streams;
And is not drowned in Consistorian Dreams.
He I teach thee Mercy, as his Master, meek;
He tells thee Christians no Revenge must seek.
Revenge on others then is A dangerous Shelf.
'Void Shipwreck! Lay not Hands upon thy Self!
Ah hapless Time! Wolves Sheepskins over them draw.
But thou may know Them by the Tearing Paw.
SECT. XXXII. Preservation by Assumption and Religious Reason.
ME thinks I hear him say, what now I write,
God First did out of Darkness bring the Light.
And wu't do Contrary, to what he then,
Reduce that Light to Darkness back again?
God in's own Image did Man first create.
Wu't that destroy? Turn Self-Assassinate?
How in Gods Image at Gods Image strike?
Thus Self-divided against Thy Self turn Pike?
God blessed Both; Bade Both, Increase and Multiply.
And with a Curse wu't Thou turn Natures Key?
He gave Them Freedom on All Fruits to carve
And must thy Spite amidst that Plenty starve?
He Thee Dominion over the Creatures gave,
And wu't Thou to the Serpent turn a Slave?
The Tree of Life, and That, which made too wise
He placed in the midst of Paradise;
What? Naught but Root and Branch? Wu't stab the First?
And taste thine own Death in the other, cursed?
Eve had Excuse: The Serpent did deceive.
But Thou deceiv'st Thy Self. Who shall Relieve?
Must Man for Flesh, and Bone of Bone
Dear Parents leave? And join to her, as One?
And She was but a Rib taken from his Side.
Which Way then can Thou Self from Self divide?
What Law pretend'st to justify That Force,
That both commits A Rape, and makes Divorce?
For Sin God drove Them out. They loath, dismiss.
Thou Fly'st Thy Self; Yea, Barricad'st from Bliss.
Eves Eldest Son, that first did Murder Act,
Gave Blood a Voice, that cried against his Fact.
And, though but banished, seemed to die with Fear,
(So sweet was Life) They Would kill Him every where!
And wu't Thou midst the Safety that Thou have,
Thy Self undo! And into Horror cast?
And was his Sentence more than he cu'd bear?
What must Self-Murder think Thou, needs then fear?
Sin links to Sin. A Lie made Murder worse.
Was Mercy short, that his Despair must curse?
Eve might forget her Grief for Abels Death,
And have some Joy restored her in a Seth.
But Thou damm'st up the Hopes of Life to flow.
Thou cutt'st thine own Root. What can ever grow?
Nor can this Crime admit of Reparation.
Repentance thus prevented is Damnation.
Noah's Ark thou sink'st, Thou blott'st out Abraham's Creed.
All Families shall be blessed in his Seed.
And Thou deny'st That Promise by Thy Deed.
For truly did believe, That Christ were come.
To cure The Leprous, Palsi'd, from the Tomb
To raise the Dead, Thou could not, Wretch, then have
A desperate Thought. Since His will All would Save.
Or did conceive The Love of God to Man.
How Infinite It was, above Our Span;
To send His Only Son, Of Such Esteem,
From Heaven to Earth, that He might Man redeem;
To suffer Scorns sharp Scourges, Cross, and Death;
And even His Father's wrath to give us Breath;
To bid Us lay Our Burdens on his Back;
And In His Name to beg whats'ere we lack;
To tell, He came to Save, and Not Condemn;
How melted He over Deaf Jerusalem!
Dust-blind Jerusalem with Prophets Bones.
She must dismantled be for murderous Stones.
How often did He call the People, clock.
As Hen her Chickens; But they stirred like Rock.
It Was not bad Memory, that Him forgot:
But perverse Wilfullness. For they would not.
They would not Turn, nor Know, what did belong
To their Day's Peace, nor hear the Charmer's Song.
How he embalmed Prediction of their Fall,
Chief, Only Mourner for Their Funrall.
He, He bequeathed All Salvation's Good;
And Signed The Testament with his Precious Blood;
And left Two Blessed Sacraments, as Seals;
By which to Us A Proper Right He deals.
O wonderful the Grace, Thy Love does give!
Jesus! Thou woo'st Us, Not to Dye, but Live!
He teaches Us the Means to Certain Cure,
The Means to Health, that is For ever Sure.
He is the Life, the Light, the Guide, the Way
Unto the Dead, the Blind, the Lame, the Stray.
To help our Wants He teaches how to pray.
He is the Best Physician to the Sick.
He Wits restores unto the Lunatic.
He is the Shepherd, that does Watch and Keep
From Wolf-like Satan his Believing Sheep.
Then let us not make our Reason less, then Sense,
To fly Protection, and such Providence!
He leads his to the Pastures, ever green,
And in Communion often by them is seen.
He drives Them by the Streams that ever run;
And after folds them at the Setting Sun.
His Yoke is easy; and his Burden Light.
It Is Day in Goshen; Though in Egypt Night.
SECT. XXXIII. By Comparatives in Law and Gospel.
BY Mighty Wonders He redeemed the Slave.
By Miracles as great he preached to Save.
He Waters Walls made; and a Path midst Seas;
Through which his People made their Pass with Ease.
And, when pursuing Pharaoh with his Host
Thought to destroy, their Wheels and all was lost.
The Waves did close. So what was firm before,
Was Waters Throat, as was the Earths to Core;
By Day a Cloud he was, a Fire by Night
To guard, and to conduct his People right;
And, that he might his mighty Arm express,
He led them forty Years through Wilderness;
As many Days He in the Flesh did fast,
When in the Wilderness He Satan cast.
The Woman's Seed the Serpent found, did feel
It bruise his Head, as he had bruised His Heel.
A Wilderness for Paradise had Stain;
For Wilderness was Paradise a Gain.
From Heaven with Manna, and with Quails he fed
His People broaching Rock the while he led.
Three Fishes and two Loaves were Thousands Bread.
He was the Brazen Serpent that did heal;
Which on Mount Calvarie He did reveal;
And, as on Sinai He the Law did give,
A Judge He Will come to the Dead, and those that Live.
The Nations Then were scatt'red, and did fall.
He was their Dread, the Mighty General;
And by his Conduct, and so great Command,
He marches Conquest into Holy Land.
This, This was He, that conquered Hell, and Death;
And broke the Chains of Darkness, forged Beneath.
He, He victorious from his Tomb does rise,
And raises Man, as his Redeemed Prize.
Wu't Thou turn Sadducee? and This withstand?
Or wu't Thou rise with Halter in thy Hand?
He has Ascended up in Triumph where
Thou may by Faith in Glory find Him. There.
SECT. XXXIIII. Supposition of Satisfaction.
BY This I deem Thy Frenzy does abate.
For whom Thou erst did serve, Thou now do hate,
I see thy streaming Eyes, thy mournful Tears
Wash off thy Blackness. Christ's Blood drowns thy Fears.
Thou wond'rest at thy Sin against God, so Good;
And start'st at the Offering to Moloch Blood.
Do! Sigh again! That will blow Holy Fire!
Sighs are the Bellows to Divine Desire.
Those Groans, like Thunder in the troubled Air,
Will make thy Breast, as Sky, Serene, and fair.
What though thou do endure A storm, or Two?
By This thou storm'st, take Heaven and entrest to?
Thou safely may commit Thus Violence.
This holy Murder slayes thy First Offense.
SECT. XXXV. Consolation.
It Is well, thou do complain; And wisely Say,
Thou had forgotten, Until Now, to pray.
Thou Art Now alive. Thou walk'st, and talk with God.
Thou have his Kiss. H' has cast away his Rod.
When first the Subtle Hunter did prevail,
He took Thee Sleeping. Then he did assail.
He frighted Thee with Specters, and grim Dreams.
He cast A Mist 'twixt Thee, and Truth's clear Beams.
O look not Back! And eye the Deadly Place,
Where thou had fallen, had it not been for Grace!
With the Apprehension where thou late did tread,
Be not, as he at Rochester, struck Dead;
But raise with praise to Heaven thy thankful Head
When God's Protction leaves Us, what are We?
Our drunken Madness reales to Misery.
Hel's Craft insinuates Ease from Present pain,
Gives Torment There, leaves here Eternal Stain.
SECT. XXXVI. Satan's Craft and Policy.
SO Lucifer undoes our Reasons Stock,
Insensibly He draws Us up a Rock;
And seems to rest Us in this Grot, that Cave,
With pleasing Sense, of what we think to have;
With Shadows coz'ning our deluded Eye;
And does pretend to lead us to the Sky.
Until H'has mounted Us to the Slipp'rie Top;
Where staggering down We into Hell do drop.
Thus does his Subtlety set hidden Traps,
Most greedily rejoicing in our Lapse,
His Kindness wu'd destroy Us. For, behold,
He offers Poison in a cup of gold!
Mark! How at First he gilded over Vice.
His Apple was The Cheat of Paradise.
Like Gods we should be; Know both Good and Evil.
But Rebels to The Subject's of the Devil.
SECT. XXXVII. Encouragement against Temptation.
Shall we believe A Lie. Or him, that says
The truth, He is? O let Us give Him Faith!
Thou shall not Kill, did God in's Law express?
No: Not be Wroth His Gospel says. That Is Less.
Let Us Mind Our League in Baptism, made gain'st Evil!
That we wu'd fight against World, The Flesh and Devil!
That we wu'd join our Force, sans Fear of Loss,
Like valiant Soldiers under Christ his Cross.
We so are Christians. So we stoutly stand;
And make our Ground good, whilst w' obey Command.
His Standarts our Protection. So We shall
Be Safe, Let whatsoever can befall.
A Foil We may have: not a Final Fall.
SECT. XXXVIII. Advance of Resolution.
THen let the World raise, muster cheating Weights!
Let tickling close-armd Flesh draw forth her Baits!
And let the Devil set out slye Deceits!
Let them embodie All! We dread no Harms.
Yea; Let Hell come too, with it is Magic Charms!
Let Us keep close Order! And our Christian Arms!
Jesus! The Word! And then they break amain.
The World turns Back, when we Heaven, Heaven do claim.
We fight so fast, the Flesh has lost her Force.
Resistance makes him fly: Prayer makes him curse.
Hell's Charms do vanish, Jesus! At Thy Name.
Thou were our Captain. So we overcame.
SECT. XXXIX. Prevention.
BUt, if the Devil stalks to Thee, Alone;
And thinks He has Advantage One to One;
And tempts Thee, as thy Savior, set high;
Shows Kingdoms, and their Glory in thine Eye;
And promises the Gift of such Worlds All;
If that Thou down to Worship him wu't fall:
Cashier him with Christ's Word: Hence Satan get!
The Lord thy God to Worship is thy Debt!
Him only shall Thou serve. He Is gone and's Net.
SECT. XL. Summary Fortification.
TAke Courage Fellow Christians! Let Us rejoice!
I hear Hearts Comfort from a Heavenly voice!
God spared not His own Son: But for Us All
Did Him deliver up. How! How then shall
He not with Him give freely Us All Things?
Since He Is the Fountain of All Good that springs.
Who is He that Condemns? It Is Christ that di'd;
Yea rather that is risen in Heaven to abide;
Who is at Gods right Hand; and Who does make
His Intercession also for our Sake.
Who then shall separate Us from Christ's Dear Love?
Shall Tribulation? shall Distresses move?
Shall Persecution? Famine? Nakedness?
Shall Peril? Shall the Sword do more then These?
Through Him that loved Us so much Before,
In All these Things W' are Conquerours and more.
For I Am persuaded, Neither Death it is;
Nor Life; Nor Angels; Principalities;
Nor Powers; Nor Present Things; Nor Things to come;
Nor Height; Nor Depth; Nor Creature (that takes room)
Shall be'able Us to sep, rate from the Love
Of God in Jesus Christ, our Lord Above.
O Blessed the Time, that Christ for all once di'd!
Is He Our Life! Abhor Self-Homicide!
LAUS DEO.


Wife Traveller through Wilderness does lead
The Christian Pilgrim, teaching where to tread:
From Feind in Worlds Way Foes he warnes his Friend.
Through Deep, up Steep, shows Heaven's his Journeys end.
F. Barlow fecit.

The Second Book.

A GUIDE TO THE Land of the Living. FOR THE DISCONTENTED; That are in the
Dangerous Path TO SELF-MVRDER.

A Comfort to All in Distress; By Way of Divine Poem, Perspective, Moral,
Prospect, Consolatory Essay.



Sen. Lib. 4. Controversiar, in Proaemio. Multiplicatur ex industria, quo
condiscimus, ut levetur, quo discernimus. The Manuduction.
A Hand may be welcome to One, that needs it either in the declivity or steep
descent from a Rock; or amidst the Labyrinth, and wandering on to Loss in a
Wilderness.

To this purpose, Distressed Friend, the Author proffers His, as a help.
Enough peradventure to Keep thee from Falling; Or Preserve thee in the Way. It
may serve thee for a Prop, if not for a Guide.

And seeing, that the Best Days are Evil to Good Men; and Bad Men make All
their Days Evil, Time gives Life a sad Progression; And the Vitiosity of
Manners makes Time seem to receive Corruption. Least thou should grow weary
of Either, Thou art here desired to ponder them Both; Lest abused Life should
prove thy Rock; or not well considered Time might become thy Willdernesse.

Supposing therefore, that thy Desperate Intentions are diverted, thy Fury
allayed, and, that a more sober Temper has reduced thee to Better Inclinations
by his former Verse he conceives it not amiss, as a careful Physician, to
prescribe thee a Diet after his operative Drugs; or not Unlike the wary Pilot,
to set up some mark to avoid a second danger.

Thou have been out of thy Way, and in hazard of Great Loss, even Loss
forever. Take that Cross for thy direction; yea let That Cross, that did
afflict thee, lead thee home to thy Happiness! Not by seeking to run from It;
But by Submitting to it. Though the way be rugged; It is direct; And being
straight, Turn not. Temptation is on either Hand. Presumption may as
dangerously overthrow thee, as Desperation was like to ensnare, to undo thee.
There allures a Spotted Panther; And Here lurkes a Seizing Tiger. Both
Devourers; Though in diverse ways.

To avoid the Peril of such Passages, the sutblety, and Fury of such Beasts,
it is Best to take Direction, and One along with thee. With such Intention in
Charity unto thee The Author has under God's Blessing fitted himself with
Provisions, and Instructions for such a journey. Not to be Employed is ery
hurtful for thee. Do here him call? Away?

CANTO I. The Den of Idleness.
1.
AWake, Dark Soul! Arise! And let us go,
To find out what is fit to Know!
Who sits stiil, still sets Corruptions Weeds to grow.
2.
In Den of Idleness so dark, so fowl;
(In which bred Monsters, hiss, and howl)
The sidelong Hag see, half asleep does stretch, and scowl.
3.
Behold her nodding Head, and Pointing Hand
To Numerous Vices round that stand,
Taking their (Q) from Her, to act her meant Command!
4.
Behold, where many an open, silent Grave:
That gape, like pits, about that Cave,
To swallow living Men, where seeming Death they have!
5.
Behold, where several Gins are scatt'rd wide,
To catch the Careless on each Side!
See not, how Covering Leaves their cunning Dangers hide?
6.
Near that Dens wanton Mouth does rise a Spring;
To whose soft Music Birds do sing,
Inchaunting Passengers with Notes, and Murmuring.
7.
But that to Satan's Prison is a Port.
Tentations Usher to the Fort.
Mark! How that Way some dance, and sing to Hell in Sport.
8.
Hark! Drumming Drones do laden home arrive,
From robbing Bees of Honey in Hive!
With others Labors see, how Drones do live, and thrive.
9.
Come off from those strange winding Ways!
Make haste! For he is intrapt, that stays.
Beware of stumbling! There are many strewn Delays.
10.
Didd'st eye the Spring near Den, that runs so clear?
Within this Lake not moving Here,
A standing Scum of stinking Drain does foul appear.
11.
Where poisonous Serpents, ugly Toads do breed,
From Filth, on which again they feed.
As if with Nature's, Sins Corruptions were agreed.
12.
It Is well, thou art past This Circes charming Power.
With Comfort thou have spent This Hour.
Keep on! Thou Have escaped Tentations, beckning to devour.
PERSPECTIVE I.
1. ADen is the Place of Thieves, There Idleness is lodged, as the greatest
waster of time, and theif of Things.

2. It is dark by Ignorance. It is foul by Sloth. Vices and Sins, like
Monsters, Exuberances of the mind, do Breed therein, that hiss with
Impudence, and howl by too Late Repentance. The hag, the Witch lays along, to
show her Security and Carelessness, half asleep, her Improvidence, by
stretching, Indisposition to Employment, and by scowling, Scorn, at Reproof.

3. By Nodding She discovers the Vanity of her Desires. By Pointing her
Unaptnesse, and imperfection to Command.

4. She buries Men Alive; Either running them into Undreamt of Dangers, or
covering them with neglected Obscurity, that they (at best) pass their silent
Days Without leaving any impression by their Footsteps left to worthy Notice,
or Memory.

5. Her Gins are temptations, that catch the Imprudent. With False Glosses,
Vain Pretenses, as with covering Leaves Idleness hides her contrived Deceits.

6. Vain Discourses, and wanton Designs are the spring at the Mouth of her
Den, which dance to the Notes of the Birds of Pleasure.

7. But this way leads to the Fort of Irrevocable loss, And to the Prison of
Unavoydable Destruction; In which Men intoxicated with Folly sport on to Ruin.

8. The Drones embleamatize, and hold the Glass unto The slothful; they rob
the Hives, and prey upon the Honey of the Bees, the Honest man's Goods and Labor.

9. It is no safe going on in Her enthralling Fascinations; Or standing still,
Unbusi'd. For Delays not only breed, but Bring forth Dangers,

10. Her stream of pleasures, and gliding waters of Vain Conceptions stand,
settle, and corrupt in A lake of filth the Sink of Vice and Sin, describing by
the noisomness of the Waters their Rottenness; by the poison of Serpents, their
Infection; and by the Ugliness of Toads, their Deformity.

MORAL I.
TAke the Moral from S. Hierom, from Plutarch, from Seneca.

Otium parit Fastidium, Exercitium Famem. Fames autem miro modo dul^ia reddit,
quae Fastidium facit insipida.

Idleness is squeazie stomackt, when good employment feeds with Hunger, which
gives a luseious Gust unto such Diet, while Idleness with Loathing rejects
sound food, as tastlesse.

Ingenium hominis ceu cariem, et senium in otio contrahit propter obscuritatem;
Et muta Quies; vitaque Sedentaria, in otio semota, non corporibus modo, verum
etiam animis marcorem conciliat.

The Wit of Man contracts old Age by Idleness before its time; And grows
decrepit in obscurity by disuse of Exercise. The dumb Rest of a Sedentary Life
in Ease, and, as it were wrapped up in a Mantle, from all employment, brings not
Bodies only, but Minds also into a deep Consumption.

Sunt quorum corpus innoxium est, and in mill fascinorum Furias men's otiosa
discurrit.

A sickly, and a wanton Mind has thrown the soundest Bodies, and most
healthful Constitutions into a Thousand Mischiefs, and as many foul Diseases.

PROSPECT. I.
Some Vainly do consume their Oil.
Some hide the Diamond with the Foil.
Some think, that Providence has Placed
Men here, On purpose to make wast.
As if The Lesson, given to read,
Concerned None Living, but The Dead.
How comes it else, So many' a Hand
Of well-made Clockes so still does stand!
Loose Idleness committs The Sin,
Maxentius did; Life, Death entwin.
How does She rock Rare Parts asleep!
Hides precious Pearls within the Deep!
It Is This Pandora's Box let us fly
Evils enough to Cloud the Sky;
With subtle Poisons mixing Air,
Makes Breath, Life's Means, Men's Life t'mpair.
Hence dire Effects, and black Events
Commit a Rape on Discontents.
Who therefore will be warned and Wise,
Must work his Hands, and watch his Eyes.
CONSOLATORY ESSAY I.
IT Was A Friendly Wish, with a smile at the end on it; That the English were as
Industrious, as they are Ingenious. it came from Erasmus; An eminent Man of
Wit; And no Dwarf in Judgment. It is a great abatement in the Coat, if the
Lion be not borne in proper Posture, or wants any thing of Due Arming.
Ingenii Acumen, vel tarditas praemium, vel poenam, in futuro collocat. Reward
crowns the Diligent; And Danger, in conspiracy with Loss, surprizeth the
Drowzie; And they deliver to Punishment the Sleeper.

Solomon had no sooner rouzed the Slugard, and sent him on an Arrant to the
Ant, to consider her ways, and be wise, etc. but he describes his Next
Neighbor, his likeliest Familiar, a Naughty person, a Wicked man, that walks
with a froward Mouth; that winks with his Eyes; speaks with his Feet; And
teaches with his Fingers. Frowardness is in his Heart; He devises Mischeife
continually, He sows Discord. Therefore shall his Calamity come suddenly;
Suddenly shall he be broken; without Remedy.

And not far off from him dwells The Bewitching Whore with Her Allurements. But
how? and whither does she lead her Paramour, her Gallant? He goes After her
straight way, as an Ox goes to the slaughter; Or, as a Fool to the
Correction of the stocks: Till a dart strike through his Liver, as A Bird
hastes to the Snare, and Knows not, that it is For his Life etc. Her house
is the way to Hell, going down to the Chambers of Death.

Behold! Sloth is The Hen; Idleness the Unclean Egg; The many sorts of
Iniquity the Plumage of wickedness, the Snare is Death, and the Devourer Hell.
Maiestas Pop. Romani peromnes Nationes, per omnes diffusa Provincias in sinu
Meretricio Iacet; Says Seneca: Even the Glory of Room, that Spread her Wings
over All Nations, whose Eagles Talons grasped the utmost Consines, slept to
Ruin in the Lap of Dalliance, running a Comparable Fate with that web of the
Chaste Penelope, whereon The Night undid the work of the Day.

Idleness can find No Bellows to blow the Fire; and will nor so much as use
her Own Breath. This is the covered Pit, that swallows the Heedlesse. while
time is wasted in the Embraces of Seeming Goods. For want of Diligence, and
Inquisition Imprudent men do miss of what is real.

While David was in Action, though Persued by Saul for his Life, he slipped not;
But, when in the pleasance of the Evening, coming from the Softness of his Bed,
when he takes a Loose turn upon the Roof of his palace, He is struck in the
Eye with the darting Beauty of Bethsheba; And it must seek for cure the blood
of Uriah. The First Evil begets a Second of a bigger Stature; Illegitimate
Voluptuousness brings forth monstrous Cruelty. How dangerous it is to set One
Foot upon The First step of Sin! the other is ready to slip, if not to run down
the Stairs No sooner in Idleness, but in Lust. Lust hurries into Adultery.
Adultery sends post to Bloodshed; and sometimes engages in such a Murder, as is
past repairing, and beyond returning.

Beware, then thou distressed Soul! Least Satan find thee either void of
buisiness, or ill employed. He will beset thee with a multitude of temptations,
and give thee a Desperate Onset; And, without Grace help thee by a Prayer, thou
lay'st open to the Storm, and it is not easy to hold out. Keep therefore thy
Watchmen on the Tower! Set a Gaurd upon every Port! Be Always Training, and
Mustering thy Forces! When he makes his Subtilest Approches, put good Actions
to work! So may thou countermine him. Feed The Hungry! So thou diggest a
crosse-Vault to his Works. Cloth the Naked! And it is a Retrenchment. Visit
the Sick! And thou have made good, where the Wall is weakest. Frequent
Religious Company! And thou have doubled thy Guards. Pray! And thou Victuallest
the Place. Read the Scriptures! Thou want no Ammunition; And thou have the
never-failing Waters of Life.

By Such continual Exercise the Devil will be disheartened, will but weakly
attempt thee, Till by every Assault thou shall grow the Stronger; and by many
Combats become A Conqueror. Vessels, that are full, are not capable of any other
Liquor; And the Well-busied mind is not at leisure to undertake a bad
Employment.

Besides the Wast of Time, that is so precious (momentum est punctum
eternitatis) thy prodigal Idleness spends thee, consumes thee in weariness.
The Hours seem asleep, and tedious to thee, like the Hand of the Dial, they
move not, as it were, at all; When Labor would refresh thee, and Season thy
Rest with Sweetness.

Fly from her therefore, as from a Pest. The Plague is not so infectious.
Untilled Land produces Thorns, and is overrun with Briars. Evil thoughts are
the want of Culture of the Mind; The word imployes Worship; Want of the worship
of God produces as Evil words, the Thorns of the Tongue, So it overruns with
wicked Actions, those Briars of the Hands, and Feet.

Sow in thy Heart Holy, and devout Meditations! And thy Hands will bear
comfortable Fruit. Then art thou never Alone, nor Out of Safety. Lie not
Lazilie, as bedrid in health! Least thou get a Sickness.

CANTO II. The Grotto of Repentance.
1.
THrough Labyrinth of Sin you go;
Where numerous Paths do Travailers confound.
Turn to the Right! Those lead thee strangely round.
Thy Wandering else an Exit will not Know.
In doubling Knots, so twined,
With Woody Darkness blind
How can thou think, or hope a way from thence to find?
2.
Some Sins do dance about, like Apes,
From trampled Paths do take, and throw the Sand;
Like Foxes Some trace ways, few Understand.
In Melancholy walks have some Beare's shapes;
Some Swine, grunt here, and there,
In dirt themselves besmeare;
Others, like Tygres, prey, and range it every where.
3.
Presumption sets her Falls, and Traps.
She takes too many, recklesse in the Snare;
And deep Pits dug are by grim Despair
Athwart, the winding Paths for dire mishaps.
The Wisest sometimes strayes
Through These bewilding ways:
By Sound of Horn are they drawn out from these mad Hayes.
4.
For in a Forest, neighbring next,
Does sober Recollection Ranger ride,
With His Bugle Horn, that hangs by his side,
With which he rouzeth those, that are perplexed.
For Dear in Hill, or Hyrne,
Close lodged, as in an Urn
Calls to Remembrance; winds his Horn, which echoes, turn.
5.
Remembrance is his faithful Hound,
That Is Very sure, and diligent withal.
He works through thick, and thin at's Master's Call.
Often hunts he on That thick Perplexed Ground.
And, if he finds Dear,
He makes them soon appear;
And's Master's Hollo draws amazed wights to him near.
6.
This Recollection Ranger is
To Lady, bright, whose proper Title's Grace.
She in that Forest has A goodly Place,
Where Those She wellcomes that have gone amiss.
The Building's pollisht fine.
It Is Crystal Windows shine
With Golden Gates; It Seems a place, that is Divine.
7.
Through this green Forest do thou pass;
Art entertained there; There refresht full well;
And have Gifts given thee, and A Holy Spell.
But On Thou must to Rocks from glistering Glass.
Now Up, then Downe's thy way;
Where diverse Mourners lay;
And to A Widow, young, they go, and Homage pay.
8.
When half way down the Rock thou art got
Well may thou hear come forth A Sighing Wind
From Hollow Vault, that seems to thee Behind.
There is The Widow Penitencie's Grott;
Where She on Ground alone
Kneeles by Two Springs of Moan.
Which thrill from her, in Cataracts do Sadly groan
9.
All over her Head do Tears distill,
And drop, like Virgin -wax, or mellting Stones;
Which raggedly do hang, like naked Bones.
These as The Springs run down A Well do fill.
While often She Knockes her Breast,
And takes (Ah!) little Rest,
As Often She cries: Lord, help A Sinner, much oppressed.
10.
As Thus With Grief She does complain,
She makes the thawed Stones in Rain to fall;
As if in Passion for her Funeral.
For Often She Swounes, though Often She comes again.
She never does give over:
But waileth more, and more;
Until An Angel comes, and bids her not deplore.
11.
Below within The Mourner's Well,
Some bath, Some rince off Natur's Moles, and Spots
With Scowring Waters, that wear late The Grot's:
That Healing did distill, when erst they fell.
Some wash The rankling Sore;
Which, Cleans'd gangreans no more;
On whose top Swims a Balm, wherewith th'anoint them ore.
12.
Then Fair they look, and cease their Cries
But yet Another Train for Help do come
With heavy Dole, and take their empty Room
With Teare-fill'd, and with much dejected Eyes;
Whose Fingers point thee to
The Place, thou now must go
Through Tribulation's Wilderness, the Pass of Woe;
And through the fruitful Vale of tears, where comforts grow.
PERSPECTIVE II.
1. A Grotto] Is a hollow Place of Solitude and refreshment Under Some Hill, or
Mountain, or aside some Rock. And this place is resembled to the Heart of Man,
the proper Site for Serious Repentance.

The Labyrinth of Sin] Denotes It Is Intricacie.

The numerous Paths] Its Disorder, and Confusion to amuse the Understanding; Or
take them for Several Choice of Evils, diverse Sorts of Tentations. To avoid
which it is best turning to The Right, the truth by Repentanc.

Wander to find no Exit] Intimates Sins perplexing Nature, intruding into
Difficulties.

Doubling Knots] are Its Fascinations.

Woody Darknesse] Its stupid Ignorance, which emprisons and fetters the Soul
from returning to The Light.

2. Apish Sins] Are wanton Pleasures.

There trampled Paths] Are Custom of acting Sins over and over. These throw
away their contemned Minutes, and wast the Sand of time.

The Foxes] Are Sins of Contrivance, Precognitancy, Subtilty, Hipocrisy, Whose
Policy Keeps their By Paths Undiscovered.

The Bears] Are Sins of Rapine, and Murder, that have their affected
Mallencholy walks of Solitude.

The Swine] Are the Sins of Excess, as Gluttony, and Drunkenness, that wallow
in Voluptuousness, and Sensuality.

Tygres] Are Sins of Ambition, Cruelty, Oppression, and Sovetousnesse, that
prey Upon, and devour all, that stand in their way.

Presumption's Falls] Shows the malignant Nature of (...) that it is a
Punishment to those that embrace it. Ambition is it is own overthrow.

Traps] Are the Deceitfulness of Temptations to an overdaring. Men are to
easie-natur'd to this Sin, being Very ready to be drawn into the Snare by
Flattery.

Despair's Deep Pits] Are Loss of Hope by weakness of Faith, or Such
Terrors of Satan, as are cast athwart to betray to destruction, not acrosse to
stop from going on in the bewildings of Sin, or bewitchings of the Tempter.

The wisest sometimes may erre] But are recovered from such Hayes (a term in
dancing) from such Enchantments by the Sound of Recollection's Horn, by Self
Examination, by timely Apprehention.

4. The Forrest] Is the Inward Man, where in Recollection is Ranger unto Grace.

His winding the Bugle-Horn] Is Touch of Conscience;

The Deer] Are the Affections, which he hunts home to the Understanding; Or may
signify the wandering Sheep, that is converted and brought home to the Church
by the careful Pastor.

The Echo of the Horn's Sound] Intimates, that the Conscience warnes to
Repentance.

5. Remembrance is Subservinet if not Coadjutor to Recollection; therefore
called his Hound, that works through thick and thin, calls to mind, known and
Searches out Secret Faults.

He looks for the Deer in Hill and Hyrn] In every Place, and Corner.

Through the thick perplexed Ground] To draw them out of Danger from the
difficulties of Returning.

Recollections Hollo] Are Divine Motions of Assisting Grace, that brings back
many a Sin-bewilded, and Satanbeguiled Soul, reducing the Affections to their
Prper Place.

6. Recollection is subservient to Grace; and is called Ranger] Because it
examines all The Forest of the Inward Man, which, Since The Fall, is naturally
A Wild Place.

The Lady Grace] Has Heaven for her Derivative Place, whither She inviteth, and
attracteth those which are Elect: But here her Palace is taken for the Divine
Bounty, where She welcomes those approaching, that were wandering Sinners:

The Crystal windows] Are the Excellencies of Providence.

The Golden Gates] Are the Riches of Heavenly Mercy.

The place seems Divine] Because Such bounty comes from God.

7. The Forest is green] flourishing, when Grace lives in the Inward Man.
Grace intertains those that come unto her, refreshes dejected Spirits, gives
Gifts, enriches the poor in Spirit, and bestows a Blessing, the Blessing of
the Gospel. But, no staying here, the Soul must on, from Glass to Rock, from
sight of Sin by Affliction to Repentance.

The Pass Up and Down] Is Prosperyty and adversity, Height of Mind, and
Humbled Condition.

The Mourners] Are Sorrows of Heart, which lay in dejection for Deeds done
amiss. These are isntrumental, or Ministerial Servants to Repentance.

Who is called a Widow] As forsaken and left by Sin her dead and Unlawful
Mate, or forsaking the World to whom her Soul was wedded.

She is said Young] Because it renewes the Soul; Young; So Repentance best,
when early.

8. When halfway down the Rock] Signifies humbled by afflictions.

The sighing wind is heard] Sorrowful expressions.

From hollow Vault] From the Inward Man, to which Sorrows seem to be behind,
to come short of the Repentance, of the Acknowledgement they seek to manifest
for the former Commission of Deeds, misdone.

Halfway down the Rock] Is Penitencie's Grott, in the Breast, in the Heart, in
the Conscience of the Sinner, who is Saxei generis of a Rocky, and stony
Nature, there is the Place of true Repentance.

The Grott] Is a place of Solitude, of Stone, of Tears, of Uncomfortablenesse,
of Mortification, of Grief.

The Two Springs of Dolour] Are Weeping Eyes, whose Tears, as they fall, seem
to run with a Noise of Groans from within.

9. The Description of a Natural Grotto sets forth the Sad Acts of
Repentance.

10. Repentance prevails, and obtains Pardon by Christ from above, when the
stony Heart melts and drops the Tears of Grief. True Repentance is full of
Fits and Passions, importunate, and persevering; Till the Distressed Soul
receives the Comfort of Remission from Grace by the Holy Spirit, as by an
Angel from Heaven.

11. The Effects of Repentance are here shadowed.

The Mourner's well] ^s Christ.

Nature's Moles] Are Original Sin.

The Spots] Actual Transgressions. The scouring waters are Christ's
Sufferings, applied to Repentant Tears by Faith.

Distilling Healing] The Promises, being the means of Recovery.

On the Top of the water Swims, the Balm] Of the Blood of Christ, which is a
certain Cure to Believers, and the Assurance of their Hope.

12. Sin thus purged by Christ's Blood, washed away in his Wounds, and the Soul
bathed in Tears appears restored by Grace, in his pristine Beauty. Sorrow is
wiped away; And the Cries of Conscience are silenced. Yet Sins rise daily,
Sorrows, come in fresh Rank, and must be by daily repentance so done away.
which give direction likewise for a continuing of our selves and a willing and
patient taking Up, and bearing of the Cross through the many Tribulations in
this world, through which we must pass with Comfort in Hope.

MORAL. II.
DIvine Grace calls us from our wanderings amidst greatest Dangers by
Recollection and the Remembrance of Evils committed by us; whereby having the
Sight our selves, and seeking by Repentance to the Rock of our Faith, we find
Christ to heal us, who is the Well of Life, and the Fountain of our Salvation.

Take Hugo's Interpretation to this Purpose.

Poenitentia appellata quasi Punientia, eo quod ipse homo in se poenitendo
punit, quod male admisit. Tria enim quae sunt in percussione Pectoris (i. e.)
Pectus, Sonus, and Manus, significant quod Poenitentia est de his, quae Mente,
Voce, Opere peccavimus.

Repentance is (not to refuse the word) a Penance upon, or punishing of our
selves in such a manner, that there is a Reluctancie and serious Sorrow in the
whole Man, that he is provoked by such Resentment to punish in himself, what
Sin soever he has foolishly admitted, or wickedly committted. Now there are
three things requisite to a stroke on the Breast; the Breast, the Sound of the
Blow, and the Hand, all which denote, that Repentance is concerning all
Offenses of Thought, Word, or Deed. So comes Contrition from within, Confession
out of our Mouths; and Satisfaction from our Hands to make up a real
Repentance.

Hear Isidore-deliver his Sentence.

Poenitentia est Medicamentum vulneris, Spes salutis, per quam Deus ad
Misericordiam provocatur, quae non tempor^ pensatur, sed profunditate Luctus,
and Lachrymarum. Poenitentia autem non mensium, ac temporum cursu pensatur, sed
poena, qua anima cruciatur, and mortificatur caro.

Repentance is the Balsam for a Wound, the Hope of Health, whereby God is
provoked to Mercy; which is not regarded for the length of Time, but the Depth
of Sorrow, and the Seriousness of Tears spent in it. Therefore it is not the
Months, or Seasons of Mourning, that prevail so much with Him, as that
infliction upon our selves, that mortifies the Flesh, and that Affliction
within our selves, that cruciates the Spirit.

Observe S. Cyprians Mind herein!

O Poenitentia! quid de te novi referam! Omnia ligata tu solvis; Omnia clausa
tu reseras; Omnia adversa tu mitigas; Omnia contrita tu sanas; Omnia confusa tu
lucidas; Omnia Desperata tu animas.

O Repentance! How shall I find terms, or Language enough to commend thee!
Thou do set free all things that are bound; Thou openest all things that are
shut, and revealest all things that are hid; Thou allayest all things that come
cross; Thou bindest up and healest all things that are broken; Thou let in
Light to all things out of Order; And thou give New Life, and as it were
another Soul, to All things gasping in Death, and Desperate.

PROSPECT. I.
WHen sad Eyes see so bad a Time,
All Ills One Heap make for One Crime;
And Wicked Nature acts her Part
TO extract Sin's Gross by Chymick Art;
And over the Helm draws All Is Offense;
To quicken Wrath with Quintessence;
Me thinks Men should not still add more;
Rather abstract from such a Store.
Unless they think, The more they dare,
That Heaven is tied Them more to spare.
Or that some Subtlety takes place,
To damn by Universal Grace.
A Miracle (or like't) behold!
The wanton Young; The doting Old;
The Mindlesse Noble; And the Show
Of Common Men, so hard to know,
Are in a Dungeon All; in Chains.
Each with his Will too so remains.
And yet the Prison Door stands open;
The Chains are loose. They might have Scope.
Who wu'd be so perversely bent,
That might be free? Why not Repent?
CONSOLATORY ESSAY I.
SIn, through Negligence, or wilfulness undiscovered, is a secret Fire in the
House; the more close, the more dangerous. Discovery then is the Best
Introductive to Cure, Self-Examination is in the First Place necessary to this
purpose, as water to quench, what is so Unruly. Such Fire is This; It will
consume All, if not taken in time. Call then for water to quench it as well, as
thou cryest, Fire! And do it soon too! There is more, than ordinary Hazard in
Delay.

But, art thou ashamed to repent? The shame lies in the Commission of the Sin;
Not in the Acknowledgement. Seneca Controverting the matter, brings in such a
Criminal Modesty. Gravius punior nunc, cum peccasse pudet, quam cum peccavi:
It Is more Irksome to unload, than to bear my Burden. He had a kind of proud
Laziness, that he was loath to confess. But it is better adjudged: Minus est
quod vitiat it, quam quod negavit. Less is the Evil in the Deed, than in the
Denial. Periculosius est negare, quam commisisse. what hope of that Patient,
that will not acknowledge himself sick? How can thou come near Pardon, when
thou block'st up Confession? When that is the way to It. As Christ, and the
Sanctified Intellectual nature of Man, His Church, are Relative, as Bridegroom
and Spouse, Sin likewise makes a Contract with the Wicked man's Soul: But it is
A Dower with a Mischief. The wages of Sin is Death.

Thou Distressed Christian! since it has been so with thee, that such an
unlawful Marriage has lept into the Saddle; Let Repentance ride upon the
Crouper! Better is a Cramp in thy Jaws, than a Convulsion in thy Bowels; than
a Stich at the heart. Repent!

Thou Know the nature of thy Sin best. It is thy Dear Acquaintance; thy
Familiar; thy bosome-Friend. But trust it not! It has betrayed thee; And will
undo thee. Look about thee then in time! For the Philistines are upon thee!
Break the Fetters! Rend asunder the Cords that bind thee! In time Repent!

Small Matters have their Great Effects in All humane Actions. One Word,
misunderstood; One Opportunity or Instant of time, slipped, has many times
occasioned so much Danger, as even the Overthrow of an Army; Of the Action, and
the Actors. Thou have undertaken A Mighty war against Three Confederates, those
Three Conspirators in one Combination; The World; The Flesh, and the Devil.
One word makes good thy Battle; Repentance. If the word be not given; Or not
Rightly; And in time too; Thou may, nay thou will lose the day by it. Custom
has taught Nations, Reason Men; and Nature Beasts, that selfdefence is more,
than Lawful; It is Necessary. Stand to thine Arms then! Betake thee to thy
Tears! For the Roaring Lion goes about seeking whom he may devour. In time
Repent!

When Homer that blind Seer among the Ancients. (For Poets were their Prophets
then) discourses of a Certain woman, whom he names Ate, he sets forth her
Character, as a Dittie to this tune; That she was Hurtful, and Pernicious to
All the Race of men. He might mean Eve by it, as well as cover another truth
under a like Fable in that of Jupiter, whom he feigns to have been the wisest
of all men living. Yet was Once deceived by Juno, by his wife. Thereby He might
in the dark point at Adam; And in A Heathen Language speak good Hebrew sense.

Thou may not rightly understand his story; And may mistake the text also.
Adam left thee much in debt; in such a condition, as to part with All, that
thou had; and to prison too was the sentence; thou were subject to
everlasting condemnation (had not one stood in the Gap) thou were within the
Penal statute of eternal Loss, and never-dying torment. It was in vain for
the man to put it upon the woman. It was no proper excuse. It was his own sin.
It was his own Fault; And he and his must pay the Forfeiture.

This Debt thy Savior undertook, as Sponsor, when He should be Incarnate;
performed it Actually in the wilderness, what Adam should have performed in
Paradise; adhered, and vanquished, as his Active obedience; and satisfied on the
Cross for the Guilt, that Adam contracted by Nonperformance, satisfying the
Justice of the Father by his passive, and was by the Father consummated in him
by his Resurrection, and Ascension.

This Score was by Him washed out in thy Baptism. But thine Actual
transgressions, though they be cast from that Serpent, are Eggs of thine own
hatching. Thou would lay these Bastards to thy First Parents now too. Thou
would have thy Excuse the Son of theirs. No. As Nathan said to David (with
reverence) may I say to thee, to my self, to any grievous Sinner, thou art the
man. Thou art the Reus laesae Majestatis. Thou the Traitor against God, and
thine own Soul. Perditio tua ex te, O Israel! Out of thine own Bed the weeds
come. Thou art the unprofitable Servant; the idle Gardener, the Garden also of
wickedness. Thou art thine own Ate. None more malicious, than thou to thy
self. Thou, that real Pandora, that open'st the Forbidden Box; That scatt'rest
within thy self, and poudrest thine own head with all Evils. Christ upon thy
Resentment and desires is ready to make Intercession for these also, for these
thine Enormous Sins; but, as Elisha did the Cure to Naaman in such another
Leprosy, He must wash at his appointed waters, at Jordan, where thy Savior
bathed for thy sin, which likewise shall be Cleansed, but his way, and upon
such Condition: Repent; and Believe!

Saint John was sent upon that Embassage mainly, to publish the Doctrine of
Repentance. No Saint John, no Christ. No Repentance, no Salvation. If thou
be not baptized in water with the Baptism, of Repentance, of the Remission
of Sins, thou have no part in the Baptism of Fire, the purification, and
purgation of Sins with the Holy Ghost. No Regeneration, no Resurrection, no
Glorification.

Take then S. John's Advice! He preaches to thee. Now the Ax is laid to the
root of the Trees. Every tree therefore, that brings not forth good Fruit
shall be hewed down, and cast into the Fire. To Day, sings the Psalmist, if you
will hear his voice, harden not your hearts, as in the Provocation, as in the
day of temptation in the wilderness. It is an Invitatory Song; Repent.

What else can thou, ought thou do, Fellow Christian? whither else
would thou turn thee? Turn thee! Look upon thy self, as Jeremy on the Jews!
How does the City sit solitary, that was full of People! (full of Graces, which
thy Sins have sent into Exile) How is she become like a widow! How is she
become Tributary! she weepeth sore in the Night, and her tears are on her
Cheeks; Among All Her Lovers she has none to comfort Her; All Her Friends
have dealt treacherously with her, they have become her Enemies etc. Her
Adversaries are the chief, her Enemies prosper. For the Lord has afflicted
her; for the multitude of her transgressions her children are gone into
Captivity before the Enemy. And from the Daughter of Zion all her Beauty is
departed; Her Princes are become like Hearts, that find no pasture, and they are
gone without strength before the pursuer, etc. Her filthiness is in her Skirts;
She remembers not her last end. Therefore she came down wonderfully; She had
no comforter, etc. The Adversary has spread out his hand upon all her pleasant
things. For she has seen, that the Heathen entered into her Sanctuary, whom
thou did command, that they should not enter into thy Congregation.

Where are All thy Pleasures then? where is thy help? or thy Refuge? For these
things let thine Eye run down with water: Because the comforter, that should
relieve thy Soul is far from thee. Then fall down! then cry out! with thy
voice, with thy Heart! Behold O Lord! For I am in distress. My bowels are
troubled. My Heart is turned. For I have grievously rebelled. Abroad the Sword
bereaveth; At home there is' as Death.

What says the Prophet Isaiah concerning Edom? Sinful Edom? Scoffing Edom?
Edom, that yet repented? The Burden of Duma. He calls me out of Seir.
Watchman! What of the Night? Watchman! what of the Night? The Watchman said;
The Morning comes, and also the Night. If ye will inquire, Inquire ye! Return!
Come!

O do thou hear thy Savior calling sweetly! Come unto Me All ye, that be
weary, and heavy laden, and I will ease you. Take his word, that is the Word;
Repent! and be saved!

CANTO III. The Wilderness of Tribulation.
1.
FOrsake the Paths of Pleasure! Those smooth Ways
Have every Mile a standing Post;
On which Time's Glass of Hours, still lost,
Is set, Which whosoever passes, breaks as with it he Plays.
2.
This rugged Way, all overgrown with Thorns,
Unpleasant to soft Flesh, and Blood,
Leads on to the Perplexing Wood; (Scorns.
Where frisking Satyrs haunt, whom some call Scoffs and
3.
This Uncouth Way, all overrun with Briars,
Is Best for Thee; Though Nature loathes
A punched Skin, or tatt'red Clothes; (sires.
And though this Way has Thieves. They Will rob thy loose De-
4.
Within a Cave does crawling Sickness hide;
And makes a Prey of Strength, and Health;
Surprising Beauty with her Stealth;
Which oftentimes with Partner Death she does divide.
5.
Here Sodom-Apples grow to cheat the Taste;
And Apparitions do appear;
At Distance Friends are, that seem near;
And in a Storm Trees, senseless move, away in haste.
6.
By many'a Cross, and many a stumbling Stone
This Straight does lead, that thou must go,
And every Danger Thou must know.
For sometimes thou may sadly travel it Alone.
7.
Beware the Magic Castle, thou shall see!
For on those Gates of shining Jet,
If thou but look, thine Eyes will wet
By represented Tortured Lovers Misery.
8.
For, when thou thin'kst to knock at that False Gate.
That, then too late, thou find'st deceive,
And wud'st thy Child, or Love reprieve,
Thou Art taken by Passion Prisoner, that breaks out thereat.
9.
O have a Care, when at the Doleful Dale!
Where Land Floods tide away with Cares.
Mark Shallowes well! the Deeps have Fears.
That will surprise; And into Mare Mortuum hale.
10.
Detractions Hounds thou'it hear perchance in Cry,
That seld Face Game, but still pursue;
And Envy gnawing others due.
Besides a Climbing Hill seems to have her dwelling by.
11.
Thou must pass near World's Rolling Globe (as Stone,
Which vexed Sysiphus of yore)
Avoid its Trinkets, and its Store!
If thou escapest That, Thy sharpest Journey's gone.
12.
For Heavens bright Sunshine then breaks out more clear,
And fair green Plain will oyen show,
Where Thou have Time Thy Self to know.
For horrid Sights before Sweet Comforts will appear.
PERSPECTIVE I.
THe Wilderness of Tribulation is a place of trial, of discomfort, of
Solitude, the many persecutions of the world. And as A wilderness has many
dangers, so has a Christian many temptations, to put him to the plunge, and
the Exercise not of his courage only, but to the use of his best
understanding. In the unknown ways of a wilderness the Sun is the Travailer's
best guide; And that is the Son of Righteousness, who is the way, and the
Light, the only Direction to the Right, and protection for safety. In a
Wilderness the Travailer must expect but hard entertainment. Therefore must he
carry his provision along with him, that is, preparation against Injuries,
which, like hunger will else starve him; and expectation of his necessity of
suffering, that he may not in the time of trial by improvidence be overcome.
He must watch and ward. Tribulation is from Tribula, A Flaile which thresheth
out the corn, from the straw.

The Paths of Pleasure] Are the occasions, the Custom or Habit of evil, that
must be avoided.

Every mile] Signifies every day of life.

The standing poast on which Times glass stands] Intimates the night. Or the
continuance of time on which the measure stands, the glass is broken, if time
be not well spent.

2. The rugged thorny way] Is the difficulties in Affliction. Not agreeing with
the delicacy of our natures. Leading men to [The perplexing wood] To the
troubling of Reason by Cares and Anxieties.

There Satyrs dwell] Which are Violence, Malice, and Derision of the world.

3. This uncouth way] Shows men's unwillingnesse to endure Affliction. It is
uncomfortable unto nature.

Has Briars] Which are Intanglements, and many provocations to passion; has
many Hindrances from an even walking; has many Impediments to a christian
progress by the imperfection of man's Frailty.

The worldlings are the theeves] That oppress the virtuous; yet are they not
absolute enemies in their plunder, but Friendly Adversaries in effect that take
from us our vain desires, and thereby weane our hearts and Affections from
Earthly Vanities.

4. Sickness hides in A Cave] In the Body of Man, where secret infirmities
lay, as in Ambush to surprise.

Makes a prey of strength] Of power.

Of Health] Of Pleasure, of Beauty, of Riches.

Death and sickness said to be Partners] Because Flesh and Blood is shared
between them. So little of well-being is there in this vexatious, transitory
world.

5. Sodome-Apples] Apparitions.

False Friends and Trees] Discover the deceitfulness, and Cosenage of the
world, that fail in time of greatest need to yield relief to those, that
rely upon the same.

6. Crosses) Are Afflictions.

Stones] Frequent Offense given.

The straight way] Signifies Necessities, wherein the wayfaring Christian is
hedged in to gain Experience and understanding of dangers, that when he is
alone, without any to counsel him, he may be able to direct himself, and to
order his course wisely.

Stones] To keep him in a sober walk, his hindrances; from running too fast,
and Remembrances to be careful, and the straight way makes him walk Right On,
even against his will.

7. The Magic Castle] Is the witchcraft of Passions, that emprison our Reason,
and fetter our Understanding.

The Gates of shining Iett] The speciousnes of Sin, the Pleasingnes of
Melancholy; as the first torments our Consciences, the last nurseth up sorrows
to torture our Affections.

8. The False Gate of the Passions] Because they open not unto us, and
represent not things as they are, but tempt men out of themselves; And the
unseasonable discovery of their deceit brings oftentimes too late Repentance.
For commonly it punishes men's fondnes, and cruciates their Dotage upon vain
terrestrial things, by occasioning the too late sight of Loss of themselves in
the Pursuit of shadows, in such earnest Prosecution of the same, so as
becoming Transgressors, even against the law of Nature, they are apprehended,
and committed to Custody by their own vices, before they are aware.

9. The Doleful Dale] Denotes the Depth of Mourning. Land Flouds] Are violent,
extreme, inordinate Sorrows, which toss and tumble us with Anxietie, and
hurries Reason impetuously away with fruitless Complainings.

Shallowes] Are moderate Griefs.

Deep] Excess of Passion; which too often casts away Life, throwing it into
the Dead Sea of Destruction.

10 Detractions Hounds] So called, as well for their spending so much at the
Mouth, Hunting, as pursuing the Chase, and seizing behind the innocent Game.

Envie] Endures not another Welfare, and dwells next.

Ambition] Still watching those that are before her, and malicing those that
are Above her.

11. Thou must pass by the Uncertainties, and Vanities of the World, lest thou
be vexed, as Sysiphus with continual and fruitless Labor about what is not
worth thy pains. Of no better Value are the Trinkets of the Worlds Pleasures,
and the Magazine of Earthly Riches.

12 When thou turn'st thy Back upon the World by despising it, the Sunshine of
Gods Grace, and his Blessing breaks out upon thee; thou art enlightened, and
come to Knowledge of thy Self. And as a green Plain is free and pleasant to
the Discovery of the Sight; Thou have instead of former Vexation and the
Darkness of thine Ignorance, thy Mind, thy Conscience quieted, and thine
Understanding of Knowledge, and present Comforts opened by the Apprehension of
the Benefits of such Afflictions, which are but for a time, and the Happiness
hereafter, which is to last for ever.

MORAL III.
HE, that passes through the Wilderness of this World, must walk with
Circumspection, and Prudence; that he neither loses his Way, nor his Time; and
must rather make Observation of all Accidents, then be in Passion at any. He
must Arm himself with prevention of Occasions of Evil; And having the
Consideration of the world's proper Nature must shield himself with the
expectation of Suffering for nothing more surprises, than our mistake of things
for what they are not, and our trust and confidence in those things, that
cannot relieve us, or will not help us; Or our stupidity, with which we
voluntarily lay down, even in the open mouth of common Perils. Nor must he let
himself loose to his passions, which rather torture the mind with their
violence, than afford any advantage, with their clamor, or heal any
misaduenture with their corrosive. Despise the world! and thou art a good Day's
Journey onward to Happiness.

Observe S. Augustine in this matter:

In furnace ardet palea, and purgatur Aurum. Illa in cinerem vertitur; et illud
Sordibus exuritur. Fornax, mundus; Aurum Iusti; Ignis tribulatio; Artifex Deus.
Quod vult ergo Artifex, facio. Ubi ponit me Artifex, tolero. Iubeor ego
tolerare, novit ille purgare. Ardeat licet palea ad incendendum me, et ad
consumendum me: illa quasi in cinerem vertitur, ut ego sordibus caream.

The Gold is purged, while the Straw burns in the fire. This turns to Ashes,
when that is refined from it is foulness. The furnace is the world; the Just
are the Gold; Tribulation the Fire; And God the Great Operator. I submit my
self therefore by Obedience to whatsoever He pleases to command. I set down
contented in what condition soever the Almighty Disposer places me. He
commands me to suffer, because he knows best whom to try, and how to order.
What though the Straw does burn to fire me, to consume me? Mark the End! The
Difference! That is therefore turned into Ashes, that I may appear the more
refined.

S. Gregory speaks herein with Fullness and Clearness.

Plerumque postquam in hoc Mundo non possumus obtinere; quod volumus, postquam
in terrenis Desideriis de impossibilitate lass^mur; tunc mentem ad Deum
reducimus, tum placere incipit, quod displicebat; Et quae nobis amata fuerant,
praecepta repent dulcescunt in Memoria; Peccatrix anima quae adulteria conata
esse non potuit, discernit fideliter esse Conjux. Qui ergo hujus Mundi
adversitatibus fracti ad Dei amorem redeunt, atque a praesentis vitae
Desideriis corriguntur; Quid isti (Fratres charissimi) nisi; ut intrent,
compelluntur?

For the most part it happens, that, when we cannot obtain what in this World
we so greedily would, so earnestly thirst for, and so violently hunt after;
After we are tired with the Vanity of our Wishes, and the Impossibility of our
earthly, too low Desires, then turn we home to our selves; then bend we our
Minds to the best Repose, to the proper Center of our Hearts, to God. Then
comes a holy longing into our Souls; and those Things begin to displease us,
which before we so much desired. Yea, those Commandments of his, that seemed so
bitter to our Pallats, and so irksome to our Natures, in an instant become
amiable to our Dispositions, and sweet to our Remembrances. Then that wandering
Sinner, The Soul, who might not be brought home as a Harlot, finds her self
faithfully rendered into the happy Condition of a Spouse. Whosoever therefore, that
are broken by the Adversities of this World, do return to the Love of God, are
corrected, and as it were whipped by Afflictions from the Desires of this
present Life; what are they (Dearest Brethren) but compelled, and in a Manner
forced into Happiness.

Hear the same Father most excellently in another Place!

Quisquis adversitate and tribulatione frangitur, a quo fractus est minime
contemplatur. Nam qui, quod non erat, facit, factum sine gubernatione non
deserit. Et qui benign hominem condidit, nequaquam injuste cruciari permittit,
nec sinit neglecte perire, quod est: qui hoc etiam, quod non fuit, creavit, ut
esset.

Many a Man is bruised with Adversity, and broken with Tribulation: But few
consider aright, few look up to Heaven upon the Hand from whence the Stroke
comes. For He, that made what was not, deserteth not, nor exileth, what he has
so made, from his Governance, and Protection. And He, that out of the Bounty of
his Grace made Man, permits him not to be unjustly afflicted at all. Nor
does suffer through Negligence to perish, what Is, who created even this World,
that was Not, that it should Be.

PROSPECT. III.
THat Chaos which was faign'd of Old,
By Men is acted, as 'twas told.
An indigested Matter There
Does in Men's Minds alive appear.
Dark Death is interwov'n with Life;
With killing Love embracing strife;
With worldly Joy as dismal Ruth;
A Lie must lay with Bed-bound Truth.
For Watrie Lust, Terrene Desire,
And Ayerie Hope sleep with Zeal's Fire;
Sin with Religion seems to lie
In The Silence of Adultery.
A Chaos All. Till the only Light
Does show the Day, divides the Night.
So Men distinguished are by Ills;
These Grace renewes, Those Nature fills.
So Nature in her falling Dress
Shows Eden's Garden Wilderness;
From whence the World has taken the Fashion
To form a Christians Tribulation.
CONSOLATORY ESSAY. III.
TRibulations surprise the Improvident, as Armed Men starting out of an
Ambuscado. They are overcome, before they think on it. The Foolish scorn, and
The Desperate throw away their Arms. So will not an experienced Soldier
hazard. He will not move, before his Scouts come in. He will not go unprovided.
He is acquainted with Dangers. He Knows their Subtleties as well, as their
Malice. The wise Travailer will not cast off his Cloak for Every Sunshine. He
expects foul weather. A calm Sea cozens not the Seaman's Eye. He stands
prepared for, though unseen, yet not unlookt for, Storms. Expect Tribulation!

Life; and Death appear to Men masked; and have false Faces (So goes the Story)
Life, which is so ill-favored, has the Fair, has the Beautiful Mask, which
makes her of Most to be so Beloved. Sometimes Passion pulls it off; and Then
men are frighted with the Ugliness of her Look. Death, which is Fair, has the
ghastly Vizard, which makes her by Most to be so Feared, and hated. But when
That Mask does slip, her Beauty appearing, She is much Affected, Sweetly
Welcomed, and Joyfully Entertained. Life indeed has many Spots, and Warts in
her Face, and no few wrinckles in her Forehead; Her Eyes look much asquint; And
her Cheeks are all furrowed. She is Fair in Prosperitie's Eye only; In
Prosperitie's; whose Brain is intoxicated. She seems to have a sharp Tongue; to
speak too much, to talk too long to Those that are in Misery. But Her Counsel
is wholsomest, when it is in the tritest, and plainest Language; And wise men
do well understand it. She has ever Sweat on her Brow, brawny Hands, and often
a Thorn in her Foot. A Coach gives her the Gout; And a Feast puts her into a
Fever. She is healthfullest at Lowest Pension. Nature is content with a
Little. Desire is Satisfied with Nothing. Affliction seems to rob, or take from
Death, what is her Due; Paying some of her Hours to Death for A Quit-Rent; And
stands Out to maintain Death's Title. Mill modis morimur is One of Her Cases;
And She has Books enough for it; And wants not many an Experienced Lawyer to
become her Pleader; Though Affliction sues In forma Pauperis. Death seems
therefore to be Her Friend; But yet is somewhat Lordly. For Death will hardly
be entreated to visit Affliction; though much invited.

This is to show the troublesome Condition of Man; whose whole Life is a
Procession week, from Cross to Cross. Initium vitae caecitas et oblivio
possidet, progressum Labor, dolor exitum, error omnia. Childehood is a foolish
Simplicity; Youth a rash Heat; Manhood a carking Carfulness; Old Age a
noisome Languishing; And his History is a Tragicomedy of Errors. Man is
Instabilis tellus, a floating Island; tossed up and down with many
Tribulations. Affliction hems him in on every Side.

Whosoere thou art therefore, that art Distressed in mind, for any outward
Loss; or Cross; Or have an Inward Convulsion for some Sin, that seeks to
overpower thee; and throw thee down, as from a Precipice! Read This short,
well-intended Tract of a weak ^nditer, and under God's Blessing thou may
profit as well peradventure, as by a Greater Lesson from a Learned Hand! Read
This, as An Epitaph upon the Living, who are daily buried in a world of
Sorrows! But dig not thine Own Grave with Anxietie; Nor do a Certain Mischief
to avoid a Seeming Inconvenience! Heap not Affliction upon Affliction! lest the
Burden become too heavy. Tie not more knots upon the Scourge! Quid misero
miserius non miserante Seipso? who shall have pity upon Thee, if Thou be
Cruel to Thy Self? It is not thy Case Alone. For Every Man has his Pressure as
well, as Thou; And Some far Greater. What art Thou, that have not deserved a
Punishment? Have changed Thy Voice to Groans? Be Patient! Thine own
Unquietness rather, than The Weight, thou carri'st wrings thy Shoulders.

Examine the True Nature of what it is, afflicts thee! Thou may think That a
Monster, which is but a Shadow. Is it a Devil? Or a Bugbear? Bring it to the
Test of thine Understanding! Use All good means to quiet and still The Hubub in
thy Bosom!

If thou can carry Thy Burden no further; Go to thy Friend! thy Priest! thy
Pastor! thy Physician! Open it to Him! He will carry Part of it for Thee; Or
direct thee, that thou may find Ease.

But by All means avoid All Occasions of aggravating Thy Misery. For Thy
Present Grief will go out of It Self if Thou add'st not Fuel to it.

If thou will needs see thy Afflictions in a Glass, let it not be a
Multiplying, or a Magnifying Glass, that may represent Them More, or More
Horrid!

Give as little Freedom to Thy Passions, as thou can! For Those Wild Horses
will run Suddenly away with The Whole Man.

If Thy Friend give Counsel, listen to it! It is as precious as Balsam. Comfort
to One despairing is, as Cordials to The Dying. Refuse it not! Nor The Means to
have it. A wise word in Time may Save Thy Goods; Thy Body; Yea thy Soul from
Eternal Loss. The Sick have need of the Physician.

Be not Obstinate against kind persuasion! For That is, as if thou did sow up
thy Mouth, when thou have an empty stomach. Repentance, and that often too late
too, pays home the Denial of good Offers.

In any Case have a Care, that thou rely'st not too much upon Thine Own
Judgment!

Have a Care of Solitude, if thy Thoughts be not good enough to keep thee
Company!

Keep not That Secret, that will, like Joab stab thee with An Embrace in the
Dark. Why should Thou be the Devil's Second against Thy Self?

CANTO IV. The Fruitful Vale of Tears.
1.
PAce on awhile unto yon Little Hill!
Whose shadie Top sends forth two Springs,
That curle about His Cheeks like Rings,
And down into that Fruitful Vale of Tears distill.
2.
Where groaning Turtles moan their Love-lost Mates,
By Fowlers Hands to Death betrayed;
And many sad Wightes side-long laid,
Whose Groans, and Sighs do seem to sympathize their Fates.
3.
Take Rest! And cast about thy wat'rie Eyes
Upon the Sweetness of the Plain,
That often is washed with dropping Rain;
Which causes Flowers to grow, as from dead Roots to rise.
4.
There stand Some telling many'a Heavy Tale;
While Others bid them gather Flowers
To dress their Bosoms up like Bowers,
Some Hearts-ease, Violets; Some choose Lilies of the Vale.
5.
On Cammomil Some lay their rest less Heads;
Some under Walnut-Trees couch Low,
Which being beaten best do grow.
Adonis Plant thrives most, when some upon It treads.
6.
Some stoop, and gather Herbs to cure their Wounds;
Some cool their Heat with Lemons sharp;
Some charm their Sadness with the Harp;
And Some with sweating Brows are digging up the Grounds.
7.
For where before Armed Thorn so stiff did grow,
A Bush of Rosemarie does rise;
To which a Woodbine Tendrils ties;
And with its Cups of Flowers does make a lovely Show.
8.
Where diverse rending Briars did run and spread,
A pleasant Vine with ripening Grapes,
As if from Earth they made Escapes,
For Sad Souls Comfort lifted up its rising Head.
9.
Where many ragged Souls, that looked forlorn
With Shoulders seemed the Earth to Plough;
And sow warm Drops with many'a Vow;
To whom did soon appear a hopeful Crop of Corn.
10.
O Sad Blessed Place, though hither roughest Way!
Thou still must on over Rocks and Hills;
And pass by several Grinding Mills.
Cheer up! and travail still, while shining Sun lends Day.
11.
Behold! You Bottom very flat does lie!
Which often these Streams do overflow;
In some parts it is exceeding Low;
There lies thy Way, by the Cell of loved Humility.
12.
See not a Crown in yonder Cloud appears!
Make Haste unto That Eastern Place!
For thou may meet the same by Grace.
O happy then! That Here thou saw the Vale of Tears.
PERSPECTIVE IV.
1. TEars are the Tide of Sorrow, which proceeding from the Afflicted Mind, as
from a Troubled Sea, work upward, and overflow the Banks; By These we find the
Argument, as the Channel of our Desire; For we do not so much pursue Grief, as
discover it. Nemo enim sibi tristis. Few are sad with out a Witness. Plerumque
omnis dolor per Lachrymas effluit. The exhalation of Sorrows to these
melancholy Clouds in the Brain often distill in showrie Tears. Passion within,
like an Earthquake at the Heart will not cease struggling, or a pent Vapor,
till it has made either Eruption by Sighs, or Expression by Groans. Some body
must hear us; We, even in that Torment are in love with Another Compassion, as
well as in Labor to be delivered of our own Pain. Therefore has it pleased
the Almighty Maker of All to place near the Eyes two Crystal Streams in the
Head to allay the Flames of a Martyred Heart; which does often evaporate it
self at the Diamond Casements of the Sight. By these we sometimes seek to
obtain, what our weak Tongues have scarce ability to request, or Courage to
Demand. And if that Innumorato did not doubt but continual Suite would mollify
His Mistress Heart, who presented her The Figure of his Mind, made in the Form
of an Eye, dropping Tears upon a Heart with Saepe cadendo.


What, with Reverence, may not we think to gain from Divine Mercie's Hands, if
we accost Heaven with the Penitence of our groaning Hearts, and the Frequencie
of our running Tears?

Therefore is Affliction called The Vale of Tears; Because it humbles us; And
The Fruitful Vale; In that Sanctified Affliction is the pleasant Ground of
Comforts.

Fletus (Says Cassiodore) est cibus Animarum, corroboratio Sensuum, et
absolutio peccatorum, refectio mentium, lavacrum culparum: Weeping is the Food
of Our Souls the Strengthening of Our Senses, the means of Absolution of Our
Sins, the Refreshment of Our Minds, The Laver, or Bath of Errors.

Grief for Sin is of the Nature of Fire. It labors still to show above, It
works more impetuously, and burns the more violently in the straightness of
it is Enclosure, when it is most hidden. It is much allayed, if not quenched, by
that Rain of Grace from Heaven, Those Ocular Shoures, that pour down upon The
Breast. In short We must proceed in Repentance from Heart to Head, and so make
use of Afflictions in Our Hearts as to consider the Head, as their Fountain
from whence they are derived.

The little Hill] Is the Head, whose shady Top resembles the Grove of Hair
upon it without, or the obnubilation of inward mourning, which sends forth
Lamentation at The Two Springs of the Eyes; running into the Fruitful Vale, to
the Breast, the Conscience made fruitful with the Riches of the Almighty Mercy.
Such Tears are the wine of Angels, and the Banquet of Comforts to The Penitent,
or to that happy Soul, whom Grace inspires with the Sight of Divine Loves
causing it to be so afflicted.

2. Groaning Turtles] Intimate, the Distempers and Passions of the mind for
Worldly Things.

Lost Mates] Earthly Vanities.

Fowlers Hands] Oppression and Injury, the Seeming Occasions of Sad Accidents.

Sad Weights side-long layd] Are the Affections not turned to their proper
Object, or their Dejection for not enjoying the humor of their desires. This
is a vain Sorrow, yet may it be introductive to a true Repentance.

3. Take rest] Signifies Recollection or Sedation of mind.

The Sweetness of the Plain] Is the Joy that accompanies Religious Sorrow.
Affliction thus received rather calms the Mind, than disturbs it; Tears refresh
the Heart, not drown it.

Dead Roots] Mortified Hearts; from whence arise by Christ in us new Life, and
a restored Being.

4. While Some spend their time in lamenting their Disadvantages, The Children
of Grace, the motions of The Holy Spirit bids us, puts us in mind, to gather
The Flowers of God's mercies, and Blessings together, wherewith we may perfume
our Bosoms, give an odor to our Consciences of the Comforts in the Gospel, so
happily revealed unto us.

Some gather (Hartsease) Which rightly used has in it a Medicine against Agues;
against Convulsions; against Fits of The Falling Sickness in Infants and
Children. Contentation likewise with present condition, and Submission to Gods
Dispose is a Cure to Irresolution and the Shaking of weak Minds and Childish
Reasons by Misfortunes, Misadventures, or Injuries, as also against the
Violence of Passions and the Danger of Despair, which is the Falling Sickness of
the Heart.

Violets] Which cool Fevers, helps Headaches, etc. So Consideration mitigates
too choleric and intemperate Humors within; and makes Moderation Mistress of
the Tongue.

Lillies of the Valley] Which restore Speech to the Dumbpalsi'd, and those in
Apoplexies; is good against the Gout, comfort the Heart, strengthen the Memory,
and help the Inflammation of the Eyes. Religious Prudence in like manner by
Humility restores a quick, yet sober Conversation to Malencholy, and
indisposed Dispositions takes off Anguish from the Impatient, and Sweetens
Afflictions to the Soul; gives Mindfulnesse, Care, and Regard of Not Doing what
is Evil, and renders us the Remembrances of the best Things, cools the Lusts of
the Flesh, and tempers, while Grace reclaims, The Lustful Wanderings of the Eye.

Some lay their Heads on Cammomil] Cammomil is an excellent Remedy against the
Collicke, Stone; but especially against Wearisomenesse; mollifies Swellings;
allayes Aches, Pains; is good for Bruises, Shrinking of Sinews. The red
Cammomil is called the flower of Adonis. How Grace and Faith give an
Aequanimitie, a free Suffering of Crosses, and a settled Quiet to the Soul,
helping against the flatulent Collicks of Ambition, the Obstructive Stone of
Covetousness, mollifieth, and disperseth the Swellings, the risings of
immoderate Passions; cures the Aches and Pains of diseased Affections, takes
off the Tiring of Patience, relieves against the Strokes of Tribulation, and
heals the Bruises of Adversity; Nor does it prevail less against the Shrinking
of Resolusion. Cammomil, and walnut Trees are the Emblemes of Virtue's better
Growth by Injuries, and Christianitie's flourishing under Persecution.

6. Stooping] Is a posture of Humility and Reverence; So Signifies Prayer; and
of yiedling to a Burden; So it denotes Submission to Gods Will; a Christian
Patience, whereby Grace is obtained to have our wounded Souls healed.

Heat] Signifies Presumption, the effect of Prosperity.

Sharp Lemons] Adversity, or the Apprehension of God's Justice.

Sands] Intimates dangerous Melancholy, or Possession of Satan by Sin, which is
charmed by the Power of the Word, the Harp of the Scripture.

Sweating Brows, and digging up the Grounds] Some labor against Temptations
by Alteration of Former Life, and take pains by Reformation of Bad Manners, and
Sinful Courses to mortify the Flesh.

7. Instead of Thorns] The former wounding of Sin, and the obscuring of Truth
by wickedness appears A Bush of Rosemary, which is a Strengthener of the Head,
and Memory; Christ appears that is the Fountain of Knowledge and Pillar of
Understanding; By Him flows the wisdom of the Father, and in him is the
Steadfastness of the Truth.

The Woodbine is Faith, which is strengthened by the application of it self unto
Christ.

The Cups of Flowers] Are pious works, which manifest such Faith in Christ
unto the world.

8. Briars] Sinfulness did overrun our wild Lapsed Natures.

The Vine] Is Our Savior, Our Redeemer.

With ripening Grapes] With Joy and Comfort.

Escapes] As overcomming Sufferings, Persecutions etc.

For Soul's Comfort lifting up his rising Head] For Salvation of those that
were lost after his Passion here, He is ascended up to become Mediator and to
come Judge.

9. Ragged Souls) Are Sinners, who are liable to the Sentence of Condemnation
by The Law, that finding their desperate Condition (Seem to plough the Earth
with their shoulder) make no account of Themselves, are humbled, and lay
prostrate, with the Confession of their Faults before The Throne of Grace, that
with Contrition of Heart Seem to tear up their Ungodly Courses (Sowing the
Drops) of Repentance (with the Vow) of Reformation, entering into a new
Covenant with God to walk and persevere in his ways. Such Grace causes (A
Hopeful Crop appear) by Faith in Gods promises; the Assurance of Pardon,
Forgiveness of Sins, and Hope of Everlasting Happiness.

10. Sad blessed Place) Are Sanctified Afflictions and Crosses.

Roughest way) Difficulties, that are unpleasant to Nature.

Rocks and Hills) Are great Temptations, and Smaller Trials.

Grinding Mils) Are Persecution in this world.

While Shining Sun) While Life lasts.

11. Bottom flatt) Is Adversity.

These Streams overflow) Are Sorrows and Tears.

Exceeding low) Comfortless; Near Despair, with dejection, and no Opinion of
Our Selves dwells profound Humility.

In a Cell) In Solitude, like A Hermit alone, whom All love, but Few Visit.

12. A Crown in A Clowd) Is the Reward of Hereafter, Seen only by the Eye of
Faith.

Eastern Place) A hint of the Resurrection, when Christ will come in Glory to
Judge and reward.

Grace) Comes toward us, if we will turn to meet with it.

O happy then) Then the Slight Affections of This World shall be recompensed
with Eternal, Joy and Bliss Everlasting.

MORAL IV.
THough many Temptations do, and must assault us for the better threshing out
the Corn, and winnowing out the Chafe to sift away, and Separate the Drosle,
and Cockle from the Wheat; if rightly understood, they are the Friends, though
of a harsh Tongue, yet Speak the best language. For many Benefits arise from
Tribulation to the better fitting, and preparing us for the Journey to
Heavenward, which the godly man expects, and a wise man ought to undertake.
And if Tribulation be well searched into, we shall find therein more reason of
Rejoicing, than of Sorrow, we shall rather love our Tears for Cleansing the
Foulness of our Sinful Eyes; and be cheared at Heart, when our Repentance
works upward, that by Such watering the Mercy of God may be obtained, whereby
becoming fruitful we may grow from Grace to Grace, having This Comfort, That
Sorrow may continue for a Night, but Joy comes in the Morning.

Most sweetly speaks S. Bernard.

Lachrymae poenitentium sunt vinum Angelorum; quia in illis odor vitae, saepor
Gratiae, gustus indulgentiae, sanitas redeuntis innocentiae, reconciliationis
jucunditas, and serenatae Conscientiae suavitas.

The Tears of the Penitent are the Wine of Angels. For therein is the fragrant
Perfume of Life; the sweet smelling savor of Grace, the quick and pleasant
Taste of Forgiveness, the strong, and Beautie-bringing health of returning
Innocence, the only Mirth, the rejoicing of Reconciliation, and no such
sweetness to that Delight, that Pleasure, as after a dark and stormy day to
enjoy a cleared Conscience.

So S. Chrysostom.

Sicut post vehementes imbres mundus Aer, ac purus efficitur; Ita and post
Lachrymarum pluvias serenitas mentis sequitur, atque tranquillitas.

As the Air becomes fair and clear after the fierceness of stormy Showers,
the brightness and tranquillity of the mind appears after the sweet fall of
Rainie Tears.

And S. Gregory upon the Twentieth Psalm.

Saepe quod torpentes latuit, fletibus innotescit, and afflictae men's certius
invenit malum quod fecerat; and reatum suum, cujus secura non meminit, hunc in
se commota deprehendit.

Tears draw the Curtain, and discover unto those whom Drowsinesse had lodged
upon the Bed asleep, what oftentimes has laid so silent in the dark; then is
made manifest that evil to the afflicted Mind, which it has committed; then
in the struggling with, and rowzing of its self, the soul brings to light, even
that her own Guilt, whereof, while she slept secure before, she was not mindful.

PROSPECT. IV.
OF Time-to come there dawns A Day,
That questions Now what Then to Say.
To That This seems A Gloomie Night.
(How else forget so many Light!)
A stormy Night of Rain, and showers
In which Tears bath our living Hours.
Wax Tapers burn, and leave sweet Fume;
While Candles with ill Sent consume.
All ore A Storm, the Clouds unfold;
The Waters rage; The Winds are bold;
The searchlesse Deep does open lay;
The roaring Seas make wide Death's way;
The woeful Mariners do cry;
With whom The Pilot's Voice does Vye,
Some throw out Goods. And well. For These
Seem 'sswage the Fury of the Seas.
The winds forsake the late-torne Sails:
And change into the milder Gales.
How Happie's He, that gains his Port,
And is not Billows Prey, but Sport!
CONSOLATORY ESSAY IV.
ADam had no sooner transgressed in the Garden, but Shame ran him into a
Corner. The Light was too bright for him. He hid himself. He thought, he was
Out of God's Eye, but he found, he was not out of His Call. Adam where art
thou? It is his pleasure still to put The Question to His People; And for whom
He has Love, He most strictly examines. Does He whip thee? yea, scourge thee,
till the blood comes? Thou answear'st Him by thy Patience, or Repining. Does He
command thee cross to thy will? Thou answer'st him by thy Obedience, or
Perversenes. Does He open the Door of thy Knowledge, by Revealing Some things,
and Shutting it up Close in Others? Thou answear'st Him by thy Humility, or
Curiosity. All, that He does, is for Thy Good: But He will Not do it Thy way.
Thou art His Creature. Thou must be guided by Him. Heaven is the Place of Joy;
And Thine in Design: But Thou must not go Laughing Thither.

There is a Great Difference betwixt Creatures, Though of the same Species; In
their Outward Forms; In their Internal Dispositions; which are distinguished by
their Race, and Kinds. That we call their Nature. One Cock crows, and Soundes
to the Battle; Another rejoices upon his Dunghill. There is no Less Difference
by their Education; which may well be styled A second Nature. One Dog (of the
same Litter) pursues the Hare; The Other runs to the wheel, or the Port; The
One prefers his Chase; the Other his Breakfast. There are Joys of Heaven; and
Joys of Earth. Both are Joys; Of the same Name; But not of the same Nature.
The Mirth of this world is Folly; And the Laughter of it Madness. With Such
unwholesome Cates the World glutteth her Darlings. In matters belonging to
Heaven the Course is Clean contrary.

For thy better Health, thou must be fed with course Fare; And be kept to a
strict Diet. Wu'dst thou have A Blessing? Take up the Cross! Wu'dst thou
rejoice Indeed? Learn Lachrymae! Or Sing the Lamentation of A Sinner! Put on
Mourning. It is lined with Scarlet. Thy Joy is Inward. It is wiser, than to
make a Noise. What have thou of thine Own, that Thou should expect a Better
Crop, than Thistles? But, though thy Heart has a Fever, meddle not with
Hellebore, Despair Not!

My Friend! Yea, My Brother, that art so perplexed! Has Sorrow broke over thee,
like A raging Tide? Or is A Shelf between Thee, and Thy Desires? Thou wud'st
have, what thou can Not; Peradventure, what wu'd hurt thee. And this Vexation
is intolerable. Recollect thy Self! Thou art A Christian; Thou art Not to
receive Thy Portion Here. It is Black money. But upon Exchange. Thy Silver; Thy
Gold; Thy Bank is in Heaven. And, where Thy treasure is, let Thy mind be also!

Pine not to death then for the Loss of A Husband! A Wife! A Brother! A
Sister! A Friend! A Mistress! A Sweetheart! Thy Fame! Thy Goods! Thy Liberty! or
the Like! What wud'st thou? God has His will; His time. Be not precipitate! Be
Not impatient!

Art Thou betrayed? So was Thy Master. Art thou contemned? Thou deserve it.
Why should Man regard Thee, when Thou respect'st not God? If at all; Not, as
Thou should.

Thou understandst not the language of God's mercy in Thine Afflictions. He
corrects Thy Sins, past; And by Them works in thee a deeper Loathing of Thy
Natural Corruption. So prevents thee from Falling into many Other Sins,
whereunto thy Disposition is too prone.

Does He afflict thee? Thou art His Son. He seals unto Thee thine Adoption:
Thou art else A Bastard. Remember, what became of Eli's Sons! The purest Corn
is Cleanest fanned. The finest Gold is oftest tried. The sweetest Grape is
hardest pressed. And the truest Christian is heaviest Crossed. In blurred
characters read The Beauty of God's Love. Thus have Thou Tribulation sent to
thee, as A token. It is thy Summons too. Thou art cited to Heaven.

Art thou Afflicted? Thy Heart is hereby weaned from Falling too much in Love
with the world. Thou art hereby reclaymed from thy Dotage upon It Is Vanities.
It is to sharpen thy Desires as well, as to set them right, that They may
shoot Upward, as to heat, to inflame thy Longing for Eternal Life. What
Comparison is there between the Joys of this world, and Joys Everlasting? The
world is Thy Stepmother. She misuseth Thee. She strikes Thee. Love her Not.

Does God afflict Thee? He musters thee, He takes notice of thine Arms, His
Graces. He does exercise thee; that thou may the Better use them. He tries
thy Faith. Rejoice in thy Tribulation!

Does God send thee Affliction? He gives thee His Livery. The Cross is His
Badge, and thy Cognizance. He shows to the world His Children's Love, and
Service. Sanctified Affliction is the Conduit-pipe to thy true Conversion, and
Repentance. David's troubles, Hezekiah's sickness, The Prodigal's Misery faced
them about, and led them weatherbeaten home upon their Knees. That is the
comfortable Posture; that Creeping Climbs Heaven.

In Affliction how is thy Heart softened with Pity! How is it melted with
Compassion! Thou art Partner with Another in Distress, and Misery. Thou art
moved to condole His and so lessenest thine Own.

The Bearing of Afflictions are the means, the Examples, that like Trumpets
proclaim and manifest the Faith, and virtues, which God has bestowed upon His
Children; that strengthen, that enliven, that give courage to those, which have
not received so great a measure of Faith.

By Afflictions He makes thee conformable to the Image of Christ. He being the
Captain of our Salvation was made perfect through Sufferings. So fight! So
overcome! So receive A Crown!

Does God humble the Godly by their Afflictions, in respect of their state and
misery? He glorifieth Himself by His deliverance of them, when they call upon
Him. He afflicts not Always for Sins, Sometimes for His Own Glory.

What is it then, that so much troubles thee, that thou art weary of thy Life?
Mark! How God has blessed thee; How He has protected thee; And that should
put a Hymn into thy mouth; and fetch Blood in thy Cheeks. Thy Fear made thee
seem more wretched, than thou art. Thou did not know the Honey, that is
within the Carcass of the Lion. Bath in the brinish Sea! It will heal thy
Soars. It will cure thine Itch. Though It smarts; It is wholesome. Through many
Tribulations you shall enter into the Kingdom of Heaven.

CANTO V. The Cell of Humility.
1.
NOw come thou to the Low and Happy Cell
Of A fair Virgin on Her Knees,
It Is, where Humility does dwell;
Her up-cast Eye Heaven's Brightness sweetly sees,
Meek Gesture, and such Posture with Her Mind agrees.
2.
Of Herbs the secret Virtue She does Ken.
Much Skill She has in Chir'geon's Art.
Full often She heals the Sores of Men;
And, though it does occasion Pain, and Smart,
Does Tumors lance, assuage with Balm the swelling Part.
3.
She minds not much the Door, or Table's End.
Who passes Hers must stoop much down.
It makes the stiffest Back to bend.
On Earth Her Hempen Napkin looking brown
Is spread; which homely Cates in Earthen Dish do crown.
4.
Beyond Her Cell, there lies A Path, well trod
To much-sought Truth's fair, Crystal Spring;
Besides This Path some Students plod;
And leaving It Is Straight Way to Error fling,
Who still in Crooked Blindness leads them wandering.
5.
Upon the Ground's green Turf the Larks do breed
Who Climb with Songs the Lofty Sky:
Her Land is sown with smallest Seed,
Which bears Plants, that grow up very High;
In which Joy'd Birds do sing, and make sweet Melody.
6.
About Her much white-flowr'd Self heal does grow;
That Inward, Outward Wounds does cure;
And quieteth the Aching Brow:
And what is Sound, it causes so to endure;
A rugged, black, dry Mouth from Swelling that makes pure
7.
The Lowly Daysie with his Fringed Ruff,
That helps the Gout, and Feaver's Heat,
Brain-purging with his iuice-bruised Snuff
Peeps there, with hoarie Time provoking Sweat. (beat.
Strong Herb-of-Grace, that Serpents, Poisons forth does
8.
And diverse humble Plants about her creep;
And harmless Beasts do 'bout her feed;
Of Nature like the Silly Sheep;
Which with Delight do There increase, and breed;
While She does please Her self with many'a pious Deed.
9.
At Foot of Faith's High Rock She safely dwells;
And at Devotion's Chapple goes to pray;
She Great men's Falls and sad Fates tells
To those, that to Her come, and pass Her Way
How Free from Storms she lives, she often to such does say.
10.
To Neighboring Virtues step by step she goes;
And gently Knocks at their Gate;
With whom her Friendship fast does close;
With such she often does associate;
She rises Early; and lays down her Head as Late.
11.
Hence must thou go by Resolutions Field;
Where hardy Soldiers 'trenched lay;
Against Surprise Redoubts they build;
And None without A Pass can go that Way, (stay.
With Cross fair signed; The Guards else cause them Prisoners
12.
First Kiss Humilitie's Fair Hand! and go!
Prepare thy Pass! and cheer thy Mind.
The art under Winds, that roughly blow.
By Observation thou shall Wisdom find.
Who travails Thus leaves Naught of worth, unseen, behind.
PERSPECTIVE V.
1 A Cell is the solitary Place of an Hermit; who is a Religious forsaker of
the World; that has chosen a Mountain in some Wilderness, or the side of a
Rock for his Habitation; resigning himself up by his continual Devotion, and
Segregation from the Company of Men to Divine Dispose only; so seeking Safety
and Repose rather among Beasts, then Men.

It is called [The Cell of Humility] for its unenvi'd Lowliness.

Low, and Happy Cell] For its Safety, Self-enjoyment, Spiritual Rejoicing.

Fair Virgin] It is the Loveliness, Innocence, and Integrity of Humility.

On her Knees] Her Reverence, and frequent Devotion.

Her up-cast Eye] Holy Contemplation of Heavenly Things.

Gesture and Posture] Her Sober, Modest Conversation, Religious Comportment,
and meek Behavior.

Her Minde] Her Disposition; Or These suit the Soul best.

2. Hearbs] Are the lowest of Plants, meaning Virtues, which are the furthest
from Preferment; Because the meanest in the Worlds Estimation.

Secret Virtues She does ken] Their operations and Effects. Hereby intimating
that Humility is the Handmaid of Knowledge, and the Secretary to Prudence.

Much Skill in Chirurgions Art] Because she opens the Understanding, and
secures the Distempers of the Mind. In a Divine sense she gives the sight of
Sins, and is the proper Object of Grace. The Surgeon is Christ, his Art is
the Gospel; which is revealed, and made manifest to the Humble; And as Physic
it self is an Art of well-curing, and reducing Health to the Body, especially
to that of Man; so to Chirurgerie likewise belongs such Science, as may with a
Physicians Skill, and an Artist's Hand best heal Hurts, and Sores, and take
away the Diseases of the same; Being chiefly conversant by two Ways to this
Effect: In solutione continui, as of Ulcers, Wounds, Fractures, and Laxations;
Et in Moderatione partis externae, as in dissolving and scattering of Tumors
that gather against Nature. The first may put in mind of Original Sin, which
the wonderful Humility of our Saviors Assumption of humane Nature, His
Submission unto his Father in undergoing his Wrath, and Suffering for Us, did
free Us from the Bonds of Death: The Latter of Actual Transgressions against
the Law, of which likewise by such His Humility in his Passion and our
application of our selves to Him by Faith, and our Humiliation by Repentance,
turning unto Newness of Life, he is the sole means of our Recovery. So heals
He our old Sores, and new Pains, and Smarts, dispersing the gathering Humors
of our disordered Affections, or lancing the rotten Tumors of our Hearts by
Afflictions, and as it were a gracious Force of Acknowledgement of our
Offenses, and asswaging the swelling of our Sins, and doing them away with the
Balm of his Mercy. So does he cure our Natural Corruptions, and assist us by
the Grace of his Holy Spirit to better Inclinations, Undertakings, Resolutions,
and Performances.

The Door or Tables End] Humility regards not Complemental Priority, or Worldly
Superiority.

The stiffest Back to bend] High Thoughts, big Words, and lofty Designs must
Buckle, must bend, must stoop to Lowliness of Mind, to Mildness of
Expression, to Meekness of Conversation before we can enter in at Humilities
Door, before we can be rightly said to be humbled, yea we must be brought down
to the Acknowledgement of our Errors, and to Repentance for our Sins, before
we can properly come to be received by Humility, whose Door is the Introduction
to the Way of Truth. And as the Back is the strongest part of the Body, and
must be bowed; so must too much Opinion of our selves, our own Strength and
Power must be declined, and laid by, if we seek, if we think to be humbled.

On Earth] The lowest, and grossest of all the Elements; The Ground, the
vilest, the dirtiest of all Places.

Her course Hempen Napkin] Is her homely Diaper, and best Courtship; the
plainest Dress is her most pleasing Entertainment.

Looking Brown] As Contemptible in common Eyes, as her own.

Is spread] She cares not who sees it.

With homely Cates] That are rather wholesome, than Dainty; Thanking God rather
for his Blessings, than being so nice as to refuse any thing that He sends, or
so bold, as to appoint or choose what He should bestow.

In an Earthen Dish] Take it either for Man's Body, that Pot composed of Clay,
at the Dispose of the Heavenly Potter, the most wise Artist, and Almighty
Maker; Or for Simplicity of Mind, and Contentation of Heart; In which she
receives whatsoever Divine Bounty bestows upon Her. Close to this purpose is
that of S. Basil. Tria sunt, quae radicata nutriunt Humilitatem, scilicet
Assiduitas Subjectionis; Consideratio propriae fragilitatis; and Consideratio
Rei melioris. If three Things take Root Humility flourishes; that is, Continual
struggling to obtain a Diligence of Subjection; The serious Consideration of our
own inbred and Natural Frailty; And the Comfortable Meditation of a better
Being.

4. Beyond her Cell there lies a Path] We must go by Humility to the Way of
Truth. Vera Discretio, non nisi vera Humilitate acquiritur. A clear Distinction
betwixt a right Discerning, and Discovery of the Natures of Things is not to be
had, not to be obtained by us, without a real, and true Humility. Haec erit
prima Probatio, si universa, non solum quae agenda sunt, sed etiam quae
cogitantur, referantur seniorum examini. This must be the first Trial, if all
Things, that, not only are to be done, but even pass our Thoughts, be
referred to the Balance of gravest Understandings. Ut nihil suo judicio
credens, illorum per omnia definitionibus acquiescat, and quod bonum, and malum
debeat judicare, eorum traditione cognoscat. That a man grounding nothing upon
self-opinion, may with their Definitions acquiesce, and sit down satisfied in
all things, and that he may know by their tradition and doctrine, as well, what
he ought to receive to be good, as what he ought to sentence to be bad. So
Cassiodore.

Well trod] Not only in respect of the Happiness of them, that find the Way
to Truth, but in regard of the Directnesse more, then the frequency of the use
of it. For Pauci inveniunt, few find this way, and fewer go it.

To much sought Truth] All seek it, few attain it.

Fair Crystal Spring] Fair for the Beauty: Crystal for the Clearness and
Purity of Truth; Spring, for its Constancy and Continuance, as also for its
Derivation from the Ocean of Divine Excellence, that Abyss of Wisdom, from
whom all Purity and Verity for ever flows.

Besides this Path some Students plod] Many take a great deal of pains to
travail themselves out of the way, not rightly distinguishing Bonum apparens,
from Bonum verum, following a thousand Mistakes and Misprisions, fall into as
many Errors, that seduce them still on in the crooked Intricacies of Doubt; or
continue them in Blind stupidity, of Ignorance.

5. Upon the Grounds green Turfe the Larks do breed] Cheerfulness is enjoyed in
a convenient humble Being; And the Mind never rejoices More, then when there
is a Despising of our Selves Most.

Who Climb with Songs, etc.] Climbing is Prayer, Songs Praise, Sky Heaven.

Her Land Sown, etc.] Pointing at our Savior's Parable concerning the Kingdom
of Heaven. Or her Land may signify the whole Man; The smallest seed, the
Diminution of his own Worth; and the low Estimate of himself in his own Opinion.

Which bears Plants that, etc.] The Plants are the Affections of the Soul,
which if sanctified grow from Grace to Grace, even reach to Heaven.

In which joy'd Birds do sing] the Affections being so exercised, the comforts
of the Holy Spirit do make Music in the Conscience.

6. About her much white-flowr'd, etc.] Self-heal is here taken for Recognition
of a man's self, his Recollection, which accompanies Humility, which asswageth
the Fury, and preventeth the Ranckling of Inward Passions, allayeth the smart,
and cures the Venom of Outward Injuries.

The Akeing Brow] Is Anxiety of Mind, or too much Carefulness.

And what is sound, etc.] Humility preserves Love, which is the health of the
Mind.

A rugged, black, dry Mouth, etc.] She purifieth the foulness of speech, she
changes the ruggedness of a violent Tongue into submiss, and mild Language;
the Blackness of Oaths and Obscaenity into modest and Pious Expression; the
dryness of the Mouth, it is Folly and vain Babblings, its Vaporings, by too much
Arrogance and Presumption, into Meekness and Loveliness of Conversation,
whereby former errors are reformed.

7. The lowly Daisie] Is Quiet, and Sedation of mind, submission of will unto
Divine Dispose; Or Innocent Enjoyment with honest Labor, that opens with the
Rising, and closes with the shutting of the Sun, that is, daily Endeavor, and
continual Obedience, observing that Sun that enlivens All, as he shines upon
us with his Blessings, or seems to withdraw from us by sending Afflictions;
to open to him by our Thansgiving, or to close with him by our Relyance, and
Patience.

Its Ruffe] Is Incircling Security.

Gout] Idleness; Covetousness, Prosperity.

Feaver's Heat] Disorder of intemperate Passions.

Brain-purging] Of evil Humors, that arise from a foul stomach; allaying, or
taking away inordinate Desires, curing the Head of Solicitation, which is the
Headache of the Mind.

With His Iuice-bruised Snuffe] With the right use, and application of
Tribulation. Snuff is made of the Juice or Powder of several Plants, as of
Helebore, Tobacco and the like, which taken, drawn or snuffed up at the
Nostrils (from whence it is so named) it seems to be troublesome by it is
pricking provoking sneezing, but is very wholesome; For it agitateth the
Spirits of the Brain; And is very good against paralytick infirmities.
Tribulation likewise is not willingly entertained by Nature, but is very
necessary, and wholesome for a Christian, who is subject by his Frailty to be
palzi'd with Prosperity, and Lethargick with forgetfulness of his Duty. The
Pestel, and the Flaile are by their offices very near a kin. The Pestel beats
out the Juice and virtue of the Plant, and breaks those which are dried, into
Powder for a Physical benefit, and the Flaile thresheth out the Corn from the
Chaff and the Straw for Natural Nourishment. As both these are very profitable
to the Body; So is Affliction to the Soul for it is better Exercise, and Being.

It peeps] Showing us the Bashfulness of Humilty. It is a very modest Virtue,
which makes her the more lovely.

With hoary Time] Signifies Opportunity, as well as gravity, choosing to deliver
and show her self in the One, as to appear comely in the Other.

Provoking sweat] Shows, Hours well spent, Good Employment, Proper Business if
not void, do purge out vicious Humors.

Strong Herb of Grace] Is a steady Confidence, and a strong Relying upon Gods
Providence; which drives away the Serpents of Temptations; and masters and
overpowers the dangerous Poison of Despair.

Humble Plants, etc. Harmeless Beasts, etc.] Are the Emblemes of the low
Condition, and sweet Harmlessness of Humility, that accompany her with Gladness
of Conscience without Fear, which Keeps the whole Man Cheerful amidst his
continued, and good Employment; and so shines forth in a holy Conversation, by
Religious Discourse, Virtuous Comportment, and charitable Dealing.

9. At foot of Faith's High Rock, etc.] Humility is the first step to that High
Rock Christ, who is the Foundation of Our Faith; and the Firmeness and
Assurance of Our Salvation; near whom fixing there is the Only Safety.

At Devotion's Chapel, etc.] Is Custom of seeking God devoutly, Praying
continually.

Great men's Falls and Fates, etc.] Humility knows the Vanity of Greatness,
and beholding the experimental Ruins of mighty Men; she discourses her own
Happiness to Those, that seek her, and discovers the sad stories of Elevated
men's Misfortunes. Therefore she trusts not in the World, nor seeks to sit
on High.

10. Neighboring Virtues, etc.] Are her Companions, that are never far from
her. Discite a me, quia Mitis sum, and Humilis cord, and inveniatis requiem
animabus vestris. Learn of me, says the Doctor of Our Souls, Our Blessed
Savior, for I am Humble, and Meek, and you shall find Rest unto your souls.
Whereupon says a Learned Expositor of that Text, Ecce Mel Humilitatis cum
dulcedine Mansuetudinis! Sicut enim Mel concordat in confectionibus Medicinae
cum omnibus diversitatibus specierum: Sic ex Humilitatis dulcedine condiuntur
omnia Genera Virtutum. Behold the Honey of Humility with the sweetness of
Gentleness! For as Honey is very agreeable to and useful for the compounding of
All Medicines according to their several sorts and qualities. In like manner
all kinds of Virtues are composed out of the sweetness of Humility.

Step by step, etc.] Humility proceeds from One Degree of Virtue to another,
from Grace to Grace.

She gently knocks, etc.] Shows her mild Desires, gentle Invitation, and
modest Inquisition.

Friendship fast does close] Intimates Constancy, in her Love and Perseverance
in her Affection, which causes her to be very much frequented by them again.

She rises Early, and lays down her Head, as Late] She is ever Watchful, and
never Weary.

11. Hence must thou go, etc.] Pointing out to the Pilgrim in This World not
only the Necessity of Patience, the Preparation to put on the Resolution of
enduring Injuries; but gives an Admonition withal to take A Pass along with
him, The Cross of Christ; The Example of Him, who is The way, signed by Faith.
Otherwise there is no passing his way, no travailing his Christian course with
Resolution; He will faint by the way, come short in his Journey, and as a
Prisoner be disabled from further Progress.

12. First Kiss Humility etc.] Is a Taking Leave to proceed on to a Further
Journey with Premonition to prepare, and Incitation to Cheerfulness, and the
Assuming of Courage.

Thou Art under Winds ande.] Intimates Safety by Divine Protection, and Quiet in
Conscience, let, whatsoever can, befall: Yet the Guide directs to make use of
Observation and wariness, which is an advance to wisdom.

MORAL. V.
HUmility is a Voluntary Inclination of the mind and a Declination of the
haughtiness of the Spirit, upon the Inspection of our Selves, and the
Beholding of the proper Condition of our present State, and Being; without
which we strive but in vain to raise the Structure of other Virtues in Our
minds, if we do not First wisely lay the Foundation of them, and for them with
the same. Upon which the Superstructures, firmly placed, may ablie sustain the
Top of Perfection, and Height of Charity. Seneca's Chorus in his Agamemnon does
act to the Life, and most fitly express the subject matter of this moral,
speaking English by the weak Pen of the Author.

Chorus.
O Regnorum Magnis fallax
Fortuna bonis! in praecipiti
Dubioque nimis excelsa locas.
Nunquam placidam sceptra quietem,
Certumve sui tenuere diem,
Alia ex aliis cura fatigat;
Vexatque animos nova Tempestas.
Non sic Lybicis Syrtibus aequor
Furit alternos volvere fluctus,
Non Euxini turget ab imis
Commota vadis unda, nivali
Vicina polo; ubi coeruleis
Immunis aquis, lucida versat
Plaustra Boots.
Ut praecipites Regum casus
Fortuna rotat! Metui cupiunt,
Metuique timent. Non nox illis
Alma recessus praebet tutos.
Non curarum somnus Domitor
Pectora solvit.
Quas non arces Scelus alternum
Dedit in praeceps impia quas non
Arma fatigant? Iura, pudorque
Et conjugis sacrata fides
Fugiunt aulas; Sequitur tristis
Sanguinolenta Bellona manu;
Quaeque superbos urit Erynnys,
Tumidas semper comitata domos
Quas in planum quaelibet bora
Tulit ex alto, licet arma vacent,
Cessentque dolt, sidunt ipso
Pondere magna; ceditque oneri
Fortuna suo.
Vela secundis inflata notis
Ventos nimium timuere suos.
Nubibus ipsis inserta caput
Turris Pluvio vapulat Austro.
Densasque nemus spargens umbras
Annosa videt robora frangi:
Feriunt celsos fulmina colles.
Corpora Morbis majora patent.
Et cum in pastus armenta vagos
Vilia currunt, placet in vulnus
Maxima cervix. Quicquid in altum
Fortuna tulit, ruitura levat.
Modicis rebus longius aevum est.
Foelix mediae quisquis turbae
Part Quietus! Aura stringit
Littora tuta timidusque Mari
Credere cymbam, reme terras
Propiore legit.
The Translation.
O The slipprie state of Things!
No Privilege have Thrones of Kings.
Chance puts in steep, and doubtful place
Whats'ere too Great, and Lofty was.
Nere Scepters joy'd in pleasing Rest;
Nor kept they certain Time at Best.
One Lord of many Cares do tire,
And raise new Tempests on Desire.
Not more on Lybian Shelves Sea raves,
To tumble ore the coursing Waves;
More swell not the Euxine Surges, steep,
Raising Rebellion from the Deep.
Neighboring the Snowy North; where bright
Charles Waine Boots hunts in Night,
Free from Sky's Light.
How Fortune spins upon her Wheel
The headlong Ends of Kings to reel!
While they wish to be feared, as just,
So such for fear does spawn Distrust;
Still Night yields such no safe Repose
Care's-Tamer sleep may Eyelids close.
Not such Breasts loose.
What Towers have Crimes not caused to throw
Down them, and theirs to ground below?
What Forts do cruel Arms not tame?
When Laws, when Wedlocke's Troth, when shame
Abandon Courts, with bloody Hand
Fierce War breaks in, and rends a Land.
Each Tury then does plunder Pride
Quarters in Houses, swelled so wide.
Whose Turrets dwarfish Time from high
Does cause even plain, and level ly.
Suppose, all peace, no Arms at all
Sly Craft asleep! Self-weight makes fall
Grant Things; What Fortune vast did build
It Is weight must yield.
Too bigg-blown Sails with prosperous Wind
Do fear ill Fare, when Force is kind.
That proud Spire's Top, that grafts in Clouds
Is stormed by Rain, when Auster's loud.
The Woods, that thickest shades do cast;
In full years growths are felled at last.
Fierce Lightnings strike the rising Hills.
Disease Great Bodies soonest fills.
While free lean Oxen course their ground,
The fattest Neck the Axe does wound.
Wheres'ever Fortune makes so Fall,
She raises for the greater Fall.
Mean State the longest life does last.
Blessed He, whose quiet, Lot is cast
In The midst of Worlds Extremes! His Sail
Bendes to safe Shoares with gentle Gale.
His Boat from feared Sea does command
With Oar, near shore he makes for Land.
PROSPECT. V.
Unruly, giddy Multitude
More senseless is not, then it is rude,
Does Bayard differ scarce from Dun;
Yet needs must guide the Horse of the Sun.
All crowd, and Each wu'd feign appear
To be the Chariot's Wagoneer;
As ignorant of that dire Fate,
Faign'd Phaeton tried, and found too late.
Who wanting Skill did overturn,
Cause Earth, and Sea inflames to burn.
As if they Brethren needs must be
To Cadmus Daughter Semele;
Or that some sisters she behind
Had living left to prompt her Mind.
Whose fond Ambition needs must move
To beg A Boon to punish Love.
Ambitious Love, too blind Desire,
The Wish, and Wisher burnt with Fire.
Too curious Love mistook The Case,
For Light, fierce Lightning did embrace.
Weak Nature so did Ashes turn;
Who Is Humble, scapes such ways to burn.
CONSOLATORY ESSAY. V.
Whosoever wu'd raise A strong, or stately Fabric, having first chosen fit and
Firm Ground, with proper and good Materials, let him lay a deep, a broad, a
square, and it is a sure foundation. The loftiest Trees have the most spreading,
have the lowest Roots. Riches inhabit in the humble Valleys, when Barrenness
overspreads the highest Mountains. On their ambitious Tops storms run their
furious Courses, While Quiet sits below and spends her Sands in Safety. Envy
still neighbors Greatness; and busies her self in contriving for* Ambition
Dangers; and with displeasure looking Upward minds not Inferior Being. She
casts her Eye asquint, not downward. And Pride does swell to bursting. Sin is
it is own Punisher. The inconsiderate Boateswain, that does rigge the Vessel
with too big Sail, does prompt the Winds to burry her beneath the Waters; And
want of Ballase makes the Ship a Prey to every wave. No man can arrive at True
Honor, but by its proper steps, whose first, the Lowest, is Humility; For want
whereof many making too Imprudent Leapes, or too hasty Progress, have either
tumbled, or fallen backward.

So vain is humane Folly, to build in the Air Imaginary Castles, and to
neglect the Lower, and securer way to the Real, and more Substantial
Foundation. What Griefs have they occasioned to Themselves! What Sorrows have
they fashioned for their own wearing! What Miseries have they compiled for
their Own Habitations! Winds do stretch the Belly, and Dropsy makes the Body
swell; when emptier Girdles, when leaner, and looser skins neither want Health,
nor need the Physician.

Men that do not know the Value of so Rich a Jewel, are very Ignorant of their
unhappy, and so bad condition by their being strangers to so excellent a
Virtue. Humility prevents or tempers the greatest Mischiefs. Abigals humble Sal
ve saved the Churl, her Husband. Her meek Address to David was not only a
putting by the Intended, and resolved Destruction of what belonged to Nabal,
but was the Occasion of her Promotion to a High Degree of Honor, even to
David's Royal, and his Lawful Bed.

The saying of Agathocles deserves the memory; who though the son of a Potter,
being raised as high as the Sicilian Crown, and sitting among his Friends at
Table, where, by his own Order, Earthen vessels were usually placed among his
Cups of Gold, of Himself gave them an humble Acknowledgement, not without
Encouragement to the like Virtue by this Expression: Behold, what it is to
persevere in travel, and in taking pains to become Virtuous, and courageous!
Heretofore we made these Pots of Earth; These now do we make of Gold.

Sit thee down then Thou, that art so much perplexed! Calm thy disturbed
Heart, thou living Earthquake! Consider what it is, that has put thy mind in a
Fever! And thee into the greatest of All Dangers; To that of Casting away thy
wretched Self! Or to the thought of so abominable a Mischief! Thou did not
rightly apprehend, what thou were. Thou were besides thy self. So was Lucifer
(though in another Nature) as in the Opinion of some, admiring in his own Glass
the Excellency of his perfection, and falling wickedly enamored of Himself, as
a Deity, was puffed up with that Pride, that lost him Heaven, and cost him Hell
for it.

It is the Idolatry of thine own Heart, that raises thy storm. Thou worship'st
thine own Imaginations; Those are thine Images; of thine own carving. Thine own
Desires are thy Dagons. Thy pride must have it is Will; though it cost thee
Dear; though it cost thee a Fall for it. Thy Heart is too big to buckle; to high
too Submit to the Almighty. Thou wu't have a Husband. Thou wu't keep Friends.
Thou wu't not part with Children. Thou must enjoy thy Paramour. Thou wu't lose
Nothing; Nor Limb, nor Liberty. And all this thou wou't do, whether God will
or no. Art thou humble? Art thou under God? No, Far otherwise. Thou seem to
be Above Him. Humility submits to Gods Blessed Will; to the fit-seeing, and
wonderful Wisdom of His Dispose; And is not without a Blessing; Blessed are
the Poor in Spirit, for theirs is the Kingdom of Heaven; They have made entry;
They have taken possestion of Heaven already.

Art thou poor (Humility makes thee to be accepted. Art thou Rich? It sets thee
off with the greater Luster. Art thou among thine enemies? It dulles the Edge
of their Malice. When if thou be too arrogant, thou raisest a Cloud in the
Brow of thy nearest Friends. Humility takes delight in good offices. For a good
word, for a good Deed she seeks opportunity. O how gracious is Humility in
friendship! How backward in reproaches to Enmity! She is not clothed with
Prosperity, nor dejected in Adversity. She expects not Another's service, nor
desires that aflatterer should send his tongue to travel about her business.
She always makes the worst of her own performances. Yet when she seems most
to depress her own worth, it rises out of the meek Acknowledgement of her own
Unworthiness; Read then her Lesson! Though the Book be small, and the Letter
little; There is much wisdom contained in it. Practice it!

Digg the Foundation of humility deep in thy Heart, and thou shall find the
stairs of Charity! Yet if thy Ambition must Climb to the height, where God
is, to Heaven, take Example by Christ, thy Savior. He descended, he came down
first, he humbled himself to the Womb, to the World, to the the Cross, to the
Grave, before He rose, before he ascended, and went up unto His Father, to sit
at His Right Hand. He was humble, He was Meek. Thou must walk in His Path,
thou must tread in his steps, if thou intendest to go His Journey.

Have thou many Crosses? Art thou environed with troubles? Is thy Cup full of
Bitterness? Can thou look no where, but the Devourer is at hand? Be not
discouraged! God is then nearest thee. All this is for thy Humiliation. And
humiliation is thy Directer to humility. Mark that hand of God, that is upon
thee! It has a Finger, that points out to thee the way to himself. Be humble!
If thou desire to be Great in Gods Eyes, be little in thine own. As therefore
thou love thine own Advancement, be Humble.

CANTO VI. The House of Prayer.
1.
FIrm Resolution's Camp to gain,
At Aletheca's Fount wash Heart, and Brain,
And Prayer's blessed Chapple visit! So thy Pass obtain!
2.
But at Faith's Mount it must be signed;
Where Hope, where Charity, that is so kind,
Her lovely Sisters thou together there shall find.
3.
By Fasting's many hollow Pits
Thou go with study lean, She smiling sits,
Eats Not; but Feeds; from empty'ing Lap restores Lost wits.
4.
What virtue Truth's clear Water has!
As thou did wash, Scales from thine eyes did pass.
See! Now thy Skin does seem as smooth, as any Glass.
5.
The art Now come near The House of Prayer,
Before The Doors behold the Treble Stayre!
Thou mai'st smell smoking Incense, that perfumes the Air.
6.
Before the Portico of Polisht Stone
In silence walks A Matrone, grave, alone,
With Book in hand Ground eyeing Meditation.
7.
With Reverence enter! Prostrate lay!
Then rise! And to next Altar take thy way! (say!
Knock Breast! kneel! Offer with thy Heart, what taught to
8.
Devotion, when thou have breathed A Groan,
Will lead thee by Six Altars, though but One;
All which do hang upon A mighty Corner Stone.
9.
Each Altar has his Censor burn,
Petition called; that fires in proper Turn;
From whose Flame flies A Bird, as Phoenix from her Urne.
10.
A burning Lamp with shining Light
Whose constant Eye winks not for Day, or Night,
In The Midst of the Church example is, that is ever bright.
11.
Then on She does conduct thy Pace,
Unto the Chancel of That Holy Place (Grace.
Where Prayer with lifted Hands kneels before the Throne of
12.
Affections all about Her Kneel
Upon The pavement, that is made of Steel;
From which reflexed Heat on Hearts from Stoves they feel.
13.
I'th'Mid'st a Spire to Heaven does strain.
So Wights mount, Angels do descend amain.
Lo! Here thou have thy wish. Of Prayer thou Pass do gain.
PERSPECTIVE VI.
1. THe House of Prayer] is the Place for Holy Worship, humble Reverence, and
Invocation of Almighty God. When the Israelites came out of Egypt, it was not a
House, but a Tabernacle which Moses was commanded to build for the Place of
such public Adoration. But in Succession of Times, when they were settled in
the promised Land, Solomon was commanded to build a Temple. And these two
shadowed the Difference between the Jews Synagogue, and the Christian Church.
The Tabernacle was moveable, and but for a Time; The Temple fixed and
permanent. The State of the Jews vanishing, to continue in their Generations:
The State of the Christians durable, to last unto the End of the World. But
more principally it shadoweth forth the State of the Church Militant here upon
Earth, and Triumphant in Heaven. Unto both the Prophet David alludeth: Lord!
Who shall sojourn in thy Holy Tabernacle? Who shall rest in Thine Holy
Mountain: Psalm. 15. 1.

The Temple at Jerusalem was thrice built. First by Solomon after a glorious
manner: when the Riches of the Vessels were of Gold. The Second Structure was
by Zorobabel, But came far short of That, even causing Tears from those, that
considered the Stateliness of the First. And very Inferior it was to that, In
respect of the Building: It was lower, and meaner, Of the Vessels; Those were
of Gold, These of Brass. Five things were lost, and wanting in The Second
Temple; All which were in the First. 1. The Ark of God. 2. Urim, and Thummim;
God gave no Answer by These, as in Former Times. 3. Fire; which in The Second
Temple never descended from Heaven to consume their burnt Sacrifices, as it did
in the First, 4. The Glory of God appearing between the Cherubims, which they
termed Schechina, The Habitation, or Dwelling of God 5. The Holy Ghost, to
enable Them for The Gift of Prophefie. Henod built the Third, the Last, And
that same was of a Statelier Kind of Building, than that of Solomon. And of
greater Glory. For Christ Preached therein. Though the Jews had many
Oratories, or Places for Prayer, caled Proseuchae; which, how they differed
from their Schools or Synagogues is not here material, yet Our Blessed Savior
fixes only, on and appropriates to the Temple above any other Place, the Use
of Prayer. So did he manifest, when he threw out The Merchants, and Money
changers from the same with this Expression: My House is called The House of
Prayer: But ye have made it a Den of Thieves. A very Sad, and uncomelie Change.

But, though the Guide points at all these before mentioned; yet here he
aymeth more especially at a Description of the Worship it Self, the Operation,
and Efficacy of Prayer.

As a House is a place for constant Residence and usual Habitation; Prayer
likewise is the Christians Best Receptacle; In which he may converse with God
continually. Not that he should do nothing else: But that he should do nothing
of moment without it. Not that much babbling is of account with the Wisdom of
God, but that we should often renew our Selves by frequent Seeking His Favor
in such Manner, Form, and Language, as He has directed, and in such Brevity,
as is Suitable to the Weakness of Our frail Natures. Non quam multum, Sed
quam been. It is not the How Much, but the How Well, that is pleasing unto Him.

Firm Resolution's Camp to gain etc.] If we think to obtain a Christian
Resolution, we must put away Hypocrisy out of our Hearts, and Falsehood out of
our Understandings. We must entertain Truth, and keep Close to Devotion; And
then the Lord graciously will be pleased both to enable us with A will to
resolve, and with a Power to do.

Prayers blessed Chapel visit] Accustom thy self to thy hours of Devotion, as
well as be mindeful to pray at all Times convenient. Pray in Season, and out of
Season. Deus in adjutorium meum intend! Domine ad adjuvandum, etc. as it is
Psalm. 70. O God haste Thee to deliver me! Make haste to Help me, O Lord!
Whereupon Cassiodore expounds the useful and very comfortable meaning. Hujus
versiculi oration in adversis, ut eruamur, in prosperis ut servemur, ne
extollamur, incessabili iugitate fundenda est. The Prayer that is narrowly
contained in this short Verse is continually to be powered forth, without
ceasing or weariness, as well in adversity, least we be Swallowed up with
Sorrows, or overthrown with difficulty, as in prosperity, that we may be
preserved from being puffed up therewith, and too much exalted. Huius ergo
versiculi meditatio in tuo pectore indirupta volvatur. Hunc in opere quolibet
ministerio, sive in intinere constitutus decantare non desinas. Hunc et
dormiens, et reficiens, et in ultimis naturae necessitatibus meditare. Let
therefore the meditation of this Versicle lay undisturbed in thy Breast, and be
ready at every Call of thy Heart. Cease not the cheerful Music hereof in thy
Lips, when thou go about any business, undertakest any thing, Use it to
refresh thee when thou do travel, or take a Journey. Even when thou
Sleep, when thou eatest, at bed, at board, wheresoever thou art, whatsoever
thou do, in the lowest necessity of nature, in the greatest extremities and
difficulties of this Life meditate Hereon continually!

So Thy Pass obtain] Is our proceeding in holy exercises by Gods Grace and
Assistance, without which we have no strength to resolve any thing that is good.

2. But at Faiths Mount it must be sign'd] Gods Grace works effectually in
us, when by Faith in Christ we are sealed to the Day of Redemption.

It is called Faiths Mount, Because it is placed on High, upon the Rock Christ,
who is the sure and blessed Foundation of our Salvation. Fides Electorum aut
nunquam deficit, aut statim reparatur. The Pass to Resolution for Performance
of Christian Duties is ascertained to Gods Children by Faith in Christ; For
that Faith it self either never fails them, or is ever repaired in them. What
Beauty, what Virtue does not always appear in the Blossom of the Tree, does
lie hidden in the Root. Quid est Fides? nisi credere quod non vides? What is
Faith, but the Belief of that, which thou do not see?

Where Hope, where Charity, etc.] These do always accompany a true and sincere
Faith. There can be no steadiness of Faith, without an Assurance by Hope; and
neither can subsist without Charity, which is the Perfection of All. Faith is
the Sap in the Root. Hope is the Life of the Tree in the Blossom. And Charity
the Strength of its Virtue in the Fruit. Fides credit, Spes and Charitas orant;
Sed sine Fide esse non possunt; Et per haec Fides orat: It is S. Augustines,
Faith Believes; Hope and Charity Pray. Without Faith, Hope and Charity cannot
be. And by Hope and Charity, Faith does also pray.

That is so kind, etc.] Charity is an Excellent Mother, and a most tender
Nurse. How does she foster the Poor, and cherish the Infirm! How does she feed
the Hungry, and Cloth the Naked! How does she Refresh the weary, and Cure the
Wounded! How does she Exercise those that advance unto her! How does she
sweetly vanquish unquiet Spirits! What several Gifts she bestows of diverse
Kinds! She makes much of every one, as if he were her own Child, her next
Heir. Do thou dispute with her? She is all Mildeness. Do thou contend with
her? She is a close Embrace. Do thou flatter her? Her Innocence does not
understand thee. If she be in passion, it is in Love. She strokes the Sore, but
pains it not; Patience is her Anger; and she shows he greatest indignation in
Humility. Charitas hominum matter est and Angelorum, Charity is the Mother of
Men and Angels, if we may believe S. Bernard. And he gives this Reason. Non
solum quae in terris, sed etiam, quae in coelo sunt pacificavit. Ipsa est, que
Deum homini placavit, and hominem Deo reconciliavit. She is not only a
Peacemaker among those on Earth, but the means of Atonement with those in
Heaven. Yea, she that has appeased Gods wrath to Man, has not left unfinish't
so happy a work, till she has reconciled Man unto God.

Her Lovely Sisters] For the Beauty and graciousnesse of their Virtues. If then
the Beauty of Body amongst Men be so much sought unto, and so much admired; how
much more is the Beauty of the Soul to be looked after, praised, loved, and
highly to be desired?

3. By Fastings many hollow Pits] signifying emptying of the Body of
superfluous Humor, and the taming of the Flesh. The Pits are the Vessels of the
Body, as the Stomach and the Rest, which are the Sinks of Riot, and the
Receptacles of Exorbitancies; wherein the Mind lies bemired, and is in a manner
oftentimes drowned. These are emptied by fasting; and the Soul returns to her
self again by Abstinence.

Thou goest] Fasting is an excellent Preparation to Prayer. Thou must go by
Fasting if thou intendst to come alone, or in that proper Dress thou should.
Thou shall else have too many Sins that lay in the Beds of thy Flesh to bear
thee company: and thou will be so puff't up, as Prayer will scarce know thee.
Thou will be infected with the drowziness of thy Sins, that thou will talk in
thy sleep, rather then Pray, at least not as thou ought. The great, best,
general, and only Fasting, is the abstinence from all iniquities, and
unlawful pleasures of this world. This indeed is Fasting in her Beauty. Si
gula peccavit sola jejunet (says S. Bernard) and sufficit. If thy throat has
only offended, put the Fast upon thy throat in a moderate manner, it is a
remedy. Si vero peccaverunt and membra caetera, cur non jejunent and ipsa? But
if the rest of thy Members be participes criminis, joyntoffenders, Why should
they go Scot-free. Iejunet igitur oculos a curiosis aspectibus, and omni
petulantia, ut been humiliatus coerceatur in poenitentia, qui male liber,
vagabatur in culpa. Let thine eye therefore Fast from curious Inquisition, from
Lascivious looks, from loose Wantonness, that when it is so restrained, so
humbled as it should be, and it may be employed in Repentance as becomes it.
Take the Forfeiture of Liberty, that made use of it to no better purpose, than
to play the Runnagate, Iejunet Auris, nequiter pruriens, a Fabulis, and
Rumoribus, and quaecunque otiosa sunt, and ad salutem minime pertinentia. Let
thine Ear keep a Fast. It is troubled with an Itching. Let it therefore abstain
from listening after Tales; New and Vain Reports, and whatsoever arises from
Unreasonable desire, and idle appetite, and all those things as neither bring
quiet, nor yield comfort to the mind. Iejunet lingua in detractione and
murmuratione ab inutilibus, and variis, atque scurrilibus verbis; Interdum
quoque, ob gravitatem silentii, ab ipsis quae videri poterant necessaria. Let
the Tongue Fast also from Detraction, and murmuring; from Unprofitable
Discourse, from many Words, from a Scurril and Scoffing kind of speaking. Let
it abstain sometimes for the comeliness, and gravity of silence, even from the
mention of those things, that may plead a privilege, and seem to argue that to
speak is necessary. Iejunent manus ab otiosis signis, and ab operibus omnibus,
quaec unque non sunt imperata, sed and multo magis anima ipsa jejunet a vitiis,
and propria voluntate sua. Let thy Hands keep a Fast from inadvised Actions,
that like Seals leave the Prints of their Folly behind them; from all such
Works, for which thou have not Commission, and from all such Deeds, as are
against Command. But above all have a care that thy soul break not the Fast
from Sin, and those Vices which are nearest a kin to thine own will, and are
most agreeable to thine own inclination.

With Study Lean she smiling sits] Her Meditation consumes her grosser
Humors. There is a Rejoicing as well as a Reviving in the Spirits, when the
Flesh is brought low. The smelling of Religious Fasting, is not without
pleasure and Loveliness. For she has a very honest look, a sweet Pale, though
not a Painted Cheek, a gentle Eye, and a sober Pace; a serious Face, and a
thoughtful Countenance, not to be tempted to Luxurient, Uncomely Laughter, lest
it injure the Modesty of her speech, or Adulterate the Purity of her Heart.
Fasting sits in respect of her Contentedness, and that she seeks not after
others, as accounting it the least part of her business, nor stands up to
show her self.

Eats not, but feeds] Does not nourish her self, but feeds others that are in
Want. Been jejunat, qui alimenta corporis, quae sunt communia dona conditoris,
cum indigentibus percipit, and qui ea, quae sibi ad tempus subtrabit, nequequam
ventri offerenda custodit, sed pauperibus tribuit. He Fasteth to the purpose,
that lets the Poor partake with him of those things that are necessary for
the Body, and which were the Common Gifts disposed by the Creator; and he Fasts
indeed that not only withholds for a Time some things from his own appetite,
and not keeping those things that he has restrained from himself, bestows
them upon the Belly of the Hungry, and the Bowels of the Needy.

From emptying Lap restores lost Wits] Alluding to the Story in Areosto's
Orlando Furioso, of Hyppogrypho's carrying Astolpho up to Heaven, where being
arrived, and welcomed by S. John, he shows Astolpho for his Entertainment many
Rarities, and Curiosities, and amongst the rest, a Jar of Wit, which was a Cure
for Madmen. Astolpho begs it for Orlando; It was not only granted to him, but
the Use or way of Application of it was likewise taught him after this manner,
That when Orlando was found asleep, the Jar should be placed right under his
Nose, and upon the sudden the Cork, or Stopper being pulled out, his Wits would
fly up at his Nostrils into his Brain.

Then kneeling down as if he asked some Boon
Of God, or some great Saint, that Pot he brought,
Which he had carried from beyond the Moon,
The Jar in which Orlando's wit was caught.
And closed it to his Nostrils, and eft-soon
He drawing breath, this Miracle was wrought.
The Jar was void, and emptied every whit,
And he restored unto his perfect Wit.
Orland. Furioso 39. Book.
Let the Mirth of the Story pass according to the Invention of so eminent a
Poet, and yet not without sober acceptance, the Moral speaks Graver matter.
Here the meaning, that was pointed at, was to signify, that Fasting is a
restorer of our minds to their former brightness, when the thick Vapors of
too much Repletion, are by Lady Jejunia wasted away, and the fullness of Vices
by studious care are corrected. Her emptying Lap is not so much lankness, and
Falling away of her Body, as her Bounty in Charitable Actions.

4. What Virtue Truth's clear Water has,] Here is an admiration of the
Excellency and Efficacy of Truth, with a Supposition, that the Pilgrim has
tasted of her Spring; which enclines to this Sense. Water is a clearer of the
Eyes, and a cleanser of the Skin. Divine Illumination of the Revealed Truth in
Holy Gospel, opens the Understanding, washes away the penitents former
Foulness, and Beautifieth the Life and Conversation of a Reconciled Christian.
There are three Degrees or States of Truth. To the first we ascend by the
Labor of our Humility. To the Second by the Affection of our Compassion. To
the Third, by the Excess of our Contemplation. In the First Truth is found
Severe. In the Second she appears Pious: And in the Third Pure. To the First
Reason leads us, whereby we examine our selves. To the Second our Affection
guides us, and thereby we commiserate others. To the Third Purity carries us,
by which we are lifted up to invisible things. Inquirimus veritatem in nobis,
in proximis, in sui natura (as S. Bernard.) In nobis, nosmet ipsos dijudicando;
In proximis, eorum malis compatiendo; in sui natura, Mundo cord contemplando.
If we seek for Truth, we shall find her in our selves, in our Neighbors, in
her own Nature. In our selves, by judgeing our selves rightly: In our
Neighbors, by Commiserating them tenderly; In her own Nature by our
contemplating of her with a cleansed Heart purely. And in all these Senses is
the Virtue of Truth represented here.

Scales from thine Eyes did pass] alludes to Saul's receiving his sight by the
Imposition of Ananias his hands at his Conversion: when he also was filled with
the Holy Ghost. All Error vanishes, as the night gives place to the dawning
day, when Truth appears.

Skin does seem as smooth as any Glass] Alludes to the Cure of Naamans Leprosy
by the Prophet Eliseus, when that General of the Aramites washed seven times in
the Water of Jordan, so as his Flesh came fresh, and new again to him, and so
became perfectly cleansed. Truth thus Cures ignorance, Error, and Obstinacy,
which is a Leprosy of the Mind.

5. Before the Doors behold the Treble Stair] Before the opening of our Lips to
Prayer, there must be Humiliation Preparation, and Intention. In Humiliation
there are 3 Stones joined. Consideration of our own Wickedness, and
Unworthiness to present our Prayers before God: An acknowledgeledgement of the
Justice of God to punish Sin: And an Apprehension of the Majesty of the
Almighty Creator of the Heaven and Earth, and all things therein contained. In
the Preparation are cemented together a serious Sorrow, and Penitencie for our
sins: A Hatred of our iniquities: And a Promise of Amendment of Life. In
intention, a Sedation, or quieting of our Minds by casting off all other
thoughts or business; an earnest Bending of them to the Matter we go about: an
inward Groaning of desire for the assistance of the Holy Spirit. Zophar, that
unkind Friend, spoke excellently, though unjustly to Job: If thou prepare thine
heart, and stretch out thine hands toward him; If iniquity be in thine hand;
put it away, and let no wickedness dwell in thy Tabernacles: then truly shall
thou lift up thy face without spot, and shall be stable, and shall not fear.

Thou may smell smoking Incense, etc.] Thou may feel comfort by Hope of
Gods acceptance of thy Prayers: or thou may see the Example of the Piety of
the Saints or Holy men.

6. Before the Portico] Is the beginning or introduction of Prayer. Such was
Solomon's Porch before the entrance into the Sanctuary.

Of Polisht Stone] The Matter of our prayer which we pray, must not be rough
stuff of inconsideration, as rude Stone newly taken out of a Quarrie; but such
as has been well digested, and best ordered by that Holy Art of Carving, and
Pollishing by the Master of the work, by Christ himself, Order of the Church,
or Orthodox Divines: Or we must so with great care frame our Prayer for our
particular necessities according unto our Saviors direction in his Sermon on
the Mount, with submission to his blessed Will and Dispose, who knows what is
best for us; who knows better what to give, then we to ask; who knows what we
stand in need of better then we our selves.

In silence walks a Matron, grave, alone; etc.] Intimating the Comeliness and
Fitness, as well as the Necessity and Custom of Reading of, and Meditating upon
some part of Holy Scripture to Sanctify our hearts before Prayer. There are
three kinds of Meditation. One upon the Creatures; another upon the
Scriptures; and a Third upon our Manners. The First arises from Admiration;
the Second from Reading; and the Third from Circumspection. Admiration begets a
Question; that Question a diligent search; and that search a finding out.
Reading does minister matter to the finding out of Truth; Meditation fits us to
pray; Prayer helps us to work; Working composes us to contemplate; and
Contemplation rejoices in her high Speculation. Circumspection of Manners
regards within, and without; Without she casts her eye upon our Fame; Within
she pries into the Conscience, examining what is expedient, and what is decent:
What is decent, as to Example; what is expedient, as to our Merit; Concerning
our selves a Vice; Concerning our Neighbors as to Example. Cogitation is of an
uncertain station, moving this way or that way, as the Tide or Wind, the
representation of the Idaea's of Things, comes, or goes, or blows. But it is
the Office of Meditation in her sober and steady steps, always to promote to
our view Things that are past and behind us. Contemplation is a free
perceivance of Things with quickness of sight in the glass of Wisdom with a
wary consult. Meditation searches out things that lay hidden. Contemplation
admires those things that are perspicuous, therefore is she called here
ground-eyeing meditation. The book in her hand is the Bible, the holy
Scriptures, which is her Rule to mesure by.

7. With Reverence enter] Reverentia est Virtus aliqua praelatione sublimitatis
debitae honorificationis cultum exhibens, says Tully: Reverence is a kind of
Virtue, that presents the proper Tender of due Worship to some Person in whom
its Estimation conceives a sublimitie, a Being far above it self. And to whom
is such so justly due as God; whose Essence is above the Reach of any Capacity
or Understanding; whose Holiness so Pure, as not conceiveable by All
imagination; Whose Power is Infinite beyond all Comprehension; And whose Glory
is Ineffable, and Everlasting, dwelling beyond all possibility of Thought in
Eternity. We must approach him then with Awe, and Reverence in our Prayer, as
he is in himself not only Absolute in Essence, but as Relative to us in that he
is our Creator, and we his Creatures, yea the Workmanship of his hands.

Prostrat lay] with the greatest Humiliation of Body, and Soul, of All, that
we can to express our sense of the Debt, we owe to so great a Maker; and with
shame to acknowledge our vile Transgressions, and foolish as much, as abominable
Rebellions against the Wonderful Love of so Gracious a Redeemer. O come let us
Worship and Fall down, and kneel before the Lord our Maker.

Then rise!] Then raise thy Head! thy Hands! Dart up thine Eyes! Sursum corda!
And lift up thine Heart on high!

And to next Altar take thy way!] Make ready then thy Soul as a Sacrifice upon
the Altar of thy Ready Prayer.

Knock thy Breast!] Show contrition for thy sin, and indignation against thy
self.

Kneel!] Show Humility and Lowness of Spirit with the buckling of thy body.

Offer with thy Heart, what taught to say!] Offer thy self in that prayer to
the Father, thatthe Lord of Life, his beloved Son, in whom he is well pleased,
has taught thee to say, and doubt not to be accepted.

8. Devotion, when thou have breathed a groan, will lead, etc.] When thou have
thus Ejaculated thy Spirit, thy Devotion will conduct thy desires to Heaven.

Six Altars, though but one] Are six Petitions, though but One Prayer.

All which do hang upon a mighty Corner Stone] Depend upon Christ. Because he
was it is Author; and was, and is the All-wise Directer and commander of the
same.

9. Each Altar has his Censer burn] Each Petition has it is proper Virtue.

That Fires in proper Turn] Comes in its due Order, inflaming the breast with
the Holy Spirit.

From whose Flames flies a Bird] this Prayer thus said has such an effectual
Force, and power of obtaining according to our Saviors Word and Promise, that
it raises us up from Death to life in Christ, as Phoenix from Urn, by his death
and Resurrection.

10 A Burning Lamp with shining Light] It is Christ's example in Life and
Doctrine; who not only taught us to pray, but left us the Forms wherewith
himself prayed. His Prayers were perfect patterns; They were short, and Full;
very decent, because in Order. His Prayers were pure and meek, chaste and
comely, clear and lovely, grave and weighty. Oration si pura, si casta fuerit,
coelos penetrare vacua non redibit. If prayer be clean and undefiled, without
spot and uncorrupted, it returns not back from through-pierced Heaven without a
Blessing. Hearken to what our Savior says in the sixth of S. Matthew: And
when thou prayest, be not as the Hypocrites, for they love to stand, and pray
in the Synagogues, and in the corners of the streets, because they would be
seen of men. Verily I say unto you they have their reward. But when thou
prayest, enter into thy Chamber; and when thou have shut thy Door, pray unto
the Father which is in secret, and thy Father which sees in secret shall
reward thee openly. Also when you pray use no vain Repetitions, as the Heathen:
For they think to be heard for their much babbling. Be ye not like unto them
therefore; for your Father knows whereof ye have need before ye ask him. Pray
after this manner, Our Father: Oration paucis verbis res multiplices
comprehendit, ut sit cito simplicitas fidei, sufficientia suae saluti
addisceret, and prudentia ingeniosorum profunditate Mysteriorum stupesceret.
This prayer contains many things in few Words, that in short there may be
preserved simplicity of Faith, that we may perfectly learn what is sufficient
for our own health, and the knowledge of the nicest Wits may be astonished at
the Depth of the Mysteries contained therein. But mark the Eleventh of Saint
Luke, And so it was, That as He was praying in a certain place, when when he
ceased, one of his Disciples said unto Him, Master teach us to pray, as John
also taught his Disciples, And he said unto them, when ye pray, Say (so there
was a command) Our Father. Dicendo Pater Noster, and veniam peccatorum, and
poenarum interitum, and justificationem, and sanctificationem, and
liberationem, and filiorum adoptionem, and haereditatem Dei, and fraternitatem
cum Unigenito copulatam, and Sancti Spiritus dona largissima, and uno sermon
significavit, By saying Our Father, he signified unto us even in one Word, not
only the Pardon of our sins, the Death of Punishment, our justification, our
sanctification, and our deliverance, but his Adoption of us Sons, and Coheirs
of God, and our being made Brethren, and joined with his only Sone, and so
sharers of the most Bountiful Gifts of the Holy Ghost.

Whose constant eye winks not for day or night] His example, his Precepts ought
to be always before us, as they are always in being.

In The midst o'th Church Example is, etc.] As Christ is in the midst of his
Church, so let him be in the midst of our Hearts. That is his place: So ought
our Bodies to be the Temples of the Holy Ghost: which is that Fire that has an
everlasting brightness, which irradiateth Spiritual Graces upon our Souls,
and warmeth them with continual comforts.

18. Then on she does conduct thy Pace, etc.] Here the Emission of our prayers
by our Devotion, Supplication in the Spirit, and the manner of Supplication is
further described. Here Devotion of the heart as an Ambassador, carries our
Petitions up toward the Throne of God. Orationis purae magna est virtus, and
velut fidelis Nuntius, mandatum peragit and penetrat, quo caro non pervenit,
says Saint Austin. Great is the Force and efficacy of sincere Prayer: Like a
trusty Messenger it presents, our desires, and breaks through the Heavens,
where Flesh and blood cannot come. Therefore pray always with all manner of
Prayer, Supplication in the Spirit, and watch thereunto with all perseverance,
and Supplication for all Saints. Ephesians. 6. 18. Continue in Prayer, and watch in
the same with thanksgiving. Collos. 4. 2. Pray continually. 1 Thessal. 5. 17.
And then in respect of our prayers there is a progression that God would make
us holy more and more until the coming of Christ, at which time and not before
we shall be perfectly holy. As S. Paul desires, 1 Thessal. 5. 23. I pray God
that your whole spirit, and Soul, and Body may be kept blamelesss unto the
coming of our Lord Jesus Christ. Devotion is said to conduct thy pace, because
prayer must be considered, and not hasty.

11. Unto the Chancel of that holy place] Still the Ascent of our prayer is
resembled; as the going up from the Body of the Church to a Chancel; or as in
Cathedral Churches from the Nave to the Quire.

Pious Christians by direction of the Apostolical power] The Bishops and
Pastors in the Church, after the Gospel had in the Primitive times passed
through the storms of persecutions, and begun to shine forth in more peaceable
Ages, did build Churches which they Dedicated to God, as most fit places for
public Worship, which in memory of their former troubles, and their great and
wonderful Deliverances out of them, they fashioned in the form of a Ship, which
is subject to be tossed to and fro with impetuous Waves, and uncertainly forced
up and down in the Sea of this World by the Tempestuous Winds of Persecution.
Being very well acquainted with that Text in Saint Luke, speaking of Christ
standing by the Lake of Gennesaret, Chap. 5. v. 2. He saw two ships stand by
the Lakes side, and the Fishermen were gone out of them, and were washing their
Nets. And he entered into one of the ships, which was Simons, and required him,
that he would thrust off a little from the Land; And He sat down, and taught
the People out of the Ship. The Ship is the Church, Christ the Priest and
Bishop of our Souls; the Prease of people upon the shore are Christians, the
Followers of his Doctrine. Nor were such Churches unlike a Ship in many kinds,
if supposed to be transverst or turned with the Bottom or Foundation upward.
The Roof is the keele, the Walls, the sides, the Foundation the upper Deck, or
Shroud, the East End, the Prow, or Forcastle, The Pinnacle in the midst, the
Mast, and the West End the Poop, or Steerage.

These Churches in their situation stand transposed to the Temple of the Jews
at Jerusalem; These face the East, as That the West. The Christians worship
toward the rising of the Sun, so acknowledging the Resurrection of that
Messiah, who is come, and ascended to the Father; The Jew looked Westward, and
in the shadow worshipped him that was to come. But here the Guides aim is by a
Reflection upon both; and by the Comparison of each with other to make a
Discovery of the way, gradation and operation of Prayer.

In the outward part of the Temple of the Jews, were the Atria divided by a low
Wall of three Cubits high, which surrounded the Temple. The one was Atrium
Populi; The other Atrium Sacerdotis. Such places are those Churchyards, and
Common places heretofore; dedicated to holy Use and consecrated for public
praise, prayer, and Preaching about Christian Cathedrals. The people belonging
to Prayer are Christian circumcised Hearts, which have communion in Atrio
Populi in the Congregation of the Saints. Devotion is the Levite which
prepares the Sacrifice, the Priest is the Minister of the Ordinances, be it
prayer for the People, or Preaching of the Sacred Word, who joining with them
in Thanksgiving sacrifices the Calves of their Lips, with a Quid retribuam
Domine? Thus is obedience the best oblation in Atrio Sacerdotis the places of
the Ordinances. The Sanctum the Sanctuary as the Body or Nave of the
Cathedrals, is a Holy Life, and Conversation, thus the Soul becomes A Temple of
the Holy Ghost. This as the Cathedral has two Isles, or Alae wings to the
Body, in position North, and South. As they belong to Prayer Saint Augustine
describes them, Hae sunt duae alae Orationis, quibus volatur ad Deum; Si
ignoscis delinquenti, that is the North Isle or left Wing, Coldness to Wrath,
that is to pardon and forgive our offending brother; Et donas egenti, that is
the South Isle, or Right wing; to sustain the Needy, to give to the Poor, who
are Members, of our Elder Brother Christ.

Through this Sanctuary of a Holy Life, prayer is carried by Ejaculation of the
Spirit into that Quire of the Church, the Holy of Holies, into Heaven, where
Jesus the ever-blessed High Priest, our Mediator and Intercessor is, sits at
the right Hand of the Father, and receives and delivers our Petitions before
the Mercy Seat, the Throne of God.

This resemblance looks up to that of Exhortation of Saint Paul 1 Timothy 2. 1.
Concerning Prayer in general. I exhort therefore that first of all
Supplications, prayers, intercessions, and giving of thanks be made for All
men. That is the Atrium Populi. For Kings, and all that are in authority, that
we may lead a quiet and a peaceable life in all Godliness and Honesty. That is
the Sanctum, the Sanctuary. For this is good and acceptable in the sight of
God, Our Savior. That is Sanctum Sanctorum, the Holy of Holies; From which
place of Bliss comes the Bounty of Blessedness.

12. Affections all about her kneel] Denoting that. Thou shall worship the Lord
thy God with all thy strength, with all thy heart, with all thy mind, with all
thy Soul, etc. The whole man must endeavor the utmost at so great a work at
the performance of so pious a Duty.

Kneel] Intimates Reverence.

Upon the pavement] Humility.

Made of Steel] Of a steedy and firm Faith.

Reflected Heat] Zeal.

On hearts] Our Consciences.

From stones they feel] From refreshing of the Holy Spirit breathing joy and
Comfort into us after an unperceiveable manner; Or may well be taken for our
Charity to others which reflecteth a Heat upon our prayers.

The sum of this Stanza points at Saint Paul's Direction to Timothy 1 Timothy 2.
8. I will therefore that men pray lifting up pure hands; that is humble,
without wrath, that is charitable, or not doubting, that is faithfully.

13. IN the midst a spire to Heaven does straine] Does reach. As in the amidst
of a Church the Steeple or spire is placed, so the Ejaculations and groanings
of Spirit rise as out of the midst of our souls, where by our Prayers mount up
to God, and his Mercies like the Angels upon Jacobs Ladder descend down to us.

Wights] Prayers.

Angels] Mercies.

Have thy wish] obtainest thy desire, and have the Effect of thy prayer.

Pass do gaine] Have obtained Assisting Grace to further thee to a Holy
Resolution. We must pray to be enabled to resolve as well as to do.

Refresh thou here a while] intimate cheerfulness after prayer.

Some rest is not in vaine] No long continuance in prayer at a time by reason
of the weakness of Nature. Whereupon The Guide takes occasion to bait, and the
Author in his sixth Canto concludes his second Book.

MORAL. VI.
NO such means of relief to a Christian in distress as prayer; No such supplier
of wants; No such obtainer of blessings. A voice out of time is as the Crying
of Swine, and a prayer without Devotion, as the Braying of Asses. Ask not
counsel of Religion of him that is without Religion, nor of Justice of him that
has no Justice, nor of a woman touching her of whom she is jealous, nor of a
coward in matters of war, nor of a Merchant concerning Exchange, nor of a Buyer
for the sale, nor of an envious man touching thankefulness, nor of the
unmerciful touching kindness, nor of an unhonest man of honesty, nor of the
slothful for any labor, nor of an hireling for the Finishing of a work; nor of
an idle servant for much business; Christ's example is the only Needle to
direct thy Compass. As he did, as he bade, so pray. For the power of prayer is
above conception, and its effects beyond understanding.

What says Saint Gregory?

Talis requirendus est ad orandum, qui sit idoneus ad placendum, quia*cum is,
qui displicet, ad intercedendum mittitur, irati animus ad deteriorem
provocatur.

It is requisite for him, that means to entreat, to be so qualified, that he be
fit to please; Lest when he, that is distasted, come to interceed, he be so far
from obtaining, what he desires, that the person; formerly offended be more
incensed to a greater wrath, and a deeper displeasure.

Since he has said so well, let us take his Opinion again.

Quisquis pro aliis intercedere nititur, sibi potius ex charitate suffragatur,
and pro semetipso tanto citius exaudiri meretur, quum magis devote pro aliis
intercedit.

Who earnestly beggs a pardon for another, does strongly give his Voice for his
own; His own Language deserves so much the sooner a Grant for himself, by how
much he was the stronger pleader for another.

Let us mind Saint Ambrose.

Multi minimi dum congregantur unanimes, sunt magni, and multorum preces
impossible est contemni.

A Quiver of Arrows are not easily broken, and a Volley of Prayers that are
unanimous, do pierce even Heaven it Self.

PROSPECT. IV.
THe Necromancer by strong spell
Fancies, he conjures Feinds from Hell.
And in his figured Circle stands
Acting his horrid thought-Commands.
And at the waving of his Rod
Conceives himself a petty God.
While he blasphemes, changed Beelzebub
Deludes the Herc'les, courts his Club,
And seems to flatter, what he says
When horridly he counter prays
Of much Obedience makes a Show,
Though come from Air, does rise below.
Such Arts, as Hell's, Laws wont condemn,
But there is a race, that is spawned from them
Whom Satan in a craftier way
Has taught to conjure, when they pray,
Blaspheming in profaned Rounds.
While black Art rives the Scripture-Grounds.
How else can any Teacher say,
All Is well? for now we need not pray.
Expunging the most Sacred Text
And if not pray; Then judgement's next.
Then pray continually! Mark how!
And what! Often Rashness spoils a Vow.
Avoid wrath So! Lest Vengeance come,
And take up Prayer's too empty Room.
CONSOLATORY ESSAY. VI.
THe Subject is Divine. It is of Prayer. Why not Our Essay also? But this might
raise the Question, why plus ultra? It Is the Task of A Divine. Too many indeed
are Intruders, and Defilers of sacred Things. What though? Is it not the work
of a Christian to understand the Excellency of so Holy, and Necessary a Duty,
not for his own Practice only, but upon occasion for the Benefit of Others.
But is there not somewhat, that may add more strength to such a Scruple? the
Supra sphaeram of the penman? All this acknowledged; and his Veneration of the
Holy Scriptures, with Reverence to the Sacred Function rightly derived in the
Apostolical Church; and sit Honor rendered to The Learned, at whose Feet he
has been educated; herein owning his own Imbecility; and not ashamed to
publish His own Infirmities, that God may any way by his unworthiness be
glorified. In all humility He conceives, that his chief Intention in This
Undertaking being pious, and not assuming, it will stand in stead of an Apology
to the Judicious, and be accepted with a smooth Brow by the Best Devoted. Yea,
since his prime aim was as well to comfort the Afflicted, to whom his
Experience and Compassion is as well akin as his Nature, as to strengthen
himself, with Gods Grace implored, by such a Meditation, He apprehends none
can count him opinionate, seeing he vieweth his own Face in the same Glass. If
the Lord out of his own Infinite Goodness, and Mercy has pleased to call so
sinful and undeserving a Creature home to himself, and has brought that
neglected Talent into the light, which he so graciously has bestowed upon him,
he doubts not, but the most Religious and most learned Understandings will,
if not encourage, yet cover his not willful, though peradventure accidental
Errors, when such shall appear, under the Wisdom as well as the Charity of
their Venerable Robes. Yet this he may, he hops safely, because truly; and
not immodestly affirm, that were his Imbecility much more then it is, what he
has received is infinitely above his merit, and his way of Thankfulness
exceedingly surpasses his Understanding. What he has, he has received from
the most Excellent, and most gracious Hand of Divine Bounty; and therefore
accounts himself highly obliged in Nature and Conscience according to his
bounden Duty to endeavor to his utmost power to set forth His Praise, and to
communicate, what Blessing soever is bestowed upon him, to the benefit of his
Neighbor. He that is the giver of All Good Things many times raises what is
contemptible in it self, the vile, the abject things of this World for the
greater Publication of his Power, and Mainfestation of His Glory. He can make
Waters flow from the Tooth of a Iaw-bone. The Fear of the Lord is the Beginning
of knowledge, of Wisdom.

When Our Savior came down from the Mount, from Tabor, where he was
transfigured; when he came to his Disciples, says Saint Mark, He saw a great
Multitude about them, and the Scribes disputing with them. And straightway all
the people, when they beheld him were amazed, and ran to him, and saeluted him,
etc. And Saint Matthew renders it, And when they were come to the Multitude,
there came unto him a certain man, and kneeled down to him, etc. Saint Luke
thus: And it came to pass the next day, as they came down from the Mountain,
much people met him. And behold a Man of the Company cried out, saying, Master,
etc. Sure there is matter of no small weight, business of much importance,
something of great moment, where there is disputing, and running, and kneeling,
and crying. The variety of posture and motion speaks it a Multitude, a heap of
Waves, rouling and tumbling in many sorts of Surges. But what was the Matter?
What dispute ye among your selves? Says Jesus to the Scribes. And one of the
company gives the Answer, as if he had been the spokesman for the Multitude,
and the Multitude had been much concerned in the Question to The Scribes. But
there might be some excuse for his impatience, there was' an Allay for his
incivility, he came out of a Multitude, and he had a Child there, a Son there,
an only Child there, and he was possessed with a Spirit. And that Spirit was a
Desperate Spirit, it was a Dumb one too. For so the father sadly relates the
matter. It was a subtle spirit, it surprised him, wheresoever it took him. A
raging Spirit; it tore him; It brought him into a very sad condition; even to
foame at the mouth, to gnash with his teeth, to pine away. It seems, it was
past The Disciples Help. They came as short in Faith, (for which they were
sharply rebuked) as they were of cure. And to make it appear, that it was a
very Desperate Spirit, it cast the Possessed into the fire, it cast him into
the waters, to destroy him. So they brought him unto our Savior; And as soon
as the Spirit saw him, he fell to work, he conceived, that his time was short,
he tore him; and the possessed must have a fit of falling, as if a fit of the
Falling Sickness, he fell down on the ground, wallowing, and foaming. Jesus
asks the man, How long it had been thus with his Son. He answers. Of a Child.
The Devil had taken early possession, and kept a long time, and was loath to
leave it. But what says his Father? But if thou can do any thing help us,
and have compassion upon us. But if thou can discovered a strange diffidence
of his power, knew him not. He prayed help for his Son, but with distrust. He
wanted Faith too. For us, It seems there is a Compassion without Devotion. His
son was possessed, and he was troubled, Jesus will help, if he can believe, He
will help the Son, if the Father can believe, for all things are possible to
him that believes. But must the Fathers Faith stand for Godfather to the sons
cure? And straightway the Father of the Child, crying with tears, says, Lord!
I believe, help mine unbelief! Much matter is packt in a little room, in a
narrow content. He has a sudden Illumination, and as quick a Repentance, he
sees himself in a manner in as bad a case, as his Son; He that commiserateth
another calls for compassion for himself, the Parent straightway cries. How
soon he was taught to speak right! He cries amidst the waters. He cries with
tears. He cries as to save from drowning, and redeem out of the Fire. It was
time to cry, Fire! and with tears to quench the same. Lord I believe! help thou
mine unbelief! A short prayer; and a weighty. What could he have said more in a
Volume? He had but seven words in his prayer; But six had the importunate Widow
in the Parable in hers to the unjust Judge: Do me justice against mine Enemies!
No more had the humble Publican in the Parable likewise, that stood a far off,
and would not lift up so much as his eyes to heaven, but smote his breast,
saying, O God be merciful to me a sinner; In the Original they are rendered
fewer, yet all were prevalent, and most effectual. What though the unjust Judge
slight the importunate suitor. Though he would not hear her for a time. It
seems she repeated the same short prayer, and renewed her request in the same
words at several times; Though he would not grant her request for a Season,
notwithstanding that he heard her; heard her, as though he heard her not ad
probationem, et magis provocationem ad rogandum, whereby Christ teaches that it
is to try our Faith, to inflame our zeal. So he proves us, and make us the
hotter in, the more earnest for the obtaining a gracious grant to our requests,
that what we obtain may be worth the valuing, when we perceive it is so hard
to come by, so difficult to attain. And he would not for a time: But afterward
he said with himself, though I fear nor God, nor reverence man, Yet because
this woman troubles me, I will do her right, lest at the last she come, and
make me weary. And the Lord said: Hear what the unrighteous Judge says: Now
shall not God avenge his Elect, which cry day and night unto him. There Is
incessant prayer indeed, prayer with out ceasing; yea, though he suffer long
for them; The injury is done unto himself. So he takes it. I tell you, he will
avenge them quickly. But when the Son of Man comes shall he find Faith on the
Earth? Luke 18. 8. How appears it that the Publican received any grant to his
short petition. I shall tell you, says Ego Sum Veritas, our Savior that is the
Truth; that this man departed to his house justified, rather then the other,
then that Pharisee, that was all outside and self justification, with his
Prayer nine times as long, that was gotten up into the Temple, that stood, and
prayed with himself. And Jesus gives his reason for it, a sound, a solid reason
for humilities preferment, before pride. For every man that exalts himself
shall be brought low, and he that humbles himself shall be exalted. And mark
here, how soon the Lord is moved. No sooner Lord I believe! Help mine unbelief!
But Jesus hears presently. The people come running, and Christ hastens his
help. When Jesus saw, that the people came running together he rebuked the
unclean spirit, saying; Thou deaf and dumb Spirit I charge thee, come out of
him. It was not only a dumb Spirit, that could not pray; a deaf spirit, that
either could not, or would not hear. For there is such an ungracious Deafness,
a deafness to the comfortable Tidings of the Gospel, a deafness to holy, to
wholesome Admonition, to sound Advice, to good Counsel To such wisdom cries
without, she utters her voice in the streets; She calls in the high streets
among the prease in the entrings of the Gates; and utters her words in the
City, saying: O ye foolish! how long will ye love foolishness! and the scornful
take their pleasure in scorning! and the Fools hate knowledge! Turn you at my
correction! Lo I will pour out my mind unto you, and make you understand my
words. Because I have called, and ye refused, I have stretched out mine hand,
and none would regard, but ye have despised all my counsel, and would none of
my correction; I will also laugh at your destruction, and mock, when your fear
comes like sudden desolation, and your destruction shall come like a
whirlewinde; When Affliction and Anguish shall come upon you, etc. Prove. 1. 20.
It was not only a deaf, and a dumb Spirit, but an unclean spirit. An unclean
spirit in the eyes of unlawful concupiscence; an unclean Spirit in the Ears,
that had the Itch of wantonness; An unclean spirit in the Mouth, of foul
obscoenity, of lying, of false, of foolish speaking, of Oaths, of Blasphemy, of
Perjury and the like abominations. An unclean spirit in the stomach, of
exorbitant Excess, of boundless Appetite, of surfeiting Luxury, of sensual
Gluttony, and beastly Drunkenness, that wallows in the Mire; An unclean Spirit
in the hand, of wicked deeds, of polluted Actions; An unclean spirit in the
feet; a spirit of committing all kind of evil with greediness; a spirit of
Cruelty, and Oppression whose Feet are swift to shed blood; An unclean spirit
in the Head, of wicked Imaginations; An unclean spirit in the heart, of ungodly
Thoughts, and impious Machinations. An unclean spirit in the Conscience, of
delusion and depravation; and that is a crooked devil, hard to be thrown out. I
charge thee come out of him. There he manifests his Command, and power, And
that he enter not into him any more, publishes his protection and Providence,
whereby the Devil is either chained-up, or turned out of the line. Then the
spirit cried, and rent him sore, and came out, and he was as one dead, in so
much that many said, He is dead. The Father cried, the Spirit cried, both
cried, but with different voices. The Father cries for help, the spirit with
horror. The Father's was a clear voice, a voice of Faith; the Spirit's a hoarse
voice, a voice of Infidelity; The Father cries, that the Spirit might be cast
out; the spirit cries, because he must out; the Father cries with tears; The
spirit cries with tearing. For he rent him sore at his coming out. Out he
comes, but leaves him as dead. If he must away, he will act his utmost
mischief. Before he goes, he rends him. Before he leaves him, he endeavors to
carry away life and all, he leaves him as dead, dead to the world, dead to
Opinion, in disconsolation dead to himself. So does the Devil, So does sin use
to take leave of her Favorites. But Jesus took took him by the hand. There was
his assisting Grace. O the Infinite Mercy! the readiness! the certainty of such
a Helper! He lifted him up, that could not else rise. There was his restoring
Grace; And he arose; There was his full Recovery. But why could not the
Disciples do this, when they were so entreated? Peter, and James, and John were
to be supposed Scholars of a higher Form in the School of Faith, but they were
at the Transfiguration, they were not among them at that time. The Disciples
themselves were very much dissatisfied about their nonperformance, and
disability to the work. We do not find them though confess, that they wanted
Faith, whereof they were reproved. Yet their silence imploys a consent to the
truth of it. Fain they would know, But they were ashamed to inquire of their
master in public. They watch't therefore their next private opportunity. For so
says the 'Text; And when he was come into the House, His Disciples asked Him
Secretly, Why could not we cast him out? He that checked them in the way of his
Justice, then informs them, to set-forth his Mercy. He checked them, to stir
up, to rouse up their Faith; He informs them, he teaches them, to satisfy
their Question, to appease their Doubt. And he said unto them: This kind can by
no other means come forth, but by Prayer, and Fasting. And what is Prayer?
Oratis est piae mentis, and humilis ad Deum conversio, fide spe, et charitate
suhnixa. Prayer is the turning of a devout, and humble mind to God, which is
underpropped with Faith, and Hope, and Charity. In the 11. Chapter of the same
Evangelist Christ speaking of the Power of Faith induces the Efficacy of
prayer, in his answer to Peter and the rest of the Disciples concerning the
withered Fig Tree. Have Faith in God. For verily I say unto you, that
whosoever shall say unto This mountain, Take thy self away, and cast thy self
into the Sea, and shall not waver in his heart, but shall believe that those
things, which he says, shall come to pass, whatsoever he says, shall be done
to him. Here we may see, that Faith calls down the power of God from Heaven,
and that which made All, can order, Act, and perform any thing. Therefore I say
unto you, whatsoever ye desire, when ye pray, believe that ye shall have it,
and it shall be done unto you. And what is fasting? If we will take Saint
Chrysostom's opinion, who was able to judge. Iejunium non ciborum, sed
peccatorum abstinentiam efficit. Though Fasting for a time, and according unto
the occasion from meats be a very necessary thing, to make it a Fast indeed, we
must abstain from sin. Iejunio passiones corporis, oratione pestes sanandae
sunt mentis, says Saint Hierom. Fasting tempers the passions, tames the Fury,
and cures the Pestilence of the Mind. Fasting cools the Fever of the Flesh,
prayer assawgeth the Tumor of the Spirit. As Fasting starves the pride of the
flesh, so prayer takes away all Sustenance from an evil Spirit. Prayer is the
speaking fasting of the flesh, and fasting is the silent prayer of the Spirit.

Come then hither, Thou man of black intentions! Or whomsoever thou art, that
sit groaning in a melancholy darkness! Draw near the Light! Behold thy
story in this Arras; Thine is only on the Backside on it. There Is a Person very
like thee. Thou art very like the Man; that was possessed. He that was without
a name, might have had thine. In his story thou mai^st read thine own Evil, the
only means for cure, and the Best way for Remedy.

Thou were such a Father's Son. In sin were thou conceived, and corruption gave
thee suck; His only Son, the Darling of Pleasure, that have been dandled in
wantonness. Thou art a Child still. Thou art not grown up to the strength of
Reason. Thou have not conn'd the primier of Religion; Or else thy Age has
double childed thee, that thou have forgot thy Lesson. Thou conversest with a
large number of wicked Men, and come with a great Multitude of wickedness.
The multitude are the Wicked. For few shall be saved. Legion is thy Companion.
How can thou then be without a Spirit?

In the multitude were the Scribes disputing. The Scribes subtle Textmen. The
Doctors and Expounders of the Law. They and the Pharisees shook hands, Both
were joynt-conspirators against, both joynt-accusers of Christ. The Scribes
accused Him of Blasphemy; The Pharisees of eating with Publicanes and sinners.
The Scribes Accusation for the breach of the Law; The Pharisees for the Breach
of Traditions. The people came to see wonders; The Seribes with them to
question the Miracles. Beware, that thou have not such a Scribe! Such a
Pharisaean friend! Such a Textman too near thee! He is possessed with a spirit
also, a Question; with a spirit of Contradiction. He cannot help thee. He has
need of cure himself. Have a care of an Ignis fatuus a false Light! That seems
a spirit too. That Vapor may lead thee to thy great hazard into Ditches, and
Waters; Into dangerous Opinions; into a multitude of Errors; into a boundless
Flood of sorrows, into the bottomless pit of Despair.

Have thou, as thou think, an intolerable burden upon thy Soul! Have thou
a grievous load upon thy Conscience! Some sin that makes it all darkness within
thee! That thou can neither hold up head to heavily offended Heaven; nor open
thy Mouth to say so much as one Lord have mercy upon me! It Is very sad with
thee indeed. The dumb spirit has taken too much possession in thee of thee.
Or is thy Melancholy senseless? Thou know not why? nor what directly it is,
that troubles thee? Thou art neither sick, nor well. Thy Soul has a (...), an
evil habit, a strange indisposition: Go to a learned Doctor! no Mountebanke: Go
to a true, and lawful Minister of Christ, an Orthodoxe Divine! He will pray for
thee; He will teach thee to pray; He will pray with thee. And if through his
own imperfections (as who lives without them?) he cannot cure thee, he will
show thee the way, he will bring thee to the Master, to blessed Jesus who both
can relieve thee, and will help thee.

Go to thy Savior! Distrust not! Go to him by prayer! He will ask thee for
that, which he gives thee, Faith. And he will give it in full measure for thy
Asking. Call then to Him in thy Heart! And he will open thy Mouth. Cry to him!
He delights to hear thee loud. But have thine eyes a Drought! Has Lust dried
up thy Springs? Look toward him, that is the Rock! and He will cause those
Rocks to flow with waters. Who looks upon the Sun, does melt his Eyes. He will
hear thee, that sees thy misery, and will show it thee, that he may recover
thee. Till thou know, thou be sick, thou art not fit for cure. If thou
can not come of thy self; take good counsel to bring thee to Christ? Read the
Scriptures! Hear his Ministers! And he will dispossess thee.

Thy Body should be the Temple of the Holy Ghost; The House of God, The House
of Prayer; How comes it Then, that it is made A Den of Thieves? yet be of good
comfort! They shall be cast out. What though the Evil spirit tear thee at
parting, with pain, with loss; with sorrow; with fear; And leaves thee as dead
in Despair? What though the World forsake thee? And leave thee? And leave thee
Dead in it is Opinion? What though thou be scorned? What though reviled? What
though a very Abject? A Thing not reckoned among the Living? neither worth
Notice nor Use? Be comforted. Thou art nearest thy Remedy, when thou think
not of it. Pray! and the evil Spirit is commanded from thee. He must Out,
though he cry, though he Roar at parting, he shall be banished from thee, that
endangered thee to the fire, to Hell fire, to damnation; that tempted thee to
Self-murder, by poisons to flame in thy blood, by a Halter to give thee a
Desperate Convulsion; by offering thee Death in the Waters, in Rivers, in
Ponds, in Wells; upon the edge of Knives, upon the Points of Poniards: he
thought and sought to surprise thee, when thou were alone. When thou thoughtst
that God had forsaken thee, and all thy friends had left thee.

Be of good comfort! Christ that begins the Cure will perfect it. Christ takes
thee by the Hand; he lifts thee up; and then thou risest indeed to Life, to
the Life of Practice, to the life of a good Conversation. He takes thee by the
Hand, by thy promise of amendment of Life, by thy new undertaking. He that is
the Life raises thee from thy former kind of dying; He becomes thy
Resurrection from sin, from death to newness of life; to Life in him, whereby
thou shall partake Glory him.

Have thou been posse'st with a Spirit of fullness, of Prosperity? A Spirit
dumb to Thanksgiving? Have thou been posse'st with a Spirit of Covetuousness?
A Spirit dumb to Almsgiving? Have thou been posse'st with a Spirit of
Oppression? A Spirit dumb to Relieving, and Deaf to the cries of the Poor? A
tearing Spirit, that rendeth the Possessions of others, as well as the
possessed. Have thou been posse'st with a Spitit of Lust, and Idleness, that
Lulleth all sins in her Bosom? A Spirit dumb and deaf to the Invitation in the
Gospel, that either hinders thee by excuses, or delays thee from coming to the
Feast? Have thou been posse'st with a Spirit of Drunkenness, Excess, and
Uncleanness? A dumb Spirit that cannot speak? Thou maust have Fasting joined
to Prayer, or there is no way to cast him out: Against his Uncleanness,
Fasting, against his Fury, Prayer.

Thou see then thy certain benefit, thy Remedy at hand, the easy way to it:
it is but Ask and have: Pray and it shall be given unto you. In all thy
distresses therefore, in any anxiety of mind, in any grief of heart, in any
trouble of thought, in any calamity, Pray! Wud'st thou have Peace of
Conscience? Pray! Wud'st thou have access to God? Pray! Wud'st thou have
comfort in Afflictions? Wud'st thou have joy in Tribulations? Pray! Wud'st thou
possess thy soul in patience? Pray! Wud'st thou have thy patience teach thee
Experience? Pray! Wud'st thou have Experience bring forth Hope? Pray! Then
shall thou find that hope, which is grounded upon Gods love, which he showed
in sending his Son to dye for thee, who were unable to raise thy self, that
were dead in sin, and unworthy of his Love in being his Enemy. Then he opens
the Charter to thee, whereby thou hold all these Graces, which is a
Reconciliation with God, procured and purchased for thee by the Merits of Jesus
Christ. Then art not thou amazed when thou beholdest thy Misery by the Fall of
Adam, who transgressed the Law of Nature before the Promulgation of the Law of
Moses: Nor is thy Faith cast down without hope at the sight of thy former
committed offenses, etc. never so Enormous Transgressions. Thy Prayer begges
Remission through Christ, thy Faith lays hold upon Gods Mercy, who sent his
Son to be a Propitiation for thy sins. He that took away the guilt of sin, took
away the strength of it. Abuse not then Gods Mercy in sinning the more! Nay sin
no more, lest a worse thing come unto the. Since God is so merciful to forgive,
misuse not thou the forgiveness of His Mercy. Have a care that thou leapest not
from Despair to Presumption. Pray therefore! Lest thou enter into, or be
overcome by Temptation. Pray often! Not long! Premeditate! Consider before what
Throne thou go! Babble not! Lest thou addest to thy sins by thy Prayers; and
so thy Aqua vita, that should refresh thee, become thy Aqua fortis, toeat out
thy bowels: such Coloquintid in the Pot, will make thy pottage thy poison; lest
that which should be thy nourishment, prove thy greater destruction.

Desir'st to have the Father to hear thee? to accept thee? Say the Prayer that
his Son taught thee! Say it intentively, zealously, heartily, understandingly!
and it is enough. The Son directs thee to the Father, and puts words into thy
mouth to that purpose. If thou will be reckoned amongst the wise, neglect them
not. If thou will not be numbered amongst the Froward, and the Despisers, refuse
them not. Seem not wiser then Wisdom it self, lest the Wisdom that thou
admirest so much in thine own eyes, prove altogether foolishness. A short
prayer is too long for a wandering mind: a short prayer is best for a weak
Devotion. Thy Devotion at the best is apt to tire for a little way. The
Publicans Lord have mercy upon me A sinner, may save thee sooner then a long
Tautologie of Words; then many a Lord! Lord! made use on to fill up disorderly
vacuities, immethodical matter, and nonsense haesitations.

If thou would have Prayers for thy particular wants, for several occasions,
Go to holy David's box of precious Balsam. Use this or the like: Turn thee unto
me, and have mercy upon me, for I am desolate and afflicted: The troubles of my
heart are enlarged: O bring me out of my distresses! Look upon mine afflictions
and my pain, and forgive all my sins! Consider mine enemies for they are many,
and they hate me with cruel hatred! O keep my soul, and deliver me! Let me not
be ashamed! For I put my trust in thee. Then let thy mouth sing forth his
praise, and God, even thy God shall give thee his blessing.

Rejoice in his holy Name; Yea, let them that seek the the Lord rejoice. Psalm.
105. 3.
Desinat apt Liber, non Laus pietate, Secundus.


Wise Traveller through Wilderness does lead
The Christian Pilgrim, teaching where to tread:
From Feind in Worlds Way Foes he warnes his Friend.
Through Deep, up Steep, shows Heaven's his Iourneys end.
F. Barlow fecit.

The Third Book.

THE Pilgrim's Pass TO THE LAND OF THE LIVING.

Sil. Ital. Explorant adversa viros, perque aspera duro
Nititur adlaudem Virtus interrita clivo.
Crosses the boldest Courages assail;
Let what can come, stout Virtue must prevail,
OR,

Affliction tries the Man; But's Virtue strains
Through all Opposals, till the Top he gains.
The Encouragement.
NAture is so apt to tire, especially in so great a journey, as it was but
reason to give her some repose. And there could not be a fitter place, wherein
to rest her afflicted Head, and wearied Feet, then in the House of Prayer: A
place of no less safety, then Refreshment; where there are Viands of all sorts,
as well to entertain the strongest Appetites, as to settle, please, and nourish
the more crasie stomachs. Through a Wilderness is an uncomfortable Passage; no
better is this World, stuff't with Thorns and Briars! stored with Thicks, and
Woods; filled with Rocks and stones; inhabited by wild Beasts, and savage
Creatures; replenished with dangers and difficulties of all sorts: But cheer
up! The worst is behind the; and having so well Refreshed, thou can not
faint. Thou art a Pilgrim, and art used to Travel. Thou can not now but with
delight move on. Get but up upon Faiths Mount, and thou shall discover the holy
Land. Such a sight will ravish thee; such a Hope will sharpen thy Desires, and
keep thee from ever growing weary. Thou will then on lively, and rejoice that
thou art in the way to so excellent a Country, that thou art so near thy
journeys end. A better End then thou could expect, or hope for. To this end
may thou safely hasten. It is thy happiness. Thus may thou with a holy kind
of Impatience long to be loosed, but it must be that thou may be with Christ.
I need not call away; I find thee, me thinks, so reudy to go: Then on in Gods
name.

BOOK III.
CANTO VII. The Mount of Faith.
1.
THou can not stay.
It Is High, it is Craggie -- way,
That to the Mount of Faith does lead.
Hear'st not one call, as if he preached to Day?
Be wary of thy steps! As he does call, so tread.
2.
Now look about!
Thou Have past ore stumbling doubt.
See some asleep upon that side!
That blind Guides cast the further way about,
With Images inarm'd, in Dreams lay round about their Guide.
3.
On the other Hand
A Rout there, there a Band,
Imaginations way advance.
Each Zeal makes Noise, as at it does understand;
Each does, against the other cry; so to Pantheon dance.
4.
The Praeco calls,
Still, still beware of Falls!
For now your way grows sharp and steep!
You must climb over rugged stones! like Walls!
Set footing wisely! Hold by hands! And sometimes creep!
5.
That way deceives,
And them of wit bereaves,
For thinking still, they upward go,
Hypocrisy them draws, and never leaves,
Till she does cast them down to Pride, that's fallen Below
6.
The Top appears;
The blew Skies brightness clears;
Even into holy Heaven you see.
The fresh green grass is gemm'd with pearly Tears,
And Faith's Pavillion stands near Figs fruit bearing Tree.
7.
The Tents wide Door
A Dam'sel sits before
Within A Chair made like a Heart.
Her eyes to Heaven do plead for Mercies store.
Her Lefts erect, Right hand on breast is placed athwart.
8.
So Faith disposed,
Her Shield is there disclosed;
Salvations Helmet also Shows;
Truth's Girdle wrought, all Lilli'd ore, and Ros'd;
Th 'Righteous Breast Plate, Words Sword, Gospel-Shooe
(deck Rows.
9.
Upon her Shield
Of Gules, the bloody Field,
To make her Foes amazed in Fight;
Resplendently a Cross of Or does guild,
With which fierce World, false Flesh, Hels Craft she puts to
(flight.
10.
Nor far from hence
On place of Eminence
(Atenariff, that's mounted high)
A Lady, decked with Beauties Excellence
Stands firm, by Cable holding, Anchored in the sky.
11.
A Fount near these
In dimpled Vale does please,
A flying Statue bears Loves Name,
Whose Breasts run Cream into Pacifick Seas,
By Cestern filled from Milkie way in th'heavenly Frame.
12.
Where th'Hungry feed;
The Sick that Cordials need,
Cure from blessed Hand of Charis find;
Who still delights to do a Pious Deed,
And th'helpless helps, the Naked clothes, and leads the Blind.
PERSPECTIVE VII.
1. THe Mount of Faith] It is so called for the Loftiness of the Position of
the Place above the neighboring inferior Earth. To go to the Etymology of the
word. A Mount, which is the diminutive expression of a Mountain is derived a
Monte, which is the Latin word for it. Whence it does come, there is no little
Contest among the Grammarians. Quidam a movendo per antiphrasin. Some would
have it, as from Not moving, because Mountains are steady in their places; Such
Vast Bodies stand fixed; as irremoveable by Art, as they are by Nature. A
little nearer the matter, though much differing from the Sound of the word, is
their opinion, for Mo^s ab ^minendo, quasi eminens, as has been first
mentioned. Scaliger backs the Sense of a non movendo, but gives a nearer Term
and Speaks it a manendo, from tarrying, and not moving from it is place. Another
inclines to Mons a moveo, quod a terra in altum moveatur; because it is cast up
high overtopping the rest. Some other a minis, as if it is height did threaten
the Sky.

But as every man's Fancy works, more especially in Criticisme, under favor it
may be conceived Mons quasi monens; a Mountain a Mark, an Advertisement; and it
carries a plausible construction with it to advertise us of the Greatness of
the Creator, in the narrower object more suitable to the Eye, which cannot
receive at once the vastness of the whole Earth; only thus it is represented
in Abstract, as a Map of the whole Fabric. Every Creature having an Impresse
of the Excellence of the Most Mighty, and Most Wise Maker thereof, this has
it is place, and order by his Dispose in an extraordinary manner; as intimating
the vastness, immovablenesse, immutability, and eminency, of the Creator above
the perception of the inferior Creatures of the Valleys. So Hills and
Mountains seem the stairs to Heaven. If we did conceive, that the Heathen had
not altogether lost the memory of Noah's Flood, but preserved it by the
Continuance of Tradition, and Antiquity of History, as Ovid, a Roman, to whom
the Latin Tongue was genuine, mentions in that of Deucalion, it is not
likely to prove a mistake that Mons should be derived from manens, because the
Ark rested upon Mount Ararat, a Mountain in Armenia; yet the former Contract of
Monens has solid reason to underprop it; if we look either into Holy writ, or
cast an eye upon the Superstition of the Heathen.

Most of all the Great works that it pleased God to manifest unto men were upon
the Turrets of the Earth. That great Trial of Abraham's Faith in offering up
of Isaac, who was a Figure of Christ, was by especial command to be done upon
a mountain. As it is in the 22. of Genesis; And He said, Take now thine only
Son Isaac, whom thou love, and get thee into the Land of Moria, and offer Him
there for A burnt Offering upon one of the mountains, which I will show thee.

Canaan, that Land of Promise, was a high Country. For Jacob sent his Sons
down into Egypt for Corn? And concerning their return it is Said Gen: 45. 25.
Then they went up from Egypt, and came into the Land of Canaan.

When the Israelites murmured in Rephidim for water, Gods answer to Moses was
Exodus 17: 5. 6. Go before the People, and take with thee of the Elders of
Israel, and thy Rod wherewith thou Smotest the River take in thine hand and go!
Behold! I will stand there before thee upon the Rock in Horeb, and thou shall
smite on the Rock, and water shall come out of it, that the people may drink.

And when Amaleck fought with Israel in Rephidim, Moses said to Joshua; Choose us
out Men; and go fight with Amaleck: To morrow I will stand on the Top of the
Hill with the Rod of God in mine hand. When Moses held up his Hand Israel
prevailed: But, when he let his Hand down Amaleck prevailed. They propped up
his Hands, and Joshua discomfitted Amalek.

From Mount Sinai the Lord declared Israel to be his peculiar People: Moses
went up unto God: for the Lord had called him out of the Mount, unto Him,
Saying: Thus shall thou say unto the House of Jacob, and tell the Children of
Israel etc. If you will hear my Voice indeed, and Keep my Covenant, then ye
shall be my chief treasure above All people, though All the Earth be mine. Ye
shall be also A Kingdom of Priests, and an Holy Nation. When Moses brought the
People out of the Tents to meet with God, and they stood in the nether part of
the Mount, Mount Sinai was all on Smoke because the Lord came down upon it in
fire, and the Smoke thereof ascended, as the Smoke of a Furnace, and all the
Mount trembled exceedingly, And when the Sound of the Trumpet blew long and
waxed louder and louder, Moses spoke, and God answered him by Voice. For the
Lord came down upon Mount Sinai, on the Top of the Mount, and when The Lord
called Moses up into the Top of the Mount, Moses went up. etc. Exodus 19. And in
the 20. chapt. God spoke all these words etc. Viz. the Ten Commandments. After
the delivery whereof All the People saw the Thunder, and Lightnings, and the
sound of the Trumpet and the Mountain Smoking; and when the People saw it,
they fled, and stood afar off. There were Temporal, and Civil Ordinances and
the making of the Tabernacle appointed by God. There the Lord said unto Moses,
Thus shall thou say unto the Children of Israel; Ye have seen, that I have
talked with you from Heaven. And Moses by command went afterward up with
Aaron, Nadab, and Ab^^u, and Seventy of the Elders of Israel; And they saw the
God of Israel; And under His Feet was, as it were a work of a Sapphire stone,
and as the very Heaven, when it is Clear. And upon the Nobles of Israel He
laid not his Hand; Also they saw God, and did eat, and drink. etc. And the
Glory of the Lord abode upon Mount Sinai; and the Cloud covered it Six days;
And the Seventh day he called unto Moses out of the midst of the Cloud. And the
Sight of the Glory of the Lord was, like consuming Fire on the Top of the
Mountain to the Eyes of the Children of Israel. And Moses entered into the
Mids of the Cloud, and went up to the Mountain. And Moses was in the Mount
Forty days and Forty nights. Moses also came down from God in Mount Horeb.
With the Second Tables went Moses up to God in Mount Sinai, and the Lord
descended in a Cloud and stood with him there and proclaimed the Name of the
Lord. So the Lord passed before his face, and cried; The Lord, The Lord,
Strong, Merciful, and Gracious, Slow to Anger, and Abundant in Goodness, and
Truth; Reserving Mercy for thousands, Forgiving Iniquity and Transgression, and
Sin, and not making the wicked inocent, visiting the iniquity of the Fathers
upon the Children, and upon Childrens Children unto the third and fourth
generation.

And when the Children of Israel with all the Congregation departed from
Kadesh, they came unto the Mount Hor; And the Lord spoke unto Moses and Aaron
in the Mount Hor near the coast of the Children of Edom. Numb. 20. when Balack
the King of the Moabites had sent for Balaam to curse the Children of Israel
who were advanced to the Plain of Moab he carries him first up into the High
Places of Baal, that thence he might see the utmost part of the People, and God
met Balaam there as Numb. 23. But blessed Israel, as the Lord had spoken. Then
Balak brought him inro Sadesophim, the field of the Spies, or of those that
watched for them the motion of Israel, to the Top of Pisgah; And the Lord met
Balaam there, and putt an answer in his Mouth. There did he bless them also.
Then Balak removes him to the Top of Peor; where the Spirit of the Lord Came
upon him. But there he blessed them also. The Lord commands Moses to go up
into the Mount Abarim, that thence he might behold the Land before his death,
which he had given unto the Children of Israel; as it is in the 27. of Numbers;
And in the 34. of Deuteronomie. Moses went from the Plain of Moab up into Mount
Nebo unto the Top of Pisgah, that is over against Jericho, and the Lord showed
him all the Land of Gilead unto Dan. etc.

Hieru alem was placed upon the Hills too. When they went to keep their Feasts
there; It is said that they went up to Jerusalem to worship, where was Mount
Sion.

Many other Examples might be showed out of the Holy writ to demonstrate Gods
appearance upon the Mountains; In Holy Gospel, there is frequent mention of
the Selection of Mountains for Prayer, and Preaching by our Blessed Savior,
who likewise Suffered death upon Mount Calvarie. The Heathen thought to find
their false Gods in Groves on High Places, as Moloch, Adram-melech, Baal, etc.
These Idols had distinctive names from the Mountains where in they were
worshipped, as Baul-Peor, Baal-Zebub, Baal-Thephon, Baal-Berith etc. So was
Jupiter called Olympius, Capitolinus etc. But all this discourse does aim at
the setting forth of the fittnesse of the Term of Mount for the place of
Residence for Faith; Since it is not only the Representation of Heaven, where
the Throne of God is mentioned to be, but the certainty of finding him by Faith
that appeared frequently upon the Mountains, and, Suffered upon a Mount. It may
therefore be called the Mount of Faith in regard of it is Elevation above the
things of this World, and in respect of the Eminency of the Object of our Faith.

Thou can not stay] shows the Constancy of a Christian Pilgrim's Course.
He must on. Non progredi est regredi. If He stands still though but a little
he loses much ground. Without Perseverance neither he, that fights, shall gain
the victory; nor he, that conquereth, shall wear the Palm, or have the Triumph.
It Is continual Endeavor, and the Vigor of a daily additional Force, that gains
the Goal of what we aim at. No Merit can be fostered without it, No Reward can
be obtained but by it, Patience bids Farewell, if not with it; Constancy has
her life in it; Peace is gained through it; All bonds and ties are knit for it;
The golden Chain of Unanimity is made of it. It is not he, that begins a good
work, but he that continues to the End with so doing, that shall be Saved.
Perseverandum est assiduo studio robur addendum, donec bona men's sit, et bona
voluntas est, can Seneca say. We must persevere and ever send in supply with
diligence wherewith still to reinforce, while the mind is well set, and the
will is rightly bent. But he speaks higher, something above a Philosopher, as
we may take his Sense; In excelso est beata vita, sed perseverantia
penetrabilis. Let Happiness be immured in Heaven, Perseverance will scale it.

It Is high] The way to Faith is out of Sight to Reason. Credimus, quod non
videmus. Faith is of Things not seen. And it is high because it is conversant
only with Heavenly Things. It Is high because the Object of our Faith that was
exalted, Super crucem exaltatus that was exalted upon the Cross, is ascended
to the right hand of His Father. Fides aliquando recipit, quod Ratio non
praesumit. Such Gifts are by Divine Grace bestowed on Faith, as Reason cannot
hope for.

It Is craggie way] It is very difficult to Flesh and Blood, a hard matter for
Sense or Reason to believe. Natures Feet are very tender, and cannot endure
rugged stones of Affliction and Trial, that lay in the Narrow way of Faith,
Lapis quidem durus est, Sed cum factum fuerit de eo opus, desistere nescit.
This kind of stone is very hard; it will last the better when it is well laid
in a building. The Devil puts a thousand Questions to a Novice in the School of
Faith. Questions are one sort of those stones.

Hear'st not one call, as if he Preached to day.] This points at the saying of
the Prophet David, in his Invitatory Psalm to the Worship and praise of the
Lord, and Exhorting to repentance with a loud call. To day if you will hear his
voice, harden not your hearts, as in the provocation, and as in the day of
temptation in the Wilderness. When your Fathers tempted me, proved me, and saw
my works. This also has reference to that of Saint John the Baptist: Now also
is the Ax laid to the Root of the Trees: therefore every Tree which bears not
good fruit, is hewn down and cast into the Fire, etc. This alludeth likewise
to that of the Prophet Jonas, as showing that there must be a continual
renewing of Repentance, for the obtaining of a firm Faith. Yet forty days and
Niniveh shall be overthrown. So the people of Niniveh believed God, etc. Jonah,
3. 4, 5. This minds that of Saint Paul, to the Hebrews, 12. Wherefore let us
also, seeing we are compassed with so great a cloud of Witnesses, cast away
every thing that presses down, and the sin that hangs so fast on; Let us run
with patience the race that is set before us, looking unto Jesus the Author and
finisher of our Faith: Who for the joy that was set before him, endured the
Cross, and despised the shame, and is set at the right hand of the Throne of
God. Faith comes by Hearing, Hearing by the Preaching of the Word. If therefore
none can hear without a Preacher, How can any believe without Hearing? and how
can he understand without Faith? Or how can he do any thing that is good
without Understanding? The word of God must be preached, that the hearer may
believe, the believer may understand, and who so understands may persevere in
the exercise of welldoing: For neither works without Faith, nor Faith without
Woeks justify those that have a kind of ability given them to use the freedom
of their Will. The holy Spirit comes to the Door and knocks; It is not broken
open; it is a fair Render of Possession, not a Burglary.

Be wary of thy steps.] Consider before thou do any thing. For Actions leave
their prints behind them. Go not every way that Temptation inviteth the: Not be
carried away with every Wind of Doctrine, according to that careful direction
of Saint Paul, 2 Timothy 3. This know also, that in the last days shall come
perilous Times: For men shall be Lovers of their own selves, Covetous,
Boasters, Proud, Cursed speakers, Disobedient to Parents, Unthankful, Unholy,
without natural affection; truce breakers, false accuses, intemperate, fierce,
despisers of them which are good; Traitors, heady, high-minded, lovers of
pleasures more then lovers of God, having a show of Godliness, but have denied
the power thereof. Turn therefore from such: For of this sort are they which
creep into houses, and lead captive simple Women, laden with sins, and led with
Diverse lusts; which Women are ever learning, but are never able to come to the
knowledge of the Truth. And as Jannes and Jambres withstood Moses, so does
these also resist the Truth, Men of corrupt mindrs, Reprobate concerning the
Faith. But they shall prevail no longer: For their madness shall be evident to
all men, as theirs also was. Examine and try the Spirits. Have a care of falling
either into Superstition, or Atheism. The One makes a Gay of thy Religion; the
Other throws down God to advance thy Sense and Reason.

As he does call, so (...)!] As the Holy Word directs thee, Live! As Christ
guides thee, Walk! As the Prophets foretold, as the Apostles witnessed, as the
Martyrs have sealed, as Reverend Bishops in Holy Churches have delivered, as
Orthodox Divines, Learned, pious, and careful Pastors have instructed by their
Religious Life, and Sound doctrine; so regulate thy Faith! so order thy Life! so
accustom thy Conversation!

2. Now look about!] When thou art in the way to Faith, as it were, in the
Entrance of believing, thou may discern the Vanities of the World, and behold
that nothing is comparable unto Christ. Thou find a beginning of Repose, and
settlement of thy troubled Mind, formerly busied with Cares, Vexations, and
Anxieties. But be watchful! Be thou Circumspect!

Thou Have past ore stumbling doubt.] Though thou have been hindered by many Embraces
of the Flesh, by several struglings with Nature; though thou have been shaken by
various oppositions of the World; though thou have been amused with numerous
Temptations and Allurements of Satan, and diverse questions concerning the Truth
have troubled thee: and not a few scruples of Conscience have tortured thee;
Yet, when thou come to the true Knowledge of the right Religion, and art
principled therein; when thou receivest the purity of the Truth, and the Light
of Faith appears, thou art comforted in thy stedfastness, and art growing
every day stronger and stronger for thy encouragement. Therefore be of good
courage! Faint not! Thy worst is behind thee.

See some asleep upon that side!] Behold here Extremes go off, and forsake the
perfect way! They will to the Right or the Left. They cannot keep the Mean.
Prodigality is always asleep; and Covetousness is ever waking: Prodigality
knows not when to spare, nor Covetousness how to spend: Prodigality is all
Lace, and Covetousness no Clothes, Liberalitie's condemned by both. Her Bounty
is too prodigal in the greedy eye of covetousness: Her discreet Parsimonie is
too narrow for the humor of Prodigality. Covetousness terms Liberality a
Spend-thrift, and Prodigality calls her a Churl. She seems by turns the
contrary to either, as they are to her Extremes both. It is even so with
Opinions to Truth, and Sects to the True Religion. Truth is accused, Religion
is Despised by all sides, condemned by all Factions. The Conclave of Rome, and
the Consistory of Geneva, agree Eodem tertio, though there be a hot and seeming
quarrel betwixt them. Both may be blamed herein: It were to be wished that
Geneva had somewhat of Rome's Charity, and Religious Decency. I cannot wish
Rome Genevah's, though I pray for their Reformation. Upon the present These
Err, both falling into the Extreme on the either hand. The one makes it a
great way about to Heaven, by Intercession of Saints; And the other goes so
near the Gates of Hell, that many a poor soul drops in by Despair. The one puts
a great efficacy upon the numerous Repetition of Ave Mary's, and Pater Nosters;
And the other no less confidence in indigested Long Prayers. The one is for
Merit by Works; the other is for Salvation by a Naked Faith. Auricular
Confession is holden absolutely necessary by the One to the Priest: Auricular
confession is holden as necessary to the Classical Elders. In this they differ
therein. The Ons accounts it a Sacred thing to keep a secret, which the Other
set at naught to violate. The One set up Images: the Other Imaginations: The
One places Summary Appeal in Cathedra, the other in the Consistory, or
Assembly; The One makes the Eucharist a Transubstantiation, the Other merely a
Sign. The One puts Excommunication into Bulls, the Other into Pulpits. The One
conceives Religion to be all Ear, the Other all Hand. I might mention many more
Parallels, but my Charity will not permit it. I rather desire and wish, that
Faults were mended, and Errors cured by an humble seeking, and a meek
submission to the Revealed Truth, and a Returning into the right way. That
Christians might have Charity to one another, and putting off Animosities,
might Worship the Lord in purity of Heart, in the beauty of Holiness, and that
our Adoration might be with Outward and Inward Reverence, as becomes us to the
Majesty, and Holiness of God. Let all things be done decently, and in Order.

They lay asleep upon that side.] Asleep with the Mists of Error, clouding
their understandings. Too much enclining to their own Opinions.

Sopor est Mortis Imago.

The Jews may be pittyed for dreaming of another Messiah so long upon this
side, and ought to be prayed for, that their Eyes may be opened, and that in
the Lords Mercy they may be recalled home to the sight of the Truth.

That blind Guides cast the further way about.] Blind Guides are such Clergy
as are themselves darkened with Errors. When the blind lead the blind, both fall
into the Ditch.

With Images enarm'd] Embracing Superstition.

In dreams lay round about their Guide.] Pleased their Fancies, they encompass,
as seeming to defend their Guides, and their showing great Affection to their
Leaders, who are overcom with ignorance of the Truth, like themselves. Thus
have they Shadows in their Brains, instead of Substance in their Hearts,
Worshipping God not his way, but making Fantastic images of their own Devise;
being fed with their own Humors, and regarding Traditions of men more then the
Commandments of God; so lying wrapped up in their beloved Darkness, and Embracing
the Vanities of their Rabbis, the subtilties of their Priests, and the
misleading of Ministers instead of the Truth.

3. On the other Hand] On the Left hand; in the other extreme.

A Root is there] Signifying the Multiplicity, and disorder of Sects, of Error
and Heresies that Defile the purity, and resist the power of the Doctrine of
Christ. For instance, view that hurly burly raised by Demetrius the Silver
Smith, as it is recorded in the Acts. And the same time there arose much
trouble about that way. For a certain man named Demetrius, a Silver Smith,
which made Temples of Diana, brought great gains unto the Crafts-men, whom he
called together with the workmen of like things, and said, Sirs, ye know that
by this Craft we have our goods. Moreover, ye see, and hear, that not alone
Ephesus, but almost throughout all* Asia, this Paul has persuaded, and turned
away much people, saying, That they be not Gods that are made with hands. So
that not only this thing is dangerous unto us, that the State should be
reproved, but also that the Temple of the great goddess Diana should be nothing
esteemed. And that it would come to pass, that her magnificence, which all
Asia, and the World worshippeth, should be destroyed. Now when they heard it,
they were all of wrath, and cried out, saying, Great is Diana of the Ephesians.
And the whole city was full of confusion, and they rushed upon the common place
with one assent and caught Gaius, and Aristarchus, etc. And when Paul would
have entered, etc. Some cried one thing and some another, and the assembly was
out of order, and the more part knew not wherefore they were come together.
Upon Alexanders appearing to appease them, when they knew that he was a Jew,
there arose a shout almost for the space of two hours of all Men, Crying,
Great is Diana of the Ephesians.

There a Band] Armed Zeals: Men of Question and Contention, that would either
silence, or destroy those which adhere unto, or publish the Truth, or force
them into their own madness. Such was the Conspiracy of more then forty Jews,
that bound themselves by an Oath to kill Paul, Acts 23.

Imaginations way advance] Following their own Humors, and the Chrotchets of
their own Crowns; presumptuously preferring their own Misapprehensions.

Each Zeal makes wise, as it does understand] Every one seems to be in the
right, and wu'd be accounted before others in judgment. This is a painted
Fire, it has no true Heat. Here Passion is mistaken for Zeal. Every one will
have a Religion of his own making, and carries it on with a several Fury.
Every man's Apprehension goes for Judgment.

Each does against the other cry] Shows not only their confusion, but their
contention, and uncharitableness; being full of questions to perplex, and put
out of countenance, a pell mell of Noise and Negations to drown the voice of
Truth.

So to Pantheon dance] Pantheon (says Dion the Historian) was a Temple in Rome
so called, Quod in Martis Venerisque imaginibus, sub ipso Templo constitutis,
omnium Dearum imagines effictae erant. Because under the images of Mars and
Venus, set up in that place, they feigned and meant, that all Gods whatsoever
were Worshipped. Under Wealth, under Force, and Lust, stalks in the Idoltary of
all Vices. The Temple was round and open in the top, as counterfeiting Heaven
in its Circular Figure, and so might give a conceit of Adoration of all the
Host of heaven, as that Idolatry in the time of the Prophets. There they
thought the Gods dwelt. Pantheon was made by Agrippa, to Jupiter the Revenger,
who is very near akin to Pluto, in the sense of Fable. Of late times it is
called the Church Divae Mariae rotundae, the Church of S. Mary the Round.

4. The Praeco calls] Gods holy Word, and his Ministers direct the way, and
give warning of dangers. So the Prophets of old, and S. John the Baptist:
Repent! for the Kingdom of God is at hand. For this is he of whom it is spoken
by the Prophet Esaias, saying, The voice of one that cries in the wilderness,
is, Prepare ye the way of the Lord! make his paths straight!

Still, still beware of Falls!] An ingemination for the greater notice of
Dangers, to stir up a diligent care against stumbling by Temptations: or
falling away from the Faith.

For now your way grows sharp and steep] In regard of our approaching to more
subtle underminings, and more violent assault; that with earnest labor we
should undertake to pass Trials, and the sifting of the Tempter: It Is sharp and
steep; very difficult for Flesh and Blood to endure that is soft and heavy,
unwilling, and unweldy for such displeasing, and troublesome employment.

You must climb over rugged stones like walls] Sins raise a wall of partition
between God and us, especially those stony sins of Cruelty, Oppression, Malice,
and Uncharitableness. We must strive to gain a Masterie of our selves; we must
deny our selves, conquer the concupiscences of the flesh. climbing is a
diligent labor.

Set footing wisely] Walk soberly with prudence, with all care and
watchfulness; for so it behooves a Christian. Persever with steddiness.

Hold by hands!] By Charitable deeds, which fasten us to Faith; and maintain
thy Faith with thy Courage. For the hands are not only the Stewards, and
dispencers of bounty, but the Guard and Weapons of the man.

And sometimes creep!] Denoting Humility and Prayer, and Christian Patience.
The higher thou go, thou art more subject to storms, and liable to eminent
and precipitious dangers.

5. That way deceives] Of Schism, Error, Heresy, Seducing, Temptation, the
speciousness of Superstition, the pretense of Holiness, Sanctimonious
Policy,. Blessed is the man that does not walk in the counsel of the wicked,
nor stand in the way of sinners, nor sit in the seat of the scornful.

And them of wit bereaves] Quos Jupiter perdere vult, dementat prius. Pharaohs
heart was hardened before his destruction: According to that which Jesus
answered the people, S. John 12. 35. Yet a little while is the light with you;
walk while ye have light! lest the darkness come upon you. For he that walks
in the dark knows not whither he goes! While ye have Light, believe in the
Light, that ye may be the children of the Light. Vitia nostra, quae amamus,
defendimus; and maluimus excusare illa, quam excutere. We are given to defend
the Errors we have embraced; and we are apter to excuse such evils, then to
renounce them.

For thinking still they upward go] Imagining that they are in the Right, being
abused with a salse Opinion. No way is like theirs to Heaven. This is Satan's
Deceptio visus, his juggling with depraved Consciences, and deluded
Understandings.

Hypocrisy them draws, and never leaves] Hypocrisy is a subtle Evil, a
secret poison, a Hidden Venom, and the Moth of Sanctity. It pretends all is
well, it deludes Prosperity, and belies Curiosity, and with a cruel Art it
stabs Virtue with its own Dagger. It kills a Fast with Fasting, and makes
Prayer undo it self, it throws down Mercy with a seeming Pity: it destroies
with cooling a Fever, and in a cold Cup it gives hot Drink. Quod corporibus
est Hydrops, hoc Hypocrisis animabus. What the Dropsy is to Bodies, Hypocrisy
is to Souls. Haec enim Hydrops bibendo sitit, Hypocrisis inebrietata est siti.
For as the Dropsy with drinking thirsts, Hypocrisy is Drunk to Thirst.

Till she does cast them down to pride] Till she destroys them with
Ambition; till she does throw them down to Hell. Pride is Satan, who possesses
men with a Spiritual Pride.

That Is fallen below] Lucifer fallen from Heaven into the Dungeon of utter
darkness, prepared for the Devil and his Angels.

6. The Top appears] When we attain Faith, our souls are elevated.

The blew Skies brightness clears) Our souls apprehend Divine things.

Even into holy Heaven you see) we behold our Mediator, who is our Redeemer,
sitting at the Right hand of his Father, and conceive the Mystery of the
Trinity, and the Blessednese that is prepared for those that love the Lord
Jesus, and expect his appearing. Fides est perceptio veritatis rerum cum
assertione, sine causarum cognitione. Faith is a discerning Understanding of
the Truth, with a Claim of things without the Knowledge of their Causes.

The fresh green Grass is gemm'd with pearlie Teares] we are renewed by Faith,
always growing upward. Green grass is beautiful to the Sight, So is faith to
our Savior. There are Tears of Repentance; and Tears of Joy, and Love; which
give a luster and beauty to the Faith of the Spouse in the Eye of the
Bridgroom. For so says he in the Canticles. Behold thou art fair, my Love!
Behold, thou art fair; Thine Eyes are like the Doves among the locks, thine
hair is like the Flock of Goats, which look down from the Mountain of Gilead,
Thou art all fair, my Love! and there is no spott in thee.

And Faith's Pavillion stands near Fig's fruit-bearing Tree] It is said Faith's
Pavilion, because it is no lasting place, both in respect of Man who is
Mortal, as also of his future Being; For though by Faith we are carried to
Heaven, it leaves us there, when we come to Fruition. It is placed near Fig's
fruit-bearing Tree, minding the Figtree in the Gospel, that was cursed because
it bare no Fruit. Faith is dead without Works. The Figtree is a Plant of
sovereign Virtue, and it is Fruit is a precious Medicine against most Diseases.

7. The Tent's wide Doore] Repentance is the Introduction to Faith. Or take it
for offered Grace, or the Calling of the Spirit. Or for the desire of Salvation.

A Damsel sits before] Faith must be pure like a Virgin. She sits, It must be
fixed, and before too. For Faith is a belief of things, that not only are past
and are but to be. She minds things to come, and so the Tent's wide door may
mind her of Eternity.

With a Chair made like a Heart] The Heart is Faith's Chair of State.

Her Eyes to Heaven] That Is the Place for expectation of Comfort. She believes
that Christ is her Mediator, and Intercessor there.

Do Plead for mercie's store] There Is her mental Prayer for Pardon, and begging
Grace, that is Gods Bounty. Mercie's store is Christ's Merits.

Her Left's erect] As laying hold of Christ's merit. The Left hand is said to
be nearest the Heart.

Right hand on Breast is plac't] Showing her Contrition, Humility, and
acknowledgment of her Unworthiness of his so great Favors.

Athwart] Signifying the sense of the Soul's trouble for Sin committed. Create
in me a clean heart O God, and renew a right spirit within me.

8. So Faith disposed) Faith in such application to Christ shows her Armourie
mentioned by Saint Paul.

9. Upon her shield of Gules etc.) Sets forth Christ's Death and Passion.

To make her Foes amazed in fight) By which he conquered Death and Hell.

Resplendently a Cross of Or does gild) His Resurrection after his Passion.

10. Not far from hence, On Place of Eminence) Hope accompanies a steadfast
faith. It is allwaies near her. And hope is placed on high to denote that she
loves to be near her Object, Christ, who has prepared a Reward in Heaven,
which She Keeps still in her Eye. Tria considero; In quibus tota Spes mea
consistit: Charitatem Adoptionis, Veritatem Promissionis; Potestatem
Redditionis. There are Three Things wherein Hope acknowledges her Self to
consist. God's exceeding love in his Adoption; His perfect Truth in His
Promise; And His Almighty Power in Performance. Christ is risen from the Dead,
and is made the First Fruits of them that slept. For as in Adam all die even so
in Christ shall All be made alive. 1. Cor. 15. 20, 22.

Tenariff) A mountain, that is accounted the highest in the world.

A Lady decked with Beautie's Excellence) The Soul adorned with heavenly Graces;
The rejoicing of Spirit in as it were the present Enjoyment of the Celestial
Joys, that the Soul shall fully possess hereafter.

Stands firm) There Is her steadfastnesse and Constancy.

By Cable holding) There Is her strength assisting Grace given from above.

Anchored in the Sky) There Is her Repositorie; In Heaven; in Christ. My
wellbeloved is mine, and I am his. He feeds among the Lillies, And a little
before she Sang. He brought me into the wine-seller, and love was his Banner
over me. Stay me with Flagons! and comfort me with Apples! For I am sick of
Love. His left hand is under my Head; and his right hand does embrace me.

11. A Fount near these) The Embleam of Charity, who cannot be far from her Two
Sisters. Dicit Fides, parata sunt magna, inexcogitabilia bona a Deo fidelibus
suis; Dicit spes: mihi illa servantur; Curro ego (ait charitas) ad illa. It is
Saint Bernards. Great, and unconceivable Good things are by God prepared for
his Believers, says Faith. They are Kept for me, cries Hope. I run to them,
for them, rejoices Charity.

In dimpled Vale does please) As a dimple in a Chin makes it seem lovely, so
does Charity make beautiful whom soever she inhabits. Adimpled Vale, fertile by
receiving showry Blessings; A dimpled Vale shows it is humility, which is lovely
in the Eye of Heaven.

A flying statue bears Love's Name) Charitie's Embleam: Love like Fire is
pyramidall, mounteth upward.

Whose Breasts run Cream into Pacifick Seas) She nourishes others with the
best of Plenty, and Relief, and is free in good offices for Atonement.

By Cistern filled) Such a Heart is replenisht with Grace, and Supplied with
Blessings.

From milkie way it'h'Heavenly Frame) From the Infinite store of Divine Bounty,
by the Free Giver of All good gifts.

12. Where th'Hungry feed etc.) Shows the works of Charity Si non vultis in
ista eremo siti mori, bibite charitatem, fons est, quem voluit Deus ponere, ne
deficiamus, and abundantius cum bibamus, cum ad patriam venerimus. If you would
not dye in the Wilderness with thirst, drink charity, It is a Fountain, which
God has pleased to place there, least we should faint, but we shall drink more
abundantly of it, even our Fill, when we come into the Holy Land, into the
Heavenly Canaan. so Saint Augustine.

MORAL VII.
FOrtitude is a Cardinal Vertve, And Virtus in medio posita. Virtue has her
habitation, and being in the Mean, wherefore to consider Fortitude as she is
passive here, she is that Virtue that moderateth Grief, whereby a Man
undantedly undergoes difficulties, and bears things that are averse to his
natural Disposition with a patient mind, and a preparation or Fortification to
That, and Active Fortitude is called Resolution. The excess of Fortitude is
Rashness and too much Boldness; The defect thereof, is Timiditie, and too
much Softness. Perfect Fortitude is conversant with terrible things with an
unshaken mind for honestie's sake, for a good Cause: That which is imperfect
Fortitude is either Irrational, by which he runs into Dangers at unawars, not
Knowing the greatness of their mischief, so unexperienc't men are Soldiers;
Or Civil, as he that is bred in the Laws for the maintenance of the same, and
for Reward defends Country Rights; Or Experimental, by which a man goes into
and frequenteth dangers, that he has often past through and overcome with the
paralogisme of a hope, that he shall still escape, he shall still have the
better on it; Or Irascible, by which a man burning with desire of Revenge leaps
into Peril. Or Fiduciary, whereby a man assists, or rescues another; Or
Mercenary, whereby a man acts stoutly for a Reward; Or Feminine, by which a
man is as courageous, as A Lion in defending his Own, and as hardy as a Cock in
defending Another. The most of these are Imperfect. That only is perfect
Fortitude, which expresses Valor in a good Cause; The witness in that Cause
is the Conscience; The Law is Reason, whose maxim and Principles are from
Religion. How can that be without Religion, which adapteth to it. No Religion
without Faith. Faith then is not only the Back to the Edge and force to the
Point of Valor, but it is shield of Defense. It sharpens and directs both.
Faith is the Engineer for the fortification of Valor. He goes most gallantly
on, that goes on in Gods name; And he endures most stoutly, that suffers for
Gods sake. In both he does though hard Duty, yet Christian service.

PERSPECTIVE VII.
It Was odly dreamed (Dreams odd things be.)
A sailing Ship in Air to see;
With Rudder like a Vultur's Train,
That steered her through the lucid Maine.
The Sheets were made of Wings of Kites,
The Mariners were Souls, not wights.
From Luna's Country, fraught with store
Of Lading never known before,
From Negromania forth they got,
Which mortals here do call the Spot.
Her course was quick, did sight beguile.
She downward made to'th' floating Isle.
Her cocket was Liregions all,
Which precious stones 'ith'Moon they call:
Whose changing colors Lustres cast,
As every Eye's Delight is placed.
Much like those Catt's Eyes, that do turn
In day to gray, in night do burn.
It seems their Virtue's very rare,
To make the ugly wondrous fair.
Their Port they gained, but feared then shook
The Dreamer's Head, They sunk. He wak't;
And sighed; But starting looked upon
Faith's Finger for his Turquoise stone.
CONSOLATORY ESSAY. 7.
FAith to take Saint Augustine's pious conceit in the Etymology of the Latin
word, has it is Nature in it is name. Fides a facto, and a Deo, from a Deed, and
from God, Interrogo te ergo, Utrum credas? Dicis, Credo. Fac, quod dicis, and
Fides est, I ask thee therefore (says he) whither thou believe? Thou
answear'st. I. Do then, what thou say, and that is faith!

Saint Paul gives the Hebrews a clear Definition, and a full Description of it.
Faith is the Substance of things, hoped for, the Evidence of Things, not seen,
Heb. 11. There shall thou find the Danger in the want of it; the various, and
several Effects of it; the knowledge by it of the Author, and Manner of the
Creation; the Acceptance of Our persons and our Actions in Abel; Freedom from
Death in Enoch; Watchfulness, and Providence in Noah; strong Trust, confidence,
and self-denial in Ahraham; temporal Blessings in Sarah; A firm Relying, a
Resting upon Gods providence for all good things, be it toward a man's self,
or his posterity, in Isaac and Jacob, who bequeathed, what was not then in
their possession; Courage to do, though even to the hazard of life, in the
Parents of Meses; contempt of the World, the Riches, the pleasures of it, in
Moses himself; God's protection of them, that undertake dangerous iourneyes in
the Israelites; Victory by weak means in that of Jericho; Preservation in the
midst of Dangers in Daniel, The three Children; Deliverance from dangers in
Rahab; Victories over dangers in Gideon, Barak, Sampson, Iepthah, Daniel,
Samuel, The Prophets; Miraculous Recovery of Life in the Woman of Sarepta's
Child; A stoutness, and valor in refusing the offers of Life to forsake their
Religion in the seven Brethren in the Maccabees; By enduring Afflictions, in
Name, by mockings, in body by Scourgings, Imprisonment, disconsolate wandering
up and down in Sheepskins, and Goat Skins; In suffering Martyrdom of several
kinds, as stoning, sawing asunder, etc. Was it not A strong Motive then to
stir up the Faith of the Hebrews by the consideration of them of Old? putting
the Blush upon them, if they should not believe in Christ, already come, when
those so long ago, who received not the Promises, did assuredly believe in
Christ before his coming.

How voluntary a certainty of Things above Opinion is Faith, which yet is
placed below Knowledge! O how rich is the treasure of Faith! More to be
desired, and sought, then the most Orient Pearls, then the most resplendent
precious Stones! More to be trusted, to be relied upon, than All the strength
of Man, than the Arms of Princes! More to be travailed for, then all the most
effectual Medicines, than the most Sovereign Balsames! No Guard like it; No
Physic of such Virtue. What does not Faith find out? Against what does it not
prevail? It seiseth upon what is inaccessible. It deprehends, it reaches down
to Us Things, that were unknown; It comprehends, it binds, what is most
furious, what most strong; It apprehends, and make subject to our capacity,
what is beyond the stretch of Time. In the vast Embraces of her Bosom, she
sits down, and, as it were besieges, yea takes even Eternity It Self.

Make hither then, thou tottering Christian! Thou shaken Reed! Thou, that art
in so great Distress by foul Weather! Here is an open Port! Wave it not!
Believe! Believe in thy Savior! Let not thy Curiosity search so much for Faith
in thine Understanding! Seek not to understand, that thou may believe!
Believe rather, that thou may understand. Understanding is a Reward of Faith.
Believe in thy Savior! He is the way; He is the Light; He is the Bread of
Eternal Life; He is the Spring of Never failing Waters; He is the Well of Life
Everlasting; He is the Truth, to direct thee; He is All in all to those, that
believe in Him.

Either thou did never believe; not believe, as thou should: Or thy Faith
is out of Breath; very pursie for want of Exercise. It Is in a Lethargy with
Idleness. Crebris otiosa tentatur incommodis: A thousand Temptations are ready
to lay hold on thee! Nay, peradventure have seized upon thee, as the
Philistines did upon Sampson, bound thee, and put out thine Eyes too. No
marvel, thou art in so bad a condition; so sick, so crazie, so full of
Quames, and swoonings. Betake thee to a Prayer! Waken that sleepy Heart of
thine! Will it, nill it! Lift up thy Hands! And, though but a good Thought with
it! Christ will hear thy Faith, when it cries in thy Bosom. Cry out with
failing Peter on, yea sinking in the troubled Waters. Lord, help! or I perish!
Christ then takes thee by the Hand presently. Let thy Heart, Thy fainting
heart, claspe Faith! Faith will lay hold on Christ, and Christ becomes, thy
strength, thy Savior, thy Redeemer. Quod oportet, Lex minando imperat; Quod
fidei, Lex credendo impetrat. What belongs to Duty the Law commands under a
Penalty; what belongs to Faith, the Law demands, mercy desires by believing.

Say! Complain! Confess then as the Church in the Canticles to thy Savior!
Look not upon me, because I am black, because the Sun has looked upon me! My
Mother's Children were angry with me: They made me keeper of the Vineyards, but
mine own Vineyard have I not kept. Tell me, O thou, whom my Soul loves! where
thou feedest, where thou make thy flock to rest at noon! For, why should I be
as one that turns aside by the flocks of thy Companions? Is he the Rose of
Sharon? and the Lilly of the Valleys? Cry'thou then! The Fig Tree puts
forth her green leaves, and the Vines with the tender Grape give a good smell;
Arise, My Love! My Fair One! and come away! O my Dove, that art in the Clefts
of the Rock! In the secret places of the stairs! Let me see thy Countenance!
Let me hear thy Voice! For sweet is thy Voice, and thy countenance is comely.
Take us the Foxes! The little Foxes! that spoil the Vines! For our Vines have
tender Grapes. Thy Neck is like the Tower of David, builded for an Armory,
whereon there hang a Thousand Bucklers; All shields of mighty men.

What though thou be at a loss? thy Faith grows stronger; more earnest.
What, if thou can not find him? What though thou call'st Him, and He gives
thee no Answer? What though the Watchmen; that go about the City find thee?
smite thee? wound thee? and the Keepers of the Wall take away the Veil from
thee? On still! Thou shall find him in an humble walk; When thou go down
into the Garden of Nets, whither he is gone to see the Fruits of the Valley,
and to see whether the Vine flourished, and the Pomegranates budded, Or ever
thou art aware, thy Soul makes thee, as the Chariots of Amminadab, thy faith
will run swiftly unto him, and call after him: Return! Return, O Shulamite?
Return! Return, that we may look upon thee! What will ye see in the Shulamite?
As it were the Company of two Armies. Thou art then thy Beloved's; and His
desire is toward Thee.

Now, beloved Christian, hold fast thy Faith! Part not with it! Part with thy
Life first! Which Thou must pay; But not with thine own Hand. Believe, and Live!

CANTO. VIII. The Camp of Resolution.
1.
REviving Soul, march on! The Day is clear!
To Resolution's Camp now draw'st thou near.
Some sculking Enemies behold I
But other some, picqueiring, bold,
At Circumspection's Scouts do disappear.
Thick Woods, loose Boggs the Passions hold;
Whence quick excursions they make out;
And often their Multitude is manly fought;
Often foiled, discovered by the quick-ey'd Master-Scout.
2.
From Vice's strengths are frequent Inrodes made.
Stern Injury, armed Impudence invade
High Resolution's well-kept Field:
But his stout men do scorn to yield.
Temerity does fleeing loose his Blade;
Which Self-Opinion, Name to gild,
With cunning folly seeks to own;
To Pride, as if redeemed by Him, it is shown.
Poor Cowardice commits theft in night, unknown.
3.
Wild passions muster often themselves amain;
March quick with hot Incursion on the plain.
Wrath leads as Van; Revenge, as Rear;
As Battle pride; No ranks keeps Fear.
For Marshal Fury counts Order vain,
Hatred does charge; And Envy tear;
Black Treason moves up, and down;
Rebellion's Drums, and Trumpets Noise do drown.
But Slander fights behind. The warre's for virtue's Crown.
4.
Often does their cunning seem to make Retreat.
They counterfeit a flight to armed Deceit,
In Ambush close by Treason laid.
To cut of any, so betrayed.
Field-Marshal prudence voideth such Defeat.
Discovered, broke, they fly, dismayed.
Ambition leaves his tired Horse;
And prodigality does run his course;
In Bogge Vainglory dropps, Thus scatt'reth Vice's Force.
5.
From Idleness, so sick, within her Den,
Sloth could not come. It was not held fit then.
But Jealousy did often show;
Intemp'rance too, that still does grow;
And apish Novelty, that pleases Men;
Ingratitude Friends wu'd not know;
And Curiosity did stay;
Often peeping through a hedged narrow way.
Ill Education likewise was in Field this day.
6.
Prosperity, Adversity aside did stand.
Voluptu'ousness made near to prosper's Band;
Despair then to advorso ran,
Desiring Him to save the man.
For those fair Quarter held on Either Hand.
At home did swearing ban;
And Covetise at home did hide
Among his Bags, that covered every side;
And superfluity, with many more, that there abide.
7.
How bravely Resolution took his Ground!
From Virtue's ports did bounding Troops abound,
Dexterity the Right Wing led;
And to the Left was Courage Head.
Before Bataile Resolution, while, Trumps sound.
Judgement's Reserve behind was spread.
At Signal given, the Charge was stout!
And Execution's Ordnance lan'd the Rout:
How Vice's Force fell, fled, as this great Gallant fought.
8.
They can but Tory now, the are grown so weak.
A party soon their ragged Troops will break.
As None, so insolent, as they,
In power; once fallen, small Lets will stay
And block their malice, though they would mischief wreak.
On! To the Camp without Delay.
There being safe, thine Eye may tell
Thine Understanding, All in Order dwell.
For every Hut is placed in Rows near's Colonel.
9.
And those are five, fit counselors of war.
Gra've Judgment; He waeighs things as just they are.
Deliberation Time perpends.
Means Disposition points to Ends.
Discretion minds, what may mend or mar.
Straight Moderation wrong things bends.
And Conscience sits Judge Advocate;
And confidence is secret Clarke of State;
And Vigilance is Captain of the Guards, when late.
10.
The Ammunition's Commissarie's place
Wise conversation, that is weary, has.
Of The Victuals Commissary is
Quick providence, prevents Amiss.
Humanity is Herald with a Grace.
Over Pioners Captain Labor is.
Fidelity repayres the Works.
Within which None, that is not employed well, lurks.
All Duty do perform, as Christians against the Turks.
11.
The Huts in Streets are placed; to 'th' General
As Heart in Body, that gives Life to All;
At Each street's end's the Captain's Tent.
His Colors there stand shot, and rent;
Whose Trump, or Drum his Language is to call.
By sound, or Beat they knowe's Intent.
But mark! The Camp's A strength, well made.
Ten Curtains scowre the Bulwarke's Face, and Shade.
Scarpe, Parapets, Graffe, Counterscarpe bid none invade.
12.
Five Ports there are (and Sent'res to Each Gate)
For Soldiers marching out, and in there at.
Each Draw bridge ore the Graffe does lie,
Where are fit Ordnances planted by;
Without round does A Line circumvallate;
In which Tenailes, Redoubts you Spy.
Each Bulwark has Great Guns command.
In proper places Sentinels there stand.
To patience Dwelling now from hence we must disband.
PERSPECTIVE VIII.
A Camp is an Artificial place of strength: a Fortification for an Enemy,
against an Army, anciently used by great Commanders and Generals, to secure
their Soldiers, and the Train belonging to them. It is not Ager, a field for
the Plough-share, but Campus, a field of War, from whence this Word is derived.
And a Camp is not a place of Defense, but of Offense, from whence Forces may
annoy an Enemy. So sometimes it is used by Military Power to sit down before a
Fort, Castle, Town, or City, to begirt, besiege, distress, and take such places
by Assault, Surprise, or Stratagem.

Resolution is the fixing of Courage, and the vigor of Fortitude; Here more
especially it is the Spirit, and Intentive strength of Faith, a Christian
earnestness of Mind set to perform Gods Commands, with a valiant Courage,
maugre all resistance, peril, or Temptation, as also to suffer therefore, and
undergo upon all occasions with an undanted mind, what Peril soever, Cross,
Calamity, or what Evil can betide, as also a determinate purpose to master and
overcome the Passions, the treacherous Rebels of the Mind.

Fortitudo est Virtus pugnans proaequitate, says Cicero. Thus Resolution is an
Excellent Commander to Order the unruly Affections, to keep them to Duty. Such
a Caesar S. Gregory means in 8. Book of Morals, saying, Fortitudo justorum est
carnem vincere, propriis voluntatibus contraire, delectatione^m vitae
praesentis extinguere, hujus mundi aspera pro aeternis praemiis amare,
prosperitatis blandimenta contemnere, adversitatis malum in cord superare. The
Gallantry of a Christians Resolution, is to Conquer the Flesh, to withstand
Inbred Appetite, to oppose natural desires, to combat, and overthrow our own
Inclinations, to delight in hardship, for Heavens sake, and to make nothing of
the Thorns and Rubs of this World for the Reward of hereafter; to contemn the
blandishments, and smoothings of Prosperity, and with a noble heart to tread
upon, and scorn the fear of Adversity. Hence is the Canto styled The Camp of
Resolution.

1. Reviving Soul] Is as one that has swounded, is fetched again with Hot
Waters: or as a condemned person, that has newly obtained his Pardon; So the
Soul is raised from death to life, from sin to grace by Regeneration of Faith,
by being Newborn in Christ, whereby it rejoices in the Comforts of the Spirit.

March on! We proceed in a Christian course with cheerfulness.

The day is clear] To the visibility of Faith, there is a shining forth of the
Truth; Christ is made manifest unto us.

To Resolutions Camp now drawst thou near) Thou approachest, and obtainest
strength, and ability to Performance to do, or endure; thou have gotten well
onward to the Power of Resistance of Temptations.

Some skulking Enemies behold!) Consider thy Corrupt Inclinations, and the
subtilty of Temptations; observe the rising of thy Passions.

But other some picqueiring bold) Picqueiring is by small numbers of Horse,
which are termed Parties, go forth from their Camp, Garrison, or Quarters,
either to seek booty, or to surprise careless Enemies; or to fetch in Scouts of
the Enemy for Intelligence; or to discover the manner of the Enemies Posture;
or to beat up Quarters, and to give Alarm; Sometimes to dare the Enemy, and to
seek to draw him out, and engaging him by offering to fetch in somewhat that is
in his eye, which in Honor he must not part with; therefore are such
Adventurers said to be bold.

At Circumspection's Scouts do disappear) Temptations and Affronts of the World
are not forward to appear, when watchfulness is in the Thoughts, and wariness
attends the Senses, and Actions, that nothing be done inconsulte, without
consideration; That the ends of Intentions, and Purposes, be looked upon
through Desires prompting to them, which are their beginnings. Temptations
vanish when they are thus taken notice of.

Thick Woods) Ignorance bewildes, and fascinates with their gloominess, and
Briars. The Shadiness denote the stupidity of Ignorance: the thickness with
Thorns and Rubbage, shows the many michiefs, and disadvantages which accompany
the same. Here is a discovery how Passions lurking in us, watch their
opportunities to carry us out of our selves. Ignorance is the strength wherein
Passions nestle and inhabit.

Loose Boggs) Are the deceitfulness, and pollution of sin, and temptations that
prevail; when they dwell in an Enthralled Mind, they hold it fast, and cleave
to it, that it is hard to get out of their hands, these swallow in mire those
that lay fast in them, and throw dirt at those that part from them. Temptations
keep a correspondence with corrupt Affections.

Whence quick Excursions they make out) Come suddenly upon us to surprise us.
Excursion is a sudden and speedy Marching out of Horse upon Command into the
Enemies Country, to surprise and disadvantage them, and to fetch in Pillage,
Forage and Provisions.

And often their multitude) Sins Temptations are very numerous, and give very
frequent onsets.

Is manly fought) With Christian Courage, to Resist, and beat back; Principas
obst^re, to foil them in their first advance, or at least to overthrow them in
their Charge.

Often foiled, discovered by the quick-ey'd Master Scout) By Circumspection, and
diligent Watchfulness. Watch, lest ye enter into Temptation, Our Saviors
advice.

2. From Vices strengths) The World, the Flesh, and the Devil; corrupt
Affections giving way, and the Passions Assisting.

Are frequent Inrodes made) Invasions, as an Enemy advancing into a Country,
into contrary Quarters, with Regiment, Brigade, or some more considerable Army.

Stern injury) Wrong has a sullen look, and a Churlish hand, sparing none.

And Impudence invade) So bold is sin, and so little outcountenance Temptation.

High Resolutions well-kept Field) Temptations think to give an unlookt for
Onset, and to Daunt or Abate Christian Courage: But that is too high for their
Attempts, too great to be disadvantaged, because it is received from above; and
the Camp is too strong, the mind is better composed and fortified, the
Affections are in better order, than to have such weakness as to be liable to
much disadvantage. The Field well kept is by assisting Grace.

But his stout men do scorn to yield) The Christians affections are better
bent; they account it a dishonor to their Calling and Profession to give
ground, or to cry Quarter! They serve the power of the only strength; their's
is an honorable service; they scorn to yield to Outlaws, Runnagates, and the
weaker force of a base Enemy.

Temerity does flying lose his Blade) Rashness loses both Honor and Power.
Sudden Temptations against Pious Resolution, soon lose their weapons.

Self opinion) A discovery of the baseness of Pride, and the Folly of
Self-opinion like the mad man in Athens that thought all the Ships were his own
that came into the Harbor. It would own others worth, having none it self:
here also it shows how subject that sin is to lying. Superbia and Cupiditas in
tantum est unum, ut nec sapientia sine cupiditate, nec* sine superbia cupiditas
possit inveniri, says S. Bernard. Pride, and desire of having are so much as
one, as neither overweening be found without too much craving, nor the too much
desire of having be entertaind with too much craving.

Poor Cowardice) As baseness of Spirit is impoverished by every Intruder, so
what it gains it is by stealth, and in the dark, and so does it operate upon
weak minds. Thus Temptations would impede Resolution by debilitating Courage,
with stealing upon it in the dark, undream't of, by presenting the shaddows of
interests and Relations. Cowardice does reason politickly, and like a Juggler.

3. Wild passions muster often themseves amain) Temptations reinforce, they will
not give over for once, or twice, making a Christians Life a continual
war-fare: they come still on, and increase their Troops upon us, and then add
more strength, when they find themselves most resisted. Nulla sunt sine
tentationum experimentis opera virtutis; nulla sine p^rturbationibus fides;
nullum sine host certamen; nulla sine congressione victoria But there can be
no good works, without the experiments of, and trials by temptations; there can
be no Faith, without conflicts and vexations; there can be no Combat without an
Enemy; there can be no Victory without an Encounter.

March quick with hot incursion on the plain) Tentations are here arrayed in
battle, their motion is swift, their encounter is very furious, and they come
on upon smooth ground, the place makes them think themselves and their violence
of motion, and excess of malice, which is their false Valor, makes them think
to have the better on it: Now or never they think to gain the Prize; for if
Resolution takes place, farewell staggering of Faith. The field is open, and
they consider not the Reserve, nor who it is that backs him; that power is
unseen.

Wrath leads as Van) Wrath has the command of the first body, and he is
likeliest to carry it; he thinks to rout the whole man; For does wrath when he
breaks into him. Nihil inter insanum and iratum est, non una dies; alter semper
insanit, alter semper irascitur. There is no difference between a wrathful,
and a mad man, not a day; For the one is always mad, and the other ever angry.
Wrath thinks to tear Resolutions force in pieces, as Tigers rend their Prey.
They need not have a madder head.

Revenge as Rear) Revenge comes slow; it steals behind the heart of Man. It is
hard to pull out Cains sin, it is so deep in us; and when it has been thrown
out, it would fain encompass us, or get in at the Postern.

As battle pride) He indeed makes his delight to Domineer over the whole Body,
yea, and Spirit too, but then he is most dangerous. He must ride, and in a
Chariot too, which has these four Horses to draw it. Amor dominandi, Desire of
Command; Amor propriae laudis, Love of his own praise; Contemp^us, Despising
others; Inobedientia, Rebellion. His Chariots Wheels are Boasting, and
Arrogance; Verbosity and Levity. His Charioteer is the Spirit of Pride, and he
is never without his Zanies, which he hurries therein along with him, even to
the overthrow of others, and those are are Amatores mundi, the lovers of the
World. Infraenes sunt Equi; volubiles rotae; auriga perversus; and qui
portatur, infirmus. The Horses are unbridled; the wheels are ever turning; the
Charioteer is madder then his Horses; and the Flatterers that are thus hurried
want as much of understanding as they do of Resolution.

No Ranks Keeps Fear) Multos in summa pericula misit venturi timor ipse mali.
Fortissimus ille est, qui promptus metuenda patitur. The very Fear of
approaching Evil has driven many into miserable Dangers. Fear cannot be kept
in order and by chance wu'd break Resolution's Ranks, because he cannot Keep
his own.

For Marshall Fury counts Order Vain) Such is the opinion of a Mad man. A
fit Marshal for such a disordred Army.

Ha red does charge) Hatred is a Great Accuser, It is so much the better that
he is an open Enemy, Pejora sunt tecta odia, quam aperta, et agnosci amat, qui
odium ostendit, Concealed Malice is worse than that which is declared, He seems
to crave pardon that discovers an intended ill turn. Here Hatred is taken to
press upon Resolution to weaken it. Hatred Visits like Job's Friends not to
try his Faith but to shake it.

And Envy tear) Fuge Invidiam, quae non solum alienos, verum multo magis eum,
quem possiderit, lacerare consuevit. Take heed of Envy! For She not once
rendeth strangers, but teareth much more whensoere She does possess.

Black Treason moves up and down) He casts about to gain advantages and to
design against Religious Resolution.

Rebellion's Drums etc.) Tumults and Noises are raised to shake Resolution.
This kind of Temptations makes use of streperous Music to discompose more
settled thoughts.

But Slander fights behind) Dentes dicti sunt a demendo, Ideo pulchrae linguae
detrahentium dentes vocantur; Quia sicut illi ciborum parts demunt; ita et
istae opiniones hominum corrodunt. Teeth are called so from taking away.
Therefore are the slippery Tongues called Teeth: Because as they divide the
Parts of meats, so detractors do tear the good names of men: and in the worst
manner ever wounding them unseen.

The War's for Virtue's Crown) To rob the Soul of hope of Happiness.

4. Often does their C^^^ing seem to make Retreat) Discovering the Subtlety of
the Temptations of the three Grand Enemies of Christian piety, the World, the
Flesh, and the Devil.

Here the Vices are rallied first, because they are the invaders of the souls
Rest and Comfort.

Field Marshall Prudence Voydeth such Defeat) Prudence here is taken for
Providence. Providentia Dei omnia gubernantur; et quae putatur poena, medicina
est. By the Providence of God are All things marshalled and governed: And happy
is it so. For that which Evil men account a Punishment is the best Physic.

Discovered, broke, they fly, dismayed) Grace Assisting Faith, gives strength to
Resolution to break them, having discovered their wicked Policies.

Ambition leaves his tired Horse) He rides post for his Ends, but having
wearied himself, and his Agents, he either is thrown or so rowted that he is
compelled to leave what was his Advancement, his Honors, and seeks safety
among the Vulgar.

And Prodigality does run his Course) Here Vices and Sins are mentioned as the
Punishers of themselves.

In Bog Vainglory drops) A Swelling Vice is like a Tumor in the Body that when
it breaks shows nothing but rottenness which is a Punishment agreeable to the
Folly.

Thus Scatt'reth Vice's Force) This is the best Conclusion of Wickedness.

5. From Idleness so sick) Idleness moves like stone toward Employment, And
is sick of doing nothing.

Sloth could not come etc.) Sloth is inseparable from Idleness.

But Jealousy did often show) Jealousy is ever stirring.

Intemp'rance too, that still does grow) Intemperance foolishly discovers it
self. It increases still upon those, that entertain her.

And Apish Noveltie, that pleases men) And this no considerable Enemy against
pious Resolution, one not to be neglected. Novelty of Opinions, News, and the
like do very much endanger the settlement of a Religious mind.

Ingratitude Friends wu'd not Know) This is an Enemy to the whole man. This
wu'd cut off the Hands of resolution, and kill the Heart of Charity; A declared
Foe to Grace; This is as forgetful of giving Thanks, as craving handed to
receive Cureesies, as evil minded to return Injuries.

And Curiosity did stay) Here is the Description of the nature of Curiosity, as
of the rest of the Vices; quarit in rem abs onditam, No going without prying
into some secret. But while this is so busy in others Quarters, no notice is
taken of the weakness on's own Guard. Curiosity Seldom parts with him that
will entertain him.

Often peeping through a hedged narrow way) Curiositas for as egreditur, et
exterius omnia considerat, qui sic interna despicit, praeterita non respicit,
praesentia non inspicit, futura non prospicit. Curiosity has much business
abroad, and takes strict notice of what is not it is own business, of what is
without; But he that despises what is within, regards not what is past, and is
as careless of what is present, as he is mindlesse of what is to come. Upon
those things that God has turned the Key, man should not temper with the Lock.
Some things are placed in their straight Limits upon purpose, that they should
not be common. And others are placed in the dark that they should not tempt an
Eye; And some have a Clowd as a Curtain drawn before them, lest their Glory
should strike blind, if not destroy. Satisfied Curiosity is a subtle Enemy to a
Christian Resolution.

Ill Education likewise was in Field this Day] Though ill Education be not a
Vice it self, yet it is Vice's Intimate, and much acquainted, therefore cannot
be out of sin's Company, wheresoever it goes. Want of godly Nurture is a
dangerous means of bringing Adversaries upon Piety.

6. Prosperity, Adversity aside did stand] These are Evils in themselves. These
are Hermaphrodites utriusque Sexus. They neither Friends, but as they are used
or abused, so declare.

Voluptuousness made near to prospers Band] Yet it is a difficult thing for
prosperity not to exceed. Pleasure is often tickling the Elbow of prosperity.

Despair then to Adverse ran] It is still attempting a miserable condition.

Desiring him to save the Man] By this seeming contrariety of speech is
expressed the Viperous nature of Despair that speaks to destroy by being
nourisht, alluding to the Fable of the Countrieman, and the Snake in Aesop,
whose commiseration had like to have cost him dear. He brings the dying Snake
unto the fire, where reviving it is ready to sting him for his kindness.

For these fair Quarter held on either hand] Neuters as they are declared Foes,
so they are no certain Friends.

At home did swearing banne] This Sin curses it self; And is it is own Chief
punisher. It keeps within it is Circle like a conjurer, and too often raises
the Devil. Sin is not so much as a seeming good to any, and a great mischief to
it self.

And Covetise at home did hide] It lives as though it lived not, like a Snaile
in his shell in Winter. Hiding here is the neglect of use of what it has. A
curse that attends it; Therefore is the Covetous properly placed next him, that
uses Execrations. As the one raps out Oaths, the other rams in Bags; Both are
conversant with their gods.

Among his Baggs, that covered every side] These are the gods of Covetousness
and his protection. Quantum nummorum habet in arca, tantum habet and fidei.
Chest and Conscience fill and empty alike. Here Is no Religion without an Idol.

And Superfluity with many more, that there abode] Exorbitancy has all his
Rooms filled with wickedness. A devil is in every corner.

7. How bravely Resolution took his Ground] Here follows in this Stanza the
Description of the Army of Virtues, and how they behaved themselves in the
Battle. They are described last; because they keep the Field; and in this
Christian matter of moment obtain the Victory.

It is no less Judgment, then Advantage for a General to choose the best
Ground, as well as to gain the Wind and the Sun for so great a Dispute, as that
of A Field. That Ground is faith, upon which Resolution cannot fail.

From Virtue's ports did bounding Troops abound] The Ports are places here from
whence Assistance is sent. So prayers by obtaining from above do send fresh
strengths to second and supply the weakness of our spirits. Whereupon they are
styled bounding Troops. For as a bounding Horse does rise from Ground and
charge, does jump upon the Earth; Prayers mounting up to heaven come swiftly
down with obtained Blessings. Mounting Troops signify also rejoicing in
Spirit, which always accompany holy Resolution.

Dexterity the Right Wing led] We must in the first place use our best skill,
and Activity to move every way, if we mean to resolve well. Dexterity leads
also the Right wing for his agility, and quickness. It Is best to resolve well
betimes.

And to the Left was Courage Head] The left is said to be next the Heart.

'Force Battle Resolution, while Trumps sound] To animate all the Spirits
against so great and violent a contention.

Iudgement's Reserve behind was spread] All occasions of doing good are to be
placed near; but the only and maine assistance is that from above, to rely upon
Christ by Faith then want we not assisting Grace.

At signal gi^en the Charge was stout] This contention betwixt the Soul and
Satan with all his Temptations of the Flesh, and the World are resembled here
to the Form of drawing up in Battalia, and the striking of a Battle, wherein
the signal must first be given, and then the violence of the Charge begins as
here betwixt these Mortal and Spiritual Enemies.

And Execution's Ordnance lan'd the Rout] Obedience to God's commands cutts
down Temptations. It is said, lan'd the Rout, from the Force of Ordnances that
cutteth through bodies of men, and numbers of Soldiers, making void spaces
like Lanes; Or from destroying sin.

How Vice's Force fell! fled! as this great Gallant fought!] When pious
Resolution bestirs himself and draws up his strength of Faith, the World
forsakes us, the flesh fails, and is disheartened; And the Devil takes his
flight.

8. They can but tarry now] This eight Stanza describes, how weak Temptations
will appear, when Resolution has got the Day; Less Opposition then so it be
continued and watch kept, will keep off rebellious Temptations; denoting also
the base Nature of such enemies, their insolence and Cowardice, concluding it
with an Invitation of the Pilgrim to Resolution's Camp, both for safety and
Refreshment; as also whetting desire to go and take notice of the Excellency of
Resolution, and the happiness of that Place (which intimates the whole man)
wherein he has Residence; how well all things are ordered under him; And needs
they must, being under Gods Guidance and Blessing. Discovering in the close the
safety and Beauty of Obedience.

9. And those are five, fit Counselors of War] A wise few are enough for a
counsel. Here every one speaks his own interpretation in this Stanza,
deciphering what virtues are necessary to so excellent Resolution; Beginning
the relation of the Commanders and Officers in the Camp, which is the Heart.

10. The Traveller, or Guide proceeds in the relation of the former Stanza,
mentioning the several Offices, and at last speaks the purpose of all this,
which is, to make good the Spiritual Warfare, to maintain Religion, and not to
shrink in a good cause.

11. The Huts in streets are placed to'th' General] The Generals Tent is pitched
in the midst of the Camp, to be fit to command and regard all Parts: The Heart
is this Tent, Resolution the General; several Graces are his Officers, several
operations are the Huts, and Affections are the Soldiers. The Colors are the
Cross, the Drum and Trumpet is the Preaching of the Word that directs to Arms
and encourages to the fight. The Camp is the whole man. Ten Curtains are
obedience to the Ten Commandments, which is accepted as performed by a working
Faith through Christ. Scarpe is resistance of Evil, Parapets cheerfulness in
working, Graffe Mortification of our Members; Counterscarpe Despising of
Dangers, All which forbid Invasion, and make the strength of Resolution
impregnable against Temptation.

12. Five Ports there are] The Five Senses are the Five Ports.

And Sent'res to each Gate] Several sorts of Warines, according their several
places. Steadfastness of Look watches the Eyes. Aversion from Evil Discourse
guardeth the Ears. Abstinence attend the Taste, and Lips. Innocence prevents
the sent of Pleasures, and Integrity keeps the hands from touching Foul things.
These suffer none to pass without The Word. The Drawbridge is the Tongue,
which is drawn by silence, and let down by Reason. The Ordnance planted by its
Severity.

Without round does a Line circumvallate] This alludes to an outward strength
made by Engineers according to Generals Commands about their Camps, especially
used when they set down before Towns at their intended Leaguers: and are to
prevent the invading, or relieving Enemy from doing them sudden injury, as also
from too much streightning their Camp, and this is done by an out-line at
Proper distance, and according unto proper form and place in proportion to
their Camp, and number of Force; Which Line is termed the Line of
Circumvallation, as about a Town the Garrison and Force in it draw a Line of
Communication to secure themselves against a Leaguer upon an Enemy sitting down
before them, and encamping upon them. This Line has Tenails at fit distance to
strengthen the Line; also Redoubts, both which have Curtains to scowre their
Faces. Tenails are Triangular Fortifications; Redoubts are square Forts for
Courts of Guard. This Line is that of Circumspection. Tenails are prevention of
occasions of Evil, and the Redoubts are Consultation not to admit any thing
rash, on the opposition of evil. Thus you see how much work is required to a
Christian Resolution.

MORAL VIII.
REsolution is from Fortitude. Fortitude from God. The Lord be praised for ever
and ever: For Wisdom and strength are his. Dan. 2. 20. Whosoever is endued
with true Virtue is valiant: And whosoever is valiant so, neither rashly
dares, nor inconsideratly fears. He is the right valiant Man that can be
temperate, will be moderate, and dares be just.

Excellently sings Divine Boethius, de consol lib. 3. metr. 5. Express.

Qui se volet esse potentem,
Animos domet ille feroces;
Nec victa libidine colla
Foedis submittat habenis.
Etenim licet Indica long
Tellus tua jura tremiscat,
Et serviat ultima Thule;
Tamen atras pellere curas,
Miserasque fugare querelas
Non posse, potentia non est.
Who great wu'd swell his name,
Fierce Passions let him tame,
Not yield his conquered Crest
To Lust, by base Reins pressed.
For though far Indies ground
Should quake, when that does sound,
At Distance Thule obeys;
Yet if thou can not raise
Cares storming siege, nor cast
Griefs far, No power thou have.
The Ten Half-Moons to the Ten Bulwarks of Resolution, are these.

1. Malum est cedere malis, and iis libertatem suam dedere.

It is a mischief to give place to evils, and to subject our liberties to such
Tyrants.

2. Magnum est Malum far non posse Malum, and infoelix est, qui far nequit
infelicitatem.

It is a greater mischief not to be able to undergo Evil, and he is very
unhappy that cannot endure misfortune.

3. Aequus animus, and bona conscientia est optimum aerumnae condimentum.

A patient mind, and a quiet conscience are the best seasoners of Troubles.

4. Res adversae nulli sunt malae, nisirepugnanti, and aspera placide ferendo
leniuntur.

Adversity is not evil to any, but him that resists it. Harsh things are
smoothed up by a gentle bearing.

5. Calamitas est efficere virtutis gymnasium.

Calamity is a strong exercise of Virtue.

6. Rosa inter spinas, inter difficultates virtus, inter curas gloria.

The Rose amidst the Prickles, among difficulties Virtue, and in a crowd of
cares hovereth Glory.

7. Miseros metiora sequentur.

Better things attend those that are in misery.

8. Fortiter ille facit, qui miser esse potest.

He does command, not undergo,

That calmly steers in storms of woe.

9. Si in unum evicti, cuncta sua mala contulissent, futurum ut propria
deportare domum, quam aliena eligere mallent.

If every man were agreed to bring to one heap all their burdens, he would
rather load himself again home, then carry another.

10. Homo timidus, ipse sibi maledicit.

A faint Heart gives the denial to his own hope.

PROSPECT VIII.
THe maimed Trunks of Civil Wars,
Do dye with wounds, and live with
Their reckless Fury does undo (scars.
Next man. For blindness knows not, who.
The Brother tilts his Brother through.
The Sacred Beds forget their Vow.
The impious Son with dagger stands
Against his Father, and s Commands.
The Mother shreeks to see her child
By cruel hands of Life despoild.
The Temples steely Fists profane,
And hither, thither troopeth Bane.
Yea, Sacrilege, that sin of sins,
Does grasp, yet loses, what it wins.
Amazement is in every eye,
Not knowing, how to live, or dye.
Such storms stern Passions often raise.
When Reasons down, what then obeys?
Religion gone, All Death involve.
In Quest of both it is best Resolve.
CONSOLATORY ESSAY. VIII.
VIrtue is the refining of Nature to an Eminence; a leading her up to the Top,
to perfection; and not only an Extraction of her to a Quintessence, but a
Direction likewise, and impulsion of the mind to the obtaining of what is most
excellent. She was, if not the Philosophers Goddess, as it were their Good
Angel, their Bonus genius, to find the True God out by. Those Athenians in the
Acts of the Apostles had set a pretty step to Heavenward, when but so far as
an Altar to an unknown God. There was a blind acknowledgement in that; and we
find it soon followed, and had so far obtained Grace, that S. Paul came to them
with the Revelation of the true one, Jesus Christ. For whom they ignorantly
worshipped, Him did he show unto them.

Make a stand then! And view so fair a Lady! She is worthy of a look. For she
is very beautiful. There is a Legitimate Fascination: Look upon her! Eye her
well in her Physiognomy! her Symmetrie! Form! Mein! and Stature! She is not
Fair only, but very comely. Thou losest not by it, if thou fallest in Love.
She is the best Mistress. The most amicable sweetheart.

Look upon her Head! So consider her in her Intellectuals! Have thou seen a
plaited or ribbed Picture, representing it self at some distance in diverse
forms, and several Figures, as thy Station has changed from one side to that
other in the Room as then placed? Such does she thus appear unto thee. In a
Notional, Contemplative, and Theorical manner, thou beholdest her to be
Wis^^^m. In the Practical, Prudence.

Observe her body! So thou look upon in her Morals. So may thou read
Justice in her Will, whose best and soundest parts decline from Evil, are
forward and ready to do Good. Whose subjective Parts (which are her Species)
are General, or Particular. So appears she distributive in her Reward; In her
Punishments. Commutative too, in Bargain, Sale, and the rest. Whose potential
parts are Religion, Piety, Observance, Obedience, Truth, Gratitude, Liberality,
Affability, Friendship.

As she is Moral you may consider her in her concupiscible appetite. Then call
her Temperance, adorned with blushing shamefastness, and innocent honesty; with
the Neck-lace of Abstinence, stomacher of Sobriety, Girdle of Chastity, and
Garment of Modesty.

Her Companions at times are lovely Virgins. Continency handeth Courtesy;
Clemency Meekness; Humility studious Regard; Moderation Eutrapelia; Ornament
Simplicity.

As thou look still upon her Morals, mind her likewise in her Irascible
Appetite! And thou must call her Fortitude, whose sinewie, musculous, and
curious Limbs are Resolution, or Magnanimity; Magnificence; Patience, and
longsuffering; Perseverance, and constancy.

So you see how all the rest branch from, or depend upon these four Cardinals,
as upon hinges, but they are Virtues. They are so called Cardinal a Cardine, a
Hinge. Thou have seen Resolutions Pedigree. He Is Highborn, Grandchild to the
Queen-Regent of the Mind, to virtue.

Wud'st thou know what he is? He is a Captain, he is a General, and fit to be
so. He is both valiant, and active. He is not too hasty in the Order of his
Designs; nor too slow in their Execution. But is steady in their settlement, as
the Laws of the Medes, and Persians, that were not to be revoked, not to be
removed. He will through with his undertaking: No let must stop him: No Enemy
gainsay him. His aim is Noble; his end is Honorable: For that he strives.
Thither he must. He slights a Treaty with the Vices. He is accustomed to their
specious pretenses; he understands their Rhetoric, and is acquainted with
their Enticements. He knows the Golden Balls thrown in Atalanta's way. He
resists or diverts their purposes. He walks upright; and on still.

Come hither then, Weak Brother! and take example! Have a Uertigo in thy Head?
Like enough, It may be blown in by some New Doctrine. Have no certain Pulse?
nor Pace? Do stagger up and down? Do reel, like a Drunken Man? It may be
so. There is a Drunkenness in the Fancy. There is an Intoxication of the
Understanding. Disorderly Passions are the Ebriety of the mind. Is it so with
thee? Take Resolution to avoid Evil! Take Resolution to do good! Thou shall
find a cure. Thou shall become sober. He, that is desperate is a Coward. He,
that is Resolute, is Valiant.

Take Courage, Man! Put on Resolution! Be a Numantine, in the better Sense! And
let not a Scipio, in the worst, overcome thee! Lose not thy Liberty, for the
glory of a Christian! O happy Numantia (Says that defeated Conqueror) which
the Gods had decreed should Once end, but Nere be vanquished! Make good the
Liberty, that God has given thee! Be not led captive by Passion! though never
so great. Let no torment debase thee! Let no Grief bring thee so low, as to
committ any thing unbeseeming a Noble Heart! Nor wish death! Nor fear it, when
it comes! It Is terrible only to Him, that thinks not of it, before it comes.
It Is horrible to him that forces and hasteneth it before it is Time.

Do thou fear God? O bey Him! Forget him Not! Nor thy Self! Hasten not an
End to Those Days, that of themselves do poast unto it! Let no Occasion prompt
A Lie to thee, to frame a base Excuse, to blind, to tempt thee to committ,
which in it self is not only most Unlawful, but most abominable! Socrates
(that wise man) by the Light of Nature can tell thee so much, like a Divine:
Thou must not suffer thy Soul to depart from the Sentery wherein she is placed
in this Body without the Leave of her Captain. So weighty a matter as Death
(says, the Divine among the Heathen, Plato) ought not to be in man's Power.

If thou find'st thy weakness, fortify thy Self by Degrees! Become Master but
of One Resolution! Thou may become Master of thy Self by it. One step is the
means to move further upward; to raise thee to a lofty Room. Resolve, thou will
avoid One Oath! but One Hour! It may produce A Day. Resolve, thou will not go
into that bad Company! But this Time! It may take thee off from Another.
Resolve, to deny thy Heart, but One unjust Request! Mark, how it will cool from
offering thee Another! If thou did not give the Devil encouragement, thou
should not peradventure have his Custom. Resolve to say but One Prayer! Take
that, which thy Lord has taught thee! It is but a short one, lest it might
seem irksom to thee. Resolve to say it humbly! In thy Heart! Resolve to do it
humbly! On thy Knees too! All Reverence of Soul, and Body is too little for so
Great a Majesty. Whosoever wu'd chill thy Reverence, wu'd Kill thy Devotion;
murder thy Prayer; and by Consequence thy Soul. Have the Angels no Knees? thou
have. Let thy Heart suit their Reverence! Let thine Intellectual Nature do a
like worship! Let thy Body perform it is own. O come let us fall down, and
worship, and Kneel before the Lord Our Maker. For he is the Lord our God, and
we are the People of his Pasture, and the Sheep of his Hands (this can not be
remembered too often) Prostrate then! The Humiliation of thy Body will humble
thy Soul! It will abate the strength of thy proud Flesh.

Resolve, as much as possibly thou can, to think of Nothing then, but God,
and thy Prayer! and thy self in it to Him! Conceive, it is the Sacrifice of thy
Soul! And that thou then discoursest with the Deity! Think of thy Savior
more, than thy Sin! Do see Another Law in thy members, warring against the
Law of thy mind, and bringing thee into Captivity to the Law of Sin, which is
in thy Members? And thereupon groanest out Saint Paul's words? O wretched Man,
that I am! Who shall deliver me from the body of this Death! Seek to make his
Application! I thank God through Jesus Christ Our Lord, by whom we have now
received the Atonement.

Resolve One good Deed of Charity! That will warm thy Heart, That may kindle
a holy flame in thy Soul. Resolve to pray, as soon as thou awakest! So thou
prevent'st Sin from taking Possession. With the Psalmist seek him early, in the
morning! Run to thy knees at Noon Day! Or when any Temptation assaulteth thee!
Resolve, not to couch thy Head on thy Pillow, before thy Peace Offering! And
that thou be to God and Man reconciled! Thy Bed may prove thy Grave. And
there is a Resurrection.

Resolve against any Notorious Sin, whereof thine Own Conscience shall arraign
thee Guilty! Make A Covenant with thine Eyes! thine Ears! thy Lips! thy Hands!
thy Feet! and thy Thoughts too! For these are the Tinder of Iniquity. Leave not
God, till thou have obtained A Blessing! Wrestle for it, as Jacob! He loves to
be sought. He delights to hear thee call upon Him; And is pleased to see a
stout Champion; what thou see'kst, is not worth his Giving, if not worth Thy
Contending for.

Strike thy Breast! That thy rockie Heart may be mollified; That it may have
the comfortable Metamorphosis from Stone to Flesh! So shall thou be reconciled
to thy displeased Father; So Christ will own thee; will send the Comforter unto
thee; And thy Body shall become the Temple of the Holy Ghost. Thou shall grow
from grace to grace, even to Eternal Glory.

Take up thine Arms then! With Them the Ingemination, that the Lord delivered
to Joshua! Be strong! and of a good courage etc. Be strong, and very
courageous! that thou may observe to do according to All the Law etc. Turn
not from it to the Right hand, or to the Left! that thou may prosper, whither
soever thou go.

CANTO IX. The Lodge of Patience.
1.
PAce softly on! The Way is deep.
It Is foul with Showers. The Clouds did weep.
Wade through that Slough! This thawed Clay!
That mires. This tires. Best, pick thy way.
Ore some deep Ditches thou must leap;
On bare foot pass sharp Stones on heap.
Through furzie Queaches thou must go;
That prick and wound from Head to Toe.
Mark Sun! and Thou thy Way shall know.
Then come thou breathless unto Sand;
An open Country and a barren Land.
It Is there, The Lodge of Patience does on Crutches stand.
2.
It stands upon a Hilly Plain;
Where Camels Food with Labor gain;
On bitter Broom, on Wormwood, Gall,
On some sour Herbs they diet All;
Both They, and Patience, whom you see
Beside her Lodge, beneath a Tree
That Palm with Shade to Her is Kind.
She Smiles at Rufflings of the Wind.
On Stone she sits, her Head does bind.
An Eagle sometimes does descend;
And lays a panting Dove down by his Friend.
With such his Labor often, her Commons he does mend.
3.
Beneath that Place there runs a Spring;
Whose Waters Sent from Brimstone bring;
Yet is there wholesome Taste most Sweet.
Her Wine it is, and Bath for Feet.
To be in Storms She much delights.
She Is used to Goblins; Not to Frights.
Wild Boars do sometimes pass that Way;
And Tygres, that do seek for Prey.
At her they try, but dare not stay.
She draws a Box, that is hid by Her,
When opening it forth flameth dreadful Fire;
At which, amated they, forsake her Then their vain Desire.
4.
Her stilted crazie seeming Lodge
Has here a Patch, and there a Bodge,
Is lined with Adamant within,
To keep fierce Storms from breaking in.
The torn Thatch Cover over her Head,
Beneath is floared all with Lead.
Two wide Doors are to South and North.
So Heat, and Cold come, and pass forth.
Their Malice she counts little worth.
Her Chambers haunted are with Sprites;
That offer dreadful Visits. Days and Nights
She sings, or sleeps secure, neglecting Fancies Frights.
5.
When Eyes unclose sad Sights appear;
With threatening Dart grim Death seems near.
Ill News of all sorts buzze in Ear,
And say, They Are Tokens sent from Fear.
The Sprites do groan, and make a Noise,
Like starving Prisoners screaming Voice.
With Scourges Others smartly strike.
Another tears, what she does like;
And against her every where is a Pike.
All these she feels; and foils by stay.
To spite them more she fervently does Pray.
They tremble Then, and roar; They vanish soon away.
6.
With sober Pace abroad she walks;
And with her Self, and Heaven she talks;
From whence an Angel comes down;
And shows the Figure of a Crown;
A Viol gives, of Cordial smell;
Of Essence it is for Her, not well.
At Sent whereof she springs with Joy,
Which nothing after can annoy.
Such Comfort Mischief cannot destroy.
A Cot-Lamb skippeth by her Side.
Her Steps to harmless Sports become a Guide.
Often Disadvantages she meets, often turns them quite aside.
7.
Wild Satyrs make their lewd Assaults.
Their Hairinesse cannot blush at Faults.
They mock; They mow; Like Dogs they bark;
And she is robbed by many'a Shark.
But still unmoved She minds Above;
To that Place only points Her Love.
All other Trifles She does scorn.
Her Noble Spirit's better borne.
She smiles at what wu'd make forlorn.
At Home She takes down Fortunes Wheel;
Forth-drawn Disasters she does spin, and reel.
To Providence she gives the Web from Loom of Steel.
8.
Before Her Lodge a Column stands,
As by Semiramis'es Hands,
So vast, so high, of Marble made,
Nor Time, nor Tempest should invade.
Of Constancy this bears the Name,
Heroic Record unto Flame.
On it such worthies Names She writes,
As David; Job, whose Lives were Lights.
With such great Letters She endites
The History of Martyrdom;
That so down to Posterity 't may come;
And, if not Shame, strike Persecution dumb.
9.
Upon the Column's Chapter's writ
In Letters, Large, for Reading It.
MY BODY'S HARD. MY HEAD IS HIGH,
'BOVE FINGERS REACH, OR INJURY.
Aloft does stand an Amazon.
A Snake her Right Foot treads upon.
Her Left Arm's locked within a Shield;
Which bears a Cross in Bloody Field.
Her Right Hand up to Heaven is held.
She boldly looks toward East;
And seems to slight fierce Storm, or furious Beast,
Whens'ere this roars, or that does aim to strike her Breast.
10.
Not far off hence there lies a Shore;
Where breaking Waves aloud do roar;
Where Shipwrackt Mariners were cast,
And like the Waves they cried, aghast.
They wrung their Hands. They tore their Hair.
Saved Life was tortured by Despair.
To the Lodge did crawl, sad Stories tell.
She to her Viol bade them smell.
Their Griefs did vanish. They were well.
Praise then they did begin to Sing.
She bade them take her Diet, sour Herbs, that spring,
They wisely took her Counsel, found them nourishing.
11.
But among the Rest one closely bound
Had hid with Clothes a stinking Wound,
As if a Cancer in his Breast;
Which did devour his Flesh, and Rest.
It was of Age, and Years so old,
That Him incurable it told.
She fetched a Balsame whose rare Power,
With Mildness killed what did devour.
And made it sound within an Hour.
To all that come She gives Cure.
And to restore lost Wits her Way is sure.
And what She heals, is sound, and so will sound endure.
12.
Abroad She often Adventures much;
She does no Difficulty grutch;
And Grace or Charity bestows
Returns with gain for what it owes.
Often has She Cordials fetched as far,
As both the distant Indies are.
From Crescent Turkey, Persian Land;
Or where there is Wealth beneath Command,
Comes Jaquenetta to her Hand;
Sherbet of Violets, Lemons, made
And such rare Juleps Patience makes her Trade
To cure her feaver'd Patients. Drink! Times Flower does vade.
PERSPECTIVE IX.
A Lodge is the lonelie Dwelling of A Keeper in a Park; Of a Ranger in a Chase;
or of a Forrester in a Forest. A Forest is a desert Place full of Woods, and
Copses. It is chiefly frequented by wild Beasts, being their proper habitation.
And many of those Beasts are not more wild, than cruel, a savage Kind of
Creature. Though this Forest within a Wilderness in the pass along the same
the experienced Traveller endeavors to direct the Pilgrim in this Discourse.

The Wilderness is the World. The Forests therein are Cities and most
inhabited Places, The Woods and Copses are the Houses, not only because they
are built with timber, but for their Thickness, and nearness of Position. The
Streets are the Walks. The wild Beasts are the Men. Indomitum Vulgus. The
People, that are not easily tamed; Who are more savage, than those wild Beasts,
devouring not only one another, but their own Kind. So as it is not Lupus
hominem Vorat, the Wolf devoureth the man, but homo homini Lupus, Man is the
Wolf to Man; nay more, Homo homini Demon; Man is a Devil to Man. And that
exceeds the Barbarism, and abomination of Those Anthropophagi Spoken of by
Pliny. lib. 6. c. 30. or those Indian Cannibals of later notice. And more than
that, Homo sibi Demon, Man is a Devil to Himself, the horridest of All. As
though the Devil were weary of or overwrought in mischief against man, and man
had taken his Journey-work.

In such a Place, among such Inhabitants lays the patrimony of Patience. No
where also to raise her Portion. And yet even to a miracle, there lives she
happy, happy in a hope not only, but in a Joincture by Assurance of Happiness
hereafter. Hence is her Habitation properly styled the Lodge of Patience.

1. Pace Softly on!) With care and steadiness.

The Way is deep.) Here the reasons are given for much circumspection. In deep
and miry ways the passenger is more than usually hindered, and he is thereby
more apt to tire. The Ground is deceitful, it is not firm, Such is the World.
Mundus est molestus et magis cavendus. The world is full of molestation, and
therefore must our steps be the more wary, the way is deep ready to swallow us
up.

It Is fowl with Showers) It is very tedious and sad with Sorrows, that abound
therein. Tears are the showrs of the Brain, that proceed from woeful Clouds,
that are there gathered, falling down upon several occasions of Lamentation.

Wade through that Slough!) Meaning the Plunges of Disadvantages in the world.
Dura res est dolor, in motu mollis, Says Seneca. Grief has hard Hands, and
soft Feet.

This thawed Clay) The nature of Clay is a stiff and a hard Earth; Limus ut hic
durescit, Sings Virgil. The Clay hardneth against the Sun, as shutting out his
Beams. Such are bad men's Persecutions of the virtuous, having their hearts
hardened against them. But this is thawed Clay, a sign of Winter, there has
been a Frost. This was a hardening by Cold, by want of Charity. This intimats
that a Difficulty may be made a greater Inconvenience by Passion, and
immoderate Sorrow. A Clod might have been more easily past over, than a Slough
or dissolved Clay is past through.

That mines] Admonet cogitque contemni. The World bids thee leave the World.
Does any man delight in Dirt? It is fitter for swine than good men. And yet see
the unreasonableness of it; the World would fain detain thee, though it is but to
welcome thee with a Mischief. Mundus iste periculosior est blandus quam
molestus, quumse illicit diligi, as S. Augustine: Then intends the World most
mischief, when it changes wrinkles into smiles, and is so wanton as to turn
the Wooer.

This tires] Cares and perplexities are very troublesome: Nay, even Flesh and
Blood, our own Nature, which is but Formata e meliori luto, made of a little
finer Dirt, is a great burden to a Christian Pilgrim in so long a journey, and
so hazardous a voyage.

Best pick thy way] Prevent all Occasions of Evil! avoid all introductions of
mischief! Be very circumspect in all thy words and actions, yea, in thy very
looks too.

Ore some deep Ditches thou must leap] He that leapeth must look before him; he
must not only use Circumspection, but Providence in the untoward passage
through this World. Pleasure is a deep ditch that swallows many; there is no
staying with Delight; It will endanger thee: it is best to leap from that thou
would avoid: do it with all speed and agility: Covetousness is a Ditch that
has no bottom. Have a care of that too, and the like.

On barefoot pass sharp stones on heap] Thou must prepare tenderness of thy
Nature to undergo many cutting discontents, many wounding afflictions. Such
Stones lie not scattered that thou may pass by them. No, they lay on Heaps,
thou must pass over them. On barefoot. Upon necessity thou must Suffer. Do it
then patiently; Go gently! For he that struggles upon those stones, does gaul
his Feet the more, does make his Wounds the Deeper. And they are stones indeed,
they are stones of offense, very grievous, and very obdurat; for they regard
not thy Complaining.

Through furzy Queaches thou must go] These are growths of Furs so thick, as
it is very hard to enter into them, much more difficulty is it to get through
them. Such is the opposition and violence of this world. Its opposition hinders
thee, withstands thee: Its violence goars thee, tears thee: Thou Had need
prepare thee for such a passage; thou had need couch thy self very close.

That Prick and wound from Head to Toe] Though thou art Achilles foot all over;
that thou art penetrable every where, Crosses and Troubles will find out places
every where to wound thee.

Mark Sun! and thou thy way shall know] All Light comes from above. The best
and only Direction is from Heaven. Mark Christ the Son of God! Tread in his
steps! Follow his Example! He is the way; the Son of Righteousness is the Light
also. He has prepared thee both by precept and Example. Read the 13. and 14.
chapter of S. John, The Servant is not greater then his Master, etc.

Then come thou breathless unto Sand] He labors hard that loses his breath.
Breath is the Air of Life. But wherefore do thou toil so? Thou must not think
after so great pains, that when thou have escaped some miseries, thou art freed
from all. They are but to forewarn thee, and to teach thee to endure more.
Change is very pleasing in delights: it is no less in sanctified Sorrows. Thou
come, does show that thou art coming home, coming to heavenward. It is not,
Thou go, as if thou were going abroad, abroad into the World. Thou passest
from Post to Pillar, from Mire to Furs, from Furs to Sand, a Dry, a Barren, a
Hungry place. To Poverty, to Scarcity, to necessities, where there is none upon
the earth to relieve thee. Sand will sooner put out thine eyes, then afford any
thing to fill thy belly, or cloth thy back. Sand is a loose earth; it is
deceitful to thy steps. So are worldly friends very unsteady. The best use of
Sand is, it is the measure of time; such benefit may thy Consideration reap by
the comparison of the barrenness and vanity of this world, with the Solidity,
Fertility, and riches of that to come.

An open Country, and a barren Land] Thou Art in a Desert, a place forsaken by
all Inhabitants, as comfortless, as Solitary. Pleasure dwells in the Country,
but a Curse upon the Land. By the open Country thou may expect hospitality,
but barren Land has shut up doors. Here comfort appeared at first sight, but
sorrow came along with it. In the way of Patience, Comfort will not be from
sorrow neither. There is some ease in changing place or Burden.

It Is there the Lodge of Patience does on Crutches stand] In such a place of
Barrenness of Comforts, in such a Desert of Disertion of Forsakenness, is the
being of Enduring the Cross: It is a Lodge, not a constant dwelling; and
outwardly it stands upon Crutches; it seems ever falling in the Worlds eye, and
very contemptible.

2. It stands upon a hilly plain] Does it stand? There is some comfort in that
yet. Upon a Hill too, and upon a Plain. It is not very high, though it is but
hilly, as it were a hill, yet high enough for the fury of storms, and the Plain
shows it low enough, and even enough for subjection to every Foot. It is open,
and made fit for Injuries.

Where Cammels food with labor gain] What Food? What nourishment can there be
in so barren a place? It is not said that they feed there. This expression of
the Traveller alludes to the Camels that pass the Deserts of Arabia for
Merchant-Trade from Egypt to Jerusalem by Caravans, by Companies of Camels,
that gain their maintenance by their travel, and get their food by their
labor. Their Provender is carried along with them by their Masters care and
providence.

A Camel is an Exotic, a very strange Creature in his Form, and a Forrainer,
or stranger by his Country, yet is much taken notice of by Writers for his
profit in, and excellency for use: Job was very rich in Beasts of this kind:
Three thousand Camels was reckoned in his general account, as a fair part of
his substance. Job 1. 3. Solinus observes of them, that they break no ground
with their Feet in their motion, because their feet and their steps like them
are backward: Sunt illis reciprocis quibusdam palmunculis vestigia carnulenta,
unde and contraria est labes ambulantibus nullo favente praesidio ad visum
insistendi. Their soft fleshy Feet leave very little impression, and that
backward and contrary to the steps of other Creatures, in so much as it is a
hard matter to find where they have gone or strayed. When they drink, they are
best pleased with thick, and troubled Water: Lutulentas aquas captant. They are
light and nimble in their Travel: and they will fast forty days from drink
without taking harm. Camor est curvum, a dorsi curvitate, from the crookedness
or bunch in his back he has his his name, says Isidore: (...), quasi (...)
curvans foemora, from his buckling down his hinder parts. Graeci (...) humile,
and breve dicunt, for that he humbles and shortens his stature when he stoops
down to take up his burden. So Isidore, and Euenus Parius: He feeds upon very
hard meat, and which is rare for a Beast without horns, he ruminates and chews
the Cud. He is useful in War for the bearing of burdens. In banquets (the
Arabians make a dainty of Camels Milk) in Combats, among the Heathen in
Sacrifices: In clothing by the Texture of his hair. His parts are excellent
many ways in Physic and Medicine. He is very reverent, docil, and pious, etc.
A very fit sort of Beasts to accustom near the Lodge of Patience that partakes
of all these qualities.

On bitter Broom, Wormwood, etc. Denote the hardship of affliction.

Patience, etc. Besides her Lodge.] She makes it her Receptacle, not her
dwelling. Her Lodge is her necessary being in this world, not her home.

Beneath a Tree.] The Palm denotes Christ, who is protection and victory.

She smiles at rufflings of the Winds] Knowing who is over her head, and so
near to shade her with his Grace she rejoices in Tribulation, and Persecutions.

On stone she sits] Signifies her meekness and humility, and contentedness,
making a Cushion of her calamities. She sits down upon them, not under them.

Her head does bind] She moderateth Passion, and restrains the wildness of
thoughts and affections.

An Eagle sometimes does descend] S. John because he delivered the height of
the Mysteries of the Trinity, and wrote more sublimely then the rest of the
Evangelists, was called an Eagle, peradventure alluding to the learning of the
Ancients, who did mention Ganimede the Messenger of Jupiter to descend in the
Form of an Eagle. S. Augustine renders the reason thus, Sermon. 34. in D. Joan.
In quatuor Evangeliis, vel potius in quatuor libris unicus Evangelii Joannes
Apostolus non immerito secundum intelligentiam spiritualem Aquilae comparatus,
multo sublimius aliis tribus erexit praedicationem suam, and ita corda erigi
voluit. Nam caeteri Evangelistae tanquam cum homine Domino in terris
ambulabant, de Divinitate ejus pauca dixerunt. Istum autem, quasi piguerit in
terra ambulare, sicut ipse in exordio sui sermonis intonuit, erexit se non
solum super terram, and omnem ambitum aeris et caeli, et super etiam omnes
exercitus Angelorum, omnemque constitutionem invisibilium potestatum, and
pervenit ad eum, per quem omnia sunt, dicendo: In principio erat verbum, etc.
Only John the Apostle in the four Gospels, or rather in the four Books of the
Gospel, is not without great cause compared according to the excellency of his
high spiritual understanding to an Eagle, in that he raised his delivery and
preaching thereof to a far sublimer pitch then any of the other three,
thereby seeking to elevate the hearts of believers. For the rest of the
Evangelists wrote as if they walked with the Lord upon the earth, as man
speaking but few things of his Divinity. But he as if it grieved him to walk
upon the Earth, did in a manner Trumpet forth in the beginning of the same, and
erected himself not only above the Earth, and above all the Regions of the
Air, and the motions of the Heavens, and above the Powers of the Angels, and
above all constitutions of invisible Orders, he comes at first to him by whom
all things were made, saying; In the beginning was the Word, etc. This has
relation likewise to the Successive Ambassadors of the Word, and
Sub-administrators of the Ordinances. This has reference likewise to the
Ravens that fed Elias by the River Cherith: 1 Kings 17. 6. As also to the Angel
that visited him, finding him asleep under the Juniper Tree in the Wilderness,
when he fled for his life from Jezabel, where at his sitting down he had
desired to dye, and where the Angel provided him a Cake to eat, and a pot of
Water to drink, bidding him, Up, and eat.

And lays a panting Dove down by his Friend] Friend to God, and God is her
Friend. For Deo judicium derelinquit, and a Deo Misericordiam consequetur: She
refers Judgment to the Lord; and from God shall she receive Mercy. She sends
up Judgment to Him, He again will bestow Mercy upon Her.

A panting Dove] The Word of God, which brings spiritual Peace along as Noah's
Dove, that returned with the Olive Branch in her Bill unto the Ark; and lays
it down by Her; so descend Gods Blessings to relieve the Distress of patient
Souls.

With such his Labor often her Commons he does mend] Her Commons is continual
Hardship. And behold, the wonderful Goodness of Almighty Mercy, he mends it
with the Word which is the Bread of Life, and with Peace, even of Conscience
which is the Banquet of the Soul.

3. Beneath that Place there runs a Spring, whose etc.] Denoting the many
Troubles that do continually arise, and seem to stifle at the first Scent, at
their first Perceivance, according to the Nature of Brimstone, whose Smoke
suffocates: but it is very wholesome and sweet in the Stomach. It has likewise
an Eye cast upon Compassion with others Sorrow. Tanto Quisque perfectior est,
quanto perfectius sentit dolores alienos. So much more perfect is our own
Patience, when it has a Sense of another Misery.

Her Wine it is, and Bath for Feet] It is a Cordial to the Soul, and it takes
away the Wearisomness of Labor. It gives a Cheerfulness to Travail, and is a
Smoother of the roughness of Accidents.

To be in Storms She much Delights] Custom of Enduring gives a Passage to
Difficulties with Ease; alluding to the Nightingale that sings most sweetly
in the midst of an April Storm. The Soul has her Dittie too: God is our Hope,
and strength, and Help in Troubles; ready to be found. Therefore will not we
fear, though the Earth be moved, and though the Mountains fall into the midst
of the Sea. Though the Waters thereof rage and be troubled, and the Mountains
shake at the Surges of the same. Yet there is a River, whose Streams shall make
glad the City of God. God is in the midst of it: Therefore shall it not be
moved. God shell help it very early. Psalm. 46.

She Is used to Goblins, not to Frights]. She is more accustomed to Afflictions,
then overcome by them. They are her sad Companions, not her insulting
Conquerours. Children being grown toward Man will not be scared with Bugbears.
Poaker then appears to be no more then a Beggar.

Wild Boars do sometimes pass that Way] According to those Epigrams of
Martial. Lib. 12. Epig. 14. Si te delectant animosa pericula, tu scis,
Tutior est Virtus, insidiemur apris.


Englished thus:

If daring Ills do please thee, thou do know
Though Bores beset, yet Virtues safer so.
Martial. Lib. 8. Epigr. 78. Omnis habet sua dona dies; Nec linea dives
Cessat, and in Populos multa Rapina cadit.
Nunc veniunt subitis lasciva Numismata nimbis,
Nunc dat spectatas tessera larga feras.
Thus rendered.

Each Day has Gifts; No sand but heapeth Wealth
And on the Peoples Heads drops frequent Stealth.
Now wanton Coins do fall in sudden Shours,
Beasts Bounty shows, whose Savagenesse devours.
And Tygres that do seek for Prey] Under the Ferocity is shadowed the Violence
of Temptations; and the Rage of the World against the Virtuous. The Spite of
Malice; and the frequent Attempts of Injury.

At her they try but dare not stay] Patience overcomes all Temptations, it
banisheth Attempts, that find they take not their wished Effects. Vice is
ashamed to look Virtue in the Face long: It is too weak-sighted, It is daunted
with the others Eye. She draws a Box that is hid by her;
When opening it forth slameth, etc.


The Box is the Heart, the flaming Fire is Charity which overcomes with
Forgiveness. And is said dreadful in way of resemblance to the Fires
Adventurers use in the Night, or other times in unknown and savage Countries to
fright away furious wild Beasts, that might otherwise endanger their Safety.

4. Her stilted crazie-seeming Lodge, etc.] Injury and the foul Weather of the
World tears many a Hole in the Coat of Patience, which she patcheth and
botcheth with fair Construction pitying their Mistakes.

Is lined with Adamant within etc.) Though it seems very weak and shaken
without to vulgar Eyes, yet it is lined with Adamant with Strength from Above,
which protecteth against the Malice, and the Mischief of the World, the Flesh,
and the Devil, Who may hitt Job in his Children, in his Substance, yea in his
Person, but shall not be able to touch his Life, nor to shake the integrity of
his Faith.

The torn Thatch Cover ore her head] Outward Poverty has inward Riches; But
the intention here was to signify, that Divine Protection over religious
hearts, is their continual Guard though not discerned by the world, who account
them, as Castawayes, that Suffer, and who measure, All as the Turks, by the
Event. As Lead is a very pliable metal For use; It is a warlike Metal also
For shot, for the Musket, and the like. So Patience is not without Courage.
Thatch without, Lead within, Contempt without, within Resolution.

Beneath is floared All with Lead] Patience is here noted to be the Compound of
Humility and Valor.

Too wide Doors are to South, and North] These Quarters of the Heaven send
forth either favorable, warm, and gentle, or blustering, impetuous, and sharp
winds. These denote Prosperity and Adversity. The wide Doors Signify free
Entertainment, Let there be Heat or Cold, they are welcome to Patience as they
come, she is not disturbed, they have free Entrance, they have free passage.
Naked came I out of my mothers womb and Naked shall I return thither. The Lord
has given, the Lord has taken, blessed be the Name of the Lord. That was
patient Job's Quietus est for his Losses.

Their malice She counts little worth] Alluding to Job's Friends; Patience
overcommeth malice by enduring.

Her Chambers haunted are with Sp'rits] This points at Job's messengers. One
Evil treads upon the Heels of another. Such News rides poast to try the
Patient. One Affliction, one Trouble or another is still at the good man's
Elbow.

She sings, She sleeps secure etc.] She is undisturbed. Her mind is settled on
things above, as she accounts these Lower matters, but Dreams and Fancies.

5. When Eyes unclose sad Sights appeare] Nulla dies sine dolor. Every Day
produces new Disasters. When we do look for light
Grief's Tears ore cloud the Sight.


One spectacle of Grief or other is the Monument of our Affections, and shows
us the Tomb of our Selves.

With threatening Dart grim Death draws near] Omnem creed Diem, que non
sperabitur hora. Think Death with every Day does come
To dig the Grave, or build a Tomb.


Affliction is like sickness the warning-piece of mortality. Persecution like
a Ruffian taks Patience by the Throat to fright her. Yet she is unmoved, though
Ultimum terribilium mors, the terriblest of All things Death appear.

Ill News of All Sorts buz in Eare] Temptations of all Kinds, that assault
thee, and insinuate with thee.

And Say they are Tokens sent from Fear!] The Falsity of their Pretense. This is
the world's nature to send poison in in a present. Job's Friends pretend
Comfort, in a Visit, but when they open it, it is Affliction.

The Spirits do groan, and make a Noise] The frailty of Nature by our own
Passions within us, do groan, the malice of the world seems to shreike, and the
Devil encompassing the Earth, and seeking whom he may devour does roar, All
these as one conspire to amaze the Resolution of the Soul.

With Scourges others smartly strike] This the Cruelty of the World, that beats
by Oppression the Weak, and wounds with Injuries the Innocent.

Another tears what she does like] Satan tries us most by hurting, or robbing
us of what we seem to affect best; he seeks to tear from us what he thinks is
most dear unto us.

And against her every where is a Pique] Life is besieged, begirt round with
mischief.

All these she feels, and foils by stay] By restraint of passions by
Recollection Patience perceving their drift, and discovering their purposes
overcoms them, but not without assisting Grace, for the Continuance whereof She
prays.

To spite them more she fervently does pray] Fervent Prayer is a scourg to
Satan. It calls down the Power before which he trembles and which he seeks to
avoid.

6, With sober Pace] This sets forth not only her Perseverance, but her
Sobriety. Bonam vitam ego puto, mala pati, and bona facere, and sic perseverare
usque ad Mortem, says S. Bernard. I account that a good Life, which consists
in doing good, and suffering evil, and to continue in so doing, even to Death.
Sobrietas temeritatem fugit, pericula cuncta declinat. Sobriety is too steady
to be rash, and so wise as to prevent the occasion of Evil. Sobrietatis
perseverantia inaestimabilis est animi Fortitudo. The Perseverance of Sobriety
is an inestimable Vigor of the Mind.

Abroad] Ab aliis patimur; She suffers Injuries from the World, that is neither
her Friend nor her Home.

She walks] This differs her from a sinnie Patience: She is not stupid. She
keeps her course.

And with her Self] The Soul meditates, discourses to her self the wonderful
goodness of God in all his Blessings, and Benefits, and what he suffered for
her Redemption; And since he suffered so much for her, how much is she bound to
undergo, even any thing whatsoever for so gracious a Lord. Besides it is the
way that leads to Happiness; She compares her Sufferings, and finds them small
in respect of the Greatness of others.

And Heaven she talks] By Ejaculations of Spirit, by Prayer, There is such a
Discourse of the Mouth and Hand too by good Conversation.

From whence an Angel comes down] The Holy Spirit descends into such a Heart.

And shows the picture of a Crown] Gives assurance of the Reward, according to
the Promises by Faith.

A Violl gives of Cordial Smell] Of Comforts still to cheer her up in all her
Calamities, and to refresh her in her Trouble.

Of Essence it is for her not well] The Contemplation of Gods Power, his Truth,
his Goodness, His Excellence, which changes her Tribulations into Rejoycings.

At Scent whereof, etc.] In Such Contemplation, and beholding the Exnellencie
of the Reward She is extasi'd, and slighteth what this World can do unto her.

A Cot-Lamp skippeth by her Side] The Embleam of rejoicing Innocence. Gaude de
Innocentia! and exulta! Gaude inquam! Quia nbique illaesaes; ubique secura. Si
tentaris, proficis; si humiliaris, eregeris; Si pugnas, vinceris; si occideris,
coronaris. Tu in securitate liberaes; in periculo tuta; in custodia lata; Tibi
omnis reatus adjicitur; Tibi universa malitia subjugatur. Te potentes honorant;
suscipiunt principes; Magnates exquirunt; Et illi nonnunquam te desiderant, qui
impugnaverunt. Tibi boni parent, mali invident, zelant aemuli, inimici
succumbunt; Nec unquam poteris victrix non esse; etiam si inter homines judex
justus defuerit. Rejoice of thine Innocence! and praise the Lord! I say,
rejoice! For thou art every where shot-free! Thou art every where secure! If
thou be tempted, thou becomest the stronger; If thou be humbled, thou art
raised the higher; If thou fightest thou gettest the Victory; If thou be
killed, thou receivest a Crown. In Servitude thou art free; In Danger thou art
safe; In a Prison thou art cheerful; All blame is thrown upon thee; But all
Malice is subjugated under thee. Potentates do honor thee; Princes admit thee;
Great men seek after thee; and they sometimes desire thee, that are most
Enemies unto thee. Good men obey thee; Wicked men envy thee; Thy Friends are
in love with thee; Even thine Enemies submit unto thee: Nor can thou ever but
prevail, let there be but a just Judge amongst Men; so S. Chrysostom. By her
Side is meant her Integrity of Heart, her Innocence of Conscience.

Her Steps, etc.] Innocence with Patience is a beautiful and a pleasant
Example.

Often Disadvantages, etc.] She prevents inconveniences, and waves Injuries.

7. Wild Satyrs make their lewd Assaults] Satyrs among the ancient Heathen
were taken for Gods. Their form was in the upper parts like Man, in the lower
like a Goat, with crooked Hands, and Horns upon their Heads, going erect, and
are said to have inhabited among the Eastern Mountains of India, in subsolanis
Indorum Montibus. Wild and salvage Monsters, accounted by some to be Devils,
and mentioned as Companions of Bacchus. These accustomed, and frequented the
Woods. These Emblematize Lust and Pride, the Temptations of Satan. Their
Hairinesse is Impudence, Horns Arrogance, Hands Rapacity; rather Beasts then
Men. Such are Worldlings that abuse the Religious, and despite the Virtuous.

They mock, they mow] Is their Contempt, and Derision.

Like dogs they bark] By Envy, Malice, and Slanders.

And She is robbed by many a Shark] Most subject to Injury.

But still unmove'd she minds above, To that, etc.] Arguing the Constancy of
her Faith, which regards the Place of her future Being.

All other Trisles she does scorn] She despises the Vanities of the World.

Her Noble Spirit's better born] She is regenerate, Heaven-born.

She smiles at what wu'd make forlorn] She bears her Affliction with Courage,
and Cheerfulness.

At home she takes down Fortunes Wheel] Alluding to the Heathens figuring of
Fortune with a Wheel as though she turned all things, and that every thing were
at her Dispose. Here the Traveller condemns their ignorant Opinion of Fortune,
ascribing unto Divine Providence as properly due, the Governance of all things
under the Sun; reading this Lecture of Patience unto the Pilgrim, That what
Misery soever does befall us, it proceeds by Divine Permission, either to
punish us for former Sins, or for a greater Trial, and manifestation of our
Faith.

Patience spins the thread and reels] She submits to Gods Will and pleasure in
all things.

Web from Loom of Steel] Patience labors through her Troubles with much
Difficulty and Hardship.

8 Before her Lodge a Column stands, etc.] Christian Patience has in the Eye of
her Faith the Constancy of Hope that reaches Heaven. A Column is the Embleam
of Strength, which may be also applied to her Courage. This Stanza describing
this Pillar, denotes the common Affections of Patience, which are Sincerity,
Constancy, Community and Singularity. Her Sincerity makes her appear no other
then she is; Her Constancy shows her Perseverance in what is honest; Her
Community sets her forth notable unto All, that behold her; and her Singularity
denotes the Eminence of her Excellence, and Heroic Raritie. So does she
deliver over unto Fame the glorious Memories of those famous Persons of all
Ages, that have been Conquerors amidst the most violent Persecutions, and
gained Crowns out of the Flames of Martyrdom. This Column is described also as
set up by Semiramis, as a Work of her Hands, because she was a Person of such
vast undertakings, and particularly in Architecture, that Berosius lib. 4.
says of this Ascalonica, Nemo unquam huic Foeminae comparandus est virorum.
She had not her Peer amongst Men. This was she that built Babylon so vastly,
and was fained at her Death to be turned into a Dove, as Ovid relates. The
Syrians both abstained from the eating of Doves, and had wont to bear a Dove in
their Babylonish Ensigns, as Diodorus Siculus has it, which the Prophet
Jeremy seems to insinuate, when he exhorts the Inhabitants of Jerusalem,
that they should flee from the Face of the anger of the Dove, which was from
the Babylonians, who bare the Dove in their Banners.

9. Upon the Columns Chapter's writ] This Stanza is altogether emblematical. On
the Head of the Column is the Motto of Constancy, discoursing the Nature of
Noble Patience.

Aloft does stand an Amazon] Denoting Courage.

A Snake her right Foot treads upon] Signifying as well the Victory over
Temptations, as a performance of her Actions with Prudence; so sapiens ut
serpens, as she is simplex ut Columba, wise, and innocent.

Her left Arm's locked within Faith's Shield] Which is firmness of Faith.

Which bears a Bloody Cross in Field] The Ensign of a Christian, the Memory
of Baptism; under which he promised to fight the Lords Battles against the
World, the Flesh and the Devil.

Her right Hand up to Heaven is held) To demonstrate her Hope and Confidence.

She boldly looks toward East) With continual Expectation, and Assurance of
the coming of Christ, the Sun of Righteousness, being Regardlesse of Dangers,
or Sufferings.

10 Not far off hence there lies a shore, etc.) This Stanza has shadowed in it
the Charity of Patience, discovering the Miseries of Men under the Shipwreck of
Mariners, as also the Way to cure in these Extremities is by Patience.

She to her Viol bade them smell] The Viol is the Word. Smelling to the Viol is
the Hearing and Understanding of the Word, which with the Reading thereof is a
Sovereign Cordial to afflicted Minds.

Praise then they did begin to sing) Use Thanksgiving when they were delivered
out of Distress.

She bade them take her Diet, etc.) Here she gives Comfort and Counsel.
Tribulation which is born with patience is rather a Comfort then Corrosive to
the soul. Consilium est examinandarum, gubernandarumque causarum subtilis animi
prospectus. Counsel is a quick consideration by the mind of Causes to be
examined, or disposed, Says Cicero.

11. But among the rest One, closely bound etc.) This Stanza intimats the
Effects, and Sanity produced by Patience of Griefs never so inveterate; or
secret. It lays down her commiseration, compassion, and fellow-feeling of
others Sorrows.

She fetched a Balsame, whose rare power etc.) Submission and Resignation to
God's will, and All-wise Dispose, which has an infallible Virtue.

And to restore Lost Wits her way is sure) She gives a remedy to all
Distempers of mind, and all Distractions of Thought. To this purpose the Virtue
of patience uses to be exercised Three several ways. Some things we suffer
from the Hand of God; Others from our Old Adversary, and not a few from our
Neighbors in this World. From our Neighbor endure we Persecutions, Losses,
Reproaches; From Satan Temptations; And from God his gentle corrections and just
Punishments. On all these a Christian Eye must be very watchful, very
circumspect, least retribution be not studied, and revenge contrived for
Neighbors Injuries; Least the Consent to Sin and the Delight in Iniquity carry
us away prisoners fettered by Our Enemies allurements; Or Least our perverse
Frowardness and stiff-necked Murmuring strikes us against the powerful
Correction of so Great an Offended Master and Maker. For he that made All out
of Nothing, can utterly destroy according to his Will and Pleasure.

12. Abroad She often adventures much) This is an Allegory taken from Merchants
vent'ring abroad for Gain; And as their Endeavors return them Riches for their
Hopes and Patience. Patience likewise has it is Spiritual Reward in a manner
here, and a certain Hope of Return hereafter. This likewise expresses the
variety of Comforts that she has to refresh her self and cure her Patients.
For as cooling Cordialls are excellent to cure the hot distempers of the Body,
so these following Receipts of patience do mittigate, and allay the Fevers of
the Mind. The first is Non incipere iniustitiam. Not to begin or enterprise any
thing, that is unjust. The Second; Postquam incoeptum est, aequalibus non
vindicari. After any Such thing be begun, not to repay the like Injury. The
Third; Non facere vexa^^iea, quae passuses, sed quiescere. Not only Not to
return to him that has wrongd'd thee such things, as thou have suffered, but to
sit down quiet. The fourth is: Tribuere seipsum in patiendo mala. To submit the
Will to the suffering of evil things. The Fifth: Amplius tribuere ille vult qui
fecit. He is much more to submit himself that occasioned those things. The
Sixth: Non odio habere, qui operatur haec. Not to hate or think amiss of him
that does these things. The Seventh: Diligere: To love one another. The Eight:
Benefacere, To do good for one another. And the last, as consummation of all,
being that strength which perfects the cure, gains the victory, Deum pro ipso
deprecari, To pray to God heartily in his behalf.

MORAL. IX.
Who so intends to win a Christian Field, must use his Shield more then his
Sword. He that endures most, gains the day. He must not play the man so much
as the Christian, if he means to conquer. This conquest must be over the lesser
World, Man's self; and yet it is the greater Victory.

Fortior est, quise, quam qui fortissima vincit Maenia. Who does not grasp
himself, though span
The World, is Dwarff, unto the man.
It Is naturally against Man's upward posture to bear; Therefore the more
difficult: He that undergoes but common griefs, has many shoulders to ease his
burden. He Is strong indeed, that without help can bear his own.

So speaks the Chorus in Seneca's Troas.

Dulce maerenti populus, dolentum;
Dulce lamentis resonare gentes.
Lentius luctus, Lachrimae quae mordent
Turbas quas fletu simili frequentat.
Semper, ah semper dolor ipse magnus
Gaudet in multos sua fata mitti,
Seque non solum patuisse poenae,
Far quam sortem patiuntur omnes
Nemo recusat.
Nemo se credit miserum, licet sit.
Toll faelices! Removeto multo
Divites auro! Removeto centum
Rura, qui scindunt, opulenta bobus!
Pauperi surgent animi jacentes.
Est miser nemo, nisi comparatus.
Dulce in immensis posito ruinis;
Neminem laetos habuisse vultus.
Ille deplorat, queriturque fatum,
Qui secans fluctum rate singulari
Nudus in portus cecidit petitos.
Aequior casum tulit and procellas,
Mill qui ponto pariter carinas
Obrui vidit, tabulaque littus
Naufraga spargi, mare cum coactis
Fluctibus Corus prohibet reverti.
The sad man's pleased, when groans go round.
Such musicks sweet, when Nations sound.
Tears, and Mourning gentler gnaw,
When many such sad Buckets draw.
Ah ever! ever sorrows, great,
In many's bosom woes do seat,
Cheered not alone to spread their pain!
To bear the burden, when all strain,
None then refrain.
That he is wretched, who does hold?
From height snatch Wantons! Take from's Gold
On heaps the Rich! Remove's hard told
Fed Kine with his hundred grounds fat Feed!
Their equal's then the man in need.
But paired no man's a wretch indeed.
What Is pleasent in vast ruins place!
None then will show a cheerful face.
It Is he does wail, and's fate complain,
Whose single Boat does cut the main,
And naught but's looked for Port does gain.
Better to him were storm and chance,
When Is eye a thousand Waves saw dance
And swallow Keels, the shore all spread
With Shipwracks Characters he read,
North-winds forced seas back measures tread.
But Christian Patience is not so much eased by others miseries, as she is the
reliever of others in misery. She is not only a good Pilot, but a fair
Sea-mark.

PROSPECT IX.
AL scourged with whips; and pierced with steel
Mild backs fierce pains, and torture feel;
Fell wrath does please it is itch of spite
To tear the Virtuous with delight.
Diogmus had ten heads before,
The Monster must have one yet more,
With much more horrid face and look,
Then all the Vizards the other took.
(When age a new Tooth up does shoot,
It Is bigger then the next unto't.
It seldom but a Grinder proves,
In pieces breaks what stomach loves.)
While quenchless Fury more does rage,
Each Martyr's Fires a shining stage.
In those bright coals a Saint may see
The face of his Eternity.
Do! Load with Irons! Gawl to bones!
And cast the Innocent on stones!
Imprison the Living among the Dead
Ye Bracelets give, makes Bridal-bed.
Mistake not your dark dungeon. He
Has light enough, that Heaven does see.
Invent! And heap us mischiefe's store!
To The patient God gives strength for more.
Abuse Gods patience too! but men!
The Day comes! Who shall Judge be then?
O let not patience more incense!
Least Triumph tramples Violence.
O stop wild force. For who so kicks,
Does wound himself against the Pricks.
CONSOLATORY ESSAY. 9.
OPinion deceives us more than things. So comes our Sense to be more certain,
than our Reason. Men differ more about Circumstances, than matter. The
Corruption of our Affections misguides the Result of our Reason. We put a
Fallacy by a false Argument upon our Understandings.

If the Vitiosity of Humor does often put a Cozenage upon the radiancy of sight,
so that it sees through deceiving Eyes, the false Colors of things: Not as
they are, but as they seem. (Peradventure Choler has given a Percolation to
the Chrystalline humor of the Eye; or Phlegm has made an uneven commixture or
thickness in the Optic Organ, or the like, by which means all is represented
yellow, or all seems black, or of the darker Dye, that the Sight returns to the
common Sense) why may not men's understandings be likewise so deceived? As sure
they are abused. For most men, yea many of the higher Form of Brain, being in
love with their own Parts, or their Credit, commit first the Error, then
undertake, make it a part of their Resolution (rather, then to recede from
misapprehended, or delivered Untruths) to account it as a concernment of
honor, and maintenace of affected reputation either to proceed to further
Obliquity, or at least to take up the stand with Obstinacy.

By this Means have we not only lost much of our Peace, but even the clear
Evidence of Truth. How comes else such a Gladiatory in the Schools (to omit the
Pulpits) such Challenges of the Pen, such Animosities in Discourse, as if our
Natures were less inclinable to Conversation, than a Combat.

Nor have Things, Indifferent, been hereby made the only occasion of the
Quarrel, of such Division; But overrun with Misprision, and overcome by
Pertinacy, they set sail to the Anticyrae, go besides themselves; not only
in falling from, but by putting the Question upon the principles of Reason, and
the very Fundamentalls of Religion. Whereby some unwisely thinking to add to
their stature, to become Giants among Men, have fallen less, then the least of
Beasts, not retayning so much, as the Prudence of the Be; yea coming short of
the providence of the Pismire; Not arriving at the Knowledge of the Ox: For he
knows his Master's Crib.

And from whence proceeds the Corruption of such our Affections, but from the
Evil of our own Hearts? No marvail then, though we see so double; as if our
Brains were intoxicated; Or as looking through artificial Glasses, multiply
our mistakes, or magnify our Errors; and diminish, yea undervalue matters of
the greatest moment. We set a Price upon Things by our own Clark of the
Market. Holy Things must go cheap; And Wordly Trash, and Trifles at the only
Estimate. Covetousness puts us first into a petty Treason, minting much Falss
Coin, and then running us into a Praemunire by assuming Authority without
lawful Warrant, we will have it go for Current: Our Desires too like their
metal are not Touch, are not Standart; Yet pass they must for the Impresse,
though Vulcan and Venus be on the One Side, and Pluto and Proserpina on the
Other.

But what comes on it; The vanity of our Desires makes them punish themselves;
putting Sisyphus to an unprofitable, and perpetual Labor, and Tityus to the
Torture. We desire without, and coutrary to a right understanding; Like silly,
like froward Children we must have, what we have a mind to; Neither considering
what is suitable to us, what is fittest for us; Nor taking notice of, or
setting a true Value upon, the Nobleness of our created Natures. The Soul is
not to be filled, with what is finite, nor commixed with what is impure.

Away then with the Dirt, and Rubbage of the world! What has Man's sublime
Nature, little inferior to the Angels, to do with the Trash of the Earth? or
the Bubbles of the Waters? Much less to be so affected to them, as to sorrow
for them?

Sit thee down then near me awhile, Distressed Man, or Woman, that wearest
Discontent on thy wrinckled Forehead, like a plaited Vestment, and show
Grief, as it were sown, in the furrows of thy Cheeks. Suspend thy Passion for a
time! Let us discourse a little! Between our selves let us argue the Matter!
Whether thou art not mistaken in the Thing? Or thy Desire? Peradventure in
Both. I conjecture, and not without some Reason; Thou art sick either from the
Retarding, or from the Loss of thy Longing; Or thou complainest under some
insupportable, and unavoidable Burden. Some Cross has put thee into a
Fever; or some Calamity into a Consumption. Thou ragest, Thou languishest,
Thou fallest away. What Is the Matter? Have suffered any Loss? Why did not
expect it? Say thou, My Beloved is Dead? Did not know, he was mortal?
Say Thou, My Friend has dealt unkindely? He loved Thee for Himself; Or Thou
Him so. Thou expectedst more of Him, than came to thy share. There will rise a
Quarrel at the Division of Interest. Interest it self is a Divider. Art thou
Poor? Who is born Rich? Or who shall die so? Do cry, I have lost my Goods, I
have lost my Fortunes! They were thy Evils, they tempted thee; Or Evils thou
made them, by abusing them. Knew'st not the Nature of thy Fortunes? Did not
understand their Language? They told thee, they were unconstant. Do
question, Where is my Honor? In other men's Mouths. In the Air. Or do
enquire, Where is my Office in another Dispose; not thine own. Did place thy
Self there? Say, Where Is my Good Name? In thy Virtue; Not in Opinion. Where
are the Hopes of my Labor? In the Vanity of thy Expectation. Do think any
thing is fastened to the Earth? Or that it is not changable. The Earth it self
is mutable; and in this Sense moveable. Thou alterest from thy Self. The World
from Thee. And thou from the World. Thou do foot the Hay. Thou must
Sometimes hedge in, sometimes wind out. Why understandest not the Dance? O!
but my Husband is furious! A Blow! O! but my Wife is ever froward! A Noise! Why
give occasion? Or allayest not the Distemper? Is a Fire quenched with Oil? Thy
Patience may cool her Heat, and allay his Violence. Multiply not Words! And
stand not in the way of a Sword. Alas for thy Conscience! Does that trouble
Thee? Thou art mistaken. It is Satan: not It. Vomit up the Filth in thy
Stomach! Disgorge thy Sins! Lest there be Death in the Pot. Can thou Buckle,
or art thou too opinionate. Spiritual Pride is a Torture. Think not to have
Ease, while thou have It. Art thou afraid of Envy? Humility puts out that
Eye, which is left her. Art thou charged by Detraction? Mildness keeps thee
Shotfree. Have thou any Discontent, afflicts thee? Be quiet, There is, or will
be an end of all Sorrows. No Night without a Morning. Have thou any Trouble,
that Shoulders thee? Thou were asleep in thine Enemie's Arms; Thank it for
wakening Thee. Is all the World thine Enemy? Thou art the honester Man. Be not
so to thy Self. Have thou any Discontent that wu'd gnaw thee? Feed it not. If
so many lay for thee, be not Alone. Have murdered like Cain? Or have thou
betrayed, and murdered too, like Judas? Have thy Imprecations hung Vengeance
ore thy Head, as the Sword over that of Damocles, that it holds but by a
Thread, a Hair to thy thinking? Thou ever expectest, when it should drop. Do
thy Perjuries thunder within thee? Has thy Sacrilege brought Fire to thy Nest?
Art a Rebel all over against God? Hold thy Hand! Rebel not against Nature too!
Why think, that thou art beyond a Pardon?

Tell me! O tell me! Is thy Sin, or God greater? Art a Christian? Or a Turk? Or
an Infidel? Or a Devil? Dare give the Almighty thy Lie? Could he create all
the World out of Nothing? And can He not save Thee? At what time soever a
Sinner does repent him of his Sin from the Bottom of his Heart, I will put all
his Wickedness out of my Remembrance, says the Lord. Did he send his Son to
die for the Sins of the whole World? to be the Salvation of his People? and the
Redemption of all them that believe in Him? And says Satan, Thou art one of
them, Do what thou list. Thou art none of them, Do what thou can. He is the
Deceiver. It is his Name. Believe him not. Give ear to distressed David's
question, again and again to himself, in the midst of his conflict for his
grievous Sins! Why art thou so full of Heaviness, O my Soul? And why art thou
so disquieted within me? Put thy trust in God! For I will give him Thanks for
the Help of his Countenance. Why art thou so vexed, O my Soul? And why art thou
so disquieted within me? O put thy trust in God. For I will yet thank him which
is the help of my Countenance, and my God.

Away then with thy Discontents! Bear thy Crosses! Run not mad at thy miseries!
Hang not thy head low with thy cares! And be not out of countenance at thy
Calamities! Be patient.

Thy Tears do not become thee. Thou art a Man. What means then this bleating
of the sheep in mine Ears? And the lowing of the Oxen which I hear says Samuel
to Saul in the case of Agag? What ayleth this sighing? this groaning? the
crying out? and roaring of thine afflictions? Be patient! thou art a Christian.

Cheer up! Thou have heaven before thee. Thy journey is not long. Blessed are
they which mourn, for they shall be comforted. Blessed are they which are
persecuted for righteousness sake, for theirs is the Kingdom of heaven. Blessed
are ye when men shall revile you, and persecute you, and say all manner of evil
against you falsely for my sake. So preached Christ in the Mount. Rejoice! and
be exceeding glad! For great is your reward in Heaven. For so persecuted they
the Prophets, that were before you. In patience therefore possess your souls,
says this Apostle S. Paul. Be patient!

Many are the troubles of the righteous, but the Lord delivers them out of all.

CANTO. X. The Ruins of Mortification.
1.
BEtween two Hills (as those of Faith, and Hope)
Thou go into a gloomy Glade,
Where Groves of Yew do cast their shade,
Thou find there a Palace that had scope;
Balconies, Rooms of pleasure, large, and long,
With Arras, and with Pictures hung,
With Aviarie's sweets, where wanton voices sung.
2.
All now dropped down within on Ruin's Tomb
Lay buried in a rubbish Graff,
As Corn within a heap of Chaff,
The Persons, and the lusty of each Room.
Where numbers dwelt before, now is desolate;
And whispers tell the walls their state,
The ruined place of flesh is sad Necrosis Gate.
3.
The Gate House only stands. The other Walls
Do seem to shoulder friendless Air,
There melancholy Bats repair,
Each screetching Owl to one another calls.
Aside this Gate House down some steps do turn
Into a Vault, where is many an Um,
Which she with Ashes fills of Flesh that late did burn.
4.
About this hollow room lie gasping sins,
That usually before they dye,
Do give a groan, or make a cry;
Which naught from her of soft compassion wins.
She upward looks with a pleased eye,
That dead their wickedness there lie,
While on a Tomb with Arm across she sits by.
5.
Her Right hand underneath her breast is placed;
Her Left upon a Yoke does lean.
Her right foot Fear-wash't very clean
Upon an Earthly Globe treads, that is defaced.
Her bare Left's set upon the gelid Ground,
That shows here and there a Wound,
Whose bleeding drops preserve her body ever sound.
6.
Upon her shoulders she does bear a Cross,
Which makes her bend a little down.
She Is very lovely, but she is brown,
And listens not to oft-brought News of loss.
From off a stone a Lamp does glimmer light,
As day were mixed with some of night,
And near the Wall Sculs Letters form words, Life does write.
7.
Such even composure of each mortal Head
Seems lively Truth in death to speak,
Whose Language does not silence break:
Your life is hid with Christ in God. You Are dead.
When Christ (that died to make us living) here,
Who is Our Life, brings glory near;
In Glory then shall also ye with him appear.
8.
Without the Gate an aged Porter stands,
Most gravely casting up his eye,
Neglecting who so passes by,
On Crosier leaning both his clasped hands;
And to the curious does deny his Name.
He has a reason for the same.
He, he expects Glory for his scorned fame.
9.
Behold. pursued by many furious Hounds,
From ore the hills a deadly Chase!
In that spoiled Grove's his heavy Case.
The Stagge does fall, and weepeth to his wounds,
While th'Huntsmen wind the death of this their prize,
A live Heart from dead Stagge does rise,
Starts up; they all pursue for Prey. Past reach he flies.
10.
A wanton woman see in this fair Grove,
Dressed all with fashions and with toys,
Discarding powdered Singing-boys,
Does change her Vest, as she does change her Love!
She bids them all, Be gone! And leave her there!
That shade admits no fierce heat near.
They gone; On fiery breast often drops a cooling tear.
11.
But see! a Hagge! that is filthy and obscene,
Descends into a purging Spring.
How 'bout her water she does fling!
Throw by her putrid clothes! And make her clean!
Sweet Youth, and Beauty then to her return.
Her scorn does former Garments spurn.
She hides among the trees, Desires to Death does mourn.
12.
There lies, by wrath fell Angers Garment, torn;
From whom wild Fury rends his clothes.
Away throws Blasphemy his Oaths.
Her wrought long Gown lays Malice by, forlorn
Concupiscence does naked run, and cry.
All follow her to the Vault, that is nigh;
And falling there before Necrosis, howl, and dye.
PERSPECTIVE X.
THe Sense and meaning of the Title of this Canto, is Obvious enough to learned
Understandings: But Feminine minds are of a weaker Apprehension; for whom
since there has been already so much pains taken as to translate all the
Latin Sentences, and Verses related out of several Authors upon necessary
occasion, by the writer hereof. He thinks it very convenient to set down his
intention likewise herein.

Ruins are the Monuments of a former building; the carcass of some goodly body;
the Yesterday of strength and beauty: The Relics and deformity of Rage, and
sad spectacle of sins disorder. Ruins nest is made by War in ashes; Ruins Bed
is made by peace in Dust. Wrath throws down, and demolishes; Age brings to
decay, and discomposes what former Art, with many a laborious hand had made for
use, and fashioned comely. Ruins are the fall of a late standing building.

Mortification is a making dead, a Consumption of life. Ruin is a destruction
to a building; Mortification the Ruin to a Body. But this is not the sense of
Mortification here. Here it is derived a morte, from death too, but applied to
a greater purpose. Totam hominis miseriam Deus complectitur mortis vocabulo.
The breach of one word of Command introduc't it. Disobedience against one Not
undid, was the Ruin of All. For so we find it in the 17. of the Second of
Genesis: But of the tree of knowledge of Good and Evil, thou shall not eat of
it; For in the day that thou eatest thereof thou shall dye the death.

To know Mortification the better, let us enquire into the diverse sorts or
degrees of death: and those are four: The first is, Mors spiritualis, a
Spiritual death, which is the privation of the Spiritual life, whereby the
whole man is Ruined and destroyed; Vivit tantum peccato, He lives to sin
only. And that kind of Life is the worst of Death.

Then there is Mors affectionum, a death of Affections, Quae est privatio
primaevae foelicitatis, The privation of former Happiness: And that is
immissio omnis generis calamitatum, The sad inlet of that raging Tide of all
sorts of Calamities, and all kinds of evil.

The third is Mors spiritualis, vel corporalis, a death of the soul and body,
(mistake me not I pray) this we call a Natural death, which is a privation of
this Animal life.

The last is, Mors Aeterna, Everlasting death, which in holy Scriptures is
called a Second death.

Mortification here claims the nearest kindred to the death of Affections.
Propter te mortificamur tota die. We are killed for thee all the day long,
sings the Psalmist, Quasi Cycnus in cantu, as the related Swan chaunteth his
Epicedium. Foelicem illam animam, cui vivere est Christus, et cum Christo mori
lucrum. Thrice happy is that soul, to whom Christ is the life; He needs not
fear to dye with him, since he is the only Gain. If Christ be in you, the body
is dead, because of sin. But the Spirit is life for righteousness sake. But if
the spirit of him that raised up Jesus from the Dead, dwell in you; He that
raised up Christ from the Dead, shall also quicken your mortal bodies, because
that his Spirit dwells in you. Therefore, Brethren, we are Debtors, not to
the flesh, to live after the flesh; For if ye live after the flesh, ye shall
dye: but if ye mortify the deeds of the body, by the Spirit, ye shall live,
writes S. Paul to the Romans, 8. 10, 11, 12, 13. And to the Philippians, cap.
3. 7. The Things that were Vantage unto me, the same I counted Loss for
Christ's Sake. Yea, doubtless I think all Things but Loss for the excellent
Knowledge Sake of Christ Jesus my Lord, for whom I have counted all things
Loss, and do judge them to be Dung, that I might win Christ. And might be
found in Him, that is not having mine own righteousness, which is of the Law,
but that which is is through the Faith of Christ, even the righteousness which
is of God through Faith. That I may know him, and the Virtue of his
Resurrerection, and the Fellowship of his afflictions, and be made conformable
unto his Death. If by any means I might attain to the Resurrection of the dead,
etc. But our Conversation is in Heaven, from whence also we look for the
Savior, even the Lord Jesus Christ; Who shall change our vile Body, that it
may be fashioned like unto his glorious Body, according to the working whereby
he is able even to subdue all things unto Himself. And this is the
Mortification in our Consideration.

1. Between two Hills, as those of Faith, and Hope] Between two Hills is the
Introduction to Mortification, and the signification of her Strength, and
Firmness. This Simile points at the Mount of Faith, and Tenariffe of Hope,
showing that the Reason or Ground of true Mortification is the enjoyment of
Christ, who is incomparably beyond all things, in the possession of which
inestimable Riches Christians despise the World, and trample upon their
Affections thereunto, knowing that in the Enjoyment of Him, they possess all
things.

Thou go into a gloomy Glade) Into what is scorned by the world's Eye, the
excellency of which place is hidden for their sight. Gloomy intimates composed,
and retired in thoughts. Glades are places that indent between hills, wherein
Fowlers set their Gins and Nets to take, and Kill Partridges, woodcocks and
the like in the mornings and Evenings, when they accustom to fly those ways.
The Glade here shows the taking notice of the Vanities and Follies of the
world, and despising of them, which is introductive to Mortification.

Where Groves of Yew do cast their Shade) A sad, and mournful condition in this
world does cloud, the virtuous in the Eye of opinion, and estimations* The
godly are accounted as swallowed up by their Afflictions, are reckoned no
better than lost men by Children of this world, who scarce number any among the
Living, that appear not in their Sunshine.

The Yew Tree, as Galen reports, is of a venomous quality, and against man's
nature; These Yewes are Afflictions, that are over shadowers of the virtuous
and are poisoners of delight in vain pleasures; being also very harsh to flesh,
and blood, and contrary to Nature. Diascorides, and most of those, that have
heretofore dealt in Herbarisme set forth, though upon no very experimental
ground, that the Yew Tree is very venomous to be taken inwardly, and that if
any do sleep under the shadow thereof, it causes many times death. Too much
sorrow taken inwardly, taken too much to heart, Kills. There is no sleeping
in a storm; no setting down still in Trouble. We must bestir us the right way,
and use the means that they may be sanctified unto us, that the Yewes of our
Miseries may be seated in our mortified hearts, as they are used to be set in
Churchyards, hallowed Places by their dedication, and customary employment for
Burialls. The Yew grows so planted near the Church: Affliction flowrisheth
when it is placed near Devotion. It is further said of the Fruit of the Yew,
that the Eating of the same is not only dangerous and deadly unto Man, but if
Birds do eat thereof, it causes them to cast their feathers, and many times to
dye. Inordinate sorrow for the things of this life bring rather mortem, quam
mortificationem, lead us to despair, to the gates of death more than to
mortification. The Birds are the Preferments of this world, False Friends cast
their feathers, their favors; the world forsakes us, when trial coms, and
leaves oftentimes men dead without help or comfort. Theophrastus Says, that
laboring Beasts do die, if they eat of the Leaves; but such Cattle, as Chew
the Cud receive no hurt at al thereby. The Leaves are the hiding the covering
of Afflictions, which is very dangerous. Affliction is death to unclean Beasts.
It makes the wicked mad. It is not hurtful to those, that are Clean, that
ruminate, that chew the Cud. To those that meditate upon the Laws, and
Statutes of the Lord, and seek unto him continually by Prayer. The Leaves of
the Yew are senselessness, negligence, and unprofitablenesse of Afflictions,
when they are not made the right use of. Whereupon it may well be said that
Affliction leaves a man either much the wiser man, or a greater Fool, than
before it found him.

Thou find there, a Palace, that had Scope] Here the Traveller makes a
loose Description of the Ruins of a stately Palace, shadowing therein the
World; whose Vanities and Pleasures must be thrown off, and lose their station
in our Affections before we can come to be mortified. What had Scope, had large
room, has none now in our Hearts.

Balconies] Are the specious glories, and glittering eminencies of the World,
those splendida peccata, those shining Sins, that draw so many Eyes after them,
and dazzle the weak Sight of the Beholders; that are in conspicuo posita, set
out to catch the Fancies of Men.

Rooms of Pleasure] Vanities of the World, wherewith forgetful Souls delight
themselves according to their several Choice and Opinion.

Large] As wide as the World.

Long] Being falsely apprehended, instead of everlasting Happiness; long; as
carrying Men still on in them, and continuing them in such a deceiving Walk
from turning.

With Arraes and with Pictures hung] The Arras, the vain Stories of Ambition;
The Pictures are the Luster of Coin, the golden Paintings of Wealth. With such
false Colors and loose Habit is this Iezabel trimmed, and dressed.

With Aviarie's Sweets, where wanton Voices sung] The Allurements of
Temptations. Against such Sirens must Ulysses stop his Ears; There is no coming
to Mortification, before an Abnegation of such Vanities, and a demolishing in
our Hearts, or at least an utter neglect of such cozening, and deceitful
Trifles. This alludes to what is fabulously related of the Sirens, ipsae
periculosa hominibus monstra propter cantus suavitatem, those same dangerous
monsters to Men, with the enchantment of their Songs, thereby first lulling
Passengers asleep to devour them. These had a Song for every Man's Humor, not
to miss any Disposition. These Sirens and their Songs are Pleasures and their
Titillations. These were feigned to be Daughters to Achelous, and one of the
Muses. Cum taurino patre, et ad voluptates propenso natae sint: of Achelous in
the shape of a Bull, from inclination to delight, from Sensuality. Of a Muse,
quae sit suavitas illa, quae nos ad eas illicit, from such an apprehended
Sweetness as is an allurement unto Pleasure. These lead us as in a Maze to
destruction. These put up their Heads, and show in that part of the Mind,
which the Philosopher calls (...), quae caret ratione, that wants Reason,
that comes short of Judgment. These were half Virgin, half Fish. The Bestial
part kept under Water. Such Monsters are Men that are given over to their
Lusts, and have relinquished others sound Counsel, and quitted the Evidence of
their own Understandings.

2. All now dropped down within own Ruine's Tombe] Fluit Voluptas, and prima
quaeque evolat. Pleasure tarries not. It does but show, and vanishes:
Saepiusque relinquit causas poenitendi, quam recordandi: It leaves us for the
most part more cause of Regret, then Reason for Remembrance. And no marvel. For
if we look upon the foul Nature of the thing. Voluptas est cum quadam lubrica
suavitate ad illicita foedae mentis inclinatio. Pleasure is an Inclination of a
defiled Mind, with a slippery desire and Itch to unlawful Things: So S. Herom.
This Stanza describes the Inconstancy and Dirtinesse of the Vanities of this
World. Destruction, and Oblivion are the best Conclusion Pleasure can hope for.

Lay buried in a Rubbish Graffe] The Walls drop into the Ditches, that lay
under them, being in a manner the expecters of, as well as receptacles for
their Downfals. Such Delights perish in their own rottenness, as dead
Carcasses do putrify, and consume in the places of their foul, and dark
Sepulture, In a Rubbish Graffe, the Sink of a vicious mind is the Reception of
all sorts of Muck, and sinful Uncleanness.

As Corn within a heap of Chaffe] Obscuring all that is good within us, and
making happy Endowments useless.

The Persons and the Luster of each Room] Here the main drift of this Stanza
opens to this effect, that in preparation to Mortification our Affections
must be rectified, and our Desires turned from the emptiness of Things, that
are finite, which have not in them a possibility to give the Soul satisfaction.
A Square cannot fill a Circle. When Prosperity leaves us, and Adversity takes
us by the Elbow we are taught by experience, that all is but Vanity, and
Vexation of Spirit; we are then apter to the Inspection into our selves, and
upon examination find what is necessary to be mortified in us.

Where Numbers dwelt before, now is desolate) Vices are ejected, there is no
habitation for them. Legion is thrown out of the Possessed; Or it may be taken
for the general custom of the world to stay no longer than the Sun shine; When
a storm comes, or a dark Winter's day of trial appears, they play least in
sight.

And Whispers tell the Walls their state) Whispers are Fears and Suspicions; Or
secret Censure. But here more properly they give us notice, when Sin has lost
it is boldness, it discovers it is weakness.

The ruined Place of Flesh is sad Necrosis Gate) Ego non sum ego is the man,
that comes to be mortified, He is not the same He. The Gatehouse only stands,
and some ruins appear of the outward Man, but his Inside is turned all topsy
turvy; he has repented, he has thrown out his former bad Guests, his Vices; he
has thrown down his Concupiscences, and foolish Affections. They lay in their
Graves, in the dust, in dissolution, in oblivion. Now welcome sad Necrosis,
severe Mortification. Mourning now is more comfortable, and becoming, than the
wonted mirth of the world, which is but madness, a mere Delirium, a ridiculous
foolishness. The flesh is mastered, conquered. For the spirit has gotten the
Day. Happy is that Tribulation, that brings to Mortification.

3. The Gatehouse only stands) The Remains of Pleasure, are only the
Repetition of what Repentance was for, and the Confession of former Error. The
Gate to the House is as the Mouth to the Stomach.

The other Walls Do seem to shoulder friendlesse Air) Denoting the tottering
condition of worldly Vanities, that conceive themselves propped by the breath
of men's mouths, but are weakly buttrised by Opinion. It sets forth likewise
that frequent mistake of those, which are in misery, applying themselves to, or
seeking redress from any mundane hand, or terrestrial Assistance, which
neither regards the Complaint of the wretched, nor stays to relieve those
which are distressed, and call upon them; which pass like the Air, and are as
trustlesse as the Wind, that rather throws down, than strengthens a stooping
structure, that overthrowes a leaning Building. Here is chiefly aimed at, that
there is no place of Entertainment left for former Wickedness.

Where Melancholic Bats repair) The disconsolation of Affliction; The
uncomfortable remembrance of Sins past. Batts are Vespertiliones, quod se
vespertino tempore ad volatum proferant, as Pliny. Because they use their wings
chiefly in the Evenings, and accustom to fly in the Night. Such are fears and
Sorrows, that take the places of former Delights. The Evening is the dusky
remembrance of the day past, the melancholy thought of what has been done
amiss. The Night is the darkness of Sorrow, heaviness of Heart, and dejection
of spirit for commision of forepast Evil. Batts are Lucifugae Creatures, that
shun the Light. Night walkers, as if they were afraid of Arrest, which imployes
their Guilt, as being conscious of Offending. In the Second of Isaiah. v. 20.
The Prophet denouncing the punishment of the rebellious, and obstinate, Says:
At that day shall man cast away his Silver Idols, and his golden Idols, (which
they had made themselves to worship them) to the Moles, and to the Batts; which
denote secrecy, and Oblivion These like Sin hate the Light. A Bat is neither a
Mouse, nor A Bird, but mediae naturae, betwixt them both. The Soul after Sin is
put to the question, whether it belonges more to Sense or Reason. If to Reason
how came sense to command; If to sense, why should not Reason obey. A Batt is
rather to be said to swim in the Air with Finns, than to fly with wings. Such
are the phantasms of worldly delights, that take their turns in our Brains not
being worthy of comparison with pious and noble thoughts. Ob hoc tenebrarum
commercium, et si alioquin tetricae, et luridae, non defuit tamen sua, cui
placeret, Dea Proserpina, Scil. Inferni regis uxor. From their commerce with
the dark, though they be very unpleasant in shape or color, yet they have not
wanted a Patroness among the heathen Goddesses, even Proserpina the wife of
Pluto, The feigned Powers of Hell. Proserpina is Beauty, Worldly Fame, and the
like, Pluto is Riches, and worldly wealth. Ye may know what manner of Things
those are by the Beast and Bird, that they patronize.

Each screeching Owl to one another calls] One sin gives the alarm to another
in the Conscience, till all be quieted by repentance. The Owl is Avis
luctisona, and funebris, A mournful, a Funeral bird. So here it signifies the
Lamentation of a sinner. The punishing himself with sorrow, and mortifying
himself with grief for his sin committed. Bubonem, cum apparuit, m^li omin^s
esse, aut bellum, aut famem, aut mortem portendere, vetus persuasio fuit, ad
nostrum usque saeculum derivatur. It was an old Augurie, and remains as a
continued vulgar opinion, a popular Ethnic tradition even in latter times,
that the appearance of an Owl was either a sign of ill luck, or War, or Famine,
or Death. All pertinent to this sense. For here under the Owls is mentioned,
that sin must leave his place; the flesh is overthrown, as in the field, by the
Spirit; sin is like to have no more sustenance. For Mortification is at hand.

A side this Gatehouse down some steps do turn] Alluding to turning from former
ways aside from the world; the Discourse of the Tongue is changed into a pious
and sober language; the Actions of the Hands are altered into Religious and
Virtuous Deeds; the Steps are downward, to denote Humility; and they turn to
show Repentance.

Into a Vault where is many an Urn] Mortification dwells very low, and out of
sight. A Vault for Urns, is a repository for the Dead, used by the Romans and
other Nations heretofore. Such is man, the burial place of disorderly
affections, when he is quickened in Christ.

Which she with Ashes fills of flesh, that late did burn] The overcoming of the
Temptations of the flesh, by the power of the spirit.

4. About this hollow Room lie gasping sins] This shows the loathness of sin to
leave us, and our close League with it that we must dye at parting. This Room
is the Conscience.

That usually before they dye, etc.] Before sin leaves us our natures being
possess't therewith, show much reluctancie; and before it goes it will
represent it self in the ugliest shape, and make a horrid noise in the
Conscience to Tempt to Despair, or seek to move compassion in the Affections.

Which naught from her of soft compassion winnes] The Mortified Soul is
resolved of a New life, and regards not any temptations.

She upward looks with a pleased eye] Heaven is her Comfort and delight. She
is pleased in the destruction of Gods enemies.

That dead their wickedness there lye] She triumphs in her conquest under
Christ's Banner.

While on a Tomb with arms acrosse she sits by] The proper emblem of
Mortification. The soul sits in a sad Posture, upon a Funeral seat, a place for
Tears, a place of Mortality.

5. Her right hand underneath her breast is plac't] Signifying her Reverence.

Her Left upon a Yoke, etc.] Her Patience. A yoke is the Emblem of Patience.

Her Right foot tear-wash't very clean] Her repentance and amendment of Life.

Upon an earthly Globe treads, that is defac't] Her contempt of the World; which
is a deformed object in her Eye.

Her bare lefts set upon the Gelid Ground] Her Humility.

That shows here and there a wound] Her Charity and compassion.

Whose bleeding drops preserve her, etc. She is ever dying to the world, and
killing the flesh.

6. Upon her shoulders she does bear a Crosse] Her Obedience.

Which makes Her bend a little down] Her Patience.

She Is very lovely, but she is brown] She is accepted in the Eye of her
Savior, though nothing beautiful in the worlds opinion.

And listens not to often brought news of loss] Her Prudence and Resolution.

From off a stone a Lamp does glimmer light] Her Life is not specious, but
austere. It is a despised laboring through many tribulations, a struggling
through temptations. Or thus; Our Lamps, our Natures are subject to many
imperfections; our corruptions like Oil will fire therein, but mortification
permits them not to flame forth, and shine out; they have but their
Glimmerings. The Lamp is placed upon stone, to show, it is mortal. A stone is a
thing without life, and used to cover the dead.

As day were mix't with some of night] This alludeth to the Painters artificial
mixing of colors with his nimble pencil, touching those brighter with some of
the sadder hue; which makes them show much darker for the better draught of his
piece to the Life, often causing shadows to set off the livelier colors. So
the Traveller here makes one composure of day and night, to set forth that the
life of mortification is a continual death. So is life resembled unto day, and
night mentioned as the privation of the same.

And near the walls Skul's Letters form words, Life does write] Here the
Traveller straineth his fancy to the resemblance of wise sentences, heretofore
accustomed to be written upon the walls within the rooms of well disposed
persons houses, which offered to the ey of those that came near them the Memory
of something that was worthy the observation. For such a silent kind of
instruction does he here build, or set skulls one upon another against the wall
to fashion words, and of such words so formed, to compose sentences. The Skulls
are Men, men dead to the World; the Letters are numbers of men; the Words are
Nations of men: ^he Sentences are the worlds of men, or the successive
generations of the distinct Ages in the world; Life writes mortality upon all
these both by precept and example, and publishes it as by a writing upon the
Table of the Universal world, as the Skulls, thus supposed in their order here,
are imagined to signify upon this wall. But this is not all: For here it is
meant concerning Regenerated men, who are dead to sin, Mortifying the Lusts
thereof in their earthly bodies. Christ is their life, who is the Word,
charactereth in their souls the Comfort, and Assurance of happiness, as it is
expressed from the words of S. Paul, Col. 3. 4. in the next Stanza in those
lines, Your life is hid with Christ in God, etc. Stanza 7.

7. Such even composure of each Mortal head, etc.] This Stanza was unlocked in
the former. The Door stands open.

8. Without the Gate an aged Porter stands] Contempt of the world he is said
aged for his experience, which conduces to bring him to what he is; he is said
Porter, as shutting out, or warding against the same. And is properly Porter
here, because he lets in to Mortification. He stands to watch, and to
resist. For such is that Posture of standing ready.

Most gravely casting up his eye] The Soul contemning the World, most devoutly
looks up to heaven, the only place of Hope, and Happiness. The Soul in that
condition casts up his Eye, raises his Faith to Christ, in whom he hops to
enjoy the Comforts of a better being.

Neglecting who so passes by) Setting at naught the enmity of Satan, the
Rebellion of the flesh, and the malice of the world.

On Crosier leaning both his clasped hands) laying hold by Faith fast upon, and
being assisted by the Cross and Passion of Christ, of his Savior, who is his
strength, and his supporter.

And to the curious does deny his name) The curious are Tempters and deriders.
The worldling asks, what is the matter when any man forsakes the world. They
account a mortified man, a thing fit for naught but a dull house, a Bedlam. S.
Paul is accounted as a mad man, when he speaks mysteries to Festus that he does
not understand. The Mortified man glories not in Name nor Fame, but only with
S. Paul, in Christ Jesus Crucified. And upon good ground too.

He has a reason for the same) He has Gods word for his authority, his
commandments for his law, and his promises for his reward.

He, he expects glory for his scorned fame) He is iterated to make the man
the more remarkable. He indeed is a rare Bird: he that forsakes the world, and
mortifies his corrupt Affections, is worth the noting. But the world
understands him not. But gives him scorn for fame, which he exchangeth for the
hope of future glory.

9. Behold pursued by many furious hounds) This Stanza does allegorize, and
from under a cloud discover the condition of man before and after his
Conversion, or the hard condition of the Virtuous and godly man in this world.
Like Actaeon is the unregenerate pursued by Hounds, Dogs of his own bringing
up. None are hotter enemies, than his own sins. They pursue him over the
hills; they call to remembrance all his fore-past evils. They drive him over
the lofty places of height of pleasure and ambition. They overthrow him in the
spoiled Grove of his Idolatry and false Worship. It is such a spoiled Grove,
despoyl'd of the Jdols as Josiah caused to be cut down in his Reformation of
the Jews. Sin brings him here into the state of death, which is his heavy case.
The falling of the Stagge upon his knees, and weeping, is man's humiliation and
repentance: To his wounds he weepeth; at the sight of his sins he is very much
dejected. While he lies in this sad condition, and Satan thinks him in despair,
and his vices and enemies seem to vaunt over his destruction; by Faith he is
regenerate, newborn, metamorphos'd, or rather turned into a Heart, the Lord's,
his Redeemer's, his Savior's beloved, and has thereby a vivification, and
newness of Life, and escapes from his spiritual and worldly enemies that are
his violent pursuers. From such Hounds S. Paul gives the Caveat, Phil. 3. 2.
Beware of Dogs, beware of evil workers, etc.

10. A wanton woman see within this Grove, etc.) This Stanza discourses under
a wanton woman that throws off her Toys, abandons her bad company, changes her
Affections, etc. The course of a true Penitent, that must mortify all evil
desires, as well as Actions. Here especially by this wanton is meant
Fornication, having relation to Colos. 3. If ye then be risen with, seek those
things which are above, where Christ sits at the right hand of God: Set your
affections on things which are above, and not on things which are on the earth:
For ye are dead, and your life is hid with Christ in God, etc. Mortify
therefore your Members, which are on the earth, Fornication, uncleanness, the
inordinate affection, evil concupiscence, and covetousness which is Idolatry.
This and the following Stanza's are directed by this Chapter of S. Paul for the
mortification of sin.

11. But see a Hagge, etc. This Stanza expresses under this Hagge,
Mortification of, and conversion from Uncleanness, which is the outward act of
Fornication, which must be avoided. As also all manner of sins of the Tongue;
as censuring, Backbiting, Lying, Swearing, Foul speaking, of the Heart, as
Anger, Wrath, and Malice. Which are mentioned in the following Stanza.

12. There lies by Wrath fell Angers garment torn) One sin quarrels with
another; but sins Garments are torn; in relation to that of putting off the old
man. A mortified man must be rid of his sins as of infected clothes, Col. 3. 8,
9, 10.

MORAL. X.
THe skillful Surgeon, that would preserve the Bodies health, does scarrifie
a part to stupifie it, and to let it blood; and in other cases does mortify
and cicatrize to prevent the mischief of a Gangreen.

Ense recidendum est, ne pars sincer a trahatur. Virtue and Vice cannot live
together. We cannot at once serve two Masters: We cannot serve God and Mammon.
We must throw down, and trample upon Idols, if we mean to serve the Living God,
There is but one Phoenix, and that has a very sweet Note, as Lactantius
Firmianus, which continues his race by the death of his Predecessor, who
gathering rich spices to his compiled Nest in the face of the Sun, fireth them,
and therein consumes in his Age, and from his Ashes arises the living young.
Who so dies to the world, lives such a Phoenix unto happiness.

PROSPECT. X.
THe Richest spice that Merchants hand
Has rapt for gain from Eastern Land,
When bruised most, does sweetest smell;
It Is Fragancie's within, does tell.
The Artist's strokes must break it is Gate
For rare Perfume to fly thereat;
With such, and famed Arabian Gumms
Pollinctors dressed the Guests of Tombs;
Who mauger death, that spoils his prey,
Made marbled flesh, made Torch of Clay.
Preserved the still-kept Form entire,
Wastlesse by time, except By fire.
So the Ancients did embalm the dead,
After their precious Unguents spread,
Thus lent a being after death;
And gave perfume instead of breath.
The soul to life does greater rise,
When she the flesh most mortifies.
The sight is strange; but blessed the womb
That bears a child within a Tomb.
CONSOLATORY ESSAY X.
FOr want of a right Apprehension of Things, as they are in themselves, as in
their own Natures, we are led too often, and carried too far out of the Way. We
are many times cozened with Mock-shewes for real Things. Hence our Affections
taking all at the Volee, wanting likewise Direction by true Knowledge to their
proper Marks, do not so much miss their Aim, as altogether miscarry. This is a
visible Discovery of want of Judgment too; Or, that it is so perverted, as it
is become the Child of a Harlot, and not of a lawful Mother, the Natural-born
of Sense, and not the Son of Reason.

How else can it come to pass that the Noble Soul of Man should so basely
please it self with as foul, as general a habit, and custom of brutish hunting
for the Back, and Belly; And to ro^ in the Mire with trivial Vanities, and
sordid Pleasures; Yea, to run with Ambition after a Butter-flie, a painted
light thing, a popular Name, a Breath, a Nothing; And to neglect the divine
Contemplation, gallant Attempt, and most excellent Acquisition of Heavenly
matters!

How else comes it about that no pains is thought enough to fetch a little
glittering Earth from the remotest parts of the World from the Indies. It is no
more. Nor of the Dignity of that which lies upon the Surface. Gold has the
lower place by Nature. No storm must withstand us. No length of Journey tire
us. Nor Hazard discourage us. No, we must have it; Though it brings Pluto's
Plagues with it; Covetousness, Contention, and a thousand Evils. Yet is it
neither Food, nor Raiment. Midas found in the Fable, that it was not edible.
And Licurgus in the Constitution of his Laconian Commonwealth, and in the
Institution of his Laws condemned it, as not necessary. He therefore shut it
out of their Gates for a Wrangler; or more properly for the prevention of a
Quarrel. It was against his Community, and Commutative Justice.

How else arises it, that we are so hurried about with our Passions, as if we
rode upon theSphears with a rapid motion, for the obtaining of those things,
that are so far from being necessary, as they are not convenient; as for
Pleasures, in regard of Health, and rest; for Honors, in respect of
Contentment, and safe enjoyment.

Were any of these things either of Value or Certainty, there were some excuse
for Appetite. Let us go to Solomon, the wisest of men, to him that had the
Treasury of Knowledge of all from the Cedar to the Shrub, that abounded with
the means, and judgment in the variety of his Experiments. What says he after
his large Progress? Vanity of vanities, says the Preacher, vanity of
vanities, all is vanity! What profit has a man of all his labor which he
takes under the Sun? That Is his Beginning. And what says he in the midst of
his Inquisition? Lo, this only have I found, that God made man upright, but
they have many inventions. And what is his winding up in the close of All? Take
his own Words, and Gods Holy Spirit in them. Let us hear the End of all. Fear
God and keep his Commandments: For this is the whole duty of Man. For God
shall bring every work into judgment, with every secret thing, whether it be
good, or whether it be evil. How Folly and Death are in a Conspiracy
together! The Vanities of the World are Sin, and the Wages of Sin is Death. It
is time to look about us; since our enemies are at hand. But which way shall we
escape them? Let us contemn the World! and we avoid its Folly. Let us mortify
our selves, and we have the better of Death.

Draw then near, thou sad-fac't Soul! that have been overcome with the one, and
art in Danger of the other! Me thinks I see Death in thy Face. Thou look as
though he were in thy Head, if not in thy Heart. Thou art Misery all over, and
die thou must. Thou must not lose thy longing. Thou hidest from the Day; and
the Night is a Burden. Company is grievous; and Solitude dangerous, yet thou
love it.

How strangely thine Imaginations work! and as vainly. How thy Breast is upon
the Rack! and thy thoughts upon the Tenters! How thy Wishes fly into the
Wind! and thy Groans do answer one another by Echoes! What contrivances thou
have in thy secret Paths! and how cunning thou art to seek out a Mischief! Thou
art now rich enough. For thou art resolved, thy Poverty shall not starve thee,
thou may do that thy self. Thou art now great enough; another shall not give
thee a Fall. Will thou undo thy self, that another may not undo thee? It Is not
to be altered. Die thou will. Only the manner of Death is the question.

Come hither, Backsliding Man! Here is thy nearest way; and thy best Death. And
since nothing would down with thee, but Death, thou shall have enough of
self-killing. Here is a Death that is at hand, and full of safety. Thou may
do it by good Authority. This Death is lawful. Thou shall not need to travel
among opinions; to search among the learned for Arguments; to strain the sense
of Mutilation; or to put the Fallacy upon eadem est ratio totius, and partium;
Thou shall not need to try thy Wit to gather poison. Here is a Death to
purpose; Thou must kill thy self all over. The Dagger, or the like strikes but
at a Part; This strikes at all. Mortify the Flesh! and the sinful Members
thereof! and thou offerest a Sacrifice; and committest not a Murder. But
Sacrifice not as those to Moloch: For that is such a Sacrifice as has Murder,
and Abomination joined to it. Draw thine Affections off from the World! And
thou have drawn a Dagger against Temptations. Fast! and thou starvest thy
worser self. Fast! ad mortificationem carnis, non usque ad mortem corporis, to
the mortification of thy sinful Flesh, not to the destruction of thy human
Body. Pray! and thy wicked purposes fall by a holy Sword. Mortify thy Lusts!
and in that instant thou art a dead man. And thou shall not need to fear thy
dying; For thou risest to a new life, and have given thee a better Being. Since
thou were so bloody minded thou shall have enough of Self-killing, even to
weariness. Thou must Kill by mortifying thy Self daily; and thou shall have
Joy, and Life by it. Since thou were so bloody minded, take thy Savior's
Blood, and may I say with reverence, Sanguinem sitisti, sanguinem bibe; Did
thou thirst for Blood? Drink that! not as there it was spoken a punishment or
contempt to Cyrus, but as a Mystery of Reconciliation of Christ to thy Soul;
and as Sanguis est rivus vitae, Blood is the River of life, so shall thou taste
vitam in sanguine the fountain of everlasting life by the stream of that
Blood. Ego sum fons, ego sum vita, says our Savior. I am the Well, and I am
the life. When Sara was old, and dead to worldly Affections, she bare Isaac the
Child of Promise. If thou have not mortified in thee worldly Affections, thou
shall never arrive at the Joy of the Spirit. Therefore we faint not, says
Saint Paul, but though our outward man perish, yet the inward man is renewed
daily. 2. Cor. 4. 16. Therefore if any man be in Christ, let him be a new
creature. Old things are passed away. Behold all things are become new. verse.
17.

Does thine Eye offend thee? Pluck it out. Prevent occasion, that is the sense
of the Letter, according to the most Learned Expositors; and has coherence
with the other parts of holy Scripture. Art thou libidinous? Fasting is the
best Castration. Throw thy Pride in the Fire! Drown thy lust in thy Tears! Make
away thy self from the World to Godward! Not by killing of thy self in Body,
but by Mortifying thy Concupiscences, and Appetite in thy Members to evil. Sic
nec alter; so not otherwise is Self-killing lawful.

CANTO. XI. The Farm of Self-Resignation.
1.
BY Reconciliation's Tents
Thou travel'st now, where bending way indents,
Where with this Brother, and with that thou mendest rents.
What thou have borrowed here thou needs must pay;
Or what thou can. From which make little stay.
Ill words, bad works Gangreen, not cured this way.
They gifts unto each other give, and send,
So former Foe they change to new-made Friend.
Gain Heaven too; and that safely guards them to their end.
2.
Most fair interpretation draws
'Twixt often contending parties, wholesome Laws;
What reason cannot compose well, there Religion aws.
Here the one to the other Alms does freely deal.
With much delight th'ones wound does the other heal.
To Laws, drawn thus, does pardon set her seal.
Which is sent up to th'Empyrean Court,
Presented thither in most humble sort;
Accepted, and confirmed, down's sent a pardon for it.
3.
With throbbing heart, and panting breath,
Wet eyes, and wounded feet; above, beneath,
Thou Have gone through dismal ways, by thousand paths of death
Take rest awhile! The wilderness is past;
As scaping storm thou now may Anchor cast.
Bid sour and bitter things farewell! Sweets taste!
See! Fertile Land enrich't by ploughmans pains!
Do show him plenty, placed in several veins.
The Fields with fullness laugh, the Swain at pregnant gains.
4.
It Is pleasant news the crowing Cock.
How he to comfort's Dawn's the chaunting clock!
How he does wild beasts fright, when he his wings does
Here self by lelf does Resignation dwell (knock!
Within a spacious Farm of doing well.
He pays himself for Rent; No coin needs tell.
But every New-year sends to's Lord a Heart,
A wreath of Laurel, and a winged Dart:
Such is his Tenure, which for All he pays in part.
5.
The Lord (say some, and those say well)
Above the Empyrean hill aloft does dwell.
The Glory of his seat can none that is mortal tell.
None like his Tenent, keeps a house so free.
At every Court yet must surrender be.
He then re-grants. None bountiful as he!
A Fence does grow about the encircled ground.
A living wall of safety all does Bound.
And every thing does thrive, which that does so surround.
6.
That River which in Post does go,
Does disembogued waters to Sea throw;
And sea through Earth's chose bosom his head springs to.
Whose gliding streams, or falling showrs of rain,
In pious thankfulness it sends again
To the vast bounty of the searchless Main.
And in his Course see, how Meanders wind!
With clear, and joy'd embraces seeming kind!
But onward hasts away, and leaves the earth behind.
7.
About the house Trees growing high,
As Cedars spreading Tops, A wood stands by;
Whose branches seem to root within the lofty sky.
It Is cal^d Man's Will, which, when the storms do come;
Is best Protection for the Farmer's Room;
To which his cattle run for shelter home.
For on their Tops a Tree does strangely grow,
Even down from Heaven, that Mortals here below
Cannot think what it should be; fruits dropping partly show.
8.
Within a fragrant Meadow near
Mild Consolation gathers every where (dear.
Choice beauteous flowers for many a one that she counts
With Chaplets some by her their head have dressed.
With Nosegayes she perfumes some others breast.
On beds of sweets she others lays to rest.
While like an Angel Love Divine stands by.
Heart-headed shafts Love shoots from thoughts that fly
^eather'd with Zeal, their expectation cuts through sky.
9.
Their Contentations Cott behold!
How well it is placed from too much heat, or cold!
See not her pleasant Lambs skip, driving to the Fold!
She Is Resignations Neighbor, and self-friend;
Regarding naught, but what may chiefly tend
To Resignations Heaven-desired End.
There real Pleasure dwells. It Is always Spring.
There are renewing Quires, that still do sing. (sting.
There naught breeds on that Ground, that venom has or
10.
Aloof, upon sinister hand,
Thine eye a floating Isle may now command
Within a troubled sea. They call it wishes Land.
Where every one does seek, what the other has,
And madly think to grind at Mills of Glass
Caught Atoms, which with wind away do pass.
Some bubbles blow into the laughing Air;
To which they fondly vent their foolish Prayer;
And when those break, they cries do send to grim despair.
But turn unto the Right! Behold a sight most fair!
11.
As Globes of Ivory, two Hills,
Embroder'd 'ore with Azure-veined Rills, (distills.
Have 'twixt them beauties Plain, through which each stream
Within this Plain a Virgin comely dressed,
Sits with dishevll'd Locks, in snowie vest:
And with a Crimson Cross upon her breast.
She sweetly sings unto the flowing streams,
The while the Sun dispenceth smiling Beams.
Thus Conscience sits; and tunes her self-instructing Theams.
12.
To Resignation from above,
Descends an Angel from the height of Love,
That with Protections Scepter ore the Farm does move.
See! Blessed are the stock, and thriving Kine;
Whose swelling Udders in white streams do join,
In praise of him them feeds, showered milk resign.
And if at any time there come command,
For all the Stock, or any fruit of the Land.
It is presented up with Free-will-offering hand.
13.
And when there is offered all that Store,
Still Resignation cries, Lord wilt have more?
Accept my Self! Alas! I give but thine before.
Here learn thine easy Lesson! It is plain.
Thou shall not need thy busy Wits to strain.
Get it by heart! It will refresh thy Brain.
Then Contentations Bliss thou shall enjoy.
No noise the Song of Conscience shall destroy.
For Reconciliation fills thy Soul with Joy.
But on! For Perseverance leads a Heavenly Way.
PERSPECTIVE XI.
A Farm signifies with us House, or Land, or Both, taken by Indenture of
Lease, or Lease parol, which is a Lease by word of mouth, as it is vulgarly
said; Firma from the Latin word Firmus, for locare ad firmum, is as much as to
set, or let to farm. The reason whereof may be in respect of the sure hold,
they have above Tenants at will. The author of the New Terms of Law deriveth
this word from the Saxon (...), which signifies to feed or yield victual. For
in ancient time the reservations were as well in victuals, as money. And so we
take it here, but more largely, as a benefit bestowed by the Lord of All, who
is the free Giver of all good Gifts, reserving all pure right, and property to
himself, that all his Creatures may have their due, and fit dependency upon
him, being to him tenants at Will.

Resignation] Resignatio is used among the Civilians for the giving up of a
Benefice into the hands of the Ordinary, otherwise called by the Canonists
Reunnciatio. And though it signify all one in nature with the word, Surrender,
yet it is by use more restrained to the yielding up of a spiritual Living,
into the hands of the Ordinary, and Surrender to the giving up of temporal
Lands into the hands of the Lord. And Resignation had wont to be made into the
hands of the King, as well as of the Diocesan, because he had Supremam
authoritatem Ecclesiasticam, as the Pope had in times past.

1. By Reconcialition's Tents] Tents a tenendo, from holding, and fastening
unto. But rather from tendo to stretch, and spread; to extend. Which is the
nature of love both to lay, and cemen^ together, and to enlarge all good
offices for the piecing together, or continuing of Amity. Such is the part of
Reconciliation betwixt man and man, which must first be done, before we can
hope for the excellent state of Reconciliation betwixt God, and man.

Thou travell'st now, where bending way indents] Which is the way of
moderation; And that is the nearest way, or outward means to mediate friendship
between those, that have been at ods, That is the best way for the working of
an Atonement between parties at variance. Likewise in the way of Compremise,
both parties, setting by Interest, do incline to amicable terms the one with
the other.

Wherewith this Brother, and with that thou mendest rents] By the Means of
Moderation, Reconciliation is obtained, Ruptures, and Breaches betwixt men are
in one conjoined, and confirmed in Amity. Seneca hereupon says very well,
Dissentio ab aliis, a te reconciliatio incipiat. Cum ignoscis ita beneficium
tuum tempera, ut non ignoscere videaris, sed absolvere. Quia gravissimum poenae
genus est, contumeliosa venia. Let others begin Dissension, but let none be
before thee in Reconciliation. And when thou do pardon, so temper such a
Benefit, that thou do not only seem to forgive, but that thou do absolve
him, not only to free him of the fault, wherein he has offended, but even to
blot out of Remembrance all such evil, as he then, and therein committed
against him. Do not do it grudgingly,. For there cannot be a more grievous
kind of punishment, then a churlish Pardon.

What thou have borrowed here thou needs must pay; Or etc.] Thou must make
Satisfaction for all injuries to the full, if thou can, if not, to thy
power. Thou must be reconciled in tune. According to that of Our most blessed
Savior; Matthew: 5. 23. 24. If then thou bring thy gift to the Altar, and there
remembrest that thy brother has ought against thee, Leave there thine offering
before the Altar, and go thy Way: first be reconciled to thy Brother, and then
come and offer thy gift. Whereupon S. Gregory, Dial. lib. 4. Sciendum quod ille
recte delicti sui veniam postulat, qui prius ho^, quod in ipso delinquitur,
relaxat. We must hereby understand, hat he does rightly ask pardon for his
offense, that first forgives another what he has offended him. Qua in re
pensandum est, ^um omnis culpae munere solvatur, quam gravis est discordiae,
qua nec munus accipitur, nec proximus reconciliatur. Debemus itaque ad
proximum, quamvis long positum, long eque disjunctum merito ire, e^que animum
subjicere, humilitate, ac benevolentia placere. Seeing that every other
Trespass may be satisfied by a gift, we are to consider how heavy a thing is
that of Discord, whereby neither is thy gift received, nor thy Neighbor
reconciled. Therefore ought we to make haste with a willing mind to find out
our Neighbor, though he be far from thee in place, and further distant by
Disaffection, and to submit thy self unto him, with Humility and all fair means
to appease, and gain him. Owe nothing to any man, but good Will.

Or what thou canst] Si cogitatu offendisti, cogitatu reconciliare; si verbis,
verbis; si factis, factis. Non enim quem factis laesisti, sine factis
placaveris, says S. Chrysostom upon the fifth of S. Matthew. If thou have
offended against thy Brother in thought, be in thought reconciled unto him; If
by Words, let thy Tongue ask thy Pardon; If in Deeds, give him satisfaction by
Deeds likewise. For whom thou have injured in Action, thou can not appease
without a suitable Satisfaction. Yet do what thou can herein, that thy good
Will in Gods sight may be accepted for the Deed.

From which make little stay! Ill words, bad Works, etc.] Mora facit periculum.
Delay is the Nurse of Danger. Agree with thine Adversary quickly, whiles thou
art in the way with him; Lest thine Adversary deliver thee to the Judge, and
the Judge deliver thee to the Sergeant, and thou be cast into Prison. Verily
I say unto thee, thou shall not come out thence, till thou have paid the utmost
farthing. Matthew. 5. 25, 26.

They gifts unto each other give, and send, etc.] In Sign of Benevolence.
Greet one another with an holy kiss, as S. Paul. Beneficium est benevola actio
tribuens, captansque gaudium, tribuendo id, quod agit. A Benefit is a
well-willing action, giving, and taking Delight in bestowing whatsoever it
gives.

So former foe they change to new made Friend] Officiorum assiduitate hosts
conciliandi sunt. Even Enemies are by many a good turn reconciled.

Gain Heaven to] Here is the Place taken for the Deity. Benefaccre homini est,
beneficium magnum apud Deum deponere. Behold the infinite Goodness of the Lord,
that he is pleased so far to condescend, that he accepts what good deed
soever is done to Man, to his little Ones, he accounts it, as a Benefit done
unto Himself. Ante Dei oculos non est vacua manus a munere, si arca cordis
plena est bona voluntate. Our Savior speaks in a fuller Sense. Whosoever
gives a Cup of Water in my Name, shall not go without a Reward.

And that safely guards him to his End] Divine Protection never forsakes those,
that do well unto others; He, that does delight in good deeds, is not wanting
of many Blessings.

2. Most fair Interpretation, draws) They that seek peace make a fair, and
candid interpretation of All things. Obstinacy endures not the closure of
Hearts in one; And Suspicion permits not so good a thought, as that there is
love from another. Huic duplici morbo duplex charitas medetur; Illa scilicet,
quae non sua quaerit, et iterum illa, quae omnia credit. To these two sick
Patients a twofold Charity is the curing Physician, giving the Pill unto the
one, That she seeks not her own; And the Cordial to the other, That she
believes, and makes the best of all that she hears.

Twixt eft-contending Parties wholesome Laws) This expression is taken from the
manner of arbitrament, that is made in way of agreement between such as have
contended at Law, in which both parties give, and seal Releases to one another
after their Articles of Agreement.

What Reason cannot compose well, there Religion awes] Arguments are to be used
of all sorts according to the several dispositions, and tempers of men to
promote peace, and to procure atonement. Si quid Religionis oritur, quicunque
resist it, quicunque repugnat plane cum Aegyptijis parvulos Israelitici
germinis necare conatur, Imo cum Herod nascentem persequitur Salvatorem. If
any strength of perswation be taken from Religion, whosoever withstands it,
whosoever resists it, does declare himself a Conspirator with the Egyptians
to murder the Children of the people of Israel; Yea; more, he joins with Herod
in the persecution of Our Savior to murder him at his Birth. Though men may
seem to put off Reason, while it is difficult to preserve themselves men, they
cannot cast off the dictate of their own Consciences.

Here the one to the other Alms do freely deal] Reconciled Hearts strive to
outvie one another in actions of love, the more to manifest their clear
affections to the same. Alms are not only charitable deeds unto the Poor,
which is a necessary and excellent Christian duty, but an obedience to that
commandment of Christ, Love one another; with a strong reason to back it. For
if thou love not thy Brother, whom thou have seen, how can thou love God,
whom thou have not seen. Saint Augustine gives his sense of dealing of Alms
very apposite to this purpose: Qui vult ordinate dare elcemosynam, a seipso
debet incipere, et eam fibi primo dare. He that would well order the Dispose of
his Alms, must begin at himself. He should bestow alms first upon himself.
There is most need, according to the Proverb, Charity begins at home. Est enim
elcemosyna opus misericordiae, verissim^quae dictum est, Miserere animae tuae
placens Deo. For Almsgiving being a work of mercy, it is most truly said if
thou intend'st to please God, be merciful to thine own Soul.

With much delight th'ones wounds does the other heal] As the Unguentum
armarium, or weapon-salve is said to heal by Sympathy. It is the property of
Charity to nourish concord, to preserve Love and Agreement, to conjoyn, and
make up the breaches of those that are divided, to direct those that are out of
the way, and to consolidate, and fortify all Virtues by the strength of her
own perfection; so that whosoever obtains Charity to take root within him,
nec a veritate deficit, neither fails of the Truth, nec a fructu inanescit,
nor can be without fruit. Experience of self-misery teaches the Compassion of
another.

To Laws drawn thus does Pardon set her Seal] In reconciliation of those that
have been separated in their affections, there is not only a Final agreement
undertaken, and settled, but an absolute acquittance of all injuries and
obliteration of the same is sealed. S. August. de verb. Domini, speaks
pleasantly upon the words of our Savior, to invite to the forgiveness of our
brother. Audistis formam, si septuagies septies. Christus peccata tibi donavit:
si huc usque ignovit, and ultra negavit: Pone and tu limitem, and ulterius noli
ignoscere. You have heard the manner of forgivenesses that Christ appointed;
that thou should forgive thy brother seventy times seven in a day, as he
has forgiven thee. If he has pardoned thee so far, but has set a bound
there, not to exceed. Go thou to that Pillar! and go no further! Thou shall not
need.

Which is sent up to the Empyrean Court] Our good deeds are Registered in
heaven, which is the Coelum Empyreum, the Heaven of heavens, above the Fabric
of this world, the Throne of the Almighty.

Presented thither in most humble sort, accepted and confirmd, etc. The
operation of our Alms by faith in Christ is effectual with the Father, and
accepted as our Prayers. As that Petition especially in that Prayer which our
blessed Lord taught us. Forgive our Debts, our Trespasses as we forgive them
that are indebted to us, or Trespass against us. Here is forgiveness for
forgiveness: forgive thy brother, and God forgives thee: the one Pardon does
not only obtain the other, but in a manner it seals it. O formidosa sententia
(cries out S. Hierom) si parva fratribus non dimittimus, magna nobis a Deo non
dimittuntur. O sentence to be trembled at! If we will not forgive our Brethren
small offenses, God will not forgive us our far greater sins.

The sum of these two preceding Stanza's is, that there must be
Reconciliation with thy brother, before thy gift of Resignation can be accepted
by God.

3. With throbbing heart] With many a stroke of Conscience, with the contrition
of Repentance, in the fear of the Lord.

And panting breath] As when a man is almost out of wind with much labor, and
sore travel; having even spent his spirits, full of faintness and weakness.

Wet eyes] Flowing sorrows; having undergone many doleful miseries.

And wounded feet] Having endured a world of injuries, Afflictions, and
persecutions, the portion of a Christian.

Above] The trials of prosperity, which is called the height of fortune, having
been subject to envy, malice, slander, and the Evils that accompany and haunt
an eminent Being, being set up, as it were, a mark for all to shoot at.

Beneath] Having passed through the Calamities of adversity, through scoffs,
and scorns, the derision and contempt by the World, the usual tramplers upon
low conditions.

Thou Have gone through dismal wayes] Through disconsolate difficulties, very
displeasing to flesh and blood to endure; Ways, the common and usual passages
of the world; dismal ways, full of frights, and fears; among the tempests and
storms of malice; many troubles, and disadvantages; amidst the darkness of
ignorance, and misconstruction; through myrie entanglements, plunging cares,
and the dirt of calumny and evil censure.

By thousand paths of death] By numberless perils, and most hazardous dangers,
leading thee to gaping destruction, that was ready to swallow thee up. The
beginning of this Stanza is a kind of review, or recapitulation of the hardship
of their former travel. That they have escaped the foul den of idleness: that
they have gone by the mournful Grott of Repentance: that they have journeyed
through the uncomfortable Wilderness of Tribulation: that they have not
omitted the fruitful vale of tears: that they have accosted the lowly Gell of
humility: that they have refreshed at the holy house of Prayer: that they have
climbed the lofty Mount of Faith: that they have passed the strong camp of
Resolution: that they have visited the storm-beaten Lodge of Patience: that
they have touched at the sad Ruins of Mortification: that now they are come to
the sight of the contented Farm of self-Resignation. Therefore now pause; sit
thee down and rest thee awhile after so much trouble and labor.

Take rest awhile] Consider all these things; the mercies and blessings of God,
his wonderful assistance, and most excellent preservation amidst, and out of
al these miseries and dangers.

The wilderness is past] Thou may be comforted; for the World is gone over.
Thou Art past the ruggedness of the world. Thou Have turned thy back on it. It Is
behind thee. Now thou have pleasant and smooth way. Thou Art even within sight of
thy happiness.

As'scaping storm, thou now may Anchor cast] Thou Art come to much perfection
in Christianity, when thou attainest to Self-Resignation, and the contempt of
the world. Thou have escaped and got out of the jaws of a world of trouble:
thou art in sight of thy Port; heaven is in thine eye; the storm is over. Thou
have a calm in thy breast.

Bid sour and bitter things farewell! Sweets taste!) Thou take leave of pain
and care. For comforts come not to thine eye only, but to thy enjoyment.

See fertile Land enrich't by ploughmans pains) This alludes to the Parable of
the husbandman, or the sower that went out to sow seed, S. Matthew. 13. 3. The
Ploughman here, is that Husbandman, that Sower. The fertile Land is the hearts
of the Faithful. The enriching of that Land by the Ploughmans pains, is the
culture of the Ministry of the Word, that by ploughing up those wild and
overgrown hearts, breaking in sunder, and turning up their inordinate
affections, they are enriched and fitted to receive the sown seed of the word,
and to bring forth a full and plentiful Crop in due season, according to the
expression in the next verse.

Does show him plenty placed in several veins) That is Our blessed Savior
Jesus Christ, from whom the Apostles in Primitive times received the
Apostleship, as he had received it from his Father; and the Bishops in that,
and after Ages received and derived the same successively from them, as also
the Pastors, and Ministers of the holy word, who likewise receive their
subadministrations from those superior hands; that Church Congregate, whereof
Christ is the head, is that Ploughman meant in this Allegory, who behold the
plenty of the Crop appearing, the Congregation of the faithful in the Church
Militant arising, and showing, the Saints upon earth (being part of the number
with those in the Church Triumphant that were given to the Son by the Father to
bestow upon them eternal life, when all Power was given him over all flesh, as
it is in the 17. of S. John.) Making manifest his Doctrine in his holy Gospel
by their Christian profession, and Godly conversation, by their believing and
steadfast faith, and their active Obedience to his commandments..

The fields with fullness laugh, the Swain at pregnant gains) The Lord
delights to see his Vine fruitful, and the Saints rejoice in the strength of
his Salvation. As Solomon sings, Cant. 8. 5. Who is this that comes up out
of the Wilderness, leaning upon her well-beloved? Swain is a Pastoral term
for a Shepherd. The fields (by a Metonymie, that is continens pro re contenta,
that which contains is taken for that which is contained) are the sheep that
feed in the fields. Who is she that comes up out of the wilderness, like
pillars of smock perfumed with Myrrh, and Incense, and with all the spices of
the Merchant? Cant. 3. 6. Thy teeth are like a fleck of sheep in good order,
which go up from the washing: which every one bring out twins, and none is
barren among them. The Lord is my shepherd! I shall not want (sings David
also.) He makes me to rest in green pastures, and leads me by the still
waters, Ps. 23.

4. It Is pleasant news, the crowing Cock) It is a sign that they have past the
Wilderness, and are come near some habitation, which is no little comfort to
the Pilgrim and traveller: Poor Christians in this world, are glad when the
wilderness, the world is behind them, when they are near their happy
expectation; when they draw toward their journeys end. Cupio dissolvi, and
esse cum Christo, was Saint Paul's longing, he fain wu'd put off his mortality,
that he might put on immortality. He was sick of love: needs must he be with
Christ. The crowing Cock, Victoriae Hieroglyphicum, is the Hieroglyphick of
victory. Hinc lacedaemonii, as Plutarch relates, cum hostem viribus
profligassent, Gallum immolabant, upon this account the Lacedaemonians when
they had worsted and scattered their enemies, the crowing Cock vigiliarum
signum, a sign of watching, therefore dedicated to Mercury. Alciate is of the
like opinion, making him the Emblem of vigilance.

Instantis quod signa canens dat Gallus Eoi,
Et revocet famula ad nova pensa manus,
Turribus in sacris effingitur. Aerea mentem
Ad superos pelvis quod revocet vigilem.
Rendered by the Author.

Because the crowing Cock does trumpet up the Sun,
Calls household hands to vie with day begun.
On hallowed Pinacles he is placed, that is gilded head
To heaven the watchful thoughts of men may lead.
Alciate hereby intimating a twofold vigilance. One of the Body, the other of
the Mind. Corporis vigilantiam Gallus referat, qui homines ad labores solet
excitare. The Cock refers to the former, because his crowing awakeneth, and
stirs men up to labor. Campana vero, quia mentem ad Deum excitat, Symbolum
interioris vigilantiae continet. The Cock refers to the latter, as a Bell,
that raises up the mind to God, and so does signify the Symbol of
watchfulness unto the mind.

How he to comfort's dawns the chaunting clock) Candoris animi signum. The
crowing Cock is a sign of candor, and integrity of mind. For that Emblem of a
Cock with the motto over his head of Sic animus, expressed the same to the
Life, setting forth that he who demonstrateth the clearness of his mind,
cannot be disturbed, cannot be offended, a quavis externa injuria, by any
outward injury whatsoever. And as that lofty Wit Scaliger acutely mentions in
his Riddle of a Hen, it may be said of the Cock.

Cui lux ante diem, tenebrae sunt ante tenebras. Fore day sees Light.
Fore dark sees night.
He discovers comfort, and Emblematizeth Providence, and foresight. Which sense
more particularly closes with the Meaning of the Traveller here, though all
the rest are congruous to a Christian, who though he meet with much offense in
his journey, yet the vigor of his spirit to Godward, clearness of his
Conscience toward Man, his foreknowledge of future happiness, and foresight
of approaching evils, makes him prudent in his walking, comforts him, preserves
him amidst his troubles, and leads him wisely on to Self-Resignation, to the
giving himself up to Gods dispose, under which shelter is the only safety.

How he does wild Beasts fright when he his Wings does knock] The Cock for his
Courage and Magnanimity is called Martis pullus, Mars his Bird, quasi ad bella
pugnasque magnopere propensus, being exceeding ready to the Battle, and very
forward to the Combat. He is animal solare, for his regard of the Sun, and he
has a Majesty in his Eye. A Trumpet in his Throat, and the Shock of a Battle
in his Breast: and the Stroke of the Day in his Wings, and Daggers in his
Heels. If we may believe Pliny, Solinus, Aelian; Proclus, Lucretius, and
others, it will appear, Gallum a Leone timeri, that the Lion is frighted by,
and stands in awe of the Cock. Angui quoque Gallus terrori est. The Serpent
cannot endure him. Basiliscus ipsum horret. The Basilisk does tremble at the
sight of this Champion Hunc aiunt mirabile dictu, cum Gallum videre forte
contingit, animo tremere, et cum cucurientem audit, tanto terrore concuti, ut
emoriatur. It is scarce to be believed, what is said of him that when the
Basilisk chances to see the Cock, he is stricken with a strange terror, but
when he hears him, he is so wonderfully affrighted, that he dies upon the
place. Quam rem non ignorantes, qui per immensas Cyrenensium solitudines, quae
pestem illam, et singular in terris malum gignunt, iter faciunt, Gallum
itineris comitem sibi adjungunt, qui cantu suo truculentissimam illam bestiam
long abigat, reports Aelian lib. 3. c. 31. Whereof those Travailers that
pass the dangerous and vast Lybean Deserts, which produce such a mischief,
and, where only, a Creature of that pestilent nature is bred and brought
forth, for safety sake they make the Cock their companion in their Travel, who
at the Clapping of his wings and the shrillness of his crowing, may drive away
far from them a Beast of that horrid countenance. There is much more furniture
of this sort, if the room were not so small, and this place so straight. Some
are of Opinion that Christ is meant by the Cock in holy Scripture, dormientes
excitans et quasi calcaribus comminationum, that I may use their words, pungens
and stimulans. Waking those, that laid asleep in sin, and security, and as it
were pricking with the spurs of his threats, and striking with the sharp heel
of his comminations. So Vitriacus Cardinalis. Venerable Bede lib. 9. Expos.
Tob. c. 7. Interprets thus: Gallum puto esse unumquemque Sanctorum, qui in
nocte, and tenebris hujus mundi accipiunt per fidem intelligentiam, and
virtutis constantiam clamandi ad Deum, ut aspiceret jam dies permanens, et
amoveantur umbrae vitae praesentis, qui urgent item sequenti clamore precum
suorum, dicentes. Emi^^te Lucem tuam, et veritatem tuam. Quod de Prophetis
intelligere possumus, qui certatim annunciaverunt Diei et Solis adventum. I
conceive the Cock to be every one of the Saints, that receive in the Night and
Darkness of this world understanding by Faith, and the constancy of the virtue
of crying to God, that the ever living Day might behold them, and that the
shadows of this present life may be removed, still enforcing their continued
cries and petitions, in these words: Let thy light and thy truth break forth.
Which we may likewise understand of the Prophets, who in a manner strived to
exceed one another in the annunciation of the coming of the Day and the Sun.
But nearer our matter is their Verdict, that apply it to the Messengers of the
Gospel, Gallus succinctus lumbos, id est, praedicatores, inter hujus noctis
tenebras verum mane nunciantes. The Cock that has his loins girt is the
Preacher of the word who declares the Truth betimes in the morning amidst the
darkness of this night. Praedicator quisque plus actibus, quam vocibus
insonet, et been vivendo vestigia sequacibus imprimat, ut potius agendo, quam
loquendo, quo gradiatur, ostendat, quia et Gallus ipse, cum jam edere cantus
parat, prius alas excutit, et semetipsum feriens vigilantiorem reddit. The
Preacher must sound by his life as well as his doctrine, and by living well,
Leave to his followers the footsteps of a good example, that he may show them
their way, whither they are to go rather by good deeds, than words, by the
hand, and the foot, rather than the Tongue; Because the very Cock when he
prepares himself to crow, first smites his wings, and striking himself, makes
himself the more watchful. His Note is Hora est jam nos de somno surgere. It is
time that we should awake from sleep! from sin! Evigilate justi! Nolite
peccare! Awake unto righteousness! sin not! The Cock then is the Preacher; The
wild Beasts are the World, the Flesh and the Devil; The crowing of the Cock is
the Publication of the Cospel, which remembered Peter, when he denied his
Master. The frighting of those wild Beasts is the repelling, and driving away
Temptations. But Simia odit Gallum, the Ape, the world, does hate, despises
his Voice, and with the deaf Adder stops his ears, though the Charmer
charmeth never so wisely.

Here Self by Self does Resignation dwell] In the Farm, in the Soul does
Resignation inhabit; In God's Promises, in the obedience to his will, and
Commandments does Christianity rest; self by self, laying by, and casting off
all manner of self confidence, or trust in any worldly help or strength only
submitting unto Divine Pleasure and God's Dispose.

Within a spacious Farm of doing well] A godly Life, and Conversation.

He pays Himself for Rent, No coin needs tell] Here the Will is taken for the
whole Man; so is the Will accepted at Gods Hands for the Deed. No Coin needs
tell, God delights in Obedience rather than Sacrifice. Man's Self is the best
payment to be tendered unto God, being enstamped in his Creation with the Image
of Himself, and being as it were new minted in his Redemption.

But every New Year sends to's Lord a Heart] At his Regeneration, and being
renewed in the Spirit, he presents, what his Lord reserves, Da mihi Cor, Give
me thy Heart, that belongs unto God only, and is the best New Years Gift to
the Master of All.

A Wreath of Laurel] Is Praise unto his Holy Name, and everliving
acknowledgement for all his Blessings, especially for that of our Salvation.

Or a winged Dart] Is Prayer that flies up to Heaven, that sticks, and
remains there, which is for assisting Grace, or for whatsoever the Soul
stands in need of.

Such is his Tenure, which for all he pays in part] This is the Jew and
Christian commanded to do by the Commandments in the Law, and by the Love that
is required in the Gospel. He that loves me, keeps my Commandments, says
our blessed Lord and Savior. Yet the most Righteous cannot be perfect in this
World, he pays but part for all his Duty; and with an earnest Will it is
accepted too through Faith in Christ. All is the Lords, and he pleases to
accept our acknowledgement. He requires only that we glorify him for all his
Benefits.

5. The Lord (say some, and those say well) All acknowledge not the Lord, only
his Elect know by Faith, who God is, and where he dwells.

Above the Empyraean Hill aloft does dwell] Heaven is his Throne.

The Glory of his Seat can none that is Mortal tell] It is ineffable. Neither
Eye has seen, nor Ear has heard, nor can Heart conceive, nor can it enter
into the Thought of Man the wonderful things that are prepared for those which
love the Lord, and expect his Appearing.

None like his tennant keeps a house so free] The Godly Man, the true Christian
is the happy Tennant unto the Lord of Lords. His Service is the only Liberty;
It is a reasonable Service says S. Paul. His Tenure is in Capite; He holds of
the King, of the Lord of Lords. His Grant is in He Farm, he depends on the
King, on the King of Kings. His is a Perpetuity, an Eternity of Bliss to
Himself and his Heirs, to his Body and Soul for ever; He does no Homage,
Healtie, or other Service to any, other then such as is especially comprised in
his Feoffment, only such as is contained in his Covenant, according to Sacred
Scripture. He is a Freeholder that he may give his Lord his Voice, that he may
magnify his Maker, that he may praise his Holy Name; He keeps Christmas
continually by his Bounty and loving Entertainment of his Neighbor; and he is
allowed for it. He keeps open House always by his Charity, and compassionate
relieving of the Needy, and shall be rewarded through Christ for it.

At every Court yet must surrender be] There must be obedience to his
Commandments; a ready and daily submission to his blessed pleasure. His Court
is a signification of his Will, and power. Surrender is in manus Domini, a
yielding up into the Lords hands, what the Tennant holds of him. It Is Curia
Baronis, He is Lord of the Manor, even Lord of the whole earth; for he is
Sovereign of all. In this Court his Suitors are Freeholders: Those
Freeholders Judges; such are the Saints who are in design joined to the great
Lord, at the last grand Court, the final summons, the day of Judgment. Their
Oath is their lawful Covenant exhibited by the Priest to the Conscience, and
sealed with a kiss of the Book by believing steadfastly in God according to his
holy word. This is a Court Christian likewise, wherein the great Bishop of our
souls is supreme Judge, and from whom there is no appeal. It is Curia
Requisitionum, a Court of Requests too, a Court of Equity, a Court of Mercy
instituted to the like purpose as the Chancery. His Court is every day; for he
is the Lord for ever.

He then regrants] The Lord is ready to be found by those that seek him: Job
must surrender his children, his estate, his good name, his friends, his
health, his All, with The Lord has given, and the Lord has taken, with a
Blessed be the name of the Lord; and then the Lord regrants, causes his
friends to submit to him, and gives him twice so much as he had before, Job 42.
10, 11. Then came unto him all his Brethren, and all his Sisters, and all they
that had been of his acquaintance before, and did eat bread with him in his
house, and had compassion of him, and comforted him for all the evil that the
Lord had brought upon him, and every man gave him a piece of money, and every
one an earing of gold. This was the Lords doing, and it is mavelous in our
eyes.

None bountiful as he] O wonderful Mercy! and unspeakable bounty of him that is
the free giver of all good gifts! O Lord, our God, how excellent is thy Name in
all the world! which have set thy glory above the Heavens! Out of the mouth of
Babes and Sucklings have thou ordained strength, because of thine enemies. that
thou might still the enemy, and the avenger. When I behold the Heavens, even
the work of thy fingers, the Moon, and the Stars, which thou have ordained.
What is man, say I, that thou art mindful of him? and the son of man that thou
visitest him? For thou have made him a little lower than God, and crowned him
with glory and worship. Thou have made him to have dominion in the works of
thine hands: thou have put all things under his feet: All sheep and Oxen, yea,
and the beasts of the field; the fouls of the air, and the fish of the Sea; and
that which passes through the paths of the Seas. O Lord, our Governor! how
excellent is thy name in all the world! Ps. 8.

A fence does grow about th'encircled ground, etc.] His Vineyard is hedged in
from the injury of the beasts of the field. His Providence, and Protection is
over all them that trust in him. All things thrive that are within his
enclosure. He is their strength and defense; he guardeth as with a shield.

6. That river which in poast does go, etc.] Here under the Allegory of a
River, the Rain, and the Sea, is described the nature and manner of a Christian
Self-Resignation. As the River pays its tribute unto the Ocean for what it has
received from its bounty, conveyed up through the earth to the head, and rising
fountain of the River. The Sea likewise that is in position above the earth,
from its immense abundance returns a continual supply for such thankfulness,
duty, return, and resignation; and as the waters send up their vapors in
clouds to heaven, Heaven pours down his Blessings in showers to refresh the
waters, and supply the Rivers, that in Love resign themselves unto the Sea
again. God is resembled by that bottomless sea, that unsearchable Abyss,
whose inscrutable paths are past finding out. The sea is a glass of the Deity,
in which man may by the weakness of expression to sense in a manner behold, and
have some conception in his mind, of the otherwise incomprehensible Almighty.
The River is man, that as it were flows from his Creation: His soul, as the
River is the Representation of the flood of the sea, is in likeness according
to the image of God his Creator, from whom it has its spirituality, and
immortality; for the very damned shall live for ever, though it is an everlasting
death in such a Life, by torment, and the privation of such bliss as the
blessed shall enjoy. The Clouds denote contentedness of resignation in parting
with its natural Place, the element of Waters, the World. The people therein
are a heap of Waters that Tide it to and fro in their several generations. The
fury of a multitude is compared in Scriptures to the raging of waters.

The River and the Sea even in obedience to the sun, send up their waters in
vapors, as his beams id a manner please to summon. For which resignation are
poured down again from the Firmament sweet waters, like blessings, in showers
and rain, that raise the streams of the River, fattening the neighboring
grounds with the abundance of heavens bestowed bounty; and as it were dancing
over their before confining banks for joy in the after smiling meadows, and
poast it flood away unto the Sea, in earnestness of desire to carry news of
what it is more than Channel could contain has yet received, and to communicate
with the waves of the Sea, their swelling felicity; yet in the Rivers
Semicircling and Meandring courses, it appears to embrace the earth with
seeming expression of Love and kindness, by its frequent windings, as in
charity with the world; but leaves it yet with a careless farewell, being
earnestly bent forward in its course without so much as looking back upon the
Hills, or making the least show of any returning. Which still more and more
sets forth that free Resignation of the Christian of himself, and whatsoever he
has received, unto the Lord that gave it, which procures from him blessings
still more and more to distill upon him, and obtains the pouring down upon him
the sweetness of spiritual rejoycings, and graces, which make fruitful in good
works, and put into his heart such a contempt of the Hills, of the greatness of
the world, that with cheerfulness he passes away without any regret at
parting, and hastes onward to his home, to Heaven the Ocean of his happiness.

7. About the house trees growing high, as Cedars spreading tops, etc.] When
the Acts or operations of the soul are to be made manifest by the description
of things belonging to sense, which are so exceedingly disproportionable unto
spiritual matters, the Pen that undertakes runs into much hazard upon
necessity, either on the one hand to fall very short of the proper, requisite,
and full expression that should be made concerning the same, or without the
excellency of a far greater skill, then the Author can find in himself, or
afsume, will remain not a little obscure. As this Stanza may give occasion of
instance, which to some may seem a Riddle. His adventure in this or the like of
his undertaking, may obtain excuse, howsoever in regard of the Example of that
famous Poet M. Spencer, who in the 22. Stanza of his 9. Canto in the second
Book of his Fairie Queen, putting Alma upon the description of the House of
Temperance, therein deciphering the curious Fabric of Man, has put many
Scholastic Wits, yea searned understandings to the plunge about the clearing
of the meaning of the same, which to this day is not sufficiently interpreted
in every part thereof, as though he had carried the Key with him of such a
Cabinet in his sheet into another world. This is not mentioned, as though
Affectation had begot Imitation, but the Author hops, that his Example may
stand, as a plea for privilege.

Now for the untying of any knots herein the better, First take the sense of
the words as here applied, and then of the matter.

The House) The Farm-house is the Christian Man.

The Trees) And these are to be considered in their bodies, and in their Tops.
The Bodies is the understanding, the Tops the Will. Voluntas est actus
intellectus, the will is an act of the understanding.

As Cedars) Is the tallness and loftiness of the understanding.

The Wood) Signifies strength and vigor, as well as shelter.

The branches seeming to root within the sky) Shows a fastening to Gods will
by Faith, and humility, whence it takes the lowly expression of a root for so
high a matter, as if a Christian compared to such a tree were turned with his
root upward, and that he received all his Life from thence. These branches so
rooted in the sky, are the Christian Man's Will.

Which when storms do come] The storms are Persecutions, Afflictions, and
Temptations, that violently press upon the Christian.

The Farmers room) Is the Soul.

His Cattle) Are his Affections, and all outward things that are the objects
thereof belonging to the outward man, as the relations to marriage, friendship,
prosperity, estate, or all outward comforts whatsoever.

Run for shelter) Seek repose and preservation.

Home) In the inward man.

The tree growing upon the tops, as down from Heaven) Is a a course shadowing
of Gods will; which tree seems to grow transvers't, as with the root in heaven,
with descending branches like Rays, which shoot into, entwine as tendrel of
Vines encompass, and grow among the tops of man's will, whereby the wood, the
understanding receives grace and protection for the Affections, to receive
stediness, and to obtain safety, and all outward things, to be under a blessing.

Mortals here below cannot think what it should be) The world understands not
the things of God; nor can the best of men find out the secrets of God,
otherwise than he has declared himself in his holy word.

Fruits dropping partly show) and those are external or internal. The external
are those acts that concern the outward man, which drop, fall, or proceed from
Divine direction and guidance, or permission and sufferance. The internal are
those operations that descend from above into the soul, either to terrify with
the presentation of his Justice, or to comfort with the offer of his mercy.
These discover fully Gods will to the understanding of man by his revealed
Word, and by his holy Spirit, that descends into the souls of Christian men;
But men understand but in part what might be there discovered.

The Sum is this: That whosoever resigneth his will freely and earnestly up to
God's will in all things with Thy will be done, has God for his best and only
Protector; whose Holy will seems joined to that Christian's, showing him the
works of his wisdom by the active demonstration of, or his permission by his
divine Dispose, which is better, than he could ask or apprehend. This Fruit
falling is not made manifest unto man but by Evidence of Action represented to
the sense or the Understanding.

All things are not only under the wisdom of God's Providence, but under the
power, though many not within his Protection. His Protection is an act of his
will, God's will may be said to be joined unto man's for his better protection,
when man's will is submitted and resigne'd unto God's for his better Direction,
which is not to be understood but by the fruit, which is the Excellency of his
evidenced most wise Dispose. So read we God's will directively in the best of
our Actions, permissively in our failings, Trials and Afflictions.

8. Within a fragrant Meadow near, Mild Consolation etc.] This Stanza is a
description of the several effects of self resignation, that the Holy Ghost
bestows thereupon many graces upon the Soul, many kinds of Consolation,
diverse degrees of Comfort: The care-free'd Head is encircled as it were crowned
with Rest. The Breast is perfumed with praise, thanksgiving and rejoicing of
spirit; The Conscience has Quiet, and Repose; and the inward man Contentment
and Satisfaction. Assisting Grace, from Divine mercy, is always at hand to
relieve against all Reencounters, stirring up Devotion, and quickening Zeal;
inflaming the Christian with Love to God, strengthening his Faith, and giving
vigor to his hope. By assurance from Gods Promises of the Reward, that is
prepared for him hereafter.

9. There Contentation's Cott behold] The Humble Sedation of the mind.

How well it is placed from too much heat, or cold] Then the Soul is neither
troubled with Heat of Desire or chilled by the cold of Fear; It is strengthened
against the violence of Passions.

See not her pleasant Lambs skip driving to the Fold!] In all employments,
and proper buisinesse the mind has an innocent and rejoicing contentment, when
the heart is so disposed, being folded in safety, according to that of the
Psalmist, I will lay me down, and also sleep in peace: For thou Lord only
make me dwell in Safety.

She Is Resignation's Neighbor and Self Friend, Regarding naught, but etc.] The
rest of this Stanza expresses, that Contentation of mind allwaies accompanies
Self-resignation of will to God's Dispose; In whose Pleasure the Soul
rejoices, always without murmuring, waiting with Patience, and not repining,
but cheerfully from his hand receiving, whatsoever comes. So as nothing
betideth such a Soul, cross or obnoxious.

10. Aloof upon sinister Hand] Vain Desires arise from the wrong side of the
Soul. They are said to be aloof as described by the Travailer to the Pilgrim to
be out of the way of a Christian's walk, to be at great distance from the way,
wherein he ought to go.

Thine Eye a floating I Will may now command, Within a troubled Sea etc.] This
discovers the Folly of worldly Desire, and the vanity of corrupt Affections; As
an I Will is divided from the Continent, they do not concern, and should not
belong to the Christian man; They are extraneous, and extravagant; They float
having nothing of firmness or steadiness in them, intimating their Vanity.
The floating I Will is a wandering Fancy; within a troubled Sea, in a distempered
Brain. Or the floating I Will, inordinate Affections; within a troubled Sea, in a
disquiet Soul. This is the description of too fond desire, and earthly
mindedness.

Where every one does seek, what the other has] The breach of the Tenth
Commandment. Nullus sua sort contentus.

And madly think to grind at mills of Glass, Caught atoms etc.] Showing the
unreasonablenesse and unfitness as well as impossibility of obtaining of
foolish Desires, discovering the Vanity of carnal appetite, which occasion
Disquiet, sorrow, and Dejection of mind, Mills of Glass are the Fancy, wherein
the Imaginative Faculty is in labor with Apparitions. When unreasonable
Expectation is disappointed, the heart is ready to faint with Despair, and the
Breast is ready to break with the loss of it is longing.

But turn etc.] Giving notice of a more worthy object Averte oculos a vanitate
mundi. Turn away from the vain world! Contemn it.

11. As Globes of Ivory, two Hills, Embroid'red over etc.] Joy and Innocence
are to a good Conscience as the fair Breasts of a beautiful Virgin, very full
of Ornament and Comeliness. As the Church is mentioned in the 7. of the
Canticles. v. 7. Thy two Breasts are as two young Roes, that are Twins. Thy
Neck is like a tower of Jvory etc.

Embroid'red ore with azure-veined Rills] Quickened and adorned with Integrity
of Life, and continually refreshed with the Comforts of the Spirit.

Have't wixt them Beautie's Plain etc.] The clear bosom of Truth; a Plain
that is fertile with well-doeing.

Within this Plain A Virgin etc.] Here is mentioned the Excellence of a
sanctified Soul, and the Eminence of a good Conscience. It is Virgo intacta a
Virgin undefiled. Thou art fair, my Love! and there is no spot in thee.

Comely drest] All about it, is decent and in order.

Sits] It is unmoved.

With dishevelled Locks] Without a Covering, without hypocrisy. Veritas non
quaerit angulos.

In Snowie Vest] purity cloatheth it all over. It is arrayed with Candor as
with a garment.

And with a Crimson Cross upon her Breast] The Badge of Religion and Devotion.

She Sweetly sings unto the flowing Streams] It provokes praise to God for his
continual Benefits, and Graces powered upon it. He makes me to rest in green
pasture, and leads me by the still waters; He restores my Soul, and leads
me into the paths of righteousness for his Name's sake. Psalm: 23. 2. 3.

Self-instructing Theams etc.] Conscientia sibi judex. The Conscience is it is
own Judge, and Counselor. How beautiful are thy goeings with shoes, O
Princes Daughter! The Joints of thy Thighs are like Jewels; the work of the
hand of a cunning workman. Thy navel is a round Cup, that wants not liquour;
Thy Belly is as an heap of wheat compassed about with Lillies etc. Thine Eyes
are like the Fish-pooles in Heshbon by the gate of Beth-rabbim. Thy Nose is as
the Tower of Lebanon, that looks toward Damascus etc. How fair art thou! and
how pleasant art thou O my Love in pleasures! This thy stature is like a Palm
tree, and thy Breasts like Clusters. Canticles. 7.

12. To Resignation from Above, Descends an Angel etc.] God out of his infinite
Love and Mercy sends his Angels down to guard those that trust in him. He is
a Pillar of Defense to the Faithful.

See! Blessed are the Stock and thriving Kine etc.] This points at the
Blessings in the 28. of Deuteronomy, to those that were obedient, and gave up
themselves to perform the Commandments of the Lord. If thou shall diligently
obey the Voice of the Lord thy God, etc. Blessed shall be the fruit of thy Body
and the Fruit of thy ground etc.

And if at any time, there come Command, For All etc.] Here is willing
submission to Gods will, and ready render with a free Heart and a rejoicing
mind, that he will daign to call for any thing, that we best esteem; and that
he will please to accept it from us.

In this, and the beginning of the next following Stanza is set down the
obedience of the soul, and the dutiful submission of a Christian heart by
self-resignation in all unto God.

MORAL. XI.
AN injured generous Mind, is conquered by submission to it. Posse and nolle
nobile, He that gives up all unto a noble heart, seiseth upon all that is in
the Possession of it. Submission, with reverence presented unto God, is an
humble argument of a Christian repentance. Resignation of the Will, a ready
discovery of the Souls devotion; the first a fair preparer for pardon, the last
a great prevailer for protection at the Throne of mercy. Submission attracts
Gods eye of mercy toward us. Resignation opens the hand of his blessings upon
us. Suhmission makes the Will an Altar for the soul; Self-resignation offers
the whole man upon that Altar. Without Submission there can be no
Reconciliation. Without self-Resignation, no perfection of Faith in a Christian.

Well says Isidore lib. 1. de sum. bon. Non erit caro subjecta animae, nec
vitia rationi, si animus non est subditus Creatori. Tunc autem recte nobis
subjiciuntur omnia, quae sub nobis sunt, si subjiciuntur ei, a quo nobis illa
subjecta sunt. The flesh shall not be subject to the Spirit, nor vice be
mastered by Reason, so long as man stands out a Rebel against his Maker. For
then are all things below us, are subjected unto us, when we become subjected
unto him, by whom all those things were made, and placed in subjection under us.

PROSPECT. XI.
BEhold the earth, that does beguile
Vain man! It Is but the larger Isle.
A fixed Leviathan to stay
By'ts Center Eggs in Seas to lay;
Which seem those lesser Isles, as rent
From Earths vast bulk the Continent.
Choose out the strongest of them all!
Let Deeps be Trenches! Ships a Wall!
Conceive in such a place, each Port
Were but a Gate unto a Fort!
Suppose faign'd Bacon's Magic line
Did all its earth with brass combine.
Were It peopled all with arms and wit
Had it wealth's nerves to sinew it.
If Sacrilege that sin of sin,
And black Rebellion live within;
If Blasphemy, that Belch of Hell,
And Perjury within do dwell;
If Murder there shows bloody hands,
And cruelty does act commands;
If there Profaneness makes a scorn
Of what is of Religion born;
If hot Ambition locks with Lust,
And break-line Incest goes for just;
If foul Adultery stains the Bed,
From Poor, Extortion snatches bread;
If Luxury new minteth vice,
If all Ills root, sharp Covetise
Shoots up by fraud, and grows by Lies;
The place is fortified in vain,
For it is but Sand that makes the chain.
Were walls to heaven, and these appear,
All Is open to Ruin every where.
Since no resistance against Gods will;
Best Policies his Hests fulfill;
No safety but with him to join;
Repent! submit! Self-wills resign!
CONSOLATORY ESSAY XI.
THere is no action, but tends to its end. By that we judge whether it be
Virtuous, or dishonest; Worthy or base. Of Causes the final is the Noble. For
as the Efficient gives Motion, and the Formal gives Essence to the matter, So
the Final gives the Judgment, and Appellation of all things: And this does
Aristotle, that Princeps Philosophorum, that Alexander among the Philosophers,
in his first Book of his Ethics make good: (...), All art, all learning, every
action, no purpose, no design whatsoever, but seems to bend toward, to seek
for, and to aim at Propositum aliquod bonum, something that we purpose to our
selves to be very good. Toward that the affections drive as their proper Home;
For that the will does press as its best purchase: At that the Understanding
shoots as its fairest Mark.

That therefore seems to please men most, that may yield them joy and safety.
Without joy, safety is no more than a still misery; without safety, joy is but
a laughing danger. Joy without safety, has too great a Spirit for a weak Body;
Safety without joy, has too strong a Body for a distempered mind. But this is
rather Supposititious than Real; A Chimaera in fancy, more than a thing in
Nature. It is but the Picture of joy, that has not safety; And it is but an
Apparition of safety, wherein there is no Joy.

Yet the world has formed such a Creature; and is in love with the Monster.
Pygmalion's Image makes a stone of the Carver. Pygmalion thinks he has given
his Ivory Statue Sense; the Statue by a kind of assimilation, as Ice makes
water Ice, takes away Pygmalions reason.

Though Roman Ovid in his deathless Metamorphosis, drew this forth for a Fable;
yet the allusion carries so much weight and substance in it, and is so lively a
Picture of the mistake of Apprehension, and so suitable to discover the vanity
of humane designs, that I cannot conceive it less suitable to the gravity of
our discourse to relate it; than that custom deserved commendation as well as
approbation of those Lacedaemonians, that called forth their Children to show
them the Odiousness of reeling Images of men in the streets, to deter them from
the like vice by their deformity; especially the story not being tedious, so
apposite to our purpose, and so happily and incomparably rendered by M. George
Sands in his 10. Book.

Pygmalion seeing these to spend their times
So beast-like, frighted with the many crimes,
That rule in Woman, chose a single life,
And long before the pleasure of a Wife.
Mean while in Ivory with happy Art,
A Statue carves, so shapeful in each part
As Woman never equaled it. Who stands
Affected to the Fabric of his hands.
It seemed a Virgin, full of living flame,
That would have moved, if not withheld by shame;
So Art it self concealed, His Art admires;
From the Image draws imaginary Fires;
And often feels it with his hands, to try,
If 't were a Body, or cold Ivory.
Nor could resolve. Who, kissing, thought it kissed;
Often Courts, Embraces, wrings it by the Wrist.
The flesh impressing (his conceit was such)
And fears to hurt it with too rude a touch.
Now flatters her, now sparkling stones presents,
And Orient Pearl (Loves witching instruments)
Soft singing Birds, each several colored flower,
First Lillies, painted Bulls, and tears that pour
From weeping Trees. Rich Robes her person deck;
Her fingers Rings; reflecting Chains her neck;
Pendents her ears; a glittering Zone her breast.
In all showed well, etc.
Now lays he her upon a Gorgeous Bed,
With Carpets of Sidonian Purple spread.
Now calls her Wife. Her head a Pillow pressed
Of Plumy down, as if with sense possessed.
Now came the day of Venus Festival
Through wealthy Cyprus solemnized by all.
White Heifers decked with golden horns, by strokes
Of Axe's fall; ascending incense smoaks.
He with his gift before the Altar stands;
Ye Gods, if all we crave be in your hands,
Give me the Wife, I wish! One like, he said;
But durst not say, give me my Ivory Maid.
The golden Venus present at her Feast,
Conceives his wish, and friendly signs expressed;
The Air thrice blazing, sparkling thrice on high,
He hastes to his admired Imag'ry;
Couches besides her, raised her with his arm,
Then kissed her tempting lips, and found them warm, etc.
He Cynaras begot, who might be styled
A man most happy, had he had no Child.
Such a Glass of Deception is the world to humane eyes, cozening with false
resemblances the weak imaginations of erring men.

Why else seek we for joy in riches? or safety in strength? Why do we lullaby
our Fancies in the lap of Pleasures? and think there is Security in Ambition?
When Joy dwells in Heaven, and Peace is flown from off the Earth. Regret
attends Delight; And Check of Conscience treads upon the hels of sinful Desire.
No Comfort; No Repose but in Piety: No Safety, but in Divine Protection. Why
then plant we so many sorts of a Newfound Paradise? Why labor we so
incessantly? and inconsiderately hope for a full Harvest in vain? Why rage we,
when we miss our Purposes, as though we might be Masters of our own Actions?
Why cry we out of Sickness, as though it were a Frenzy? Why hate we our
brethren's Infirmity? And increase our own by shunning another's weakness, as
if it were the Plague? Why are our Burdens intolerable, when we laid them
upon our own shoulders? Why account we so irreverently? and are so ignorant of
the Deity, when we profess our selves Christians? Why war we against Heaven
with our perverse Wills, and so add to the heap of our Sins, by our
frowardness still more to provoke the Allmighty? when there is no Rest to be
found upon Earth, but in God? Nor any Safety but under the shadow of His Wings.
What conceive we of His wonderful Wisdom that prefer our own imaginations
before It? Why raise we our Vain Desire against His most Holy Pleasure? and
make the Rebellion of our Hearts to be as the Sin of Witchcraft? Why fondly
have we to every Bush for shelter? Or think we to avoid the storm by the
nimblenesse of our failing Feet?

Come then my sad Companion in distress! My other Self in Misery! Sit thee
down by me! Sit thee down, and rest thee! Many say, who will show us any good.
But Lord, lift up thy countenance upon us. Thou have given me more joy of
Heart, than they have had when their wheat, and their Wine did abound. I will
lay me down; and also sleep in peace. For Thou, Lord, only make me to dwell
in Safety.

Has the Lord humbled thee? and set thee down in the shadow? Has he besieged
thee with many Troubles? Has he beset thee with a multitude of Afflictions? Is
there no way to escape? Do His Arrows fly about thee. O consider, what thou
have deserved! Remember, that His Patience is wonderful! and His loving
Kindness above measure! His Corrections are gentle; and His Mercies never fail
those that trust in him. His Straightnings are Life; and His Goodness
surpasses understanding. Why hold out? And giv'st not up the Place? Resign!

Has Abraham but one Son? His Joy? His only comfort? And must Isaac be a
Sacrifice? Were there not Cattle enough among all the Herds for one Offering?
Nor a nearer place, than a strange Country for an Altar? Must he travail to
his Loss? the Loss of his only Son? his beloved? And must that come by his
own hand too? And was his obedience without grutching? with cheerfulness?
Without question? O how great was his Faith! But what followed? The stroke was
restrained, Isaac saved; a Ram presented, and in his stead offered; Abraham
proved, and approved. For so calls the Angel of the Lord from heaven, Abraham!
Abraham! Lay not thine hand upon the Child! Neither do any thing unto him! For
now I know, that thou fear God; Seeing for My sake thou have not spared thine
only Son. O the infinite mercy of the Lord! He is tender, and full of
compassion. Is He the only stay, and Refuge? Withstand him not! Submit!
Resign!

Whither is Jonas run? from his Message? from the Lord, that sent him to
Ninive? Can a ship hide him? Or the Sea promise him Safety? He runs from a Calm
to a Storm; From the God of peace and power to the inconstancy of the
Creature. Is a Lot better, than a Portion? Or a Whal's Belly a more pleasing
Entertainment, than a City? Is the Deep more comfortable, than the brightness
of the Heavens? Or a dying habitation in the Living more to be esteemed, than a
lively Publication of God's warning to those, that were otherwise appointed to
die? Let every Jonas, that is out of the way, turn again! For the Lord is
gracious; and His Mercy endures for ever. Alas for thee! Murmur not! Keep not
thy Will! Let it not be thine own! Resign!

CANTO XII. The Holy Hill of Contemplation.
The Downs of Cogitation.
1.
FRom Hill to Hill we go.
Now leave thou things below,
Sublimer Things to Know:
Here mighty Waves of terrene Seas,
As green as Neptune's, Sight may please;
His roll in Storm; In Quiet these.
These Downs are styled, all spread with silken Grass,
Thick, Short, and smooth, as slippery Ice, or Glass.
A Carpet made of Plush, it seems to those, that Pass.
2.
All ore this Flowrie Place,
Bright Stars grow space by space,
And show their Sweets and Grace.
Here Swallows plumed Oars do plie;
With agile Pineons Swiftness try;
Who shall dart quickest as they fly.
From Poast to Poast here* Coursers run amain;
And freely of Themselves away do strain.
So course fleet Thoughts upon the beating Brain.
3.
Out from Thelema's Cave
Comes driving like a Wave,
In Noble Habit Brave.
For DIANOIA in her Look
Clasping in Hand an unbound Book,
And sits as if she fresh awoke.
Within a Wagon that does nimbly glide,
Whose noiselesse Wheels do whirle on either side.
By Dromedaries drawn; wherein She does abide.
4.
Behind her stands a Wight,
All clad in Snowie White,
That guides her Wagon right.
SANCTIFICATION some Her Name.
Heaven-born She is. For such her Fame.
She shines as now from thence she came.
Often Oil she pours upon the Damsels Head.
With Rod she Flies, and Hornets strikes Dead,
That buz about the Ears of the Dame where once they bred.
5.
Thus ore the Downs she drives;
At PHRONTIS Height arrives;
Often Holy Hill atchieves.
Where Contemplation sits so high,
To whom We pass on by and by:
Let DIANOIA go and spy.
There let the Dame go, take a sweet Repose,
So modest She Is, She never doffs her Clothes,
And none but One, what is on her Breast, yet ever knows.
The Promontory of Meditation.
6.
On Promontory there does dwell
Wise Phrontis that old Deeds does tell;
And Future Happiness does spell.
A Holy One did build her dwelling place.
And did bestow upon it pious Grace;
As if an Hermit, she there spends her days.
Except she take unseen a Journey through the Air;
'Lights; Takes a walk in the Portico of the House of Prayer,
And thence as often unseen does Home again repair.
7.
From out her Study She does eye
Both Land, and Sea, and all does try,
That Is worthy notice far or nigh:
She takes much pleasing pains to get by Heart
The rarest Skill in Meletetick Art;
So finds She Purity of Mind is part.
So She perceives, what he must be, that Meditates,
Devout, and wisely skilled in any case, he states,
And with prepared Affections, as the same relates.
8.
Her Object she does keep in sight;
The manner often perpends aright;
Dividing draws, so hits the white.
She has a Mint of Business, and Lore.
She takes from Memory, what was before,
And lays it up in Recordation's Store.
Three friendly Helps she has, whens'ever she grows weak.
When speechless Logicks Knowledge makes her speak;
When Deaf, Attention cures. Her Stupour Praying breaks.
9.
Her Library is large and fair.
In 3 Ranks placed about her chair.
On those she reads in arbour'd air.
The first holds Natures Books, the Creatures all.
The next Redemptions works, that saved from fall.
Sanctification's gave a growing tall.
A Sedentarie Quiet She does Love, and Choose;
And Temperance to visit her does often use.
For Solitude all Company She does refuse.
10.
She Is beckned often abroad by Love,
To take a Walk in shadie Grove;
As often admireth Things above.
For Admiration gives to her a Law,
As does the Load stone that does Iron draw.
Her laughing ere, seld any Creature saw.
No dwelling's here. Our Souls do burn with high Desire.
To Contemplations holy Hill their Flames aspire.
Away! Let Us mount! O let us not quench such kindling Fire!
The Holy Hill of Contemplation.
11.
Aloft now raise
Thy Self with praise,
For high thy Way's.
It leads Thee up to Sky.
To Stars thou shall be nigh
Where soaring Eagles fly.
Thou shall pass Clouds that swim in Air
Unto a Place that is clear, and fair.
No Fogs thy sight shall there impair.
Now Contemplations HOLY HILL ascend
But Reverence bids at every Step to bend
For humble climbing gains this Journeyes End.
And, when thou have gained the towering Top, and look below,
All Things will then to Sight so petty little show,
As Thou scarce Them, or Mortals Thee will hardly know.
12.
Behold the Place
A Narrow Space!
Like up-cast Face:
Or as some Perspective
Through which Eyes Beams do drive
At the Object far to arrive.
As in an Astrolabe the Dame
Does pierce with sight the heavenly Frame
To the Only One, I AM by Name.
She with weak Eyes does God in Essence see;
And by Reflex of's Word eyes in One Three.
Though Eyes too weak (alas!) for^s Mystery.
First in His ESSENCE Him she INFINITE does find,
IMMORTAL Him, INCOMPREHENSIBLE by Mind.
Subsistences so Three to GOD by'Inbeeing joined.
13.
SUBSISTENCES
Amaze such Eyes,
Wu'd be too Wise.
In their Inb'eeing may see,
How every One of the Three
Exceedes Capacity.
IMCOMPREHENSIBLE the are so,
INEFFABLE by all that know
From such their In-beeing does flow
The Persons COESSENTIALITIE.
So does She apprehend the TRINITY;
And so does find it in the UNITY.
Their Emanation, or Procession there is none
Can comprehend or utter. All Conceits out-gone.
So Coeternall, so Coequall Three in One.
Let Gospel show, Church read, such Depth She lets alone.
14.
Her lofty Bower
Or living Tower,
Whose top does flower,
Although it raise her high,
And helps her piercing Eye
To dart up through the sky,
And into Heaven to aim aright,
Where Glory is Eternal Light,
Her Eye's too weak yet for the Sight.
But there sits mounted, and her Garments are
Embroid'red over with many a Gemmie Star;
An Eagle pierched from her stands not far.
With constant Look upon the Radiating Sun,
As if he watched his Steeds that 'bout the World do run,
Whose wings often try a Course before the Day be done.
15.
There thus alone,
With Love oregone,
Views The Only One.
Her Soul's a spirie Fire
Of Extasi'd Desire
And flames the more, the nigher.
So his Perfection does behold
As in his Attributes are told.
None but Himself can God unfold.
Amazement seizes on her Dazzled Sense,
At Sight of the Mysterious Excellence
Of The TRINITY. All Energies from thence.
What Pen can write? Or skill can read His Holy Name?
All tongues are Dumb; and each attempting hand is lame.
Had he not told Himself, how could she know, I am.
16.
Her too weak Bow
Shoots not to know,
What Is locked from show.
As in Himself God None
Does know, but God alone
Who Is Infinite, and One.
She studies not their Brain to cure
Wu'd find a Circles Quadrature,
Her Thoughts are hallowed, sober, pure.
Enough's for her His Back-Parts She behold.
She dares not further then is revealed, be bold;
Nor knows she how to go, If not first told.
And what is so revealed enough to Good Life is.
She sees without bold prying into Mysteries.
No vein she has to search, for what vain searching it is.
17.
With humble bent,
With meek Ascent,
With Mind intent,
From Gods Sufficience she
Does his Efficience see,
Her knowledge such must be.
Such are her Faith's attempting Wings,
By which she climbes to holy Things,
And to Capacity Them bringes.
These unto Consolation are the Prop,
And Pietie's Provokers to the Top;
And in pursuit of these she makes no stop.
In Gods Sufficience all Fullness sees, more shall
In His Efficiencie, as in His Public Hall
She views, how wondrous in his Works, Gods All in All.
18.
HIM absolute,
None ought Dispute
None can confute,
For in his Essence She
Beholds ETERNITY.
Before world, or ought was He.
Thus does She raise a vigorous Look,
Before Time, or storm but by one Book,
That any Their Creation took.
As Relative toward Him She Eye does place
Upon the first o'th Intellectual Race,
Reads Angels made. Some stood some lost their place.
To those adhered, and stood the great Creator gave
Their Confirmation, Everlasting Bliss to have,
But those that fell, were thrust to Hell in chains of Slave.
19.
Then Tophet told,
Ordained of old,
Prepared to hold
Those Fiends in quenchlesse fire,
TO endure The Almighties Ire,
In Pains that never expire.
Then Tophet was ordained to be
And then prepared by Decree,
Prepared only She does see.
And for those only was that horrid Den,
For Reprobation absolute Decreed then,
As their Predestination it had been
As Relative She GOD Creator does perceive
Of The World, called Visible, Man second Race does give,
Man second Race of Intellectuals then made did live.
20.
By Satan's Spell
(Alas) Man fell,
Deserving Hell.
Inward Adhaesion lost,
Outward Obedience crossed,
Soul's, Body's curse it cost.
Forfeit was Nature, with drawn Grace
Glory come short of; from blessed Place,
So fell both Man, and all his Race.
The Interpellation of the Eternal Word
Did Mercie's Miracle for him afford,
And was first means for Man to be restored.
His standing in the Gappe Did Execution stay
His Superceeding It was stop in Sentence Way.
His Sponsion gained Decree, that He the Debt should pay.
21.
'Twas co-decreed,
For such a Deed,
As Man did need,
The Word should Flesh become,
And satisfy God's Doom,
By Suffering in Man's Room,
So sanctified was Nature then,
Grace, Glory was restored again,
In that Decree to help fallen Men.
As co-decreed, coactuated were
The Apostles place, Mediators he should bear,
Though both distinct, yet both on him t'appear.
The Apostleship by Unction of the Holy Ghost,
The Principle of Government for Church, so tossed.
And special Ordinances Fount choice Men to accost.
22.
And those were given
From bounteous Heaven
In Portions even.
Yet were they several,
As to those Patriarchs all,
As Moses special Call.
In Shadow Revelation was;
Redemption so in Type did pass;
So read first Times The future Case,
Administrations interlegal came
By the Baptists Ministry before that Lamb,
To whom the Angel gave the Holy Name.
But the Evangelical delivered were to the Jews,
And to the twelve Apostles whom Christ's Self did choose;
And to All Nations that would not the same refuse.
23.
Time did at full
The Curtain pull,
And types annul.
In Substance Revelation,
In Truth appeared Salvation,
To Jew, to every Nation.
Then did break forth the shining Light
Of The Gospel to appear more bright
Is represented to her Sight
Of Jew was borne, unto the Jew Christ came,
And to them first He published his Name.
Then to the Gentiles did He do the same.
To several Ages were all These Administrations,
In their respective times emergent Revelations,
Summed, and upon Record were Scripture Affirmations.
24.
MEDIATORS Place
By, UNION was.
Of Natures, as!
Redemptions Principle,
Regenerations Well
Of Life to those that fell.
So Nature sanctified new stood
Restored is Grace, Glory made good
In's Person. Brooks so fill by Flood.
Of Grace the Covenant called Derivative,
From whence Believers Title do derive,
His Mediatorship did erst atchieve.
Parties, Conditions, and their Seals She does Behold,
Prerogatives by Faith She sees manifold.
Such as Saint John, Saint Paul have so divinely told.
21.
Most humbly She
Looks up to see
Trines Mystery.
Father the Creator is,
New Creator Son (O Bliss!)
Holy Spirit's Seal to This.
In Earnest of Redemption so
Regeneration does new flow
In such a manner few do know.
The Church Regenerate the firstborn may
Those Spirits of Just men so made perfect, say
Nature divine partake those with allay.
Of The Righteousness of the Kingdom. For it is sealed
To those, and those to It (with Reverence) anneal'd;
So One with Jesus Christ Mediator thus revealed.
26.
As Wondrous was
Gods free given grace
To bring to pass
Redemption in Design,
The TRINITY did join
In Counsel most Divine;
Interpellation Covenant past
For all to be performed, and last,
For all were Providence cast.
Administrations Author FATHER is,
SON Grand Administrator unto These,
The Principle of special Ordinances
The HOLY GHOST. Subministrators from Sublime
Take Government, so ordination claim from Prime
Words, Sacraments Administration pass through Time.
27.
Means to save All
The Church then call
HIERARCHICALL,
And MINISTERIAL whence
Church congregate in Sense
Kingdom of God from thence
By calling Saints, and with Christ One
As He Apostle was alone;
Without Whom Government is none.
As Rivers may divide from out a Lake,
That Is ever full, of which their Streams partake;
Whose various Courses that vast Flood does make.
So Government from One to Twelve came whence again
Those subdivided into lesser Brooks did vein;
So from Apostles, Bishops influence obtain.
28.
Her down-cast Eye
Sees Man must die,
Sin's Wages try.
The Bubble of his Breath
Must needs be broke by Death,
His Body engraved beneath:
Yet's Soul does fly to place of Rest,
To Paradise, that keeps the Best;
But wicked Ones with Sin are pressed;
Until the Resurrections Trump does blow;
When all the teeming Graves their Dead shall show;
And every One Reward to Deeds shall know.
The glorious Judge, Just Jesus comes to Sentence All.
The Righteous then to th'Right shall hear: his Blessed Call;
When Go ye cursed, shall be Then the wicked's Fall.
29.
And now behold
Her Locks like gold
For us She Is told.
By Angel from Above,
Whom Seraph wings do move,
Encircling round with Love
Choose Mortals! either here aloft to dwell
By Faith, by Love, by doing well:
Or, desperate leap with Horror into Hell.
Choose! Choose! Eternity of Bliss! or Pain!
E'relasting Loss! Or everlasting Gain!
Bath in the Lambs Blood! O wash away your Stain!
Could ye conceive the Joys that here are Infinite,
And glory such as Tongues nor Pens could ere indite,
To gain this Place, All earthly Torments Smiles wu'd slight
30.
Hear'st this? Away!
Let Us make no Stay!
But use our Day!
Down through the Wilderness
Amidst the Worlds Distress,
Let Joyful Courage Press!
When we are returned unto our Place,
Let Us Mind these Things in any Case.
Life's short. Good Life a narrow Space.
Let Us listen still to hear the silent Feet
Of Death, who will bring home Bliss wrapped in a sheet.
The blessed Angels then with Joy will greet.
Then tune we Tongues to Steps with never-failing Praise!
Let pious Works our Hearts, our Souls to Heav'nward raise!
Let Hands! Let Thoughts! Let All God magnify always!
PERSPECTIVE XII.
DOwns are an open Place of intermixed Hills and Dals, commonly upon the Coast
and many times in the Inland; Where sometimes they are a rising Ridg of Hills
and Valleys, whose free and pleasant scope overtop and overlook the
neighboring inferior Country. And from the declining and ascending position
of the Earth as the high and more swelling Waves in the deeper Seas are not
unlikely to have derived their name from their seeming to carry their
Passengers over them up and down. These for their healthful Air, by their
Loftiness, pleasant prospect, by their opennesse, and smooth Turf for their
Evenesse, do often invite in the delightful seasons of the Year Persons of
quality and leisure to take the Air upon them, and to spend some time in
recreation. Horsemen choose such places thereupon to make and run races with
their swiftest Coursers to try their courage, wind, and swiftness of their
Heels; Such are Newmarket Heath, or Bainstead Downs. They are called the Downs
of Cogitation. Because Thoughts are full of motion and uncertainty, that have
their erection and dejection upon the Mind; as the first Stanza mentions.

1. From hill to hill we go etc.] Here is a Comparison between the Downs and
the Waves of the Sea; Both much agreeing in their resemblances with one
another; And both expressing the manner of Cogitation.

2 All ore this flowery place etc.] The pleasure of Thoughts is compared in this
Stanza to Flowers; their subtility and quickness to the nimble flight of
Swallows. And here Swallows seem to be matched as Coursers to express in a
poetical manner both the pleasure and swiftness of Cogitation together.

3. Out from Thelema's Cave etc.] Here is first described the origination and
purification of Cogitation. (...) is Voluntas, the Will and Affection, from
whence Thoughts as Waters out of the head of a Spring do take their rise, and
have their flux. As the Heart is, such are the Thoughts, And that is Thelema's
Cave in the side of the Downs, the Man; This being taken from that vulgar,
though not true opinion according to Anatomists, that the Heart is placed in
the left side of the Body. A Generous Heart dresseth or sets forth the
Thoughts in Gallantry, and Nobleness. So appears Dianoia, Cogitation, fair and
beautiful, when Devotion is in the Heart, and Charity in the Hand, which is an
unbound Book, the obedience unto Holy Writ, ready to be dispensed according to
active piety. Thoughts seem awaked, when drawn out of the sleep of Sin, and
darkness of pollution. Sitting is a Posture of steadiness and Recollection.
Thoughts dwell in a Wagon as the old Scythians, that never used Houses, but
such Receptacles, as might more properly be called their Movables than their
Habitations. Silent wheels is the imperceptibility of Thought. Drawn with
Dromedaries is their velocity, as also the tenacity by Cogitation of things
first apprehended. For though a Dromedary be a kind of Cammell, it differs in
dorso; The Cammel has a Bunch on his Back, the Dromedary two Fins as I may call
them, the one near his Wallis, the other more backward to the Chine, both upon
the Ridg of his back, which fall down loose upon his sides without weight, and
rise and claspe in an imposed Burden. With an unperceived Pace Dromedaries move
with great strength and swiftness. Whereupon Livie recites them, as very
useful in Warlike expeditions. His utebantur praecipue in bellicis
expeditionibus. And Curtius in his 7. book mentions that Polydamus was sent by
Alexander for the more speed upon Dromedaries by the unfrequented passages of
media per occulta, et squalida tesqua to dispatch Parmenio. Zenobia fled upon a
Dromedary after her defeat by Aurelian, as Vopiscus tells the story.
Cogitationes sunt motus voluntatis, et cordis humani. Thoughts are the motions
of the will, and the spirituous stirrings of the Heart.

4. Behind her stands a wight etc.] In this Stanza is Sanctification described,
that purifies the Heart, and rectifies the Thoughts. The Heart is allwaies
moving like the driving of a Chariot. Sanctificationis parts sunt, aversio a
malo; conversio ad bonum; Sanctification taken absolutely in it is parts is a
turning from evil, and a turning to good. Therefore here a fit directer of the
Thoughts. The Causes of Sanctification are; first the Efficient, which is the
principal: and that is the Grace of God, which instrumentally is conveyed unto
us by the means of Faith obtained by the hearing of Gods revealed Will, and
understanding the same from the Preaching and reading of this written word. The
matter is the hatred of sin, and the study and love of righteousness. The
Form is the renewing of our minds, our wills, and Affections; The End is the
Glory of God, the confirmation of Election, conversion of others, and the
rejoicing of Saints, Angels, and Men. The Effects of Sanctification are good
works. The proper purpose therefore is Sanctification the best directer of the
Thoughts. For from evil Thoughts proceed bad words, and worse Actions. Pouring
of Oil is a hallowing of the Mind. Her Rod is a hatred of Sin, which kills
those natural Corruptions, which have been bred in us, and buz in our Fancies.

5. Thus ore the Downs She drives etc.] Cogitation, it comes to settled, and
sanctified comes to meditation, which is (...) in the Greek. And when it is
elevated with sublimity in Thought it mounteth up to Contemplation. Here is
expressed also the secretness of the Thoughts of the Heart. Deus sol us (...),
the very Angels know not the secrets of the heart, ipse intuetur in corda
hominum, et illa scrutatur. God only is the knower of the Thoughts, God the
only searcher into the Heart of Man.

6. On Promontorie there does dwell, Wise Phrontis etc.] Here Meditation dwells
upon a Place, that is Mountainous and high and reaching from the Land into the
Sea, she views God's works upon Sea and Land. Meditation in this place is taken
for a continued working of the thoughts in a pious consideration circa opera
creationis, redemptionis, et sanctificationis of His works in the Creation of
the world, and all therein, in his Redemption of fallen mankind, and in the
sanctification of His Elect, of those that he has called to the hope of Glory.
This Promontory is Man; His Flesh is the Earth, and His Blood is the Sea, which
ebbeth and flows about his Flesh, made and created by God, the Holy of Holies
in Heaven, who endowed the Soul with most excellent Gifts, giving it at first
Free will and the like Graces before the Fall. Os homini sublime dedit
coelumque tueri; videre some render it, says Ovid, a Heathen. God made Man's
countenance erect, and to take the sense of videre more properly to this
purpose, that he might the better meditate upon the wonderful works of His
maker. Tueri agrees better with Contemplation; both aim at the same End, the
Glory of God. Meditation is devout, retired, and solitary like an Hermit; It is
private, yet frequent intercourse with Prayer.

7. From out her study she does eye etc.] This Stanza is an explanation of the
former Stanza and an explication of the operation, and requisites to the
performance thereof. Meletetick art is the Method of Meditating, and the
discovery of circumstantials conducent to the same. (...), the study, before
and contrivance of all kind of business. Ars meditandi est omnium studiorum, et
negotiorum anima. The art of meditation is as the Soul to all studies, and
Employments. Sicut flamma motu excitatur, et lumen solis reflexione roboratur;
Sic studia nostra frequenti mentis agitatione illuminantur, excoluntur, vit a
donantur: As a Flame is quickened by motion, and the light of the Sun is the
more brightened by reflection, the beams of greater Force by their rebounding;
Our studies likewise by an accustomed agitation, and frequent exercise of
otherwise our too sedentary minds are no less enlightened, but improved, yea
receive their animation.

8. Her Object she does keep in sight etc.] Here Meditation shows her
Judgment, as well as her Nature. She has a natural Logic in her, as well as a
sweet Inclination, and is a discreet orderer of all the affairs of the Soul, of
matters of the greatest Concernment; very provident to lay up in the Trust of
memory, what upon occasion she receives from the hands of memory by
Recordation, that is Remembrance. She cannot do amiss, having quickness of
reason, judgment in inquisition, and true Devotion to assist her.

9. Her Liberary is large and fair etc.] In Her Library all the Creatures in
the World are for her Books, quaelibet herba Deum, every Creature has the
Frontispeice of the Creator. Her Liberary is disposed into three ranks, as
before mentioned into thoughts of the Creation, Redemption and Sanctification.
All studies must have a method. Otherwise multitudo librorum destruit animum, a
multitude of Books would rather astonish, than instruct the mind. In the rest
of this Stanza are the Conveniences expressed for Meditation.

10. She Is beck'ned often abroad by Love etc.] Meditation has divine affection,
that invites to a mental religious pleasure in a solitary walk by reposedness
and the better selfenjoyment, in the shade, out of the eye, or thought of the
world, and thereby enjoying in her mind the society and comfort of holy things;
which as a Loadstone attracts the Soul. Upon which the Travailer takes occasion
to provoke the Pilgrim to the Holy Hill of contemplation.

11. It is called the Holy Hill of Contemplation in resemblance of Sion
recorded in Holy Scripture, which is styled the Holy Hill of Sion. Heaven is
the proper object of Contemplation. Divine things are only fit for highest
Thoughts, whose lawful Ambition may be industrious, but not curious. A Hill is
a lofty Place upon the Earth, and Contemplation is the acumen, and elevation of
the mind.

A loft now raise Thy Self etc.] This Stanza is the excitation of the Christian
Soul to an elevation by Contemplation.

12. Behold the Place etc.] Here is in this Sanza first a poetical Description
of the manner of contemplation, Then begins her Speculation; which, because it
is more dogmaticall, than poetical, spares the Author much pains at the
present for it is Exposition. And being, in much of it, not the Author's own,
but from the industry of a very Learned Man, and worthy Doctor in Divinity as
to the Method and the matter, though not in the Verse, and composure, He
thinks fit to set now down only such Animaduersions as may render his
Apprehensions as the matter is agreeable to the doctrine of Holy Scriptures and
the interpretation of such divine things has been formerly rendered by the late
unparalelled Church of England; Not but that he does highly honor the noble
industry of so worthy a man for his indefatigable pains toward the
investigation of any latent Truth, as in a Scheam he has demonstrated.

13. Subsistences etc.] There is much criticisme betwixt the words Emanation
and Procession; the difference of their sense is left to the Learned. The
Gospel says that the Son came forth from the Father, which is nearest to
Procession as our distressed Mother the Church of England holds. In this
Stanza and the former are set down Speculations concerning the Trinity.

14. Her lofty Bower etc.] This Stanza is a poetical description of the Soul's
rapture by divine Contemplation, the Travailer bringing a comparative discourse
of the Eagle in his station, posture, and flight to illustrate the same.

15. There thus alone etc.] Here the Travailer proceeds in showing to the
Pilgrim that divine Contemplation is accompanied with Divine Love, resembling
it to the spicy Neast of the Phoenix, as vulgarly related, that enfireth with
the heat of the Beams of the Sun.

16. Her too weak Bow etc.] Here he sets forth the modesty and humility in the
Contemplation of divine Mysteries; as also discovering the Soul's imperfection,
while it is in an earthly Body, that God can not be understood, but as he has
revealed himself in Sacred Scripture.

17. With humble bent etc.] The Travailer makes an humble progression in his
discovery of divine Contemplation concerning the All Sufficiency and
All-Efficiency of the Deity

18. Him Absolute etc.] Here is a Look before the Creation of the Visible
World, upon the created Angels, and the Fall of Those with Lucifer, which the
Doctor styles the first Race of Intellectualls.

19. Then Tophet told etc.] The Place ordained as a Prison for the Damned;
which the Doctor stateth to be here decreed, In this Stanza is mentioned the
Creation of the Visible World, and Man, whom he styles the Second Race of
Intellectualls.

20. By Satan's Spell etc.] In this Stanza is described the Manner of the Fall
of Man, and his Loss thereby; As also the primary means of his Restoration.

21. It Was co-decreed etc.] Here is described the manner of man's Restoration
in Design; and that the Second Person in the Trinity should take upon Him the
Apostleship and Mediatorship for the performance of so great a Work.

22. And Those were given etc.] Here are set down how, and to whom the
Ordinances, and Administrations were delivered and conveyed in former Ages.

23. Time did at Full etc.] Here is related the Revelation of the Gospel, and
the manifestation of Jesus Christ in the Flesh; which also is further related
in the 24. Stanza.

25. Most humbly She etc.] Here is the Eternal Trinity manifested so far as
necessary to Salvation; The Creator of the World in the Old Bible is here The
Father in the New Testament. The Word in that Old is the Son in the New. The
Spirit in the Old is the Holy Ghost in the New; In which is revealed and
clearly manifested the mystery of the Trinity so far as in necessary for
Salvation.

26. As wondrous was etc.] In this Stanza is deciphered the conveyance down to
future times of the Ordinances, and Subadministrations.

27. Means to save All etc.] Here is shown the right Title and true Claim of
Episcopacy from the Apostleship; Primariely in Christ; Derivatively in the
Apostles, Successively in Episcopacy, or Bishops.

28. Her downcast Eye etc.] This Stanza speaks the State of Death, and the
Resurection.

29. And now behold etc.] This Stanza is a representation of all the former
Discourse, as an arguing with all Christian Souls after the manner that the
Lord by his Prophets put the Case to His peculiar People, the Jews, thereby the
more to convince, or to leave the obstinate to punishment inexcusably. So Our
Christ in the Flesh did manifest the Light, and declare what was darkness, as
in the Gospel, and afterward by his Apostles.

30. Hear'st This? Away! etc.] Here is the Travailers Application to the
Pilgrim, his Advise, and Invitation to do thereafter, that they may attain
unto Salvation. Here is Exhortation and encouragement to betake themselves to
their Callings with Cheerfulness, to be in the World, not of the World, to
labor daily for a better Being, and to despise all the Miseries of this Life
in respect of the Reward, the Joy, the Happiness, that is laid up for All those
that love The Lord, and expect His Appearing. And then concludes as with the
Magnificat. My Soul does Magnify The Lord; My Spirit rejoices in God my
Savior.

Gloria Patri, Filio, et Spiritui Sancto etc.

In secula seculorum

MORAL. XII.
COGITATION is fuller of Care, then it is of Business, and if not reined in by
Sanctification is as unruly as a wild Beast. Meditation does no business out
of her study; and there she must have a Fire; her Piety will cool else. In
meditatione mea exardescit ignis. That Fire is the Love of God, which must be
kindled in our Hearts, in our Wills, in our Affections. Without Grace
Cogitation would make us mad; Without true Religion Meditation would lead us
into a despairing Melancholy; And without modest bounds Contemplation may
carry us, if not into dangerous Errors, into much Folly. All are excellent in
their kinds, but not without their qualifications.

Meditation and Contemplation are much at one; yet herein there is some
distinction between them. Meditatio convenit iis, qui cum difficultate and
labor de rebus divinis cogitant. Meditation belongs to those, that bestow
their Thoughts with no small Pains, and no less difficulty about divine
matters. Contemplatio convenit iis, qui sunt exercitati in rebus divinis.
Contemplation is proper to those that are exercised in holy Things. In
Meditation and Contemplation consist not Perfection, sed in amando Deum, but in
loving God.

Contemplation is a work of the understanding; The way, and the means to
Perfection, not It. In elevando voluntatem nostram in Deum per Divinam Unionem,
et amorem supremum consistit Perfectio. Perfection consists in the Resignation
of our Wills, in the Elevation of our affections by divine Union, and
transcendent Love to God. The Understanding finds not the Soul Meat, but makes
it ready.

S. Gregory in his Morals delivers himself excellently, and in part to our
Purpose.

Si a domo mentis ad monumentum ratio discedat: quasi absente domina
cogitationum clamare velut garrula ancillarum turba multiplicat. Ut autem ratio
ad mentem redierit; mox se confusio tumultuosa compescit; et quasi ancillae se
adjunctum opus tacit reprimunt, dum cogitationes protinus se causis propriis
ad utilitatem subdunt.

Suppose that Reason went abroad a visiting, and left the house of the mind to
the Dispose of her servants, the Thoughts. When the Mistress is thus out of
the way, what a noise, what gossiping there is among the Maids; But let Reason
return unto the mind again, when the Mistress comes home; no sooner her Foot
at the Door, but all is hush, all Disorder vanishes, and as every Maid betakes
her self silently to her Work, the Thoughts in like manner become well ordered,
and for much benefit to the Mind adjoyn themselves, and set themselves on Work
in their proper Business.

Let us look upon a Neoterick.

Ut figuli celerrima rotae, and manus concitatione in dissimiles, and prope
infinitas, elegantes tamen imagines mollieres argillae massam transmutant:
Simili ratione meditatio afficit, ut infinita rerum abstrusarum genera, acriter
ratiocinando assequamur, and paria paribus, contraria contrariis, praeterita
prasentibus comparemus.

As the Potter transforms the Mass of purer Clay with the swift Motion of his
turning Hand, into many unlike, and in a manner numberless Figures, yet
curious shapes: After the same manner works Meditation, She brings it so to
pass, that we may reach untold sorts of secret things by a quick and inward
reasoning, comparing like to like, contrary with contrary, and weighing with
the present things what went before.

Let Us hear what another says.

Cum bonum sit objectum voluntatis nostrae, adeo quod nihil possit esse amatum,
nisi bonum, aut sub specie boni; Cumque intellectus concipiat infinitam
bonitatis abyssum in Deo, valde frigida esset voluntas, quae non instar
alterius Phoenicis exardesceret in amoris divini ignem contemplando
lucidissimos solis justitiae radios. Discute igitur alas tuas instar Phoenicis,
et erige cortuum inter meditandum, et invenies te convertendum in cinerem and
vermes, dum agnoscis tuam utilitatem coram infinita, et immensa illa bonitate
Dei.

When, what is Good, is the object of our Wills, so nothing can be affected but
That, or something like it. Seeing then, that the Understanding may conceive
the infinite Abyss of Goodness, that is in God, the Will were Ice, if it
should not as another Phoenix fly all on fire with Divine Love by
Contemplation, beholding those most glorious Rays of the Sun of
Righteousness. Display thy Wings then like the Phoenix, raise thy Heart, and
mount thy Spirit between thy Meditations, and with Job thou shall find thy
Self converted into Dust, and Worms, while thou do acknowledge thine own
Vileness in the Presence of that most Infinite, and most Immense Goodness of
the Lord.

PROSPECT XII.
WHen wicked Policies do reign,
They roll their Trenches in the Brain;
And subtly wind false Works with Art
To Undermine the Noblest Heart:
While Cunning spends utmost Skill
To act, what is New invented Ill;
Makes Stratagems, walks untrod Ways
Their hid Designs to height to raise;
Do make it their Business to surprise
What Truth cannot gain, they wu'd by Lies.
And all is but to make a Prey
Of The Soul, which still they wu'd betray.
What Vizards do they wear? For Ends
(O most unjust) each other rends.
None sooner ruin brings them to,
Than Craft does Cunnings self undo.
While Sin does seek all ways to thrive,
Religious Sails to Heavenward drive.
Sin falls with Plots, and the Soul does gain
By Contemplation Hope to reign.
CONSOLATORY ESSAY XII.
AS Men hear they tell the News; But as they see they know, so it is in Plautus
that old Comoedian. Qui audiunt, audita dicunt; qui vident, plane sciunt. The
Tongue and the Hand are very unruly Members, especially when Honesty and Reason
are not their Masters. The Tongue seems the more desperate, but the Hand
appears the more dangerous. What is spoken may be helped by Supposition of
Mistaking, or Disagreement in the Reporters, or Death. For then Breath and Life
vanish together; whereas that of the Hand appears to Posterity, surviveth the
Writer, and Reader, and remains as a Thousand Witnesses. Illis est Thesaurus
stultis in Lingua situs,
Et questui habeant male loqui melioribus.


Says the same Plautus. Those Fools think Treasures placed in the Tongue,
That count belying Betters Gain, for Wrong.


Incautus fuerit, si propria manu tale aliquid comprehenderit, a qua utique re,
unice cavere debes; quod nihil sit, quo tam facile convincaris. It is
Macrobius. He may be accounted indiscreet that leaves a loose Action under his
own Hand; which a man ought with special care to avoid, lest it become a snare
to take his want of foresight. Wherefore as no Vice lays a more foul aspersion
upon Man, then that of Ingratitude; So no evidence is so strong to taint him
therewith, or convict him thereof, as his own Handwriting in Detestation of
that Vice, and his Actual Approbation of the Contrary.

How comes it then, that Christians, that have so often set their Hands to so
many Obligations to God, as have been so often iterated in, and since Baptism,
should fall away in such a manner, as by the Wickedness of their Hands, and
the ungodliness of their impudent Actions to testify against themselves their
own Impiety, and to divulge abroad the Characters of their not less great,
than Abominable ingratitude; To unman themselves by ingratitude to their Maker;
to unchristian themselves by unthankfulness to their Redeemer; when the least
that can be done in such a Case is, to render Obedience for Creation, Duty for
Protection, and to return Praise for Blessings.

Do the Dumb Beasts give Thanks in their Looks, and cast their Eyes unto the
Hands that feed them? Shall condemned Androgeo find Gratitude in a Den of
Lions? And can any Christian be at a Loss, when he Looks for it in his Bosom?

My Friend! and Brother Christian! Ubi animus, ibi oculus; The Watch of thine
Eye goes, as the Spring of thine Affection directs. Let Us mark our Blessed
Saviors advice: He preached it in the Mount. Lay not up Treasures for your
selves upon the Earth, where the Moth and Canker corrupt, and where the Thieves
dig through and steal: But lay up Treasures for your Selves in Heaven, where
neither the Moth, nor Canker corrupts, and where the Thieves neither dig
through, nor steal. For, where your Treasure is, there will your Heart be also.

Have thou had a dejected Look from a heavy Heart? as if the adst lost thy
Comfort, and could not find thy Happiness? Did seek it in the Earth? that
Treasure is not in Mines; nor in the Darkness of so dull an Element. Look
upward, Soul! Look upward! and be thankful! Look upward! and be mindful! Be
mindful of all, that the Lord so wonderfully has done for Thee, so mercifully
has done unto Thee, so bountifully has bestowed upon Thee. Strive to turn
thine Eyes toward him from Vanity; And entreat His help to quicken thee in
his Way.

Can thou tell the number of his Mercies? Can thou tell how many be the
Rays of the Sun? And can thou consider all his Blessings? Look up! and
rejoice at the excellent Goodness of the Lord! Look up with the Eyes of Faith
through the Heavens! and behold the Brightness of His Glory that he has
prepared for the Saints! Meditate! and Look all about Thee! Contemplate! and
cast up thine Eyes above Thee! Here is Comfort. There is Joy. Here Christ
eases thy Burden. There he gives Thee a reward.

Observe then his Testimonies! and obey his Statutes! Let thy Soul then
magnify his Name! Let thy Lips sing Praises to his Holiness! Let thy Breast
become a smoking Altar! And let thy Soul be all a flame of holy Love! Let all
thy Breath be as sweet smelling Incense up to Heaven! Fix there thy Faith! thy
Hope! thy Heart! thy Soul! That Is thy Place, thy dwelling. Hasten as directed
thither! Only remember thou art Mortal! Deal thine Alms! Give thy Dole before
thou go!

Praise ye the Lord! For it is good to sing unto our God. For it is a pleasant
Thing; and Praise is comely. The Lord does build up Jerusalem, and gather
together the disper^^ of Israel. He heals those that are broken in Heart,
(...) binds up their Sores. He counts the number of the Stars, and calls
them all by their Names. Great is our Lord, and great is his Power, his Wisdom
is infinite. The Lord relieiveth the meek, and abaseth the wicked to the
Ground. Sing unto the Lord with Praise! Sing upon the Harp unto our God!

Praise the Lord. For his Mercy endures for ever.
FINIS.

