A Catalogue of the AUTHORS and BOOKS made use of in the following Collection.
LIttleton. Plowden. Dyer. Stamford. Fitz-Herbert. Bracton. Fortescue. Brook.
Liber Assis. Book of Entries. The Year-Books. Coke. Lambert. Yelverton. Thorpe.
Mountague. Wray, L. Chapter J. Hollinshed. Sir Tho. Smith.
Arcana Parliamentaria: OR PRECEDENTS CONCERNING Elections, Proceedings,
Privileges, and Punishments in PARLIAMENT. Faithfully collected out of the
Common and Statute Law of this Realm. With particular Quotations of the Authors
in each Case. By R.C. of the Middle Temple, Esquire To which is added, The
Authority, Form, and Manner of Holding Parliaments. By the Learned Sir Tho.
Smith, Doctor of Laws.

London, Printed for M. Gilliflower, at the Spread Eagle and Crown in
Westminster Hall. 1685.

The Authority, Form, and Manner of holding Parliaments.
THE most high and absolute Power of the Realm of England consists in the
Parliament. For, as in War, where the King himself in Person, the Nobility, the
rest of the Gentility, and the Yeomanry are, is the Force and Power of England;
So in Peace and Consultation, where the Prince is to give Life, and the last
and highest Commandment; the Barony or Nobility for the higher, the Knights,
Esquires, Gentlemen and Commons for the lower part of the Commonwealth; the
Bishops for the Clergy, be present to advertise, consult, and show what is good
and necessary for the Commonwealth, and to consult together; and upon mature
deliberation, every Bill or Law being thrice read and disputed upon in either
House, the other two Parts, first each apart, and after the Prince himself, in
presence of both the Parties, does consent unto and allows. That is the
Princes and whole Realms Deed; whereupon justly no man can complain, but must
accommodate himself to find it good, and obey it.

That which is done by this Consent is called firm, stable and sanctum, and is
taken for Law. The Parliament abrogateth old Laws, makes new, gives order for
things past, and for things hereafter to be followed, changes Right and
Possessions of private men, legitimateth Bastards, establishes Forms of
Religion, alters Weights and Measures, defines of doubtful Rights, whereof
is no Law already made, do appoint Subsidies, Talies, Taxes, and Impositions,
gives most free Pardons and Absolutions, restores in Blood and Name: as the
highest Court, condemns or absolveth them whom the Prince will put to Trial:
And to be short, all that ever the People of Rome might do, either Centuriatis
Comitiis, or Tributis, the same may be done by the Parliament of England, which
represents, and has the Power of the whole Realm, both the Head and Body.
For every Englishman is intended to be there present, either in Person, or by
Procuration and Attorney, of what Pre-eminence, State, Dignity, or Quality
soever he be, from the Prince, (be it King or Queen) to the lowest Person of
England. And the Consent of the Parliament is taken to be every man's Consent.

The Judges in Parliament are, the the King or Queen's Majesty, the Lords
Temporal and Spiritual, the Commons, represented by the Knights and Burgesses
of every Shire and Borough Town. These all, or the greater part of them, and
that with the consent of the Prince for the time being, must agree to the
making of Laws.

The Officers in Parliament are the Speakers, two Clerks, the one for the
Higher House, the other for the Lower, and Committees.

The Speaker is he that does commend and prefer the Bills exhibited into the
Parliament, and is the Mouth of the Parliament. He is commonly appointed by the
King or Queen, though accepted by the Assent of the House.

The Clerks are the Keepers of the Parliament-Rolls and Records, and of the
Statutes made, and have the custody of the private Statutes not printed.

The Committees are such as either the Lords in the higher House, or Burgesses
in the lower House, do choose, to frame the Laws upon such Bills as are agreed
upon, and afterward to be ratified by the same Houses.

The Form of holding the Parliament.
THE Prince sends forth his Writs to every Duke, Marquess, Baron, and every
other Lord Temporal or Spiritual, who has Voice in the Parliament, to be at
his great Counsel of Parliament such a day; (the space from the date of the
Writ is commonly at the least forty days.) He sends also Writs to the
Sheriffs of every Shire, to admonish the whole Shire to choose two Knights of
the Parliament in the name of the Shire, to hear, and reason, and to give their
Advice and Consent in the name of the Shire; and to be present at that day:
likewise to every City and Town, which of ancient time has been wont to find
Burgesses of the Parliament, so to make Election, that they might be present
there at the first day of the Parliament. The Knights of the Shire be chosen by
all the Gentlemen and Yeomen of the Shire, present at the day assigned for the
Election.: the voice of any absent can be counted for none. Yeomen I call here
(as before) that may dispend at the least forty shillings of yearly Rent of
free Land of his own.

The Writ of Parliament for the Lords.
JAcobus Secundus, etc. Charissimo consanguineo suo Edwardo Comit' Oxon'
salutem. Quia de advisamento and assensu consilii nostri pro quibusdam arduis
urgentibus negotiis nos, statum and defensionem Regni nostri Angliae and
Ecclesiae Anglicanae concernent' quoddam Parliamentum nostrum apud Civitatem
nostram Westmonasterium decimonono die -- prox' futur' tener' ordinavimus, and
ibid' vobiscum ac cum Prelat', Magnatibus and Proceribus dict' Regni nostri
colloquium habere and tractare, vobis sub fide and ligeanciis quibus nobis
tenemini firmiter injungend' mandamus, quod considerat' dictorum negotiorum
arduitate and periculis imminentibus, cessante excusatione quacunque dict' die
and loco personaliter intersitis nobiscum ac cum Prelatis, magnatibus and
Proceribus praedictis, super dictis negotiis tractatur' vestrumque consilium
impensur' and hoo sicut nos and honorem nostrum ac salvationem and defensionem
Regni and Ecclesiae praedictorum expeditionemque dictorum negotiorum diligitis
nullatenus omittatis. Test meipso apud Westm' decimo die -- anno Regni nostri
--

The Writ of Parliament for the Knights.
REx Vic' N. etc. salut. quia de advisamento and assensu Consilii nostri pro
quibusdam arduis and urgentibus negotiis, nos, statum, and defensionem Regni
nostri Angliae, and Ecclesiae Anglicanae, concernen' quoddam Parliamentum
nostrum apud Civitatem nostram Westm' duodecimo die -- prox' futur' teneri
ordinavimus, and ibid' cum Prelatis Magnatibus and Proceribus dicti Regni
nostri colloquium habere and tract: Tibi praecipimus firmiter injungentes quod
facta proclamac' in prox' comitat' tuo post receptionem hujus brevis nostri
tenend' die and loco praedict' duos milit' gladiis cinct' magis idoneos and
discretos comit' praedicti, and de qualib' civitate com' illius duos cives, and
de quolibet Burgo duos Burgenses de discretior' and magis sufficientibus libere
and indifferenter per illos qui proclam' hujusmodi interfuer' juxta for mam
Statutorum inde edit' and provis' eligi, and nomina eorundum milit', civium and
Burgensium, sic electorum in quibusdam indentur' inter te and illos qui
hujusmodi election' interfuerit, inde conficiend' sive hujusmodi electi
praesentes fuerint vel absentes, inseri: eosque ad dict' diem and locum venire
fac'. Ita quod iidem Milites plenam and sufficientem potestatem pro se and
communitate comit' praedicti ac dict' Cives and Burgenses pro se et communitat'
Civitatum et Burgorum praedictorum divisim ab ipsis habeant, ad faciendum et
consentiendum his quae tunc ibid' de communi consilio dicti Reg' nostri
(favente Deo) contigerint ordinari super negotiis ante dictis: Ita quod pro
defectu potestatis hujusmodi, seu propter improvidam electionem milit' Civium
aut Burgensium praedictorum, dicta negotia infecta non remaneant quovis modo.
Nolumus autem quod tu nec aliquis alius vic' dicti Reg' nostri aliqualiter sit
electus. Et electionem illam in pleno comitatu factam, distinct and aperte sub
sigillo tuo and sigillis eorum qui electioni illi interfuerint, nobis in
Cancellar nostram ad dict' diem and locum certifices indilate, remittens nobis
alteram partem: indenturarum praedictarum praesentibus consut' una cum hoc
breve. Test meipso apud Westmonasterium decimo octavo die -- Anno Regni nostri
--

The Return of the Sheriff upon this Writ.
VIrtute istius brevis eligi feci duos milit' gladiis cinctos magis idoneos and
discretos de comitat' meo, viz. W. F. and V. S. qui plenam and sufficientem
potestatem pro se and communitate comitat' predicti habeant, ad saciendum and
consentiendum iis quae ad diem and locum infra contentos de communi consilio
regni Angliae ordinari contigerint: and praedicti W. F. and V. S. manucapti
sunt per I. P. V. B. I. D. and R. N. ad essendum ad Parliamentum domini Regis
apud Westmonast. ad diem infra contentum ad faciendum quod hoc breve in se
exigit and requirit. Li. Int. 595.

Feci etiam praeceptum virtute hujus brevis I. B. and A. S. Ballivis libertatis
villae de G. in comitat' meo, quod de eodem Burgo eligi facerent duos Burgenses
de discretioribus and magis sufficient' quod sint ad Parliamentum dicti domini
Regis ad diem and locum infra cont', ad faciendum and consentiendum ut
praedictum est, qui quidem Ballivi sic mihi respondent, qd' eligi fecerunt de
praedicto Burgo de G. duos Burg. discretos and magis sufficient', ad essend' ad
Parliamentum praedictum: viz. R. P. and G. I. ad faciendum and consentiendum ut
supradictum est. Virtute etiam istius brevis ad proximum Comitat' meum post
receptionem ejusdem, tentum apud V. tali die and anno in pleno comitatu illo
proclamari feci omnia in isto brevi contenta, secundum formam and effectum
hujus brevis, prout hoc breve in se exigit and requirit.

Residuum vero executionis istius brevis patet in quibusdam Indent' huic brevi
consut. Li. Intr' 595.

The Indenture between the Sheriff and Burgesses.
HAEC Indentura facta tali die and anno inter G. A. armig' vic' comitatus N. ex
una part, and I. B. and I. D. etc. ex altera part, testatur, quod secundum
formam brevis huic Indent' consut', fact', proclam' in pleno comitatu meo tento
apud G. tali die and an* praedicti I. B. I. D. and alii qui Procl' predict' in
pleno comitat' predict' interfuerunt, secundum formam statutorum in brevi
predicto specificatorum and secundum exigen' brevis illius eligerunt W. F. and
V. S. milites, Gladiis cinctos pro comitatu predicto, ad essendum ad
parliamentum in eodem brevi specific' qui plenam and sufficientem potestatem
pro se and communitate comitatus predicti habeant, ad faciendum and
consentiendum prout breve illud in se exigit and requirit. In cujus rei
testimonium parts predict' his indenturis sigilla sua alternatim apposuer'.
Datum tali die and an. Plo. 120.

G. A. armig. vic'

These meeting at one day, the two who have the most of their voices, be chosen
Knights of the Shire for that Parliament: likewise by the plurality of the
Voices of the Citizens and Burgesses, be the Burgesses elected. The first day
of the Parliament, the Prince and all the Lords in their Robes of Parliament do
meet in the higher House, where, after Prayers made, they that be present are
written, and they that be absent, upon sickness, or some other reasonable cause
(which the Prince will allow) do constitute under their hand and Seal, some one
of those who be present, as their Proxy or Attorney, to give Voice for them, so
that by presence, or Attorney, and Proxy they be all there, all the Princes and
Barons, and all Archbishops and Bishops, and (when Abbots were) so many Abbots
as had Voice in Parliament. The place, where the assembly is, is richly
tapessed and hanged, a Princely and Royal Throne, as appertains to a King,
set in the midst of the higher place thereof. Next under the Prince sits the
Chancellor, who is the Voice and Orator of the Prince. On the one side of
that House or Chamber, sits the Archbishops and Bishops, each in his rank,
on the other side the Dukes and Barons.

In the midst thereof, upon Wool-sacks, sits the Judges of the Realm, the
Master of the Rolls, and the Secretaries of Estate; But these that sit on the
Wool-sacks have no Voice in the House, but only sit there to answer their
knowledge in the Law, when they be asked, if any doubt arise among the Lords.
The Secretaries do answer of such Letters or things passed in Council, whereof
they have the custody or knowledge; and this is called the Upper House, whose
Consent and Dissent is given by each man severally, and by himself; first, for
himself, and then severally, for so many as he has Letters and Proxies, when
it comes to the question, saying only, Content, or not content, without
farther reasoning or replying. In the mean time, the Knights of the Shires, and
Burgesses of Parliament (for so they are called that have Voice in Parliament,
and are chosen (as I have said before) to the number of about five hundred and
ten) are called by such as it pleases the Prince to appoint, into another
great House or Chamber, by name, to which they answer; and declaring for what
Town or Shire they answer: then they are willed to choose an able and discreet
man, to be as it were the Mouth of them all, and to speak for, and in the name
of them, and to present him so chosen by them to the Prince: which done, they
coming all with him to a Bar, which is at the nether end of the upper House,
there he first praises the Prince, then makes his excuse of Inability, and
prays the Prince that he would command the Commons to choose another. The
Chancellor, in the Prince's name, does so much declare him able, as he did
declare himself unable, and thanketh the Commons for choosing so Wise, Discreet,
and Eloquent a man, and wills them to go and consult of Laws for the
Commonwealth. Then the Speaker makes certain Requests to the Prince in the
Commons Name, First, that his Majesty would be content that they may use and
enjoy all their Liberties and Privileges that the Commons House was wont to
enjoy.

Secondly, That they may frankly and freely say their minds, in disputing of
such Matters as may come in question, and that without offense to His Majesty.

Thirdly, If any should chance, of that Lower House, to offend, or not to do or
say as should become him, or if any should offend any of them, being called to
that his Highness Court, that they themselves might (according to the ancient
custom) have the punishment of them.

Fourthly, That if there come any doubt, whereupon they shall desire to have
the Advice of, or Conference with his Majesty, or with any of the Lords, they
might do it; All which he promises in the Commons names, that they* shall not
abuse, but have such regard as most faithful, true, and loving Subjects ought
to have to their Prince.

The Chancellor answers in the Prince's name, as appertains. And this is
all that is done for one day, and sometime for two. Besides the Chancellor,
there is one in the upper House, who is called Clerk of the Parliament, who
reads the Bills. For all that comes in consultation either in the upper
House or in the nether House, is put in writing first in Paper, which being
once read, he that will, rises up and speaks for it or against it: and so
one after another, so long as they shall think good. That done, they go to
another, and so another Bill. After it has been once or twice read, and does
appear that it is somewhat liked as reasonable, with such amendment in Words,
and peradventure some Sentences, as by disputation seems to be amended: in
the upper House the Chancellor asks, if they will have it* engrossed, that
is to say, put into Parchment: which done, and read the third time, and that
eft-soons; if any be disposed to object or dispute again among them, the
Chancellor asks, if they will go to the question? and if they agree to go to
the question, then he says, Here is such a Law or Act concerning such a
matter, which has been thrice read here in this House, are ye content that it
be enacted or no? If the Not-contents be most, then the Bill is dashed, that is
to say, the Law is annihilated, and goes no farther. If the Contents be the
most, then the Clerk writes underneath; Soit bail aux commons.

And so when they see time, they send such Bills as they have approved, by two
or three of those which do sit on the Wool-sacks to the Commons: who, asking
License, and coming into the House, with due reverence says to the Speaker:
Master Speaker, my Lords of the upper House have passed among them, and think
good, that there should be enacted by Parliament such an Act, and such an Act,
and so reads the Titles of that Act or Acts. They pray you to consider of
them, and show them your advice; which done, they go their way. They being gone,
and the door again shut, the Speaker rehearses to the House what they said.
And if they be not busy disputing at that time another Bill, he asks them
straightway if they will have that Bill, or (if there be more) one of them.

In like manner in the lower House, the Speaker, sitting in a Seat, or Chair
for that purpose, somewhat higher, that he may see and be seen of them all,
has before him, in a lower Seat, his Clerk* who reads such Bills as be first
propounded in the lower House, or be sent down from the Lords. For in that
point each House has equal Authority, to propound what they think meet, either
for the abrogating of some Law made before, or for making of a new. All Bills
be thrice in three diverse days read and disputed upon, before they come to the
question. In the disputing is a mavelous good order used in the lower House.
He that stands up bare-headed, is to be understood, that he will speak to the
Bill. If more stand up, who that is first judged to arise, is first heard;
though the one do praise the Law, the other dissuade it, yet there is no
passionate reasonings. For every man speaks as to the Speaker, not as one to
another, for that is against the Order of the House. It is also taken against
the Order, to name him whom ye do confute, but by cir^umlocution, as he that
speaks with the Bill, or he that spoke against the Bill, and gave this and
this reason. And so with perpetual Oration, not with intrenching discourse, he
goes through till he have made an end. He that once has spoken in a Bill,
though he be confuted straight, that day may not reply, no, though he would
change his Opinion. So that to one Bill in one day, one may not in that House
speak twice, or else one or two with cross disputation would spend all the
time. The next day he may, but then also but once.

No reviling or nipping words must be used. For then all the House will cry, it
is against the Order: and if any speak unreverently or seditiously against the
Prince, or the Privy Council, I have seen them not only interrupted, but it
has been moved after to the House, and they have sent them to the Tower. So
that in such a multitude, and in such diversity of Minds and Opinions, there is
the greatest Modesty and Temperance of Speech that can be used. Nevertheless,
with very mild and gentle Terms, they make their reasons as violent, and as
vehement the one against the other as they may ordinarily, except it be for
urgent causes, and hasting of time. At the afternoon they keep no Parliament.
The Speaker has no voice in the House, no^ they will not suffer him to speak
in any Bill to move or dissuade it. But when any Bill is read, the Speakers
Office is, a^ briefly and as plainly as he may, to declare the Effect thereof
to the House. I^ the Commons do assent to such Bills as be sent to them first
agreed upon from the Lords, thus subscribed, Les Communs ont assentus, so if
the Lords do agree to such Bills as be first agreed upon by the Commons, they
send them down to the Speaker thus subscribed, Les Seigneurs ont assentus, If
they cannot agree, the two Houses (for every Bill from whencesoever it does
come, is thrice read in each of the Houses) if it be understood that there is
any sticking, sometimes the Lords to the Commons, sometimes the Commons to the
Lords, do require that certain of each house may meet together, and so each
part to be informed of others meaning, and this is always granted. After which
meeting, for the most part, not always, either part agrees to others Bills.

In the upper House they give their assent and dissent, each man severally, and
by himself, first, for himself, and then for so many as he has Proxy. When the
Chancellor has demanded of them, whether they will go to the question, after
the Bill has been thrice read, they saying only, Content or not content,
without further reasoning or replying: and as the greater number does agree, so
it is agreed on, or dashed.

In the lower House, none of them that is elected, either Knight or Burgess,
can give his Voice to another, nor his consent or dissent by Proxy. The major
part of them that be present only makes the consent or dissent. After the Bill
has been twice read, and then engrossed, and est-soons read and disputed on
enough as is thought, the Speaker asks, if they will go to the question? and
if they agree, he holds the Bill up in his hand and says: As many as will
have this Bill go forward, which is concerning such a matter, say yea. Then
they which allow the Bill, cry Yea, and as many as will not, say No; as the cry
of the yea or no is bigger, so the Bill is allowed or dashed. If it be a doubt
which cry is bigger, they divide the House, the Speaker saying, as many as do
allow the Bill go down with the Bill, and as many as do not, sit still. So they
divide themselves, and being so divided they are numbered who made the major
part, and so the Bill does pass. It chances sometime that some part of the
Bill is allowed, some other part has much controversy and doubt made of it:
and it is thought if it were amended it would go forward. Then they choose
certain Committees of them who have spoken for the Bill and against it, to
amend it, and bring it again so amended, as they amongst them shall think meet:
and this is before it is engrossed, yea, and sometime after. But the agreement
of these Committees is no prejudice to the House. For at the last question they
will either accept it or dash it, as it shall seem good, notwithstanding that
whatsoever the Committees have done.

Thus no Bill is an Act of Parliament, Ordinance, or Edict of Law, until both
the Houses severally have agreed unto it after the order aforesaid; no nor then
neither. But the last day of that Parliament or Session, the Prince comes in
Person in his Parliament Robes, and sits in his state: all the upper House
sits about the Prince in their states and order, in their Robes. The
Speaker, with all the Common House, comes to the Bar, and there, after
thanksgiving first in the Lords Name by the Chancellor, etc. and in the
Commons Name by the Speaker to the Prince, for that he has so great care of
the good Government of his People, and for calling them together to advise of
such things as should be for the Reformation. Establishing, and Ornament of the
Commonwealth: the Chancellor, in the Prince's Name, gives thanks to the
Lords and Commons for their pains and travels taken, which, he says, the
Prince will remember and recompense when time and occasion shall serve, and
that he for his part is ready to declare his Pleasure concerning their
Proceedings, whereby the same may have perfect Life and Accomplishment by his
Princely Authority, and so have the whole Consent of the Realm. Then one reads
the Titles of every Act which has passed at that Session, but only in this
fashion: An Act concerning such a thing, etc. It is marked there what the
Prince does allow, and to such he says, Le Roy, or la Royne le veult. And
those be taken now as perfect Laws and Ordinances of the Realm of England, and
none other, and, as soon as may be, put in print, except it be some private
Case, or Law, made for the benefit or prejudice of some private man, which the
Romans were wont to call Privilegia. These be only exemplified under the Seal
of the Parliament, and for the most part not printed. To those which the Prince
likes not, he answers, Le Roy, or la Rain sadvisera, and those be accounted
utterly dashed, and of none effect.

This is the order and form of the highest and most authentical Court of
England, by virtue whereof all those things be established whereof I spoke
before, and no other means accounted available to make any new forfeiture of
Life, Member, or Lands of any English man, where there was no Law ordained for
it before.

Note, Where the Parliament Writ speaks de qualibet Civitate Comitatus illius,
this is intended, where the City is not a County in it self, etc. For if it be
a County of it self, as London, Norwich, and such like, then the Writ shall be
directed to them, etc. As it is to Sheriffs of other Counties.

At the next County meeting to be holden after the delivery of the Parliament
Writ to the Sheriff, Proclamation shall be made in the full County, of the day,
and place of the Parliament, and every one shall attend for the Election of the
Knights for the same County for the Parliament, which Knights ought to be
resident within the same County where they are chosen; the day of the date of
the Writ of Summons to the Parliament. And they shall be chosen by People
dwelling and resident within the same County, whereof every one of them shall
have Land, or Tenement, to the value of forty Shillings, above all charges,
within the same County; And such as have the greatest number of Voices of such
Chusers, shall be returned by the Sheriffs, Knights for the same County. 7 H.
4. c. 15. 1 H. c. 1. 8 H. 6. c. 7. 10 H. 6. c. 2.

The Sheriff may examine every Chuser upon the Evangelists, how much he may
expend by the year, if he be in doubt of the value, 8 H. 6 c. 7.

The said Election shall be made in full County, between the Hour of 8, and the
Hour of 9 in the Forenoon. 13 H. 6. c. 15.

The Knights shall be returned into Chancery, by Indenture sealed betwixt the
Sheriff and the Choosers of Knights for the Parliament. 8 H 6. c. 7. 7 H. 4. c.
1.^ 23 H. 6. c. 15. As it appears by the Writ abovesaid.

Every Sheriff that makes not a good, and true Return of such Election of
Knights to come to Parliament, according to the Statutes of H. 5. and H. 6.
shall forfeit 100 l. to the King, and 100 l. to the Knight so chosen, that
shall commence his Action within three Months after the Parliament begun, and
proceed in the same Suit effectually without Fraud. And if he so do not,
another that will sue shall have the said Action, for the said 100 l. with
costs, as the Knight should have had, 23 H. 6. c. 15. A Sheriff shall not be
chosen for Knight, nor Burgess of Parliament, L. Int. 411. as appears also by
the Writ it self directed to the Sheriff.

In every Writ of Parliament directed to the Sheriff, this Clause must be put
in. Electionem tuam in pleno comitatu tuo factam distinct et aperte sub
sigillo tuo et sigil' eorum qui electioni illi interfuerunt nobis in
Cancellariam nostram ad diem et locum in breve content' certifices indilate, 7
H. 4. c. 15.

The Election must be by the greater number of Freeholders; And, in an Action
of Debt for him that is chosen Knight of the County, and not returned, it
suffices to declare, that he was chosen by the major part of the Freeholders,
etc. Plowd. Com. 118. Dyer 113.

Note, If a man keeps a Household in one County, and remains in service with
another Family in another County, yet he may be at choosing of Knights of the
Shire, where he keeps a Family; for he shall be said in Law to be resident in
either of the said Counties: as in Debt, he may be impleaded where he keeps his
Household, ut supra, and be resident in the other County by reason of the
Arrest. Vide 19 H. 6. fol. 1.

And the Statute of 10 H. 6. c. 2. is, that Knights of the Shire shall be
chosen by Freeholders that are resident within the same County.

The Sheriff, after the receipt of the Writ, etc. as aforesaid, shall deliver
without fraud a sufficient Precept under his Seal to every Mayor, and Bailiff
(either Bailiffs, or Bailiff, where there is no Mayor of the Cities and
Buroughs within his County) reciting in it the Precept of the Parliament Writ;
commanding them by the said Precept, if it be a City, to choose Citizens for
the same City by Citizens, etc. If it be a Borough, then Burgesses by Burgesses
thereof, to come to the Parliament; and that the Mayor, and Bailiffs (or
Bailiffs or Bailiff, where there is no Mayor) shall duly return the said
Precept to the Sheriff, by Indenture betwixt the Sheriff and those of the
Election; and the names of the Citizens, and Burgesses by them so chosen. 23 H.
6. c. 15.

The Sheriff shall make a good return of such Writ, and of every return by the
Mayors, and Bailiffs (or Bailiffs or Bailiff, where there is no Mayor) to him
made. And if the Sheriff does contrary to this Statue, or any other Statute for
choosing of Knights, Citizens, and Burgesses to come to Parliament, he shall
incur the Penalty of 100 l. to the King and shall be imprisoned for one year
without Bail or Mainprise; and the Knights for the County, returned contrary to
the said Ordinances, shall lose their Wages, by 8 H. 6. c. 7. and the Sheriff
shall forfeit 100 l. to every Knight, Citizen, or Burgess in his County, chosen
to come to Parliament, not duly returned; or to any other, that in their
default will sue for it by action of Debt, with costs expended in it, in which
the Defendant shall not wage his Law, nor have any Esloin. 23 H. 6. c. 15.

If the Mayor, and Bailiffs, or Bailiffs or Bailiff, where no Mayor is, shall
return other than those which be chosen by the Citizens, and Burgesses of the
Cities or Boroughs where such Elections be; shall incur, and forfeit to the
King forty pound, and moreover, shall forfeit to every Person hereafter chosen,
Citizen, or Burgess, to come to Parliament, and not by the same Mayor, and
Bailiffs, or Bailiffs or Bailiff, where no Mayor is, returned; or to any other
Person, which in default of such Citizen or Burgess so chosen will sue for it,
shall have his Action of Debt for forty pound, with his Costs in this case
expended; in which the Defendant shall not wage his Law, nor have any Essoin.
Ibid.

Every Knight, Citizen, and Burgess, chosen and not returned, shall bring his
Action of Debt within three Months after the same Parliament commenced, to
proceed in the same Suit effectually without Fraud; And if he so do not,
another that will sue shall have the same Action for the said Forfeitures, and
Costs in such case expended, wherein the Defendant shall not wage his Law, nor
be essoined: Ibid.

If any Knight, Citizen, or Burgess, that shall be returned by the Sheriff to
come to Parliament, after such return, be put out by any Person, and another
put in the Place of him which is out, if he take upon him to be Knight,
Citizen, or Burgess, shall forfeit to the King an hundred pound, and so much to
the Knight, Citizen or Burgess, so returned by the Sheriff; and after, as
aforesaid, put out. And that Knight, Citizen, or Burgess, which is so put out,
shall have an Action of Debt against him so put in his place, his Executors, or
Administrators; provided always that he shall begin his Suit within three
Months after the Parliament commenced. And if he do not, then he that will sue,
shall have an action of Debt of the same one hundred pound against him which is
put in the place of him that is so put out, after such return, etc. And that no
Defendant in such Action shall wage his Law, nor be essoin'd; so that the
Knights of the Shire for the Parliament hereafter to be chosen, shall be
Knights, or otherwise such eminent Esquires, or Gentlemen of the same Counties,
as shall be able to be Knights, and no man to be such Knight, which stands in
the degree of a Yeoman, and under, 23 H. 6. c. 15.

All Persons, and Communalties, which shall have the Summons of the Parliament,
shall come to the Parliament in the manner as they are bounden to do, and have
been accustomed of ancient times. And he that does not come (except he may
reasonably, and honestly excuse himself) shall be amerced or otherwise
punished, according as of old times has beeen used. 5 R. 2. St^^^ 2. c. 4.

No Baron, Knight, Citize^ or Burgess, which shall be elected to come to
Parliament, shall depart from it till the Parliament be fully ended, or
prorogued, except he has License of the Speaker, and Commons in such Parliament
assembled: which License shall be entered in the Book of the Clerk of the
Parliament; appointed for the Commons House, upon pain to lose their Wages, and
all Counties, Cities, and Boroughs shall be discharged of the said Wages. 6 H.
8. c. 16. Vide Stamford, 153. The Bishop of Winchester was arrested in the
Kings Bench for that he coming to Parliament, departed without License. Coron.
F. 161. 3 Ed. 2.

The Lands, which were wont to be contributory to the Expenses of Knights of
Parliament, shall be liable to those charges, notwithstanding the purchase of
them by any Lord, or any other Person whatsoever. 12 R. 2. c. 12.

The Sheriff, after the Receipt of the Writ for levying the Wages of the
Knights of the Parliament, at the next County Court, shall make Proclamation
that the Coroners, and every chief Constable of the same County, and the
Bailiffs of every Hundred or Wapentake of the same County, and every other,
which will be at the assessing of the Wages of the Knights of the Shires, shall
be at the next County to assess the said Wages; and that the Sheriff, under
Sheriff, Coroner, or Bailiff, for the time being, be there in their proper
Person, upon pain of forfeiture to the King forty Shillings, of every of them
that makes default. 23 H. 6. c. 11.

At which time the Sheriff, or Undersheriff, in the presence of them that
shall come to the same, and of the Suitors of the same County, then being there
in full County, well and duly shall assess every Hundred to that assessable, by
it self, to pay a certain Sum for the Wages of the Knights of the Shire; so
that the whole Sum of all the Hundreds do not exceed the Sum which shall be due
to the said Knights. And after that, in the same County, they shall assess well
and lawfully every Village within the same Hundreds, which should be there
assessable to a certain Sum for the payment of the said Wages; so that the
whole Sum of all the Towns within any of the said Hundreds, do not exceed the
Sum assessed upon the Hundred of which they be. Ibidem.

And that the said Sheriff, Undersheriff, Bailiffs, nor any other Officer, for
the Cause aforesaid, shall levy more Money of any Village than that whereunto
they were assessed. And if any do assess any Hundred, or Village, otherwise
than is aforesaid, he shall forfeit for every default to the King, twenty
pound, and to any man which will sue in this case, ten pound. Ibidem.

And that the Sheriff well and duly shall levy the Money so assessed upon the
aforesaid Villages, as speedily as they well may after the said assessing; and
the same shall deliver to the said Knights, according to the Writs thereof, to
be made upon the said Penalties. Ibidem.

And he that will sue in this Case, shall be thereunto admitted, and shall have
a Scire Facias against him that offends contrary to this Ordinance, and shall
recover ten pounds to their own use, over the said twenty pound, with their
treble Damages for the Costs of their Suits. Ibidem.

And that the Justices of the Kings Bench, and of the Common Place, Justices of
Assizes, and Gaol delivery, and Justices of the Peace, shall have Power to
enquire, hear, and determine, of all the said Defaults, as well by Inquiry at
the Kings Suit, as by Action at the Suit of the Parties. 23 H. 6. c. 11.

And that all such Expenses of Knights shall not be levied of any other
Villages, Seigniories, or Places, but of such whereof it has been before this
Time. And that in every such Writ to be made to levy the Wages of the Knights,
This Act shall be comprehended in the same. 23 H. 6. c. 11. Vide Register 261.
That Villains shall not be contributory to the Wages of Knights of the Shire
for the Parliament, Br. 96. And Freeholders and Tenants at Will in ancient
Demesne, and the Lords shall also be acquitted of such Expenses for Knights of
the Parliament. Ancient Demesne. Br. 431. F. Natura brevium, 14.

That to every Parliament two Knights shall be chosen for the County of
Monmouth, and one Burgess for the Borough of Monmouth, in like manner, form,
and order, as Knights, and Burgesses of the Parliament be elected in every
County of England; and that the same Knights and Burgesses shall have like
Dignity, Pre-eminence, and Privilege, and shall be allowed such Fees, as other
Knights and Burgesses of Parliament have been allowed; And such Fees to be
levied, received, and paid in such manner, form, and order, as such Fees be
gathered, received, and paid in other Shires of the Realm of England. 27 H. 8.
c. 26.

And the Burgesses Fees to be levied as well within the Borough of Monmouth, as
within all other ancient Boroughs within the said Shire of Monmouth: And that a
Knight shall be chosen to the same Parliament for every of the Shires of
Brecnock, Radnor, Montgomery, and Denbigh, and for every other Shire within the
Dominion of Wales; and for every Borough being a Shire Town, within the Country
and Dominion of Wales (except the Shire-Town of the County of Mereoneth) one
Burgess; And the Election to be in manner, form, and order, as Knights, and
Burgesses of the Parliament be elected in other Shires of this Realm. Ibid.

And that the Knight, and Burgess, and every of them, shall have like Dignity,
Pre-eminence, and Privilege, and shall be allowed such Fees as other Knights
of the Parliament are allowed; And the Knights Fees to be levied and gathered
of the Commons of the Shire that they be elected in; and the Fees of Burgesses
to be levied, and gathered as well of the Boroughs, and Shire-Towns, as they be
Burgesses of, as of all other ancient Boroughs within the same Shires. 27 H. 8.
c. 26.

The Sheriffs of every of the 12 Shires in Wales, and in the County of
Monmouth, shall have power to levy, gather, or to be levied and gathered the
said Knights Fees and Wages of the Inhabitants of the 12 Shires, and of the
said County of Monmouth, which ought to pay the same; and the same so gathered,
shall pay to the Knights within two Months after the delivery of the Kings Writ
for payment of the said Wages or Fees; otherwise the Sheriff shall lose, and
forfeit twenty pounds: one Moiety to the King, and the other Moiety to him that
will sue for the same, in any Court of Record, by Information, Bill, or Plaint,
or otherwise, before any of the Kings Officers, wherein no Essoign, Protection,
or Wager of Law shall be admitted. 35 H. 8. c. 11.

And if it shall happen any Sheriff in any of the twelve Shires, and County of
Monmouth, to make default of payment of the said Wages, or Fees, by a longer
term than two Months; then every such Sheriff shall forfeit for every Month
that he shall make default twenty pounds, to be forfeited and levied in manner
and form as is aforesaid. Ibidem.

And that every Mayor, and Bailiff, and other chief Officers of Cities,
Boroughs, and Towns in every of the said twelve Shires, and in the County of
Monmouth, within like term and space of two Months after the receipt of the
Kings Writ De solutione faedi. burgent. Parliament. as is before mentioned, for
gathering of the Knights Fees, shall levy, gather, and pay the Wages and Fees
to their Burgesses, in like manner and form as is aforesaid, and in, and under
like pain and forfeitures, as before mentioned, to be levied of the Goods and
Chattels of every such Mayor, Bailiff, or other head Officers to whom the Kings
said Writ shall be directed for the levying of such Fees, making default of
pavment of the said Fees, and Wages to the Burgesses, in manner and form as is
aforesaid; And the Burgesses of Cities, Boroughs, and Towns, within the twelve
Shires of Wales, and the County of Monmouth, which are or shall be contributory
to the payment of the Burgesses Wages of the said Shire-Towns, shall be
lawfully admonished, by Proclamation, or otherwise, by the Mayors, Bailiffs, or
other head Officers of the said Towns, or by one of them, to come, and give
their Elections for the electing of the said Burgesses, at such time and place,
lawful and reasonable, which shall for that intent be assigned; in which
Elections the Burgesses shall have like Voice and Authority, to elect, and name
the Burgesses of every the said Shire-Towns, as the Burgesses of the said
Shire-Towns have or use. Ibidem.

Two Justices of Peace in every of the said Shires in Wales, and in the said
County of Monmouth, have Power and Authority, indifferently, to lot, and tax
every City, Borough, and Town, within the Shires in Wales, wherein they do
inhabit; and in the said County of Monmouth, for the Portions and Rates that
every the said Cities, and Boroughs shall bear and pay toward the said
Burgesses, within the said Shire-Towns of every of the said Shires in Wales,
and the County of Monmouth, which Rates so rated, and taxed in gross by the
said two Justices of Peace, as is aforesaid, shall be again rated, and taxed on
the Inhabitants of every the said Cities and Boroughs, by 4 or 6 discreet and
substantial Burgesses of every the said Cities and Boroughs in Wales, thereunto
named and assigned by the Mayor, Bailiffs, or other Head Officers of them for
the time being; and thereupon the Mayors, Bailiffs, and other Head Officers of
every such City, Borough, or Town, to collect the same, and thereof to make
payment in manner and form as aforesaid, to the Burgesses of the Parliament,
within like time, and upon the like pains and forfeitures, as is above
mentioned. 35 H. 8 c. 11.

The Kings Assent, by his Letters Patents under the great Seal of England, and
signed with his Hand, and notified in his absence to the Lords of Parliament,
and Commons assembled together in the higher House, is, and ever was of as good
strength and force, as if the King's Person had been there personally present,
and had assented openly and publicly to the same; and such Royal Assent,
notified as aforesaid, shall be taken good, and so effectual to all Intents,
without ambiguity or doubt, any Custom or Usage to the contrary
notwithstanding, 33 H. 8. cap. 21.

Every Knight chosen for the Parliament, and Sheriff that makes Election for
them, shall have their Traverse to such Inquests and Offices, before any
Justices of Assize hereafter to be taken, and they shall not be endammaged unto
the King for any such Inquest taken, until they be duly convicted according to
the form of the Law. 6 H. 6. cap. 4.

All the Clergy hereafter to be called to the Convocation by the King's Writ,
and their Servants and Familiars, shall for ever hereafter fully use, and enjoy
such Liberty, or Defense in coming, tarrying, and returning, as the great Men,
and Commonalty of the Realm of England, called, or to be called to the King's
Parliament, do, or were wont to enjoy. 8 H. 6. cap.

No Appeal shall be pursued in Parliament. 1 H. 4. c. 14.

The Burgesses of Parliament shall not be Collectors of a Fifteen, except they
can dispend in the County, out of the City or Borough of which they are
Burgesses, in Lands or Tenements, to the value of an hundred Shillings by the
Year, over the Charges and Reprises. 18 H. 6. cap. 5.

Knights, Citizens, Burgesses and Barons of Parliament, must take the Oath of
Supremacy, before they enter into the Parliament House; but Lords of Parliament
shall not be compelled to take the said Oath. 5 Eliz. c. 1.

Vide, How Lords of Parliament shall be placed in the Parliament, and other
Assemblies and Conferences of Council. 31 H. 8. cap. 10.

Lords of Parliament, for matters of Religion, shall be tried by their Peers. 1
Eliz. c. 2.

Persons attainted by Parliament, and after become Lunatic, shall be executed
notwithstanding, 33 H. 8. c. 20. Quere, if this be not repealed by 1 and 2 Ph.
and Mary, c. 10. Staunford, 153.

Women that have Joyntures assigned after marriage, may wave them, and take
their Dowry at Common Law, if the Jointure be not assigned by Parliament, 27 H.
8. c. 10.

The County Palatine of Chester shall have two Knights for the County Palatine,
and likewise two Citizens to be Burgesses for the City of Chester, to be chosen
by Process, to be awarded by the Chancellor of England, unto the Chamberlain of
Chester, or his Lieutenant for the time being. And so like process to be made
by the Chamberlain, or his Lieutenant, or Deputy, to the Sheriff of the said
County of Chester: And the same Election to be made under like manner, and
formed to all intents, constructions, and purposes, as is used within the
County Palatine of Lancaster, or any other County and City within England;
which Knights and Burgesses, and every of them so elected, shall be returned by
the said Sheriff into the Chancery of England, upon the like pains as it is
ordained that the Sheriff of any other County within this Realm should make
their Return in case like. Which said Knights and Burgesses, and every of them,
so chosen, and returned, shall be Knights and Burgesses of the Court of
Parliament, and have like Voice and Authority to all intents and purposes, as
any other the Knights and Burgesses of the said Court of Parliament have, use,
and enjoy: And also may have, and take all and every such Liberties,
Advantages, Dignities, Privileges, Wages, and Commodities, concerning the said
Court of Parliament, to all Intents, Constructions, and Purposes, as any other
the Knights and Burgesses of the said Court, may or ought to take and enjoy, 34
H. 8. c. 13.

If any Assault or Affray be made to any Lord Spiritual or Temporal, Knight of
the Shire, Citizen or Burgess, coming to the Parliament, or to other Council of
the King, by his Commandment, and there being and attending at the Parliament
or Council, that then Proclamation shall be made, in the most open Places in
the Town, by three several days, where the Assault or Affray shall be made,
that the Party that made such Affray or Assault, yield himself before the King
in his Bench, within a quarter of a year after the Proclamation made, if it be
in the time of the Term, or otherwise at the next day in the time of the Term
following the said quarter, and if he do not, that he be attainted of the same
deed, and pay to the Party grieved his double damages, to be taxed by the
discretion of the Justices of the same Bench, or by Inquest, if it be needful,
and make Fine and Ransom at the King's will; and if he come, and be found
Guilty by Inquest, by examination or otherwise, of such Affray or Assault, then
he shall pay to the Party so grieved his double damages, found by the Inquest,
or to be taxed by the discretion of the said Justices, and make fine and
ransom at the King's will, as above is said, 11 H. 6. c. 11.

Vide, the Act made for the assurance of Lands to John Hind, Sergeant at Law,
and his Heirs, paying annually ten pounds toward the maintenance and wages of
Knights of Parliament, for the County of Cambridge for ever, 34 and 35 H. 8. c.
24.

Note, by Kirby, Clerk of the Rolls of Parliament, that the custom or usage of
Parliament is, that if a Bill come first to the Commons, and they pass it, then
the Use is to indorse it in such manner, Soit bail a Seigniores, and upon
that, if neither the Lords, nor the King do alter it, then it shall be
delivered to the Clerk of the Parliament to be enrolled, without indorsing it,
and if it be a general Bill, it shall be enrolled, but not if it be a private
Bill, but it shall be put on the File, and that is sufficient; but if the party
will sue to have it enrolled, then it may be enrolled for sureties sake, 33 H.
6. 17.

If the Lords will alter a Bill, in that which may stand with the Bill, they
may so do, without remanding to the Commons; as if the Commons grant Poundage
for four years, and the Lords will grant it but for two years, this Bill shall
not be carried back again to the Commons. But if the Commons grant it but for
two years, and the Lords will grant for four years, there the Bill shall be
delivered to the Commons; and in this case the Lords ought to make a Schedule
of their Intention, or indorse the Bill in this manner; The Lords have assented
for the term of four years. And when the Commons have the Bill again, and they
will not assent to it, this can be no Act. But if the Commons will assent, then
they indorse their Answer upon the Margent of the Bill beneath in such form;
The Commons have assented to the Schedule of the Lords annexed to the same
Bill, and then it is delivered to the Clerk of Parliament, ut supra. 33 H. 6.
17.

If a Bill be first delivered to the Lords, and they pass it, they use not to
make any Indorsement, but send the Bill to the Commons, and if it pass them,
the use is to indorse it thus, Les Commons sont Assentants, and this proves
that it passed the Lords before: And therefore if J. S. be attainted of
Trespass by Parliament, and the Commons assent, that if he does not come in by
such a day, he shall forfeit such a Sum, and the Lords give him a longer day,
and the Bill is not sent back to the Commons again, this is no Act, for that
the Bill was not delivered back to the Commons after the enlargement of the day
given by the Lords. 33 H. 6.17.

Every Bill that passes the Parliament, shall have relation to the first day of
Parliament, although it come in at the end of the Parliament, and it is not the
custom to make any mention what day the Bill was delivered in to the
Parliament; per Faukes Clerk of the Parliament. 33 H. 6. 17. unless a time be
specially appointed by the Statute when it shall Commence. Com. 79.

If the Parliament begin before Pentecost, and continue after Pentecost, and
the Commons agree to a Bill after Pentecost, and give a day at Pentecost next,
and the Lords do so too; Now for that, a Bill shall have relation to the first
day of Parliament, if it be not ordered otherwise; it shall be taken for this
Pentecost, which is passed at this Sessions, whereas the intent of the Lords
and Commons, was, that it should be Pentecost after this Petition named in the
Bill. Parliament B. 4.

Although the Lords and Commons agree to a Bill, yet it is no Act, till the King
has given his Royal Assent to it in proper Person, or under his great Seal, and
if the King Assent, then is written upon the Bill, Le Roy veult; And if the
King will not Assent, then it is indorsed, Le Roy advisera. 33 H. 6. 17. 33 H.
8. c. 21.

Every Knight, Burgess, Baron of the Cinque Ports, or other called to
Parliament, shall have privilege of Parliament during the Parliament, or
Session of Parliament, so that he that arrests any of them during that time,
shall be imprisoned in the Tower by the Lower House, of which he is, and shall
be put to a Fine, and the Keeper also, if he will not deliver him so arrested,
when the Sergeant at Arms comes for him, by the command of the House of which
he is. Dier, 60.

Note, in the Lower House, when a Bill is read, the Speaker does open the parts
of the Bill, so that each Member of the House may understand the intention of
each part of the Bill; and the like is done by the Lord Chancellor in the
Upper House; then when it is read the second time, sometimes it is engrossed
without any Commitment, but then the Speaker makes question of it, in this
manner: The question is, Whether this Bill shall be engrossed or not? As many
as would have the Bill engrossed, shall say, Yea, and as many as would not,
say, No.

But in the Upper House of Parliament, when such question is made about
Engrossing, if there be no Contradiction, the Lords do not deliver their Assent
in saying, Content, or their Dissent in saying, Not Content, for husbanding the
time: But if there be any Contradiction, it is tried Seriatim, by Content or
Not Content; but neither in the Upper or Lower House, the Lord Chancellor or
Speaker, shall not repeat a Bill or an Amendment but once. Ibidem.

When a Bill is committed to the second reading, then if the Committees amend
it in any point, then they shall write down their amendment in a Paper, and
shall direct to a Line, and between what words the Amendment shall be put in,
or what words shall be interlined, and then all shall be engrossed in a Bill.
Ibid.

And if a Bill pass in the Commons House, and the Lords amend the Bill when it
is sent to the Upper House, they do as before show the Line, and between what
words, and after the Amendments are engrossed, with particular References, and
the Bill with the Amendments, are sent again to the House of Commons, where
they affirm them: The amendments are read three times, and then they insert
them in the body of the Bill, and so e Converso of a Bill which passes first
in the Upper House. But Note, that in one of these Cases, the entire Bill shall
not be read again in the House, wherein they first pass, but the amendments
only, for no Bill shall be read above three times. Ibidem.

No Lord ought to speak to the Bill twice in one day: Also no Knight, Citizen
or Burgess, ought to speak above once to one Bill in one day, unless sometimes
by way of Explication.

No private Bill ought to be read before the public Bills, unless the one
House or the other do require it. Coke lib. 13.

Note, in the House of Commons, those that are for the new Bill, (if there be a
question of Voices) shall go out of the House, and those who are against the
Bill, and for the Common Law, or any former Law, shall sit still in the House;
for they are in possession of the old Law, the other of the other, to number
the Voices. Coke, lib. 13.

In both Houses, he which first stands up to speak, he shall first speak
without any difference of Persons. Ibid.

When a Bill is engrossed, at the third reading it may be amended in the same
House in any matter of Substance a fortiori; the Error of the Clerk in the
Engrossing may be amended.

Note; The Privilege, Order, or Custom of Parliament, either of the Upper
House, or of the House of Commons, belongs to the Determination or Decision
only of the Court of Parliament; And this appears by two notable Precedents.

The one, at a Parliament holden the twenty seventh Year of King Henry the 6
th. There was a Controversy moved in the Upper House, between the Earls of
Arundel and of Devon-shire, for their Seats, Places, and Preheminencies of the
same, to be had in the King's Presence, as well in the High Court of
Parliament, as in his Counsels, and elsewhere: The King, by the advice of the
Lords Spiritual and Temporal, committed the same to certain Lords of
Parliament, who, for that they had not leisure to examine the same, it pleased
the King, by the advice of the Lords at this Parliament, in Anno 27 th. of his
Reign, that the Judges of the Land should hear, see, and examine the Title,
etc. and to report what they conceive herein: The Judges made Report as
follows; That this matter ( viz. of Honor and Precedence, between the two
Earls, Lords of Parliament) was a matter of Parliament, and belonged to the
King's Highness, and the Lords Spiritual and Temporal in Parliament, by them to
be decided and determined; yet being there so commanded, they showed what they
found upon Examination, and their Opinions thereupon.

Another Parliament in 31 H. 6. which Parliament begun the sixth of March, and
after it had continued some time, it was prorogued until the fourteenth of
February; and afterward in Michaelmas Term, Anno 31 H. 6. Thomas Thorpe, the
Speaker of the Commons House, at the Suit of the Duke of Buckingham, was
condemned in the Exchequer in 1000 l. damages for a Trespass done to him: The
fourteenth of February, the Commons moved in the Upper House, That their
Speaker might be set at liberty to exercise his Place: The Lords referred this
Case to the Judges; and Fortescue and Prisot, the two Chief Justices, in the
name of all the Judges, after sad Consideration, and mature Deliberation had
amongst them, answered, and said, that they ought not to answer to this
Question, for it has not been used aforetime, That the Justices should in any
wise determine the Privilege of this High Court of Parliament, for it is so
High and Mighty in its nature, that it may make Laws, and that that is Law, it
may make no Law: And the determination and knowledge of that Privilege,
belongs to the Lords of the Parliament, and not to the Justices: But as for
the proceedings in the Lower Courts in such Cases, they delivered their
Opinions. And in 12 E. 4. 2. in Sir John Paston's Case, it is holden, that
every Court shall determine and decide the Privileges and Customs of the same
Court, etc.

See Dier, Fol. 275. One was in Execution, that was a Burgess of Parliament,
and was let at large by a Privilege Writ of Parliament: P. 34 and 35 H. 8.
Rot. 23. And Debt brought against the Jailer for an escape, but he says not
what happened thereon.

See Hollinsked, in his Cronicle, Fol. 1584. The Case of one Ferrers, set at
liberty, that was a Burgess of Parliament, and arrested, and put in Execution
in London, sitting the Parliament; and this was Anno 34 H. 8. and was the Case
of Ferrers, as I believe, of which Dier, Fol. 275 speaks.

In the Lent Season, whilst the Parliament yet continued, one George Ferrers,
Gentleman, Servant to the King, being elect a Burgess for the Town of Plimmouth
in the County of Devon, in going to the Parliament House was arrested in
London, by a Process out of the King's Bench, at the Suit of one White, for the
Sum of two hundred Marks, or thereabouts, wherein he was late before condemned,
as a Surety for the Debt of one Welden of Salisbury; which Arrest being
signified to Sir Thomas Moile, Knight, then Speaker of the Parliament, and to
the Knights and Burgesses there, Order was taken, that the Sergeant of the
Parliament, called S. I. should forthwith repair to the Counter in Breadstreet,
whither the said Ferrers was carried, and there to demand delivery of the
Prisoner. The Sergeant, as he had in charge, went to the Counter, and declared
to the Clerks there what he had in commandment, but they, and other Officers of
the City, were so far from obeying the said Commandment, as, after many stout
words, they forcibly resisted the said Sergeant, whereof ensued a Fray within
the Counter-gates, between the said Ferrers and the said Officers, not without
hurt of either part, so that the said Sergeant was driven to defend himself
with his Mace of Arms, and had the Crown thereof broken by bearing off a
stroke, and his man stricken down. During this Brawl, the Sheriffs of London,
called Rowland Hill, and H. Suckley, came thither, to whom the Sergeant
complained of this Injury, and required of them the delivery of the said
Burgess, as before; but they bearing with their Officers, made little account
either of his Complaint or his Message, rejecting the same contemptuously, with
much proud Language, so as the Sergeant was forced to return without the
Prisoner; and finding the Speaker, and all the Knights and Burgesses set in
their places, declared unto them the whole cause as it fell out, who took the
same in so ill part, that they all together (of whom there were not a few, as
well of the King's Privy Council, as also of his Privy Chamber) would sit no
longer without their Burgess, but rose up wholly and repaired to the Upper
House, where the whole Case was declared by the mouth of the Speaker before Sir
T. Audley, Knight, then Lord Chancellor of England, and all the Lords and
Judges there assembled, who judging the Contempt to be very great, referred the
punishment thereof to the order of the Common House. They returning to their
places again, upon new debate of the Case, took order that their Sergeant
should speedily repair to the Sheriffs of London, and require delivery of the
said Burgess, without any Writ or Warrant had for the same, but only as before.
Albeit the Lord Chancellor offered there to grant a Writ, which they of the
Common House refused, being in a clear Opinion, that all Commandments, and
other Acts proceeding from the nether House, were to be done and executed by
their Sergeant without Writ, only by showing of his Mace, which was his
Warrant. But before the Serjeant's return into London, the Sheriffs having
intelligence how heinously the matter was taken, became somewhat more mild, so
as upon the said second demand, they delivered the Prisoner up without any
denial. But the Sergeant having then further in commandment from those of the
nether House, charged the said Sheriffs to appear personally on the morrow by
eight of the clock before the Speaker in the nether House, and to bring thither
the Clerks of the Counter, and such other of their Officers as were Parties to
the said Affray, and in like manner to take into his custody the said White,
which wittingly procured the said Arrest, in Contempt of the privilege of the
Parliament, which Commandment being done by the said Sergeant accordingly on
the morrow, the two Sheriffs, with one of the Clerks of the Counter (which was
the chief occasion of the said Affray) together with the said White appeared in
the Common House, where the Speaker charging them with their Contempt and
Misdemeanor aforesaid, they were compelled to make immediate Answer, without
being admitted to any Counsel. Albeit Sir To. Cholmley then Recorder of London,
and other the Counsel of the City there present, offered to speak in the cause,
which were all put to silence, and none suffered to speak, but the parties
themselves, whereupon in conclusion, the said Sheriffs and the same White were
committed to the Tower^ of London, and the said Clerk (which was the occasion
of the Fray) to a place there called Little-ease, and the Officer of London
which did the Arrest, called Tailor, with four Officers, to Newgate, where they
remained from the 28 th until the 30 th of March, and then they were delivered,
not without humble suit made by the Mayor of London, and other their Friends.
And forasmuch as the said Ferrers being in Execution upon a Condemnation of
Debt, and set at large by privilege of Parliament, was not by Law to be
brought again into Execution, and fo the party without remedy for his Debt, as
well against him as his principal Debtor; after long debate of the same, by the
space of nine or ten days together, at last they resolved upon an Act of
Parliament to be made, and to revive the Execution of the said Debt against the
said Welden, which was Principal Debtor, and to discharge the said Ferrers. But
before this came to pass, the Common House was divided upon the Question: but
in conclusion, the Act passed for the said Ferrers, who won by fourteen Voices.
The King being then advertised of all this proceeding, called immediately
before him the Lord Chancellor of England and his Judges, with the Speaker of
the Parliament, and other of the gravest Persons of the nether House, to whom
he declared his Opinion to this effect. First, commending their wisdom in
maintaining the Privileges of their House (which he would not have to be
infringed in any point) alleged, that-he being Head of the Parliament, and
attending in his own Person upon the business thereof, ought in reason to have
Privilege for him and all his Servants attending there upon him. So that if
the said Ferrers had been no Burgess, but only his Servant, that in respect
thereof, he was to have the privilege as well as any other. For I understand
(quoth he) that you not only for your own Persons, but also for your necessary
Servants, even to your Cooks and Horse-keepers, enjoy the said Privilege,
insomuch as my Lord Chancellor here present, has informed Us, that he being
Speaker of the Parliament, the Cook of the Temple was arrested in London, and
in Execution upon a statute of the Staple: And forasmuch as the said Cook,
during the Parliament served the Speaker in that Office, he was taken out of
Execution by the privilege of the Parliament: and farther, We be informed by
our Judges, that We at no time stand so highly in our Estate Royal as in the
time of Parliament, wherein We as Head, and you as Members, are conjoined and
knit together into one Body Politic, so as whatsoever Offense or Injury
(during that time is offered) to the meanest Member of the House, is to be
judged, as done against our Person, and the whole Court of Parliament, which
Prerogative of the Court is so great (as our learned Counsel informs us) as
all Acts and Processes coming out of any other inferior Courts, must for the
time cease and give place to the highest. And touching the Party, it was a
great Presumption in him, knowing our Servant to be one of this House, and
being warned thereof before, would nevertheless prosecute this matter out of
time, and therefore was well worthy to have lost his Debt, which I would not
wish, and therefore do commend your Equity, that having lost the same by Law,
have restored him to the same against him who was his Debtor, and this may be a
good Example to others, not to attempt any thing against the Privilege of this
Court, but to take the time better; whereupon Sir Edward Montague, then Lord
Chief Justice, very gravely declared his Opinion, confirming by diverse reasons
all that the King had said, which was assented unto by all the Residue, none
speaking to the contrary, the Act indeed passed not the higher House, for the
Lords had not time to consider of it, by reason of the dissolution of the
Parliament. Because this Case has been diversely reported, as is commonly
alleged as a President for the privilege of the Parliament, I have endeavored
my self to learn the Truth thereof, and to set it forth with the whole
Circumstances at large, according to their Instructions who ought best both to
know and remember it.

Note, Danby says -- That one coming to Westminster (for that he was a
Parliament Man) and was arrested, and lay in Execution upon a Condemnation long
time before the Parliament, and would have been discharged of the Execution,
and the matter was notified to the King's Council, and to the Justices of the
Bench, that he could not be discharged, and Coke said, that it was true. 2 E.
4. fol. 8. vide Dyer, 162. A man in Execution for Debt, although he was necessary
for War, which is for the public good, cannot be taken out of Execution. per
omnes Justic.

The Parliament shall not give Privilege, in time of Vacation, but sitting the
Court, Privilege. Br. 56.

Necessary Servants attending upon their Masters, during the Parliament, shall
have privilege of Parliament; so that they shall not be arrested for Debt, or
such like; And so shall have privilege of Parliament the necessary Officers
that attend on the Parliament, as the Sergeant at Arms, Porter of the House,
Clerks, and such like, and in the same manner for their necessary goods, so
that they shall not be arrested nor taken by any other Officer (unless it be in
case of Treason or Felony) in the same manner as Judges, or Ministers of other
Courts shall have for their Servants, Goods, and Chattels necessary;
Privilege, Br. 6. 29. 24.

If they cannot agree in Parliament upon a Bill, the Trial shall be by the
greater number of Polls.

He that comes to Parliament, ought to be a lawful Person, not Out-lawed, nor
in Execution, nor attainted of Treason or Felony, neither shall he be a
Villain. Vide Process Fitzh. 20 8. 34 E. 1. A Witness that was named in a Deed
among others, was Out-lawed, no Process shall be awarded against him by the
Statute, for that he was Out-lawed; If one of the Indictors be Out-lawed, the
Indictment is not good, because he is not Legalis and probus Homo. 11 H. 4. 11.

Diverse of Parliament were attainted of Treason by the Parliament in the time
of R. 3. with H. 7. and it was agreed by the Justices, that until the Act of
Attainder was repealed, such Burgessesses or Knights shall not be received into
the House to sit there, but as soon as the Act was reversed and annulled, they
should come into their places, and then may proceed upon any thing there moved
lawfully, as lawful Persons; But as to the King himself, it was agreed, that
the King was a Person able, and discharged of any former Attainder ipso facto,
that he took upon him to Reign, and to be King, for there is no Superior to
discharge him. 1 H. 7.4.

If there be diverse Sessions of Parliament, and there Acts passed at every
Session, every Act shall have relation to the first day of every Session.
Comment. 78.

The Errors committed in Chancery, in things appertaining to the Common Law,
shall be reversed in the Kings Bench. Dyer 315, and Error Fitzh. 71.18 E.3. by
which it seems that the Kings Bench is a Higher Court than the Court of
Chancery as to that; Tamen quaere, vide 37. H. 6.15, where it is said, that it
shall be reversed in Parliament, by Choke, Danby, and Ashton, vide Com. 393,
and Breve Fitzh. 651. Vide 42 Lib Ass. 22. where Error was committed in
Chancery upon Petition made there, and a Scire facias issued in the same Court
against the Party to the Petition of the Terre-Tenant, to reverse this
Erroneous Judgment thereof. If the King be deceived in making his Charter, it
shall by Scire facias be annulled in Chancery, out of which it issued, and not
in Parliament, Brief Fitzh. 651.16 E. 3. But note there, that both are the
Kings Courts, and the King may sue in which of his Courts he pleases, in his
own Case. But Thorpe said there, that in the Case between G. and G. the Suit
was in Parliament, to reverse a grant and Charter of the King, which Parner
granted, for that it was between party, and party; and as to the last matter,
vide 21 E. 3.46, accorded.

If there be a Statute that was never put in ure, yet it may be put in ure at
this time, 11 H. 4.7. yet see the Statute of Butler made 20 E. 1. is not put in
ure, which gives waste to the Heir done in the time of his Ancestor, for the
Register gives not a Writ of waste done in the time of the Ancestor, etc.

A Parliament may err, as appears Parliament. Br. 16. which reversed the Estate
of J. S. in certain Land, and the Charter thereof to him made, without calling
the Patentee to it by process before the Repeal; 21 E. 3.4. Plowd. Com. 400. in
the case of the Earl of Leicester, and Heyden. And Error in Parliament ought to
be reversed by Parliament. Error Br. 65.

The Queen may under the great Seal assign two or three Lords of Parliament to
supply her place in Parliament, if she be sick, or if she will not come for any
other cause to Parliament, as it was done Anno 31 Eliz. the Queen that now is;
at which time the Archbishop of Canterbury, the Lord Treasurer of England, and
the Earl of Derby, under the great Seal, were appointed Commanders by our
Sovereign Lady the Queen to represent her Person in the Parliament, and they
sat one space lower from the Cloth of Estate in the Parliament House.

A Statute in the negative restrains the Common Law, so that after such
Statute a Man may not use the Common Law, as the Statute of Marlbr. c. 3. Non
ideo puniatur dominus per Redemsione, and Magn. Chart. c. 34. nullus appelletur
ad sectam elienius feminoe nisi de morte virt sui. Otherwise, it is where a
Statute is made in the Affirmative, because that does not alter the Common Law.
Parliament. Br. 72.108.

Note, by Englefield Justice, in the case of Button and Savage, that where a
man had an elder Title to Land by one Entail, and after the same Land is given
to him by Parliament, his Heir shall not be remitted, for by the Act all other
Titles are extinct, for that the Act is the Common Judgment, and an Estoppel to
every one that is privy to the Act. Parliament. Brook 73.29 H. 8.21 Ed. 4.57.

If the King has an ancient Title to Land tayled, and the same Land is given to
him by Parliament, the Entail is gone, so that his Heir shall not avoid Leases
made by his Father, nor Charges and the like. Parl. Br. 73.29 H. 8.

It was held, that these words, to wit, the King with the Assent of his Lords
and Commonalty Grants, or Establishes, etc. This is as well as if it had been,
That it was enacted at the Request of the Lords and Commons, etc. and that the
King had assented; but the more usual words are, That it be enacted by the
King, by the assent of the Lords and Commons, etc. But the shorter, and
sufficienter Words are, that it be enacted by the Authority of Parliament.
Parliament. Brook 76.7 H. 7.14.

The ancient Statutes, as Magna Charta, and other Statutes are, Quod Rex
Statuit, and good, for it is implied, that the Lords and Commons assented,
Parliament. Br. 76. and the Statute de Finibus, 27 E. 1. is, Statuimus and
ordinavimus.

No Lord shall be tried by Peers, but Lords of Parliament, which are Temporal
Lords, and not Spiritual Lords; for a Bishop, that is a Lord of Parliament,
shall be tried as other common Persons are, as by Knights, Esquires, and
Gentlemen; for that a Bishop is not a Lord but by reason of his Bishopric, and
so was Cranmer, Archbishop of Canterbury, 1 Mar. Reg. Stanford, 153.

A Peer of the Realm shall be tried in an Appeal by Knights, etc. and no^ by
his Peers, because it is at the suit o^ the Party. Trial. Br. 142. Coron. Br.
153.10 E. 4.6. Stam. 152. Otherwise it is in an Indictment of Treason or
Felony, for that it is at the suit of the King, 10 E* 4.6.

The Duke of Somerset in the time of Ed. 6. was tried for Felony and Treason by
his Peers upon an Indictment, for it is the Suit of the King. Coron. Br. 153.10
Ed. 4.6. accords. And there it is said by Littleton, that the Lord Gray of
Codnor, in an Appeal, was tried, as a Common Person is, and not by his Peers,
although he was a Lord of Parliament. Treason, Br. 2.

A man may be attainted by Parliament of Treason as well as by the Common Law,
by Verdict, Outlawry, or Confession; because the Parliament is the highest
Court of Record in England, and shall not be restored in his Blood without
Parliament, but the King may give to him that is attainted his Life by his
Charter of Pardon, and that by apt Words. Stanford 53.

The King cannot alter the Common Law, nor a general custom of the Country, as
the descent of Land in Gavil-kind, Borough-English, and such like,
withoutParliament. Prerogative, Brook 15. 11 H. 4. 74. and see the Statute of
33 H. 8. c. 3. of the alteration of descents of Gavil-kind, and that the
descent shall be as to Heirs at Common Law.

When a Lord of Parliament is tried by his Peers, they shall not be sworn to
say their Verdict, but they shall give their Verdict upon their Honor, and are
not otherwise charged but upon their Honors. 1 H. 4. 1. and Stamford 152. From
this, note what account the Law makes of a Peers Word, when he speaks upon his
Honor, and this in case of a man's Life. A multo fortiori they ought to observe
in lesser Cases when they speak, and make promise upon their Honor upon good
Considerations.

When a Statute may be taken to a double intent, the better shall be taken for
the King, as the Statute of 14 E. 3. c. ultimo, in Stat. 1. it is ordained,
that for every Sack of Wool carried out of the Realm, the Merchant shall find
Surety to bring into England Plate of Silver of two Marks, and to take two
marks of Coin again for Bullion; and after were two Statutes, one made 36 E. 3.
c. 11. whereby it is ordained, for that the Commons have granted to the King of
every Sack of Wool for three years one grand Subsidy, he grants by the same
Statute, that after the three years, nothing shall be taken or demanded of the
Commons but the ancient Custom of one Mark of every Sack of Wool; and the other
Statute made 45 E. 3. c. 4. which ordains, that no Imposition, or Charge shall
be put upon Wools, etc. other than the Custom and Subsidy granted to the King,
in no sort, without the assent of the Parliament, and upon an Information in
the Exchequer against one that had carried Wools, and had not found Surety
according to the said Statute of 14 E. 3. which two Statutes aforesaid were
pleaded, and adjudged, that the finding of Surety for bringing in the two Marks
of Bullion is not taken way, for every Statute shall be taken most beneficial
for the King, where it may be taken to a double intent, and it shall be taken,
that it was the intent of the Makers of those said Statutes, to discharge the
Commons of the grand Charges upon Wools after the three years, 4 E. 3. fol. 3.
and fol. 12. Bar. Fitzh. 309. Vide Com. 10. 11.

The Duke of Buckingham brought an Action, de Scandalis Magnatum, against one
Lucas; for that he had said, the Duke had no more Conscience than a Dog, and so
that he may have Goods, he cared not how he came by them, and recovered forty
pound, as appears, Mich. 4 H. 8. Rot. 659. And the Duke may have a Suit in the
Star Chamber for such words; and I have viewed a Copy of the Record.

The Lord Abergaveny, brought an Action upon the said Statute against
Cartwright, for that the Defendant had told, and counterfeited false news of
the Plaintiff; to which the Defendant said, that the Plaintiff will wind the
Guts of the Defendant about his Neck; the Defendant pleaded not Guilty, and in
Evidence the Plaintiff showed a Letter written to one B. wherein the Defendant
said, that he understands by Report, that the Lord had said, ut supra, and held
good Evidence, and it was found for the Plaintiff, and had Judgment
accordingly; And so see, that to write and to say, are all one, for it is
public. Vide Book of Entries 13. that fixing a slanderous Bill in an open and
and public Place bears an Action, etc.

In an Error in Parliament, the Record remains with the Justices, and they are
to show it to the Parliament, and it shall not be removed to Parliament. 8 H.
5. Error Fitzh. 88. Dyer. 375. In such Case the Roll was carried by Wray Chief
Justice into Parliament, for the Error was assigned in the King's Bench, but
after that the Court of Parliament had examined it, he takes the Record with
him, and leaves a Transcript in the Court of Parliament.

A Petition in Parliament exhibited by A. T. for a Title he made to Land, that
the King enjoyed, which was received, and sent into Chancery to be tried, Ass.
Fitzh. 287. Lib. Ass. and he surmised, that there was a delay in the Trial of
his Right.

Those of London may bargain and sell their Land there, as they might before
the Statute of Inrolments, and so it may be done in other Boroughs and Cities;
and it was the Opinion of the Justices of both Benches, that the Lands in
Cities, etc. are, where the Common Law is exempted from the Act, and so, that
Lands devisable before, 32 H. 8. c. 1. are devisable at this day,
notwithstanding the Act aforesaid. Dyer 155. And so a Statute in the
Affirmative shall not change the Common Law, nor common Custom of a Town, as to
Inheritances.

A Lord of Parliament shall have Knights upon his Trial in every Action, 27 H.
8 fol. 27. Challenge. Fitzh. 115. 13 E. 3. in a Quare Impedit against a Bishop
it has been so adjudged. Com. 117. Dyer 208. according.

A Lord of Parliament may be Outlawed for Murder, 27 H. 8. Fol. 17. and it was
the Case of the Bishop of Winchester, Ibidem. Vide Proc' F. 224.

If a Lord of Parliament makes a Rescous, a Capias shall be taken out against
him, if the Sheriff return the Rescous; otherwise it is in Case of Debt. 27 H.
8.27.

An Exigent shall issue forth against a Lord of Parliament, if it be not
certified that he is a Lord of Parliament, 27 H. 8.27. 35 H. 6. A Lord of
Parliament shall not be Sworn on an Inquest, 27 H. 8.27.

Day of Grace shall not be given against a Lord of Parliament. 27 H. 8.27. 27
E. 3.

A Capias ad Satisfaciendum, does not lie against a Lord of Parliament. 27 H.
8.27. for the Law presumes that he has Assets, etc. 11 H. 4.15.

A Man shall not be remitted that takes an Estate by Parliament. 34. H. 8.
Remitter Br. 49. If the King gives Land to me, that is mine already, by Patent
in Fee, I shall not be remitted. 21 E. 4.57. But if the King recites my former
Right, and gives it me, I shall be remitted. Ibidem. Lib. Ass. 28.

Note; That the King cannot alter the Law, by his Proclamation, but he can make
Proclamation, that if any one does contrary to the Contents of the
Proclamation, that he shall incurr the Indignity of his Majesty; But upon pain
of forfeiture of his Land or Life, without Parliament he cannot. Vide 31 H. 8.
c. 8. That it was ordained by Parliament, that Proclamations made by the King,
by advice of certain of his Council named in the same Act, ought to be obeyed,
as though they were made by Act of Parliament. And after, 34. H. 8. c. 23.
another Statute was made, concerning Offenders of the former Statute; But by
the 1 H. 6. c. 12. both the Statutes are repealed; by which Statutes it
appears, that Proclamations shall not bind, as Acts of Parliament do, unless
it be so ordained by Parliament; for if so, the said Statutes of H. 8. were
made in vain.

A Statute recites, that such are attainted of Treason before such
Commissioners, and this Attainder is confirmed; if there were no such Attainder
in deed, the Act does not attaint them at all. Com. 400. A notable Case between
Robert Earl of Leicester and Sir Christopher Heydon, and the recital that they
were attainted, shall not conclude the Party so supposed to be attainted, but
that by an Averrment he may avoid it; see the Book.

By the 27 H. 8 th. it was ordained, that it should be Felony in a Servant to
embezil the Goods of his Master, and after by 1 E. 6. c. 12. all Felonies, made
in the time of H. 8 th. are annulled, but the Felony of Embezilling, etc. And
by the said Statute of 1 E. 6. it is shown, that the said Statute of 27 H. 8
th. was held at Westminster, upon diverse Prorogations, the 4 th. of February in
Anno. 27 H. 8. and there continued, and kept until the 24 th. day of April
next following; and for that the said Branch* misrecites the Act of 27 H. 8.
aforesaid, (for that Session begun the fourth day of February 27 H. 8. and
continued until 24 th. day of April then next following, and then ended, and
not continued until 24 th. day of April, as the Branch makes mention) by which
it is Evident, that the Branch of the Act that referrs to a Statute made in one
Parliament, that begun such a day and continued till such a day, (whereas the
Parliament did not continue) this must be void in point of time: and so the
Parliament may mistake a thing, and by reason of this Misprision, it will not
Arraign a Man that shall embezil his Master's Goods, after the said Act of 27
H. 8. Com. 400.

If a Statute make an Act Felony, and does not mention Accessories, yet there
shall be Accessories in the Case of the Statute: and this Master Dallison,
Justice of the King's Bench, said, that it was so held by the King's Bench
Court, 3 and 4 Ph. et Mar. as Lambert Reports in his Book of the Justices of
Peace. Fol. 289. Vide Stamford, 44. and 19 H. 6.47. according. In the Case of
counterfeiting the Seal, or Money, where the consenter or aider to it, etc. And
yet the Statute speaks, If a Man counterfeit, etc. which thing another did not:
so of Rape, where one commits the Act, and the other aids. 11 H. 4.12. Coron.
Fitzh. 228. Vide Parliament. Br. 46.

If an Act make a new Law in the Affirmative, which was not at Common Law, this
Law implies a Negative; as a Man seized in right of his Wife, infe-offs a
Stranger to the use of himself and his Wife, she is not remitted because she is
a Purchaser of the Use, and she shall have the Land, as to the Use, wherein so
much is implied, as if the Statute had said, Et non aliter, seu alio modo. Com.
113. As the Statute of Westminster. 2 c. 4. grants, that in a Quod. ei Deforciat, if
the Tennant recover, and maintain the Title of that which the Demandants call
Ad Warrantum ac si essent, Tenants in Priori brevi, there, if the former Action
had been such, in which he could not Vouch, as a Scire Facias, the Demandant
shall not Vouch because it is not a new Ordinance of a thing that was at Common
Law, which implies a Negative; As if it had been said, Et nullo alio modo.
Ibidem. 113.

When a Statute is made to Redress Covin, or an Inconvenience which was at
Common Law, although it be penal, yet other Cases in the same mischief shall be
taken by Equity of the Statute, as the Statute of the 16 R. 2. c. 5. of
Praemunire enacts, that if a man Sue for any thing in the Court of Rome, or
elsewhere, for which he may have remedy in the Court of the King, he shall
lose his Land, etc. In this Case, if a man Sue at the Court of Rome for that,
for which he may have remedy in the Bishops Court in England, he shall be
within the said Statute, and yet the said Statute speaks of the Court of
Rome, as appears, Praemunire Br. 9.9 E. 4.3. per Yelverton, who said, that in
the King's Bench it has often been the Opinion, that if a Clerk sue another in
the Court of Rome for a thing Spiritual, where he may have remedy in this
Realm, in the Court of the Ordinary, that he is in the Case of the Statute. The
Statute de Religiosis, is that a recovery by the Defendant shall be Mortmain,
and the Recovery by Reddition, Confession, or Action tried, is taken by Equity,
by Genney, which is not decided, and so of Rent or Common, which is neither
Land nor Tenement, by Lacon, which is not denied, 3 E. 4.14. Vide Montague in
the Case of Wimbish. Com. 59. That the Statute which comes to redress Covin and
Fraud, shall be taken by Equity, although it be not within the words of the
Statute, and a Statute that is for the Redressing a general Mischief may be
taken by Equity. by Horton. Parl. Br. 13.19.

The Justices ought to take notice of a general Pardon given by Parliament, and
allow it to the Party upon his Arraignment, although the Party do not plead it,
unless there be an Exception in the Pardon so given, for in such Case he ought
to show, that he is not one of them that is excepted, 27 H. 8.7. for the former
and the latter, 8 E. 4.7. Charter of Pardon, Br 46.

The King shall not be bound by a Statute, unless he be expressly named in it,
by Prisot, and Ashton, as in a Quare Impedit. Although the six Months are elapsed,
the King shall not be bound, but shall have a Quare Impedit; so if the King
usurp on an Infant, this shall put him out of Possession, notwithstanding the
Statute of Westminster. 2 c. 5. which aids an Infant against a common Person. 35 H.
6.62, 63.

A Man is attainted of Treason, and after the King gives his Lands to a
stranger, and then he commits a Trepass on the Land, and after this he is
restored by Parliament, and the Attainder is annulled, as if there had been no
such Attainder, he shall not be punished for that Trespass. Vide Trespass Br.
425.10 H. 7. adjudged; Vide 4 H. 7.10. But if a Daughter, or other collateral
Heir enter, and take the Profits, and after the next Heir is born, as a Son; he
shall not have remedy for the outing of the Incumbent, nor shall have an
account for the mean Profits. 9 H. 6.23.

Note, if a man is attainted of Treason by Act of Parliament, all his Lands,
Goods and Chattels are forfeited to the Crown, although it be not so said in the
Act it self: by Townsend Justice:

By the Common Law, if a man be attainted by Parliament of Treason or Felony,
yet the Land is not in the Crown, before it be so found by Office, if it had
not been so ordered by the Statute, 33 H. 8. c. 20, which gives possession in
such case to the King without any Office; yet where a Tenant of the King dies
without Heir, there the Freehold shall be in the King without Office, for that
the Freehold cannot be in suspense. 9 H. 7.2 Dyer 486. Com. 486, 229.

An Act of Parliament in the Affirmative shall not alter the Common Law, as a
man recovering Debt or Damages, does not sue Execution within the year he was
put at the Common Law to his new. Original, for he should not have had a Scire
Facias before the Statute of Westminster. 2. c. 45. de his quae recordata sunt, which
gives a Scire Facias in such case, yet the party that recovers, may have a Writ
of Debt after this Recovery, for that the said Statute is the affirmative, 39
H. 6.3.

The Statute of 42 E. 3: c. 11. ordains, that four days before the Assizes,
the Panel of the Assize shall be arrayed, yet two days before the Assize it
is sufficient to array the Panel in Assizes, for that the Statute is in the
affirmative, 43 Lib. Ass. 22.

It is enacted by Parliament, that A.B. shall be restored, and that he may
enter, yet he shall not enter upon the King, if it be not so enacted by
Statute, that he may enter as well upon the King, as upon a Common Person. 4.
E. 4.22, 23.

At a Parliament holden by Adjournment, 38 H. 8. it was admitted, that if a
Burgess of Parliament was made Mayor of a Town that had Judicial Jurisdiction,
and the other is sick, that those are sufficient Reasons to choose others; and
so they did by Writ of the King out of Chancery, that contained this matter,
that it was admitted in the Commons House of Parliament. Par. Br. 7. 38 H. 8.

Note, A Statute or Act of Parliament shall not be proclaimed, for the
Parliament represents the Body of the whole Realm, for there are Knights, and
Burgesses of every County and Town, 39 E. 3.7. But otherwise where it is
ordained by the Act, that it shall be proclaimed, as the Statute of Laborers,
23 H. 6. c. 13. And the Statutes of Maintenance, Champerty, Imbracery, and
Reteiners, 32 H. 8. c. 9. are ordained to be proclaimed.

A private Act of Parliament shall not conclude men, as a general Act shall;
neither are strangers to it bound to take any notice, as Privies are, by 37 H.
6.15. 13 E. 4.8. Office de Court, Br. 27.

Where the matter is against Reason, and the Party has no Remedy by the Common
Law, he may sue for Remedy in Parliament, 37 Lib. Ass. 7.

A man was restored by Parliament to Land that was forfeited, and had a Writ
directed to the Escheator to put him into Possession, and he returns, that he
was disturbed in making Execution, by A. B. who came, and said, that he had not
notice of the Restitution, and by the Justices he is excused till he had
notice, and the Reason, as it seems is, for that it is a particular Act, 43
Lib. Ass. 29.

The Crown of England, and the Pre-eminence thereof, by Parliament, with all
Prerogatives belonging to it, was given to H. 7. in Tail, this extends not to
Liberties and Franchises of others. 1 H. 7.13.

The King and the Lords assent, that H. B. shall be attainted, and lose his
Land, and because it did not appear by the Act, that the Commons assented,
therefore adjudged by all the Justices, that it was no Act of Parliament:
whereupon the party was restored, 4 H. 7.10.

Note. By the same Reason, that the Queen by her absolute Authority may commit
a man to Prison, and to tarry there during Pleasure, as appears, Stamford, 72.
so also by her Proclamation she may ordain, that if any one do act against the
Content of that Proclamation, that he shall be imprisoned, and yet see 42 Lib.
Ass. 5. where a Commission issuing out of Chancery to seize the Goods of A. and
his Body without other process, the Suit was awarded void.

Note, The Queen may by Proclamation inhibit, that her Subject shall not go out
of the Realm, upon pain to make Fine for the Contempt if he go, etc. Fitzh.
Not. Br. 85.

T. infeoffs W. and A. his Wife in Tail, and after it was enacted by
Parliament, that all Estates made by T. to W. shall be void; yet by Fineax and
Brian Chief Justice, this is void, as well to the Wife as to the Husband, for
they are but one Person in Law, and the Wife cannot take but by the Husband;
But if an Estate had been made to J. and to another Man, and all Estates made
to J. are enacted by Parliament to be void; there the Estate is good for a
Moiety to the other man, and with this agreed Vavisor, yet others are of a
contrary Opinion 5 H. 7.34. Dyer 331, 332.

Note, that it was agreed by the Justices, that the Statute of Additions, made
in Anno 1 H. 5. c. 5. shall bind the King as to Indictments and such like, as
well as common Persons. 5 E. 4.32. Com. 236. But see there, that an Indictment
is specially mentioned, which is at the King's Suit, and so is as a Name in the
Statute.

See in the Book of Bracton, about a Parliament holden by a Lieutenant, or by a
Protector, or by a Deputy, and the like; See 8 H. 5. c. 1. whereby it is
enacted, that Parliament Writs being awarded in the name of the King's
Lieutenant, shall not be staid upon the King's Return into England, neither
shall the Parliament be dissolved.

An Act of Parliament in the time of H. 6. was made, whereby all Corporations
and Licenses granted by that King were made void: It was held, that this Act
must be pleaded Certain, and the Court is not bound to take Connisance of them
no more than of a particular Act for a particular Person, for this Act is not
general, but particular in a generality, That all Corporations, etc. or that
all Lords, or all Bishops shall have such a Thing, etc. But where an Act is
general, and extends to every Man, this ought to be pleaded. 13 Eliz. 4.8.

A particular Act was made, that the Chancellor calling to him a Justice, may
award a Subpaena against A. and B. and make Fine of the matter; there all the
Justices besides Littleton, would not award a Subpaena General, but a Special
one, making mention of the Act, for a particular Act shall be taken strictly,
and a general Act for the Public Good shall be construed largely. 14 Eliz. c.
41.

Every one shall be bound by an Act of Parliament, if his Right be not saved,
for every one is privy to an Act of Parliament. 21 H. 7.4. by Vavisor.

The Statute gives a Writ of Praemunire, etc. Yet one may have a Bill in the
King's Bench, in Custodia Mareschalli, 2 R. 3.17. and the Statute of 1 R. 2. c.
12. gives a Writ of Debt against the Jailer, and yet the Party may have a Bill
upon the Escape against him: Com. 35.

If the King be entitled to the Land of J. S. by forfeiture for Treason, or
Felony, by Act of Parliament, or Office, by this all Tenures are determined, as
well of the King as of all others, and there, if this Land be afterward given
to another, by another Act of Parliament (saving to others all Rights,
Interests, Titles, Rents, Service, and the like, as if no such Act had been
made) there the Seigniories and the like, are revived, for no Seigniory was in
esse at the time of the second Act made, and so there are no Words of giving,
nor of reviving, but Words of saving, which serve not but to save that which is
in esse at the time of saving, etc. But such Proviso in the first Act may
serve, for it comes with the Act, that intitles the King, and if the King is
entitled to Land by Office, by Escheat, and after it is enacted by Parliament,
that the King shall enjoy it, saving to all others their Seigniories and
Hundreds, there such saving will not serve, for the Reason aforesaid, for all
was extinct before by Office, and nothing was in esse at the time of the
saving, etc. 27 H. 8. Parliament. Br. 77.

Note, If an Act be general, viz. Where it speaks as well within Franchise, as
without, this shall bind a County Palatine. 19. H. 6.12. by Hoddy.

Note, Those Words that destroy Life and Member in Statutes, are intended of
Felony, as the Statute of Westminster. 2. c. 34. where a Man ravished a Woman
espoused, or Damsel, that assented not before or after, he shall have Judgment
of Life and Member; which Words have always been taken to be Felony, without
the word Felony mentioned in a Statute; and so the Statute de frangentibus
Prisonam. 1 E. 2. Coron. Br. 204. 9 E. 4.20.

If a Felon be pardoned by Parliament, and pleads not Guilty, he shall not have
a Writ of Conspiracy, for the Felony was gone before by the Pardon. Fitzh. Not.
Br. in the Writ of Conspiracy there.

In a Replevin, the Defendant justifies, as under Sheriff of London, by a Fieri
facias, to levy the Expenses of the Knights of Parliament, amounting to, etc.
And every Hundred was put in certain, and W. one of the Towns of such an
Hundred, was rated 10 l. and he, as under Sheriff, took the Cattle in the Town,
in such a Place, and the same Beasts he sold, and paid the Knights, and so
avows, etc. And there by the Court, he may take the Arms of a Man for the Duty
of the whole Town; and that those Boroughs which send Burgesses of Parliament,
shall not pay to the Expenses of the Knights of the County, unless there be a
Prescription, That the Tenants of the Ancient Possessions of Lords of
Parliament, have paid toward the expenses of Knights of Counties; But if the
Lords purchase Lands de novo, (that are liable to those Expenses) there the
Tenants must pay. 11 H. 4. Fol. 2.

The Villains of Lords of Parliament, that come to Parliament, shall not be
contributory to the Wages of Knights of the County, that come to Parliament,
but the Lords shall have Letters in their own names, directed to the Sheriff,
commanding him, not to distrain their Villains, etc. F. N. B. fol. 229.

If there be diverse Sessions in one Parliament, and the King signs not a Bill
till the last, there all is but one and the same day, and all shall have
Relation to the first day of the first Session, and the first day and the last
are but one Parliament, and one and the same day, unless special mention be
made in the Act when it shall take its force; but every Session, wherein the
King signs Bills, is a day by it self, and one Parliament by it self, and shall
have no other Relation, but to the same Session. 33 H. 8. Parliament. Br. 86.

Note, If a Man in pleading allege a Statute, and misrecites it in the Matter,
or in the Year, Day, or Place, the other Party may demurr generally, because
there is no such Law; for every one that alleges a Statute, ought to recite
the Law truly, but in the Kings case it may be amended, and this in another
Term, otherwise in the case of a common Person. 33 H. 8 Parliament. Br. 87.

A Man cannot prescribe against a Statute, as in Trespass, the Defendant
prescribed to distrain for Tenure upon the Land holden, and to carry the
distress to D. in another County, whereupon he was condemned, for the Statute
is, that a man shall not take a distress in one County, and carry it into
another. Marlebr. 4. and W. 1. c. 16. 30 Lib. Assis. Pl. 38. Prescription Br.
50. And yet, if a man hold Land in one County, of a Manor that is in another
County, he may distrain for Rent, or Services of the same Land, and carry the
distress where the Manor is, and impound it there. 1 H. 6.4. Vide
Prescription. Fitz. 58. 8 H. 3. etc. 6 H. 8. Rot. 351.

Ass. was awarded of Damages for the Plaintiff upon Certificat of the Bishop,
that the Tenant was a Bastard, and the Parliament wrote to the Justices of
Assize to cease, and yet they proceeded; whereupon the Chancellor reversed
this Judgment before the Council, and adjudged it in the same manner as it was
upon the Certificat, etc. And then remitted it to the Justices of Assize, that
had proceeded, and given Judgment for the Plaintiff, for that the Bishop had
certified the Tenant to be a Bastard; and they took no notice of the Reversal
before the Council, for that is not a place where a Judgment ought to be
reversed. 39 E. 3. 14.

Note, After Judgments given in the Court of the King, the Parties and their
Heirs shall continue in possession till the Judgment be avoided by Attaint, or
by Error, as it has been used by the Laws in the time of the Kings
Progenitors. 4 H. 4. c. 23.

The Parliament may take Recognizances, whilst it is sitting, viz. the Upper
House, 1 H. 7.20. and so it seems may the Lower House, Recogn. Br. 8. Parl. Br.
92.

Note, That it has been often sound, that Wales, and the Counties Palatines
that did not come to Parliament, should not be bound by the Parliament of
England, for Ancient Demesne is a good Plea in an Action of Waste, given by the
Statute, and yet Ancient Demesne is not excepted; and it is enacted, 2 E. 6. c.
28. that Fines with Proclamations shall be in Chester, for the former Statutes
do not extend to it, and it is enacted, that Fines with Proclamation shall be
likewise in Lancaster, 37 H. 8. c. 19. and Proclamation upon an Exigent is
given by Statute, in Chester, and in Wales, 1 E. 6. c. 10. and such another Act
of Lancaster, 5 and 6 E. 6. c. 26. And the Statute of Justices of Peace shall
not extend to Wales, nor to a County Palatine, and therefore an Act is made for
Chester and Wales, 27 H. 8. c. 5. But see Tit. County Palatine, 17. and 20.
that any Act shall extend to a County Palatine, 8 H. 6. c. 34. See above, the
Act for Knights and Burgesses of the said County Palatine to come to
Parliament, etc. 34 H. 8. c. 13.

The Wife of a Duke, Earl, Baron, and such as being married, or Widows, in Case
of Felony and Treason, shall be tried by their Peers, as her Husband shall be
tried. per 20 H. 6. c. 11. Stamf. 153. But if her Husband cannot have such
Trial, the Wife shall not; and if after the death of the Husband, she marries
an Esquire or Knight, she loses her Dignity in Law. Dyer 79.

An Attachment is not grantable by the Common Law, Statute Law, Custom, or
Precedent, against a Lord of Parliament, and the Lord Cromwell by order in the
Parliament Chamber was discharged of such Process. Dyer, 316.

See Debt, for 100 l. brought by R. Buckley, Knight, against Richard Thomas of
Lanuaire, upon the Statute of 23 H. 6. for that he was chosen Knight for the
County of Anglesey in Wales, which said R. T. being Sheriff of that County, did
not return him accordingly, where it was argued, that the Statute did not
extend to Wales, as to give the forfeiture aforesaid to the Knight chosen, and
not returned; And yet it was adjudged, that the Plaintiff should recover,
because the Statute 27 H. 6. enacts, that the Country, and Dominion of Wales
shall be, stand, and continue for ever incorporated, united, and annexed to and
with the Realm of England, and that every Person born, or after to be born in
the said Country or Dominion of Wales, shall have, enjoy, and inherit all and
every Liberties, Franchises, Rights, Privileges, and Laws, within this Realm,
and other Dominions of the King, as other Kings Subjects naturally born within
the same, have had and have enjoyed. Com. 120.

If a man speaks slanderous words of the Queen, and is not punished within the
time given by the Statute of 23 Eliz. c. 2. he shall be punished by the Statute
of Westminster. 1. viz. shall be imprisoned until he find the Person that spoke,
etc. according to the Statute, W. 1. cap. 33. and not according to the advice
of the Council, for that is when the slander touches the Nobles and great
Officers, expressed in the Statutes made 2 R. 2. c. 5. and 12. R. 2. c. 11. and
not the King, for he is a Person exempted, and not employed in those words of
great Men and Nobles. Dyer, 155.

In a Praemunire against a Lord of Parliament, he ought to appear in his proper
Person, and not by Attorney, unless he has a special Writ of Chancery. 14 H.
4.14. 9 E. 4.2.

Note, that in January, 38 H. 8. Henry Howard, Earl of Surrey, Son and Heir
Apparent of Thomas Duke of Norfolk, was attainted of high Treason for joining
the Arms of England, before the Conquest, and other Arms after, to his own
Arms, and other pretenses against the Prince, and he was tried by Knights and
Gentlemen, and not by Lords, nor by Peers of the Kingdom, for that he was not
an Earl by Creation but by Birth, as Heir Apparent of a Duke, who was invested
with the dignity in Law, for if it had been a Dignity by Creation, and a Lord
of Parliament, he should have been tried by his Peers. 38 H. 8. Treason, Br. 2.

A Statute in the Affirmative does not alter the Common Law. Dier. 50.

Every Session is as a Parliament. Dyer, Fol. 203.

Note, An attaint by Parliament, shall have Relation to the first day of
Parliament, as to the forfeiture of the Lands of the Offender, unless it be
specified in the Act, that the forfeiture shall relate to the day when the
Treason was committed. Relation, 43.35. H. 8.

Note, That in every Case of Treason or Felony newly made by Statute, the Lords
of Parliament shall have their Trial by their Peers, notwithstanding that the
Statute does not provide for it by express Words; so that the Proviso inserted
for their Trials in such Cases in the Statute is an abundance. per Stamford,
153. And Trial per pares is given by Magna Charta, cap. 9. Stamford, 152.

Note, That in Cases of misprision of Treason, or Felony, Lords of Parliament
shall be tried by their Peers.

Note, That a Statute was made Anno Domini 1296. by the King and his Barons,
Clero excluso; and this was at a Parliament holden at St. Edmundsbury, in the
Reign of Ed. 1. as Jewel Bishop of Sarum, against Harding, fol. 620, reports;
And in a Province at Merton, in the time of H. 3. 1273, where the matter was
moved touching Basterdy, for the Legitimation of those that were born before
Marriage, and it is said, that the Statute passed entirely with the Lords
Temporal without the Clergy; but it seems that it is no Statute, but an
affirmance of the Common Law, which the Lords said, that they would not alter.
see 11 R. 2. cap. 9.

A man attainted of Felony or Treason, shall not be restored in Blood without
Parliament. Restitution. Br. p. 37. 3 E. 6.

In a Homine Replegiando the Sheriff returns, that the Defendant had eloigned
the Body, so that he could not make deliverance, etc. then the Plaintiff shall
have a Capias in Withernam, to take the Body of the Defendant, and detain him,
etc. until, etc. be he either a Peer of the Realm, or other Common Person, and
if the Sheriff return, Non est inventus, upon this Capias in Withernam, of the
Body, then the Plaintiff shall have a Withernam of the Goods of the Defendant.
F. Not. Brevium 68. 11 H. 4.15.

R. E. brought a Writ of Chancery, and of the Privy Seal, to be discharged of
serving in Juries and Assizes, for that he was a Baron, and therefore ought not
to be sworn in Ass. against his own Will, and it was questioned whether he held
by Barony, to come to Parliament as a Baron, and he said, that he held by one
part of a Barony, and that he and his Ancestors have used to hold so time out
of mind; and after upon good Advise he was altogether discharged. Exemption.
Br. 3. 46 E. 3.30.

When an Error is sued in Parliament, committed in the Kings Bench, a Scire
facias shall issue forth to the Party to answer at the next Parliament; and by
Hankford, in Error sued there, it is said, that the Record must remain with
the Justices, and they send a transcript of it thither, etc. Error. Fitz. 18. 8
H. 5. and Dier 375, the Record it self, and a Transcript of it, was brought
into Parliament to be examined, and the Transcript was left there.

Bagot was made a Denizen by H. 6. and after, by a Parliament in the time of
Ed. 4. All Acts done by H. 6. are repealed and annulled, yet B. continues a
Denizen, for that he was made once a Denizen, and there must be a special Act
to annull that Denizenship. Denizen. Fitzh. 1.9 E. 4.

Note, If a Peer of the Realm, or Lord of Parliament, be Demandant, for
Plaintiff, Tenant or Defendant, there must two Knights be returned of his Jury,
or else the Array may be quashed; as appears in an Assize betwixt the Earl of
D. and Newdigate. Com. 117. Challenge, Fitzh. 115. 13 E. 3. and Dier, 107. Vide
Dyer. 318. where the Defendant was proclaimed Earl of Kent, by Descent, pending
the Writ, and after the Earl challenged the Array, for that he was an Earl, and
no Knight returned in the Panel, and it was not allowed, for the admittance of
both Parties is to the contrary, and no default in the Sheriff, for he had no
notice of such estate of either Parties; and note, Dier 246. If there are
diverse Defendants, whereof one is a Lord of Parliament, and the Array is
challenged for the Cause before, this shall serve to quash all the Array
against the other Defendants also, for that it is entire.

The Statute of 4 H. 7. of Fines is penal, because the Right shall be bound, if
he comes not in within five years after the Title accrued, and for that the
Statute is very beneficial for the repose and quiet of Land in Possession of
the Subject, it shall be largely expounded, and therefore, if the time Commence
in the Father, which is a stranger to the Fine, to make claim within the five
years, and after he dies, within the five years, his Issue, that is within Age,
shall be bound to pursue the rest of the five years commenced in the Life of
his Father; as it is adjudged in the Case of Zouch and Stowell. Com. Fol. 375.
And a Corporation, as Mayor and Communalty, that have an absolute Estate, shall
be bound, if they do not make claim within five years after the Title accrued;
and yet the Statute of 4 H. 7. of Fines, makes no mention of Corporations, or
Bodies politic, but yet are Parties within the intent of the Statute. Com.
538. Otherwise it is of a Person of the Church, and a Bishop, because they have
not an absolute Estate. Ibidem.

Chaplains, that are Masters of Chancery, and are attendant on the Parliament,
shall not be Contributory (by reason of their Benefices) to the expenses of
Proctors made by the Clergy, that come to Parliament, and if they be, they
shall have a Writ to the Archdeacon and his Officers, for the discharging
them, and upon that there shall be an Alias, and Pluries, and Attachment
against them: which Writ appears in Fitzh. Not: Brevium, 229. and by the Writ
it appears there, that this is given by the Statute of Westminster. Privilege.
Br. 56.

Lord and Tenant, and the Tenant is attainted of Treason by Parliament, and it
is ordained by it, that he shall forfeit all his Lands, and after is pardoned
and restored by another Parliament, Habendum sibi, and Haeredibus suis, as if
there were no such Attainder, now he shall hold of the common Person as before,
and yet once the Tenure was extinct by the forfeiture of the Land to the King.
21 H. 8. Tenures. Br. 70. Vide, Parliament Br. 77. What words in an Act will
revive Seigniories, which were before extinguished, and that it is no good
Case; And see Stamford. 197. That if the King infeoff an estranger of them, it
ought to revive the mesn Seigniory, which was before the Attainder, Tenendum of
the mesn Lord, as it was before the Attainder. Vide Petition F. 19 H. 4. 6 Edw.
3. For this excellent Case, Vide Dyer 313. where the saving of a Seigniory in a
Statute is not good.

When a Statute gives a forfeiture to the King, and to the Party grieved, as
where a man is prejudiced by Perjury, or by a fraudulent conveyance of Land or
Goods, to defraud the Action or Suit of Creditors, and such like, there none
shall have the Suit upon the Statute but the King, or the Party that has
received Loss thereby.

Otherwise it is, if the Statute says, that the King shall have a Moiety, and
he that shall inform shall have the other Moiety (without mentioning the Party
grieved.) And if the King commenceth the Suit before an Information of the
Party, in this Case the King shall have all the Forfeiture, and he may, before
the Suit of the Informer, release to the Party offending, and by it every other
Person is excluded. 1 H. 7.19.

The Statute of 21 H. 8. c. 13. is, If a Parson take another Benefice beyond
the yearly value of 8 l. without a Qualification, the first Benefice is void;
This value shall not be taken as the Parsonage is valued in the Book of
First Fruits, but as it is valued in deed. Dyer, 237.

The Statute 21 H. 8. c. 13. says, that no Parson of a Church, or such
Spiritual Man, shall take a Lease for years, for Life, or at Will, etc. upon
pain of forfeiture for every Month that he shall occupy it, 10 l. to the King
and Informer; But note, that the Lease is not made void by the said Statute, as
it has been ruled. Dyer, 358.

Note, no man can make Proclamation but by Authority of the King, as Mayors,
and such like, as have privileges in Cities and Boroughs so to do, or have it
by Custom; And therefore where an Executor made Proclamations in certain Market
Towns, that the Creditors should come by a certain day, and claim, and prove
their Debts due by the Testator, and because he did this without Authority, he
was committed to the Fleet, and fined. 22 H. Br. 8. 10.

Note, a Man shall not be made a Bastard after the death of his Father and
Mother, because the marriage is determined, and if a Commissary after their
death find such Case of Divorce, and after such Diovrce being made, after the
death of one of the Parties, this shall never Bastardize the Issue; and so it
was taken in Parliament. 24 H. 8. Bastard. Br. 23.39. c. 3.32.

Note, If a man gives Lands to one, and his Heirs Males, in this Case his Heirs
Females shall also inherit; and this was also adjudged in Parliament, as Thorpe
said, 18 La. p. 5.

Note, It was written Tybinry-broke, in a Writ of Cosinage, and in the Habere
facias Visum, the Writ was Tybinry without Broke, and it was demanded of the
King's Council, by S. H. Green and Thorpe, Justices, whether this word may be
amended by the Statute of 14 E. 3. c. 6. which enacts, that the Justices may
amend a Syllable or Letter, which is found too little or too much; and one of
the Council answered, that it was a needless Question of them, whether it may
be amended, for he said, that it may be well amended, be it a Syllable or a
Letter, without which the Word cannot subsist, and no difference. 40 E. 3.34.
And so see the Justices demanded the intent of the makers of the Statute, of
those that were of the King's Council.

Note, A Fifteenth is granted by Parliament, and it is well known by the
Exchequer Roll how much every Town in England shall pay at every Quinzim
granted. Br. 9. 34 H. 8. And if the Tenants pay for their Goods, the Lord shall
not pay toward the Fifteen out of the Rents of the Lands that they occupy and
enjoy. 7 H. 4.33. 11 H. 4.46.

A Town is charged upon a fifteen granted, at the sum of 4 l. and one of the
Town by the Kings Charter is discharged of the fifteen in the same Town, so
much as amounts to his part shall be recounted in the said 4 l. and the Town
shall be charged of the rest. Per Curiam, 19 H. 6.63.

Note, A Bishop has a Manor within which are Tenements by the Verge, by Copy
of Court Roll; which Copy-holds, time out of Mind, have been taxed within the
same manner to the Wages of the Knights of Parliament, and a good Prescription,
although the Lord come to Parliament, and is charged for his Spiritual Possessions
for the Dismes or Tenths among the Clergy. Vide Avow. Fitzh. 260. 8 R. 2.
according.

One is taxed for the Fifteenth in his Land, and when he perceived that the
Collector was coming to distrain for the 15th; that is to say, for his part
that he was to pay toward the 15th, he drove his Cattle out of the same Land,
before the Collector could take them: he cannot pursue: by Brian. So for damage
feasant, 19 E. 4.10. otherwise it is for Rent-service. 44 E. 3.20.

At the time of a 15th granted to the King, A. who lives in W. has Corn growing
in C. and before the Assessment, he reaps and carries it to W. it shall be
liable for the goods in W. and not in C. and in a Replevin the Issue shall be,
If at the time of the Assessation of the 15th the Corn were remaining in C. or
at W. 21 E. 3.42.

Note, The Fifteenth at this day is levied by Rods of Land most commonly, and
in some places upon their Goods. Quinz. Br. 9. 34 H. 8.

Note, That where the Abbey of Saint Edmundsbury was founded by the King's
Progenitors, and exempted from all Episcopal Jurisdiction, so that no Ordinary
could Visit there, contrary to the Foundation, and Ordinance aforesaid; upon a
difference that was between A. Bishop of Norwich, and B. Abbot of Bury,
concerning that Exemption; It was Ordained at a Parliament of William the
Conqueror, held such a Year (by the Archbishop of Canterbury, and all other
Bishops of the Realm, and by the Earls and Barons) that for the time to come,
neither the Bishop of Norwich, nor any of his Successors, should act contrary
to the Points of the Exemption and Foundation abovesaid; and that he that shall
be Bishop, shall pay to the King or his Heirs thirty Talents of Gold; and for
that the Bishop of Norwich that now is, has gone contrary to this Ordinance of
the King, a Contempt was issued against him, and the Bishop pleaded Not Guilty,
and was found Guilty; whereupon it was awarded, That the Bishop's Temporalities
shall be seized into the King's Hands, and that the King shall recover the said
Sum of Money. 21 E. 3.60.

Note, Those of Ireland are bound by the Statute of England for their Goods, if
the Statute gives forfeiture of Goods, for doing a thing contrary to the
Statute, but not for Land, or any thing touching Land there. 2 R. 3. fol. 12.
And yet those of Ireland, do not send any Lord, Knight, or Burgess to the
Parliament of England, for they have a Parliament of their own when the King
pleases. Vide Action upon the Statute, Fitzh. 1. and 11 H. 6. where Hussy
Chief Justice said, that the Statutes of England bind those of Ireland, which
was not much denied by the other Justices at that time, although the Term before
some were of a contrary Opinion. Vide 20 H. 6.9. That those of Ireland are not
bound by the Statutes of England, as if Tenths be granted by the Parliament of
England, those of Ireland are not bound, because they are not summoned to the
Parliament of England.

Vide, Fitzh. Not. Brevium 22. Error in the King's Bench of Ireland, reversed in
the King's Bench of England. Assis. Fitzh. 328.

Vide Dier, 360. A Lord of Ireland shall not be tried in England for Treason
done in Ireland, nor by his Peers, not by Jury, because he is a Subject of
Ireland; And England and Ireland have several Seals; whereby it appears, that
the Laws of England shall not bind those of Ireland for their Land. Dier, 303.
A man has Goods in England, and other Goods in Ireland, and dies intestate in
England; and the Intestate has an Obligation of a Merchant that dwells in
Ireland, which Obligation was in England, when he died, and the Son of the
Intestate obtains the Administration of the Bishop of Dublin for the Goods
there, and the Wife of the Intestate of the Goods in England, of the
Archbishop of Canterbury within his Province, the Son releaseth to the Obligor
in Ireland, and in Debt by the Wife of the Intestate, who has the Obligation in
her Hand. This Release was pleaded, and the issue taken was, whether the
Obligation was in England or in Ireland, when the Obligee died. Out of which it
may be collected, that the Archbishop of Canterbury had to do with it, and not
the Bishop of Dublin. Dier 305.

Vide p. 16. El. To. 436. Lanc. A Writ of Account was brought by Steven Pinde,
by his Guardian assigned by the Court, after that he was of the Age of fourteen
years, and before twenty one years, for the profits of Land in Gavelkind,
received by Giles Frankling Defendant, Guardian of the said Pinde Plaintiff,
before fourteen years, and yet the Statute is, Cum ad aetatem, etc. and this is
intended one and twenty years. Vide 29 E. 3.3. Account for Land in Gavelkind
after that the Heir came to fifteen years.

A man has Restitution by Act of Parliament, and a Writ of Ouster le main
issued forth to the Escheator, and the Tenant that had the Land, upon a
Traverse by him tendered, made Rescous: If he had not notice of this
Restitution, he shall not be punished by Fine for that Rescous, and the reason
may be, for that it is a special Act. 43. Lib. Ass. 28.

Henric', etc. Vic. Darby salutem; Praecipimus tibi quod statim post
receptionem praesentium in singulis locis infra Ballivas tuas, tam infra
Libertates, quam extra, ubi magis expedire videris ex part nostra solempniter,
and public Proclamation' fact' quaedam Statuta, and Ordinationes per nos de
Communi assensu Praelatorum, Magnatum, and Communit. Regni nostri in presenti
Parliamenti nostri apud Westmonasterium pro communi utilitate totius Regni
nostri praedicti, editi, and Provisi, quae in quibusdam schedulis huic brevi
nostro annex' per Latorem praesentium tibi mittimus, mandantes praeterea quod
immediate post Proclamationem sicut permit. per te factas omnes and singul'.
hujusmodi schaedulas in separat' distinct', et public' locis, ut subditis et
Ligeis nostris before apparere poterit, in Tabulis affigi, et poni similiter
fac', et hoc sub periculo incumbente non omitti; Test, etc.

Note; That a special Bill against J. P. was put into Parliament, 33 H. 6. for
Ravishing of a Woman, whereby it was ordained, that he come before the Lords
within a certain day after the Proclamation made by the Sheriff of the County
of E. after Pentecost next, and if he appeared not, then he should be
attainted, and pay a certain Sum to the Woman, and this Bill was exhibited to
the Commons after Pentecost, which was within the time of Parliament, that
begun 15 P. before; Anno Praedict'. And the Lords gave day to J. P. to appear
after Pentecost, Anno 1457, which was 34 H. 6. within a day certain after the
Proclamation, and this Bill was not sent to the Commons, as it ought to have
been, for that the Lords gave a longer time than the Commons gave, and after J.
P. did not appear according to the Proclamation, whereupon he was taken, and
sent into the King's Bench, and there pleaded by his Counsel, that the Act was
not an Act, for that the Lords had given a longer day, ut supra, and the Bill
was transcribed upon a Certiorari in Chancery, and by Mittimus of Chancery
under the Seal there, was sent to the Justices, and the Writ was, Rex
Justitiariis suis, etc. Transcriptum cujusdam billae coram nobis in
Cancellariam nostram in filacio, etc. exhibit', and authoritate ultimi
Parliamenti nostri, etc. Confirm. versus J. P. Vobis mittimus, by which, etc.
And although it is not an Act of Parliament in Law, for that the Lords gave a
longer time, ut supra, yet the Clerk of Chancery made the Writ, which was
confirmed by Parliament, and it was not so in Truth; And Fortescue, in the
Exchequer Chamber, seems, that it cannot be intended but that the Act is good,
for that the King by his Writ certified the Justices, that the Bill was
confirmed by Parliament; But Illingworth, Chief Baron, said, that it shall not
be taken for an Act of Parliament; for the writing of a Clerk of Chancery
cannot make an Act of Parliament good, if it be vicious or void in it self; and
after, Fortescue said, that this is an Act of Parliament, and he would be
advised before he would make void an Act of Parliament; and so see, if a
Certificat under the Seal of the Chancery of a Record there, shall be
contradicted. Vide Com. 232. and 21 E. 3.40. that a Man shall not have an
Averrment against a Certificat under the great Seal.

FINIS.

