The Case of many Protestants in the County of Cambridge, humbly tendered to the
Consideration of the present PARLIAMENT.
IT would be tedious to enumerate the Names and Particulars of the Sufferings
of Protestants in this County, from a severe Execution of the Laws expressly
made in the Reigns of Queen Elizabeth and King James, against Papists; and
because we intend with all Modesty to represent our own Case, we shall not take
notice what favor the Papists (who indeed are but few) have found amongst us,
nor should we rejoice in their Prosecution, but we must say, the Burden lies
heavy upon us, that do in our Souls detest Popish Idolatries.

Many of us have been long proceeded against, and Returned into the Exchequer
as Popish Recusants; and there are about Fifty Freeholders, as such, made
Tenants to his Majesty, and the two Thirds of their Revenue levied upon them in
such a manner, that it were better for them to hold their Lands of a Neighbor
Gentleman at a Rack-rent; and even beyond the Extent of the Law the Copyhold
Lands of some are seized.

We have given all possible demonstration in our spheres of our Abhorrence of
Popery, and of our Sense of the Danger threatening his Majesty and the
Protestant Religion from the Hellish Popish Plot, and yet since the most happy
Discovery thereof, we have found a more rigorous Execution of these Laws than
in all the time of his Majesty's Reign: For since the Elections to this
Parliament, we have had at least One hundred and fifty Protestants convicted as
Recusants, and some are now Prisoners upon those Laws, and all prosecuted in
the Exchequer.

Mr. Francis Holcroft a Nonconformist Minister, being met alone upon the Road
in June last, by Thomas Ducket Esquire a Captain in the Militia, was taken Prisoner
by him about seven miles from Cambridge, and committed to the common Jail by a
Warrant of something an unusual nature from the Captain and his Lieutenant.

It was Enacted in the 35 of Queen Elizabeth, That if any person shall forbear
for the space of a Month to hear Divine Service, and shall be present at a
Conventicle, and be thereof Convicted, he shall be committed to Prison, there
to remain till he Conforms and makes the Declaration and Submission in that Act
directed: And that upon refusal he shall Abjure the Realm, and if he shall not
depart, or abjuring, shall retutn, he shall dye as a Felon without Benefit of
Clergy.

Some not being contented to keep Mr. Holcroft Prisoner, are putting this Law
in Execution upon him, an Account whereof follows.

At the General Quarter Sessions of the Peace the 7th of October, 1680. before
Sir Thomas Hatton, Sir Levinus Bennet, Sir Robert Cotton, Dr. Cook (who had
the Chair) Dr. Stoite, etc. he was Indicted as follows.
Cambridge-shire ss.
THe Jurors for our Sovereign Lord the King, upon their Oath do present, that
Francis Holcroft late of Chesterton in the aforesaid County, Gentleman, the 1st
of September in the 28. Year of the Reign of our Sovereign Lord the King that
now is, being of the Age of sixteen Years and more, at Chesterton aforesaid, in
the County aforesaid, did obstinately refuse to repair to any Church, Chapel
or usual place of Common Prayer to hear Divine Service now established by the
Laws and Statutes of the Realm, and did forbear to hear Divine Service as
aforesaid from the said first day of September in the 28. Year of the King by
the space of one Month thence ensuing, and that the said Francis afterward,
that is to say, the 30th. day of March in the 29th. Year of the said Kings
Majesty's Reign, at Chesterton aforesaid in the County aforesaid, in the
Mansion House of one Robert Stainsmore in Chesterton aforesaid, was of himself
voluntarily present at an unlawful Assembly Conventicle and Meeting of diverse
persons to the Jurors unknown, and in the said house then and there gathered
under color and pretense of the exercise of Religion against the Laws and
Statutes of the Realm of England, against the Peace of the Kings Majesty his
Crown and Dignity, and against the form of the Statute in such case made and
provided.

It is a notorious part of the Popish Plot, to have Protestant Dissenters
esteemed Papists, which Plot has indeed been in the World as long as
Christianity it self, but we are infallibly assured of a discrimination, for

Mat. 10.25, 26. It is enough for the Disciple that he be as his Master, and
the Servant as his Lord; if they have called the Master of the house Beelzebub,
how much more shall they call them of the household; fear them not therefore,
for there is nothing covered that shall not be revealed, and bid that shall not
be known.



