ORDERS Concluded by the Lord Strange and his Adherents: AT PRESTON IN The
County of LANCASTER.

WITH SOME QVAERIES Concerning the late difference at WINCHESTER.

Printed, December 29. 1642.

At a meeting at Preston in Amounderness, in the County of Lancaster, the tenth
day of December, 1642. By the Right Honorable, James Earl of Derby, Lord
General of the County of Lancaster, etc. Sir John Grilington, Knight, high
Sheriff of the County, Alexander Rigby of Burgh Esquire, Robert Holt Esquire,
Roger Kirby Esquire, and William Farington Esquire, with many more great
Papists, etc.
IT is concluded and agreed, that the sum of eight thousand and seven hundred
pounds shall be ratably assessed upon the several Hundreds of this County,
according to an agreement made at Preston, and according to an assessement for
the Subsidy granted in the seventeenth year of His Majesty's Reign that now
is, which said sum is to be employed for the payment of 2000. foot, and 400
horse, and also for the provision of a Magazine, and Ammunition for the said
County, for the safeguard and security thereof, and the same moneys forthwith
to be raised, and collected by such Officers as shall be appointed for that
service, and paid over to such Treasurer or Treasurers as shall be likewise
named.

And it is likewise agreed, that Sir John Grilington knight, now high Sheriff
of this County, Adam Morte Gentleman, Mayor of the Town of Preston, and
William Farington Esquire, shall be Treasurers of the sum aforesaid; And that
they, or any two of them shall have full power to receive and disburse the same
moneys, and to give account of the same to the Lord General aforesaid, or to
such as his Honor shall appoint.

And it is further agreed, that Sir John Grilington, and Roger Kirby shall be
Collectors for the Hundred of Lainsdale, Adam Morte Gentleman, Mayor of
Preston, and Alexander Rigby of Burgh Esquire, for the Hundred of Amounderness,
William Farington, and John Fleetwood Esquires, for the Hundred of Layland,
Henry Ogle Esquire, John Bretherton Gentleman, and Robert Mercer Gentleman, for
the Hundred of West Derby, Robert Holt, and Francis Sherington Esquires, for
the Hundred of Salford, Sir John Talbott knight, and Ratliffe Ashton Esquire,
for the Hundred of Blackborne.

And it is also agreed, that Sir John Grilington knight, Adam Morte Gentleman,
Mayor of Preston (an arch Papist accounted) James Anderton Esquire, and Roger
Kirby Esquire, or three of them to be constantly resiant in the Town of
Preston, and to be a certain Counsel there, to assist the said General, and
to receive his Lotdships Orders and Commands, and to give his Lordship an
account of their daily proceedings from time to time; And they are likewise to
have power to call to their assistance, Sir Gilbert Hoghton knight and Baronet
(a convicted Papist) Thomas Clifton, William Farington, and John Fleetwood
Esquires, or any of them, or any other of His Majesty's Commissioners of Array
within the said County, so often as they shall see occasion.

And it is likewise agreed that William Smith Gentleman (a professed Papist)
shall be Commissary for the Hundreds of West Derby, and Layland, and Hugh
Anderton Gentleman (an active and dangerous Papist) for the Hundreds of
Amounderness and Lainsdale.

And it is likewise agreed, that every Captain of Foot shall receive for his
pay ten shillings by the day, every Lieutenant four shillings, every Ancient
three shillings, every Sergeant eighteen pence, every Drummer fifteen pence,
every Corporal twelve pence, and every common Soldier nine p^nce.

And that every Capt. of Horse 16. shillings, every Lieutenant 8. shillings,
every Cornet six shillings, every Corporal four shillings, every Trumpeter
five shillings, every Horseman two shillings six pence.

And every Captain of Dragooneers twelve shillings, every Lieutenant six
shillings, every Cornet four shillings, Sergeant three shillings, Corporal
two shillings, every Dragooneere eighteen pence, kettle Drum two shillings, and
to every Commissary five shillings Per diem.

DERBY. Jo: Grilington. Roger Kirby. Will: Farington. Alex: Rigby. Robert Holt.
Henry Ogle.


Some Quaeries about the actions of a Party, or Brigade to be sent forth.
FIrst, whether if experience tells, that soldiers are seldom got out of
their quarters four hours after the time set, it be not discretion, the march
intended being long, to prefixe a sooner time.

Secondly, whether it be discretion to march within Musket shot of the enemy,
and not to come there until five hours within night, not knowing the strength
of the enemy, nor how he was quartered.

Thirdly, Whether it he fit the Commander in chief should have long discourse
in private with a person of great report* and quality, and after let him go,
not so much as making him prisoner.

Fourthly, Whether it be wise, when the enemy is fighting with a part of the
forces of an Army, and news is brought to the Commander in chief, that they
are killing his men, and have taken Colors from them, that he should swear
God confound him, if any stirred to relieve them, he would pistol them.

Fifthly, Whether it be discreet that the Commander in chief march out of a
place with part of his forces, never giving direction how the rest of the
forces should dispose of themselves, the enemy being but a mile off.

Sixthly, Whether drawing of swords, and coming into the quarters of other
soldiers, hacking and he wing men of the same Brigade, be not fit to be
punished.

Seventhly, Whether the murdering men of the same party be not punishable, as
well as the killing of a prisoner received to mercy.

Eighthly, Whether it be fit those men should have quarters, that refuse to
deliver up their Colors, pretending they were burnt, when the Colors taking
is the greatest honor to the Victor, and emblem of Victory.

Ninthly, Whether when the soldiers stand ready to assault a place, and all
prepared for it, the enemy shooting, it be not a fault to withhold the word of
Command.

Tenthly, Whether it be fit a prisoner of quality should in his going to
prison, be as well mounted as any in the company, and be accommodated with
Pistols, and other weapons.

Eleven thly, Whether in case an Officer in a party, gone out upon service,
refuse to do according to rules of War, whether it be commendable for the
Commander in chief to draw out a Regiment of Horse to reduce him to obedience,
and so as much as in him lies, bring destruction to the whole party, and
whether it had not been better to call it to account.

FINIS.

