A DESCRIPTION OF TREDAGH IN IRELAND.
With the Antiquity, Situation, Natural Strength, and Fortifications of the
said Place.
Licensed September the 25th. J. F. 1689.

THis Town being now the Key, or Inlet to Dublin from the North, and as well
for that reason, as for its Fortifications and natural strength, the most
important Garrison in the whole Kingdom; the subduing of which gains Dublin,
and consequently the best part of Ireland; on which account it has been the
desire of the most Curious to know the Situation and Strength of this
important Place. Tredagh (for its Antiquity) is the first Corporation in
Ireland, before the Metroplis Dublin it self: It being an Ancient Prerogative,
when the Major of Tredagh is Chosen, to dispatch a Horseman with all Expedition
to the Lord Mayor and Court of Alderman then Assembled in the Tolsall, to
acquaint them that the Mayor of Tredagh is Chosen, upon which immediately the
Lord Mayor of Dublin is Sworn the same day.

It stands in the Province of Vlster in the County of Louth, on the River of
Boyn, on the Mouth of the said River running full on the Sea, and within twenty
Miles of Dublin by Land: The River Boyn divides it as the Thames does London
and Southwark, or as the Liffy does Ostman-Town and Dublin. It has over it a
spacious Bridge with Nine Arches and Pillars, and a very Commodious Haven, in
which Ships of the greatest Burden may ly at Anchor; and Merchantmen of two
or three hundred Tun sail up to the Key.

It took the name of Droghedah from the Bridge, which (to the wonder of the
Natives) was built over the River. Drohed, in the Irish Language signifying a
Bridge or Passage over the Water, since by the English, Dredagh, now generally
Tredagh.

It is a very Fair, Rich, and Popolous City, famous for all sorts of Commerce
and Traffic, both by Sea and Land: This is evident by the richness of their
Merchants and Tradesmen, some of whom are valued Twenty, some Thirty, some
Forty thousands pounds Sterlin.

It is strongly Fortified as well by Art as Nature, having round it a strong
Wall of 6 Foot, in some Places 7 Foot deep, with a Bastion at every Corner,
besides several Terrets, or Towers, with small Cannons mounted on the said
Towers, and two Demilunes, or Half-moons, on each side of the Town, on each of
which, are planted Four Demiculverins: And two Plat-forms to the Waterside,
with as many great Cannons.

Within the Circumference of this spacious Wall it has Six Gates, viz. Dublin
Gate. St. John's Gate. West Gate. Lawrance Gate. Shop Gate. Pillory Gate.


Dublin Gate is that which opens on Dublin side, and enters the City that way
which gives Denomination to the whole Street, at the end of which stands the
Corn-market, besides the Streets which take their Denomination from the Gates,
as, Dublin-street. St. Johns-street. West-street. Lawrance-street. Shop-street.
Pillory-street.


There are several other very large and spacious Streets, as Dear-street, on
the Left Hand at the Upper-end of the great Street, where stands the Tolsall,
which is an Ancient and Curious Structure, the Seat of Judicature, and Place of
their public Assemblies.

Bridges-street on the other-side the Bridge, upon which is built the
Town-Jayl, called Guild hall, over the Boyn, besides Alleys, Courts, and Lanes,
innumerable.

To pass by Shop-street, which is the most eminent and remarkable for
Merchants, there are two Famous Keys, Saviors and Merchants Key, upon which is
built the Custom-house, the Burs, or Exchange.

There were once as many large Churches as Streets, most of which were
Demolished in the time of the War: There yet remains the Famous Church of St.
Peter's, well beautified and kept in its Primative splendour; and St. John's
Church in St. John's Street, which are the only two Churches endowed, and a
Chapel of Ease allowed to St. Peter's, tell St. Lawrance Church be built. There
is likewise a large Convention or Meeting House on Saviors Key. The Popish
Chapel in West-street is pulled down.

Besides what has been mentioned, there is yet one thing more remarkable called
the Mill Mount, which being in the Center of the Town, Commanding the Country
6. or 7. Miles round every way, so that if this place were but well Built and
Fortified, it would make the Town Inaccessable and almost Impregniable: The
Neglect of this Fortification gave O. Cromwell such speedy and easy Access into
that Garrison, who reduced it in a weeks time, which the Wild Irish could
hardly do in 3. Years.

This sucessfull Conqueror Marched out of Dublin with a Detatchment of 10000
Chosen Men the 30th. of August, 1649 with a Train of Artillery and 4. Whole,
and 5. Demi Cannnons, Sir. George Ascough with his Fleet blocking them up by
sea, He came before Droghedah, on the 2d. of September. Where (without the
Ceremonies of Drawing Lines, or Making Trenches, the Usual formalites of a
Seige, he presently planted a strong Battery, which Quickly levelled the
Steeple of a Church on the south side of the Town, and a Tower by it, which
Battery contriving (with the Fleet Blocking them up by sea) the 9th. of the
same Month (which was within a weeks time) he became master of the place,
having taken it by storm, and put all to the sword, to the Number of above
3000. We doubt not but the same success will attend the no less Victorious
General his Grace the D, of Schomberg in this present undertaking and thee
Speedy Reducing of this Important place, which will prove for effectual an
Inlett to the Subduing the whole Nation.

FINIS.
LONDON, Printed for Joseph Bowers, next the Corner of St. Martins Lane.
MDCLXXXIX.


