A True and Exact COPY Of some Passionate LETTERS AND VERSES, As they were
Writ, and sent by a Person of Quality to the LADY -

LONDON, Printed for N. R. in St. Paul's Churchyard.

TO Sir CHARLES GAUDY Knight and Baronet, OF DEBUHAM In the County of SUFFOLK.
SIR,
THese Papers lighting into my Hands, and finding something in them, no less
remarkable than different to the general Practices of the present Age; I could
not force my self to admit of their Concealment, and indeed the greater was my
inducement to their Publication. When, Sir, you were brought by the perusal of
them fresh to my Memory, as being owner of all those excellent Qualifications
they so lively represent, and are requisite in Persons to whom things of this
nature are Dedicated; These Reasons I soon found too powerful to be refused by
what I could allege against giving you this trouble, and skreening this my
Friend under your Protection. The greatest fault you will find in him, was, that
he Loved; but he Loved well, which persuades me, that according to the
Character you deservedly bear in the World, you will find something that so
nearly resembles your self, as will make it difficult to distinguish the one
from the other. He like you has felt that Passion ever produced in a Soul frait
with Love and Tenderness, which makes me presume you will be pleased to esteem
this no improper Address; and really, Sir, notwithstanding these Perfections,
with the addition of sincere Friendship and Generosity, which I never knew him
failing in. I should yet despair of his Pardon, for making his Letters public;
had I not presented them to your Patronage, it having been his greatest Care
and Concernment these many years to keep them from the censorious World, and
himself in a Retirement, little distant from being Buried to all his
Acquaintance, except when his Quality rendered his public Appearance
unavoidable; and so fond was he of his own Choice, that he would often protest
to me, he found more Content in his little Cell, by Contemplating upon that
dear Person to whom these Letters were writ, and her Idea that was always
present with him, than Courts or Crowns could give him; In short, nothing was
able to draw him from his Fidelity, which would bear many things to be said in
his Commendation; but I shall forbear all flourishes, either upon his Faith or
Constancy in this place; being well assured, you will find in the following
Papers, what will convince you of this, better than any thing I can possibly
say; and withal, how great a Reproach his Constancy is, to the Levity of all
Pretenders to Love in our days; which makes me have very little more to add,
only that Methridatia, Delia and Asteria, all imply one and the same Person;
and accordingly my Friend assumed the three subsequent Names, Callimichus,
Polierchus, and Orantes, in order to carry on their Amor with the greater
Secrecy. If Sir, you take any satisfaction in looking upon the excellent
Endowments of his Mind, though far short of the great Perfections of your own: I
hope you will be pleased to pardon my Presumption in Dedicating this little Book
to you, whose Protection for it is the greatest of my Ambition, and whose Mercy
I will not despair, of having had a thousand occasions of knowing your
Generosity, which extends it self to all People, and more particularly to,

SIR, Your most Humble, and Obedient Servant, C. D.

Some passionate Letters and Verses, etc.
SInce this, Madam, Addresses it self to you, shrouded under such a permission
as can defend it, from the violence of those apprehensions that attended my
last; You may easily guess how I wish every Letter laden with such a legible
Gratitude, and adorned with so submissive a Reverence, as might agreeably
represent the power of your Merit, and the passionate Admiration I have of it.
But Madam, it is as equally above my Hope, as my Capacity. And I shall only
beseech your Ladyship, you will illustrate the Sense of the one, by your
Knowledge of the other, and then, though you may still believe I want enough to
make the return proportionable, yet you will no longer doubt my paying all.
These are not, Madam, the sudden Impresses upon Sense only, nor the immediate
effects of that Fury which so commonly surprizeth, though I must confess I have
with Impatience and Delight felt the influences of Methridatia's Eyes; but all
that consideration, years, and a hopeless resistance could do, have so fataly
convinced my reason, as what was but at first my inclination, has long ago so
much be come my Judgment, as pardon me for having often concluded with my self,
'twas no crime to acknowledge or submit to what I saw was inevitable. Yet
Madam, they who have set the most refined Rules, and made such Discoveries the
nicities of Romances, have never doomed them to so long a confinement, nor
produced more misfortunes for an expiation; if therefore the silent Oratory of
Unhappiness, or the dumb Eloquence of Respect for so long a time past, can be
any obligation to your being farther acquainted with what had so blameless a
beginning, let me be forgiven: for seeing you would admit its continuance, and
I here protest by all that is Sacred, it shall never know the violation of your
Commands; and can a Passion destitute of pretenses, by the merit its paid to,
destructive of its own being by Arrogance or Disobedience, and hopeless of any
Favor but what its Humility may entitle it to, be rejected or despised by one
whose Generosity is extensive enough to oblige the World, and yet discerning
enough to know the properest Objects for that venture; put me past this doubt,
I beseech you, and let me know, that till you have a greater exception to my
admiring you, then that I do admire you, it shall be allowed: Oh Madam, charm
me with a favorable Return, as you have done with your Beauty, your Humor and
your Wit, and perm^t me to tell you, that all the Reason and Senses I have, are
tributary to several of your Perfections; nay, so irrevocably fixed, that like
the Eart^, it cannot loose its Nature, tho^ it may its prolifick Virtue, when
it lies benighted under the absence of the Sun, or where it never knows the
power of a fertile Shower; Forgive this, and let me know it, unless you wish me
the unhappiest of Men.

Madam,
'Twas Heat and Light that first made Mortals pay
Devotion to the beauteous Orb: and they
Whom Balmy Sweets, and perfumed Flowers made guess
Their Gods such fragrant Mansions did possess.
Pay but what Love and humblest Zeal inspire,
Sweets became Incense, and Sacred was the Fire.
It Is true, then Zeal, not Merit, made Men bow,
And such blind Honors you may disallow
But you have dispersed the Cloud and Merit here.
Re^ines the Power and the Worshipper
Forgive me then, if I implore you now,
To lay but at your Feet an humble Vow.
The Passion which I pay shall never dispense
With Duty, Promises, or Reverence,
At other Altars I Will never kindle Fire
Beyond what you will allow, I Will not aspire
When these don't guide my Passion, let me Die,
Scorned and unpitied in my Infamy.
Till then, deign but to see those radiant Eyes,
Inform me of my Fate, for there it lies.
Oh let that sweet and gentle influence,
Which charms at once our Reason and our Sense,
Drop Joys int my Soul, from whence shall rise.
All that makes a grateful Sacrifice;
And think not, Madam, that you are less
Your own, for being thus the Happiness
Of -- Polierchus.

II.
WHat sweet Mithridatia terms Captivity, she has no reason to be dissatisfied
withal; since being confined by no other obligation than her Parole, nor no
longer by that, than whilst she is treated with all the respect and submission
that can be due to a Princess; it may more properly be called Generosity, the
Desert as well as Demerit of what ought to be paid her, having long ago
justified a Remove; it is therefore generous Mithridatia that makes her obliging
Mithridatia. And since I can find out no other reason to hope for her Favor,
than that which makes her give it; She can be no longer tied, than she declines
making use of her Authority, and happy Call. That it so falls out, for had
Call, by surprise, or her own negligence divested her of it, she could not have
failed of regaining it by the accession of new Force, or by the weakness of
that, by which I must have maintained it; but having laid down some part of her
own Power, having descended from her Throne to raise a Peasant to the foot of
it; it would be a greater violation of her Generosity to depress him now, than
if she had never exalted him; You see Madam, the Terms I own to stand upon, I
think it tacitly acknowledges all the Duty of my Soul, for my Happiness, and
that being so closely allied, I must choose to be miserable when I cease to be
obedient; if you will therefore take a right estimate of the disproportion
between poor Call. and charming Mithridatia, there can be no room for
diffidence, but what either severe Mithridatia the other day said of her self,
or from an Opinion I shall conspire to be the executioner of my own Delights,
preferring Reproach and Affliction, before Honor and Content; I think I may
lawfully Swear, I shall not do this, and as secure I am against the other;
Pardon me, charming Mithridatia, that I vow, amongst other things, to have
admired you for being just contrary to the Characters you gave of your self,
and I am sure I am not mistaken, the Conditions upon which you admit my
Respects, justifying my Belief; if therefore the having all that one can wish,
or think of to Love and Admire, be any security that one should Love and Admire
it. If our Reason and our Senses can conduct us to the sole Object of our
Desires; I am undoubtedly brought within prospect of all that Interest,
Inclination and Reason can think most valuable; there is no Soul so stupid,
whose Delights are not comprehended in these, not to be fixed when these are
attained, is to make it the pittifullest piece of the Creation; but we are
better informed by those inferior Agents which all acquiesce in their Centers;
And is Man alone the worse for being endued with the Happiness of a nobler, and
more certain guide, than all the World besides, to be false to this Direction
is to turn Beast, to destroy the Delights we aspire at, and wilfully extinguish
that Glorious Light which the bounty of Fate has allowed us; there is
therefore fine Mithridatia, a period to a rational Man's Inconstancy, a time
when he is past another Choice, by the Laws of his own Content; If you can
therefore allow me Reason enough to know what I like, you must conclude me past
a farther search; and that though I am as far from its possession, as if I had
not found it, yet that I know where all that is delightful duly, I thought my
self secure for one half Hour, but I am called and can only say, that I am
with all the Passion and Respect imaginable Mithridatia's Admirer: although I am
infinitely satisfied, Dearest Mithridatia, that upon the strictest inquiry, I
cannot inform my self, whether has the greatest prevalency upon my Soul, my
Passion, or my Respect; yet I cannot but confess the different Considerations
they infuse, are oftentimes my disturbance, the present contest about this
humble Offering, has admitted of such a Dispute, as should I stay to hear what
both could say, I might probably lose the opportunity, you will see the
succession of this, which being carried in favor of my Desires, I am resolved
to hope it will be as agreeable that I have waved the Rules of Ceremony, by so
suddenly pursuing you with this trouble, as that I should have paid you that
Compliment by the omission of this: Sweet Charming Mithridatia, though I am not
so far raised upon the steps to Happiness, as to believe my Passion were the
gratefullest Sacrifice I can make you; yet I should be too low for one that is
admitted to make use of his Ambition in the service of so fine a Woman; if I
thought you took no notice of its neglect, I will not so much as doubt then
your forgiving this, but looking upon the greatest Indulgence to be most
properly a Virtue of the greatest power, I beg of you to use it as a thing of
your own Creation, the Genuine effect of that Beauty, Wit, and Generosity which
has made me the most passionate, and the most faithful of Men. Oh Mithridatia!
How do you allay the pleasure I take in this Contemplation, by saying it cannot
be, and if it were it could not make you happy: Had you only mentioned your
doubt, I had not despaired of its conviction, but if its assurance cannot
confirm your Happiness, How little do I fear you wish it; it is true, I ought
not to set so narrow limits to what deserves the whole World. But Madam, since
not a Multitude but Fidelity; not Extent, but Obedience makes both Dominion and
Happiness, Why may not you enjoy both? where the Territory is not small, as the
Duty is large; It is not here confined by those common Considerations of
Convenience or Satisfaction; Let but Mithridatia propose, and if I obey not
implicitly, let her make me as much the Object of her Contempt, as I wish to
be of her Favor: Why should you be so great a stranger to the happiness of
being Absolute in the Breast of your Admirer; it must be the deserts of the
place you are admired in, that prevent it, and those methinks you have too long
known to turn so severely upon now: besides, I resolve to transform them into
something so fit for the service I design you, that you shall not only make me
a better Lover, but a better Man than ever I was; this claim to your kindness
you ought not to deny, it being the consequent of such a Merit, and such a
Love, as I beg of you to ask Sweet -- Whether it were not a crime to part
them,? If you will let her be the Priest, she shall at our next meeting,
pronounce them inseparable, and then should my journey prove my death; I shall
have all the satisfactions, that being parted from you can admit; and if there
be such a thing in the next State, as retaining our least sentiments here, they
will have Purity and Innocence enough to be my Companions there, Adieu.

Sweet as the Breezes Eastern Winds convey,
As breath of Cows, or Rose at break of Day.
She breaths a Wit, as sweet as Flowers to Sense,
And over my Soul she has such influence,
That when but near me in a Thought she is come,
My Breast for nothing else can find a room.
Did you know fine Asteria, you would say,
She Is gently Great, Obliging, Sweet and Gay.
Converse finds there its first and chief Delight.
The Splendour of the Day, and Pleasure of the Night.
'Twas there I left my Soul, and found her Mind,
The Wonder, yet the Pleasure of Mankind:
Farwell all Joys, except she will allow,
I come to beg, and fetch them from her Brow.
Ah! there I Would kneel, and pray I might express,
The Beauties and the cause of Happiness,
But she well knows they are to her self confined
There bounteous Nature, all her strength combined
To make the finest Body, noblest Mind.
III.
SInce all the content of my Life depends upon giving you these reiterated
assurances of my Passion, you must, finest Mithridatia forgive me, if I seize
upon all opportunities to tell you, I am now arrived to that degree, that
living and loving you, is one and the same thing, and that nothing but the
expiration of the one, can be the destruction of the other; the loss of your
Favor will make me miserable in excess, but the end of my passion depends upon
nothing but death, too violent a remedy for any thing but the dreadful
misfortune of your unkindness, not so ghastly, if I know my Heart, as to make me
rather bear that burden than shun it; but if you will encourage me to throw
away these melancholy Reflections, and make me desire to preserve my life for
your service, Accept of that Love which properly makes a Life, and which, under
the severest dispensations, shall be pleasant to me with your kindness, the
greatest Blessing I beg of this side Heaven, and of Heaven I beg it. Since the
Reverence and Respect, I will use so great a Blessing with, shall be such as
Angels shall not think Criminal, my desires have been regulated by that Virtue
which makes my Passion such: My Friendship shall be Just and Constant, my
Fidelity shall be as uncorrupted, as the sweet Mithridatia I adore; and the
Admiration I have for you shall be so particular, as excluding all possibility
of other Temptations; My Love shall Saint us; confirm this Passion of no common
Nature, by all the Holy Obligations that such things can admit: Let our Vows,
our Promises make as firm a Contract as Love can tie, and if I pursue you not
all the days of my life with such uncessant peals of kindness as to Mankind, is
now a stranger, make me the unhappiest of Men; for I am content you have this
Reserve of banishing and ruining me, the moment I digress from what I say, you
need not tell me of what any Mortal would dread, but I never presume to trouble
you with that. Did your confidence in me bear an equal sway, I scarce know what
could hinder you from preferring my Love before that of other Men, nay, all the
World, since nothing in it ever loved a Woman more, or more submissively; the
uncertainty of telling you this, and the care I must always take to preserve
the niceties of your Reputation before my own Happiness; make me decline the
Blessing of being near you, to give you these more distant Discoveries, I shall
not expect you should be under so great inconveniences in this place to make
me returns of the same nature, but I must, and do upon my knees beseech you to
make your Eyes and Tongue the messengers of my Happiness, you shall, with your
permission, receive, when I can make an answer to them this way, for God above
knows I had rather spend my time in this, or in the pleasure of your converse,
than in all that my ambition or wishes can aspire to, Adieu, forgive me this,
Callimicles.

IV.
I Come sweetest Delia, upon so sad an Errand, as will require both your
Generosity and Compassion, to extenuate the misfortunes that attend it; It Is,
Madam, to take my leave of you, and by that Word and Action of Parting, to tell
you I am as unhappy as a Man divested of all he can call or think satisfaction
can be supposed to be; it is true, the great part of my Life looks like a
continued parting, but distance is a great aggravation of absence, and I am
more unfortunate, as the space is greater between me, and that which alone can
allay the troubles of my Life, or add to its content; The truth of this, Madam,
is, as great as that I have a Being, and fixed upon my Soul in such indelible
Characters, that to live and have respect for you above the rest of the World,
is one and the same thing. Give me, dearest Madam, the delight to know you
desire it should be so; and it shall not be in the power of any thing Humane to
make it otherwise; This Passion implanted by all the irrefragable Arguments of
Reason and Inclination, shall pursue you and your Interest, in all the shapes
of friendship Gratitude and Service, shall pay you all those Duties the
censorious World admits in acquaintance, and all those which Reverence and
Fidelity impose upon one tied by Vows and Love; if this condition charming
Delia presents its self agreeably enough to obtain your Opinion of its being a
Happiness desirable; scruple not to let me know it; 'twill be the only
companion I wish in my journey, a permission to entertain my self with an
assurance you will instate me in so great a Bliss will be all I now desire. Oh
my admired Delia, make me as irresistibly yours by Obligation, as I am
inevitably so by Passion; not that I can wish more reasons to be so, than I
have, but that I would not have you want one to conclude me so; I hope you will
forgive me if I am now more importunate than ordinarily in petitioning your
Favor, and that I presume to give you this Note at this time, it is to beg of
you, and I do it this moment upon my Knees, that you will add something this
Afternoon to what I know you design me, that may convince me of my being in
your Favor; let me in plain words without a dash, receive some such
expression, as you do not usually part with; in return I will present you with
Services shall be legible enough for you to understand, no Mortal was ever more
in love, the Sun can as well cease his motion as Po. loving, you see how little
I prize my own preservation, when I am always acquainting you with what you
make use of to my destruction; However, I must, and do with all imaginable
sincerity, protest my Vows and my Love, are the never to be parted Companions
of my Soul, joined by the force of Inclination, and secured by Laws, both
Humane and Divine. Adieu.

Joy is taking of its flight
Dearest Delia, How shall I
Live when Life is out of sight,
I believe I shall dye.
Nor is the Eye at leisure here
To suffer the instructions of the Ear
The dull instructions of Advice
May fit the Happy or the Wise,
What can the wretched have from Hope?
Or can it my Destruction stop?
Or if it could, 'twould be a grief,
To find in absence a relief.
V.
MY Dearest Dear Lady, every way Dear to poor Call. Where alone it is the
faithfullest Servant living, searches for what is most valuable upon Earth, his
Pleasure, his Ambition, and his Love terminates all their Wishes there, distant
from thence every thing looses both its Nature and its Name: Quiet is a
stranger, Content is not to be found, Time, the Soul, and Essence of every
thing turns to torment to the then dear Authoress of all my Joy I have, and
inseparable from my Thoughts. Does Call. send this little and imperfect Atom of
his Love, from larger Worlds of Thought; this Season having made him a Creature
of Contemplation and Devotion: I do from the truth of the one, and
consideration of the other avow, that I am sure I know his Soul so well, as to
swear for him; he has more Love, more Admiration, and more Fidelity for dear
Mithridatia, than all the World besides for the rest of her Sex; Oh Madam, I am
in no humor to Lie, and yesterday being Sunday, where I eat the food of Angels,
may all its Holy nourishment turn to my destruction, if ever I forsake or love
my charming Mithridatia less; this is not the impression of a sudden Passion,
no Madam, years before you ever knew it was my Adorable and admired
Mithridatia, my Choice both by Reason and Inclination; But alas, What a Bar
has Fate thrown betwixt us, will you be angry if I repeat what I told you the
last time I had the Blessing to see you, come, it must be, it will be so; The
old Parliament Gentleman cheered up after Sixteen years despair. I shall yet
live to own to the World a Passion, that you too much trusted in your last; Ah
Mithridatia, I am so little able to support my self under the affliction of
your disfavour, or under the seeming guilt of any thing derogatory to that
respect and love, under which I have vowed to live and dye, as I have sent this
to Mithridatia to beg, and beg it I do with all the earnestness imaginable,
that she will send me one kind Line by this Bearer, and to dissipate my Fears
she will bid me come and lay my self at her Feet; First to tell her of my Love,
and then how it was my Brothers Business with my Mother, which I have been
forced to adjust, there being accounts between them, that has created me much
trouble; but how can I talk of trouble, when* I have all that can be called so
in your unkindness; that I cannot, bear, oh dear Madam, let me no longer be
left destitute of all I can think or esteem happiness, let not that be laid to
my Charge, which whenever I contract upon my self, I withal bring a Sorrow that
is as inconsistent with my Health, as Light and Darkness; Well, my dear
Mithridatia, adieu, despise me not for my Demerit, nor yet for my Age, for upon
my Salvation, I have Love enough to hide those blemishes, and Courage enough to
dye for you, rather than live for any Woman else upon Earth; and to convince
you of the truth of what I now say, I am come this moment out of my little
Grove, where I have invoked the Holy Angels to witness against me to my
Creator, whenever I prove false to my Vows. Ah Madam, I must lose the Image of
my Maker, and the reasonable Soul wherewithal he has endued me, when such
villainies enter my Breast; and till then disdain me not from being the most
passionate, the most faithful, and the most obedient of Men, Callimachus.

VI.
I Should be unfortunate beyond expression, if the Malice or Design of
prejudiced persons should lessen me in the Favor of her, to whom I pay a
Homage of such a nature as I think in the Eye of Heaven, cannot be deemed
criminal or defective, if there be such a thing as allowance for Humanity, if
sweet Mi. find it guilty of either I shall submit to her Censure, but it is too
unhappy to be at the mercy of others, for what they are not concerned in. I beg
you to distinguish between those who prefer you before all the World by
Inclination, and those whose envy pay your Merit an unwilling acknowledgment in
their emulation; we both in our way do you right, but I wish such a Joy as my
own Happiness is not more engaged by it, than the content I take in your being
more deserving than all the World. I beg leave to tell my amiable Mi. there
dwells not in the Soul of Man, a Passion more securely guarded by Fidelity and
Respect, as the one will always make me love and admire you, the other will
always oblige me to do it in the manner you will approve, so that till you find
I grow disobedient, give me not death by your unkindess, and when I change from
what I have so often vowed to Heaven and you; then my Charming Mi. may I become
not only the scorn of every one, but an exemplary punishment of him that made
me; May I dye unpittied, and my Grave be filled with infamy and reproach, when
ever I forsake the only Woman upon Earth I ever loved (for by that great
Argument Comparison, it is so,) then why will not my Adorable Mi. be contented
with my Love. When she can tell her self it is such an one as the dull World is
yet a stranger to; it pursues you Madam in every shape, Obedience, Duty and
Submission are its attendance; my Fortune and my Life shall follow you to the
last period, be but then contented I should live, and that impulse which has
told me, so a thousand times, tells me now we shall yet live to get of the
bright side of the Cloud, and end our days together, and if I fail you, may I
never see the face of the Holy Beatitude: Adieu; Let me hear the next Post,
unless you design me more misery than I can bear. Calli.

VII.
I This day, Madam, found two Papers with Superscriptions that soon recalled
those Thoughts, that either public or private Business had set on work, like
Atoms that Stormy weather had set on float, retire when the Calm arrives; that
Center, Dear Methridatia, (if I may say so) did all the wishes of my Soul
repair to, yet not to be so firmly fixed, as to be without such agitations as
Love produces, I was glad to see, yet feared what I was to see, and now I find
my fears were not ill grounded; for after all the redress I found was a long
reproach, Two whole Letters loading me with Injustice and Falsity, that never
sound a moments Rest in any part of my Soul. What? did I go down to you to
avoid you? And did I call at -- going and coming, on purpose to miss you? Had I
spent my time in some of your Business, that I might keep it from your
Knowledge? Why such contradictions? Why such impossibilities, to contrive my
misfortunes with? Why did you not throw a thicker Veil over your unkindness? A
dim sighted Man may look through this, but I must not see, yet you force me
too; For why such pleasure in resigning up my Vows? Why such sudden
Declarations? that you wish no other causes of my Service, than my Service; you
would have scorned that Notion at another time, as much as I prefer the Honor
and the Love of Serving you before any other thing. and so you bid me adieu.
Ah! How well do you know that is a farewell to all my Content; and how little I
deserve this, let your own Reflections judge? You applaud my Generosity, Madam,
But would it not prove the gratefullest effect of it? To bid adieu to my
pretensions, and make in that Sacrifice, room for the more fortunate. Ah!
Madam, I am scarce sit to write in the Humor I am in, my Soul being heavy to
death; The All-seeing Powers know, I wish the World yours, and my little one in
it, you should be sure of in spite all my great misfortunes; Your
intelligence, Madam, I much admire, but were you half so kind to poor Call. as
to lying Fame, you had been greater proof against such weak Assaults. Well,
Madam, I Will trouble you no more now, but since you have made me so frank a
Present of all my Vows, they come seasonably to my Relief. I send them to you
all again, born upon the Wings of thousands more, and though they never reach the
breast of my unjust Methridatia, I lay them all at her Feet with Love and
Friendship. Well, for your Comfort, I am as little happy as you wish me, but
when I am that false wretch you represent me, let Disease and Misfortune be my
portion, and when I break one of the Vows I have made, ever to love you, may I
be pointed at for the basest of Men. Adieu.

VIII.
HAving but one source, dearest Delia, from whence I derive all my Happiness,
and but one refuge to appeal to in all my misfortunes, I hope you will no more
repine than wonder, if you be the object of all my Addresses; it is from the
joint consent of both these, that this presumption arrives you, and the Fate of
both depending upon you; it were as unreasonable as impossible to expect any
other redress; Give me leave therefore to tell you, that retiring into this
little Cell, to spend those Minutes I can call my own in contemplation of what
is so distant from all but my Thoughts, I was assaulted with such melancholy
Reflections, upon that Discourse of charming Delia, which Subject I too well
remember, (that my endeavors to love her less would be an obligation) if you
had observed how it surprised and oppressed me; then, when I was with you, and
when I had a thousand pleasures (like Showers upon a Flame) to allay it: What
influence do you think it has now, when I have nothing to withstand the
cruelties of that Consideration. For my part, I am of opinion it gave me more
trouble and more misfortune than you wish your greatest Enemy; but there being
no Entertainment worse than that of Sorrow, I will at least exclude it from
this Paper, and tell my Delia, that having lain under this pressure till it
became insupportable; I was necessitated to that recourse of thinking more upon
Delia, than what she said, which I own to have given me all, and the only quiet
Moments I can enjoy in absence; Had you seen how diligently I searched those
Treasures of Bliss for an Antidote; I cannot but think in pity you would have
given one your self to the Man that dies without you, and wishes not to live
but for you; surely you would Delia, yes and have reversed the very mention of
what carries with it Death, and so great an impossibility of Obedience: If I
err in this, dear Madam, or am thought to have done too much to rescue my self
from the tyranny of Grief, my submission shall yet inform you, I am
unacquainted with presumption; nay, I will rather choose to dye and love you
silently, than lose one dram of your esteem by an unpardonable Arrogance; Ah
Delia did you know how madly I dote on you, you must be troubled at that
cruciating thing you said to me; Tell me Dear, tell me who is that happy Man, I
must be made a Sacrifice to, for were there not that in the cause, why, after
so many years services of Duty and Fidelity (the strictest Man ever paid)
Should I be wished out of the World, for there is no difference betwixt that,
and what you would have me do; However, use me as you please, for never, never
will I change from the vows I have made ever to love you, and to aver the Truth
of what I now say, could I invent greater Curses than those I have already
wished on my self, when ever I am that perjured Villain to renounce my Fidelity
and Faith with you, I would by them conjure you, never to persecute me more
with that which will bring me to my Grave; but as my Religion binds me to
believe those I have already sworn to, will disrobe my Soul of all the Luster
and Bliss I wish it; so will they, I hope, be of consequence great enough for
you to depend upon poor Pol. who has no life under your disfavour, which if
you will deign to preserve, shall be laid at your Feet with more Devotion, and
more Delight, than ever Gums or Incense were offered by the most Seraphick
Hermit. Adieu, my most admired Delia.

IX.
It Is Joy upon Joy, Dear Madam, to have a long, (probably) an unlucky day,
crowned with the delight of hearing from sweet Asteria. Those Evenings are the
propitious times that bring me a recompense for all my pains; that Salves all,
Cures the distempers of a troubled Mind: What shall I say, How shall I thank
the dear Fountain of all my Joy and Pleasure? 'Twas last night I received the
Bliss, it is this Night, Darling, that I pay my Thanks; let such a distribution
of my time ever be my Fate; Let me ever be receiving or acknowledging Benefits
from that place, which makes the least Favor more materially my Happiness,
than the greatest elsewhere; Ah dearest, ask me again and agan, when you shall
see Orantes, do send me a thousand such Questions, I Will answer them in a
thousand -- when you will permit me to see you; till then I Will only say I see
nothing else, that can divert me, I have just sight enough to conduct me from
one trouble to another: Thus the kind Turtle parted from his Mate, passes by a
thousand Objects, and only mourns at all he sees; but met, their Joy, their
Life and Love are through each others Bill conveyed. Dearest Asteria, give me
one quarter of an hour, sit down and write all that Love inspires, show me its
strength in that kind Glass, it may flatter, and yet be like, That Art our
finest Painters study, and Color now set off the Features, it is impossible my
sweetest, finest Asteria to Treat thee so; nay, contrariwise How dull a Rogue
should I be, if I were called to Limn thee so, all I can say, can never tell
the World, how much thou deservest my Passion, and my Duty, nor how much I
love; but whither could I fly? to thy Arms I cannot? What matters then my poor
remove? But not to be too troublesome, I will only add the firm resolution I
have made, that as long as Heaven endues me with Reason and Sense, I will love
Asteria, and nothing else, I wish my Period and a Thought, contrary to this,
may have one and the same Moment. Adieu.

X.
THey that court Contemplation most, cannot brag of being more obliged by Her
and all her Helps, than I, when I was last forced to repair to her for some
assistance, against those misfortunes which began to attack me, when I was
driven from that place, which neither comparison nor expression will permit me
to describe; the time, dearest Delia obliged me with all the quiet, the Emblems
of Death afford, Silence, Night, and the general retirement of all; but Poli,
would have easily fed an ambitious Fancy, that he had all the World to himself;
the Stars were full as bright as those which wandering Martillo changed for his
Mistriss's want of Love; The Birds that Dion cursed, for hindering Thought were
all at rest; nay, Earth it self had got so soft a covering, my Horse could make
no noise. Ah Dearest Delia, How do you think I spent the Night? or rather can
you think it possible that the Beauties and the Charms I quitted, and the
Passion I brought away, could make me spend it otherwise than I did; Blessed
Providence that made Thought not only the best argument of Man's living, but
the best way to distinguish him from other parts of Created matter. I Thought
indeed, and in that world of Thought, 'twas only Delia lived, and she appeared
from thence as irresistible, as unparall'd. I did not long enjoy the pleasing
Contemplation of the one, without the more severe one of the other; those very
Powers which made her inevitable, rendered her also inaccessible; all the
considerable occurrences of my life, since that moment, I had the presumption,
or rather the necessity of telling sweet Delia that I loved, repassed the track
of Thought, through which they had gone; guess then how many Storms I had
within, which all the calm without could not allay, but futurity being so
perfectly opposite to what is past, I must not expect to support the one, with
what may serve the other; give me leave therefore to tell you, that death being
infinitely my desire before life, without my love for Delia, that Passion must
be unexpressibly miserable without her Favor. Ah Madam, I were unworthy and
false to my own Reason, if I should not say, your Favor is inestimable; but
since Heaven it self is attainable, May I not lay at your feet all the Service,
all the Justice, and all the Fidelity, which Love, Merit and Gratitude have
made irrevocable, and beg your leave, that these humble Emissaries may in my
absence, make use of their intercession; I know they offer nothing which comes
not also (like Tribute to the Sea) from numerous streams; But Just as well as
Great, they who can least capitulate, have most reason to be protected.

Thus petty States are often preserved
When greater Kingdoms are denied,
Where is your Mercy, if deserved,
Or Power, when a Title's tried.
XI.
SInce a Power above my own wishes, Dearest Delia, permits me not to choose my
own Happiness, I am forced to think it one to compound for such as I may hope
to receve thus being now denied seeking for pleasures as innumerable as there
are Beauties in Delia's Eyes; I must beg of my Charmer to transcribe them from
that Copy; indeed I may not only read the Beauties of her Person, but the
Ornaments of her Mind. I know not how kindly she may design to use me in the
description of the the one, but the other must he natural, and I cannot but
confess, nay, bind it with an Oath, that in absence I always found the power of
Delia's Wit, enough to Eternize my Love and Respect, without any reflections
upon her Face, and I must as firmly vow, That whenever I had the opportunity to
make my Senses my Judges, I always thought it sufficient to be under the
Dominion of her Eyes, without considering the Beauties of her Mind. But since I
have heard of those who have been reproved for entertaining charming Delia upon
this Subject, I shall only say, that it is not the first time my Love has
submitted to my Obedience. Ah, dearest Delia, let me hear from you, for I long
to have some of those new Delights renewed, which this kind of Converse
affords; Who can love as Pol. does, and not seek to redress the miseries of
Absence? Who that loses the pleasure of one Sense, seeks not to indulge
another? Who that is obliged to Thought for the greatest part of his Content,
can live without seeking it some subsistence where Passion and Friendship meet;
the integrity of the one obtains a Pardon for the other; What, fine Delia may
not approve from her Lover, she may from her Friend: and it being yet
disputable on which side the excess lies; sure where they both join, you must
less doubt the truth, than I your reception: Dearest Delia, they both
sympathize in the Message, and both beg of you to think upon poor Pol. And to
conclude, he thinks of nothing but you: believe him in absence as miserable, as
he believes Delia meritorious, dreaming and resolving upon nothing but his
Fidelity and his Love; both these, Madam, shall take their measures from your
directions; Oh, do but say how I ever can or shall serve you, and I will a
thousand times sooner dispute being Happy than Obedient, Polierchus.

XII.
IF to all my Affliction I must meet with the addition of being so
misinterpreted, as to have the destruction of that life attributed to me, which
Heaven knows I would preserve with the loss of my own, I have then scarce
another misfortune to look for, nor indeed, should want one to dispatch me,
were I not in Reason as well as Opinion convinced, that upon consideration I
shall be acquitted by that very breath that accused me; pray consider whether
such a condition be consistent with what I have offered, if nothing else will
do, think whether laying down every thing but my Soul to serve Delia, can have
in it the thought of her prejudice; all this is at her service every hour of
the day, but a thousand Worlds should never be my temptation for a days sorrow
to her; give me not therefore this new wound, and throw that which is tenderer
to me than my Eye, or my Heart; Ah charming De. heal all these by believing I
love you with a Devotion above that of Authorities, as you might do all my
other miseries, if you thought I deserved the Cure; No Delia, live, and live as
the finest, the worthiest, and, the most charming Woman alive ought to do, and
with this assurance, that whenever I must wade through a Sea of Miseries and
Afflictions, nay, to death, to contribute to that happy condition you deserve,
by all that is Sacred I Will do it; having said this, and vowed once more by the
Eternal Powers, that I will perform it, I will say no more. And now give me
leave to tell you, that all kinds of Obedience, being as much your due as any
ones, I will try what I can to live to serve you, till you require the other;
yes, I will serve you with such Respect, with such Passion, and such Care, as
neither you nor the World shall call me in question; Ah Delia; With what
Transport did I find out that word Hope in your Letter, I know I perverted it
to Senses you never meant, it was but a short Content I enjoyed by it,
therefore pray forgive me, but in its most limited Sense I must acquaint you,
that it gave me more redress than all the Physicians in Town could do; truly I
must confess, I was in a condition very different from what I am in at this
momoment; and though I try to recover, only that my relapse may be more
dangerous, I will nevertheless obey you as fast as I can, and shall long of all
things to hear, whether it be in my case better than Sacrifice; Blessed Angels
hover about you, and if it be true, that as faithful Guardians they inspire
Dreams for our direction; may they infuse into your Soul, the and humble
Passion I have for you, Delia will then know that no Mortal had ever more
obedience than I, nor more power than Delia; make use of it, Madam, as you
please, till Nature in my last Tragedy incapacitate me, you shall never fail of
such effects, as the greatest Merit, and the greatest Love must necessarily
produce. Adieu.

XIII.
YOu must be so abundantly satisfied, not only of the Notion I have of
Happiness, but of the foundation I have laid of all I wish in this World, that
it is impossible you should think Call. the person you represent him. Besides,
knowing, fine Methri. so generous as to have some kind of content in making
others happy. I am naturally led to the sad Reflections of my own
Imperfections; when I enquire for a reason, why I should always be so unjustly
and unkindly interpreted: Oh Madam, How can you say that the declaration of
Contempt for charming Methri. would have looked like the Sentiments of my Heart;
but that you can never believe what I have made my whole business to convince
you of: Bestow a moment, I beg of you, to consider, whether I were capable of
saying the one, so long as Heaven Blessed me with my Reason and my Sense; and
think whether I deserve to have the other said to me; believe it, I have had no
such pleasure since I see you last, as to want this allay, nor so unmindful of
what is now the inseparable attendant of my life, as to merit this reproach.
But how can you force your Reason to make such a construction of something else
I said; as to conclude, I have taken such pains to deface that Idea, which is
so infinitely preferible before any other object, it is true, I said since I
admired you, and before you knew it; amongst other attempts I resolved to try
the Philosophy of expelling Fire by Fire; but having given you an account of
the success then, I wonder you could infer any thing but the contrary of what
you did: Since that Blessed moment wherein you deigned to know you were in my
Thoughts the finest Woman living; I hope you do not expect I should give you
Thanks for the obliging assistance you so readily offer me, or that in savor
of your kind protestation, I should this Post, according to your desire, send
you word, I am in want of your help; no Madam, I must tell you, that all the
Trials you can find, not all the Charms of the Sex, not all the power of Call.
can make me endeavor, desire, or think of so great baseness, or so much
misfortune without horror; imagine then how infinitely you have afflicted one
that loves the ground you tread on, one that would lay his Fortune and his
Life, as he has done his Love at your Feet, to obtain your Favor or Belief;
But how impossible is it for me to enjoy these Blessings under the unhappy
condition of Absence, where Malice, Emulation, and that ready Inclination that
always waits upon you to make the severest and most undeserved Interpretation
of whatever I can say or write, will still render me unfortunate. Well,
sweetest Methridatia live, assured whatever Fate attends me in this
unparalled concern, it shall be the last of this nature that shall ever
possess my Soul, and that as you may secure me with all delight imaginable,
whatever Passion, Reverence, or Fidelity made any Man, so under all
misfortunes, you shall never divest me of these Resolves; adieu, if you will
throw one Thought upon the greatest Fidelity in being; Let me not waste my
tedious hours away in trouble of this kind, but send poor Call. some such
expressions as have often filled his Heart with Joy, in return you shall be
presented with treasures of Love and Respect in a Heart so full of Obedience,
as shall make you as absolute in your power, as you are in your Merit. Adieu,
Adieu.

XIV.
SInce the pleasures of poor Orantes increase with the health of sweetest
Asteria, How do you think he is engaged for every moments care taken to
preserve it; I know he is every day making it his business to requite the
Obligation, and if I am not mistaken, or rather too short lived, I fancy I
shall live to see dear Asteria convinced; Love, Friendship and Fidelity, are
the Ballast of his Soul; Ah Madam, they carry his little Pinnace steady through
all Storms and all Climates, and when he parts with them, may his Vessel sink,
I long now for the happy time, but that submission which always guides me, is
not now to fail me; well fine Asteria, Nature has no stronger ties, no not
those that hold the World together, than those that keep the faithful Orantes
in your service, and you in the Heart of him, there it is you reign solely,
that little Monarchy, adorable Asteria is your own; it is not in the power of
Humane race to hinder it, and nothing but death can dethrone you; Yes Asteria,
By the Eternal Powers it is true, and may I dye poor, unpittied and without
friend, when I am perjured, or break the Vows I have called Heaven and all its
Angels to witness to; no dear Asteria, Orantes would be the most inhumane,
barbarous and unjustest of Mankind (the inferences from which will make up the
greatest Imposture living) if he could admit a second Love to triumph there,
then why may not the more powerful, and the more meritorious Asteria, love as
well, and as long as Orantes, when once 'twas vowed; Why does not that Law of
the Medes and Persians tie the one as well as the other; Ah Asteria, You cannot,
you must be none but mine,
And may I perish, when I am not wholly thine.


XV.
I Am, dearest Methridatia, says a Miscellanie of Passions raised by hope of
that tenderest compassion which so surround Delia. and so deprest by fear of my
own demerits, that being unaccountable to my self, it cannot be supposed I
should give any other relation to charming Meth. than that I love in spite of
all those Calms and Tempests, whose suspense is a fresh torment; Ah sweet Meth.
if I am to hear such news as will bring all the joys and quiet that can keep me
alive, or can allay a thousand terrors, let me not be denied one minute from
you, to enlarge upon Delia's resolution, whether she will depend upon Pol. for
her Content, and Happiness, as he does upon her for his Life, and every Breath
he draws. But if inexorable Fate dooms me to more than I can express; and Delia
gives up her self to another, that she may own her Conquest to the World; a
little will serve to guess at what involves him unsuitable Sorrow, and what, I
think will carry me to my Grave; Oh Methridatia, Delia is your Friend, persuade
her I may live; tell her, it is pity such a mass of Love and Faith should be
hurried to the lower Shades; tell her I will be her Skreen at Noon day, to keep
her from the heat and violence of the Sun, and at night my Eyes shall keep a
strict watch to guard her from the evils may happen; Do Methridatia tell her
all this, and let me tell you, if ever Paper were attended with wishes violent
enough to force success; this comes stored with enough, indeedi as many as ever
the prospect of the greatest Bliss or Terror of the highest Misery, extorted
from the Breast of Mortal. Adieu. For till I hear I have no more power to allow
a word to any other Subject, than Misfortune has to make Pol. alter his Faith
and Love, that is to be his longest companion on Earth; wit that (let Delia use
him as she please) He resolves to stemn all Tides, being assured as he can
never be happy without it, so can he never be so miserable as to be divested of
that support in the most unhappy condition.

If Delia gives me a Reprieve,
I shall be be Blessed, and wish to Live.
Yet Delia, it is not fit I die;
I Will live, and share thy Destiny.
XVI.
IF so mean an assistance as that of wishes could contribute to the Happiness
of the meritorious Methridatia, there are enough sent her by the Humble Call.
for a Newyears-gift, to make her Blessed to such degrees, as her Thoughts cannot
reach. Mental Services have always been the constant offerings of the greatest
Lovers, and Heaven has always placed them amongst the prime Oblations; but on
Earth there is a material difference that attends, not our Sacrifices to those
above, for there the Mind of them that pay, set a value upon what they pay; But
here it is the inclination of them that receive that, stamps the Estimation,
which being so, I dare not presume to lay a greater claim to the merit of what
I offer, than what sweet Methridatia will permit, and that I fear depending
upon the Humor this may find her in; I can but make very uncertain measures of
what will be its sat; it comes charming Methri. to let you see, I will begin
this as I ended the last year, and to beg you will give me leave to make this
protestation, That nothing but death shall hinder me from performing these
services, or any other I can pay you as successive as the years of my life;
nothing comes encompassed with such advantage, surrounded with such Glory and
Beauty as can divert my Thoughts, or looks one moment; no Meth know that I --

Without a change or taking turn,
Only for you in silence burn,
Let your sound Reason judge for me,
You Will see I can no others be,
Unless designed for Misery. Adieu.
XVII.
YOu seemed sweet Methridatia so inclinable to oblige me with the favor of
your Note, as I could not but think you extremely unkind, to be so hardly
persuaded to what I have often told you is so great a pleasure: But I begin to
think you were in it more generous than at that time I apprehended; and that
knowing how many things in the World discontent me, you declined giving me the
occasion of increasing their number; if therefore my importunity drew upon me
the misfortune, I confess my self properly chargeable, yet I cannot but say,
there was a great deal of cruelty in the Fancy that dictated, and in the Hand
that inflicted so severe a Sentence, as with so much Wit, and so little
Kindness you shrouded under the seeming Obligation of Liberty: Oh Methridatia,
Do you think it is ten thousand to one, but some new Object will come to deface
the Impressions you have fixed in my mind, and that rather than fail, I shall be
rifling my Memory to recall the Idea of something that may be agreeable enough
to divert my Thoughts; Severity, Madam, could design, nor Infidelity deserve no
more; if you really believe me this Man, or if I am so, I unworthily aggravate
my Crimes by the presumption of coming near you, and ought to die; and if you
think me not so, I am made too unhappy in your Expression; But too charming and
too unkind Methridatia, was it not enough to render me odious to my self, but
from the faults I will sooner expire than act, to lay a foundation for the
liberty you are resolved to take; Ask, sweet -- whether this be not too much, I
dare swear, she will say it is probable my Misfortunes may, my Guilt will never
oblige you with such a freedom; But if it may be allowable to answer for my
self, let me say, if either a part or future prospect could have prevailed so
far upon my imagination, as to have appeared under a possibility of redressing
my misfortunes, I have not had more reason than time to put it in execution;
Flattery or Change, Madam, never found way into my Soul, since that fatal time
of renouncing my own Power, and submitting to Time, Mithridatia; I was never
beholden to the hopes of Happiness for those resolutions my Reason obliged me
with, in preferring you before the race of Womankind, nor was I ever frighted
with the Image of my sufferings from one of those Vows, by which I have united
those various emotions that too often hinder our considerations in what we
undertake; without arrogating therefore to my self, I am as sure as our
condition on this side Heaven will admit, that no exterior Object can dethrone
my Sense, my Reason, and my Resolution to make room for any diversions, except
such as result from the contemplation of M^thridatia's Merit; I am therefore,
Madam, with or without your permission, under a fate impossible to be removed
from, in point of Opinion, and as unalterable in Practice, If sweet Methridatia
would think the Service and Respect of my Life were a fit offering to be
accepted. I am resolved to find a way to take my leave to Morrow in the
Evening, in hopes you will not be so willing to Manumiss one that courts h^s
Chains, before the Liberty to you so easily give; and who in absence knows no
other pleasure than to contemplate upon those Delights he had in seeing
Methridatia last. Adieu Soul of my Soul, never to be diminished by time or
misfortune in the thought of poor Callimiches.

XVIII.
IF you be convinced, your Happiness or Misfortune depends upon the Passion and
Respect that is paid you by Call. pray conclude upon the first, if it be
possible for him to confirm it, for I here call all that is powerful to attest
this Protestation. that rather than make you miserable, I will not only quit my
Delight, but my Life. Nor do I think the Compliment such as to make you scruple
its belief; for if all the pleasure of my days consists in the Love I pay you,
What reason have I to wish the length of that time, which does but but give me
a duration to my ruin and destruction, in making that which is as dear as my
Soul, unhappy; I am now past all those doubts which attend new taken up
Passions; I must love you, but that Love will make me wish my end, rather than
your misfortune. Oh Methri. it is but your resolving to make us both happy, and
we will be so; if poor Mortals are not deluded in their Belief, nothing creates
it but Love and Fidelity: And I do here invoke Heaven to punish me with all the
Afflictions the Egyptians ever knew, when I cease loving my admired
Methridatia, or break those Vows I have made to serve her, till I am no more;
Yes, Methridatia may, and Sufferings be my Eternal Reward when I love you not,
as now I tell you; we should be too happy could you love the faithful
Calamiches half so well. Adieu.

When thirsty Feavors scorch up all our Blood,
We Dream of Rivers drinking up a Flood.
When we are preyed upon by fierce desire,
We quench not, but are adding to the fire,
An absent Love has torments of each kind,
Destroys the Body, Macerates the Mind.
Fears in their horrid shapes appear to fright
Despair, clothed with thick darkness as the Night
Permits; not hope to look through that black Veil;
Nor can our Reason those high Mountains scale,
Which are between our Joys and us. Ah-Dear!
Light, that can scatter Mists, make Distance near,
Shed thy prolifick Beams, and show poor C.
That he is happy in his loving D.
XIX.
DId. Sweet Asteria know how fearful poor Orantes is of being troublesome, and
yet how impossible it is for him to resist any opportunity, he would be
forgiven for erring on this side; it would be an unspeakable torment to him to
be injurious to her Repose; But he has begged these may be always laid aside
till some auspicious moment gives them admittance, they are truly, the only
Entertainment he has, which gives him any content or ease; they unlade a part
of his Sorrows by sending them to represent the Sense he has of being wounded
in the tenderest part, but Heaven has reserved the Knowledge of our Spirits to
its self, for who can describe Pain, or paint Sorrow in its true sufferings,
and yet there is something both so certain and unaccountable in our Souls as
methinks I know and seel my dear Asteria's troubles, I am sure, I do enough to
make it the greatest Grief and Affliction that ever reached my Soul; Ah, when
shall disconsolate Orantes hear Asteria mends and is cheerful; it is an Age
since those Joys arrived, but sure you are not so wanting either to Heaven or
your self, as not to promote them to your Power; but I fear I am too long,
Guards of Angels attend you, tender as my wishes, may my disasters never load
you, nor my Prayers never fail you; may all I have vowed be my Damnation, if I
leave you, and may you live to be convinced beyond a doubt, that Orantes
prefers his Fidelity before his Life. Adieu.

XX.
I was not more loath to leave the sweet Authress of my Joy, the night before I
came away; then I was troubled not to see her the Morning after, but I was so
plagued with the disorders and noise of a company of Excize-men, who were going
out or Town, that I was forced to get up; it was like midnight when I passed by
the Door of my Dearest Delia. Besides, the Snow and the Winds were so excessive
sharp, that I was near being cured of all manner of trouble by their having
taken from me the sense of Pain; indeed I put my Face almost benumbed into the
weather, and can safely swear I never self such Cold before, nor have yet
recovered one of my Hands, I had that day a Conviction, that our Soul's are
most employed when the Body's useless, for I only knew I lived because I
thought; and how often did I think of the vast difference betwixt what I
enjoyed over night, and what I then wanted; that mighty disproportion, dearest
Madam, looked most dismal, I had no charming Mithridatia's Eyes to warm me, no
enchanting of Delia's Tongue to allay my Griess, no meritorious Asteria by me,
and for an addition, that cruciating Thought, like Wild fire flew about me, for
not having paid the Duty I both desired and ought to do; I had all the
afflictions were wished me by a power which can as easily inflict them, as she
can confer Blessings; Ah Dear Dear, wish me no ill, for if you do, may this
hour be my last, if I wish to prosper; you have my Life and my Happiness, and I
may say without presumption, my Salvation depends upon you, it being absolutely
in your Power to make me a better or a worse Man, as you please; Why may it not
then be the first: Have we not often, my dear Delia, concluded something in our
Natures, our Humors and Reason so alike, as if Heaven had designed but one Soul
betwixt us; and will you not take care of your own? Ah Delia, deny it not, and
you shall have a Life spent in your service, the expiration of which shall only
end it; but I must now leave this, and tell you I am again encouraged to go to
London and there being some things which are the common intercourses of
acquaintance, as such disdain, not to know you must command your faithful Pol.
Ah Delia, (this is business) He hates to mention any thing in love, but what
the nicest Thought of Delia may allow from the Humble and Passionate Pol. Who
has not a Iess solid, though a differnt foundation, who has Indies, though not
Golden ones to offer, Empires, though not so gross as Interest and Ambition lives
upon. Ah Delia, Heaven and the Powers above (of which the Mind of Man is a
Type,) confirm what I say to you for Truth, and show you the vast difference
betwixt the lasting power of Merit, and the short dominion of Design; but
whether am I falling, let some prosperous Gale direct my Passion into Delia's
Breast, sweet, safe and happy Harbor, let me there unload all that Love,
Fidelity, Religion and Honor ever made binding, and let Delia take choice of
all I have to offer; nay, she must refuse none, it being the gift of Heaven as
well as mine; well, Adieu, all the Blessings of Heaven descend upon you, quiet
Hours, soft Dreams, and steady Friends be your Portion, and let me beg you to
believe none so much, so as your unfortunate Lover Polierchus.

XXI.
SInce all the ambition of my Life received its Original from, and has its
termination in finest Methridatia; How pardonable is it, I complain of the
unjust diminution you make of that Merit which gave my Passion its Being, and
is the happy assurance of its duration; it is of the highest concern possible
to me, to oblige you to believe, that I think you what you are, but it is very
strange you will not own what you know you are; it is yet some satisfaction to see
what Arguments you are forced to support your diffidence withal, either to
resolve I must be ignorant of what I make appear I know, or to disown your own
knowledge, rather than believe what I vow to be true, Charming Methridatia, be
not any longer injurious to so many attractions as make all can be paid your
due, nor to that Love which besides being its own destruction, would in its
Falsity, be my Infamy and misfortune. But consider, had you not upon a long
Contemplation been preferible to me before all the World, you had not been my
choice, and had you not been that, my Passion had been impossible, now my
Reason is its companion, and being determined by a Power which can confer what
the nature of Reason and Love can desire; there can be no greater assurance of
its continuance, than your Favor; give me that, dearest Madam, and believe me
Just, and it shall not be in the power of Second Causes to violate in our Case,
that Order which Nature in other things is so careful to preserve; my Happiness
shall depend upon my Love, that upon my Vows, they upon my Reason, and all upon
Methridatia's Merit; as the Spring, the only sweet Fountain from whence to
derive upon passionate Call the pleasant moments of his Life; Call not this
Folly, Madam, nor think it so easily alterable, at your own, or any other
bodies pleasure; for had you an equal Obligation both from your Judgment and
your Inclination to value Call. before any thing else; you would not know where
to look for either Power or Will to resist the sweet violence of a
particularity: But because this Case is not like to arrive from the inequality
you will always find betwixt your self and others; yet must you not by this
Rule judge them, especially poor Call. whose unhappy defects make his pretenses
to any right in your kindness impossible, but yet cannot stop the tide of that
Ambition which rises as far as Admiration and Respect will admit; I cannot
give you a greater Instance of both, than when I tell you that nothing has
been more my wish and desire, than your being satisfied to allay the terror of
Absence with this kind of Converse; but since you say it is troublesome, and I
cannot be obliged but at the expense of being disagreeable, I will endeavor to
moderate the heat of those impatiencies which yet I cannot so regulate, as not
to wish for a Note to day; But pardon me, if I err in the moment, I pretend to
repent; and indeed I fear your own Declaration looks too like a Civil notice,
that mine are too frequent and too long, yet I cannot forbear saying, that if I
have any Sense, you designed my making use of it, when you tell me, if your
observation fail not, the heat will be over by that time you return. Oh
Methridatia, it had all the Cruelty imaginable in it, to answer for one, and
pardon me if I say all the disobligation and injustice possible to include the
other; it carrying with it all that can conclude me miserable or infamous: No
Madam, I have not built my Passion upon the hopes of Happiness, it had
misfortune in prospect, but it looked not grim enough to divert me more from
loving you to come in that State, then it did long ago under a suffering
Silence; you cannot therefore be free from my Respect; however, I may be
divested of your Favor, which yet I will prosecute with a life so spent in
your Service, as shall make you wish I had more Merit, to have been made more
Happy. Adieu.

I never found, seeing my Love one day,
Could the Delights to morrow brings allay,
Each day produces various Joys,
And Pleasure does consit in Choice;
Why then should this Converse which must supply
The Powers of Sense meet a worse destiny,
It ceases to be Love or Joy, when we,
Cease wishing them Eternity.
Down Rebel Fear, the Just Asteria,
The pleasant Charming Methridatia,
The fine, the sweet the generous Delia,
Will not refuse the Duty that I pay
Because 'twas humbly paid them yesterday.
Absence that preys on Thought when this Relief
Cannot be had, turn^ all to Fear and Grief.
Now Love and Hope at work Command in Chief.
By these two Messengers be pleased to know,
That Streams do not more naturally flow
To their dear Ocean, then my Soul to you
That Sweets from Flowers, persum'd Gums from Tree,
That Virgin Honey from the ^^den Be,
Are not so sweet as one kind Look from D.
XXII.
IT is not my charming Delia without a mixture of all those apprehensions which
make up the greatest Concern, that I ever now receive the Honor of a Letter,
the Joy to see it, and the fear to find in it any thing ruinous to my Love, are
always endeavoring to supplant one another, and truly I cannot but say I found
enough couched under a serious and grave style to set my Fears on work; for
dear Delia, should it proceed from a diffidence of my Love (as sure thus many
years has convinced you I can never change) I will waste away this wretched
Life in despair; Yes Madam, if my Vows and Oaths, which Heaven only knows I
have made, without those I have paid at your Feet, will not secure you to this
Breast, and persuade you I will carry this Passion to my Grave, I am not
sitting to live; Alas, to break with you would be barbarous, inhumane and base,
I am not arrived at such Villainies yet, and when I do, let my end come, or what
is worse, be every Man's wonder. Then give me leave to hope you believe this,
and to send you a Vow taken from the bottom my Soul, sent with a Passion and
Fidelity inferior to none I ever read of, that if you will keep me alive and
give me leave to love you, it shall never violate the Rules you set to your own
Goodness and my Duty, nor ever know decay till Pol. His great one, Ah dearest
Delia, believe poor Po. that is ready to dye for Love and Grief, to read a
melancholy Letter, let me implore you not to question my Faith; but to conclude
me as unalterable as the decrees of Heaven; come Delia, the Sun will yet shine,
and we shall yet live to appear our selves. Charge not your self for not
searching the World, nor do not lay such Corrosives as too many of them will
cause the death of the passionate Poli. Adieu Soul of my Soul.

I Love thee more than Misers do their Wealth,
Than Captives Freedom, or than sick Men Health.
XXIII.
I Was in such great hopes that the Saturdays Post would have brought some
account of Delia's Health, as poor Po. has wasted his whole Day with
expectation and wishes, but the Post is come and no news; if it be designed as
a continued piece of severity, Po. submits. But since he cannot but dread every
accident which hinders his hearing when dear Delia is not well; it may easily
be guessed how uneasy he is, all his Treasure is in one bottom, and how
natural, at least how frequent is it, to make the apprehensions of a ruin,
almost as great as the ruin it self; indeed Po. is extremely concerned as ever
I saw him in my life; Alas, he is so far from omitting any opportunity of
sending, as were the conveniences every hour of the day I dare say, Delia
would miss very few, for he spends them all in thinking of his Dearest; and his
only Concern. Truly all the tenderness that the Soul of Man has, is employed,
when we fear for that dear Friend; you must let me some way or other, know how
you are, or torment me to death; order some body to write two words, for I
would not have you venture your Eyes yet: But alas, what do I talk, you may be
dead, you may be any thing, I have not heard these three Posts; Ah how
wretchedly miserable has this made me, if satal this arrives, farewell to Joy
with as much resolution, as I will welcome Death, which the Holy one knows I
will do whenever I lose my Delia; I was in hopes the worst had been past, when
I left you, and if so, Why do I not hear from you; remember what Grief and
Sorrow plunged me into at the beginning of this great misfortune, you know I am
but just recovered, and if you have a mind to defer my death, have a care of
the most deserving of Women, for it is to her alone my Services and my Life are
Dedicated; Fidelity is not more your due, than it is my nature, therefore
whatever Calumnies from Malice or Ignorance I may lie under, you can answer for
me for many years: I pray take it here for an undeniable Truth, bound with all
the reiteravows and Resolutions my Soul can make, that only at the Feet of my
charming Delia will I breath out my Love and my Obedience in my last breath; my
Love shall end with my Life, and when that goes my Eyes shall close up the
Image of my Adorable Delia; Let me hear, I beseech you, as soon as possible,
for if ever uncertainty was pain, it is now a torment, an unspeakable one to
me; Ah Delia, What did I not leave you well, and of such a Disease, how cruel
is the mention of it? Why did not Fate permit Po. to bear the burden; I repent
the word, for I should esteem it one, though it were my destruction: Ah think how
loath I am say Farewell to all that is my Joy, and all that is my Life. Adieu.

Witness this Truth for me, ye Rural Powers,
Such as inhabit Groves, or sit in Bowers.
You watery Nymphs, and such as dwell in Shade.
How often to you was this confession made?
Witness you nimble Spirits of the Air,
And you its Quire who sing away your Care.
I tried as many years as most have loved
To save the Heart, has so defenseless proved
But as some Warlike Nation grown too great,
And numerous for its Native fertile Seat;
Sends Colonies abroad to dispossess
Those who made Homebred Ease their Happiness.
Too much confined, though in vast Empire She
Conquers no less than general Liberty
Such Force victorions Delia did display,
Night could as well resist the approaching Day.
Yet have we seen a thickened watery Cloud,
Sometimes attempt to be the Morning Shroud,
And as the mighty spreading light begun,
Tried to withstand the luster of the Sun,
Suce weak attempts has Reason sometimes made,
But how like Clouds did opposition fade.
Tell her, Oh tell her, ye Powers above,
I am made up of Duty and of Love.
XXIV.
DId you know how valuable every little is that comes from the Head and Hand of
finest Methridatia, there would have been more care taken, than to have let so
great a part of that little, suffer Martyrdom before it came to Trial: Nay,
having made Call. Judge, I am sure the execution had been deferred till they
had been companions in destruction; But remember you are accountable to me for
the Ruin of what I esteem above the value of anything, but such an reparation
as you can make, and having now so fair an opportunity of appealing to your
generosity; think not I have so much as to lose it; nay, had I as much as
generous Methridatia her self, I should dare entrench upon what she prizeth so
much, or rob her of so great a share, as she has now occasion for; Know then
the thirsty Earth was never more covetous; nay, that I have in this case a Soul
so great, as not to be contented with less, than what the Noblest Person living
can give in compensation, for what was almost inestimable; expect me therefore
to come and dun you. I should not be in a condition to have entertained any one
so much at random upon this Subject, if I had not been last night blessed with
the happy news of a friend of mine being recovered of a Distemper I dreaded, a
person so dear to me; by all that merit and obligation can inspire, as I must
beg of you to congratulate with me; Oh! Comparisons are odious, yet I must say,
that neither Methridatia nor Delia, (both whom I am sure you admire) put
together, have more Charms, she has as well the awful Grandeur of the one, as
the more gentle attractions of the other: She has the smart Wit of one, as
well as the sweet and conversible temper of the other; she wants not those
Beauties that variety in Humor gives the one, nor those several Graces wherein
the particularity of the other abounds; that misterious kind of negligent Charm
in one, which makes all sorts of Persons and Tempers follow her, whilst it
neither looks like pain or design in her: nor that irresistible Power in the
other, which never yet failed her whenever she designed it, either for Bliss or
Punishment, have not in either kind made them more considerable; then this
friend of mine who has that easy unexpensive, yet bewitching Civility of the
one, which makes every one doubt, whether their Happiness or her Kindness be
possible; and that more peculiar advantage in her particular converse which in
the other, makes the Friendship and Fidelity she would preserve inviolabe. Oh
Madam, no attractive or admired quality in the Soul of either of these, exceeds
what my friend enjoys; nay, there is so great a resemblance as would you give
me encouragement, I should not despair of pleasing you upon this Subject; since
the Picture I should give you of my own, would be almost the Character of your
two Friends, who seem to be both born to be like mine; for she has the fine
Hair and Eyes of one, the sweet moild Shape and Mien of the other, Motion and
Clothes are as much her Friends, as she is happy in defiance of both.
Negligence or Design being ever thought best, as she is found in either; but I
begin to fear you will think me as fond of the Parallel as of my Friend, and
doubt whether I love yours or my own best, and if so, I am in some hope also,
that you will begin to suspect your self, and truly I think not without reason,
for if in sweet Asteria you can find all the Charms, that are in Methridatia
and Delia, Why should you not be contented to contract what now you are forced
to divide; but if not, I will propose this, That I will promise to gain you all
the Friendship and Interest imaginable in mine, if you will endeavor to set me
firm in the Opinion and esteem of your Friends; Oh did you, or would you know
the pleasure of such a Converse; this little parcel of Friends, with almost any
misfortunes else were more preserible, than what the World in great mistake,
besides Calls great and pleasant; the thought of it makes my Cell a Paradise,
its enjoyments admits no parallel; Adieu, I do not intend to take your
forgiving this for any part of the recompense I expect, for the using Wit, and
may be kindness, as the Romans did the Bodies of diseased Friends; theirs was
Honorable Interrment, yours was Murder. Adieu.

XXV.
IT is no wonder if all that ever represented it self, obligatory to the Mind
of Man, appears with advantage when it comes under the consideration of my
Love, for this great Merit and great Passion may have been your Observation;
yet it is so seldom that these are supported by foundations, great as any of
themselves, that poor Po. may not only Bless his own Fate, but surely convince
dearest Delia, that if a sense of having been tied by Honor, the highest
Obligations Interest and Friendship can Eternize the Thoughts of a Gentleman;
He may then say, change, misfortune, or ambition can no more dethrone the
Sweet, the Charming Image of my Adored Delia from the Soul of Po: then the
Giants, (those Monsters of Earth,) could Jupiter from Heaven; no, Delia is
there; neither can the Objects of most prosperous or adverse condition make her
less absolute. To this I sign the purest part of that Fidelity Heaven endued me
with, to you, oh dearest Delia, I send as many and more Sighs than here are
Letters; a crowd of Thoughts and Wishes inspire my passionate Soul; Yet I must
keep within bounds: So adieu, Million of Blessings surround you.

XXVI.
ALas Dear Asteria, to say Orantes loves, is but to say he lives, and to own
its due to Asteria, and the Obligations she has conferred, is but to say I
have not lost my reason, and that I am not the basest of Men; truly I boast
not, but I rejoice that Gratitude and Fidelity are as inseparable from my Life,
as Life from my Soul; Where is the place, What does Orantes do, that makes your
diffidence his misfortune? Ah Asteria, examine all your unkindness can suggest?
Think how it is possible for him to be unjust, whose Fidelity by being his
recompense is to be his happiness; besides, is not Asteria my deliberately
chosen Object, have I not in a crowd, as well as in private, sworn, no Man's
choice was so well fitted to his Mind? Ah Madam, I must lose the name of Man,
and turn to that of Beast, whenever any temptation or bait fetch tha Passion
from my Soul, or one spark of it from my Breast, which I have sworn to you: No,
Asteria, my preferring you before all the World, has only made me wish to have
my Life prolonged; those only being the darling Moments of my time, that are
spent in Asteria's Favor, and Service; then conclude, no exchange, no barter
for such Joys, whenever I do, may I break, grow wretched, and dye unpittied.
Adieu.

XXVII.
THE Blessings of a Favor from my delightful Asteria, is so perfect a reward
for all my sufferings, as I lose all my resentments and forget being unhappy
whenever she presents to my view, the dear Paper filled with Kindness and Wit.
But why should I say this, methinks it is like thanking you for missing the
first Post, or complimenting the privilege you have to put poor Orantes upon
the rack, that you may give him the pleasure of a Cure; Ah charming Asteria you
know your Power, and it is no matter what I confess, I, am sure you know that
all my Streams of Bliss being derived from one sourse, I subsist no longer than
the benign ^ountain gives her self; and how great, how pleasant an one is it to
find sweet Asteria, arguing me into into my own Happiness, that my safety
should be the effect of her Care and my Joy, the product of her Love: well,
sure it is not what I am, but what I think she would have me, that makes me
happy; for I never can give any account of my self, but as I am sensible of the
soft impressions of her kindness, or the ruffer impulses of her Favor; I must
therefore now with all the force of Love and Gratitude, own the delight you
gave me, at those two irresistible Charms of Wit and Kindness, and descending
from a person sufficient to inspire Love without them both, are enough to
justify the truth of my professing to devote to sweet obliging Asteria my
Love, my Life, my All; they are yours Madam, by the undoubted Right of a
thousand Merits, and a deathless Passion, secured by all those Holy
invocations, that our Reason commands us to hold binding; Ah Asteria, your dear
Image is no more to be divided from my Soul, then my Soul from my Body; my Love
and my Life shall know but one end; I am big with expectation of hearing this
day from whence the only good news of my Life can come. I sit telling the hours
as I have a thousand times done the miles. When I have wished the heavy Horse
could fly; truly dear Asteria, every thing that comes from you has such a
reception from me, as the thirsty Sands gives to the joyful Showers, such is
the esteem Orantes makes of every thing that looks but kind from Asteria, but
its no sit comparison, yet surely Asteria that knows he loves beyond all things
on Earth; knows he will at any time make himself the price of Asteria's
kindness; let that be a valuable price, which is all I have to offer, and the
rather Heaven knows that shall never want to be offered well, poor Orantes
loves and suffers, and could dye before any misfortune should divest him of
that Respect which will live in his Soul, whilst Breath is in his Body; it is as
natural to submit to Asteria, as it is to live, and to live and love is all one;
Ah Madam, How long could I entertain you, and how little reason is there to
suspect that I have any other pleasure. Adieu, Adieu, Blessings surround you.

XXVIII.
HOw does Delia melt her Oil into my Wounds, and then for fear they should heal
too fast, applies her Corrosives, prepares Po. for the hardest of Fates, with
so sweet a Lenitive as opiates all his Grief: But alas, when I go but two Lines
farther, she says her Inclinations are far beyond Sea, Why, what has Po. done
to deserve this great misfortune; Has he not always clothed his Love in that
true genuine Passion of his Soul? Has he not offered his Blood to expiate any
misfortunes of hers, and would he not at this hour drain every Vein to convince
her, Man never loved so madly as he does: Yes Delia, its true, I want neither
Resolution nor Courage, if your Quiet can be bought at no cheaper rate: then
why, if it be a Dispute, should not Pol. carry it, and keep two such Loves, as
separation in this kind would absolutely bring destruction to, within the four
Seas; Ah Delia, Where can you be within that compass, that you and he may not
meet often and advise? for if he live, he will make your ease the care and
scope of all his time. Yes Delia, he has vowed it when the most ambitious and
covetous has been at rest, and he now swears not to perform it, if Honor and
Truth has not forsaken the Soul of Man. Ah Delia, I have a thousand
unexpressible troubles upon me, for fear you should be persuaded to that which
will undeniably prove my death. It Is not Affectation nor Untruth, my admired
Delia, as I am a Christian, that it stops my Pen and Sight, accept the Tribute
I may with your assistance wipe these from my Eyes, but never can that Sorrow
which any affliction of yours will make inseparable from my Soul; could I be
supposed to live without Delia, my Life would be either a miserable Knowledge,
or a dull ignorance worse than death; Is not this Argument then a fit concerns
my Being, and indeed both our Interests of weight enough to carry the Balance;
but as our Love lies so hard at stake, there is nothing ought to come in
competition; Sure Delia did this to try her faithful Swain, one who will outdo
Cassandra, and will not be unfortunate as long as she is Just: Come we have
lived on the cold side of the Mountain a long time, Blasts and sharp Air have
blown upon us, if we be near enough to help one another, we may climb over, go
round about, or like Hannibal make our way through with Vinegar; we may get on
the Sunny side, and though our Tubs be no bigger than Diogenes's, we may have
nothing to desire of Alexander, but that he would stand between us and the Sun.
Well dear Delia think of this, it will be ill driving us to despair, when we
may not be past hope: Adieu; I have not a worse Enemy to my Quiet than my
Fears, as Delia will manage them; She may ease the torment of her ever faithful
Lover Polierchus.

XXIX.
SUre nothing suits the genius of this Age, worse than Orantes, for that like a
rolling Sea sends Billow after Billow, and every Blast changes the face of the
great Ocean; He, like the weather-beaten Shrub upon the Beach, flourishes never
the more for a Calm, nor withers in a Storm: Dear Asteria is the Rock his Love
grows upon, there is Merit enough for the Roots to fix in; he is now at leisure
to consider the foundation all alone, free to Thought, the Reins are now loose,
Asteria is the sole Object, he sees her with his Eyes shut, hears her at a
hundred miles distance, and talks to her at the same; Rapture and Dream are not
very unlike, yet this has the better on it, for I can think it over and over
again, and am not at the mercy of a starter or a noise to loose the dear
Delight: Charming Asteria, Orantes is awake, not only thinks, but knows and
resolves, and from his strictest reasoning can averr he loves, and she deserves
all, and more than he can ever pay; yet with pleasure he is endeavoring all
the dispatch possible to his design of seeing and serving her; it is his whole
business. Sir William Temple makes an ingenious descant upon comparing the
steady temper of the Dutch with the more acute Wit of other Nations; he says
one cuts like a Razor, but blunted by hard opposition; the other like a
Hatchet, and makes the deeper impression: they are, as he says, more dilatory,
but more sure both in their Councils and Dispatch, because they are always
intending what they are about; apply it dear Asteria, and doubt not the effect,
it is not the trifling Project of some one advantage that animates the Spirit of
Orantes, it is no less than all the whole Cargo is at stake, and then ask what
every one does for that, the Miser and the Generous are then alike. Adieu,
Gratitude and Honor would flourish upon any opportunity of serving you, and
would quit all pretenses for this gratificacation of perfecting what I have so
often promised, what I have been so long about, and what I hope to effect; Dear
Asteria farewell; when you can with ease to your own Concerns, think of one
whose enjoyments can never amount to a cessation of misfortune, till he has
the Blessing to see you again; Forgive this trouble, and if I may beg it, to
love Orantes once more. Adieu.

My dearest, powerful and propitious Fate,
May all thy Hours be Quiet and Sedate:
May thou be constant to thy Love and Friend,
And all that makes thee Happy know no end.
THE Relation of Delia's Concerns, have like the sudden Fires you mention,
startled me, and made me look round for Refuge; But alas, it is no news to poor
Pol. His Reason to hear she has a thousand Offers, and what she says, is
enforced with as many Considerations of Prudence; the tenderest Concerns lie at
stake, and nothing to stand in the way but unfortunate Pol. How can I think,
that that, which every thing crushes can oppose so mighty a force, Ah Delia, my
Pen is ready to drop out of my hand, by all that is Sacred, cold and heavy Grief
has seized my Heart, and my Eyes will no longer perform their Duty; Forgive the
little stop I make, Dear Delia, and I will on again; Is your Prosperity,
Happiness and Honor dearer to me than my Lives Blood? and yet must I be the
only Man to oppose it, Ah Delia! to what necessity am I brought, that I must
quit both my Love and my Life; it is true, when ever I part with one, the other
will undoubtedly follow, But may I not hope my Adorable Dear Delia will look
once back, and think, whether two Souls, the nearest being one that ever were
made, can now be parted: Consider it Delia, let your Pity be moved to your
Slave; and I do here again upon my bended Knees implore your Compassion; Deny
it not for Heavens sake, unless you will abandon me to all that Cruelty which
would make the most barbarous Relent. Adieu, my Life depends upon the next,
remember I have no Solicitor, none to Appeal to for help, but Delia her self:
Well, I have only to say, that unalterable as Fate, is the Passion and
Friendship of poor Polierchus; or may the Eternal Powers for ever hate him.
Adieu.

FINIS.
An Advertisement.
FOR want of Care in the Printing, some Mistakes are made in these Papers, as
particularly the Second and Third Letters are joined together, the former of
which ends at the Word Admirer, Page 9. Line 6. The rest of the Errors the
Reader may correct thus:

Page 3. Line 2. for seeing, read suing. p. 3. l. 15. r. virtue. p. 6. l. 4. r.
desect. p. 9. l. 2. r. dwells. p. 9. l. 20. r. the success in this. p. 11. l.
16. r. desects. p. 12. l. 9. r. last. p. 19. l. 18. in stead of, I believe I
shall die, r. I believe it, I shall die. p. 21. l. 20. r. crushed. p. 24. l.
15. r. with. p. 32. l. 12. r. Darling of my Thoughts p. 34. l. 21. r. charged.
p. 40. l. 14. r. Anchorites. p. 48. l. 1. r. such. p. 52. l. 2. r. so little
inclinable. p. 53. l. 24. r. past. p. 54. l. 6. r. fine. p. 56. l. 22. r. may
Death and Sufferings. p. 69. l pen. r. Wound. p. 72. l. pen. r. I should not
esteem. p. 74. l. 10. r. little. p. 75. l. 15. r. I should not dare to. p. 79.
l. 2. r. for great Merit. p. 82. l. 19. r. disfavour. p. 82. l. 22. r. ah
those. p. 84. l. 21. r. for beyond. p. 86. l. 11. r. as it.


