A CONSIDERATION AND A RESOLVTION.

FIRST, SECONDLY,

Prepared for the Honorable House of PARLIAMENT.

By Sr. E. D. Knight. and Baronet.

LONDON, Printed for F. Eglesfeild, 1641.

A CONSIDERATION UPON THE LATE CANONS.
THat the late Canons are invalidous, it will easily appear, and that they are
so originally in the foundation, or rather in the founders of them, I will
assume upon my self to demonstrate, having first intimated my sense by way of
preparative.

The Pope (as they say) has a triple Crown, answerable thereunto, and to
support that, he pretends to have a threefold Law. The first is, jus divinum,
Episcopacie by divine right; and this he would have you think to be the
Coronet next his head, that which does circle and secure his power. Our Bishops
have (in an unlucky time) entered their plea and pretended title to this Crown,
Episcopacy by divine right.

The second is Ius humanum, Constantin's donation, the gift of indulgent
Princes; Temporal power. This Law belongs to his second, or his middle Crown;
already also pleaded for by our Prelates in print.

These two Crowns being obtained, he (the Pope) does frame and make his third
Crown himself, and setts that upmost, upon the top -- This Crown also has
its Law, and that is Ius Canonicum, the Canon law, of more use unto his
Popeship then both the other -- Just so our Prelates from the pretended
divinity of their Episcopacy, and from the temporal power granted by our
Princes they would now obtrude a new Canon Law upon us.

They have charged their Canons at us to the full, and never fearing that ever
they would recoyle back into a Parliament they have rammed a prodigious
ungodly oath into them.

The illegality and invalidity of these Canons (as I conceive) is easily
discoverable by one short question, viz. what do you call the meeting wherein
they were made? give it a name to know it by: who can frame his argument aright
unless he can first tell against what he is to argue? would you confute the
Convocation? they were a holy Synod? would you argue against the Synod? why
they were Commissioners, would you dispute the Commission? they will mingle all
powers together, and answer that they were some fourth thing, that we neither
know nor imagine.

Quo teneam nodo mutantem Protea? unless they will unriddle themselves, and
own what they were, we may prosecute, but hardly with concludent arguments.
Yet I venture.

I have conferred with some of the founders of these new Canons, but I profess
clearly, that I could never yet meet with any one of that assembly, who could
(in behalf of their meeting) well answer me the first question in the
Catechism, what is your name? Alas, they are parted before they know what they
were when they were together.

The sum of the several answers, that I have received, does amount to this.
They were a Convocationall -- Synodicall -- assembly of Commissioners, indeed
a threefold Chimaera, a monster to our Laws, a Cerberus to our Religion.

A strange Commission wherein no one Commissioners name is to be found. A
strange Convocation that lived when the Parliament was dead: A strange holy
Synod where one part never saw, never confirred with the other. -- But indeed
what use or need of conference, if that be true of these Canons, which I read
of the former ones, Notum est Canones formari Lambethae, priusquam in Synodo
ventilentur?

Thus far preparatory. I proceed to my argument, whereby to manifest the
invalidity of these Canons, not borrowing but avoiding what have formerly been
instanced by others.

I will neither inveigh upon them as unnamed Commissioners, nor infirm them as
the work of a dead Convocation; But will take them in the capacity of their
own affected title of a Synod. Such they bragged themselves to be whilst
they sat: Such they style themselves in the Title Page of these (never to be
Canonized) Canons -- The words are -- Canons treated upon in Convocation --
agreed upon in Synod.

Thus treating in one capacity and agreeing in another: is a new mould to cast
Canons in never used before. Canons bredde, in a Convocation, borne in a Synod.
Thus although we find not one good father, here are yet two mothers to one
illfavored child; never known before, nor imagined but of Bacchus, whom the
Poet calls among other attributes -- Solumque bimatrem.

I proceed, if their meeting be a Synod, either it is so by Donation, by
Election, or only by Usurpation.

Donation from the King, is this title and authority, indulged to them by his
Majesty: Look through all his highness Letters Patents, and they are not
once saluted with the ambitious title of a Synod. Yet in the Canons they have
assumed it seventeen times, it is their own pride, their own presumption.

The King has not done it, (pardon me) no Prince ever did it or can do it; no
power Regal, Imperial, or Papal did ever attempt it, to ordain that
William, and Richard, Matthew and John, etc. and I know not who more, being met
and assembled upon other summons shall by a Commission be on a sudden
translated from what they were, into an unthought-of national Synod, without
voice or choice of any man to be concerned: this never was done, this never
can be well done.

As for due election for such meetings, this indeed is or ought to be of the
true esse to a Legitimate Synod. But due election made up by voices is so much
a stranger to this Synod, that their fatherhoods will confess that they were
never trusted to this Synod, as a Synod by any, either of the Clergy or of the
Laity.

Concerning the choice of a few of them, and but a few (about 50. as I guess)
chosen to the Convocation house, that will never render them a lawful Synod,
until they can prove metamorphosis and Transubstantiation. -- For the votes of
all their chusers upon expiration of the Convocation house returned back home
to every man's bosom from whence they breathed. So that if you will en-live the
same men to be now Synodall, who were before but Convocationall, you must
renew the old Pythagorean Transmigration, for they want the breath and life of
an election. A new one you have not, and the old one is not to be had but by
(...).

Besides I do affirm and shall approve, that the electors to a Convocation and
to a Synod are not all one. The Clergy only do, and of right only ought to
choose unto the Convocation house. The reason; we of the Laity (so they will
call us) have our houses of Commons where our Trustees by virtue of our voices
do sit at the same time. But in the choice unto a Synod, we who must be bound
by the determinations of the Synod, ought also to be interessed in the parties
determining. This is clear enough in reason, and will be better cleared
presently.

Of Synods I find five several sorts, first a general or universal Synod;
secondly, Patriarchichall, Thirdly National, fourthly Provincial; fifthly a
Diocesan Synod. I pass by the two first and last, as not pertinent to this
time and affair. Concerning Provincial and National Synods a word or two; If
I knew which to call their late meeting. They run on in riddles: and I want
Oedipus at every turn.

These Canons, were they forged in one Synod National, or in two Proncialls?
-- were they two Provincial Synods? how then come their Acts and Canons to
be imbodyed together? how comes it to pass that all the Canons speak in the
singular number? The Synod; The holy Synod; The Sacred Synod. Sacred will now
be hardly granted, unless as the Poet does, -- Auri sacra fames.

Was it then but one? was it a National Synod? why the Provinces (we all
know) never did convene, they never met together. Look on the representative
body of the Commons of this whole Land: every one within the same walls
hearing every ones argument, and thereupon mending, altering, and (as occasion
is) correcting his own judgment, and afterward ((...),) joining in unanimous
consent. And if the able members of the North beyond Trent were divided from
the rest, there would be quickly found a want of their worth and weight, nor
could their sitting at the same time at York, make the rest a house of Commons
here, for the whole Kingdom must be represented entire.

But as we have done the Title Synod, so let us give them the attribute
National, a National Synod, and yet see how inconsistant and invalidous they
are!

The very esse of every Synod does subsist in a double foundation. Fundamentum
materiale and fundamentum formale. -- The due materials of a Synod are the
inteteriour qualities and indowments of the persons where of the Synod
consists, not their external dignityes and promotions. And therefore every
man thus qualified is as capable to be of the Synod, as any Deane or
Archdeacon of them all.

The fundamentum formale, is Delegatio ab ecclesia and debita electio. A due
choice to be made by all that are or shall be concerned in the determinations
of the Synod: and this trust of choice may fall upon another man, as well and
as soon as upon Deane or Archdeacon.

I will not quarrel the want of able parts in any the members of that late
doubtful dangerous meeting: I grant them the materials of a true Synod, but
will insist only upon the second, want of form, want of due election: which
if they want the most virtuall and most obliging tie, and the most binding part
is wanting.

That they had no such election, we need not go forth to prove; No one man in
the Kingdom can say that he gave a voice to the election of any one Deane or
Archdeacon to sit for him in that Synod, nor were the Clerks chosen by all who
were to be bound. So then there remains only to be proved this. That such
election of persons, by all persons to be concerned in the Decrees, and Canons,
is necessary to the constituting of a lawful Synod; which is all one as to say,
that the elections to a Synod ought to by, both be the Clergy and the Laity.

I will trouble you but with one reason, and a very few instances, all br^ifely.

The Acts and Canons of every Lawful National Council or Synod, ought to
bind the whole Nation both Laity and Clergy: But this cannot be reasonable
and just, if the Laity be excluded both from consultation and from choice of
consulters. The reason is plain. It is ground in nature, and so confessed upon
this very case by Dr. Field, who has it out of Occom -- quod omnes tangit ab
omnibus tractari debet. And this is so clear a maxim, that in this very sense
also; for the Laity to be present at Counsels this very Aphorism is used by
the Pope in his own gloss upon the Canonist Gratian. Quod omnes tangit ab
omnibus tractari debet. Surely our Clergy are much too high, if herein they
would outgoe the very Canons of the Papal Synods, and conclude that which
shall bind all, where all are not admitted to treat; neither by themselves
nor by proxy.

Now the benefit of this Law of nature and of Reason (as Dr. Field calls it)
we claim. The present Canons do concern us. I may be a Churchwarden, my
son may be a Master of Art; then must I present upon their yet unborne
articles, and he must swear their oath of Covenant -- well, they were never
trusted by us unto a Synod, and therefore ought not to tie us up un-heard, it
is against nature and reason.

To second this Argument by instance in proof of practice, I shall produce a
few, and but a few of many examples and authorities: the originalls I cannot
now Command, but must be content to name a few extracts, which by way of
transcript do walk along with my vademecum.

The point that I would establish is this, that in Synods and Counsels where
Lay men are concerned in the Decrees, there the Laity ought to be present to
consult if not also to decide the conclusions. I will but point, I will not
enlarge to the vouching every place verbatim; Dr. Field, Dr. Fulke, Goulartius,
are clear and positive in this point.

Our Statutes for correcting and gathering together the former Canons into a
new body, do clearly evidence this unto us; in all which there is an equal
proportion mixed, sixteen of the Clergy and as many of the Laity.

The Author of the history of Trent is frequent in this point, adding this for
a reason, that in a general Council, the universal Church cannot be
represented if the Laity be excluded. So by the rule a paribus: The reason
holds the same, a National Council cannot represent a Nation if but one
degree of men, men of one quality and capacity be only present, and the rest
altogether excluded.

Gratian, the Canonist does allow the Laity to be present, especially in such
Counsels as do treat of faith, and for proof does vouch Pope Nicolas.

I will omit many proof^s of many Emperors being personally present and
president in many Counsels, by themselves and sometimes by their vicegerents,
as Marcellinus, Candidianus, Martianus, etc. yet even this is argumentative for
us, and a preservative of our right, for the Laity to be present.

The Greek historians are so plentiful that I will but name them.

Theodoret. l 5. c. 9. Eusebius de vita Constantin. l. 3. c. 9 and 10 Sozomen.
l. ^. c. 16. and 17. Niceph. Callistus. l. 8 c. 15. Socrates. l. 1. c. 5. and l
6. c. 2.
Among the Latin fathers Cyprian is very plentiful.

As for Counsels, look,

Nice. 1. vouched by Eusebius de vita Constantini -- 4 conc. Carthag. cited by
Gratian. -- The Council of Eliberis in Spain. Council of Constantinople in
Theodoret. -- Council of Constance; And the second of Nice. -- where it is
said of that imperial Lady the famous Pulcheria Augusta, that ipsa persemet
ipsam in sancta quarta Synodo sedit: which fourth Synod was with Martianus the
Emperor.

To these I add the very Ordo celebrandi concilia written by Isidor, and like
unto the Modus tenendi Parliamentum.

Thus much for humane testimony, I have done with my hasty notes, only I add
this, and I beseech you to intend it.

Whilst we of the Laity had our power and voices to choose our own Ministers,
and our own Bishops, (which was our ancient right, constantly allowed and
practiced in the best Primitive times, whereof the proofs are yet evident
enough) so long (I say) we might trust them in a Synod, whom we first had
trusted to direct and guide our souls in all the ministerial function. -- But
to conclude us up now and shut us out contrary to the Law of Nature and Reason,
contrary to ancient usages: not to admit us to determination, nay to exclude us
from consultation, and after all to take from us all assent both in choice and
in refusal of Pastors to be set over us, and yet to bind us by decres so
made, may prove (I fear) no less then soule-tyranny. I do not press the
deserved right of our choice of Pastors: but one thing more, lend me patience
to add as supreme Coronis to all that I have said for right of Laity in Synods.

Look I beseech you in the first Synod that ever was held in the Christian
Church and that for so great and singular a cause as never was occasion for the
like in the world before or since: you have it in the first of the Acts of the
holy Apostles, and it is for the choice of a new Apostle. There were in this
Synod and of this Synod, ^he eleven Apostles, Acts 1. 13. with the brethren of
the Lord, verse 14. There were the Disciples, there was Turba (...) a
multitude, of about a 120 names, ver. 15. Saint Peter tells them that out of
that number one must be ordained to be a witness of the resurrection of our
Savior; thereupon what does the multitude of Disciples there present. (...)
verse 23. they place or set two before the Apostles: And the same men viz. all
the Disciples verse 26. (...) they give forth their lots, and thereupon, the
lot falling upon Matthias, he was numbered (says our Translation) with the
eleven Apostles; but the Original is more (...) communibus calculis
annumeratus est, he was by common assent or by common voices reckoned with the
eleven. Now who were these common voices, who were these 120 men? Evangelists,
Bishops, Deacons, and Presbyters or Elders, as yet there was not one in all the
world, the Apostles were but eleven, perhaps not numbered in this 120. The
Disciples if you will say, that they were there and were Clergy men, yet they
were but 70. So that here is no evasion: the Laity were present, and not
passive only, they were active in this so original, so weighty a Synod.

My second instance in this kind, is out of the second Council that ever we
read was held, and this is Acts 6. where the Apostles call a Council for the
choice of 7 deacons. Then the twelve called the multitude of the Disciples to
them, ver. 2. (...). They being assembled do not say, we have decreed, we have
ordered and ordained, and enjoined, but their language is verse 3. (...),
brethren look ye out, the word is the same as (...) both from (...) to
oversee, do you oversee among you, seven men of honest report. And the saying
(as it is verse 5.) pleased (...), the whole multitude, there is a consent of
theirs, more plain in (...) they the multitude chose seven, Stephen and
Philip, etc. (...) whom they (still the multitude (...)) verse 6. did set or
place before the Apostles.

The third and the last shall be the (...) the great and general Council held
by the Apostles upon the dissension of the Church in point of Circumcision (and
that is Acts 15.) there you shall again find present, (...) verse 12. All the
multitude: but you will say and object that the next word is (...) the
multitude kept silence. True, ergo what? Therefore they speak not at all in
this Council? nothing less. But ergo they had spoken before: for it is plain
by the word. Then all the multitude kept silence. If they had nothing there to
do but to be always silent, this particle of time, Then might well have been
spared. This may perhaps be objected and therefore ought to be prevented, for
the further clearing whereof, observe (I pray) the next verse, v. 13. where in
like manner, it is said of Paul and Barnabas (...). And after they held their
peace, ergo they had spoken. And therefore the Friar who collected together a
body of Counsels (Peter Crabbe the German) does even from this place infer a
consent of the people saying, Tacuit omnis multitudo Consentiens Petro.

But if you would have this more clearly evidenced beyond all exceptions, I
pray take notice of the resolution of this Synod, verse 22. Then pleased it the
Apostles and Elders with the whole Church. With the whole Church, what is that?
The blessed Apostles and their fellow laborers did not engrosse, and (as our
Churchmen affect to do) usurp and monopolize the word Church, as proper
only to Churchmen. -- No you shall find it even in the Epigraphe of the
Canons and Decrees of this true, holy, and sacred Synod, that the despised
Laity are in these Canons conjoined with the blessed Apostles although Pope and
Patriarch, Primate and Metropolitan, Archbishop and Bishops, yea even down to
Deane and Archdeacon: (I have heard it) do despise the thought of admitmitting
the Laity. I do not say to decision, but even to Consultation, nay to the very
choice of consulters in Religion: nay lower even so much as to have a negative
power, when a man of inabilitie, and of ill life is obtruded upon them; I
proceed, for I would not orare but probare, look verse 23. They that were
present had voice, They who voiced the Canons, joined in the decree, and
sending the decree unto Antioch. The words are thus, The Apostles and Elders,
and Brethren send greeting to the Brethren which are in Antioch, etc. Here the
Brethren at Jerusalem are (with the Apostles and the Elders) actors in and
authors of the Canons in this Council agreed. There is no evasion, no clusion,
to be had, unless you can prove that all the Brethren in Antioch to whom these
Brethren in Jerusalem did write, were only Clergy men.

Which if you should affirm, our Clergy will hardly be pleased with you, for
they must then be of the multitude (not a special lot) for Barnabas and Paul
did deliver this Epistle (being the decree of this Synod) to the multitude
(...) as it is found in the 30 verse. And when they had gathered the multitude
together they delivered the Epistle.

Thus much in way of pursuit for this one argument, that no Canons can bind
the Laity where we have no voice of our own, nor choice of the Clergy persons
who do found them, nor assent in the susception of them after they are framed.
Quod omnes tangit ab omnibus tractari debet.

It remains as a wish that every member of that meeting, who voted these
exorbitant Canons, should come severally to the bar of the Parliament house
with a Canon book in his hand, and there unless he can answer his Catechism
(as I called it) and show what is the name of their meeting, and (unless he
can manifest that the Laity are no part of the Church) conceptis verbis in such
express terms as that house should think fit, to abjure his own ill
begotten issue, or else be Commanded to give fire to his own Canons.

FINIS.
HOSEA 8. 4. (...). They have reigned to themselves, and not by me: they have
been princes, and I knew it not.
THAT BB. OUGHT NOT TO HOLD SECVLAR POWER.
OUR Lord and Savior (blessed for ever) being indeed a King, Pilate (his
Judge) seems to start and be in fear at that great title: Although our
Savior had told him ( John 18. 36.) saying, My Kingdom is not of this world:
Pilate (still in fear) sought to release him ( John 19. 12.) but more in fear
of Caesar (the King at that time of this world) he adjudged the Lord of life to
death, yet honorably writes his Title ( Mat. 27. 37.) This is Jesus the King
of the Jews. This title he then was crowned withal, when life and death
divided his soul and body asunder; that in a manner it may be said, he never
was King indeed, until he was out of this world.

If he who was our Lord and Master (Ioh. 13. 13.) had not this worlds royalty,
whence comes that the Pope is Crowned? and his Cardinall's in purple? whence
have our Bishops their Lordships? and as themselves call it (Bishop Hall in his
Episcopacy, etc. part 2. p. 106.) jura regalia) their royalty and rites of
Baronage?

It may prove a disquisition deep and dangerous, yet I desire (without envy to
their pomp or persons) to wade so far as may satisfy a mind that loves
Truth, and desires to be led by it: and this with all possible brevity. There
has been a happy and blessed reformation of our Church, God send a better,
and a more severe reformation of our Churchmen, or else our Church is now in
danger to be deformed again.

The state of this inquiry may be this, viz. whether the Ministers of Christ's
Kingdom may receive worldly titles, and execute worldly offices and powers? or
more generally thus: Whether a Clergy man may semel and simul, be both a Clergy
man and a Layman, in power, office and authotity over other men in both kinds?

Go we to the fountain head ( Luke 22. 24) There was a strife among them (the
Apostles) which of them should be accounted the greatest; which of the twelve
soever began this emulation of power. Certain it is that the two soones of
Zebedee, James and John with their mother first presumed ( Mat. 20. 20.) to
come and ask the highest places of honor (next to the very throne) in the
Kingdom of Christ; which Kingdom was conceited by them shortly after to be
raised in the splendor of this world: This is genuinely gathered from this
very story, generally confessed, and clearly confirmed in the history of the
Acts, etc. where the Apostles do ask our Savior, even after his resurrection
saying ( Acts 1. 6.) Lord will thou at this time restore again the Kingdom to
Israel. Therefore to these two brethren and their mother, so much mistaken in
the nature of his Kingdom he makes answer ( Mat. 20. 22.) ye know not what
you ask. He presently shows the entertainment of his Kingdom, A cup to
drink of, that many were like to pray might pass from them; but they answer
they are able to drink thereof. This their answer as it proved true in all the
twelve Apostles, so by the providence of God, one of these two brothers ( Acts
12. ^^) James, was the first of all the rest, who drank the cup of Martyrdom,
and as some think John was the last of the Apostles.

Equals look awry on the ambition of their fellows. These two were vain in
their high request, and the other ten murmured at their presumption ( Math. 20.
24.) They were moved with indignation says Saint Matthew: (Mar. 10. 41.) They
began to be much displeased, says Saint Mark. But by this happy error of
these two Apostles, our Savior takes occasion to instruct them, and the other
ten, and in them all other Ministers belonging unto him, how far different
the pastoral care of his Church, is from the power which governs in
commonwealthes.

Here upon the son of God calls unto him all the twelve Apostles, saying, (
Mat. 20. 25.) ye know that the Princes of the Gentiles exercise dominion, etc.
(Mar. 10. 24.) ye know that they which are accounted to rule over the Gentiles,
exercise Lordships, etc. (Luke 22. 25.) The Kings of the Gentiles exercise
Lordships, etc. (...). But it shall not be so among you. This is a statute not
to be repealed. This is spoken authorative and definitive, it is the
determinate Law of a just authority. A Canon ordained and irrevocably fixed by
the wisdom of God. Confirmed by an example above all argument ( Mat. 20. 28.
Mar. 10. 45.) For the son of man came not to be ministered unto, but to
Minister. (Luke 22. 22.) I am among you as he that serves. And before this he
had taught them, ( Mat. 10. 24.) That the Disciple is not, above his Master.
(Ioh. 13. 15. 16.) I have given you an example, that you shall do as I have
done to you, verily, verily, the servant is not greater then the Lord.

This ministry being thus performed in humility, and without worldly titles.
The Ministers shall be then exalted. Our blessed Savior in the express words
following says unto them ( Luke 22. 29.) I appoint unto you a Kingdom (but
adds) as my Father has appointed me. Now his own Kingdom is spiritual, or
as himself said unto Pilate, not of this world. Let them then renounce
temporal, and they shall have spiritual honor. But some of the Clergy would
(it seems) confound both Kingdoms, being ambitious to inherit Glory in the
Kingdom of Grace. I fear our Bishops do not know how sublime a virtue
Christian humility is! how full of Honor.

Every (...) must be (...), let the greatest be (Lu. 22. 26.) as the youngest
that is the way to be a right Elder, he must be (...) Luke 22. 27. as he that
serves that is the way to be ministered unto. He must be (...) ( Matthew 20.
27. Mark 10. 44.) a servant, that he may be (...) the prime or chief. He must
be (...) ( Mat. 20. 25.) a Minister that he may be (...) a great one. These
antitheses our Savior has placed in the text upon the former occasion.

From hence, may well be argued as a Corollary, to these undoubted premises,
that no Minister of the Gospel can lawfully assume, hold, or exercise that
power which by the Lord of the Gospel is inhibited to his Ministers. But our
Savior Jesus Christ (Lord and only head of his Church) has inhibited all
temporal Lordship, Magistracy and Dominion unto his servants. Therefore no
Minister of this Gospel may hold or exercise temporal Lordships or dominion.

These words (...) etc. It shall not be so among you, do so straighten the
Bishops miters, that they sit uneasy on their heads: to soften and as it were
to line them for their ease: the Bishops that are and would be both Papal and
Protestant do quilt a gentler sense into these words then can bear analogy
with the Text. They search the original and pretend to find another sense in
our Saviors sentence.

This Text (say they) forbids not unto Clergy men, the use and exercise of
worldly titles, power, offices, dignities, Commands, dominion, Lordships, etc.
but the abuse of them: domineering and tyrannizing with them. This they pretend
to make firm out of the greek word (...); which they would have so taken in
the worst sense of exorbitant power, even for Tyrannizing. So then, they would
teach us, that, Lord it they may, and Lord it they may not: Lord it they may
with all Pomp, state, power; Lord it they may not, with pride, vanity, and
oppression. But I shall easily prove this interpretation to be inconsistent
with the scope and analogy of the Context.

Will they frame their argument from the verb (...) to be a Lord, or to rule?
or from the preposition (...), added and united thereunto? neither will serve.
And if the pomp of our Prelates cannot avoid the power of this text, they are
down for ever. Let me therefore scan it to the full.

First (...) to be a Lord, or to have rule or Lordship, is never properly taken
in that ill sense which they would he ere create, as having unjust, or
oppressive power. It is derived from the usual and most frequent title of our
Lord and Savior, whom the holy Scripture so often saluteth (...) Lord. Here
is no shadow for Tyranny.

The true sense of (...) is authoritatem habens one that has authority: being
derived from (...) authority which is known to be approved and ordained by
God himself from whom all lawful authority is derived. Mark how well this
word is senced through all Authors: Demosthenes calls the heads and chief
of the City (...). A law in force and principal authority is called by
Aeschines (...). Gallen calls the chief and principal members of a man's
body (...): yet one member does not tyrannize over another. Aristotle (6.
Ethic.) has (...) propria virtus, (that is) a virtue properly or principally
so called. (...) is one that is Lord or master of himself, not one that
domineeres over himself. (...) ( Apoc. 1. 10.) The Lords day. (...) (1 Cor.
11. 20.) The Lords Supper. Saint Paul says that ( Romans 7. 1.) The law has
dominion over a man so long as he lives, he does not mean that the law is a
Tyrant, yet the word is (...) ( Romans 14. 19.) Christ both dyed, and rose, and
revived, that he might be Lord both of the living and the dead: (...). From
(...) Lord comes (...) Lordship: four times mentioned by the holy Apostles,
but never taxed as a power tending to Tyranny, but to be obeyed in them who
duly are therewith invested, as may be seen. ( Ephesians. 1. 21. Coloss. 1. 16. 2
Pet. 2. 10. and Jude 8.) Clearly then in (...) there is no print of usurpation
or of oppressive and tyrannical power. If there be, we are then well warned to
beware of our Bishops, who not only own the title (...), but expressly plead
for it, as Bishop Hall in his late Episcopacy, (part 2. page 104.

Secondly, (...) the very word (used by Saint Matthew, and Saint Mark, in
these before alleged Textes) whereby our Savior forbids his Apostles to
exercise Dominion or Lordship is a compounded word of two (...) and (...). That
is, to rule as one that has authority. I may render it to be, or to behave one
self ((...) juxta, Secundum) according as one that has authority.

This preposition in words compounded has sometimes a signification of his
own, sometimes none at all as in (...), etc. clearly it has no special
signification in this (...), much less a force so exegeticall as to draw the
lawful power of (...) into the exorbitancy of a Tyranny. That it has no force
here, is by this apparent, for that the speech of our Savior, recorded by the
holy Ghost in Saint Mat. and S. Mark by (...) and by (...) are rendered by the
same spirit in Saint Luke) (...) and (...). So that plainly you must not
pretend tyrannizing to be meant in the sense of one place except you can find
it also in both, unless you will come to this that he forbids tyranny in
one place, and worldly power in the other, which if you do you grant the
question.

This is enough alone, yet for a further interpretation of (...) look in (1.
28. Genesis) where God gives unto man in the time of man's innocence, the rule
and dominion over all his creatures, even whilst they all were ( Genesis 1. 31.)
very good. The name and word of power in that great Charter granted is (...).
Now the time of this power granted, the person to whom it is granted, the
creatures all good on whom it was to be exercised, and above all the goodness
of Almighty God who granted it, do exclude all imagination of a Tyrannical
power, and admit only of a fatherly mastership over the new creatures of God.

If then the frequent and constant sense of both (...) and (...), be only to
have power and authority, civil, temporal, and ordinary dominion, and that
all such authority is forbidden them, how poor and weak is that evasion for
our Bishops, who would have this speech of our Savior taken in a forced sense
different from all these other places? and would forge a new meaning, as if our
Savior did not here forbid (...) but only (...), not a Commanding Lordlines,
but a Tyrannuos use of it; when as it is hereby evident, that Christ having
ordained the Aristocracy of twelve, did therein and in his reprehension here
take away those several benches of honor, and that proud imparity of
Temporal power which our Bishops do swell withal.

That the former speeches of our Savior, does destroy the Lordlinesse of our
Prelates, let us confirm it with a farther consideration, which is thus. Our
Savior Christ being (1 Cor. 1. 24.) the wisdom of God, must be thought to
fit and suite his answer to the question and request made unto him by the two
Apostles. But what Bishop in defense of his usurped power, dares affirm that
two such admirable ( Gal. 2. 9.) Pillars, as James, and John, should ask of
such a Master iniquam dominationem, a cruel dominion over their fellows, as
if the meaning of their request were thus. Master, gives us two leave to
tyrannize over the other ten! He had taught them before, ( Mat. 5. 5.) Blessed
are the meek and ( Math. 11. 29.) Learn of me for I am meek and lowly in
heart: Can it then be thought that the beloved Disciple and his brother, shall
ask of the master of all Humility, a Tyrannical power to oppress their
partners? No man has such a heart of lead to think, yet there have not wanted
foreheads of brass to affirm so: Certainly, in that Kingdom of Christ, by
them as then supposed to be Temporal, they desired the honor to shine in
civil dignity, and eminency of power and authority, which (no question) they
intended to have exercised with all brotherly moderation, yet are they (and I
wish our Bishops also were) answered with his reprehension, first ( Math. 20.
22.) ye know not what ye ask, next with his absolute denial and forbiddance,
(...) etc. it shall not be so among you.

Will the practice of Saint Paul, and the Council of Saint Peter serve for
comment to this text? Saint Paul says (...), (2 Cor. 1. 2. 4.) We Lord it not.
Saint Peter (1 Pet. 5.) Himself an Elder to other Elders, exhorts them to
feed the flock, (...) overseeing it: and that not by constraint (...), nor as
being Lords. But as in the fifth verse, All of you be subject one to another.

Therefore my resolution stands clear upon this vote; That it may be declared
that true and right Episcopacy is incompatible and inconsistant with secular
power. They who give in their names to be laborers in Gods vineyard must not
go out of the door, and think to return at pleasure: their whole time they
have vowed to the great Master of the Vineyard, and I find no wages promised
but to them who enter and continue there to the last hour. No man putting his
hand to the plough and looking back, is fit for the kingdom of God. Luke 9.
62.

Let therefore this inhibitory statute against Bishops having temporal
Lordships, stand (as it must stand) irrepealable (...). It shall not be so
among you.

FINIS.

