THREE SPEECHES OF SIR EDWARD DEARINGS, Knight and Baronet in the Commons House
of Parliament.

The first concerning the freedom of Mr. Wilson, a Minister in Kent. The
second at a grand Committee of the whole house for Religion. The third at a
delivery of a Petition out of Kent, concerning the present government of the
Church.
LONDON, Printed for John Stafford, in Chancerylane over against the Roules.
1641.

A SPEECH MADE BY SIR EDWARD DEARING KNIGHT AND Baronet, in the Commons house
of Parliament concerning the freedom of Master Wilson, upon the tenth day of
Novemer, 1640.
Mr. SPEAKER,
YEsterday the affairs of this House did borrow all the time allotted to the
great Committee for Religion. I am sorry that having but half a day in a whole
week, we have lost that.

Mr. Speaker, It has pleased God to put into the heart of his Majesty (for
the Kings heart is in the hand of the Lord) once more to assemble us into a
Senate, to consult upon the unhappy distractions, the sad dangers, and the much
feared ruins of this last flourishing Church and Kingdom. God be praised both
for his goodness, and for his severity wherewith he has impelled this
meeting; and humble thanks unto his Majesty whose parentall care of us his
Subjects, is willing to relieve us.

The sufferances that we have undergone are reducible to two heads. The first
concerning the Church: the second belonging to the Commonwealth. The first of
these must have the first fruits of this Parliament, as being the first in
write and worth, and more immediate to the honor of God and his Glory, every
dram whereof is worth the whole weight of a Kingdom.

The Commonwealth (it is true) is full of apparent dangers. The sword is come
home unto us, and the two twinne-Nations united together under one royal head,
breathren together in the bowels and the bosom of the same Island, and which
is above all imbanded together with the same Religion (I say the same Religion)
by a devilish machination, like to be fatally imbread in each others blood,
ready to dig each others grave Quantillum abfuit?

For other grievances also, the poor disheartened subject, sadly groans, not
able to distinguish betwixt Power and Law. And with a weeping heart (no
question) has prayed for this hour, in hope to be relieved, and to know
hereafter, whether any thing he has, besides his poor part and portion of
the Common air he breathes, may be truly called his own.

These (Mr. Speaker) and many other do deserve and must shortly have our deep
regard but Suo gradu, not in the first place: There is a unum necessarium above
all our worldly sufferances and dangers. Religion the immediate service due
unto the honor of Almighty God. And herein let us all be confident, that all
our consultations will prove unprosperous, if we put any determination before
that of Religion.

For my part, Let the sword reach from the North to the South, and a general
perdition of all our remaining right and safety, threaten us in open view, it
shall be so far from making me to decline the first settling of Religion,
that I shall ever argue, and rather conclude it thus. The more great, the more
iminent our perils of this world are, the stronger and quicker ought our care
to be, for the Glory of God and the pure Law of our souls.

If then (Mr. Speaker) it may pass with full allowance, that all our cares may
give way unto the treaty of Religion, I will reduce that also to be considered
under two heads: first of Ecclesiasticke persons, then of Ecclesiasticke
causes. Let no man start or be affrighted at the im at the immagined length of
this consultation, it will not, it cannot take up so much time as it is worth.
-- This it is God and the King, this is God and the Kingdom, nay, this is God
and the two Kingdoms cause.

And therefore (Mr. Speaker) my humble motion is, that we may all of us
seriously, speedily, and heartily enter upon this, the best, the greatest, the
most important cause we can treat of.

Now (Mr. Speaker) in pursuit of my own motion, and to make a little entrance
into this great affayre, I will present unto you the petition of a poor
oppessed Minister in the County of Kent: A man Orthodox in his Doctrine,
conformable in his life, laborious in the Ministry as any we have, or I do
know.

He is now a sufferer (as all good men are) under the general obliquity of a
Puritan, as with other things was excellently delivered by that silver trumpet
at the Bar. The Pursivant watches his door, and divides him and his cure
asunder, to both their greifes: For it is not with him as (perhaps) with some
that set the Pursivant at work, gladded of an excuse to be out of their
Pulpit, It is his delight to Preach.

About a week since I went over to Lambeth, to move that great Bishop (too
great indeed) to take this danger off from this Minister, and to recall the
Pursivant. And withal I did undertake for Master Wilson (for so your
Petitioner is called) that he should answer in any his accusers, of the Kings
Courts at Westminster.

The Bishop made me answer (as near as I can remember) in haec verba, I am
sure that he will not be absent from his cure a twelvemoneth together, and
then (I doubt not) but once in a year we shall have him.

This was all I could obtain, but I hope, (by the help of this house) before
this year of threats run round, His Grace will either have more Grace, or
no Grace at all. For our manifold griefs do fill a mighty and a vast
Circumferance, yet so that from every part our lives of sorrow, do lead unto
him, and point at him the Center, from, whence our miseries in this Church, and
many of them in the Common wealth do grow.

Let the Petition be read, and let us enter upon the work.
A SPEECH AT A Grand Committee of the whole house for Religion.
YOu have many private Petitions, give me leave (by word of mouth) to
interpose one more general, which thus you may receive. Gods true Religion is
violently invaded by two seeming enemies: But indeed they are (like Herod and
Pilate) fast friends for the destruction of Truth. I mean the Papists for one
party, and our Prelating faction for the other. Between these two in their
several progress, I observe the concurrence of some few Parallells, fit (as I
conceive) to be represented to this Honorable House.

First with the Papists, there is a severe Inquisition: and with us (as it is
used) there is a bitter high Commission; both these ( contra fas and jus) are
judges in their own cause: yet herein their Inquisitors are better then our
High Commissioners -- They (for ought I ever heard) do not ( saevire in suos)
punish for delinquents and offenders, such as profess and practice, according
to the Religion established by the Laws of the Land where they live.

But with us how many poor distressed Ministers? nay how many scores of them,
in a few years past, have been suspended, degraded, deprived, excommunicated,
not guilty of the breach of any our established Laws. The petitions of many
are here with us, more are coming: All their prayers are in haven for
redress.

Secondly, with the Papist, there is a Mysterious artifice I mean their Index
expurgatorius whereby they clippe the tongues of such witnesses, whose evidence
they do not like. -- To this I parallel our late Imprimatur's: Licenses for
the press: so handled that the Truth is suppressed, and Popish pamphlets fly
abroad cum privilegio: witness audatious and Libelling Pamphlets against True
Religion; written by Pocklington, Heyling, Dow, Cosins, Shelford, Swan, Reeves,
Yates, Hausted, Studley, Sparow, Brown, Robertes, Ironside, -- Many more: I
name no Bishops, but I add, etc.

Nay they are already grown so bold in this new trade, that the most learned
labors of our ancient and best Divines, must be now corrected and defaced with
a Deleatur by a supercilious pen of my Lords young Chapline; (fit perhaps) for
the techincall arts, but unfit to hold the Chair for Divinity.

But herein the Roman Index is better then are our English Licenses: They
thereby do preserve the current of their own established doctrines: a point
of wisdom. But with us our Innovators by this artifice do altar our settled
Doctrines; Nay they do subinduce points repugnant and contrariant. And this I
dare assume upon my self to prove.

One Parallel more I have, and that is this. Among the Papists, there is one
acknowledged supreme Pope, supreme in honor, in order, and in power: from
whose judgment there is no appeal. -- I confess ( M. Speaker) I cannot
altogether match a Pope with a Pope: (yet one of the ancient titles of our
English Primate was Alterius orbis Papa.) But thus far I can go, Ex ore suo.
It is in Print. -- He pleades fair for a Patriarchtae: And for such an one,
whose judgment, he (beforehand) professes ought to be final: and then (I
am sure) it ought to be un-erring.

Put these together and you shall find that the final determination of a
Patriarch will want very little of a Pope -- and then we may say -- mutato
nomine de te Fabula narratur --

He pleades Popeship under the name of a Patriarch. And I much fear least the
end and top of his Patriarchall plea may be as that of Cardinal Pole (his
predecessor) who would have two heads, one Caput Regale, another Caput
Sacerdotale: a proud parallel, to set up the Miter as high as the Crown.

But herein I shall be free and clear, if one there must be (be it a Pope,
be it a Patriach;) this I resolve upon for my own choice ( Procul a Jove
procul a fulmine.) I had rather serve one as far off as Tyber, then to have
him come so near me as the Thames. A Pope at Rome will do me less hurt then
a Patriarch may do at Lambeth.

I have done, and for this third Parallel I submitt it to the wisdom and
consideration of this grand Committee for Religion, in the mean time I do
ground my motion, upon the former two, and it is this in brief.

That you would please to select a subcommittee of a few, and to empower them
for the discovery of the numbers of oppressed Ministers under the Bishops
tyranny for these ten years last past. We have the complaint of some, but more
are silent: some are patient and will not complain, others are fearful and
dare not, many are beyond Sea and cannot complain.

And in the second place, that the subcommittee may examine the Printers what
books by bad Licenses have been corruptly issued forth: and what good books
have been (like good Minsters) silenced, Clipped or cropped.

The work I conceive will not be difficult, but will quickly return into
your hand full of weight.

And this is my Motion.
A SPEECH AT THE DELIVERY of a Petition out of Kent, concerning the present
Government of the Church.
Mr. SPEAKER.
YEsterday we did regulate the most important business before us: and gave
them motion, so that our great and weighty affairs, are now on their feet in
their progress, journing on toward their several periods, where some I hope
will shortly find their latest home.

Yet among all these I observe one, a very maine one, to sleep sine die: give
me leave to awaken it; It is a business of an immense weight, and worth; such
as deserves our best care, and most severe circumspection. I mean the Grand
Petition long since given in by many thousand Citizens against the dominering
Clergy.

Wherein (for my part) although I cannot approve of all that is presented unto
you, yet I do clearly profess, that a great part of it, nay the greatest
part thereof, is so well grounded, that my heart goes cheerful along
therewith.

It seems that my Country (for which I have the honor to serve) is of the
same mind, and least that you should think that all faults are included
within the walls of Troy, they will show you Iliacos intra muros peccatur and
extra.

The same greivances which the City groans under, are provincial unto us,
and I much fear they are national among us all.

The Pride, the Avarice, the Ambition and oppression, by our ruling Clergy is
Epidemicall, it has infected them all. There is not any, or scarce any of
them, who is not practical in their own great cause in hand, which they
impiously do mis-call, the Piety of the times, but in truth, so wrong a Piety
that I am bold to say, In facinus jurasse putes. --

Here in this Petition is the disease represented, here is the cure entreated.

The number of your Petitioners is considerable, being above five and twenty
hundred names, and would have been four times as many, if that were thought
material.

The matter in the Petition is of high import: But your Petitioners themselves
are all of them quiet and silent at their own houses, humbly expecting and
praying the resolution of this great Senate, upon these their earnest and
thrice hearty desires.

Here is no noise, no numbers at your door: they will be neither your trouble
nor your jealousy; for I do not know of any one of them this day in the
Town: So much they do affie in the justice of their Petition, and in the
goodness of this House.

If now you want any of them here, to make avowance of their Petition, I am
their servant. I do appear for them and for my self, and am ready to avow
this Petition, in their names, and in my own.

Nothing doubting, but fully confident, that I may justly say of the present
usage of the Hierarchy in the Church of England, as once the Pope (Pope Adrian
as I remember) said of the Clergy in his time: A vertice capitis and plantam
pedis, nihil est sanum in toto ordine ecclesiastico.

I beseech you read the Petition, regard us, and relieve us.
FINIS.

