LA FOY fondee sur les Saints Escritures.

FAITH Grounded upon the Holy Scriptures; Against the NEW METHODISTS. by JOHN
DAILLE. Printed in French at Paris anno 1634.

And now Englished by M. M.

Faith comes by hearing, and hearing, by the Word of God, Romans 10.18. LONDON,
Printed for Benj. Took at the sign of the Ship in S. Paul's Churchyard, 1675.

AN ADVERTISEMENT TO THE READER.
ALthough the French translation, of the Holy Bible, made by the Doctors of
Louvain, can, by no means, be comparable to the neatness, clearness and
faithfulness of that which is read among us, yet, (to fit, my self to the gust
of our Adversaries,) I have drawn from their Translations (and not from ours)
the most part of the places of Scripture, which I make use of in this little
book, namely in the second and third parts; to the end, they might not wrangle
with us about words, as many of them do, and perticularly these new Methodists
against whom I have composed this Treatise.

Only let me inform you, that in three or four passages which are nothing to
our controversy, I have taken the liberty to correct that in the Greek and
Latin texts which these Gentlemen had too evidently turned false, by in
advertency (as I am willing to believe) and ignorance, and not by malice. As
for example in the second part Chap. 4.3. page 124. I produce the first verse
of the Gospel of S. John, in these words, the word was God, and not as these
Doctors have expounded it, God was the word, whereof the two construction which
these words are capable of, Deus erat verbum, they choose to follow that which
is less to purpose, and which, besides the consusion which it brings to the
contexture of the Apostles thoughts, does manifestly overturn the words of the
Greek text, (...), where the particle (...) shows that the word (...) cannot of
necessity, be the predicate, but the subject of the prop^sition, as those, who
have any knowledge in the Laws and use of the Greek tongue, know well enough.
So in the Epistle to Titus, see how they translate the words of S. Tit. 2.13.
Paul, expectantes beatam spem, and adventum gloriae magni Dei and Servatoris
nostri Jesu Christi, expecting (say they) the blessed hope, and the coming of
the glory of the great God and our Savior Jesus Christ, separating this God,
whose advent we expect, from our Savior Jesus Christ, as if the Apostle should
say, we expect the coming of God, and we expect also the coming of our Savior
Jesus Christ, an interpretation, neither pertinent nor advantageous to the
Church; for first, the Greek text cannot bear it which binds and ties up all
these words, great, and our Savior, in the same bundle by means of the
particle (...), which the Apostle put into their heads (...), obliging us
necessarily to take them, not as names of two persons, one of which is called
God, and the other Jesus Christ, but as two different qualities, attributed to
one only and the same Jesus Christ, which is altogether the same with the
great God, and the Savior, whose advent we expect; but this same
interpretation is also prejudicial, for it takes away from the Catholics a
clear and invincible proof of the divinity of Jesus Christ, for if you follow
it, suppose that Jesus Christ be our Savior (which the Samotosateniens and
Arrians confess,) yet still he is not our God, and this is that which they
struggle for principally. No body then can blame me for leaving the Louvain
version in this place to follow the Greek Text in translating this passage Part
2. Chap. 4.3. page 124. where I produce against the heretics, expecting the
blessed hope and the coming of the glory of our great God and Savior Jesus
Christ. That which I have changed (part 2. Chap. 8. 1. page 106.) in the second
chapter of the first of S. Peter, is less important, Love the brotherhood,
instead of which our adversaries Bible says, Love brotherhood, leaving out the
particle (...) which is in the Greek.

So in the first of S. Luke I read, and therefore that which is born of thee
holy, shall be called the Son of God (Part 2. Chap 4. Sect. 7. page 92.)
therefore the holy one that shall be born of thee, as they of Louvain have
translated it, contrary to the Faith of the Greeks who say, (...), and not
(...), and of the Latin, which says likewise, quod nascetur ex te Sanctum,
and not, qui nascetur ex te Sanctus. As for the small change of words in the 2
Cor. chap. 5. verse 8. where we say, we have a good will rather to be out of
the body, and to be with the Lord, instead of that which is in the Louvain
bible, I have a good will better to be out of the body, we have done this only
to sweeten the manner of speaking, avoir bonne volonte meiux estre is rough and
unknown in our language, and the Greek and Latin texts do no way oblige us to
interpret it so.

These are (if my memory does not cheat me) all the passages in which I have
varied from the Louvain version in diverse other places I bear with its faults,
because they do no great prejudice to the justice and truth of my cause,
although there are some of them which testify (in these Doctors) a passion
unworthy of the quality which they take of interpreting the Word of God, as
among others, when in, Pet. 1.5, 3. (alleged part 2. chapter 8. 5. page 109. they
read having dominion of the Clergy of the People of God, instead of the
plainness of the Greek and Latin, having dominion (...) in Cleris over the
heritage, being licensed to add the words, and people of God, and to hide, by
this means, the sense which the Apostle gives in the word Clergy, employed to
signify the Christian people, which is contrary to the use and pretense of
those of Rome.

FAITH Grounded upon the Holy Scriptures.
Part I.
CHAP. I. The Preface of the whole Work.
SOme years since certain Doctors started up, who, to render our Religion
odious, published, that it could not be proved by the Scriptures; which
nevertheless, according to us, is the only thing capable to ground our Faith
upon. Their invention was found so plausible, that many of our adversaries have
reduced all their dialectiques to it; thinking that to defeat us, there needs
no more, but to demand some express and formal passages upon every Article of
our Confession of Faith, and whosoever can press that demand home he is the man
that must overcome us. This easy way of arguing has increased Disputants
among them: and instead (as at first) of shunning conferences concerning
Religion, and not permitting any but Priests to discourse it, now all sorts of
people hunt after it even to the Sempstress and Scullion, and so by this fine
method, become teachers in an instant. But now to shut their mouths and to arm
ours against their little punctillios, I have undertaken briefly to prove our
Faith by the Scriptures; And that I may proceed as I ought, before I enter upon
the matter, it is necessary for me to clear two points, The one is, what those
things are which we are obliged to prove, and the other is, by what means we
are obliged to prove them.

CHAP. II. That we are obliged to prove by the Scriptures the things only which
we believe, and not those which we reject.
AS to the first point it is evident that our Faith is that which we have to
prove, that is to say, the things which we believe true in Religion, and by the
belief of which we hope to obtain Salvation. As for other things which we do
not believe, and which are not included in our Faith, we are not obliged to say
any thing of them. If any one believes them it belongs to him toprove them, and
to show the truth of them by convenient reasons: it suffices us who do not
believe them to hear and then answer by good and pertinent arguments. For in
all disciplines, it belongs to him that imposes an opinion, and will oblige
others to believe it, to make the truth of that opinon appear, it being evident
(without that) no one is tied to believe since reason does not oblige us to
believe any but what is true. From whence does already appear the extreme
injustice of those new Disputants, who demand of us not only a proof of that
which we believe, but also a formal rejection of that which we do not believe;
and when it is their part to show the truth of that which they believe, they
desire us to produce some passages, importing the falsehood of what they
believe; for example, they are not contented that we prove by Scripture, that
the Son of God is our Mediator, which is precisely that which we believe, but
they press us still to produce some passage in Scripture, which rejects and
condemns this proposition, that the Saints are our Mediators, which is that
which they do, and that which we do not believe. They would have us not only to
furnish our selves with passages which establish the Sacrifice of the Cross of
Jesus Christ, which we believe, but with others too which formally rejects the
pretended propitiatory sacrifice of the Mass, which they believe and we do not.
Likewise they pretend, that besides the passages which say, that Jesus is the
head of the Church which is one of the Articles of our Faith, we ought to put
in another, which says that the Pope of Rome is not the head of the visible
Church, which is (as every one knows) one of the Articles of their Faith and
none of ours, and because that is not produced, they assert we are not able to
prove our Faith by the Scriptures, and therefore we are Obliged to embrace
theirs. Can any one imagine a more irregular piece of injustice. The law orders
that he that puts an action should be obliged to prove it. It is enough for one
that is accused to show the nullity of the proofs of the adverse party. No
right, no law, no custom, let it be never so injust, has ever obliged the
accused to prove by affirmative witnesses, that he has not done that, which
they charge him with; he is quitted so soon as it appears that the reasons and
allegations of the accuser are nulled; and from hence comes the proverb of the
Lawyers, evidently Grounded upon natural justice, that it belongs to him who
lays the action, to prove it; for there is a respect to be had to the right
of the action as well as to the action it self. So as it belongs to him who
supposes a fault to prove it; so also it belongs to him who supposes a right
to make proof of it; as for example, if I suppose that according to the right
of the Romans, a house should return to the vender after having been fifty
years in the possession of the buyer, it belongs to me to produce some Roman
law expressly containing this deposition, and if I cannot produce this clearly
and expressly, my pretensions will evidently come to nothing, and no man will be
obliged to believe it. But if instead of doing this I should press the
contradictors to produce me a passage of the right of the Romans expressly
importing that the Sellor should not be put into the possession of the estate
alienated by him, and in case of his not producing such a passage of right, I
should protest against him. Who has patience sufficient to bare such an
impertinent procedure? But nevertheless it is this exactly which the Disputers
of this age hold. They pretend that it is a deposition of divine right that the
Faithful worship their Host, that he partakes of the Sacrifice of their Altar,
that he acknowledges the Pope of Rome to be head of the Church. And instead of
producing some passages of divine right, which say that their Host ought to be
adored, that the Mass ought to be our sacrifice, and the Pope our head, they
press us to prove that this is not so, and if we do not produce such proofs,
they protest that our Faith is not to be proved, nor theirs to be refuted by
Scripture. What man is there so blind who sees not that it belongs to them
alone to prove, what they believe, what they preach, and that which they would
persuade me to, and to me only to hear their proofs and resolve, and in case
they cannot produce pertinent arguments, to conclude that their pretensions are
vain.

CHAP. III. That the Articles of the Confession of our Faith are some
affirmative and some negative: of their difference, and how they are proved by
the Scriptures.
THE color with which they paint so wicked a procedure, is, that our Churches
in their Confession of Faith, does not only propose that which we believe, but
jointly rejects, that which we approve not in the Romans belief. These men take
from thence an occasion to make the whole pass for Articles of our Faith, and
demand of us proofs from Scripture for both these points; which is an
artificial disguise, it being evident, that although these things be exposed in
the same treatise, nevertheless we do not hold them to be of the same rank and
nature. For as for those which we believe as revealed from God, we esteem the
knowledge of them necessary, it being not possible that a man should be saved
without believing, as for example, that there is a God, that Jesus Christ has
suffered for us, that we are obliged to live holily and righteously, and other
things of the like nature. But as for those which we reject, whither added or
maintained by the Pope, it is only necessary not to believe them; for we are so
far from thinking it necessary for us to have the knowledge of them, that we
(as well as our Doctors) reject them formally and precisely, and wish that they
had never been spoken off, and that they may be Aeternally buried in the cave
of errors from whence they came. For as Eating good meat is sufficient to
preserve the life of man; nor is it necessary for him to know Hemlock, Aconite,
or Antimony, or to know poisons, it is enough that he is not so unhappy as to
eat of them; even so it is in Religion; for to obtain salvation, it is sufficient
for a man that he believe the holy and wholesome truths communicated to us by
the Lord Jesus: there is no need that he should know particularly the
innumerable poisons which the enemy has scattered in the World, nor that he
should know exactly to what degree every one of these false doctrines are
poisonous; it is enough for him that he is so happy as to believe none of them.
To speak properly the express and formal rejection of an error makes no part
of Faith, for then Faith would have been imperfect before the birth of the
error. Before Mahomet came into the World the Faith of Christians was entire
and sufficient, although it was ignorant of the seducements of that Impostor,
and though it knows nothing of Marcion, of Manicheus, of Arrius, nor of
Pelagius, yet it is sufficient to salvation, provided that it believes firmly,
that which Jesus Christ has revealed.

There is then a great difference between those propositions which supposes
and affirms the truth, and those which reject the error; The reason why our
Fathers have ranked them in the body of the same declaration was not because
they were ignorant of this difference, but another occasion obliged them to do
it; for being separated from the Church, of Rome, and afterward having been
calumniated of holding diverse very strange opinions, vide Epist. 10. the K.
which is in the beginning of our Confession of the year 1559.
in fine to make the King their master and his subjects, their fellow Citizens,
see clearly what their thoughts were about Religion, they not only declared
the belief they had of Christianity, and of every one of the articles of which
it consisted; but also what they thought of the doctrine and communion of the
Pope, from which they had withdrawn themselves.

We ought then to distinguish carefully these two sorts of articles which this
reason joins and mixeth together, some affirmative and positive, declaring that
which we believe; others negative and exclusive declaring that which we do not
believe: the first lays down that which is our Faith: the second rejects that
which is not so: For example, these are of the first sort, that there is a God.
that he ought to be worshipped with all our affections; that Jesus Christ is
the Son of God, and God Eternal, that he was made man, that he has taken our
nature in the womb of the holy Virgin, that he dyed to expiate our crimes, that
his blood has washed and purged our souls from all sin that he is risen and
ascended into heaven, and there reigns at the right hand of the Father: that
sins are pardoned to men, by the grace of God, when they believe in the Gospel,
that believers are obliged to live holily; that Charity is necessary for
salvation; that the Lord has ordained that we should be baptized in the name
of the Father Son and holy Ghost, for the remission of our sins; and that he
has likewise commanded us to celebrate the memory of his death in taking,
eating, and drinking the Sanctified bread and wine, that this bread and this
wine are the communication of his flesh and of his blood; that those who
believe and live according to the Gospel of Jesus Christ shall have Aeternal
salvation, and that those who believe not in him shall perish: But these
following are of the second sort, That we ought not to adore the Host of the
Church of Rome, nor invoke their dead Saints, that the mass is not an expiatory
sacrifice for the sins of men, that the Pope is not the head and spouse of the
universal Church, that he has no power neither directly or indirectly over the
temporals of Kings and States of the world; that neither he nor the Church
which adheres to him, have the right of never erring in the Faith, nor are they
the reason and grounds of our Faith, that it is not for the merits of our works
that our sins are forgiven us, or that grace or life is given to us, that the
bread which we break, and the cup which we bless in the Church loses not their
substance, that none of those who communicate at his table ought to be hindered
from drinking of the Cup of the Lord: that neither the chrism, nor the
penitence, nor the ordainor, the marriages, nor the extreme unction are
Sacraments; that believing souls departed this life are not burned in the fire
of Purgatory.

Since we believe the first Articles and that we preach and recommend them to
men we are obliged to show the truth of them, and since the most part of them
are so obscure that we have not natural light enough to discover and perceive
them, it remains that we prove that God has revealed them to humane kind. For
these are the three sources of all our knowledge, sense, reason, and the
revelation of God, now it is neither the sins nor reason of man, that
demonstrates to us that Jesus Christ is the son of God, or that those who
believe his Gospel shall have the happy Aeternity; We cannot prove the truth of
it then but only by the means of revelation. Now all Christians and namely
those of the Church of Rome (with whom we dispute in this Treatise) confess
that the writers of the Old and new Testaments were inspired by God, and did
write by the revelations of the Spirit, now we cannot more clearly ground the
Truth of the Articles upon which our Faith consists then by showing that they
are taught in these divine writings; It Is for this we acknowledge our selves
obliged, and of which it is most easy to acquit our selves, as we hope, to make
appear in this book. And as for the other Articles which are of the second
sort, it belongs to us to justify and make appear that the holy Scripture
teaches no where to believe what it self rejects, as it teaches no where that
there is a Purgatory, or that the Pope is the Monarch of the Church, or that
the Mass is a propitiatory sacrifice. For having once showed that we shall have
clearly justified that we have been obliged to exclude such opinions of our
Faith, since we hold, that all the things which we ought to believe, as
necessary to our salvation, are taught in the Scriptures; for that if these be
not found there, Rome is in the wrong to believe and preach it as necessary,
and have reason not to receive it in our belief. It Is an unjust cavilling to
demand this of us further, that we should furnish them with texts, in which the
second sort of Articles are contained, where, for example, it is said expressly
that there is no fire of Purgatory, and that the Pope of Rome is not the head,
nor spouse of the universal Church, and to say for want of this the holy
Scriptures, as we have it, is not perfect, is an impertinence fit only to
dazzle the eyes of children; for the Perfection of the Scriptures (according to
our supposition) consists in that it teaches all things that ought to be done
and believed, for salvation: as the perfection of a book consists in containing
all the Truths necessary to the science of which it treats. Will you say that
the books which Aristotle has left us of Philosophy are imperfect, because
they do not expressly reject that which the Masters of the sciences have since
his time opened? or that the treatises of the ancient writers upon eloquence
are imperfect, because they did not expressly contradict these new lights which
the fantasy of our moderns boast of having discovered? Error is an infinite
thing for which the sciences cannot, nor ought not to have a good esteem. It Is
enough for their perfection to have showed all the truth of the things of which
they treat: otherwise there would never be any thing perfect in this matter.
For upon this account the Mussilman will reproach our Scripiure because it has
not expressly anathematized his Mahomet, Mareion and the Manicheans, the David
Georgists and all the other impostors will impute to it as an imperfection, not
to have made an inventory of all their follies. What need was there that it
should black its paper with their names and dotages so many ages before their
birth? It Is sufficient to keep me from it that she has said nothing of them.
The surest and shortest means to keep the right way amongst so many confuted
ones, is to despise all that which the Scripture does not recommend, and not to
disdain to examine what she does not disdain to teach us. It speaks to me of
God and of his Christ, what he has done for me and what he requires of me. It
instructs and fills my soul with that wisdom which is necessary to Salvation.
It is enough for me to be saved, I am contented with knowing so much. As for
what the Pope dogmatizes besides this, let him show it me in the Scripture and
I will believe it as I do the rest; but if it be not to be found there, who can
imagine but I must be ignorant of it. and cannot believe it without danger,
faith coming by hearing and hearing by the word of God, Romans 10.17.
of which the Scripture is the first, the most clear, most certain, and (in my
judgment) the only infallible Doctrine?

CHAP. IV, An answer to what our adversaries allege that they are in
possession of them.
BUt these new disputants make another stop here to oblige us to their
pretended method, saying that they have had them in possession many ages since;
thinking that sufficient for them without being obliged to produce any other
titles or Doctrins of their Religion; that it belongs to us, who contest with
them, to make their wrongs appear, by clear, and inviolable proofs. It is a
word which they always have in their mouths and which they believe cannot be
answered. But in truth we can say nothing more vain nor less pertinent, for if
this possession (as they call it) might be alleged in the case, the Apostles
of Christ would have wronged the Heathens about their Religion seeing they
possessed it far long before; the Jesuits would do wrong to the Chinese, if
they should endeavor to drive from their hearts the idolatry and worshipping of
Pagods which they have possessed time out of mind, truth and virtue should
leave in mankind the error and vice which they found established there, for
fear of violating unjustly the right of their long possession. The old man will
have little to maintain himself against the new, and philosophy ought not to
yield to the Gospel; upon this account we also ought to return under their yoke
as that of our first and most ancient Masters. But God forbid that a little
word ill understood should ever make so enormous a prejudice to the right of
God of his Christ and of his truth: we confess clearly that where there is a
question made about lands or houses or any one thing which is, and which is
seen in nature, the possession may be alleged, and that it belongs to him who
turns out the possessor to show that he held it unjustly, and to make it appear
by good titles that the things belongs to him, in our contest with the Doctors
of Rome there is nothing like this, they press us to believe with them the
Purgatory the Mass and other articles. We desire them to show us the truth of
them of which we can yet see but little. Instead of satisfying so just a
request they allege that they have them in possession and so consequently are
not obliged to prove any of them; certainly if they think to make the world
believe things mearly upon their saying them, without demonstrating the truth
of them, they propound to us a position evidently unjust and tyrannical, For a
man cannot believe before he knows the thing to be veritable, and he cannot
without denying his nature yield an entire faith to that which is to him either
sall or doubtful. Those who will persuade him to any thing are necessarily
obliged, by the right of nature, to demonstrate to him that it is true either
by sense or reason, and if the thing be above sense and reason, let it be done
by divine revelations, it remains then that these gentlemen renounce this
possession which they allege to us, since it is so contrary to the rights of our
nature, and that they make it their endeavor to demonstrate to us that which
they desire to persuade us to. They are in possession to demand belief of
things doubtful and uncertain: and as for me I am in possession to believe
nothing but those things the truth is of which they make appear to me. My
possession is evidently more antlent then theirs; It Is but reason then that
they yield to my right, and not that I submit to their usurpation. Moreover in
civil causes where this maxim has place the possessor is sued and pressed to
forsake that which he holds: Here quite contrary, there are pretended
possessors which contend with us and press us to enter into possession with
them, for they would havee us believe what they believe, and it is this belief
which they call their possession; who sees not not then that Fundamentally it is
they properly who have begun this action with us, and who ought, by onsequence,
to show us by good and lawful Doctrine that we have right to enter into this
possession to which they call us; we are ready to yield to them if they can
make us see that that which they would have us possess is real. For to believe
a thing which is not, a possession, but a dream and an error, it is the heritage
of the wicked to whom the wise man gives nothing for his possession but the
wind. Truth is ample and specious and can receive possession. Error on the
contrary is a nothing which cannot properly be said to be possessed by any.
Until then they do show us the truth of the things which they believe, it is in
vain for them to boast of their possessing them. That which is not, is not
possessed. The field of which one alleges the possession in the Court, is a
thing which appears, and of whose existence no body can doubt. Here the
purgatory, the Sacrifice of the mass, the all powerfulness and infallibility of
the Pope the transubstantiation of the eucharist, and in short all their
pretended possessions are things which our sense perceives not and which our
reason cannot find out. That very thing then of which they pretend a
possession, obliges them to show the truth of it by the Scriptures, since it
does not appear in nature. For to alledg the possession of a thing which one
cannot make out to any one, is evidently to mock the world, it is to pay it with
illusions and chimaeras. So it is clear notwithstanding this allegation, that
our adversaries are obliged to ground the Articles which they lay down, upon
good and clear doctrins of Scripture: and for us who will not receive them, it is
sufficient for the justification of our refusal, that no part of them can be
found in that authentic instrument of the revelation of God, which both
parties acknowledge; to conclude then it remains that to prove our faith by the
Scriptures, we are only obliged to show that the things we lay down and firmly
believe in religion, are taught in the scriptures, and that those which we do
not believe are not taught there.

CHAP. V. That the new method was unknown to the Lord, his Apostles and the
holy fathers, and that it is contrary to the procedure which the Lord and his
Apostles took in disputing with their adversaries.
BUt it behooves us now to consider, in the second place, what proofs we ought
to furnish our selves with, to ground our belief upon the Scriptures. For these
Methodists dedemand of us formal passages (these are their terms) where that
which we would prove, be expressed in so many words. If you produce any thing
of it, where the same thing is signified but in other words, and from whence
with the light of discourse it is very easy to conclude it, they cry that these
are dreams and Chimaeras, and in short they will not acknowledge any thing for
the Doctrines of Scripture but what they read precisely there; for example they
do not think that the belief of the holy Trinity is a doctrine of the
Scripture, because they do not meet with the very word there, though the thing
which signifies it, be evidently set down there, This is all the cunning of
this brave Method, with which they boast to gagg the Ministers and subdue all
the enemies of the Church; but if this pretended means of overcoming the
heretics, be as lawful and as powerful (as they seem to believe it) how comes
it that neither Jesus Christ, nor his Apostles, nor the ancient Doctors of the
Church have ever taught it their disciples, or employed themselves against
those of their adversaries who disputed by Scripture. Matt. 4.6.
When the Tempter alleged to our Lord that verse of the Psalms, he shall give
his Angels charge over thee, to persuade him to cast himself down from a high
pinnacle, how comes it to pass that he answered him not according to this
abridged method, that the passage was not formal, Matt. 12.2, 3, 4, 5, 6.
and when the Pharisees employed the ordinance of the Sabbath against his
disciples plucking the ears of corn, why he give himself the trouble to
justify their Action by the example of David and the priests? why did he not
tell them in one word, that the passage was not formal? how happens it that his
Apostles in so many books which they have left us; have not not given us at
least some notice of so wonderful a secret? Why did not the holy fathers make
use of this to resolve those infinite reasons that the heretics pretended
they had drawn from the Scriptures? Sabellius alleged. I and the father are
one. Arius, the Father is greater then I: Eutychis the word has been made
flesh, the first to prove that the person of the son is the same with that of
the father: the second to show that the substance is different: the third to
establish the mixture of these natures. The ancients were so shallow as to
write great books to explain these passages, and to resolve the sophisms of
these heretics. Where was their judgment if they could (as they pretend) make
void all the difficulty in one word only, by saying, that the passages are not
formal, and that the consequences are nothing but Fantasies. Read the Books of
Irenaeus against the Gnostiques, of Justin against the Jews, of Tertullian
against Marcion, Apelles, Hermogenes, and others, of Athanasius, Hilarious,
Basil, Gregory, Chrysostom and an infinite number of others against the
Arians, of Cyril against Nestorius, of Theodoret, and Gelaze against Eutychus,
of Hierome, Augustine, Prosper against Pelagius, and in short all the writings
which the Christians have composed against the Heretics, sixteen hundred
years since; you will find that none of them have ever answered, to any of the
arguments propounded by their adversaries, that which the methodists now a days
answer to ours, that the conclusion is not in formal terms in Scripture. Who
will believe that the Church has been ignorant, for the space of so many ages,
for so excellent a means of gagging its enemies, and that these honest men
(whom one may call, without offense not the most accomplished and learned of
our age) should alone be advised of that in our days which the lights of the
world have not yet been able to discover: and that poor truth should have
sighthed so long in the bonds of consequences expecting its liberty only from
the sword of these new Alexanders. But the Lord and all his servants has not
only permitted that to their adversaries, which ours deny us, viz, consequences
and reasonings upon Texts of Scripture, but made use of it themselves to
establish truth as well as to refute errors. The tempter promising the Son of
God all the Glory of the world, if he would worship him, the Lord checked his
impudence by that Scripture which says, Matt. 4.9, 10, 6, 7.
Thou shall worship the Lord thy God, and him only shall thou serve; and when
he desired him to throw himself down from the pinnacle he answered as it is
written, thou shall not tempt the Lord thy God, unusefully, if you believe
these methodists, since neither the first of these passages denies expressly
in so many words the worshipping the Devil, nor the second the casting himself
down from the top of the Temple. For in S. Matthew he alleges the law, Mat.
15.4.
honor thy Father and Mother, and the ordinance, he that curses Father or
Mother shall die the death, against the traditions of the Scribes and
Pharesies, who hold that a child who is obliged by an oath or a rash vow not to
give any assistance to its Father and Mother, would not sin in refusing them
the honor which is due to them. And nevertheless neither of these two passages
do formally and in so many words express what they would conclude from them. To
the Saduces who questioned him about the resurrection of the dead he produced
that which God said in the Scriptures, Mat. 22.32.
I am the God of Abraham, the God of Isaac and the God of Jacob, the Saduces
remained confused and all the multitude admired the force and strength of this
proof. Our methodists laugh at it and demand a formal passage and say that the
consequences are faulty. The Apostles follow faithfully the tracts of their
Master, they prove the truth of the gospel against the Jews, not by formal
passages of the old Testament, but by consequences and reasoning which they
drew from it. In this manner holy Peter, showed the sending and coming of
Christ to the world by the words of Moses, Act. 3.22. Deuteronomy. 18.15. Act.
2.27.29, 30, 31. Ps. 16, 10. Romans 4. Ps. 32 1, 2. Genesis 15.6.
a prophet shall the Lord your God raise up unto you of your brethren like to
me; his resurrection by that of the Psalms, thou shall not suffer thy holy one,
to see corruption; so St. Paul concludes that a man is not justified by the law
but by grace, in those words of the Prophet blessed is he whose transgression
is forgiven, Romans 9.8.
and from that which is written, that Abraham believed, and it was imputed to him
for righteousness.

Thus he proves in his epistles to the Romans and Galatians, Gala. 4.28.
that it is by faith and not by works that we are justified, and by the word of
the Lord to Abraham, Genesis 21, 12. Romans 9.15.16. Ex. 33.19.
in Isaac shall thy seed be called, and that the calling of beleivers, is not
of him that willleth nor of him that runs, but of God that shows mercy,
from that which God said to Moses, I will be gracito whom I will be gracious,
and I will show mercy on whom I will show mercy. In the same manner he shows
the rejection of the Jews by these words of the Scripture, Romans 9.23.33, Hos.
2, 23. Romans 14.10, 11. Esai. 45.25.
behold I lay in Sion a stumbling stone: and the calling of the Gentiles by
this, I will call them my people which were not my people, and the last
judgment by these other, as I live says the Lord every knee shall bow to me.
What shall I say of his Epistle to the Hebrews all interwoven with proofs of
his nature? as when he shows the excellency of Christ above the Angels by the
words of David, Heb. 1.5. Psalm. 2.7. Heb. 5.7. tot.
thou art my son this day have I begotten thee, his eternal preisthood by the
History of Melchisedeck in Genesis, the advantage of his alliance above the
ancients by the oath set down in Psalms 21.10 the Lord has sworn and well not
repert of it. Heb. 7.21.
I must wholly transcribe the Epistles of this divine man, if I would deny here
all the examples where he furnishes us with these sorts of proofs, for he
disputes every where thus, and draws from the holy Scriptures, by the force of
reasoning, thousands of conclusions which cannot be read there expressly. And
if one cannot prove by the Scriptures, except it speaks in so many words (as
the new method pretends) how did the same Apostle dispute by the Scripture
against the Jews of Thessalonica; that it behooves that Christ must suffer,
Act. 17.2.3. Act. 18.28.
and that he should rise from the dead, and that this Jesus (viz. he who was
crucified in Judea) was the Christ? and how did the Apostles demonstrate the
same proposition by the same Scriptures? certainly this proposition that Jesus
is the Christ is found couched in these terms in no places of the old
testament, as every one confesses. How comes it then that Paul and the
Apostles showed it by this ancient Scripture? it is be cause they showed diverse
things in the Scripture from whence it necessarily followed; for they gathered
together all the marks of Christ contained in the books of the old Testament,
from whence they formed this proposition, he who has such and such qualities,
who is born at such a time and in such a place who does, suffers, and teaches
such and such things, is the Christ: this being once so put, they consequently
apply to their Jesus all the marks and qualities, of the Messiah, proveing by
clear and irrefragable witneses that he had exactly in him, all that the
prophets had attributed to the Messiah, from whence the conclusion follows of
it self, that Jesus is then the Messiah; this is that which S. Luke calls to
declare and propose in the book of the Acts, Acts. 17.3. (...)
useing two words most proper for this subject, the first of which signifies to
open, the second to put one thing near another, to tell us that the Apostles
prove these conclusions by the Scriptures, first in making the prophecies
appear clear, and showing the true sense of them, and then in examining them
with the events, and comparing the figures with the things, and the shadow with
the body, from whence the light of the truths of the Gospel shine forth of
themselves. Since the Lord and his Apostles used this way, we must acknowledge
that a proposition is lawfully and valuably proved by the Scriptures, when one
shows that it evidently follows from the things which are contained in it;
although it be not there it self expressly, except one were so desperate as to
accuse the Sovereign Wisdom and his most faithful and intimate Ministers of
having employed vain and frivilous Sophisms instead of good and sollid
deemonstrations. But besides their examples, they have authorized this way of
proof by their command. For our Lord according to the exposition of the most
parts of the ancient and modern Interpreters commanded the Jews in the fifth of
St. Joh. 5.39.
John to search the Scriptures. Why should he command that we should search for
other things then those which are directly expressed there? all the
circumstances of the passage show that he wishes them to learn who is truly
the Christ. But this cannot be drawn from ancient Scriptures but only by
consequences. It follows then that the Lord expects that we should learn not
only that which it tells us directly, but also that which may be concluded from
it by good and valid consequences. Mat. 22.29, 31, 32.
And in Matt. 22. disputing against the Pharisees who denied the resurrection
from the dead, you err (said he to them) not knowing the Scriptures nor the
power of God etc. Have you never read that which was spoken to you by God, I am
the God of Abraham the God of Isaac and the God of Jacob. God is not the God of
the dead but of the living. He blames them for not having learned the
resurrection of the dead in this sentence of Scripture. Certainly then they
ought to have learned it there, for he is too good to blame him who has done
his duty. Now the sentence which he produces says nothing of the Resurrection
of the dead expressly and directly, he draws it only by the consequences of that
which he lays down. We must confess then that it is our duty not only to learn
and believe the things which we read in the Scriptures, but also to draw from
them and conclude those things which may be deduced from them although they are
not read there in so many words, and to embrace them with the same faith as we
do the others, and that without this wear ignorant of the Scriptures and are
in danger of erring.

CHAP. VI. That the new method is contrary to the procedure and maxims of the
holy Fathers in their disputes, and favorable to the Heretics and Infidels.
THe Holy Fathers, following the command and example of Christ and his
Apostles, make use every where of this sort of proofs without any scruple,
esteeming they have sufficiently showed their belief by the Scripture, when
they had drawn them from thence by good and clear consequences. Those whom we
have above named do not dispute otherwise, enjoying freely that right which
they give their adversaries. I should be too long, should I here repeat all the
examples of them, as when they prove by the Scripture against the Sabellions
that God the Father is not begotten and is without beginning; (...)
and against the Arians that the Son is consubstantial with the Father, (...)
and against the Nestorians that the Holy Virgin is mother of God, (...)
and against the Eutichians that Jesus Christ has two natures, (...)
all propositions which are not found in the Scripture exactly set down in the
same words, and which nevertheless they profess to demonstrate by the
Scripture, (as every one may see in their books) are an evident sign that they
have believed that it is a good and sufficient way to prove a belief by the
Scriptures when one draws from it by reasoning, although one cannot allege any
passage where it is formally and expressly set down.

In a word, you must either forsake the cause of God and instructions and
convictions of the Heretics or proceed in this manner. For otherwise how
could the fathers dispute against them? Let us give an Arian to one of our
Methodists to be instructed or convinced; which way will he take? how will he
prove the consubstantiality of the Son? he cannot alledg one exact text for it;
for it is clear, that in the whole Bible there is not one of that nature, and
he cannot take advantage of the texts which show this truth since they do not
exactly express it, for the law of his Method forbids him the use of this sort
of proofs. Will he use the Authority of the council of Nice, or of the Church
which he pretends is Catholic? but this would be to deceive himself and not
to dispute, this would be to allege for proof of the question, the same thing
which is directly in question. For if the Arian should appeal either to the
Nicean faith or to the authority of the Catholic Church, he would not be an
Arian. That which made him renounce both these, is the belief that you will
prove it to him. You must necessarily then leave him in an error, because your
pretended Method has divested you of all the means of drawing him out of it.
You can prevail no better against a Sabellion, an Eutichian, or in general,
against any of the Heretics who deny the Church any of her positive beliefs
not expressed in so many words in the Scripture. Even the Jew will take
advantage of your maxims, and laugh, by your example, at all which you produce
from the Old Testament to make him believe the New; and will say, as you do,
that the consequences are Chimeras and phancies, and will protest not to yield
unless that he has a formal passage which says expressly that Jesus Son of
Mary born in B^thlehem under Augustus Caesar is the Christ promised by the
ancient Oracles. Council Lateran. sub: 4. lex. 3 cap. 24 Council. Lateran. sub
Innoc. 3. exped. pro recup. terr. sanct. p. 63. col. 1.8.
So he will find, when all is done, that your fine Method is the gagg of the
Church and not Heresy, and that it fortifies it instead of subdueing it. And
acquires to the Church nothing but losses and Funerals instead of victories and
Triumphs which it promised her. But if formally one has judged them worthy of
an Anathema, and of the loss of liberty, by the Council, who should furnish
these infidels with sword, poinyard and cordage. What thunderbolt and
ex-Communication do the Fathers of this Method merit, who (as much as in them
lies) arm the Jews and Heretics with a buckler Shot-proof, and take from the
Church the only arms which God has put into her hands to scatter all sorts of
enemies: to wit, his Holy word.

But this method does not only deprive us of the use of the Scriptures against
those who receive them either all or in part. It renders likewise all truths
unuseful to us, the knowledge of which God has imprinted in the nature of men
taking from us discourse or reasoning, without which it is not possible to
explain them to be useful either for the instruction or conviction of the
ignorant; For according to these new maxims every one will demand formal proofs
of that which one would persuade them, and will hold himselelf obliged not to
believe any thing, beyond those very things which nature has taught him. The
Pagans will reject the unity of the Divinity, because it cannot be drawn but by
consequences from our General notions, he will receive none of the arguments,
which you will use to establish the Justice, goodness, and Power of God, the
truth of the Scriptures, the Authority of the Church and other such like
grounds of Christianity, because you have taught him that these reasonings are
but mere dreams, and none of their conclusions is worthy of an assured belief.
Briefly there was never any method so perplexing and troublesome as this, which
renders all the differences of philosophy and Religion Aeternal, without
leaving us any means to determine them. For since, that to make them agree it
will not suffer us to employ any other that an express and formaldecision, by
the Authority of which these two parties should be agreed, it is clear that
their debates will never be decided, since it has its birth from that same
thing which this method wants to determine it. For if in their common principle
there should be found any such decision of their controversies, they would not
enter into contest about it; for example, the Methodists will not let any one
make use of any one thing in Scripture to prove that the Pope is not the head
of Church, if there be not some passage which says expressly that the Pope is
not the head of the Church. Who sees not that it is to fly the decision of the
controversy, and desire the continuation of it for ever? for to demand of me
to determine it, is a condition according to all the appearance of reason,
impossible to be done, it being not credible, that the adversaries who
acknowledge with me the Divinity and truth of the Scriptures, should bare me
down that the Pope is the head of the Church; though it denies it formally and
in so many words.

If we desire then to end our differences we must absolutely renounce this
Method, and proceed that very way which they so unjustly condemn, by proving
all our conclusions, by the principles so well known to both parties, and those
are by the grace of God, the oracle of the old and new Testament, determining
doubtful things by certain, clearing the obscure by evident, and persuading
those things. which they reject as false, by the connection and dependence which
they have one with another, that they confess them true. This is the true
Method which one ought to follow in all disputes, and which indeed all masters
of all Sciences have followed, those of Philosophy, Civil-law Physic, and
others. St. Augustine defended it, a long time, against the calumnies of the
Donatists, who because he took it upon himself to dispute against them accused
him of being a Logician Aug. contr. Crecon. l. 1. c. 13.
, and under this pretense shunned him as a dangerous man. He showed at large
that the Lord The same chapt. and 14, 17, 18. Aug. tom. 6. l. ^. cont. Circon.
Gramat. c. 15. G.
and his Apostles made use of this Method, and were Logicians, if this is to be
a Logician to reason, and from a clear thing to prove a thing that is obscure,
and willing to propose to us a Pattern of a wise Disputant, see how he
describes him. First he endeavors (says he) not to be cheated himself for
want of discerning truth from falsehood, and this he cannot obtain without the
help of God. Then being willing to unfould, for the instruction of others, that
which he has in himself, he first considers what it is they already know for
certain, to the end that from thence he might conduct them to the things they
know not, or would not believe, showing them these follow from those which they
hold, either by reasoning or faith, so that by the truths which they consent
to, they may be constrained to confess and approve those which they had denied,
and by this means the truth which seemed false to them at first, would be
discerned from the false, being found conformable to the truths which they knew
before. Hitherto St. Austin, who could not more clearly Authorize the
procedure, which these new Disputants now condemn with so much injustice and
passion.

CHAP. VII. That the procedure of the methodists is the same which the Arians
and other Heretics held formerly against the ancient Fathers.
ANd though it be a thing most unworthy those praises, which they give
ordinaryly to antiquity, to expose a novelty to the view of the world: and that
on the other side, it is not much honor to be thought to be esteemed the father
of an invention, so impertinent, and so contrary as well to the practice of the
Lord, of his Apostles, and of the holy fathers, as to the common sense and
reason of men, nevertheless to take from them in this place all subject of vain
glory, I will farther advertise the readers, that those of our adversaries
which at this day make use of this method are not the first authors of it; For
I find, at the bottom of it, that it is an old and superannuated wrangling of the
Arians, and other ancient heretics, who to fly the searching and decision of
the truth, demanded of the Catholics of their times in the same manner,
formal passages, where the consubstantiality of the son, and other points, may
be expressly read, this we learn by the books of the fathers. In St.
Athanasius, the question being concerning the word consubstantial used by the
Council of Nice to express the truth of the eternal divinity of the Son, (say
the Arians) is not writ. And in a dialogue printed among his works (though in
my opinion it is none of his) leave these Sylogisms (say they) and give us a
Demonstration by writing that the Son is the true God Atha. Ep. de Synod-Arim.
and Seleue. T. p. 911 Part. ultim. (...). and Dialog. cont. Arim. p. 126.
. In St. Austin the Count Pascentius, an Arian by Religion, pressed likewise
this only Doctor, with whom he had the presumption to enter into Conference, to
show him the word consubstantial in the Scripture, not suffering him to draw it
from thence by reasonings. Ep. 174.178. Aug.
St. Augustine having else where proved the Divinity of the Holy Ghost, by
these places of the Apostle which say, that we are his temple, so that if he
were not God he would have no Temple, Maximinus an Arian Bishop against whom he
disputed, answered that the truth is not concluded by arguments but proved by
certain testimonies, Id con. Mixim, l. 1 6 fol. 444. G.
and in a dialogue published under the name of S. Vigil (but in my judgment it is
certainly Pope Gelaz's) the Arian, who is brought in there, disputes exactly as
our Methodists do now. He would have one show him the word Consubstantial
expressly and properly so writ, and that it be proved, not by any reasonings,
but, by the naked and pure propriety of the words. Let them read it to me
(says he) so properly laid down or let them depart from their Confession.
Dial. inter Atha Sabell. Arian. inter Cassand. opera. p. 475.
Eutichus the head of another Heresy, who confounded the two natures of the
Lord, disputed in the same manner, demanding in what Scripture it is set down
that Jesus Christ has two Natures? In Act. cont. chalced. p. 115. A.
so that one ought not to wonder if Scholarius has long since observed, that
many Heretics made use of this praetext, viz. desire that they would show
them all things expressly by the Scripture Scholar. orat. Henet. 3. council.
flor. p. 590, E.
.

CHAP. VIII. That the Fathers have rejected this pretended method as
impertinent, and that by their examples we can retort them upon our Adversaries.
WHat do the Holy Fathers say then to this procedure of the Heretics? do they
grant them that one ought to hold nothing but that for a doctrine of Scripture
which we read there in so many words? and not reading exactly there the words
of which the question is, have they recourse to the Church to defend by its
authority that which they think cannot be proved by the formal words of the
Scripture, which is the point at which all the cheating blows of our
methodists aim? They do nothing of all this. They do not put the infalibilitie
of the Church in play. They hold themselves to the Scriptures and use its
authority but for the defense of their cause, and confessing that the terms of
their questions are not read there exactly, they protest that it is enough that
the thing it self is found there, and that it is gathered and deduced lawfully
from thence, and prove upon discourse found upon diverse passages, and after
having so proved it, conclude that they have demonstrated it by the Scripture.
It Is no matter (says S. Athan. Ep. de Synod. Arim. and Seleuc. T. p. 913. D.
Athanasius in one of his books above named) whither the words which one makes
use of be in the Scripture or not, provided that the sense of them be Orthodox;
and in the treatise of the decrees of the Council of Nice, idem l. de decret.
Synod. Nic. p. 270. B.
although that the words (says he) be not so laid down in Scripture, it is no
matter, so long, as they have a sense truly drawn from the Scripture (as it
has been said before) what can one call more contentious (says S. Austin
answering to Pascentius) then to dispute of the name when the thing is
manifest? Aug. Ep. 17, T. 2. p. 150. F,
and a little after, you see (says he to him) that from those words which are
not in the Scripture, one may give such reason, by which it may appear that
they are truths; Ibid. O.
Maximinus who pressed him to prove by express terms of the Scripture that one
ought to adore the holy Ghost, it is well said, (answered he) as if from the
things which we read there we could not learn certain other things which we do
not read there? Id l. 3. contr. Max. c. 3.
and following this distinction he professes elsewhere, to have said, what he
read in or understood by the Scriptures, conforming himself to their authority,
and St. Chrysostom Id. l. 15 de civit. D. cap. 1.
gives us this rule, that we ought to hold those things for holy writ whose
sense is found in the Scriptures although they are not found there in the same
words. Chrysostom. Hom. 7. in 1 Cor. p. 380.


S. Gregory of Nazianzen in his thirty seventh speech disputes against the
Heretics, who denying the divinity of the Holy Ghost urged him with the same
wrangling to produce them a passage of Scripture which testifies it expressly;
Greg Nazian. c. col. 37.599.605 edit paris an. 1609.
Our methodists would have yielded to this assault, and would have granted
them, that there being no formal passage to show this truth it could not be
proved by the Scriptures. But S. Gregory on the contrary makes to them this
wise and judicious remarke with the Style and manner of the teaching of the
holy Scriptures p. 605.
that there are things which are said there, which notwithstanding are not
there: and there are other things which are not said there, which nevertheless
are not wanting there, some others are not said there, nor are they there in
effect, and in fine some others are there and are spoke there. He puts in the
first rank sleeping, wakeing and the motions of God; in the second his
impassibility, and that he is without beginning: for though the Scriptures say
often that God sleeps or that he awaketh, or that he moves locally, yet
notwithstanding it does not signify so. And though that be in these words it is
not in that sense. And though it never says expressly that he is impassible or
without beginning, (...)
it signifies it notwithstanding in diverse places in other words. Which the
Divine made his adversaries confess who held, that God was not begotten and
without beginning, and yet they could not produce any one passage which said it
formally, from whence he concludes, that since by their own confession, own may
very well prove by the Scriptures that God is without beginning although it
says no where so expressly, their procedure is altogether ridiculous, for
concluding that the divinity of the Holy Spirit cannot be proved by Scripture
under pretext that it is not expressed there. Show me these things (says) he
that God is not begotten and without beginning) written in so many words, or
else we will reject them because they are not written. p. 606.
And a little after, how (says he) do thou keep thy self so closely to the
letter? and how do thou side with the Judaical wisdom, tying thy self to
syllables and leaving the things? if thou should name twice five or twice
seven, and I should come and conclude from thence ten or fourteen; or conclude
that this thing which you call a mortal and rational animal is a man, should I
talk idly in thy opinion in discoursing after this manner? but how can thou
think so, fince I say but the very same things which thou said before. For
the determination is not more from who says it, then from him who does oblidge
necessarily to speak it, b p. 606. D.
viz. in saying things from whence it necessarily and inevitably follows. See
how this great man clearly establishes the consequences which are drawn from
Scripture! Theodoret in a Dialogue printed with the works of S. Athanasius
brings in one of these Heretics (which they call Macedonians from Macedonius
their Author) who alleged likewise, that it is no where writ that the holy Ghost
is God. Dialog. contr. Macedon. tom. 2. operum. Athan. p. 276 B. edit. Paris.
An. 1627.
To which the Orthodox Divine answered, let us suppose that the name of God is
not attributed to him in the Scriptures, do but acknowledge that he has the
nature and operations of God, and that satisfies me for the confession of his
divinity. But (says the other) why do you say that which is not written? it is
sufficient (answers the Orthodox) if you but only acknowledge his nature, for
though it were not written his nature of it self would consequenly draw this
name from it. For if once one confesses that the holy Ghost is a person
subsisting, sanctifying and uncreated, he of necessity is God, though thou will
not confess it. Where is it that it is written (says the Macedonian) that the
Spirit is God? even there (answers the Orthodox) where it is written that he is
of the same essence. And upon this Groand the Heretic having replied that the
Fathers had called the Son consubstantial, is that (says the Orthodox) the
sense and intention of the Scripture which has moved them to use that word
which is not writ, or have they said it of their own Authority? it is (says
the Macedonian) the sense of the Scripture which has moved them to it. Now
(answered the Orhodox) this is also the sense and intention of the Scripture
which teaches that the Spirit being uncreated and subsistant of God,
inlivening and sanctifying is a divine Spirit. Thus far Theodoret who knew not
how to maintain more clearly that one could ground the articles of our Faith
upon the consequences of Scripture and not upon words only. But this same
Author in two pieces which Photius warants us to be his (although by some
error they have printed them also amongst the works of St. Athanasius) shows us
that the Spirit of our Methodists reigned at his time in certain Heretics whom
he names not, Pho. biblioth. cod. 46. P. 31,
but who in my judgment were the Eutichians. He says that they would have
every one receive the words of the Scripture simply without considering the
things which they signify, under pretense that they surpass the understanding
of all men Theod. tract. 16. secund. Phot. T. 2. Op. Athan, p. 308.
that they be constrained to hear some words of the Gospel those which they
think favorable to them, but they will not suffer them to understand and
interpret them religiously; that one hear the words but not search the truth
and convenient sense of them; that they call Faith and inconsiderate not
belief, which without any examen imbraceth to its own ruin things not
established by any demonstration, Id. tract. 23. p. 325. d.
that they command to believe without reason Ibid.
to believe simply that which is said without considering what is convenient
and what is not so, Ibid Tit. tract. 23.
without examining whither the thing be possible, useful, seemly, agreeable to
God, or convenient to nature, whither it agrees with the truth, whether it
has any connection with the design of the Author, whether it does not
contradict the mystery, whether it be not agreeable to Godliness, Ibid. D.
that they would have Ibid.
their words believed without permiting any one to examine their Doctrine for
fear they should be convinced. p, 326. A.
Are not these the same fancies with our Methodists who receive nothing but
formal words: who reject all expositions, evidences, and reasonings? but now
Theodore^ Dispates sharply against these men, accusing them of overthrowing by
this means all humane affairs and of making men irrationale, p. 903.
of changing them into bruit beasts, making them take their nature and
habitudes; of making all the intentions of the Prophets and Apostles unuseful,
who according to this reckoning of theirs, beat our ears in vain with the sound
of their words, the hearers not carrying away any fruit from them, nor profit
in the Treasury of their hearts, Ibid. D.
that their procedure confounds every thing, and that he who follows this
Method knows not how to make those things agree, which seem to clash, nor
answer those who desire to ask him, as we are all obliged to do to them, Ibid.
3.
(which he verifieth at large by the induction of diverse passages of eternity,
and of the temporal birth of Christ which seems contrary, p. 310. D.
so they expose the Scriptures to the mockery of the Infidels; p. 326.327.328.
and for these and such like reasons, he declares at the beginning of one of
these Treatises, that this invention is the worst of all the Doctrines which
the Devils have introduced among men, 327. D.
and give us a rule quite contrary, wishing that in the interpretation of the
Scriptures, in stead of being tied to the words made naked by their sense, they
should seriously consider what belongs to God, what is convenient for our
purpose, that which the truth carries, that which agrees with the Law, that
which has a just correspondence with nature, the Purity and the Liveliness of
Faith, the firmness of Hope, the sincerity of Charity, that which does no wrong
to Esteem, that which is above Envy, that which is worthy of Grace: e Ibid. p.
325. A.
and that he ought not to believe without reason nor speak without Faith. Let
them take the pains to read these two Treatises through, for they are very
short and most excellent. Athanasius, (whom the Author of the Dialogue
published under the Name of S. Vigil made to Dispute against the Arians) follow
exactly the precedure of Gregory and Theodoret against the Macedonians. For he
constrained the Arians to confess, that one may prove by the Scriptures many
things which are not expressed there, alleging to him the words which the
Arians held although they were not expressed in the Scripture; as when they
said against the Sabellians, that the Father is impassible: and against the
Ennomians, that the Son is like the Father: and against Fotinus, that the Son
is the Light of the Light; show me (said he to him) where it is written Purely,
Nakedly, Properly, and in so many words, that the Father is impassible or not
begotten, that the Son is God of God, Light of Light, or like the Father. It is
not enough that you say, that the reason of Faith requires it, piety teaches
it, the inference or consequence from the Scriptures obliges me to the
profession of this Name. I desire that you would not allege these things to
me, since you will not suffer me to allege them for the proof of the word
consubstantial. Behold at this juncture of time the volume of Divine Books in
my Hand, read there the Names of the Words above said in so many syllables and
in the same senses; either show us where it is written, that the Son is like
the Father, or confess that he is unlike him; there is no way for you to draw
your selves out of this evil path, being wraped up in your own objections, it is
not in your power to unty the knots of this Proposition. Give me leave then to
prove the consubstantiality (that is to say the belief of the one Substance of
God) by consequences, where if you will not agree with me, you must also
renounce those things which you confess your self, since you find them no where
directly set down in any place in the Scriptures Dialog. int. Sabel Photar. and
Athan. liter. opera Cassandri. p. 475. med.
then beating him with his own weapons, he pressed him to bring him some
passage, which speaks formally the belief of the Arians, viz. that there is
three Substances in the Trinity. Here (says he) the arguments serve for
nothing where one concludes the truth by the consequence of reason: they demand
proper and express passages, read to us three Substances expressly so laid down
in the Scripture, do not come hither to argue that if the Father, the Son, and
the Holy Ghost are three, it must of necessity be that they have in them three
Substances. For upon this account I can also reason more truly if the Father
and the Son are one according to that which he says himself, I and the Father
are one, how is there more then one Substance? but you have not been willing at
all to enter into this way of Dispute, in demanding of me a passage where the
word Consubstantial was exactly, and properly laid down. It Is then for you,
also by the same reason to read to us the three Substances properly and
expressly set down in the Scriptures. Ibid. p. 476. infrmed.
And upon this debate of the manner of the proofs, which should be used, by
both parties, the Author of this Dialogue, caused a good man (whom they made
arbitrator of their Disputes) to pronounce this judgment. In as much as it
appears, by your Dispute, that you cannot show formally and expressly in the
Scriptures, neither you the word Consubstantial, nor you that of three
Substances; to the end then that we may not lose more time, in a childish
debate of superfluous things, leave of demanding of one another a formal
passage, and gather from the authority of the Scriptures, by the reason of
consequences, that there is either one or three Substances in the Trinity,
Ibid. p. 477. ante med.
and at the beginning of the following Sessions, repeating the result of the
foregoing dispute, he says that they did agree to prove the confession of one,
or of three Substances by the consequence of Holy Letters, passing by the
demand of a passage where the word is found Properly and Nakedly laid down.
Ibid. med.
Judge if this be not the very Image of the Disputes, of our Methodists? do not
they demand of us as the Arians do of the Catholics formal passages upon every
point of our differences? Do not they reject with the same importunity the
consequence, and conclusions drawn from the Scriptures; Do not they reproach us
with the same injustice that these are tricks in logic with which we endeavor
to save our seves? Ibid. p. 475. fin. Arius. de Athan.
Do not they press us with the same opiniatrety, either to read exactly what we
believe, or to quit the belief of it? blessed be God that our cause is found to
be like that of the ancient believers: And the procedure of our adversaries
like that of the old Heretics. Since they choose the method of the Arians, let
us keep our selves to the desence of the Holy Fathers, and by their example let
us put our Methodists upon their own rack. You demand of us Gentlemen formal
passages; Let us then have the same liberty. Show us exactly and expressly in
the Scriptures, that the Pope of Rome is the spouse of the Church, and the
Monarch of the World; that out of his communion there is neither Grace nor
Salvation; that his judgments are infallible oracles, and that in matters of
Faith it is impossible he should err; That it is from his hand only, that we
ought to receive the Scriptures, and that without the Testimony which he gives
them, they should have no more weight with us, then Aesops sables or the
Alcoran of Mahomet. Show us written in any one of the books of the Old and New
Testament, that there is a place bordering upon Hell where some souls
sanctified by the blood of the Son of God are burned, that there are Altars
upon the earth, where Jesus Christ is realy sacrificed by a mortal man for the
remission of our sins. Let us see a passage, which says expressly that we ought
to render adoration to your Host, which you Name Letrcia, or that we ought to
worship the Images of Saints departed, and kneel down before them, invoke their
Spirits, and acknowledge them for our Mediators. I would not have you say that
all this can be concluded from Scripture. I demand according to your example
precise and formal passages; either permit me to prove my Faith by
consequences, or renounce yours, full of so many things of which you cannot
read one word in the Scriptures. Here you have much more interest then I. For
my Faith consists of less Articles then yours; and the Articles which I
believe, are for the most part so clearly and expressly laid down in the
Scriptures that I need no logic to draw them from it. It Is enough for our eyes
to read them there; In stead of which, the beliefes which you and I contest
about are so far from the words and sense of the Scriptures, that the greatest
logic in the world is not sufficient to draw them from it. Here to unravel
your selves from these straits, you will not fail to allege the authority of
your Church. But besides telling me of that, you go about to persuade me
doubtful things, by that which is as much, or rather more doubtful, and by this
you evidently renounce the procedure of them whom you call your Fathers, for if
the authority of the Church, ought to decide matters here, why did not they
interpose it in their Disputes* And if it be an ill proceeding to say either
prove your Faith by express and formal passages of Scripture, or suffer me to
prove mine by consequences; why did they use it against the Arians? say what
you please, you cannot turn it so but it will manifestly appear to be a great
precedent for me against you to prove that you Dispute like the Arians, and I
like the Holy Fathers:

CHAP. IX. That that which is concluded evidently and necessarily from the
Scriptures is veritable and Divine, and is part of the Scripture.
NOw to come to the bottom, what can one Imagine more unreasonable then this
wilfulness of you, the Arians, Macedonians and and Eutichians; not to receive
for true and divine, that which is concluded from the Scriptures? For since
from a truth nothing can be inferred but what is true, confessing (as you do)
the truth of the Scriptures, is not this an intangling of your selves in an
evident contradiction, to make a doubt of what is drawn from the Scriptures? is
not this an offense, either to the Scriptures in suspecting it to be alse in
certain places, or to the truth in accusing it to produce sometimes lies, and
bring forth (in a manner) monsters? That which one gathers out of the Divine
Scriptures, is there, or not there: if it be not there how could it be drawn
from it, since it is not possible to draw from a subject any other thing but
what is there, nothing giving that which it has not: if it be not there, why
did our Lord say speaking of the Scriptures of the Old Testament, that they
bare witness of him, Joh. 5.3.6.
and how could he declare by all the Scriptures biginning with Moses, and so
through all the Prophets the things concerning himself: Luke 24.27.
and again how could his Apostles protest that he had said nothing but those
things, which, as well the Prophets as Moses had foretold that they would come
to pass, that it, behooveth that the Christ should suffer, Acts 26.22, 23.
and finally, how could he in another place assure the 1 Cor. 15 34.
Corinthians that Christ died for our sins according to the Scriptures; that he
was buried, and that he rose again the third Day according to the Scriptures,
since it is evident that none of these propositions, is literally and expressly
so written in any of the Books of the Old Testament, but only are gathered from
thence by consequence? Now if that which is drawn from the Scriptures by good
consequence, is really in the Scriptures, why do you reject it, since you
confess with me, that there is nothing in the Scripture but what is Holy; True
and Divine? conclusions of Truth are not formally in their principles but one
cannot deny them to be there in Virtue and Power; so that admitting of a
principle, one admits also all things that can be inferred from it, by that
very act; as for instance, he who says that we have four gospels, says also
that we have two and two of them, these numbers being evidently contained in
that which he has expressed: And the Scripture saying that Jesus Christ is a
man, says also by those very words, that he has a soul and body, the two
parts of the nature of man's It Is very true that a man may sometimes lay down
things the consequences of which he will not allow of; but this proceeds from
the weakness of his understanding, which does not see all the Lawful
consequences which may be drawn from them. God, whose Wisdom is infinite, never
affirms any thing, without Knowing all the consequences, which can be drawn
from it, so that we need not fear that he will go back from his word, or deny
any Doctrine to be his that can reasonably be concluded out of his word Since
then that all things that can be lawfully inferred from the Holy Scripture are
unavoidably true and Divine, it is clear, that one does sufficiently prove the
truth and holiness of a Creed, when he shows that it follows from the positions
expressed in the Holy Scripture, without any need (as formerly the Arians and
now the new Methodists pretend) to show it in so many words. This is the first
principle which Scholarius a Greek indeed, but of the side of the Latins laid
down at the beginning of his Dispute, against those of his own nation,
concerning the procession of the Holy Ghost; first Scholar. orat. Henet. 3.
part. Act. Conc. Flor. p. 580.
then, we must not exspect (says he) to find all the proofs expressly and in so
many words in the Scripture, for this is an excuse which many Heretics used to
save themselves, but if there be any thing that may be deduced from what is
said in the Scriptures, we must Also receive it with the same honor as the
Scriptures it self. Cardinal Bellarmin who alone has more desert and
reputation, in the Roman party, then all the Authors and defenders of this new
Method have, put them all together, acknowledges this same truth. That which
one infers evidently from the Scriptures (says he) is evidently true, the
Scriptures presupposing it Bellar. l. 4. de Ec. c. 3.
. Melchior Canus Can. loc. Theol. l. b. c. 8.
, Bishop of the Canaries, Vega Veg. l. 9. de justificat. c. 39.
, Gabril Vasques Vasques Tom. 1 in Thom. dispute 5.6, 3. and disput. 12. art.
8.6. ^.
Alfons Salmeron Salmer T. 1 prolegum. de Canc. 91.
, all very famous amongst our adversaries, make the same judgment of it; and
the last especially speaks thus of it. We ought to hold for Doctrins of Divine
Authority, and worthy to be received by Faith, not only the things which are
expressly contained in the Scriptures: but those also which are inferred from
them by an necessary and evident consequence. Certainly it is enough for us to
prove to our adversaries the truth of our beliefs, either that we read them in
the Scripture, or that we infer them from thence, since they agree with us that
it is a book Divinely inspired.

CHAP. X. That this pretended Method takes away certitude from all humane
Knowledge, and plungeth Religion, the Sciences, and all the life of men into a
horrible confusion.
But these men demand of us here, how we can assure our selves that the
consequences which we draw from the Scripture are good and lawful? for (say
they) reason is sometimes abused, concluding from a principle that which cannot
truly be inferred from it. Arians and Eutichians who demand formal Passages of
the Chatholicks did not they pretend to conclude their false and pernicious
opinions from diverse places of Scripture where notwithstanding they were not?
Nestorius, Palagius, and before them all Origin, were deceived in the same
manner; and there is not, perhaps, any Heresy which has not endeavored to
ground it self upon the Scripture by false and abusive discourse. Reason then
being faulty, how can we be assured of the truth of the things which by its
means we have discovered in the Scripture? for since it is often deceived who
can tell us that it is not so now? I do not think it strange that an Atheist
should make this objection to us, since his impiety obliges him to confound all
knowledge in an infinite and remedisess incertitude. But that men who make
profession of the Christian Religion, and whose interest it is to preserve Faith,
Assurance and Credulity in the world, should propose to us a discourse which
rums all these things from top to bottom, in my opinion, it is either an
impudence or an extreme passion. For consider (I beseech you) how far this fine
discourse goes, reason (say they) is faulty therefore we cannot be assured of
the conclusion which it draws from the Scripture. But if this consequence be
good, what assurance can we have? First what will become of this so much
bragged of certainty of the Catholic Faith which they have always in their
mouths? it will be accounted to them no other then a mere in discretion.

For whether they will or no, it is our understanding which receives the things
of Faith, which considers them, and is lead to believe them by the reasons of
truth which it sees in them. If our understanding by mistakes and abuses
sometimes makes its aprehensions and conclusions uncertain, our faith must
necessarily be so too. The consent of the people, the ancient and uninterrupted
successions of the Bishop of Rome, the Majesty and brightness of the power,
Beauty, Order, and pomp of the ministers, the light of the divine protection,
and such like considerations, may persuade you that Rome is truly the Church
of Jesus Christ; but (I say) how can you be sure of it, since this reason to
whose report you give credit is false and if it may be faulty in other things
why not in this? and if you have from this Principle, upon which depends all
the Roman Faith but a doubtful and floting opinion, what assurance can you have
for the rest? but besides their Religion this discourse ruins all learning. For
if reason by the faults into which it sometimes falls, does not deserve that
one should yield it any certain and assured consent, we ought to doubt,
according to their supposition, whither a right line falling perpendicularly
upon another right line makes two right Angles, and whither a square described
by the side sustaining the right angle of a triangle is equal to two squares
described by the two other sides; whither all Bodies are composed of matter and
form, whither the liver be the Source of veins, whither Senna purges
Melancholy, and of all other things in short which are demonstrated in
Mathematics, natural Philosophy, Physic, and other sciences, because this
reason which teaches them is a cheating Mistress. We shall not be able to be
assured whither the whole be bigger then its part, nor whither if you take away
equal things from equal things that which remains will be equal. For (these new
Scepticks will tell you,) how do you know but this reason which is abused in so
many other things is not so here to? but it is worse still, for besides the
knowledge of the understanding, this discourse takes from us, moreover, all the
apprehensions of our senses. If that faculty which sometimes chances to deceive
us can assure us of nothing, who amongst us can trust any of his senses, since
it is evident, that sometimes they represent things to us otherwise then they
are? the eye makes that Tower which is square seem round, makes the straight
oar crooked, and robs the Sun, Moon, and other Stars of the greatest part of
their grandeur. The taste and the nicest touch of our senses are sometimes
mistaken. So that the Methodists will not be assured of any one thing which is
conveyed to us by our senses. They will doubt whither snow be white, and
believe but by halves that fire is hot and Ice cold, and will not dare to
maintain that Honey is sweet and wormwood bitter, they will believe that the
light of the Sun, the roundness of the heavens, the Motion of the winds, the
flux of the Sea, the course of Rivers, and the Visages of men, of their
neighbors and domestics, are nothing but cheats and illusions. And if this
certainty of reason and sense be once taken away, what will become of the
actions of piety and virtue, all which proceed from an assured knowledge and
firm resolve, without which they do not so much as deserve the Name of virtue
and Wisdom? what will become of the mysteries of peace and war? and all the
functions in which the society of men are concerned, and consequently families,
Towns, and States? and in short what will become of all humane life? for as
natural bodies cannot move but upon some thing fixed and immovable, so our
minds cannot act but upon some fixedness and certainty. Belief and persuasion
are as the hing upon which they turn themselves; without this they cannot move,
but besides the wrong which this pernicious imagination does to men, it is
infinitely abusive to the providence of God, who (if we reckon after this
manner) would have given the superintendence of all his works, and the keeping
of his truth to a thing blind and deceitful, and incapable of bringing him any
glory. And it is clear that this error had never been advanced neither in the
schools of Christanity, nor any other Religion, if they had but never so little
heart for the honor of God and the salvation of men. The new Academy alone had
formerly produced it, judge then in what despair these Methodists were, who for
the defense of their cause were constrained to raise up this Pagan Idol which
has been dead and buried so long since. To take from me the liberty of
justifying my Faith by the Scriptures they ruin their own, they put out the
light of Siences, they bring to naught sense, they offend the Lord and wrap up
humame kind in eternal darkness. What blind passion is this, to purchase the
loss of those we hate by our own ruin, and (as Gobrias heretofore) had rather
perish with his enemy then save himself by letting him live? but they may
consider of this, if they think fit.

CHAP. XI. That the faults which reason sometimes commits does not argue that
all her reasonings are doubtful and uncertain.
It Is not very difficult for us to defend our selves from this blow which they
throw at us with so much violence, for what can there be more vain then their
objections? reason is sometimes deceived. Be it so, we cannot then assure our
selves of any one thing which it concludes from the Scriptures: Why not? what
necessity is there of this consequence? must that which once errs, err always?
or is there no way to know the truth whether it errs or not? the eye sometimes
is mistaken, as we said before, giving to its objects a greater or an other
figure then that which they truly have Is this to say that the sense of sight
is absolutely uncertain, and that it is weakness and sottishness to believe
assuredly upon its credit that snow is white or that the Sun shines at midday,
or that the emrauld is green or Ink black? the touch also sometimes
equivocates, and feels but two cards when there is but one. Is this to say that
its perception ought to be counted for nothing and that we cannot assure our
selves of any one thing which it represents to us, no, even that fire is hot,
Snow cold, water humid, and earth dry? to a man in a fever all meats seem
bitter and unpleasant; and because of this shall we suspect all the sense of
tasting? shall we not dare to believe that Honey is sweet and wormwood bitter?
but no body can be ignorant, that so great and fond an imagination as this
falls only into a foolish soul; and that all humane kind would condemn him as
extravagant who should have the least doubt of any one of these truths, and
send him rather to a Physician to purge his brains with a good dose of
Helebore, then to a Philosopher, to confound his errors by an exquisite
dispute? for if the faults which the senses commit at times, does not hinder us
of being assured, for the most part, of those things which we know by their
means, by what right will you conclude, that those of reason, ought to take
from it, all the Faith in that thing which she infers from Scripture?
Origin, Arius, Pelagius, Nestorius, and many others have thought to find in the
Scripture that which is not there. Be it so (although it is clear enough that
they have erred, not so much for having ill disputed upon the Scriptures, as
for having forsaken them and taken principles of their false discourse in
humane Philosophy Look to the perticulars of Origin. Theophil. Alex. or at.
P^^asch. 2. p. 96 A.B: and 98. B. and 102. D. and Paschal 3 p. 109 c. 110 B.
Bibl. PP. T. 3. and for the Heretics in General Chrysostom. Hom. 87. in Mat.
7:9. D. and Hom. 59. ( lat. 58.) in John p. 298. A. Hierom. com. 2. in Mich. p.
378. F. and comm. in Agg. p. 506. F. Gregro. Mvg. Moral: in Job. l. 18, c. 14.
) but nevertheless, so let it be since they will have it so. Shall their fond
imagination wrong truth, and that under the pretense of thinking to see that in
the Scripture which is not there, I cannot assure my self of having found there
all that which is there? diverse men have all reasoned in Mathematics and drawn
from the principles of that Sience some conclusions which are not really there.
But shall it be denied me, under the pretense of this, to hold this consequence
for good and assuredly veritable, that the whole is greater then the part, that
a triangle is bigger then the basis, and the Body of a man bigger then his
finger? but where is the man, how stupid soever he be, who notwithstanding the
paralogisms of Brison and all the other, does not presently, see that this
arguing is most true and necessary? so there are Authors found in natural
Philosophy Astrology and Physic, who have discoursed ill, phancying to find
something in the principles of these Siences, which is not there. Would not
this be not any injustice, but Sottishness or madness, to endeavor to peswade
us, under this pretense that we cannot receive any of the consequences drawn
from these principles, as certain and necessary? nor assure our selves that if
a horse, sees, hears, and runs, he is then an animal, or if a stone has
nothing of sense, then it is no animal? now we are exactly upon these terms in
respect to the Scripture. Many have a mind to draw from it, by discourse,
things which it speaks nothing of, Genesis 1.16.
and the Roman doctors more then all the others, who in the two Luminaries,
which it places in the heavens, have pretended to find out the power of their
Pope to be above the Emperor, and his spiritual monarchies in the Faith and
qualifications, which it attributes to S. Peter. and his power to interdict
States, to depose Princes among animals, Act. 10.13.
which it represents to us to have been signified to the Apostle in a vision.
It Is by the same Logic that they conclude their purgatory from the parable,
which says, thou shall not go out till thou have Mat. 5.2.
paid the last farthing, and their Sacrifice from the words of the Lord, 1 Cor.
11.24. Matt. 26.26.
do this; and their transubstantiation from the other, this is my Body. But if
their consequences are false and even absurd, does it follow that I cannot
assure my self that the Scripture teaches us, that Jesus Christ has a Body
and a soul, since it says that he is a man? that it teaches, that he is the
God of Israel, since it says he founded the earth in the beginning, and that
the heavens are the works of his hands, and that he was tempted by Israel in
the wilderness? certainly neither sense nor reason ever offended without some
reasons. These are saculties naturally right and every one capable of their
functions, but sometimes they meet with particular causes which hinders them
from acting so. For as to sense, who knows not that its errors comes either
from the indisposition of the Organs, from the Situation of the object, or
from the quality of the medium which is between them? as for example, it is the
bilis with which the tongue of a sick man is moistened which makes it taste all
meats bitter, and to those who have Jaundies, it is also the spreading of that
humor which dies all objects yellow, but it is the too great distance from the
sun, which makes it appear to us much less then it is, and which blunts the
Angles of a Tower, which we see a far off, figuring it to us round when it is
really square, and which makes the two sides of the end of a long Gallery seem
to be very near each other, in fine it is the diversity of the medium through
which we see, which makes an oar appear to us in the water as if it were bent
and crooked when it is really straight, except in these and the like cases the
eye always to does its duty faithfully, and the other senses likewise do
theirs; so that it being most easy to know for a truth whether the functions
of our senses are so well disposed or not, it is an insupportable error to
conclude that we are not able to assure our selves of any one of their reports,
under pretense that it happens to deceive them, when they fail of any one of
the conditions necessary to perform their function well. Now it is the same in
reason. If she concludes wrong, it is certainly because she takes that for a
true thing which is not so, or that for clear and certain which is obscure and
doubtful. As when our adversaries conclude from that which the Lord said to St.
Peter, thou art Peter, that their Pope is by right the Monarch of the Christian
Church, they conclude falsely, because they take that for an evident truth in
Scripture which does not so much as appear there; viz, first that our Lord in
these words, promises the Monarchy of his Church to St. Peter; and Secondly,
that their Pope is the successor of St. Peter in this quality. But if these two
things which they take for truth were truth, then that which they conclude from
them must necessarily be so too, and he to must be out of his senses who denies
the consequences of them: And this necessary connection of propositions with
their conclusions is a work, not of the mind and reasoning of man, but of the
will of God, as S. Austin expressly remarkes. The truth of consequences (says
he) and connexions which propositions have one with another, has not been
instituted, but considered and remarked by men, to be able either to learn or
teach it; for it is perpetual and divinely established in the reason of the
things themselves, for as he, who counts the degrees of time, does not make
them himself; and he, who shows the situation of places, the nature of
animals, of plants, or of Stones, does not show the things instituted by men;
and he, who shows us the stars and their motions, shows us nothing made and
established by any man; in like manner he, who says, when the consequence is
false, it is not possible but the thing from whence it follows should be false
also, speaks most truly, and does not make the thing to be so, but only
demonstrates that it is so Aug. T. 3. l. 2. de. doctr. clic. c. 32.
. From whence it comes that he observes elsewhere, that no man in disputeing is
reduced to a false conclusion, unless he has first granted something false from
whence this conclusion of necessity, and whither he will or no form it self. Id
contr. Crescon-Gram. l. c. 20.
Now every man who is in his right senses, may know certainly, if he gives a
convenient attention, whither the propositions which one first lays down to
conclude something from, whither I say, those propositions be in the Scripture
or not. For as to the consequence of things themselves, it is of necessity so
evidently inevitable, that no body can contradict it; as for example, since
every man is composed of soul and Body, if you grant that Jesus Christ is a
man, it is not possible but you must confess also, that he has a Soul and Body,
so if you know that the Scripture puts this proposition (as it is very easy to
know whither it does or not) you cannot without renouncingsense and reason,
deny that the conclusion is also in the Scripture. So all this fear which they
give us of the incertitude of conclusions drawn from Scripture by reasoning is
but a vain Chimera, which passion alone has made them produce to Authorize
this redicule Method by which they pretend to reduce men not to discourse; and
without which they know well enough, it is not possible for them to defend their
Faith. Dial. inter. Sab. Pbot. ar. and Athon. p. 476.
For (to apply to them that which one of the Fathers above named said of the
Arian) they know very certainly, that if rejecting their Method we would once
prove our belief by consequence from Scripture, it is very easy to overcome
them; and so the defiance and fears of this danger carries them to demand of us
proofs consisting in Nude and formal words.

Shall I repeat hear the impertinent objections which they make to us upon this
subject, that if we believe that which our reason concludes from the
Scriptures, our Faith will then begrounded upon reason? as if our reason in
this dispute should declare the proposition from which we draw a conclusion,
and not the faculty of the spirit with which we draw it. certainly upon this
account one might say also, that our Faith is grounded upon the sense of
hearing, since the Apostle teaches us, that Faith comes by hearing. But where
is there a child that does not see, that it is grounded upon the divine word,
which we hear, and not upon the ear with which we hear? the ear is the Organ
which receives this word, but the cause which moves us to believe it, is the
truth which is there, and not the ear.

CHAP. XII. That the faith which we add to the truths drawn from Scripture by
reasoning, is grounded upon Scriptures, and not upon reason Romans 10.17.
REason in like manner or (to use another term less equivocal) understanding
sees in Scripture that which is there; that conceives, discerns, and believes
it. But that which makes it believe it, is the Authority of the Scripture, in
which it has seen it, and not the action which it has made use of to see it.
As when the Apostle says that Jesus Christ is a man, you conclude, then that
he has a Soul, the ground of your conclusion is the saying of the Apostle and
not the faculty or act of your reason. All that your reason has done, is, that
it has found in the Apostles words that which is really so. Now this is not to
give us Faith, but to receive it and to do that which is not only permitted
but commanded. If it teaches any thing of its own growth, if it makes its
inventions pass for Oracles, it is but just to be condemned. For usurping that
which belongs to God only; but if that which reason believes and persuades
others to, has been taught by the word of God, if that was there before she
believed it, that which she has seen there, and that which she has done to
the end, that others might see it there, cannot be imputed as a crime to her,
as if she attributed to her self, in doing this, to be the foundation of our
Faith. This is all which we require for her in this place, that she may have
leave to open her eyes, to mind, and see, that which God has propounded in his
word. We do not pretend to the gift of revealing new secrets to humane kind,
nor the privilege of making articles of Faith. We only beg that they would not
take from us, that which nature has given to all men, the faculty of seeing,
that which is exposed to our eyes, and to understanding that which is said
plainly to us, and from thence conclude that which evidently follows. Romans
3.10, 11, 12. Hebr. 4.15. John. 3.16.18.
It seems to us that one may very well judge though he be not altogether a
prophet, that the Scriptures which tells us that all men have sinned except our
Lord, says also that John, James, and Peter, have sinned; and that which tells
us that all those who believe in Jesus Christ shall not perrish, has also said
to us that Paul and Peter (presupposing that they believe) shall not perish;
Gal. 3.10. Deuteronomy. 27.26. Exodus 20.14.
and that which says that cursed is he that confirms not all the words
written in the law, says also to us that he who commits adultery is cursed by
the law, since it is written thou shall not commit adultery. Our adversaries
will pardon us if we say, that to deprive us of the judgment of such
consequences, it is to endeavor to take from us not only the light of the
Prophecy or the Spirit of particular revelation (things to which we never
pretended any thing) but the sense and nature of men, and to transform us into
Geese.

CHAP. XIII. That it is sufficient that one of the propositions be in Scripture
to infer a conclusion of divine truth.
BUt they produce another difficulty upon this point, let it be so (say they)
let the consequences take place; then when that is done we can receive no
conclusions for divine but those which one draws from two propositions both of
which are laid down in Scripture, if one be not drawn from the word of God but
from sense or humane reason; we cannot receive that which follows from it,
unless it be for a humane truth, that is to say doubtful and uncertain, because
in arguing the conclusion always follows the weakest part, as Logicions have
observed; for example, if you dispute thus, he who has created the heavens and
the earth, is the true and eternal God worshipped heretofore by the Isrealites,
Now Jesus Christ has created the heavens and the Earth, he is then the true
God worshipped heretofore in Israel; they will make no difficulty perhaps to
receive this conclusion for a Divine truth and worthy of an entire and certain
belief, because the two propositions, from which it follows, are both of them
in the Scripture, as we shall see hereafter. But if you reason thus, a Body
which is in heaven is not at that time in the earth, now the Body of Christ is
in heaven, therefore it is not in the earth, and so you think to oblige them by
that, to hold, this conclusion, that the Body of Christ is not on the earth for
a thing certainly and Divinety revealed, they will tell you that it cannot pass
for any more then for a humane doctrine, since from two propositions from which
one is drawn, viz. The first is drawn from maxims of reason only, and not from
Scripture as the second is. They triumph in this observation, and put it upon
all occasions amongst their gravest and most serious conference; but I say,
first that if our particular interest were only concerned in it, there were no
need to consider it, since that which is granted, is sufficient for this
dispute. For it grants us that the propositions which are lawfully drawn from
two truths, one of which revelation teaches, and sense, or reason the other,
are true, at least to the same degree as the truths which we learn by reason
and sense, and that we may give at least the same kind of Faith to believe them
in the same manner as we believe (for example) that Snow is white, the Heavens
round, or that the whole is bigger then its part. Now we demand no more for our
design; for we employ the most part of these discourses, mixed with
propositions of a different nature, only to overthrow their belief, and not to
establish ours; now to destroy a doctrine and render it unworthy of belief,
it is enough to show that it is contrary to some truth, and then one ought to hold
it for false of what condition or origin soever that truth be which it
opposes, whither it be revealed or natural. For truth is a simple thing and
uniforme, always like to it self; lies often wound themselves, one falsity
destroying another, but all truth; agree and perfectly conspire together, and
it is impossible they should oppose or overthrow one another. If it be found then
that the Doctrines of our adversary are contrary to some truth, be it to that
which sense teaches us, to that which we learn in thescholof reason, or to
that which divine revelation tells us, it is enough to justify that they are by
no means veritable, far from being (as they pretend) the articles of the
Christian Faith. For the Author of Nature, Grace, Sense, Reason, and Faith, is
one and the same God, who has not destroyed in the school of grace what he
has taught in that of nature (God forbid) but has polished and perfected in
one what he had begun the rough drawn in the other. So it is manifest that (far
from being obliged, in this kind of discourse, to employ propositions contained
in Scripture only) I can use arguments drawn entirely from sense and reason,
without taking the propositions of which they consist from revelation. As for
example, if I should conclude that the Eucharist is not a humane body, because
a humane body cannot be held entire in a man's mouth, whereas the Eucharist may
be held in an infants, he would answer impertinently that should allege that
it is not Scripture but sense and reason which learns us these two propositions,
and therefore the conclusion is not a truth revealed. For at this time we have
concern about that, the question is not about the Master who has taught these
propositions whither it be sense or Faith, but about their quality, whither
they be true or not; for if they are both true, their conclusion is so of
necessity, and by consequence your opinion which opposes its inevitable false
it being absolutely impossible that two contradictory propositions should be
both true, as this, the Eucharist is a humane body, which is your opinion; and
this other, the Eucharist is not a humane body, which is the conclusion of my
discourse.

But I say in the second place that their maxim is false, that to infer a
conclusion from authority and divine Faith, it behooves that the two
propositions be drawn from the revelation of God; it is enough that one be
revealed, and the other evident by the light of nature. The Church discourses
thus against the fond imaginations of Apollinaris, every man has a foul endued
with understanding, Jesus Christ our Lord is a man, therefore he has Soul
endued with understanding; of the two propositions from whence this conclusion
is drawn, the second is in the Scriptures, the first is not there; but we have
learned it in the school of reason; would you say under this pretext, that the
conclusion, viz. that Jesus Christ has a soul endued with understanding, is
not a divine truth but a humane, learned from earth and not from heaven? but
where is the infant that does not see, that God revealing to us, that his Son
is a man, does not reveal by the same means that he has a body, a Soul,
understanding, and in short all the essential parts of the nature signified by
this word man. Otherwise one must say that in teaching us that Jesus Christ is
man, it teaches us nothing, but simply strikes the ear with the vain and
unprofitable sound of the word, for what is it to say that Jesus Christ is man,
unless he has a body, Soul, understanding, and the other things of which the
nature of the subject consist, signified by this word man. In the same manner
when the Scripture teaches us that God has created the earth, it teaches us
by the same means that he has created America, and the Austral Countries,
China; and the Isles of the Sound, although it be sense and reason, and not
Scripture which teaches us that these Countries are part of the Globe of the
earth, and he would be impertinent to the hight, who should say that the
Scripture has not revealed to us, that God has created China or Taproban,
because it simply tells us that God has created the earth, without telling
that these Countries are part of it. And so of the rest, for God in his
Scripture presupposes every where that those to whom he speaks are men and not
beasts; that they know, if not subtily and Phylosophically (that which is not
necessary for his design) at least grossly and in some measure the nature of
those things, of which he speaks to them; and by consequence that they are
capable of applying to every part of a subject what he has told them in gross,
so that when he learns us some thing of a whole, it is clear that it is as much,
as if he revealed all and every one of its parts to us perticularly, as when he
tells us that Jesus Christ is a man, it is as much as if he should say, he has a
Body formed like ours, consisting of quantity, occupying a space which is fit
to it, moving it self in time from one place to another, in such manner that
its parts are not altogether in the same place, that he has a Soul which
reasons, wills, loves, and in short endued with all the essential faculties
of man. This is so clear that no Body ever can put it in doubt, even none of
these new disputants; the best Authors of their own party grant this. It is
(says the Bishop of Canaries) a thing worthy of great and diligent
consideration, that we ought to hold for a part of the Catholic doctrine, not
only that which has been expressly revealed to the Apostles, but also that
which is concluded by arguments and by evident consequences from two
propositions, one of which i^ revealed, the other certain by the light of
nature Melch Canus lo^. theolog. l. 6 c. 8.
.

Vega says likewise that nothing hinders these propositions from being ranked
amongst those of Faith Vega 9 de justify. c 39.
. And Vasques makes the same judgment of it. Vasques. in. 1 Them. q. 1. disput
12. art. 8. c. 2.
F. Ambrose Catharin at that time Bishop of Minory, and since Archbishop of
Conza, a most learned and a most celebrated person, and one of those who
appeared most at the the Council of Trent, held this very opinion against Soto
in a little book which he has writ against him, to prove that the faithful may
be assured of being in the grace of God, and produced Scotus for his Author; I
think also (says he speaking to Soto) that what you say is false, viz. that
when one of the propositions is from Faith, and the other from science or
experience, the conclusion which is drawn from thence is from science and
experience and not from Faith, according to that rule, that the conclusion
follows the weakest part. Against this strange proposition; which one may call
truly inopiniable, Scotus teaches (as you who are versed in the Scholastiques
may have seen) that when one takes two propositions, one naturally evident and
the other from faith, the the conclusion which follows from it is of Faith, see
here the example which he brings, as (says he) if one should say, whosoever
begets is really different from him whom he has begotten (which is as he holds
a natural maxim) and if one should add afterward, now the father has
begotten in divinity (which is a proposition of faith) the conclusion which
follows from it, viz. therefore the Father begetting in divinity is really
distinguished from the Son begotten, this conclusion (say I) is not natural but
of Faith, whereas if your hypothesis were true it ought to be natural, since
that according to you the natural propositions is the weakest, now the reason
of that is, that in our judgment, the proposition which is of Faith, is the
most uncertain of them; and it is in this that you abuse your selves and abuse
others Ambros. bath polit. in expurgat. ad Soto. p. 250 257. 258 edit. Lugd.
An. 1551.
See how Catharin turns against Soto and the methodists, this very maxim of
logic, which they produce to ground their error upon, for the proposition of
Faith being in our opinion there the least certain; and by consequences the
most weak, since the conclusion follows the weakest part, its evident, that
according to this rule it ought to be from Faith, if any of the propositions
from which one has drawn it be of Faith. But besides this subtle and ingenious
consideration of Catharin, I think for mine own part, that this rule of logic
that the conclusion follows the weakest part is ill alleged to the purpose, by
the methodists, in this dispute; for the Masters of Logic mean only by that,
that if one of the propositions be particular and the other universal, or if
one be negative and the other affirmative, or if one be of a truth only
probable and the other of a necessary; the conclusion will not be universal but
particular, nor affirmitive but negative, not necessary but probable, we grant
it very willingly in this sense, and if it ever happens to us, in disputing
against our adversaries, to conclude a proposition universal or affirmative
from a particular, or from a negative, or pretend that from a truth only
probable the conclusion should be necessary, then we will submit our selves to
the lash of their Logic. But to stretch this maxim further, and let it
signify, that if of the two propositions which we use, the one has been
revealed from God and the other taught by nature, the conclusion ought to be
put amongst humane maxims and not amongst the Divine Doctrines, it is a fancy
so far from reason that I am assured that none of the Logicians have ever
dreamed of it.

The End of the First part.
THE Positive and Affirmative ARTICLES OF OUR BELIEF Are proved by Scripture.
Second Part.
CHAP. I. An exposition of the principal and most necessary Articles of our
Faith.
THese thing are sufficient, in my judgment, to keep our sense and reason from
the troublesome and unjust chains with which the new Methodists pretend
tyrannically to bind them: Let us come now to our design, and briefly show our
Faith, that we may prove every one of the Articles of which it consists, by
Scripture, whether they be read there, or evidently inferred from thence.

First then, We believe that which heaven and earth teaches us, that there is
one God, eternal, infinite, incomprehensible, soveraignly good, wise, powerful,
and just: Who has created the Universe, and governs it by his Providence,
nothing happening in Nature or amongst Men without his Order or Permission. We
believe that this great God made Man, in the beginning of the World, according
to his own image and likeness, and put him into the Garden of Eden, there to
lead an immortal life, and that Man fell from this happy condition by his own
fault, having disobeyed his Lord, and that by this crime, he and all his
Offspring remains out of the grace of God, Slaves of Sin and Death. We believe
that God, moved by compassion, toward his own work, has sent his Son Jesus
Christ into the World, in the fullness of time, who has done and suffered all
things necessary to draw men from perdition, and to give them eternal Life;
that this Son is the same God, with the Father, of the same power and essence,
and subsisted from all eternity with him, that he made himself man in time, and
took to himself our nature, in the womb of the virgin Mary, uniting it
personally with his Divinity, and after having preached his Grace to the people
of the Jews, he was, at their accusation, crucified by Pontius Pilate, and
being dead upon the Cross, and then buried, he rose the third day from the
dead, and after having conversed forty days with his Disciples, he ascended
into Heaven, where the Father has given him all authority and power. We
believe that he reigns there now in a Sovereign glory, governing all the World
according to his good pleasure, and that one day he shall come to Judge it for
the last time. We believe that by his death he has satisfied the justice of
the Father, in as much as he has suffered the pains for the Sins of humane
kind, and that he has acquired an eternal Salvation, and that the Religion
which he has given us to obtain this consists in Faith and Charity; that the
Father appeased by his Obedience, receives to mercy all those, who knowing
their misery, and repenting of their Sins, do confide in his bounty, and
believe in his promises, that he pardons them gratis all their faults, and
treats them as if they had never offended, and these being animated, and
enlivened by Faith, live afterward holily and Christianly in Piety toward
God, and Charity toward their Neighbors, according to the Gospel of Christ.
For he wills, that all his Faithful love, and serve God with one love and
sovereign adoration, and that they have a true Charity toward all men;
carefully keeping themselves from violating their dignity, Life, Chastity,
Estates, or Honor, neither in Deed, Word, nor Thought, every one subjecting
themselves to their Order and Laws of their Civil Societies, and to the state
of the Country where they live: but that they entertain a particular amity with
the rest of the Faithful, cherishing them as their own Brethren, uniting
themselves to them, that so there may be but one Body in Religion: and that for
this end, there be amongst them Pastors and Supervisers, who have the
overlooking of their Communion, administering to them, as well the divine
Doctrine, as the holy Sacraments, which the Lord has left as tokens of his
grace, and marks and seals of his Covenant, having commanded that his faithful
Servants should be baptized in the Name of the Father, Son, and Holy Ghost for
the remission of their sins, and that they should eat the Bread, and drink the
sanctified Wine, in commemoration of his Death, and communication of his Flesh
and Blood: We believe that although the truth of these things is most clear,
yet men are so blinded by the Passion of their malice, that they would never
understand them, if the HOLYSPIRIT, true God, eternally blessed with the FATHER
and the SON, did not inlighten their understanding, opening their hearts, that
the light of this heavenly Doctrine may enter in, and that God affords them
this grace of his own good pleasure, giving it when, to whom, and in what
measure it seems good to him. We believe, that to those who shall have
believed, and lived according to this holy doctrine, God will give his
Salvation, preserving them and taking care of them, and when they depart this
Life gather their Souls into his repose, expecting the last day, in which
having raised their Bodies, will lift them up with Jesus Christ their Head,
into an incorruptable Heaven, there to live eternally in his Glory; but the
Wicked and incredulous shall perish, being punished with the Devil and his
Angels in the torments of Hell.

Reader, if thou art conversant in reading the Holy Bible, say in thy
Conscience, whether it be not too great a boldness to deny, that these things
are clearly contained there? only hearing them named do you not as soon
perceive, that these Divine Books, and especially those of the New Testament
are full of them? How hard is it to find one verse, which lays not down some
of these instructions? Nevertheless (because they will have it so) we verify
them, Article by Article; and to the end that they should not (as it is their
custom) wrangle with us about words, we will produce passages of Scripture in
those very words, into which the Interpreter of our Adversaries has translated
them, and then say a little upon every point, contenting our selves to mark the
rest in the Margint. For if we should gather together all the places of
Scripture, where these Doctrines are positively laid down or hinted, we must
transcribe almost all of them, and as to the Scripture it self, we suppose the
truth of it without disputing it in this Treatise, where the business is only
to prove, that the Articles, whose belief we esteem necessary to Salvation, are
all found in the Book, which we hold for the Rule and principle of our Faith.
For that is sufficient to bring to nothing the calumny of these new Disputants,
who to convince the Scripture of imperfection, and constrain us by the same
means to have recourse to the Authority of their Church, crying incessantly
that we our selves who make so much account of Scripture, cannot prove by it
all the things which we believe necessary to Salvation.

CHAP. II. Of the Essence and Nature of God. Of his Qualities and Works.
1. FIrst then as to the Article of the Essence, and Divine Nature, the
Scripture lays down at the first word that there is one God, in saying, that
he created the Heaven and the Earth in the beginning, and speaks of him every
where as of a thing, whose being and subsistence, every one knows and
understands, holding them not only for impious and irreligious, but for mere
fools and sense-less creatures who think there is none. Psalm. 13. (Heb. 14.) 1.
The Scripture makes him Act and speak in infinite ways and manners, from the
beginning to the very end, teaching not only that he is, but that there is
none besides him, who truly is, all the rest not being but in him and by him.
So long then as there are passages in Scripture which attribute to God some
quality, action, or word (and of this kind there are an infinite number) they
are so much the stronger and evident proofs of this truth. See Duet. 4.39. and
6.4. ^sa. 45.5.6.21. John 17.3 and many other places.


Heb. 11.6. It behooves him that comes to God, to believe that he is, and that
he is a rewarder of those who diligently seek him.

Act. 17.27, 28. God is not far from any one of us, for in him we live, move,
and are.

1 Cor. 8.6. We have one God, who is the Father, from whom are all things, and
we in him.

Exodus 3.14. The Lord said to Moses, I am, that I am, then he said, thou shall
tell the Children of Israel, he that is has sent me to you.

Esaiah. 37.16. Lord of Armies, the God of Israel, who art set upon the
Cherubims, thou art alone God of all the Kingdoms of the earth, thou have made
the Heaven and the earth.

Esaiab. 43.10, 11. There was no God, formed before me, nor shall be after me,
I am, I am the Lord, and there is none other Savior but me.

Psalm. 89. ( Heb. 90.) 2. Before the Mountains were made, and the earth and
world were formed, from age to age, thou art God.

2. That Godis Eternal.
Genesis 21.33. See Ex. 15.19. Job. 36.26. Psalm. 9. (Heb. 10) 8.37, 38. Heb. 90.2.
Abraham etc. called upon the name of God Eternal.

Psalm. 101. ( Heb. 102.) 27, 28. The heavens shall perish, but thou shall be
permanent, and all of them shall wax old as a garment, and thou shall change
them as a vesture, and they shall be changed, but thou art the same, thou art
and thy years fail not.

Romans 16.26. Esai. 41.4.43.10.44.6. and 48.12. 1 Timothy 1.17. Re. 1.8.
By the commandment of the Eternal God.

1 Timothy 6.16. God only has immortality.

3. That God is Infinite
Jerem. 23, 24. 2. Kings 8.27. and 2. Paralipom. 2.6. and 6, 18. Psalm. 138
(Heb. 139) 7. Esa. 66.1.
do not I fill heaven and earth says the Lord.

Acts. 7.47, 48. The most high dwells not in Temples made with hands as the
Prophet says. Heaven is my throne and the earth is my foot stool, what house
will you build me says the Lord, or where is the place of my rest.

Job. 11.7, 8, 9. Shall thou by chance find out the ways of God, and shall thou
at length find out the Almighty? he is higher then heaven and what will thou
do? he is deeper then Hell, and how will thou know him? his measure is longer
then the earth, and larger then the Sea.

4: That the nature and judgments of God are incomprehensible.
Romans 11.33. Exodus 33.20. 1 Timothy 1.17.
O profound riches of the wisdom and knowledge of God! how incomprehensible
are his judgments, and his ways past finding out! for who is he that has
known a thought of the Lord? or who has been his Counselour.

1. Tim. 6.15, 16. The blessed and only powerful King of Kings and Lord of
Lords, etc. Has only immortality, and inhabits an inaccessible light, the
which no man has or can see.

5. That God is Soveraginly good.
Exodus 34.6, 7. Lord God ruler, Merciful, Pitiful, Patient, and of great
compassion, and true, who keeps mercys for thousands, who takes a way iniquity
and sin Psalm. 135. ( Heb. 136.) 1. The Lord is good and his mercy indureth
Eternally.

Matthew. 19.17. There is one good viz. God. (or as our bibles are translated)
there is none good but one viz. God.

6. That God is most just.
Jerem. 12.1. In truth Lord if I dispute with thee thou art just.

Psalm. 10. ( Heb. 11.) 8. The Lord is just, and has loved justice, his face
has seen equity.

Psalm. 118. ( Heb. 119.) 137. Lord thou art just and thy judgment is right.

7. That God is Infinitely wise.
Psalm. 146. ( Heb. 147.) 5. Our Lord is great, and his Virtue great; and there
is no numbering of his wisdom.

Romans 11.33. O profound riches of the Wisdom and knowledge of God.

Romans 16.27. To God only wise be honor and glory for ever through Jesus Christ.

8. That God is all powerful.
Genesis 17.1. Genesis 1^.14, and 35.11. and 48.3.
God appeared to Abraham, and said to him I am the Lord all powerful.

Matthew. 19.26. To God all things are possible.

Luke 1.37. Nothing shall be impossible to God.

Ephe. 3.20. To him, who by his power which Acts in us, can do in all
abundance, above all that which we can ask or think, to him, I say, be glory in
the Church in Jesus Christ, in all ages, world without end, Amen.

9. That God has created all things.
Genesis 1.1. Acts 14.14.
God created in the beginning the heaven and the earth.

Acts. 4.24. Lord, who has made the heavens and the earth the Sea and all
things which are there.

Acts. 17.24. God has made the World and all things which are in it.

Romans 11.36. Of him, and by him, and for him, are all things, to him then be
glory eternally, Amen. Genesis 18.25. Job. 38.41. Psalm. 103. (Heb 104.) 21. and
135. (Heb. 136.) 25. and 144. (Heb 145.) 15, 16. and 146. (Heb 147.) 8, 9.
Prove. 16.1.4.33. and 20.24. and 21.1 Isa. 45.6. Jer. 10, 11, 12, 13, 23. Amos
3.6. Matt. 6.26.28, 29, 30.


Ephe. 3.9. God has created all.

10. That God governes all things according to his good pleasure.
Matt 10.29. Are not two Sparrows sold for a farthing, nevertheless one of them
shall not fall to the ground without your father. And even the hairs of your
head are all numbered.

Acts. 17.25, 26, 28. God gives to all life, breath, and all things, and has
made all humane kind of one, to inhabit the whole space of the earth,
determining ordained seasons, and the bounds of their habitation etc. in him we
live, have motion, and are.

Romans 11.36. From him, and by him, and for him are all things.

Esa. 45.6, 7: I am the Lord and there is none other forming light and creating
darkness, making peace and creating evil. I am the Lord doing all these things.

CHAP. III. Of the Creation, nature, and corruption of man.
1. That God created man at the beginning after his own Image.
Genesis 1.26, 27. Furthermore God said: let us make man according to our Image
and similitude, and let him have dominion over the fishes of the Sea, and over
the Birds of the heavens, Genesis 2.7, 8, 15, 17.
and over the beasts, and over all the earth, and over every creeping thing
creeping upon the earth. God then created man according to his own Image and
likeness; he created him according to the Image of God.

2. That man is fallen from his happiness by his disobedience.
You have the History of it in the third Chapter of Genesis and 7 Eccles. 30. God
has made man right and he has entangled himself with infinite questions.

3. That by the disobedience of the first man all his posterity have been
subjected to sin and death.
Romans 5.12. By one man sin entered into the world, and by sin death. And so
death is come upon all men, in that all have sinned.

1 Cor. 15.22. All die in Adam.

4. That all men are from their nature defiled by sin and subject to death.
Romans 3.23. All have sinned, and have need of the glory of God.

Ephesians. 2.23. We have all conversed sometimes in the concupiscences of our flesh,
executing the desires of the flesh, and of our thoughts, and were from nature
children of wrath as others, and in verse the fifth we were dead in sin.

5. That this corruption is in men from their birth.
Psalm. 50. ( Heb. 51.) Behold truly I have been conceived in iniquity, and my
mother has conceived me in sin.

John. 3.6. That which is born of the flesh is flesh.

Job. 14.4. Who can make man clean who is conceived of filthyness? is it not
thou only?

CHAP. IV. Of the Mediator of his person and natures.
1. That God by his mercy has sent his Son Jesus Christ into the world to save
humane kind.
JOhn 3.16. God has so loved the world, that he has given his only Son to
the end that whosoever believes in him should not perish but have eternal life.

Romans 8.3. That which was impossible to the Law (in as much as it was weak
through the flesh) God having sent his own Son in the likeness of sinful flesh,
and for sin condemned sin in the flesh, etc.

1 Cor. 1.30. Jesus Christ has been made to us by God, wisdom, justice,
sanctification and redemption.

2. That the Son, sent for us, John. 3 13. comp. with John. 662. 1 Cor. 10.9.
subsisted before he took humane flesh in the womb of the Virgin.
John. 1.1, 2. In the beginning was the Verb (or the word as our Bibles have it
translated) and the Verb was with God, and the Verb was God, he was in the
beginning with God, and verse. the 14 and the Verb has been made flesh and
dwelt amongst us.

Phil. 2.6, 7. Jesus Christ being in form of God he has not reputed it rapine
to be equal with God, so he became nothing himself, having taken the form of a
servant, made in the likeness of man, found in figure as a man, he did, I say,
abase himself.

2 Cor. 8, 9. You know the grace of Jesus Christ our Lord, viz. that he made
himself poor for you, though he were rich, that by his Poverty you might be
rich.

John. 8.58. Jesus said to them verily, verily, I say unto you before Abraham
was made I am.

3. That the Son sent for us is God.
St. John in the beginning of his Gospel speaking of the word which has been
made flesh ( verse. 14.) says, in the beginning was the Verb and the Verb was
with God. and the Verb was God.

Romans 9.5. Christ who is God above all things blessed eternally.

Titus. 2.13. We expect the happy hope and coming of the glory of our great God
and Savior Jesus Christ.

1. 1 John 5.20. He, that is to say the Son, is the true God and life eternal.
This is proved clearly thus, he who has created heaven and earth, and who now
preserves them is the true God as Esaias teaches who makes the Lord speak thus,
I am the Lord who makes all things alone, expanding the heavene, rendering the
earth, from Esa. 44.24. From whence it comes, that the Scripture very often
gives the quality of a creature to God as an elogy, which does not agree with
him, but only to distinguish him from all other things, as in Esaias these things
says the Lord God, who has created the heavens and stretched them out, who
has conformed the earth and the things which spring from it Esa 42.5. and
likewise, Esa. 45.12. and 48.13. and 51.13. Now the Son of God sent for us has
created the heavens, and the earth, and all the things which are in them, and
governs and sustains them by his power and wisdom, St. John speaking of the
Verb made flesh: for us all things have been made by him, says he, and without
him nothing has been done that has been done. John 1.3, and to verse. 9, and
10. he is the true light which enlightens every man coming into the world, he
was in the world the world has been made by him.

Col. 1.15, 16. The Apostle speaking of the Son of Gods love, who is the image
of the invisible God, first born (that is to say Lord) of every creature, adds,
in him have been created all things in heaven and in earth visible and
invisible, be they thrones, governments, principallities, or powers, all
things, I say, are created by him and in him, and he was before all things, and
all consist by him.

Heb. 1.2, 3. God has spoken to us in these latter days by his Son, whom he
has constituted heir (that is to say Lord) of all things, by whom also he has
made the ages, which Son being the splendor of the glory, and figure of the
substance of him, and maintaining all things by his powerful word, having made
the purgation of sins, is set at the right hand of Majesty in high places, and
verse. 10, 11. The Apostle appropriates to him these words of the Psalmist, Lord
thou have founded the earth from the beginning and the Heavens are the works of
thy hands.

They shall perish but thou art permanent, and all shall grow old as a garment,
and thou shall change them as a vesture and they shall be, changed, but thou
art the same and thy years fail not, it follows then that the Son sent for us
is the true God.

2. He who by his intelligence knows the thought of humane hearts truly is God,
as Solomon teaches 3 Kings ( Heb. 1 Kings) 8.39. 2 Chr. 6.20. Where speaking to
God, thou alone says he knows the hearts of all the Sons of men; now the Son
of God knows the secrets of the hearts of men: Reve, 2.23. where he says, I
am he who examine the reins and hearts, and will give to every one of you
according to his works.

One must then confess that he is the true God.

3. He whomay and ought to be served and worshipped with a soverain worship
properly so called is God, for the Scripture teaches us that this worship
appertains but to God alone Mat. 4.10. thou shall worship the Lord thy God and
him only shall thou serve.

Now the Son of God ought to be worshipped by men and angels with a Sovereign
worship.

John. 5.22, 23. The Father has given all judgment to the Son, to the end that
all should honor the Son as they honor the Father, he who honors not the
Son honors not the Father who has sent him, Heb. 1.6^ when he brings his
first begotten Son into the world, he says, and let all the Angels of God
worship him.

Phil. 2.9, 10. God has Soverainly lifted up (Jesus) and has given him a
name, which is above all names to the end that at the name of Jesus every knee
should bow, of those who are in heaven, in the earth, and under the earth.

4. That the Son of God is the same God who was worshipped heretofore in
Israel, and who is called the Lord or the Eternal, in the books of the Old
Testament
1. This appears first from what we have already shown, that the Son is God.
For all the Scripture teaches us that there is no other God but the eternal
Lord, known and worshipped in Israel, Deuteronomy. 4.35. The Lord is God and there is
no other besides him. Deuteronomy. 6.4. Hear Israel the Lord our God is God alone,
Deuteronomy. 32.39. See now that I am only, and there is no other God but me.

Now Christ is God as we have shown by the Scriptures.

It follows then that he is the same Lord or eternal, who was worshipped
heretofore by the Israelites.

2. He whose glory Isaiah saw in the sixth chapter of his revelations, is
truly the Lord eternal, worshipped by the Jews, I see (says he) the Lord
sitting upon an High Seat and lifted up, and this appears in the 3, 5, 7, and
11. verses, now Jesus is he whose Glory Isaiah saw, as S. John in the 12.
Chapter of his Gospel witnesses verse. the 41. where having alleged some words
of this passage of Isaiah, he adds, these things said Isaiah when he saw the
glory of him ( viz. of the Lord Jesus) and spoke of him.

It follows than that Jesus Christ is this same eternal worshipped by the
ancient people.

3. The Lord of the Temple of Jerusalem is the eternal, since the Templ^ has
not been consecrated to any but him, as it appears through all the Old
Testament.

Now Christ is the Lord of the Temple of Jerusalem, as it appears by the
Prophet Malachy, who foretelling the coming of the Messiah, the Governor whom
you demand, says he, and the Angel of the Covenant whom you desire, shall come
to (or into) his Temple, Malachy 3.1. Christ is then the very eternal.

4. The Lord of David, and other Beleivers, living under the old Testament, is
the eternal whom they worshipped, at it appears by all the books of the Old
Scripture. I am the Lord thy God, thou shall have no other before me, Exodus
20.2, 3.

Thou art our Father and Abraham has not known us, and Israel has not known
us.

Lord thou art our Father and our Redeeemer, Isai. 63.16.

Now Christ is the Lord of David, as Jesus Christ himself remarks, alleging!
these Words from Psalm. 109 ( Heb. 110.) 1. The Lord has said to my Lord sit
thou at my Right Hand.

He is then truly the eternal.

5. He whom the Isralites tempted in the Wilderness is the eternal.

Now Jesus Christ is he whom the Israelites tempted in the desert, 1 Cor, 10.9.
Let us not tempt Christ as some of them have tempted him and have been
destroyed by the Serpents.

He is then this same eternal worshipped by Israel.

6. He of whom David spoke in the 101 Psalm (Heb. 102.) verse. 26, 27, 28. Is
the eternal, the God of Israel, as it appears through all that Psalm, and
perticularly by the 25. verse where he calls him his strong God (in the Hebrew
text) which quality he had care, of not giving to any other then to the Lord
eternal.

Now Jesus is he to whom David, spoke in that place, as the Apostle in the
first Chapter of the Epistle to the Hebrews verse. 10. witnesses in applying to
him the words of the Psalmist, already recited here above Chap. 4. Sect. 3.

It follows then that Jesus is truly this same eternal.

7. In a Word the Lord protests in Isaia, that he would not give his glory to
any other, Isai. 42.8, and 48.11.

Now the Father eternal has given this glory to Jesus Christ, as he himself
says in St. John. The Father, etc. has given all judgment to the Son, to the
end that all might honor the Son as they honor the Father, John. 5.22, 23.

It follows then that Jesus is none other then the Lord eternal.

5. That the Son of God sent for us, is not the same person with the Father.
Now although this eternal worshipped by the Israelites, and the Son sent for
us, be one and the same God as we have already shown, and that theyave by
consequence one and the same substance, essence, or nature, nevertheless these
two persons are distinct one from the other, and are represented to us so in
the Scripture, one being called the Father, and the other the Son. For since he
who begets is not the same person with him that is begotten, nor he who sends
the same person with him that is sent, the Father and the Son are of necessity
two persons, since the Father has begotten and sent the Son. Psalm. 2.7. where
the Father speaks to Jesus Christ as the Apostle teaches us in Acts 13.33.
Thou art my Son this day have I begotten thee Gal. 4.1, 4. God has sent his
Son, John 3 16. It remains then that we say that the Father and the Son are two
persons, although they are one and the same divinity, which is the belief of
every true Christian.

6. That the Son of God is made man in the fullness of time, taking our flesh in
the womb of the blessed Virgin Mary.
John. 1.14. The World has been made Flesh and dwelt amongst us (and we have
seen its glory, Romans 8.3. Phil. 2.6. Heb. 2.17. Romans 13, 4.
glory I say, as of the only issue of the Father) full of Grace and Truth.

Gal. 4.4. When the fullness of time is come, God has sent his Son made of
woman, made under the Law, that he might Redeem those who were under the Law.

1 Timothy 3.16. Without contradiction the secret of Piety is great, viz. God is
manifested in the Flesh, sanctified in the Spirit.

Luke 1.30, 31, 32, 33, 34, 35. Mat. 1.18.
The Angel said unto her fear not Mary. For thou have found favor before God.
And behold thou shall conceive in thy womb, and shall bring forth a Son, and
shall call his name Jesus, he shall be great, and shall call himself the Son of
the Sovereign, and the Lord shall give him the Throne of David his Father, etc.
The Holy Ghost shall come upon thee and the Virtue of the Sovereign shall over
shadow thee, or in-shadow thee, therefore that also which shall be born of
thee: Holy shall be called the Son of God.

CHAP. V. Of the Sufferings, Actions, Glories, Merits, and Doctrine of Christ
the Mediator.
1. That the Son of God manifested in the Flesh has been crucified in Judea by
the Sentence of Pontius Pilate.
ACt. 2.23. Acts 4.10, and 10, 39.
Jesus of Nazereth being delivered by the determinate counsel and Providence of
God, you have taken, crucified, and killed him by the Hands of wicked men.

You have the History of it at large in the 27. of S. Mat. in the 15. of S.
Mark; the 23. of S. Luke; and the 19. of S. John; which is known enough to
every one.

2. That the Son of God did rise the third day from the dead.
1 Cor. 15.3, 4. Before all things I have given you that which I had also
received viz. that Christ is dead for our sins according to the Scriptures,
that he has been buried, and is risen the third Day according to the
Scriptures.

You have the History of his Resurrection at large, Acts 2.24, 31. and 10.40.
and 13.30. and 17.31. Romans 4.25, and 6.4, and 8.33. and 14.9. 2 Timothy 2.
Mat. 28.6. Mar. 16.6. Luke 24.5. John 26.9.

3. That the Son of God is ascended into Heaven, and that he reigns there in a
Sovereign power.
The History of it is described in St. Mar. 16.19. Luke 24.51. and more at
large, Act. 1.9.

Ephesians. 1.20, 21, 22. 1 Cor. 15.25, 27. Ephesians. 4.10. Phil. 2.9.10.11. Heb. 2.9.
God has raised Christ from the dead, and has made him sit at his Right Hand
in Heavenly places, above all Principalities and Powers, Virtue and Dominion,
and every Name which is Named. Not only in this World, but in that which is to
come. And has put all things under his Feet.

1 Pet. 3.22. Jesus Christ is at the Right Hand of God swallowing up death, to
make us Heirs of life eternal, being gone to Heaven to whom the Angels, Powers,
and Dominions are subject.

4. That the Son of God shall come at the Last Day to Judge the World.
Mat. 16.27. Mat. 24.30. Luke 17.24.30. and 21.27. Acts 1.11, and 17.31. Romans 2
16. 1 Cor. 4.5. 2 Cor. 5.10, 1 These. 4.16. 1 Pet. 4.4, 5. Rev. 20.11, 12, 13.
The Son of God shall come in the glory of his Father with his Angels, and then
he shall render to every one according to his works.

Acts 10.42. Jesus has commanded us to preach to the people and to Testify
that it is him who is ordained by God, to be judge of the living and the dead.

2 These. 1.6, 7, 8. This is a just thing with God, that he renders affliction
to those who a flict you, and to you who are afflicted deliverance with us,
when that the Lord Jesus shall show himself from Heaven with the Angels of his
power, and with the flame of fire, doing vengeance upon them that know not God.

2 Timothy 4.1. Jesus Christ shall judge the living and dead at his coming and
reign.

5. That the Son of God is dead for oursins, and bath Redeemed us in suffering
death for us.
1 Peter 3.18. Romans 4.25. Gal. 1.4.
Christ has suffered once for our sins, the just for the unjust that he might
lead us to God.

Isaiah. 53.5. He has been wounded for our iniquities, he has been bruised
for our sins. The discipline of our peace is upon him, and we are healed by his
stripes.

Romans 3.25. God has propounded Jesus Christ a propitiator (propitiatory) by
Faith in his blood to demonstrate his justice for the remission of sins past,
through the forbearance of God.

Gal. 3.13. Christ has redeemed us from the curse of the Law, Ephesians. 1.7. Col.
1.14. Heb. 9.12. Revel. 5.9.
when he was made a curse for us, for it is written, cursed is he who hangs
upon a tree.

1 Timothy 11.5. There is God and one Mediator (Moyenneur) between God and men,
viz. Jesus Christ man, who has given himself as a ransom for us all.

1 Peter 1.18, 19. Mat. 20.28
You have been Redeemed from your vain conversation (which was given to you by
your Fathers) not by things corruptible as by Gold or Silver, Act. 20.28
but by the precious blood of Christ, as of a Lamb without blemish and spot.

Romans 5 8. Luke 22.19. John 10.11, 15. and 10, 51, 52. 2 Cor. 5 15. Gal. 2.20.
Heb. 2.9. 1 Pet. 2.21. and 4.1. 1 John 1.16.
God certified his love to us, in this, that although we were yet abandoned to
sin, according to time Christ is dead for us.

Romans 8.32. God has not spared his own Son, but has given him for us all.

Ephesians. 5.2. Christ has loved us and delivered himself for us, an oblation and
sacrifice to God, an Odor of a good smell.

Tit. 2.14. Jesus Christ has given himself for us, to the end he might Redeem
us from all iniquity, and cleanse us, to be to him an agreeable people, given
to good works.

1 Peter 2.24. Christ has born our sins in his Body upon the Tree, Heb. 1.3.
Joh. 1.29. 1 John 1.7.
to the end that being dead to sin, we might live to justice, by whose
bruisings we have been healed.

Hebrews 9.28. Christ has been offered one time to abolish the sins of many.

2 Corinthians 5.21. God has made him who knew no sin to be sin for us, to the
end we should be made the justice of God in him.

Isaiah 53.4, 5. Truly he has born our greifs, and himself has carried our
Sorrows, and we have esteemed him as leprous, and stricken of God, and abased;
and verse 6. The Lord has put upon him the iniquity of us all; and verse
11.12. This same is my just servant, in justifying many by his knowledge, and
even he shall bear their iniquities, therefore I will part to him many, and he
shall divide the spoil with the strong, because he has given his soul to
death, and has been reputed amongst the wicked, and even he has born the sins
of many, and prayed for transgressors.

6. That the Religion of the Lord consists in Faith and Charity.
1 John 3.23. Behold the command of God, that we believe in the name of his Son
Jesus Christ and love one another as he has commanded ^s.

CHAP. VI. Of the Justification of man by the Grace of God: and of the Nature
of Faith.
1 That God appeased by the Sacrifice of the death of his Son, received into
Grace all those who believed in him, pardoning their sins and treating them as
if they had never sinned.
^Ohn 3.18. He who believes in (...) Jesus Christ shall not be condemn^d, but
he who does not believe is al^eady condemned.

John verse 24. Verily verily I say unto you, that he who hears my word, and
believes in him who has sent me, ^ath life eternal, and shall not come unto
condemnation, but is passed from ^eath to life,

John. 6.40. This is the will of ^im that sent me, that who ever ^eth the Son
and believes in him ^ath life eternal, and therefore I will raise him up at the
Last Day

Romans 3.21, 22, 23, 24. No^ the justice of God is manifested with out the
Law, having witness of (...) Law and Prophets, viz. the justice (...) God by
the Faith of Jesus Christ for all, and upon all them which believ^ in him; for
there is no difference sin^ all have sinned, and have need of the Glory of God,
being justified grat^ by his Grace, by the Redemption which is in Jesus Christ,
whom G^^ has Propounded a Propitiator b^ Faith in his blood.

Romans 4.5. To him who work^ eth not but believes in him wh^ justifies the
wicked his Faith (...) counted to him for Righteousnes^ according to the good
will of the Grace of God. And verse 23, 24* Now that this was imputed to
Abr^ham for righteousness, was not only written for him, but also for us, t^
whom also this shall be imputed, viz to us, who believe in him who hat^ raised
from the dead our Lord Jes^^ Christ.

Romans 10.9, 10. Romans 5.1.
If thou confesses the Lord Jesus Christ wit^ thy mouth and believe in thy
heart, that God has raised him from the dead, thou shall be saved. For with
the heart, man believes unto righteousness, and with the mouth confession is
made unto salvation.

Ephesians 2.8. By Grace are you faved through Faith, and this is not of your
selves, (for it is the gift of God) not by works, least any man should boast.
For we are his workmanship, being created in Christ Jesus unto good works,
which God has prepared, that we should walk in them.

2 Corinthians 5.19. God was in Christ, reconciling the World to himself, not
imputing their forfeits to them.

1 John 1.19. If we confess our sins he is Faithful and Just to pardon our fins
and cleanse us from all iniquity.

1 John 2.12. If any one has sinned we have an Advocate with the Father, viz.
Jesus Christ the Just. For it is he who is the Propitiatory for our sins, and not
only for ours, but for those of the whole World.

2. That those who believe in God and know him truly give themselves to
Sanctification and good works.
James 2.26. As the Body without the Soul is dead, so Faith without works is
dead.

1 John 2.3. By this we know that we have known him, Gal. 5.24.
viz. If we keep his commandments, he who says he knows God, and keeps
not his commandments, is a liar and the truth is not in him.

1. This is proved clearly thus who is begotten of God, gives himself to
holiness and good works, and does no more the mystery of iniquity 1 John 3.10.
By this is manifest the children of God and the children of the Devil. Whoever
does not justice nor loves his brother is not of God. Now whoever beleiveth
that Jesus is the Christ, is born of God, says S. John in his first Epistle
Chapter 5. verse 1. Then who ever believes that Jesus is the Christ gives
himself to Holiness and good works.

2. Who ever shall have eternal life is sanctified, as it is clear by that which
the Apostle says, Heb. 12.14. without holiness no man shall see God.

Now who ever believes shall have eternal life, he who believes in the Son of
God shall not perish but have eternal life, John. 3.16, 18. and 5.24. and in
other places alleged here above, then who ever believes is sanctified.

CHAP. VII. Of the sanctification of the faithful, and of their principle
parts, Piety, Charity, Submission, Humanity, Chastity, Justice, Truth, and
others.
1. Of the Charity and sanctification of the faithful; and first that they
ought to love God and serve him with a Sovereign adoration.
MAt. 22.37.38. Deuteronomy. 6.5, Luk 10.27.
Thou shall love the Lord thy God with all thy heart, with all thy Soul, and
with all thy thought, this is the first and great command.

Matt. 4.10. Thou shall worship. the Lord thy God, and him only shall thou
serve.

Romans 12.1. I beseech you then brethren by the mercy of God, that you offer
your bodies a living sacrifice^ holy, pleasing to God, which is your reasonable
service.

2. That we must love our neighbors with an ardent and sincere affection.
Mat. 22.39. The second commandment is like the first, thou shall love thy
neighbor as thy self.

Mat. 5.43, 44, 45. You have heard that it has been said thou shall love thy
neighbor and hate thy enemy, but I say unto you love your enemies, do good to
them who hate you, and pray for them who calumniate and persecute you, that you
may be the children of your Father which is in Heaven, who makes his Sun to
rise upon the good and evil, and sends rain upon the just and unjust.

Rem. 12.9. Let love be without dissembling, etc. Be inclined by brotherly
Charity to love one another, preferring one another in honor.

1. John 4.7, 8. Well beoved let us love one another. For charity is of God,
and whoever loves, is born of God, and knows God, he that loves not knows not
God, for God is charity.

3. That we must honor our Superioues.
Ephesians. 6.1, 2, 3. Children obey your Parents in the Lord, for that is just,
Honor thy Father and thy Mother, which is the first commandment with promise,
that it may be well with thee; and that thou may live long upon the earth.

Verse 5. Servants obey them that are your Masters according to the flesh, with
fear and trembling, in simplicity of heart, as to Christ, Romans 13.7, 8. Render
then to all that which is their due, to whom tribute is, tribute, to whom
custom is, custom, to whom fear, fear, to whom honor, honor, owe no man any
thing, but love one another, for he who loves his neighbor has accomplished
the Law.

4. That we must preserve our selves pure from all murders, outrages, offenses,
and batred against our neighbors.
Mat. 5.21, 22. You have heard that it has been said by them of Old time, thou
shall not kill, and he who shall kill, shall be worthy to be punished by
judgment; but I say unto you whosoever is angry with his brother he shall be
worthy to be punished; by judgment; and he who shall say to his brother Raca,
shall be worthy to be punished by the Council; and who shall say to him fool,
shall be worthy to be punished with the fire of hell.

Ephesians. 4.31, 32. Let all bitterness, anger, indignation, clamor, and evil
speaking be taken from you with all malice. Be ye kind one to another
cordially, pardoning one another as God has pardoned you by Christ.

5. That we must fly all the filthyness and stains of the flesh.
Mat. 5.27, 28. You have heard that it has been said to them of Old time thou
shall not commit adultery, but I say unto you, whosoever shall look upon a
woman to covet her, he has committed adultery with her already in his heart.

Ephesians. 5.3. Col. 3.5.
Fornication and all uncleaness, or covetousness, let it not be once named
amongst you, as becomes Saints, neither filthiness, nor foolish talking, nor
jesting, etc.

1 These. 4.3, 4, 5. 1 Cor. 6.15, 16, 17, 18, 19, 20,
This is the will of God, your sanctification, that is to say, that you abstain
from whore dome, and that every one of you possess his own vessel in
sanctification and honor, not being passionate with concupiscence, as the
Gentiles who know not God.

6. That we must keep our selves from Thieving, and every one work in his
calling.
Ephesians. 4.28. Let him who stole, steal no more, but rather let him work, being
busied with his hands in that which is good, that he may have to give to him
who has need of it.

2 These. 3.10. When we were with you, we told you that if any one would not
work he should not eat.

7. That we must fly lying and calumny, and be true in all our Actions and
Words.
Ephesians 4.25. Put away lying, and speak truth every one to his neighbor;
for we are members one of another.

Col. 3.9. Lie not one to another having put off the Old man with his deeds;
and having put on the new.

8. That we must be subject to, and humbly obey, the superior powers of the
Country where we live.
Romans 13.1, 2, 5. Tit. 3.1. 1 Pet. 2.13. 14, 17.
Let every person be subject to the Higher powers; for there is no power but of
God. The powers which are, are ordained of God. Wherefore he that resists the
power resists the Ordinance of God, and those who resist it draw damnation
upon themselves, etc. Therefore we must be subject not only for fear of anger,
but also for conscience.

Matthew 22.21. Render to Caesar the things which are Caesar's, and to God those
which are Gods.

9. That in a Word we live Holily and Honestly.
Romans 12.2. Do not conform your selves to the World but be you transformed by
the renewing of your senses to try what is the good will of God, well pleasing
and perfect;

Ephesians 4.22, 23, 24. Put off the Old man according to the foregoing
conversation, which is corrupt by concupiscences, which seduce it, and be
renewed in the spirit of your mind, and be ye clothed with the new man,
created according to God in justice, and true holiness.

Phil. 4.8. Finally my brethren, what ever things are true, Col 3.1, 2, 3, 4, 5.
what ever things are modest, whatever things are Just, what ever things are
Holy, what ever things are Lovely, what ever things are of good renown, if
there be any virtue and any praise of discipline, think of these things.

Titus 2.11, 12. The grace of God which brings salvation to all men has
appeared, teaching us that by renouncing infidelity, and Worldly desires we
should live in this present Age, Soberly, Justly, and Religiously, expecting
the happy Hope and advent of the Glory of our great God and Savior Jesus
Christ.

10. That this Holiness of life is necessary for the having a part in the
Kingdom of Christ.
Matthew 5.20. John 3.2.
I say unto you that if your Righteousness does not surpass that of the Scribes
and Pharisees you shall not enter into the Kingdom of Heaven.

Romans 8.13. If you live according to the flesh you shall die, but if by the
Spirit you mortify the deeds of the flesh you shall live.

1 Cor. 6.9, 10. Know you not that the unjust shall not inherit the Kingdom of
God? Ephesians. 5. Heb. 12.14. Gal. 6.7, 8.
do not abuse your selves, neither Whoremongers, nor Idolaters, nor Adulterers,
nor Effeminate, nor (les bougrees) abusers of themselves with mankind, nor
Thieves, nor Covetous, nor Drunkards, nor evil speakers, nor (ravisseurs)
Extortioners, shall inherit the Kingdom of God.

CHAP. VIII. Of the Union of the Faithful: Of the means necessary to preserve
it; as of the order of the Ministry of the Gospel, and the Discipline.
1. That we must perticularly love the Faithful.
JOhn 13.34, 35. I give you a new commandment that ye love one another as I
have loved you, to the end that you love one another, by this all shall know
that you be my disciples, if you have love one to another.

John 15.12, 13. 1 John 3.2, and 4.12. 1 Pet. 3, 8. Heb. 13.3. Mat. 18.6, 10.
This is my commandment that you love one another as I have loved you. None
has greater love then this, viz. when any one lays down his soul for his
friends.

Gal. 6.12. Whilst we have time let us do good to all, but especially to the
Household of Faith.

1 Peter 2.17. Bear honor to all, love the brotherhood.

2. That the Faithful ought to meet together to pray to God, and to mind other
exercises of Religion.
Heb. 10.24, 25. Let us take care of one another, to incite us to charity and
good works, not forsaking our assembling as some have used to do, but
admonishing one another.

This appears by the examples of the first Christians in the times of the
Apostles, when you gather your selves together (says St. Paul to the
Corinthians) you hold not the form of eating the Supper of the Lord 1 Cor.
11.20.

And by the promise which the Lord made us, Matt. 18.20. Where there be two or
three gathered together in my name, I am there in the midst of them.

3. That there ought to be Pastors and Overseers in the Church of the Faithful.
Romans 12.6, 7, 8. Having then gifts differing according to the grace that is
given to us whether prophecy, let us prophecy, according to the proportion of
Faith: or ministry let us wait on our ministering, or he that teaches on
teaching; or he that exhorts on exhortation, he that gives, let him do it
with simplicity: he that rules with diligence, he that shows mercy with
cheerfulness.

1 Cor. 12.27, 28. Now ye are the Body of Christ and (members de membre)
members in particular; Ephesians. 4.11,
And God has set some of them in the Church, first Apostles, secondarily
Prophets, thirdly Doctors, after that virtues, then gifts of healing, helps,
governments, diversities of tongues, interpretations of them.

Tit. 1.5. I have left thee in Crete, to the end that thou should correct
the things which remain, and that thou should constitute Priests (or elders)
through the Towns as I have ordered thee.

You have the History of the institution of the Deacons, and the distinction of
the Ministers serving the word, from those who serve the table and Alms, in
the 6 Chap. of the Acts.

4. What ought to be the Morals of Pastors and other Ministers
1 Timothy 3.1, 2, 3. and so on. Tit. 1.7, 8, 9.
This word is certain, if any one has an affection to be a Bishop he desires
an excellent work. But a Bishop must be irreprehensible, the Husband of one
woman only, Sober, prudent, modest, chaste, willingly receiving strangers, apt
to teach, not given to wine, no striker, but benign, no quarreller, not
covetous, but governing his house honestly, having his children subject in all
chastity, etc. Not a new convert for fear he being puffed up with pride, should
fall into the condemnation of the devil; he must also have a good testimony
from them who are without, least he fall into reproach, and the snare of the
devil. Likewise the Deacons must be grave not double in words, not given to much
wine, nor covetous of dishonest gain, holding the mystery of the faith in a
pure conscience, and let these first be proved, then let them serve being
irreprehensible, etc.

5. What the Charge of Pastors is.
1 Pet. 5.1, 2, 3. Act 20.28, 1 Cor. 4, 1, 2 1 Timothy 5.20. 2 Cor. 1.23. and 13.8.
5.1, 2, 3. I beseech the esders which are amongst you, I who am an elder with
you, and a witness of the sufferings of Christ, who am also a partaker of the
glory which shall be revealed? feed the flock of God, which is committed to
you, having, care over it, not by constraint, but willingly, according to God;
not for dishonest gain but of a ready mind, not as having Lord-ship over the
people and clergy of God, but so that you be examples to the flock by good will.

2 Cor. 4.5. We do not preach our selves, but Jesus Christ our Lord, and that
we are your servants for Jesus.

2 Timothy 2.2. that which thou have heard of me among many witnesses, do thou
commit to faithful men, who shall be sufficient to teach others also, and verse
the 14 remember these things, protesting before God etc. Study to render thy
self approved to God, to open without confusion, and handling rightly the words
of truth.

2 Timothy 4.2. Preach the word, be instant, in season, out of season, reprove,
rebuke, exhort with all patience and doctrine.

6. The dignity of the charge of Pastors and Supervisors.
1 Cor. 4.1. Let a man esteem of us as of the Ministers of Christ, 2 Cor. 5.10.
and dispensors of the secrets of God.

1 Timothy 3.1. This word is certain if any one has a mind to be a Bishop he
desires a good work.

7. That the Faithful ought to honor their Pastors, obey, and nourish them.
Matt. 18.17. If thy brother disdains to hear the Church let him be to thee as
a Pagan and Publican.

Luke 10.16. He that hears you hears me, says the Lord, speaking to his
Disciples, and he that rejects you rejects me.

Heb. 13.17. Obey them who rule over you and submit to them, for they watch for
your souls, as they who ought to give an account of them, that they may do it
with joy and not with grief, for that will not become profitable to you.

1 Timothy 5.17. The Priests (or elders as the Louvain version renders this word,
Sect 5 in the passage of St. Peter, 1 Ep. Chapter 5.1.) who rule well, let them be
reputed worthy of double honor, principally they who labor in the word of
doctrine. For the Scripture says, thou shall not tie the throat of the Ox that
treads out the corn, and the work man is worthy of his hire.

1 Cor. 9.13, 14. Do you not know that those who do Sacrifices, Gal. 6.6.
eat the things which are sacrificed? and they who are busied at the altar,
partake with the altar? so likewise our Lord has ordained that those who
preach the Gospel should live of the Gospel. See the verses 7, 8, 9, 10. Of the
same Chapter.

8. That the Faithful ought to reject the Ministers who preach any other thing
then the Gospel of Jesus Christ
Gal. 1.8. If we our selves, or an an Angel from Heaven should preach, other
wise then we have preached to you, let him be accursed. So as we have said
before, now also I say again, if any one preach to you any thing but that which
you have received let him be accursed.

1 John 4.1. Beloved, believe not all spirits; but try the spirit whether they
are of God. For many false Prophets are come into the World.

2 John verse 10. If any one comes to you, and brings not this Doctrine do not
receive him into your house, nor salute him.

CHAP. IX. Of the holy Sacraments, Baptism and the Eucharist.
1. That Christians ought to be baptized in the name of the Father, of the Son,
and of the Holy Ghost.
MAt. Mark, 16.16.
28.19. Go and teach all men, baptizing them in the name of the Father, of the
Son, and of the Holy Ghost.

Examples of this are common, in the books of the New Testamentperticularly in
the Acts of the Apostles, where we read that those, who believed the Doctrine
of Jesus Christ and received it, were baptized, Acts 2.38, 41. and 8.12, 13.
and 9.10. and 10.47, and 16.15.

2. That Baptism gives remission of sins, and the Grace of the Holy Ghost
Acts 2.38. Peter said to them repent, and be every one baptized, and you shall
receive the gift of the Holy Ghost.

Romans 6.3. Mar 6.16. 1 Pet. 3.21 Ehh. 6.26.
Know you not brethren that all of us who have been baptized in Jesus Christ,
have been baptized in his death? for we are buried with him in death by
baptism, so that as Christ is risen from the dead, by the glory of the Father,
we also should walk in newness of life.

Gal. 3.27. You all who were baptized in Christ have put on Christ.

Col. 2.11, 12. You being circumcised with a circumcision made without hands,
by putting off the body of Flesh, viz. by the circumcision of Jesus Christ,
being buried with him by baptism, in which also you are risen together by the
Faith of the operation of God, who has raised him from the dead.

3. That the Faithful ought to eat the bread and drink the sanctified wine in
commemoration of the death of the Lord.
1 Cor. 11.23. etc. I have received from the Lord that which also I give you;
that the Lord Jesus in the night in which he was betrayed, took bread, and
having given thanks, he brake it, and said, take eat; this here is my Body
which shall be given for you, Mat 26, 26, 27, 28. Mar. 14.22, 23, 24. Luke 22,
17, 18, 19, 20.
do this in remembrance of me. Likewise also he took the chalice, after he had
supped, saying, this chalice is the New Testament in my blood, I do this every
time that you drink of it in remembrance of me. For every time that you shall
eat this bread and drink this chalice, you will show forth the Lords death till
he comes, etc. Let a man then try himself, and so eat of this bread and drink
of this chalice.

4. That the bread and wine of the Eucharist are the communication of the Body
and blood of Jesus Christ.
1 Cor. 10.16. The cup of blessing which we bless, is it not the communication
of the blood of Christ? and the bread which we break, is it not the communion
of the body of the Lord.

CHAP. X. Of the Holy Ghost: Of the necessity of his light to have Faith: Of
his Nature and Person.
1. That the malice of man is so great that of himself he neither understands
nor believes the heavenly Doctrine preached by the Apostles of Jesus Christ,
nor can he live in piety according to the Gospel.
JOhn 3.3. Verily, verily, I say unto thee, that who is not born again cannot
see the Kingdom of God.

John 6.44. No one can come to me except the Father who has sent me draw him.

Rom, 8, 7. The wisdom of the flesh is an enemy to God, for it is not subject
to the Law of God, nor in truth can it be.

1 Cor. 2.14. The Animal man does not comprehend the things which are of the
Spirit God, for they are to him folly, and he cannot understand them in as much
as they are discerned spiritually.

2. That the Spirit of God which gives to men the graceof understanding and
believing the Gospel, and of living according to the Doctrine of the Lord.
1 Cor. 2.7, 8, 9, 10. We speak the Wisdom of God, which is a mystery, which
is hid, etc. Which none of the Princes of this World has known (for if they
had known if, they had never crucified the Lord of glory) but as it is written
the things which the eye has not seen, nor the ear heard, and which are not
entered into the heart of man, are those which God has prepared for those
which love him: but God has revealed them to us by his Spirit.

Matthew. 11.25. At that time Jesus answered and said, O Father, Lord of Heaven
and Earth, I thank thee, that thou have hid these things from the wise and
understanding; and have revealed them to little Children.

Matthew. 11.17. Thou art blessed Simon, Son of Jonas, for flesh and blood has
not revealed this unto thee viz. That Jesus Christ is the Son of the living
God, but my Father which is in heaven.

John. 1.12, 13. Those who believe in the name of God, are not born of blood,
nor of the will of the flesh, nor of the will of man, but are born of God.

Acts 16.14. The Lord opened the heart of Lydia, to understand the things which
Paul said.

Phil. 1.29. It is given to you for Christ, not only to believe in him but
also to endure for him.

Phil. 2.13. It Is God that works in you to do and to will, according to his
good will.

Ezech. Jer. 31.33. and 32.39.
11.19, 20. And I will give them a heart, and will put into them a new spirit,
and I will take away the heart of stone from their flesh, and will give them a
heart of flesh, that they may walkin my commandments, and keep my judgments,
and do them, and that they be my people, and that I be their God.

3. That the Holy Ghost is a person distinct from the Father and the Son.
John. 14.16, 17. I will pray the Father (says our Lord Jesus Christ) and he
shall give you another comforter, to abide with you eternally, viz. The Spirit
of truth which the world cannot receive, because it neither sees him nor knows
him, but you know him, for he shalld well with you, and be in you, and verse
the 26. The Comforter which is the Holy Ghost, whom the Father will send in my
name, shall teach you all things, and shall inspire into you all things which I
have said.

Matt. 28.19. Teach all nations baptizing them in the name of the Father of the
Son and of the Holy Ghost.

This appears because he proceeds from the Father, and is sent by the Son. When
the Comforter shall come (says the Lord) which I will send to you from my
Father, the Spirit of truth which proceeds from my Father that shall witness
of me. John 15.26. If I go I will send to you the Comforter Joh. 16.7. and ver.
13, 14. When the Spirit of truth shall come he will teach you all truth, for he
will not speak of himself, but will say all which he shall have heard, and will
tell you things to come, he shall gloryfie me, for he shall take of mine and
show it unto you.

4. That the Holy Ghost is God.
Acts. 5.3, 4. Peter said to Ananias, Ananias why has Satan filled thy heart
to lie to the Holy Ghost etc. Thou have not lied unto men but God.

This is proved evidently because the proprieties and works of the true God,
are attributed to him in the Scripture: as first, His presence in all places,
Psalm. 138 ( Heb 139.) 7, 8. Where shall I go back from thy Spirit, or where
shall I flee back from thy face; if I go into heaven thou art there, if I
descend into hell thou art present there.

Secondly, his presence in the persons of all the faithful, Romans 8.9. You are
not in the flesh, but in the Spirit, if the Spirit of God dwells in you, 1 Cor.
6.19.
1 Cor. 3.16. Know you not that you are the Temple of God, and that the Spirit
of God dwells in you? 2 Timothy 1.14. The Holy Ghost dwells in us.

Thirdly, His knowing all things, 1 Cor. 2.10, 11. The Spirit searches all
things, yea even the deep things of God, for what is it in men which knows the
things of man, except the Spirit of man which is in him? likewise no man has
known the things of God except the Spirit of God. John. 14.26. The Comforter
which is the Holy Ghost, which the Father will send in my Name, shall teach you
all things, see also, John. 14.13.

Fourthly, His knowledge and prediction of things to come, 1 Timothy 4.1. The
Spirit says expressly, that in the last times some shall revolt from the Faith.

Fifthly, His all powerfulness, 1 Cor. 12.11. One and the same Spirit does all
things, distributing to every one particularly, according as he will.

Sixthly, His right of having a Temple an evident sign of his Divinity, 1 Cor.
6.19. Do not you know that your body is the Temple of the Holy Ghost, which is
in you, the which you have of God.

Seventhly, His virtue of creating, Job. 26.13. His Spirit has adorned the
heavens, Job. 33.4. The Spirit of God has made me, and the breath of the
Almighty has given me life, Luke 1.35. The Angel answered and said to Mary.
The Holy Ghost shall come upon thee, and the Virtue of the Sovereign shall over
shadow thee, and therefore the Saint which shall be born of thee, shall be
called the Son of God.

Eighthly, That it is he which teaches the faithful of Jesus Christ, which is a
work of God, (as it appears by Isai 54.13. alleged by the Lord, John. 6.45.
They shall be all taught of God) 1 Cor. 2.10. God has revealed to us heavenly
things by his Spirit, and verse 12. and in John. 16.13. The Spirit of truth
shall teach you all truth.

Ninthly, That he subsisted before the creation of all things, Genesis 1, 2. The
Spirit of God moved upon the waters.

5. That the Holy Ghost is that same God which is called the Lord or Eternal in
Scripture.
This appears clearly. For since there is no other God but the Lord Eternal,
(as we have already proved by Scripture) the Holy Ghost being God, (as we have
shown) it must necessarily be concluded that he is the same Lord eternal, since
otherwise he would not be God.

Moreover this is proved most evidently thus, he who has instructed, sent, and
inspired the ancient Prophets of the Old Testament is the true eternal God
worshipped heretofore in Israel, as it appears through all their prophecies,
now it is the holy Spirit which has instructed, sent, and inspired them, 2
Pet. 1.21. The holy men of God being inspired by the holy Spirit have spoken.
It Is he perticularly ( Acts. 1.16.) who has foretold that which we read in
David, Psalm. 40. ( Heb. 41.) 10. It Is he who spoke by Isai. ( Acts. 28.25.) and
commanded him to say that which we read in the 6 Chap. verse. 9. of his
prophecy, It Is he ( Heb. 9.1, 8.) who gave to Moses the ordinance which we
read, Levit. 16.2. It Is he ( Heb. 10.15.) who spoke in the 31 Chap. verse 32.
of Jeremy. It Is he lastly ( Heb. 3.7) who says in the 94 Psalm. ( Heb. 95.) 8.
that which we read there: it follows then of necessity, that he is the same
Lord Eternal, whom the Faithful under the Old Testament adored.

Thus have we clearly proved the Doctrine of the Trinity. That there is three
of them, the Scripture teaches it expressly, 1 John. 5.7. There are three which
gives witness in heaven, the Father, the Word, and the Spirit, and these three
are one, Matt. 28.19. Teaching all Nations baptizing them in the name of the
Father, of the Son, and of the holy Ghost, 2 Cor. 13.13. The grace of our Lord
Jesus Christ, and the love of God, and the Communion of the Spirit, be with you
all, Amen. And when the Lord Jesus was baptized these three persons were
manifested distinctly, the Father crying from heaven, this is my beloved Son in
whom I have taken delight; the Son receiving the baptism in his humanity, the
Holy Ghost descending from heaven upon hm in form of a dove, Matthew. 3.16, 17.
And that these three persons are one and the same divinity, appears by what we
have all ready said. Now that the Father is the true eternal God adored by the
Israelites all the Scripture says it, and the words alone of Jesus Christ,
John. 17.3. sufficiently teaches it, were speaking to the Father, this is life
eternal (says he) that they should know the only true God. That Jesus Christ
is likewise the true eternal God, and that the Holy Spirit is so also, we have
proved here above. Since then that all the Scripture professes, that this
eternal Lord is one only God, as we have also justified, one must then of
necessity conclude, that these three blessed and glorious persons, the Father,
the Son, and the Holy Ghost; are but one and the same God; which is that which
the Church names the doctrine of the Trinity.

CHAP. XI. Of the Liberty, Efficacy, Effect, and Constancy of the Grace of the
Lord.
1. That God gives the Grace of his Spirit according to his good pleasure.
Romans 9.15, 16. I will have mercy (says the Lord) on him on whom I will have
mercy, and I will have compassion on him on whom I will have compassion. It is
not then (concludes the Apostle) of him who wills; nor of him who runs; but of
God who does mercy.

Ephesians. 1.5. God has predestined us into the adoption of his children by Jesus
Christ, according to the good pleasure of his will.

Phil. 2.13. It Is God, which has made in you both to will and to do according
to his good will.

Matt. 11.25, 26. O Father Lord of heaven and earth, I render thee thanks, that
thou have hid these things from the wise, and understanding, and have revealed
them to little children, even so Father for as much as thy good pleasure has
been such.

2. That those whom God has enlighttened by his Spirit come unto him.
John. 6.45. Whosoever has heard of the Father, and has learnt, he comes to
me.

Romans 8.29. Those whom God has before known, he has also predestined to be
made conformable to the image of his Son, etc. And those whom he predestined,
he has also called, and those whom he has called, he has also justified, and
those whom he has justified, he has also glorified.

3. That God will give his Salvation to those who shall have-believed in his
Son, and lived according to his Gospel.
John. 3.36. Who believes in the Son has eternal life.

Romans 8.1. There is therefore now no condemnation to those who are in Jesus
Christ, who walk not according to the flesh, see also, verse 13. and 14.

Joh. 5.11, 12. God has given us eternal life, and this life is in his Son;
who has the Son of God, he has life, who has not the Son of God, has not
life.

4. That he preserves and comforts them by his Spirit dureing this life.
John. 15.18. I will pray the Father, and he shall give you another Comforter
to dwell with you eternally. etc. I will not leave you Orphans, and adds Matthew.
28.20. behold, I am with you always, even to the end of the world.

John. 17.11. Now I am no more in the world; (said the Lord upon the point of
his passion) but these are in the world, and I come to thee, Holy Father, keep
them in thy name, those I say, which thou have given me, to the end they may be
one, as we are, etc. And in verse 15. I do not pray that thou would take
them out of the world, but that thou would keep them from the evil, and in
verse. 20. Now I pray not only for them, but also for those who shall believe
in me by their word.

Romans 8.32. God who has not spared his own Son, but gave him for us all, how
shall he not give us also all things with him? and in verse. 35.37. Who then
shall separate us from the love of Christ, shall it be oppression, or trouble,
or samine, or nakedness, or peril, or persecution, or sword? etc. But rather in
all these things we are conquerrours, through him who has loved us.

1 Cor. 1.8, 9. The Lord shall preserve you unto the end, that you may be
blameless in the day of our Lord Jesus Christ. God is faithful by whom you have
been called into the company of Jesus Christ our Lord.

1 Cor. 10.13. God is faithful who will not suffer you to be tempted beyond
what you are able, so he will give you aid in temptation, to the end you may be
able to bear it.

CHAP. XII. Of the last end of Men, as well Faithful as Reprobate.
1. That God gathers the Spirits of the Faithful into his Repose when they
depart this life.
REvel. 14.13. Blessed are the dead who die to the Lord from henceforth (says
the Spirit) that they rest from their labors for their works follows them.

2 Cor. 5.1. We know that if our earthly habitation of this body were destroyed
we have a building from God, viz. a house which is not made with hands, but
eternal in the heavens, and ver. 6, 7, 8. Wherefore having always confidence,
and knowing that when we are in this body we are absent from the Lord (for we
walk by Faith and not by sight) but we are assured, and have a good will rather
to be out of the body, and to be with the Lord.

2. That God shall raise the Faithful at the last day, and shall lead them into
heaven, to live and reign eternally with Christ in a Sovereign glory
John. 6.39. The will of my Father, which has sent me, is, that I should lose
nothing of all that which he has given me, but that I should raise them up at
the last day.

Romans 8.11. If the spirit of him who raised up Jesus from the dead, dwell in
you, he who raised Jesus Christ from the dead shall quicken also your mortal
Bodies, because of his Spirit dwelling in you.

Phil. 3.20, 21. We expect from heaven a Savior, viz. the Lord Jesus Christ:
Who shall transform our vile body, that it may be made conformable to his
glorious body, according to the efficacy by which, he can even make all things
subject to himself.

1 These. 4.14. If we believe that Jesus is dead and risen, likewise those who
sleep in Jesus, ver. 16.17:
God will bring them with him. Then in verse 15.16. For the Lord, with the
command and voice of the Archangel, and with the trumpet of God, shall descend
from Heaven, and those, who are dead in Christ, shall rise first. Then we, who
live and remain, shall be caught up together with them in the clouds before the
Lord in the air, and so shall be always with the Lord.

See the description, the clearness, and the history of all the Mystery of our
last resurrection in the Chap. 1 Cor.

3. That life eternal is a gift and grace of God.
Romans 6.23. The wages of sin is death, and the grace of God is life eternal by
Jesus Christ our Lord.

2 Timothy 1.18. The Lord give to Onesiphorus, to find mercy from God in the last
Day.

4. That the wicked and incredulous shall perish eternally.
2 These. 1.7, 8, 9. The Lord Jesus shall show himself from heaven with the
Angels of his power; with a flame of fire doing vengeance upon them, who know
not God, and who obey not the Gospel of our Lord Jesus Christ, who shall be
punished with eternal punishments, from the face of God, and from the glory of
his power.

Revel. 21.8. But the fearful, and Unbelieving, and execrable, and Murderers,
and Whoremongers, and Poisonous, and Idolaters, and all Liars, their part shall
be in the lake burning with fire and brimstone: which is the second death.

The End of the Second Part.
FAITH Grounded upon the Holy Scriptures.
Where the Articles of our Faith are justified by the Scripture Negative and
Exclusive; of the Creeds of the Roman Church.
Part III.
CHAP. I. The Antiquity, Universality, and Clearness of our Religion; and from
whence comes our difference with Rome.
THus have we shown our faith by the Scriptures. The Passages are clear, and
for the most part express and formal; which Rome and Geneva equally acknowledge
in their Version, which the East and West, North and South read in common,
since the first times of Christianity to this minute, without their being able
to reproach us, that we have violated the Original, abused the Pricks of the
Hebrew, or the Accents of the Greek. The Consequences are of so evident
necessity that Children are capable of understanding them: So easy is it to
prove, that the Beliefs which we have just now demonstrated by Scripture, are
common to all Christians. The Ancients have explained and cleared them in their
Symbols and Councils. The Moderns have retained them notwithstanding all the
Changes which has happened in Religion. All the Climates of the Christian world
have received them with an universal consent. Rome it self does not contest
with us about them; she makes a Profession to believe them also. There is but
Sabellius, Paul de Samosate, Arius, Fotinus, Manicheusi, Pelagius, Nestorius,
and Eutyches, every one of whom debate something of them with us, all
Heretics, being crushed by the Thunderbolts of the Catholic Church many
hundred years since. They alone demand proofs of us, the others believe all
with us: From whence it appears by the way, how false the Calumny of those is,
who accuse our Religion of novelty or particularity. For what is there either
more Ancient or Universal among Christians than those Creeds of which it
consists? Who can deny that the Catholic Church has had them in all Ages?
That Rome it self has them not now? Whether Antiquity has had any Opinion
which I have not, it is another Question; and upon which it falls out to
consider: First, Whether this be a thing which has been revealed by Jesus
Christ, and preached by his Apostles. And Secondly, ipresupposing it to be a
truth, that it is so necessary, that one cannot without believing it, have part
in the Grace and Glory of God. But as to my Religion, that is to say, this
faith which I have proved by the Scriptures, it is clear, that all the true
Christians both Ancient and Modern are agreed in it; who by confequence are all
of my Religion, although perhaps I am not of their Opinion in all other things.
They hold all my Beliefs, only I confess, it is better that I hold not all their
Opinions; see the terms upon which we are with those of Rome. For they profess
to believe the Articles which we have explained. All the difference springs
from the Articles which they lay down to the confession of which they would
oblige us, and which we cannot receive. This is all our Controversy. From
whence every one may see the injustice of the new Methodists, who press us to
prove by formal passages the points of our faith, controversed between them and
us: Whereas the Points of my faith (Gentlemen) are not controversed, but those
of yours; as for Example, the Question is not whether we ought to worship God
and Jesus Christ, which is a Point of my faith; but whether we ought to worship
the Host, which is an Article of yours. The Question is not, whether Jesus
Christ is our Mediator, or whether the Oblation of his death is a Sacrifice,
which are Articles of my belief; but whether the Saints departed are our
Mediators; and whether the pretended Oblation of your Altars is a true, a
properly called Sacrifice, which are the Points of your Faith. We do not
dispute whether we ought to call upon God, or hope for Paradise, and fear Hell,
which is my belief; but whether we ought to Invogue the Saints and apprehend
the fire of Purgatory, which is your Doctrine. It Is you then ought to prove
your says, and not I mine. Since to dispute well and lawfully, one ought to
prove, not things which the parties are agreed on (which would be a superflous
labor) but those about which they differ. Nevertheless to content your humor,
we have proved our faith by the Scripture. Let us see now if you can as easily
find yours there, and that which you add to ours, upon which indeed is all
your contest.

CHAP. II. An Exposition of the Principal Beliefs of the Roman Church, which we
reject from our Faith.
FOr we confess voluntarily that we cannot believe, neither that which you
teach, that Jesus Christ the Savior of the world, besides his being once
offered upon the Cross, is still every day immolated, and truly and properly
sacrificed upon your Altars, under the Signs of Bread and Wine, for the
expiation of the sins of men; nor that which you presuppose to this purpose,
that the body of Jesus Christ, although it be in Heaven in Sovereign Glory, is
notwithstanding here below really and substantially under the Species of Bread
and Wine which you consecrate entirely under every part of the Species of the
Bread and the Wine loosing their first substance, and being changed into that
of his Body and Blood; nor that which you conclude, that all the faithful of
the Lord are obliged, without scrupling, to render to your Sacrament the
adoration, Cult. de Latria.
worship and service due to the true God.

We reject also from our faith, this which you assert in yours, that the Souls
of some of the faithful, after having been washed in the Blood of Christ, which
cleanses from all sin, ought yet to be purged by, I know not what,
subterranean flames, in a place which you name Purgatory: Nor can we persuade
our selves to believe what you so firmly maintain, that sinful men obtain the
pardon of their Crimes not by faith alone (as we all believe) but also by the
merits of their own works, such (as most of you say) as they even merit Divine
Grace, and life eternal.

Neither can we receive that which you teach, that besides this great God whom
we adore, we ought also to serve the Saints departed; and besides the love and
honor which we bare them as persons who have lived in the fear of God, and who
now rejoice in his Glory, we ought moreover to invoke them, pray to them, and
have recourse to their aid, and render as well to their Images as to those of
Christ, a certain Religious Veneration, in kissing and saluting them,
uncovering our heads and prostrating our bodies before them.

Less yet do we think our selves obliged (as you do) to acknowledge the Bishop
of Rome for the Head and Spouse of the Universal Church, besides Jesus Christ
our Lord, or to attribute to him a Sovereign and Independent Authority over all
other Pastors and Bishops, and even over Councils; and an infallible Light in
the Faith, never erring in the decision of things which concerns it: and
therefore we do not believe that the Laws which he has made of celebrating
certain Feasts, and of abstaining certain days from certain kinds of meats does
oblige the Consciences of the Faithful.

And as to the Ministers of Religion in particular, we do not believe (as you
do) that they are obliged to abstain from Marriage, which the Astle calls
honorable, believing that it is enough that they have the good qualities which
is required in them in the first of Tim. and elsewhere.

Upon the Articles of the Sacraments, we confess that Baptism and the Supper
are sufficient for us, not being able (as you have ordained) to receive for
true and proper Sacraments of the Christian Religion; your Confirmation,
Orders, Extreme Unction, Penitence, nor Marriage; nor do we believe (as you do)
that the faithful are obliged before they communicate of the holy Eucharist, to
confess to a Priest all and every one of their sins in particular, declaring to
him the kinds and circumstances of them, believing that it is sufficient, that
a man try himself, 1 Cor. 11.28,
and so eat of that bread, and drink of that wine of the Lord, as the Apostle
prescribes.

In a word, we cannot believe that your Clerks ought to be exempted from the
Jurisdiction and Subjection of Princes and States in the Country in which they
live; nor that Princes and States should be subject to your Pope, or to any
other Ecclesiastical Minister in his Temporal Concerns, as the Court of Rome
holds, which you acknowledge as the Mother and Head of the Catholic Church.

These are the Principle Articles of the Faith of our Adversaries, which we
will not receive. Let us consider now as briefly as it is possible whether they
are found in the Holy Scriptures. If we will follow their Principles, it will
be very easy for us to finish all this Dispute in one word. For since
according to the Maxims of their Method we ought to hold for Doctrine of the
Scriptures, nothing but what we read there, precisely and in so many words, the
Consequences being faulty and discourse deceitful abusive; who sees not but by
their own Confession all the Articles which we have excluded from our faith,
are out of the Scripture, and cannot be proved by it; it being clear that one
cannot read there any one thing expressly, formally, and literally in the same
terms as they believe them and expound them; and upon this account I should be
already at the end of my task. For since that according to us the Scripture is
the only Principal of faith, so perfect that we do not think that it is
permitted us to receive into our Religion any Article of Belief which is not
taught by the Scriptures: and since on the other side, none of the Articles
which those of Rome lay down, can be read there, which is according to these
new Disputers, the only Method to justify a Belief by the Scripture, it
follows clearly that my faith is all entire, and most agreeable to the Holy
Scriptures (which is all the design of this Treatise) since that which it
believes is found there, and that which it does not believe is not found there.
But God forbid that we should take advantage by the wrangling of our
Adversaries. We shall always acknowledge for true Doctrine of the Scriptures,
that which can be clearly and necessarily drawn from thence; all that which
they charge upon Reason being false, and not to the purpose, as we have showed
here above. Let us deal honestly then, and examine whether their Beliefs which
appear no where in formal and precise terms in the Scripture may
notwithstanding be concluded from thence by some evident and necessary
Consequences. We will recite here only those which seem to them to be most
strong, passing by a great number of them; which though used by their Authors
are so weak, and (if I may be permitted to say it) so extravagant, that whoever
hears them will think them the idle talk of a sleeping man, rather than the
discourse of one that is awake. For to what purpose should I go about to spoil
Paper, and lose time to copy the Arguments of those who conclude the Monarchy
of the Bishop of Rome from that which Jesus Christ said to St. Luke 5.4.
Peter, Duc in altum, Go into the deep: or the truth of Purgatory from that
which David said, Psalm 129.1. (Lat. 130.1.) (Hebr.)
De profundis clamavi ad te, Domine: Lord, I have cried to thee from the deep
places: or that the Priests are obliged to a single life, from that which St.
Paul says, Romans 8 8.
that those who are in the flesh cannot please God; or the worshipping of
Images, from that which is said, the Lord made man after his own Image, and the
like? Without lying, if these Consequences, and the works of our understandings
were all of this nature, these Gentlemen would have great reason to reject
them. We will produce as much as possible we can, only those of their proofs
which seem to have some color and shadow of Reason, although at the bottom any
one may easily know, in bearing but attention to them, that they are nothing in
effect.

CHAP. III. That the pretended Sacrifice of the Mass is not taught in the
Scriptures.
FIrst, To prove that the Eucharist is a Sacrifice truly propitiatory for the
sins of men, they allege, that Melchizedek the Type of Jesus Christ offered
bread and wine. Geu. 14.18.
But what appearance is there in this Consequence? First, the Sacred Text both
in the (...)
Original, and in their own Proferens.
Version, signifies, that Melchisedek produced bread, and brought out wine,
and not that he offered it; and all these circumstances lead us to believe that
it was for the refreshment of Abraham and his men being weary with fighting, 2
Kings (Hebr. 2 Samuel.) 17.28.
and with the Journey; by a humanity like to that which Berzillai the Gileadite
has since used to David and those who were with him. Secondly, though Moses
did say that Melchisedek offered bread and wine, not to refresh Abraham, but in
Sacrifice to God, how can they prove that it was a propitiatory Sacrifice, and
not rather an action of thanks; since under the Old Testament all the
propitiatory Sacrifices had with them an effusion of blood? Heb. 9.22.
And in a word, suppose that this pretended Oblation of Melchisedek had been a
Sacrifice realy propitiatory, how can they prove that it figured the Eucharist,
which is never called Sacrifice in the New Testament; and not rather the death
of Jesus Christ, acknowledged for a true Sacrifice through out all the
Scriptures, and by all Christians, where the Lord, the true bread of life,
descended from Heaven, has been offered to the Father, for the expiation of
the sins of humanekinde?

Secondly, They produce Malachy, Mal. 1.11.
who prophesying the times of the New Testament, says, that in every place
they shall offer to the Lord an oblation pure, or clean: that is (say they) the
Eucharist. But first, although it should be so, how could they conclude from
thence that the Eucharist is a Sacrifice truly and properly expiatory? The
thanks which accompanies this action, and gives it the name of Eucharist, that
is to say, of an Action of Thanksgiving, may be called a pure Oblation, which
one presents to the Lord for his goodness to us, without being a propitiatory
Sacrifice, any more, than Alms, Prayers, and the Preaching of the Gospel, which
are named also Sacrifices. Secondly, What necessity is there to assert that
this pure Oblation predicted by Malachy should precisely be the Eucharist? Heb.
13.15, 16. Romans 15.16.
it is aim evidently enough is to fignifie, that the Service of God should be no
more as formerly tied to the Mountain of Zion, but should be done in all
places, from the rising to the going down of the Sun, not to the people of
Israel only, but communicated to all Nations. For these Divine Authors very
often employ the terms and things of the Church of their times, to signify the
state and things of the Church to come; as when Esaiah says, Esa. 2.3.
that the nations shall go up to the Mountain and Temple of the Lord, to
signify that they shall make profession of his knowledge, and shall serve him:
And when the Lord himself represents the estate of the Church to the Age to
come, in saying, Mat. 8.11.
that we shall be set at the Table with Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob, terms which
agree properly to the present Church. Malachy in the same manner used the word
Oblation, which is properly a part of the Service which had place in the Church
of his time, to denote the Evangelical Service which succeeded him under the
New Testament; and to signify it more particularly, he called it, a pure
Oblation; no more carnal and gross, consisting of Fat and Oil, in Flower, and
in the blood of Beasts, as heretofore, but wholly spiritual and true; this is
the service St. Paul understands where making opposition of the Christians with
the Jews, he says, Phil. 3.3. Romans 1.9.
that we should serve God in spirit; and speaking of himself, he says, that he
served God in his Spirit; and shows elsewhere, that his preaching was part of
it, where he says, Romans 15.16.
he applied himself to the Sacrifice of the Gospel of God, to the end that the
oblation of the Gentiles might be acceptable, being sanctified by the Holy
Ghost. He describes it so in general in the 12th of the Romans, That our
service (which he calls reasonable, for the same Reasons for which Malachy
names it pure) is that we should present our bodies as a living Sacrifice, holy
and pleasing to God. Romans 12.1
Jesus Christ a long time since Malachy, foretold exactly the same thing, at
the time of his complement. John 4.20, 23.
The hour comes (says he) that the true worshippers shall worship the Father
in Spirit and in truth; no more in the mountain of Gerezim as the Patriarchs
did, nor in Jerusalem as the Jews, but in every place, as the Prophet said. By
comparing of these passages it is easy to find out that the pure oblation of
Malachy is nothing else but the worshipping in Spirit and truth, which our Lord
says, and the oblation of our bodies as a living Sacrifice, as St. Paul speaks
and our service in Spirit, as he says, and so consequently not the Mass.

Thirdly, But they allege from the New Testament that Jesus Christ in
celebrating the Eucharist, said to his Disciples, Do this; now to do,
signifies sometimes to sacrifice: but what necessity is there to take it so in
this place? Who sees not that, do this, signifies an action of which the Lord
had spoken. Now he had said nothing of sacrificing (he spoke not one word of
that) but of eating and drinking. For after having given them the sanctified
bread to eat, and the sanctified Cup to drink, he adds, do this in remembrance
of me. Wherefore then shall not we take these words, do this, to signify, to
eat this Bread, and drink of this Chalice? St. Paul explains it clearly so,
when after having rehearsed these words of the Lord, Do this every time, and as
often as you drink of it in remembrance of me, he adds, for every time and as often
as you eat of this bread and drink of this Cup, you signify the Lords death
till he come. 2 Cor. 12.25, 26.
The connection of this Verse with the precedent evidently shows, that to do
this, fignifieth eating of this bread, and drinking of this Cup.

Fourthly, They produced also, that our Lord in the 22 of St. Luke speaking of
the Cup of the Eucharist, says, Luke 22.20.
that it is shed for us; from whence they conclude, that it is then an
expiatory Sacrifice for our sins. But I say, first, that although the words of
the Lord in Saint Luke cannot be taken otherwise than in saying that the Holy
Cup is shed for us; nevertheless it does not follow that the Eucharist is, to
speak properly, a propitiatory Sacrifice. What? is not the Water of the Holy
Baptism spilled for those who receive it? Do you conclude from hence that
Baptism is a propitiatory Sacrifice? Many things make for us which nevertheless
are not Sacrifices. The Chalice of the Eucharist is it not useful and wholesome
for us? Is it not given us to communicate to us the blood of the Lord, Grace,
and the remission of our fins? It is enough to say truly that it is shed for
us, there being no need to change it into Sacrifice to explain this manner of
speaking. But without coming to this one may justify this otherwise. For since
the Cup is the Sacrament of the blood of Christ, which has been truly shed as
a Sacrifice on the Cross, to merit the remission of our sins; and since it is
the custom to give to the Sacraments the qualities and attributions of the
things of which they are Sacraments, none ought to think it more strange that
the Cup should be said to be shed for us, than that which St. 1 Cor. ^0.4
Paul says, that the Rock in the Desert was Christ. Secondly, I say, that it
is not necessary to take the words of St. Luke in that sense which they produce
them. On the contrary it seems that their Belief, and their Latin
Interpretation licensed by the Council of Trent, Council of Trent, Sess. 4.
does not permit them to take them so. Their Belief. For if the Cup of the
Eucharist is shed for us, since by the Cup they understand the blood of Jesus
Christ contained in the Cup they must say that the blood of Christ is shed for
us in the Eucharist, which is directly contrary both to what they confess of
the glorious and impassible state of the body of the Lord, and to that which
they expressly assert, that the Eucharist is a Sacrifice not bloody, and that
Christ is offered there without the effusion of blood. Their Interpreter. For
thus he translates these words: This Chalice is the New Testament in my blood
which shall be shed for you, Council. Trid. Sess. 22. c. 2.
showing evidently by the Future-Tense in which he puts the Verb, which shall
be shed; that he attributes this effusion, not to the Cup, but to the blood of
Christ, which was shed some time after; whereas the Chalice was shed at that
very hour. He ought then to apply the effusion to the blood of Christ, and not
to the Cup; and to translate this passage thus, This Cup is the New Testament
in my blood which is shed for you. And they ought not to allege that the
Participle (...), which is, spilt, is in another case, as (...), my Blood; the
first being in the Nominative, and the other in the Dative, as the Grammarians
speak. For though this sort of Construction be extraordinary in the Greek,
nevertheless it is in use in the Books of the New Testament, as in the 8th
Chapter of the Revelation, Revel. 8.9. (...) Rev. 1.5.
the third part of the Creatures which were in the Sea and had life, died;
where the Participle having (...), does not agree with the Noun of Creatures in
this Case (...) to which nevertheless it it is clearly applied; one being in
the Genetive and the other in the Nominative; and in the first Chapter of the
same Book, (...), by Jesus Christ, the faithful Witness; where these words
(...), faithful Witness, which are in the nominative, are applied clearly to
the Name of our Lord, (...), Jesus Christ, though it be in the Genetive, as all
Interpreters acknowledge. Those who understand the Greek tongue, may remark
other passages where, these Divine Authors do construe alike the words
different in Case and in number, Luke 5.9. and 9.53. John 21.12. 1 John 4.3.
Mark 12.38, 40. Apoc. 3.12, 21. 1 Timothy 4.1, 2. One may here then likewise
without staying ones self so scrupulously to the Grammar, construe the word,
shed with the blood, and not with the Cup; and translate, This Cup is the New
Testament in my Blood which is shed for you; Bazil. Ethic. definit. 21.
and it is just so that the holy Bazel reads it, ancienter than us, more than
1256 years, where he mentions it in his Morals.

5. But they make show likewise to stand upon the words of St. 1 Cor. 10.17,
18, 21.
Paul in the 10th of the first to the Corinthians, comparing the Table of the
Lord with the Altar of the ancient Hebrews, and with the profane Altars of the
Pagans. For in doing this (say they) does he not give us to underderstand that
the Eucharist is a true and properly named Sacrifice, as those which they
offered upon the Altars of the Hebrews, and the Gentiles. But if this must be
thus urged, I will then conclude that the Eucharist is a bloody Sacrifice,
since those of the Jews and Pagans, with whom they pretend that it is compared,
were of the same nature. Who sees not that the Apostle in all these places
does not compare the action of the Hebrew and Gentile Sacrificers offering
their Sacrifices with the action of Evangelical Ministers, blessing the
Eucharist: But the action of the Hebrews and Gentiles every one eating the
bread, and drinking the Chalice of the Supper? And that he compares them only
in this point, that as one was a public protestation which the Hebrews and
Gentiles did to participate with the Altars upon which had been sacrificed the
flesh whereof they eat, and to the Divinity to which they had sacrificed them;
so also the second was a solemn and authentic act the Communion of which the
faithful have with Jesus Christ, and of the part which they pretend in his
flesh and in his blood? So that since it is impossible to have Communion with
Jesus Christ, and with the Devils together; the Apostle concluding that to eat
meats sacrificed to the Devil is a thing inconsistent with the marks and
profession of Christianity: behold how far he design of the Apostle extends,
and no farther.

6. Lastly, They endeavor to establish their pretended Sacrifice upon this
Divine Altar which we have (says the Author of the Epistle to the Hebrews) and
of which those who serve at the Tabernacle have no power to eat. Heb. 13.10.
But the circumstances of the passage, and even the most celebrous Writers
amongst Nic. de Lyra, Thomas. and others upon this passage.
our Adversaries teach us, that the holy Apostle spoke in that place of the
mystical Altar of the Church, Jesus, our Priest, our Victim, and our Altar; the
virtue and life of which those who are yet under the shadow of Moses and the
Service of his earthly Sanctuary, have no part in; as aforetime under the Old
Testament, Lev. 16.27
the Ministers of the Mosaical Tabernacle eat not of the flesh of the Victims
sacrificed for sin.

CHAP. IV. That the pretended Transubstantiation of the Holy Eucharist is not
taught in the Scriptures.
SO it appears that the pretended Propitiatory Sacrifice of the Mass is not in
the Scriptures, it being as impossible to draw it from thence by Consequences,
as to read it there in formal terms.

Let us see if this mavelous change which they presuppose of the Substance of
the Consecrated Bread into that of the body of Christ, may be found more easily
there.

First then, Matthew. 26.26. Macrk. 14.22. Luke 22.19. 1 Cor. 11.24.
They seek it in the words which the Lord pronounced in his instituting the
Eucharist: for having taken and blessed it, he said, This is my Body. From
whence they conclude, that the bread has then lost the Substance of bread,
because otherwise it could not be the body of Christ. But what necessity is
there in this Consequence. St. Paul said of the Church, the same which is said
of the bread of the Eucharist, that she is the body of the Lord; 1 Cor. 12.27.
Ephesians. 1.23. 1 Cor. 6, 15.
and says particularly of the Corinthians, that they are the body of Christ;
and nevertheless, no one concludes from thence that the Church has lost its
first Substance, nor the Corinthians theirs. The same says well, that our
bodies are the members of Christ; and every one confesses that they have not
changed their Substance, because of that. And then why shall one conclude that
the Eucharist is not bread, because it is called the body of Christ? Cajetan in
Thom. q. 75. art. 1. Scot. cite per Bellard. l. 3. c. 23. of the Eucharist.
The Cardinal Cajetan one of the most famous Writers of the Church of Rome,
confesses himself that there was no necessity for it there: There appears
nothing in the Evangelist (says he) which constrains us to take the words
literally. Scotus holds it likewise. And it will avail nothing to reply, that
the Lord said, that it was his body which should be delivered for us, which
cannot be understood but of his true body. Cajetan ibid.
From whence (says Cajetan) one cannot evidently conclude that the words
mentioned ought to be understood properly, since that these relative words
(which are given for you) do not show us that it is properly the body. For the
relative, which does not signify the conjunction of the predicate with the
Subject, but this relates to the predicate only, viz. My Body: and with the
truth of this relation remains the true proposition mentioned, This is my Body,
taken only in a Metaphorical sense, as it appears by the example, now the Stone
was Christ. For if the Apostle had added, who has been crucified, who is
risen, and who is ascended into Heaven, in saying, now the Stone was Christ,
which has been crucified, etc. nevertheless the underwritten Proposition, now
the Stone was Christ, should be understood Metaphorically and not properly.
Even so in our dispute are the words of the Lord, This is my Body which shall
be delivered for you. This addition, which shall be delivered for you, does not
restrain the precedent Proposition to a literal sense; for it is nevertheless
as true, though it were spoken in a Metaphorical sense only. Thus far Card.
Cajetan.

So all that one can lawfuily and necessarily conclude from the words of the
Lord, is that the bread of the Eucharist is the Mystery, the Sacrament, and the
memorial of his body; which we believe and confess with all Christians, and
which the Lord expressly pronounces himself in the following words, in saying,
Do this in remembrance of me; as from the words of St. Paul, the Church is the
body of Christ, one cannot evidently infer any thing, Mat. 13.37, 38, 39. 1
Cor. 10. Apoc. 4.1, 20. and 17.9, 28. Genesis 17.15. and 40.12. and 41.27. Exodus
12.11. Judge. 7.14. 2 Kin. (Heb. 2 Samuel.) 12.7. Ezt. 37.11. Dan. 2.38. and 4.19.
and 7.24.
except that the Church is the Mystery of the natural body of Christ, and (as
they say ordinarily) his Mystical body. For it is an ordinary Phrase in the New
Testament to say, That the sign is the thing which it signifies, and the
Image that which it represents, drawn from the style of the Old Testament,
which gives always to the Sign the name of the thing signified; and
reciprocally, the name of the Sign to the thing signified.

2. They allege in the Second place, the words of the Lord in St. Luke, This
Chalice is the New Testament in my Blood, which shall be shed for you, saying,
that because the Cup, that is to say, the Liquor which is in the Cup) is shed
for us, it is then the blood of Christ (and not Wine) really and in Substance;
it being clear that is the blood of the Lord, and not Wine which has been shed
for us. But we have already showed above, that we ought to apply this word
shed, to the blood of Christ shed really for us on the Cross, and not to the
Cup, notwithstanding the disagreeing of the Gender, which is found between
these words in the Original Texts; and although the Lord said, that this which is
in the Cup is shed for us, it does not follow nevertheless that it is not Wine
in substance, since that without putting any Transubstantiation in the water of
the Holy Baptism; one may as well say, that it is shed for those who are
baptized with it.

3. They use in the third place the words of St. Paul, 1 Cor. 10.16.
The bread which we break is the communication of the body of the Lord, and the
Chalice of Benediction which we bless the communication of his blood. For (say
they) How is it that the Bread and the Chalice consecrated, should communicate
to us the body and blood of Christ, if they are not in substance the body and
blood of Christ? But this Consequence is ridicule. For it is unlikely that it
should follow from these words, that the bread consecrated, is no more bread,
but quite contrary; the words evidently express that it is bread, the Apostle
saying expressly, that it is bread broken for us, which is the communication of
the body of the Lord; in the same manner as he adds in the following Verse,
Ibid. ver. 18.
That those of Israel which eat of the Sacrifices were partakers of the Altar;
it evidently follows, not that the Sacrifices, by the eating whereof they
participated of the Altar, were changed into the Substance of the Altar (which
would be absurd and prodigious) but that they were Sacrifices, having a
Substance different from that of the Altar: and what an extragavant speech
would it be to say that those who eat the Sacrifices participate of the Altar,
as if the Sacrifice and the Altar were one and the same thing in substance;
(for this would be to say, that those who eat of the Altar are partakers of the
Altar) so would it also be a cold and impertinent Proposition, to say, that the
bread which we break is the communication of the body of Christ; as if this
bread is in Substance one and the same thing with the Body of Christ. For upon
this account it should be said that the body of Christ is the communication of
the Body of Christ. As then the Sacrifices of the Hebrews communicated the
Altar upon which they had sacrificed to those who eat them (for those who eat,
were, said the Apostle, partakers of the Altar) without losing their substance,
(...).
or being changed into that of the Altar; even so the Bread and the Chalice of
the Eucharist, (...).
communicates to us the Body and blood of the Lord, of which they are the
Sacraments, without losing their first Substance, or being changed into that of
the body and blood of the Lord. And as those who eat the Sacrifices of the
Hebrews communicated to the Altar, in as much as they had part in the virtue
and sanctification of the Altar, without necessity of touching corporally the
substance of the Altar it self: So those who eat the bread and drink the
Chalice of the Lord communicate of his body and of his blood, in as much as
they have part in the virtue and efficacy of his body and of his blood, broken
and shed for the remission of our sins, without necessity of touching
corporally their substance.

4. But they lay great force upon that which the same Apostle says in the
following Chapter, where speaking of the Eucharist: 1 Cor. 11.27, 29.
Whosoever (says he) shall eat of the bread or drink of the Chalice of the
Lord unworthily, shall be guilty of the body and blood of the Lord. And in the
Verse beneath he adds, that they discern not the body of the Lord. How can that
be (say they) if the body and blood of the Lord be not really present in the
Eucharist? But first, they conclude not that which is in Question. The Question
is, whether the bread and wine change Substance? and they conclude that the
body and blood of the Lord are present in the Eucharist; now they may be
present there, and yet the bread and wine not lose their Substance. And it is
very unlikely, that these Propositions of the Apostles infer, that that which
he calls bread and Chalice, should be in Substance one and the same thing with
the body and blood of the Lord, that contrarily they evidently presuppose that
they are different Subjects. For if the bread which one eats unworthily were
the very body of Christ, this language would be cold and impertinent; he who
eats of this bread unworthily, is guilty of the body of Christ, and does not
discern the body of Christ, since upon this account it would be to say, that he
who eats the body of Christ unworthily, is guilty of the body of Christ and
does not discern the body of Christ.

Secondly, I say that that which they draw from this Text (besides its not
being the Question) cannot be concluded from thence. For he who receives the
Baptism unworthily (as Simon the Magitian did) does wrong to Christ and is
guilty of it; and nevertheless no body can conclude from thence that the
Substance of Jesus Christ is really present in the Baptism. They who sin
voluntarily after they have received the knowledge of the Truth, Heb. 10.26.
put the Son of God under their feet, and hold the blood of the Testament for a
profane thing. And no body can conclude from hence that the Son of God or his
blood is really present under the feet of these wicked wretches. Luke 10.12.
John 13.20.
He who despises the Apostles despises him that sent them, and who receives
him that he has sent, receives the same that sent him; and nevertheless every
one confesses that the Substance of Jesus Christ was not really, because of
this, present in the Apostles nor in those whom he sent. They who sin against
their Brethren, Mat. 18.5.
and wound their weak Consciences, sin against Christ. 1 Cor. 8.12.
And nevertheless every one avoweth that the Substance of Christ is not for all
this really present in their Consciences or in their persons. And then why
should one any more infer that the body and the blood of the Lord are really
present in the Eucharist, because they who take it unworthily are guilty of his
body, and do not discern it? who sees not that this is an abusing of the Lord,
to reject those who appertain to him, or to despise that which he has
instituted, and that which has relation to himself: As it is an abuse to a
Prince to despise his Ambassadors, his Seal, his Arms, or his Essigies? And it
is not sufficient that the Eucharist be the Sacrament of Christ the
communication of his body, and of his blood, and the memorial of his death
(that which all confess) to render this Proposition true; whosoever receives it
unworthily is guilty of the body of the Lord, and does not discern it, without
affirming (as our Adversaries do) that this body and this blood are really
present there.

5. Finally, They produce the meaning of the Lord, in the 6th of St. John, John
6.51 and so on.
I am the living bread which came down from Heaven, if any one eats of this
bread, he shall live eternally; and the bread which I shall give is my flesh
for the life of the world: and that which follows to the 59 Verse,
presupposing that the Lord spoke of the Eucharist; they conclude from thence
that the Eucharist is not then bread and wine in Substance, but the body and
blood of the Lord. But this Argument is so weak, that it hardly deserves to be
considered. For it supposes a dubious thing, and concludes wrong, which are
the most irregular faults, that can be in reasoning. First then, he supposes
that the Lord speaks of the Eucharist in the 6th of St. John, which appears in
no place in that Text, where the Evangelist makes no mention any where of the
Holy Sacrament; it seems rather that one might induce the contrary from it.
For the eating, upon which the Question is, is necessarily efficacious to
Salvation; if any one eats of this bread he shall live eternally. Joh. 6.50.
He that eats my flesh and drinks my blood, he has eternal life, and I will
raise him up at the last day: He dwells in me, and I in him: Verse. 54. Verse. 56.
As the living Father has sent me, so I live because of my Father, and he whr
shall eat me, shall live also because of me. Now the eating of the Eucharist is
not necessarily efficacious to Salvation, many eating it to their judgment and
condemnation. Verse. 57. 1 Cor. 11.29.
This is not that then about which the Question is in the 6th of St. John.
Moreover the eating which the Lord means, was necessary to those to whom he
spoke, for the obtaining Salvation; Joh. 6.53.
if you eat not the flesh of the Son of man, and drink not his blood, you have
no life in you; now the eating of the Eucharist was not necessary to those to
whom he spoke for the obtaining Salvation, it being clear, that according to
the Doctrine, even of our Adversaries, Baptism, Faith, and good Works are
sufficient for them for the obtaining Salvation. It is not then the eating of
the Sacrament, which our Lord spoke of in the 6 of St. John, as many very
famous Interpreters have considered both Ancient and Modern, and even amongst
our Aen. Syl. since Pius II. Epist. 130. Cusan. ep. 7. ad Boh. John de Ragus.
Orat. cor. Council. Bazil. Cajet. in Joh. part. 3. q. 80. art. 8. Gabriel. in
Can. John Hesseltus l. de commun. sub una specie Jansen. concord. Evang. c. 59.
Ruard. Tapper. Art. 15. Vald. T. 2. de Sacram. c. 91. Armac. l. 9. c. 8.
Adversaries, and understand it a spiritual eating of the Body and Blood of
Christ Jesus, which is done by Faith. And indeed the Lord showed evidently that
by eating his flesh and drinking his blood, he signified coming to him,
believing in him, and meditating on him, since in his own discourse he ascribes
the same effects to these actions, as to those of eating his flesh and drinking
his blood. Who comes to me (says he) shall not hunger, John 7.35.41, 47.
and who believes in me shall never thirst. Whosoever sees the Son and
believes in him has eternal life, and therefore I will raise him up at the
last day. But although that which they presuppose, viz. that the Lord in the 6
of St. John spoke of the Sacrament of the Eucharist, were as clear and true, as
it is obscure and doubtful, I always say, that they do not argue pertinently.
First, they do not conclude that which is in Question. For the Question is not,
whether the body and blood of Christ are present in the Eucharist (which is
that which they conclude) but, whether the bread and the wine lose their nature
there, and are there changed into the substance of the body and blood of the
Lord, which they cannot infer from it, although one should grant them what they
could draw from it, it being clear (as we said before) that the body and blood
of the Lord may be present in the Eucharist, and the bread and wine not change
their Substance. But I say lastly, that this which they would conclude from it
cannot lawfully be inferred. For if because we eat the body of the Lord and
drink his blood in the Supper, it follows that the substance of his body and
his blood is really present there; then in the same manner it will follow also,
that it is present in the Souls of all those who believe in him: since that
according to many Fathers, and the most part of the Doctors of Rome, to believe
in Jesus Christ is to eat his flesh and drink his blood; Ephesians. 2.17.
and since according to St. Paul, it is by faith that Christ dwells in our
hearts: it will follow that the Substance of Christ is really present in our
Baptism, since that those who are baptized put on Jesus Christ, Gal. 3.27. Romans
6.3.
and are buried with him in his death: it will follow that the Substance of his
blood is really present in the Souls of all the truly faithful, chosen
according to the Providence of God, since they are sprinkled with the blood of
Jesus Christ; 1 Pet. 1.2. Apoc. 7.14
and in the Souls of those who are come from tribulation, since they have
washed their long robes, and made them white in the blood of the Lamb. Now if
one can eat the flesh and drink the blood of Jesus Christ in believing, and
have him dwelling in his heart, and put him on, and be buried with him, and be
sprinkled with his blood, and be washed and made white in his blood, and
nevertheless not touch really the substance, why may not one in the like manner
eat his flesh and drink his blood in the Eucharist, without his being there
bodily? Who sees not that these ways of speaking signify only virtue of the
death of the Lord in them to whom he communicates himself by faith, and the
Spirit giving them the same effects in respect of the spiritual life, which
Meats, Vestments, Liquors and Water with which one is cleansed in respect of
the temporal life gives us, sustaining and preserving us, making sin die in us,
covering the nakedness of our Souls, fortifying our hearts, cleansing and
purging us from all spiritual filthiness? let us conclude then that this famous
Transubstantiation the principal piece of the Roman Religion, is neither
expressed nor presupposed in Scripture, it being not less impossible to
discover it there by the light of Reason, than by that of Sense.

CHAP. V. That the Adoration of the Consecrated Eucharist is not taught in the
Scriptures.
FRom whence it follows that the Adoration of the Host (the Sovereign Service
of their Religion) cannot be proved by Scripture, since it has no other ground
than Transubstantiation, it being clear that they should not adore this
Substance covered with the Accidents of Bread and Wine, if they believe it to
be a true Substance of Bread and Wine, and not that of the body and blood of
Christ Jesus.

CHAP. VI. That the Scripture does not teach in any part of it the fire of
Purgatory.
1. LEt us come now to the fire of Purgatory, where they will have the Souls of
the faithful satisfy for the temporal punishment of their sins, before they
enter Heaven. It Is sad to see them sweat to find in the Scripture something
wherewith to blow up light, and maintain this fire. For this Opinion impassions
them in such a manner, that they that see it in all the places, where a Pit, a
Lake, a Prison, a Goal, a Fire, purging, refining, a refining pot, etc. are
spoken of. The Lord proposing to us the form of the true Sancitification
required in his Church, in the 5th of St. Matthew, Matthew. 5.25, 26.
Commands us amongst other things to have a heart clean from all hatred,
malice, anger toward our neighbors, threatening them with grievous torments
who shall never so little offend them; protesting that nothing ought to be in
more commendation than to live in concord and good friendship with them,
adding, Agree thou with thine adversary quickly, whilst thou art in the way
with him, for fear that thine adversary should deliver thee to the Judge, and
the Judge deliver thee to the Officer, and thou be put into Prison; verily I
say unto thee, that thou shall not come out thence till thou have paid the last
farthing. This Prison say they, is the Purgatory. But who sees not that this
is to suppose, and not to prove it? For why should we understand Purgatory by
this Prison, rather than a true properly named Prison, where the wicked
Pay-masters and Cheaters are often put for their stubborness, with much loss
and scandal, which they might escape in agreeing lovingly and betimes with
their Adverseparty, Chrysostom. Theophyl. Euthym. upon this passage. Barrad.
Harmon. Evang. T. 2.1.7. c. 17.
as our Lord Commands in this place, and the Apostle in the first Epistle to
the Corinthians? St. Chrysostom and many others take it simply so, and even
this Jesuit Barradius. But if one would take the passage Allegorically, as an
Image of the Judgments of God against them who will not use charity toward
their Brethren; why should not we understand by this Prison either the
chastisements in which our Lord locks up sometimes men in this life for having
neglected the duties of Charity toward their Neighbors, or even the pains of
Hell, in which he will confine for ever after this life, all those who have not
used mercy toward their Brethren, Maldon. Mat. 5.25. To let. in Luke 12.
Annot. 86. and 89. Jansen. Concord, Evang. c. 40. Stella in Luc. T. 2. c. 12.
See also Salmeron. T. 5. Tractat 37.
as the Jesuit Maldonat, Cardinal Tolett, Bishop Jansenius expound it, who
confess ingeniously that this place cannot be urged for Purgatory, and the
Cordelier Stella, confessing (that which is indeed most evident) that these
words, Thou shall pay the last farthing, simply signify, Thou shall be punished
to the rigor, they shall not pardon thee any thing; so that they do not infer
by any means that the Criminal of whom this dispute is, ought at any time to go
out of prison; but they suppose only that he shall go out if he pays the last
farthing of his debt, and by consequence he shall never go out if he cannot pay
it? And as as to that which is said, that he to whom we have not used Charity
shall be our enemy, and shall deliver us to the Judge, it is the same manner of
speaking, like that in the Proverbs, and repeated in the Epistle to the Romans,
that he who does good to his enemy, Prove. 15.21. Romans 12.20. Luke 16.9.
heaps coals of fire on his head; and like that in the fixth of St. Luke, That
those to whom we give alms receive us into eternal habitations; where the
Scripture says, that he does a thing, which is the reason for which he does
it, although to speak properly and exactly he does not do it.

Secondly, They abuse also the words of the Lord, where he says, that the
blasphemy against the Holy Ghost shall not be forgiven, Matt. 12.32.
neither in this age, nor in the other; that is to say (add they) neither in
this life, nor in Purgatory. But why should not we rather say, that by the age
to come, the Lord according to the Style of the Scriptures, understands the Age
which shall follow after the Resurrection from the dead? and that it
signifies, that God will never pardon this crime to the men who are guilty of
it, neither now, nor at the last Judgment? that he will never give them
absolution for it, neither in this life by the voice of his Spirit in their
hearts, nor in the other by the mouth of his Son? Or why do not we say, that he
means that this sin shall be grievously and irresistably punished, as well in
this Age with temporal pains, as in the other with eternal? For as remitting or
pardoning a sin signifies not to punish, so the not pardoning it signifies to
punish it; yea, to punish it grievously and certainly. In that great day the
Lord will also remit the sins to the faithful, but not to impenitent sinners;
and besides what the thing says of its self, St. Paul testifies it expressly,
where he prays God to have mercy on the house of Onesiphorus in that day; 2 Timothy 1.18. Acts 1.19, 20.
and St. Peter, where he exhorts the Jews to believe to the end, that their
sins might be blotted out in the time of the refreshment of the Lord.

Thirdly, 1 Cor 3.15.
The most part of the Adversaries turn to the Service of their Purgatory, that
which St. Paul writes in the first to the Corinthians, If the work of any one
be burnt, he shall suffer loss: but he shall be saved, yet as amidst the fire,
or rather by the fire, pretending that this fire is that of Purgatory. But
first, this passage by the common consent of Ancients and Moderns, is reckoned
amongst the obscure and Allegorical, and by Consequence not proper to ground an
Article of Faith upon. Secondly, I say, that nothing can force us to take it
for Purgatory. For to leave the Expositions of Chrysostom, of St. Augustine, and
of many others which take it otherwise, why shall we not rather understand it
of the Judgment, which God shall make at the last day, of the Doctrine of those
Preachers, who having retained the foundation of the Gospel, have built upon it
vain Beliefs, which shall be reprehended by the light of the Advent of Jesus
Christ, but in such manner, Amos 4.11.
that losing the liking and praise of their own works, they themselves shall
not perish? their works shall perish and not their persons, which shall be
saved; but nevertheless as plucked out of the fire, that is to say, very
hardly, Paraphrase upon the Epistles of St. Paul to the Corinth. Gal. and Ephesians.
Printed by Touss du Bray. An. 1632. with Privilege and Approbation.
as if they escaped from a fire; as a firebrand rescued from the burning, as
Amos says; and in such manner that they shall hold their Souls for a prey,
being obliged only to the bounty and Divine mercy for not having been devoured
together with their works by the heat of that consuming fire which shall try
all men, as many Learned men expound it, and even the Author of the French
Paraphrase upon the Epistle to the Corinthians, Published lately at Paris, and
approved by three Doctors of Sorbonne.

Fourthly, They have also-recourse to the Old Testament, and allege, that the
Lord in Zechary promised, Zech. 9.11.
That he would draw his prisoners out of the lake in which there is no water.
These are (say they) the Spirits which suffer in Purgatory. But this is to play
and not to reason. For what is there in the Text of the Prophet which obliges
us to take this Lake for Purgatory? I leave the literal Interpretation, which
understands it to be the Captivity and calamity of the Jews deprived of the
refreshments of the Divine word, and of the exercises of their Religion: If we
must Allegorize, why should not we rather bring this passage to the eternal
redemption which the Lord Jesus has acquired to us by his blood, drawing his
mystical Israel (that is to say) his Church from the sad and pitiful condition,
where it was naturally, being a prisoner of the Devil, a slave of sin, and
guilty of the wrath of God, the true Lake where there is no water, since in
that state there is no confolation; whereas the Souls which they shut up in
their Purgatory, notwithstanding their griefs, have according to what they say,
Bellar. of Purgl. 2. c. 4.
an incredible consolation, because of the certain hope of their Salvation.

CHAP. VII. That Justification by Works is not taught in the Scriptures.
FIrst, To the validity of the good works, which the regenerate do such (as
they pretend) as merit the remission of sins and life eternal, it can no more
be proved by the Scriptures than the precedent Doctrines. It is true, that the
Lord said of the penitent sinner, Luke 7.47.
Many sins are forgiven her, for she has loved much. But it is also clear,
both by the precedent similitude, and by the opposition which the Lord adds in
saying, Ver. 41, 42.
that to him to whom less is forgiven, loves less, that he shows her love
which she bare to him, not as the meritorious cause, but as the sign and
argument of the Grace which he had done her. So we say very often, Ver. 47.
the Sun is risen, for it is high day, to signify that the clearness of the
day is not the cause but the effect and sign of the rising of the Sun. And so
it is that the Jesuit Villalpandus understands this passage in his Commentaries
upon Ezech. Villalp. in Ezech. 19.10.
where having remarked that quoniam, because, is taken very often in the
Scripture to signify therefore, and he alleges this passage for an example
of it; Many sins are forgiven her, for she has loved much, that is to say,
Behold, why she has loved much (says he) for the Argument of the Lord drawn
from the Parable of the Creditor, required such an epiphonema, as is evident to
the Reader. As to the rest, that faith was the cause of the remission of the
sins of this woman, the Lord shows it clear enough, saying to her in the two
Verses following, Thy faith has saved thee, go in peace; and that love to God,
Charity to our Neighbors, and good works are the effects of the Grace which
God does us in pardoning us, all the Scriptures teaches clearly, and namely
Saint Paul, Ephesians. 2.10.
where he says, That we are the work of God created in Jesus Christ to good
works which God has prepared, to the end we might walk in them.

Secondly, I confess that St. James writes, James 2 21.
that Abraham was justified by his works, when he offered up his Son Isaac upon
the Altar. But it is clear that he understands not by this word, that Abraham
did receive from God the pardon of his sins by the merit of this his work,
since the Scripture says (as St. Paul reports it) that before the birth of
Isaac, Genesis 15.6. Romans ^.23.
the faith of Abraham was imputed to him for righteousness. St. James disputes
in this place not of the manner or condition by which man is absolved from his
sin before God, but of the quality of the faith by which he is received into
Grace, viz. that it is efficacious in good works, and not barren and
unfruitful, as that of which the Hypocrites boast. And to prove it, he alleges
amongst other reasons the example of Abraham, who indeed was absolved and
received into Grace by faith; but 'twas by a lively faith, and effectual in
good works, as he is justified by the admirable obedience which he rendered to
God in offering his only Son to him in Sacrifice. Then was clearly accomplished
the Scripture which gives him the praise of having believed in God; it appears
then that what is said of him is most true, James 2.22.
Abraham believed in God, and it was imputed to him for righteousness. His
says was finished or accomplished, says the Apostle, that is to say, 2 Cor.
12.9.
it showed its perfection and accomplishment by works in the same manner as St.
Paul says, That the strength of the Lord is made perfect, or accomplished, in
weakness, that is to say, that it shows his valor and perfection in our
infirmities and afflictions. 1 Timothy 3.16.
This is that then which St. James means, when he says, that Abraham was
justified by works, that is to say, he proved and demonstrated by his works
that which was real; as when St. Paul says, That the Lord Jesus was justified
in Spirit, that is, that he proved and demonstrated by his great and admirable
works, that he is true God blessed for ever. And it is in the same sense that
we ought to understand that which St. James concludes, Verse. 24.
You see then that a man is justified by works, and not only by faith, that is
to say, the man shows and proves what he is, not only in believing, but also
in well-doing; if we confess voluntarily that we do detest from our hearts this
phantasm of faith which vaunts of believing without producing any good fruit,
and confess that it is unuseful; it is exactly that which Saint James lays down
at the beginning, Verse. 4.
as the subject of all his design, What will it profit him, if any one says
that he has faith and has not works? faith (or rather this faith) can it save
him?

CHAP. VIII. That the Holy Scriptures does not teach us that works merit
eternal life.
1. THat if the good works of the faithful merit not the remission of their
sins, much less can they merit eternal life. To prove it is so, they heap up
diverse places of the Scripture which show that God will give eternal life to
those who have lived holily, as the following, and other-like places, Romans 1.6,
7.10.
God shall render to every one according to his works, viz. to those who with
patience and well doing seek for glory, honor, and immortality, eternal life:
But to those who are given to contentions, and agree not to the truth, but give
themselves to iniquity shall be indignation and wrath. Whosoever shall give to
drink a Cup of eold water only to one of these little ones in the name of a
Disciple, Mat. 10.42.
verily I say unto you, that he shall not lose his reward. Mat. 25.34.
Then shall the King say to them on his right hand, Come ye blessed of my
Father, possess the Kingdom which has been prepared for you from the
foundation of the world, for I was an hungered and you gave me to eat, I was
thirsty and you gave me to drink, I was a stranger and you took me in, etc. But
neither these passages nor any like to them, As Mat. 5.12. and 16.27. 2 Cor.
5.10. Heb. 6.10. and 10 25. and 1.26. 2 Timothy 4.8. Apoc. 21.7. and 22 12. Prove.
11.10. Esa. 3.10.
which are found in many places in the Holy Scriptures can prove that is in
Question, viz. that the dignity and the excellency of the works of the
faithful are such as are worth eternal life, and that there is a certain
proportion and equality between them and the Glory to come, which precisely
requires that it should be given to them for reward, God being there obliged
even by the justice of the same thing, and consequently cannot fail of it
without violating the Justice which is between him and man. This is that which
the merit of works signify, which we deny and our Adversaries maintain. Bell.
de Justif. l. 5. c. 17 and 18.
All that one can lawfully infer from these passages, is, that God has
promised to give eternal life to those who live well and holily; that one day
he will accomplish perfectly this his promise; on this condition eternal life
is a consequent, an acknowledgment and a reward of holiness and good works,
which the faithful who labor and persevere in their vocation may and ought to
expect from God. But who doubts of any of these truths? all that we say is,
that we must expect this reward only from the Grace of God, who has promised
and will give it, because he is most good, and not for the value and
excellency of our works, which (how good soever they be) are but our duty,
with which we acquit our selves to God; incapable by consequence of meriting
any thing, it being clear that he who does that which he ought, and to whom he
is obliged, acquits himself only, and does not merit.

Secondly, They allege that the Lord speaking of the happy, Luke 20.35.
says, That they who shall be made worthy to obtain that life and the
resurrection from the dead; Rev. 3.4.
and elsewhere, that the faithful of Sardis should walk with him in white
clothing, because they are worthy of it; and that St. Paul says, speaking of
the Thessalonians, that they were afflicted to be counted worthy of the Kingdom
of God. 2 These. 1.5
But I answer, that this word worthy, signifies the disposition and
convenience of a thing, and not its merit. As when St. John exhorts the Jews to
bring forth fruits worthy of repentance, Mat. 3.8.
that is to say, convenient for the repentance, which it answers, and not
which it merits (for this would be ridicule) it is then in this scuse that the
truly faithful who live holily and persevere constantly in piety are worthy of
the Kingdom and white Vestments of the Lord, that is to say, they have the
qualities and conditions which are convenient for them, since it is to them who
are such, 2 These. 1.6, 7.
that God promises these things in his Grace.

Thirdly, Moreover they say, that this retribution of God is a work of his
Justice; it is a just thing before God (says the Apostle) That he gives
affliction to those who afflict you, Heb. 6.10.
and to you who are afflicted deliverance with us, when the Lord Jesus shall be
revealed from Heaven with the Angels of his power: and elsewhere, God is not
unjust to forget your work and charity which you have showed toward his Name,
in as much as you have ministered to the Saints, and do minister: 2 Timothy 4.8.
Psalm. 112.9. 2 Cor. 9.9. Mat. 6.1. Dan. 4.24. and 9.16. Ezech. 18.19, 21. in
the Version of the 70. Deuteronomy. 24.3 Eccles. 44.10.
and again in another place, The Crown of Justice is kept for me, which the
Lord the righteous Judge shall give me at that day, and not to me only, but
also to all those who love his coming. But I say first, that this word Justice
according to the phrase of the Hebrew Language signifies very often benignity
and liberality, and just likewise, benign and gracious, as in the 112 Psalm
alleged by St. Paul, He has dispersed, he has given to the poor, his
righteousness endures for ever; from whence it comes that Alms which is an act
of gratuity and beneficence is called Justice in the 6th of St. Matthew. In
this sense who sees not that retribution of life eternal to the faithful, is
truly an act of the Divine Justice, that is to say, of his Grace and benignity;
that it is an Alms which he gives us. Secondly, I say, that it is just that God
should give life eternal to those who have believed and obeyed, not that they
have merited, but because hehath promlsed it. As it is also a justice to keep
ones word in accomplishing that which one has promised, Nohem 9.
although one has promised it but upon mere gratuity, without being obliged to
it by the merits of him to whom one promises it. In fine, in comparing the
cause and case of the faithful with that of the wicked who afflict them, the
one having manifestly the right on their side, and the other the wrong; it is
yet in this respect for the Justice of God to maintain the one and condemn and
punish the other. But this is not to say, that considering thoroughly the
persons and works of the faithful in themselves; and without this comparison,
there is nothing in them, which to speak properly merits the Heavenly Glory,
with which the Father will one day Crown them gratis, according to the saying
of the Apostle, Romans 6.23.
that life eternal by Jesus Christ our Lord, is a Grace of God. But there is no
need to insist much upon this Article, since that amongst our Adversaries
themselves there are found great and celebrated Authors, who openly reject this
Doctrine, being far from pretending that it is in the Scriptures, some
disputing that the good works of the faithful are not meritorious, by reason of
the works themselves, but only by reason of the Promise and Divine acceptance,
as Scotus and Vaga: Others, that supposing the Promise of God, yet they are not
such that the hire is due to them by Justice, See Bellar. of Justif. l. 5. c,
16.
but only by the liberality of God; as Durandus, so Cardinal Bellarmin reports
it.

CHAP. IX. That praying to Saints departed, is not taught in the Scriptures.
1. LEt us now consider of praying to the Saints departed, for which there is
found neither Command nor Example in all the Writings of the Old and New
Testaments; and they allege for its foundation nothing but passages very far
fetched; as for example, that which Jacob said being upon his deathbed, Let my
name be called upon these Children, Genesis 48.16.
that is, upon Ephraim and Manasseh, which is not a Command to invoke him after
his death, but a declaration by which he adopts them, willing that they might
be called by his name as if they had been his proper Children, as all the
Learned party of our Adversaries confess, Nic. d'Lyra, Pintus, Eman. Sa,
Pagnin, Arias Montauus, and it is the same manner of speaking which is found in
Esai. in the fourth Chapter, where he brings in women which say to a man, Isai.
4.1.
only let thy name be called upon us.

Secondly, But say they, the faithful under the Old Testament, make mention of
the Saints departed in the prayers which they put up to God, Have remembrance
of Abraham, Exodus 32.13.
Isaac, and Israel thy servants, to whom thou have sworn by thy self, saying, I
will multiply your seed as the Stars in Heaven. We do not deny that it was
permitted them to produce to the Lord the Promises which he made to their
Fathers, as it is lawful for us to put him in mind of that which he has done
for us in Jesus Christ, of which these first were the figures. But the question
is, whether we may, and ought to address these prayers to deceased Saints,
which cannot be drawn from this allegation by any good reason.

Thirdly, Moreover, Mat. 22.30.
they discourse thus: Our Lord teaches us that the Saints departed are as the
Angels of God in Heaven; Genesis 48.15.
now Jacob invoked an Angel: It is then permitted us to invoke the Saints. A
feeble, a pitiful reasoning. For first, the Lord speaks of the state of Saints
after the Resurrection; and the Question is of the condition they are in now
before the Resurrection. Secondly, The Lord compares them to Angels, not
generally and in respect of all the conditions of their beings (for upon this
account they must conclude they will have no bodies after the Resurrection,
since the Angels have none) but only in respect of these things, viz that they
will not marry, Maldon. upon this passage.
as St. Jerome, and after him the Jesuit Maldonat remarks; in the Resurrection
(says the Lord) they shall neither marry, nor be given in marriage, but shall
be as the Angels of God in Heaven. And as to the Angel which Jacob invoked, who
knows not that it is the Angel of the Covenant, Mal. 3.1. Genesis 48. 15, 16.
the eternal Son of God. The God (says he) before whom my fathers Abraham and
Isaac have walked, the God who fed me from my youth to this day, Cyril. Alex.
Thesaur. l. 3.
the Angel who has defended me from evil bless these Children: St. Cyril of
Alexandria has so amply defended this truth against the Arians, who would (as
our Adversaries at this time) bend these words to a created Angel, which we
have no need to insist upon any longer to clear.

Fourthly, They argue again thus; We pray the faithful living here below with
us to pray to God for us, as St. Paul commanded the Romans, Romans 15.30. Coll.
4.3.1. Ephesians. 6.9. 1 These. 5.25. 2 These. 3.1 1. Heb. 13.18.
the Ephesians, the Colossians, the Thessalonians, and the Hebrews; and
therefore why should not we demand the same office of the Saints departed? But
first, who sees not that although this reason should be pertinent, it always
concludes much less than that they would have it: for it hints only, that it
behooves to pray to the departed Saints, as S. Paul prayed the Romans, and the
other faithful whilst they lived. Now he prayed them only to pray to God for
him. He did not kneel down before them although absent, to make this request to
them, he erected no Statues to them, he constituted no Images to them, he did
not prostrate himself before their Representations; nor did he offer them
lighted Tapers, or make Vows to them; nor did he pray them to command our
Redeemer to defend him against the Enemy, to receive him at the hour of his
death, and to heal the inaladies of his nature, nor is there any wise Christian
that will do or demand such things of a living man; upon this account it will
follow that all the Prayers where our Adversaries demand these things of the
Saints departed are unlawful, their own Reasons (as much esteemed as they are)
permits them only to require the Saints to pray to God for them. But in the
second place who sees not the extreme impertinence of this discourse? We pray
the living Saints to pray to God for us, we may then use the same toward them
that are dead? I pray you what is it that gives them ground to argue so? What!
is there not a difference between these two? we see the one, we speak to them,
and hear the answers they make to our requests; whereas the other are separated
from us by a great and almost infinite distance, without being able to know for
certain whether they hear any of our words, without having any mutual and
reciprocal commerce with them. We do not doubt, that as we thank God for their
happiness, they pray for ours, wishing the triumph of the Church which they
know fights yet, upon the earth under the Ensign of their Christ. But it is to
mock the world to conclude from hence, that we may and ought to speak to them
as we do to persons here below which are of our acquaintance. That which Elisha
knew by the revelation of God concerning what his Servant Gehazi had done being
absent, 2 King. 5.16.
and Daniel that which Nebuchadnezzar had dreamt. Dan. 2.19. Acts 12.34.
And St. Peter what Ananias and Saphira had contrived, shows, that the Lord
can if he pleases, discover the thoughts of our hearts, and the words of our
mouths to the Saints who live in heaven (that which we have called in Question)
but not that he will, and does it in effect, which is the point of this
Question, whereof we ought to be assured, to be able to address our prayers to
them. It cannot be proved by the knowledge which the Angels have of the
repentance of sinners. Luke 15.10. Heb. 1.14.
For the Angels being ministering Spirits, which God sends to serve because of
those who shall receive the inheritance of Salvation, it is not strange that
they should know that which happens to us; whereas we read not any thing like
this of the Souls of the faithful that are deceased; Apoc. 14.
but only that they rest from their labors. And after all, although we should
be assured that the Saints should understand us, there would always be
indiscretion in these prayers, since there is neither Command nor Example in
the Scriptures for them. Join to this the evident peril we should be put into
by this practice, of giving to the Creature that which appertains to the
Creator. For Nature has her self imprinted this Opinion in our hearts, that
it is a divine thing to penetrate into the secrets of men, and to know what the
absent do and say, it is not possible for us to converse with the Saints, whom
we do not see, without allowing them a kind of Divinity, as it appears but too
much in the practice of the Adversaries, the most part of whom, and above all
those of the minute people, praying to the Saints, have toward them
incitements to devotion, and a respect altogether like that which they have to
God, when they pray to him, But it is sufficiently seen that this praying to
deceased Saints cannot be proved by the Scriptures.

CHAP. X. That Veneration of Images is not Commanded in Scripture, nor any way
taught there.
1. AS for their Images and those of Jesus Christ and the holy Virgin, it is
still much less possible to establish the Veneration of them by Scripture,
Exodus 25.18, 19, 20.
since instead of Commanding it, they disprove and forbid the service of all
Images and Representations in general.

Nevertheless let us see what Rome alleges for this design.

She then alleges the Cherubims which Moses made to cover the forepart of the
propitiatory, Numb. 21.8. 1 King. 6.32, 35. and 7.25, 29, 36.
and the brazen Serpent which he lifted up in the Desert, and the Cherubims,
the Palmtrees, and the Buds of Flowers spread, which Solomon caused to be
carved upon the Doors of the Temple, and the Molten Oxen upon which he set the
Laver of Brass, and the Figures of Lions and other Creatures with which he
enriched its Basis. Tertull. striking at Idolatry, Tertul. de Idolol. c. 5.
in a Book which he has expressly made, objects the same thing in favor of
them, who defended it, and resolves the Question learnedly according to his
ordinary custom. But to keep my self to my business, what does all this make
for the veneration of Images? First, they were not the Representators of God,
nor of any person whom he had employed in any eminent Service of his Church.
Secondly, These Images were made, some for Types and sacred Symbols, as the
Cherubims of the Ark and the brazen Serpent, the others for the ornament and
enriching of the Temple only, as the Palms, the Oxen, and the Lions of Solomon,
none to be honored and worshipped, which was so contrary to the intention of
these Divine men, that the people offering Incense to the brazen Serpent
Hezekiah to stop the abuse, 2 Kings 18, 4.
made no scruple to break it in pieces. So all that one can lawfully conclude
from the last part of this allegation is, not that it is permitted or allowed
to kiss the Images by devotion, to be uncovered and prostrate before them, and
to render them worship in honor to Christ and his Saints (which our Adversaries
think and practice) but that one may carve Pictures of Creatures and Flowers
upon the Doors and other parts of the Temples to adorn and enrich them, Council
of Trent D^utri. 2
for which we never contested with any one. But for the Cherubims and the
brazen Serpent, the instance they bring of it is quite out of our purpose.
First, because that these Types have no place (any longer) in the Church, Jesus
Christ having caused the shadow to vanish by the true body which he has
publicly showed. Secondly, because God expressly commanded Moses that he should
do them; whereas he never ordained suchlike Images in the Roman Church. All
that one can conclude from it, is, that since the Serpent made by the Command
of God, was nevertheless broken by Hezekiah, when the people rendered to it a
religious honor; it would be very convenient also that Christian Princes and
Bishops should take from Churches and public places the Images of he and she
Saints, when men begin to worship them, though they were neasted there, not
only (as every one knows) by humane Authority, but Divine Institution. But this
Consequence does not favor their Veneration.

CHAP. XI. That the Scripture teaches not that the Bishop of Rome is the
Pontifical Spouse, and Monarch of the Universal Church, nor Authorizes any
thing which is founded only upon the Authorities of the Pope.
1. THe great and principal Article follows, which they esteem alone capable
and needful to maintain all the rest, viz. the Monarchy and infallibility of
the Pope of Rome. They endeavor to prove by Scripture, that he is the Head,
Spouse, and Monarch of the Universal Church, but by reasons so strange and far
from all appearance, that it is very easy to find that it is their Passion and
not their Judgment which has conceived them.

For first, they assert the Sovereign Pontifex which precided over all the
Church of Israel, during the time of the Old Testament; and that this Type may
have its accomplishment under the new Covenant, they conclude that there is a
Sovereign Pontifex in the Christian Church, Heb. 3.2. and 4.14. and 5.5, 6. and
7.26, 27. and 8.1, 2. and 9, to the 11.
and add that the Pope of Rome is the Monarch of it, as if St. Paul the Apostle
had not taught us that Jesus Christ is the Sovereign High Priest of his Church;
or as if this his Priesthood alone had not body and truth enough to accomplish
all the figure of the Ancient; and as if on the contrary the Unity of the
Ancient Pontifex did not evidently exclude the pretensions of Rome, it being
clear that if they have place, there will be two Highpriests in the Christian
Church against that which was figured in the Judaical, where they had but one;
and finally, as if this High Priesthood ought to belong to the Bishop of Rome
rather than to any other, supposing that there was one in the Christian Church
besides that of our Lord Jesus Christ.

They have also recourse to that which the Lord promised St. Peter, Matthew.
16.18.19.
to build his Church upon him, and to give him the Keys of the Kingdom of
Heaven, and the power of binding and unbinding; and that which he commanded him
three times after his Resurrection, John 21.15, 16, 17.
to feed his sheep, and to some advantages which he seems to have had above
the other Apostles, Matthew. 10.2. Matthew. 17.24.
as, that he is called the first, and that the Lord paid Tribute-Money for
him; and from all this conclude, that the Bishop of Reme is the Prince and
Sovereign Monarch of the Catholic Church: an ill and impertinent reasoning,
which supposes falsities, and concludes ill. For to begin with the last, that
St. Peter was the Foundation and Monarch of the Church, the Prince and King of
the Apostles; and in sum, what you will; what is this in common to the Pope at
present, or with any of his Bredecessours, to conclude from one to the other,
Peter was the Head of the Church, the Pope sitting now at Rome is therefore so?
How many Seas and Abysses must be filled before these two can join? for they
must first prove that St. Peter was at Rome. Secondly, that he was Bishop of
the Roman Church. Thirdly, that he left the Bishop of Rome all the dignities
that he had. Now it is evident that they cannot prove any one of these three
Articles by the Holy Scriptures; not so much as the first of these, which is
the important. For let Rome be this Babylon from whence St. Peter dated his
first Epistle, 1 Pet. 5.13.
there is no necessity obliges us to believe it; so that to be able to prove a
Thesis by Scripture, one must not (according to them) enter into any
Proposition in the proof of it, which is not in the Scripture; it is perfectly
clear that the power of the Pope cannot be found in the Scriptures. And as for
the other two Propositions, one that St. Peter was the Bishop of Rome: the
other, that he left all his Dignity to the Bishop of Rome, they are infinitely
far from all appearance of truth and reason. But it suffices us for the
design of this Treatise, that it cannot be founded upon the Scriptures. So
then although it says, Thou art Peter, and feed my sheep, one cannot draw from
thence the Monarchy of the Pope. But I say moreover, that what they presuppose
in their discourse, viz. that St. Peter was the Master and Prince of the other
Apostles is false, and cannot be proved by any of those passages which they
allege. The Lord said to him, Thou art Peter, and upon this stone will I build
my Church. But in what Logic does that signify that he should be the Monarch
of the Church, and the Prince of the Apostles? I shall pass by the belief which
the most part of the Ancient Fathers, and some of our Adversaries have of
taking this Stone upon which our Lord promised to build his Church; for the
Lord himself, the Rock or Stone of Ages confessed by St. Peter, a August. de
verbis Dom. See Mat. Sermon. 13. Tract. 124. in John.
for his Faith and Confession, b. Tract. 13. in Epist. John. D. T. 9. Sermon. 22.
ex 40. Sermon. edit a Sermon. p 248. primals. l. 2. in Apoc. p. 13.84. c. and l. 5.
p. 1456. C. Bibi. pp. T. 1. Anselm. in eum loc. Gloss. interlin. Lyran. Joan.
Arbor. Theosophia l. 5. c. 5. Alliac concord. l. 2. c. 13. c. Hilar. l. 6. de
Trin fol. 30. b. col. 2. Ambros. 6. de Incar. Dom. Sacram. c. 5. in it. Aug.
tract. 10. in ep. John. l. tom. 9. Auctor.
and not for the person of St. Peter. I will suppose that these words, and upon
this stone I will build my Church, be applied to St. Peter. What is it that
gives him so much advantage about the foundation of it, and upon the Prophets
themselves which God raised up at the beginning of Christianity, following that
which St. Paul says, That we are built upon the foundation of the Apostles and
Prophets, Jesus Christ himself being the chief corner stone; and what other
thing does it signify, except that in preaching the Gospel they have abolished
the Synagogue and founded the Christian Church, the new Republike of the Lord
his Celestial Kingdom: All the advantage which St. Peter had over the other in
this respect was, that he preached the first of them all, and was the first
that laid the foundation of the Church, as well among the Jews as Gentiles?
for it was by his preaching that the three thousand Jews at Jerusalem, and the
family of the Centurion Cornelius in Cesarea believed, the one being the
first fruits of Israel, and the other the first fruits of the Gentiles? who
knows not but that is an advantage purely personal proper to St. Peter, and
incommunicable to any other, consisting only in this, that he had the honor to
preach first the Gospel of Christ, and to put his hand first to the building of
this Celestial house? That which he adds, that he would give him the Keys of
the Kingdom of Heaven, and that what he should bind on earth should be bound in
Heaven, and what he should unbinde on earth should be unbound in Heaven, is but
reason, Sermon. in Pentic. inter opera Chrysostom. T. 6. p. 233. a. Chrysostom. Hom.
54. in Mat. p. 483. e. and Hom. 21. (lat. 20.) in Joh. p. 106. d. and in Gal.
1. p. 961. f. Bazil. Seleuc. Orat. 25. p. 142. 6. Vict. Atioch. in Mark. c. 3.
p. 417. c. Bibl. PP. T. 1. John. Aurel. l 3. contr. Claud. Taurin. Bibl. t. 4.
PP. part. 1. p. 586. a Carthusan. Ferus. Titelman. Gorran. in eum locum. Apoc.
21.14.
because he promised him For the honor of building the Church of Christ was
founded upon the Apostleship, which is writ in these words, the which (in my
judgment) signifies only, that he will eestablish Teachers in the Christian
Church, Ephesians. 2.20. Acts 2.14.41. Acts 10.5. 34, 47.
to teach men what is truly lawful or unlawful, commanded, permitted, or
denied. For the Key was the mark of Doctorship amongst the Jews; and the Lord
makes allusions to it, where he says, Luke 11.52.
That the Doctors of the Law entertained the Key of Knowledge, and the Kingdom
of Heaven, signifies every where in the Evangelists the Church of the Messiah,
which is also the sense, where this word is used by the (...)
Hebrews both Ancient and Modern: So that these words, I will give thee the
Keys of the Kingdom of Heaven, promises to St. Peter the Charge and Dignity of
Doctor or Master (as the Jews speak) not in the Synagogue, but in the Church;
not in the earthly and carnal Israel, but in the Spiritual and Heavenly. This
binding and unbinding, which he adds, are the functions of this new and
heavenly Doctorship which he promised him. For the style in which the Judaical
Language runs (in which our Savior then spoke) to bind, signifies to forbid
something, and to unbinde, on the contrary to permit and declare that it is
lawful; from whence it comes, that to say a thing is to defend, or permit it;
the Masters of the Jews saying only, (...)
that is bound, and, that is unbound; the Lord promised then (in sum) to St.
Peter, that he should have in the Kingdom of Heaven, that is to say in his
Church, the Dignity of Doctor, to proclaim and declare to the Nations what is
truly lawful or unlawful, holy or profane, unbinding many things which Moses,
or the Priests of the Gentiles had bound, and binding many other things which
the vices and follies of men had unbound; and all with a wisdom and Authority
so ample, that Heaven approved all his Doctrines, and was the Protector of it.
Now this dignity is not the Power and Authority of a Monarch, nor is it
particular to St. Peter, the other Apostles having had share with him, as it
appears clearly both by their Acts and Epistles; and namely by the 18th of St.
Matthew, where the Lord said to them all that which he here said to St. Peter,
Mat. 18.19.
Verily I say unto you, all that you shall bind on earth shall be bound in
Heaven, and all things that you shall unbinde on earth shall be unbound in
Heaven. Neither can they pretend any particular for St. Peter, in that which
was commanded him of feeding the sheep of the Lord. For had not the other
Apostles also as well as he the charge of feeding, common by his testimony to
all the Ministers of the word, and the commission of all the sheep of the Lord?
1 Pet. 5.2. Mark 16.15. 2 Cor. 11.28.
Preach the Gospel to all Creatures, and the care of all the Churches comes
upon me from day to day: it is true, that the Lord made toward him and repeated
this command three times, Cyril upon St. John l. 12 64.
but (as some of the Fathers have very well observed) to abolish the failing of
his three denials, very far from thinking by this means to establish the
Monarchy of others.

Secondly, As to this, that the Lord being at Capernaum paid the Tribute-money
for St. Peter and not for the other of the Apostles; that does not infer any
Authority of St. Peter's above them. For it may be that it proceeded from some
other consideration, as, that the others had already paid it, or that they
were not present when the Tribute money was demanded of our Savior, or that
they were not Inhabitants of Capernaum, as St. Peter was, who had his family
there. In brief, whatever it be, it is a wonderful Consequence to say, Christ
has paid the Tribute-mony for St. Peter, therefore St Peter was the Monarch
of the Universal Church, and the Prince and Lord of the Apostles.

Thirdly, Neither can this be inferred out of that place, where Saint Matthew
numbering the Apostles, says, The first is Simon, who is called Peter. For a
President is the first in his Chamber, and a Dean the first in his Assembly,
nevertheless none can conclude that the President is Lord of the Counselors in
his Chambers, or the Dean the Prince of his Brethren. I grant that St. Peter,
either for his age, his capacity, his zeal, or some other consideration has
had the like advantage in the Company of the Apostles. he might have been the
first of them, but yet not the Master, much less the Monarch of them.

Fourthly, And that suffices to show, that they cannot prove by the Scriptures
this mavelous quality which they attribute to the Pope, of not being able to
err in matters of faith. For since all the things which they allege are
grounded upon those things which regard St. Peter, who sees not that they
infer nothing for the advantage of the Pope, except they prove by the
Scriptures that all the right of St. Peter belongs to the Pope, that which I
think they dare not so much as attempt to show by the Scriptures?

Fifthly, I say as much of the Opinion of those amongst them, who attribute the
Infallibility and Sovereignity, not to the Pope (as at this time the greatest
part of their Doctors do) but to the Roman Church assembled in the Universal
Council. For all which they can draw from the Scriptures in favor of their
Opinion, speaks of the true Church of Jesus Christ, without amusing our selves
than to consider the just value of that which is attributed to the Church in
these places, whether that this Infallibility and Sovereignty be pretended or
real, it is enough to resolve their Reasons, to say, that they can conclude
nothing for themselves, until they have proved that the Christians of Rome are
the true Church of Jesus Christ, which they can never prove by the Scriptures.

6ly, Now this Sovereign Authority which they give to the Pope and to the
Church which acknowledges him being impossible to be proved by the Scriptures,
it follows that all the things which depend on it are not grounded there.
Such for Example is that distinction which they make between meats at certain
days, permitting the Christians to eat fish and not flesh in Lent and
other-like times; the establishing of Feasts, the single life of the Ministers
of their Religion, the retrenchment of the Sacred Cup to all those who
communicate, except to him who has consecrated the Eucharist, and otherlike
things, for which they allege, for the most part no other soundation than the
Authority of the Pope, and of the Church, which depends upon him. At least it
is clear that they cannot prove by the Scriptures, all that which any one of
them affirm. eth or uses for this purpose, it being so slight and so far from
their purpose, that I do not think it worthy the relating.

CHAP. XII. That the Scripture does no where assert the five pretended
Sacraments which Rome adds to Baptism and the Lord's Supper.
I Come now to the Sacraments, the number of which they have increased, adding
five to the two which we allow of.

The first is the Ceremony of the Confirmation, where the Bishop anoints the
person baptized with Oil and Balm consecrated after a certain manner, giving
him a light box on the ear, and making the sign of the Cross, says, I sign
thee with the Sign of the Cross, and confirm thee with the Oil or Chrysm of
Salvation, In the Name of the Father, Son, and Holy Ghost: All this to
strengthen him, that he may be the better able to resist temptations. Where is
it that the Scriptures orders or commands us this Ceremony? Certainly it so
little agrees with the Scripture that Alexandre and Bonaventure, two of the
first and most famous Authors of their School held that it was instituted
neither by Jesus Christ, Biel in 4. Sent. did. 7.
nor by his Apostles, as Gabriel Biel witnesnesseth writing upon these
Sentences. Others, seeing that it cannot be a Sacrament of the Christian Church
unless it had been ordained by the Lord, they wrack the Scriptures to find it
there. Dominic. a Sot. in 4. did. 7. art. 1.
They produce some Testimonies, such according to their own confession, which
without the Authority of their Church, who were not capable of showing and
concluding their Opinion. And first they remark that which is written in the
Acts, Acts 8.17.
that the Apostles laid their hands on those who had been baptized in Samaria.
But what has this in common with the Roman Confirmation? Where is it there
spoken of the Oil which is the matter of it? From these words, I sign thee,
etc. which are the form of it? of the increase of Justifying Grace, which is
the end of it? for it does not appear that the Apostles anointed with Oil, or
consecrated with the Sign of the Crose those upon whom they laid their hands.
And as to the end for which they laid their hands upon them, Acts 19.6
it appears from the nineteenth Chapter, which was to communicate to them the
extraordinary Grace of the Holy Ghost, as the gift of Tongues, and other the
like things, which are very different from justifying Grace.

Secondly, The Imposition of hands, Heb. 6.2.
of which there is mention made in the Epistle to the Hebrews, not being
accompanied with any anointing or visible Consecration, can serve for nothing
to establish the pretended Sacrament of the Roman confirmation, of which these
things are the two essential parts.

Thirdly, Concerning Repentance, we agree that it is necessary, and that the
Pastors have Authority to forgive sins to those who repent, and to retain them
to the impenitent according to that which the Lord said to his Apostles, John
29.23.
To all those to whom you remit their sins, they are remitted (or rather, shall
be) and to whomsoever you retain them, they are retained. Only we deny, that
such an action is a Sacrament, and there appears nothing in the Scriptures
which obliges us to believe it.

Fourthly, For the Confession, which they make part of this wonderful
Sacrament, we believe that every faithful one is obliged to prove himself
before he approaches the Table of the Lord: 1 Cor. 11.28.
For St. Paul orders it expressly. But none of the Divine Authors prescribes to
any Christian to go and reveal to a Priest all his sins, yea, even his most
secret ones, before he communicates at the Table of the Lord. It Is true, they
allege the words of St. James, James 5.16.
Confess your faults one to another. But how far is this from their Auricular
Confession. Cajetan upon this passage.
The Cardinal Cajetan, one of their most subtle and most famous Writers, and a
great Adversary of Luthers, being sent Legate against him into Germany,
answers there for us: I speak not here (said he, commenting upon this passage
in the City of Rome when he was above threescore years of age) of the
Sacramental Confession (as it appears in that which he says, Confess you one
to the other. For the Sacramental Confession is not done mutually from one to
the other, but to the Priests only.) But of the Confession by which we discover
our selves mutually one to another that we are sinners, to the end they may
pray for us, and of the confession of faults committed of the one part and the
other to appease and reconcile us one to another.

5ly, This same Cardinal confesses ingeniously also, Ephesians. 5.32. Cajetan upon
this passage.
That that passage which he alleges in the 5 Chap. of the Epistle to the
Ephesians. to demonstrate that Marriage is a Sacrament, is nothing to the purpose.
Wary Reader (says Cajetan upon these words) St. Paul does not furnish you with
any thing in this place to prove that Marriage is a Sacrament. For he says
not, this Sacrament, but this Mystery is great, viz. of the words which St.
Paul in the preceding Verse alleged of Moses. For this a man shall leave his
father and his mother, and shall cleave unto his wife, and they two shall be
one flesh.

Sixthly, 1 Timothy 4.14. and 5.22. and 2 Timothy 1.6.
As to the Orders we confess that the Apostles laid their hands upon those whom
they established in charge, and that this Ceremony is holy and praiseworthy,
and practiced carefully amongst us in ordaining our Pastors. But that this
action is one of the common and properly-named Sacraments of the New Testament,
neither Scripture nor reason teaches us.

Seventhly. There remains now the Extreme Unction, which with a visible Oil,
accompanied with certain words, pronounced by the mouth of the Priest in form
of Prayer, remits sins to a sick person, who is in extremity. And it is here
that the Disciples of the Methodists commonly triumph, alleging a passage of
St. James upon this Subject, very express (as they pretend) and they begin the
most part of their Disputes by this last piece of their Devotion, Jam. 5.14
Is there any amongst you that is sick? (says St. James) let him call for the
Priests of the Church, and let them pray over him, and anoint him with Oil in
the Name of the Lord, and the prayer of faith shall save the sick, and the Lord
shall heal him; and if he have committed sins they shall be forgiven him.

But let Cardinal Cajet. Cajetan upon this passage.
answer once more for us. It appears (says he) by these words of the Apostles,
and by the effects, that these words were not spoken of the Sacramental
Unction, nor of the Extreme Unction, but rather of the Unction which the Lord
Jesus instituted in the Gospel for the use of the diseased. For the Text says
not, Is any one sick unto death? but plainly, Is any one sick? and says that
the healing of the sick is an effect of it, and speaks not of forgiveness of
sins, but conditionally; whereas this Extreme Unction is not given but at the
point of death, and tends directly (as its form signifies) to the remission of
sins. And besides St. James ordains, that for one sick body they should call
many Priests, as well to pray for, as to anoint them, which is different from
the Extreme Unction.

CHAP. XIII. The Scriptures does not teach that Ministers should be exempted
from the Subjection of Civil Powers, nor that the Bishop of Rome has any right
over them in respect of Tempoporals.
I Do not see that they can reasonably draw from the Scriptures the exemption
of their Clergy, nor the Temporal Power of their Pope over the estates of
Christians.

First, That which they allege, the Lord said to St. Peter, Mat. 17.25, 26.
Of whom do the Kings of the earth take Tribute and Imposts? is it of their
Children or of Strangers? and St. Peter having answered of Strangers: Jesus
says, then are their Children free. This I say, does not prove that the Clerks
are of divine right exempted from paying Tribute to the Magistrates. For first,
it is not evident that the Tribute of the Drachmas, of which the Question is,
was paid to the Magistrate, and there is much more likelihood that it was the
half Shekel which every Israelite at above twenty years of Age paid to God for
the use of the Sanctuary according to the Ordinance of Moses in the 30th of
Exodus, Exodus 30.11, 12, 13, 14, 15, 16.
which is nothing like these Tributes which the Magistrates raised. But
although the same Question should be of a Civil Tribute it is clear that the
Lord exempted none from it, not so much as himself. Now since the Son of God,
even as he was Man was not of right subject to any Magistrate, this is not to
say, that the Ministers of the Church have the same right, seeing the great and
infinite difference which is between their persons and his. In a word, although
the Apostles ought to rejoice in this liberty by the beneficence of their
Master, so long as he was on the earth; it does not follow that they since his
Ascension into Heaven, nor those who succeeded them in the Ministry of the Word
ought always to enjoy the same exemption. For so long as he was upon the earth
they were his Family according to Civil Law, following and serving him, and as
Domestiques had part in this his privilege. But since he is retired from the
earth as to his humanity, neither they nor we are any more of his Family
according to Civil Law. For as we are his Spiritual and Mystical Family in
respect of Religion, he gives us not this Privilege. For then one might say
that all Christians must enjoy it since every one in this sense is of the
Family of the Lord.

Secondly, As to this power, let it be direct or indirect which those of the
Court of Rome attribute to the Pope over the Estates of Christians, even in
respect of Temporals, I think it not necessary to consider that which they
allege from the Scriptures, to ground it upon; since they are things so weak,
and so far from their purpose, that the greatest and best part of our
Adversaries themselves have rejected their Consequences, and reject with us
this pretended Authority of the Roman Seat, namely in this Kingdom, France.
where thanks be to God, it has not yet been established.

CHAP. XIV. Resolution of that which the Adversaries pretend, that the
abovementioned Articles have been taught by the Apostles, although they are
not contained in the Scriptures.
SO evident is it, that none of the Articles of the Belief of Rome, which we
reject from ours can be shown by Scripture.

First, To which they will answer, it may be, that although it be so, they have
nevertheless been revealed by the Lord, and taught by word of mouth by his
Apostles, the Scriptures not containing all the Articles of the Christian
Doctrines; of which many have been (as they say) given and preserved from hand
to hand by a Tradition not written. But I say, first, that to consider the
thing exactly, it seems to me that the silence of the Scriptures upon these
Articles is sufficient to prove that they have been revealed, neither by Jesus
Christ, nor received and believed by his Apostles, nor by them given and
commanded to their Disciples for Doctrines necessary to faith and Salvation.
For if at that time they had been kept in the list which Rome at this time
gives them, if they had been esteemed the principal Fundamentals of Religion,
and the most exquisite and important parts of the service of God; why should
not these holy men have made some mention of them, in the many Books which they
have purposely writ upon Divine things, and which by the Providence of the Lord
are come to us? Why did the four Evangelists conceal them? the Acts make no
mention of them? How comes it that St. Peter, St. John, St. James, St. Jude,
and above all St. Paul in his fourteen admirable Epistles, so full and so
abounding every where in Christian Doctrine, have not said one word of them? I
do not now urge that these Books are the Cannon of Faith that they have been
set down in writing to the end the Doctrine of Religion should be preserved
entirely there. Let us suppose (since Rome will have it so) that they were
written by chance, and without the design of giving to us the whole body of
faith. Yet one cannot deny but they have been written the most part of them
upon matters of faith. Now who will believe that so many excellent persons
writing so many Books upon such a Subject should forget the principal, as by a
consort and common conspiration? how happened it that in some place they did
not speak to us of the Sacrifice of the Mass, the pretended Soul of all
Religion? Of Transubstantiation, which is the ground of it; of the worshipping
of the Host, the heart of Devotion; of the Veneration of Images; of private
Confession; of the Invocation of departed Saints; all exercises of Piety so
exquisite and saving? If you believe those of Rome. Why have they not in some
places commanded obedience to the Pope, magnified his Authority, the only hinge
upon which their faith turns, the life and Salvavation of humane kind,
according to the Mximes of our Adversaries? Now and some Ages pust there has
not been written any Book of Religion how little soever it has been, where
these Doctrines have not always been met withal; and indeed if they were of
that importance which they make them, it were to betray men to speak to them of
piety without touching upon these. Let then the Scriptures of the New Testament
be, if they please a Letter only of Credence, an imperfect Rule, and in sum,
what they will; yet it consists of many Books of considerable bigness, and it
is no way credible but in some part or other there would have been some mention
made of these Doctrines, if these divine Authors had believed and taught them.

Secondly, Above all, if you consider that the particular design of their
Tracts and Disputes would evidently oblige them to speak of them in diverse
places, where they say nothing of them. For Example, St. Paul making a long
comparison between Christ and Melchisedec in the seventh Chapter of his Epistle
to the Hebrews, and treating almost of no other thing in all that Divine
Epistle, but of the Priesthood, was not he evidently obliged to speak of the
Sacrifice of the Altar, and of the Species under which he was offered, and so
mysteriously figured so many Ages before by the bread and wine of Melchisedec?
and nevertheless he says not a word of it. What do I say, that he said not a
word of it? he has done more. For instead of saying these things so necessary
to his Subject according to the Hypothesis of Rome, he says others of it,
which shakes it so rudely, that the Devoto's of his Sacrifice were all
scandalized at it, their Doctors sweating unprofitably to make these agree with
their belief.

Thirdly, In the eleventh of the first to the Corinthians, the Apostle
chastises the irreverence of the Corinthians in the celebrating of the
Sacrament who mixed their meals with the Communion of the Lord, could he
allege to them upon this Subject any thing more to the purpose than the
Transubstantiation and Adoration of the Sacrament, showing them, that it is not
bread which we receive in the Eucharist, that it is the Lord of Glory, the very
body which was crucified for us upon the Cross? What Romish Doctor is there who
being to treat of this Subject does not use this reason at the beginning,
middle, and end of his Dispute? But the Apostle says nothing of it, and (that
which is altogether strange) very far from speaking so, in speaking of the
Sacrament, he calls it Bread three times.

Fourthly, in diverse places of his Epistles, as namely in the 12 Chapter of the
Epistle to the Romans, in the fourth of the Epistle to the Ephesians, in the
third of the Epistle to the Colossians, and elsewhere, he infers all along the
duties of the faithful, as well for their piety toward God, as for their
charity toward their Neighbors. But he says not a word of their secret
Confession, nor of their Invocation of Saints, nor of their worshipping of
Images, nor of any suchlike things.

Fifthly, 1 These. 4.13.
In the first to the Thessalonians, he speaks of our duties in the mourning
which we use for departed friends; but without speaking to us to pray for them,
which was the fittest place for it.

Sixthly, In the first to the Corinthians he reprehends their divisions at the
beginning, but it is without saying any thing to them of the Chair of St. Peter,
the only line of the Union of Christians, as those of Rome say.

Sevently, 1 Cor. 12.28. Ephesians. 4.11.
In the twelfth of the same Epistle, and in the fourth of the Epistle to the
Ephesians, he makes a Catalogue of the Charges which the Lord instituted in his
Church, he having given Apostles, Prophets, Evangelists, Pastors and Doctors.
How in such a place should he have forgotten the Pope if he had known him? 1 Timothy 3.1 2, 3, 8, 9.


Eighthly, In the first to Timothy, and in the Epistle to Titus he writes at
large the conditions requisite to to the Bishops and Deacons. Tit. 1.6.
How upon this point, did he not speak of their not marrying, if it were
esteemed necessary in such charges?

Ninthly, 1 Pet. 1.1. and 5.1.
St. Peter in the beginning of his Epistle is qualified with the Title of the
Apostle of Jesus Christ; and in the last Chapter recommends to the Priests the
duty of their charge, and to make them value his admonition, he alleges to
them only that he is an Elder amongst them. Why did he not take in such an
occasion the name of Monarch of the Church, or, Of Servant of the Servants of
God, that is to say, the first and highest of all the Officers of God, which
are in the world: no body can be ignorant, but that it would have been an
imprudence near to stupidity of these holy Authors to have forgotten these
things in such considerable places if they had believed them? But their
Writings (although we knew no other things of them) does enough justify to us
their wisdom and dexterity in judiciously using every thing that might serve
for their purpose. Read St. Paul, and the first Epistle of St. Peter, and you
will not demand other proofs for this. It remains then that we say that their
silence about these Doctrines of Rome so constant and so universal, and even in
places where it had been to the purpose to allege them, prove clearly that
they did not know them.

10. After all, If it be not possible to show by the Scriptures that these
Doctrines have been revealed by the Lord, and taught by his Apostles, I do not
see by what other means one can prove it. For as for the Books of the Ancient
Doctors, which they commonly call the Fathers, their Authority is not great
enough, nor the testimonies which they render of these Doctrines evident enough
to ground them upon, and to oblige us necessarily to put them amongst the
Articles of our Faith, as we have (in my Opinion) sufficiently showed in a
Treatise which we have published upon this Subject. And as to the Authority of
the Roman Church which now is, it is as doubtful and incredible as all the
other Articles which they assert, so that this cannot serve to prove that they
are Divine and Apostolic. Since then that the Articles of our faith are in
the Scriptures, and those of Rome are not there, it is clear that our Religion
is certain and assured, as founded upon the most authentic Instructions of
Christianity, and that it cannot be rejected without denying Christianity it
self; and that of Rome on the contrary in that wherein it differs from ours, is
doubtful and uncertain, and cannot be embraced with a full and entire faith.

11. But I say in the second place, that all this Dispute is out of our way:
For my design is only to show that our Beliefs are in the Scriptures, and that
those of Rome which we reject, are not there; to destroy the accusations of the
Methodists who pretend that to establish our faith, we are obliged to have
recourse to other Principles than Scripture. Whether the Beliefs of Rome be
found in other Documents of Christianity, as in Books of the Fathers, or no,
it is another Question. It Is sufficient at present for me that they are not
found in Scripture. Now this being so, it is clear that I have had reason to
reject them from my Confession, since I receive nothing into it but what is
taught in Scripture. And this is sufficient (as all may see) to justify our
Faith by the Scriptures.

CHAP. XV. That the Articles of the Belief of Rome which we receive not into
ours are contrary to the Scriptures, and very far from being taught there.
BUt to fill up the measure of our proofs, I will add in the last place, that
the Doctrines believed by the Church of Rome, and rejected by ours; besides
their not being found in any part of the Scripture, shake it diverse ways,
destroying certain things which the Scripture lays down, and laying down other
things which it destroys: This is so clear, that whoever will consider the
whole without passion and prejudice will incontinently perceive it.

1. Upon the Point of Sacrifice.
1. ROme says, that Jesus Christ is, and will be every day crucified in an
infinite of places, even to the end of the world. The Scripture says, Heb.
9.^5, 26, 27, 28, and 7.27.
That he has not offered himself more than once, and that he has been once
offered to take away the sins of many: So as it is ordained for men once to die.

Secondly, Rome says, That Christ is now offered for our sins without
suffering. The Scripture says, Heb. 9.26.
that if he has been offered many times he must have suffered more than once.

Thirdly, Rome says, That the remission of sins is obtained in his pretended
Sacrifice, Heb. 9.22. John 19.30. Heb. 1.3. and 9 26.
without the effusion of blood. The Scripture says, that without shedding of
blood there is no remission.

Fourthly, The Scripture says, that Christ dying on the Cross all was
accomplished, and before his Ascension into Heaven, he himself has purged away
our sins and abolished them. How then ought he still, as Rome says, to be
every day sacrificed for the same thing.

Fifthly, The Scripture says, That none takes the honor of High Priest, Heb.
5.4.
and possesses it, but he who is called of God as was Aaron. How is it then
that the Priests of the Roman Church pretend this Dignity, since they cannot
make appear that God has called them to it?

Sixthly The Scripture says, that Jesus Christ is eternal High Priest, Psalm.
110.4. Heb. 5.6. and 7.3.24, 25, 28.
that he lives eternally, that he has a perpetual Priesthood, that he is
consecrated for ever, that he always lives a High Priest according to the Order
of Melchisedec, who remains a Priest for ever. Why then does Rome give
Successors to him in this Office?

Seventhly Rome holds, That the Priests bless and consecrate the body of the
Son of God. How does this agree with that which the Scripture lays down, Heb.
7.7.
That without all contradiction that which is least is blessed by that which is
greater? Are then the Priests of the Church of Rome greater than the Lord?

2. Upon the Transubstantiation and the real Presence.
1. ROme says that, that which the faithful eat in the Eucharist is not
bread. The Scripture says that it is bread. 1 Cor. 11.26, 27, 28.
Every time that you eat this bread and drink this Chalice, you show forth the
Lords death till he come. Wherefore whosoever shall eat of this bread, etc.
unworthily, shall be guilty of the body and blood of the Lord. Let a man then
examine himself, and so eat of this bread and drink of this Cup. 1 Cor. 10.16.
The bread which we break is it not the communion of the body of the Lord?

2. Rome says that, that which the Lord made his Disciples drink in the
consecrated Chalice was not wine. The Scripture says that it was the fruit of
the Vine. Mat. 26.27, 28, 29.
Taking the Cup he gave thanks, and gave it to them, saying, Drink all of this.
For this is my blood of the New Testament which shall be shed for many for the
remission of sins. And I say unto you, that from this time I will not drink of
this fruit of the vine till that day that I shall drink it new with you in my
Fathers Kingdom.

3. The Scripture says, that we shall not have the Lord always with us here on
the earth, Mat. 26.11. John 12.9. Acts 3.21.
and that the Heaven must receive him until the time of restitution of all
things. How so, if that which Rome holds is true, that his body is yet
perpetually kept here below upon their Altars, and in their Pixes?

Fourthly, The Scripture says, that the Lord is above, sitting at the right
hand of God his Father in a Sovereign Glory. Rome says that his holy Body is
under the Species of a mean Creature, inanimate and insensible, that it enters
into the Stomachs of mortal men, yea, sometimes of the most wicked, and is
subject to many other indignities, which we hardly dare think on. Is this to be
in a state of Glory?

Fifthly, Rome believes that the body of the Lord is entire under every crum of
bread and in every drop of the wine of the Eucharist, and that his head, his
feet, and all the parts of his body are in one and the same place, and that his
body is altogether above in Heaven, and here below in a thousand and a thousand
places of the earth; above visible, here invisible. Is this that which the
Scripture says, that except in sin, Heb. 2.17.
he is like his brethren in all things; that is to say, to the faithful, as
every one confesses? is there ever a Believer whose body is capable of such
accidents? the flesh of the Believers is a true body, and has all the
properties of it. Now there was never seen a body of this nature, which is held
in a place much lesser than its proper quantity.

3. Upon the Adoration of the Eucharist.
THere is no need to add any thing to what I have been speaking concerning the
precedent Article. For since the Eucharist is truly bread in substance, every
one sees enough how much this Sovereign service, which they give it in the
Roman Church, is contrary to all Scripture, which from the beginning to the end
forbids us nothing, more expressly, oftener, and under more grievous threatenings
than the adoration of any Creature of what nature and dignity soever. Ex^d.
20.3. Mat. 4.10.
Thou shall have no other God before me. Thou shall worship the Lord thy God,
and him only shall thou serve.

4. Upon Purgatory.
ROme says, that it often happens that those who die in the faith of Jesus
Christ are burnt in a fire as hot as that of Hell. The Scriptures says, Apoc.
14.13. Romans 8.1. 2 Cor. 5.6, 8.
That they are happy, that they rest from their labors; that there is no
condemnation for them; that their earthly habitaion of this house being
dissolved, they have a building of God, an eternal house not made with hands in
the Heavens. That so long as they are in this body they are strangers to the
Lord: and when they are strangers to the body (which is when they quit it) they
shall be with the Lord; Luke 23.23.
and tells us, that the repenting Thief was with the Lord in Paradise the same
day he died.

2. Rome says, that this subterranean fire purges us from some of our sins.
1 John 1.7.
The Scripture says, that the blood of Jesus Christ purges us from all sin.

5. Upon Justification.
ROme teaches that we are justified partly by faith, and partly by good works.
How agrees this with that Scripture, which says, Gal. 2.16. Tit. 3.5.
that man is not justified by the works of the Law, but by the faith of Jesus
Christ; and that God has saved us, not for the righteous works which we have
done, but according to his mercy, and with that which is asserted in so many
places, Romans 11.6
that we are saved and justified by Grace, since that if it be by Grace, it is
not by works, otherwise Grace would be no more Grace; Romans 4.4.
and that to him that works, the hire is not reckoned of Grace but of debt;
and with that which is said, that we have not whereof to glory, Ephesians. 2.9. Romans
4.2.
since that he who is justified by his works has (according to the same)
whereof to glory.

6. Upon the Merit of Works.
ROme teaches, that we do by our good works so much merit eternal life; that
if God should not give it to us, he would do unjustly. How can this agree with
the Language which the Scriptures teaches us, Luke 17.10.
when you have done all the things which are commanded you to do, say, we are
unprofitable Servants, we have done that which we ought to have done.

2. Rome holds that eternal life is, to speak properly, a reward due to the
value of our works. Romans 6.23. 2 Timothy 1.18.
The Scripture says, that it is a gift, or a grace of God, and a mercy, and
that although we should have kept his Commandments (that which we fail much in)
yet he uses gratuity and mercy toward us in well-doing. Exo. 20.6.


3. Rome holds, that between the virtue of the faithful and eternal life there
is a proportion; and the Scripture says, Romans 8.18
That the sufferings of this present time are not worthy to be compared with
the glory to come which shall be revealed in us.

4. Rome holds, that the Lord owes him who has lived well and holily, eternal
life. The Scripture Scripture teaches us, that God owes no body any thing:
Who is he that has given him first, and it shall be rendered to him again?
Romans 11.35.


7. Upon the Worshipping of Saints.
1. The Scripture condems those men who worship ((...)) those which by nature
are no Gods. Gal. 4.8.
Rome worshippeth ((...)) the Saints which are no Gods by nature.

2. The Scripture says, 1 King. 8.39.
that God only knows the hearts of all men, and that the dead know no more any
thing; that they understand not whether their Sons are noble or ignoble, Eccl
9.5, 6 Job 14.20, 21. 2 Kin. 22.20.
that their eyes do not see the evils which God brings upon the places where
they have lived. Rome teaches, that deceased Saints know all that is done upon
the earth, and that they know the most secret thoughts of our hearts.

8. Upon the Worshipping of Images.
Rome fills her Temples and Streets with the Images of God, Father, Son, Holy
Ghost, and of the most Blessed Virgin, and of all the Saints, represented, as
well by flat painting, as in all sorts of Sculpture. She will have one render
to them an adoration and veneration analogical; prostrate before them, kiss
them, offer them Bougies or Tapers, go a Pilgrimage to the places which are
consecrated to them. How agrees this with what the Scripture says, Deuteronomy.
4.12, 15, 16.
You saw no similitude in the day that the Lord your God spoke to you in Horeb
out of the midst of the fire, lest perhaps being deceived, you should make you
any graven Image in the likeness of male or female. Thou shall make thee no
graven Image, Exodus 20.
nor the likeness of any that is in Heaven above, or in the earth beneath, or
in the waters under the earth. Thou shall not bow down to them nor worship them
(The Hebrew says, thou shall not prostrate before them) and serve them. Lev.
26.1.
You shall make you no Idol nor graven Image, nor rear up any Image, nor set up
any Image of stone in your Land to adore it. (It is also in the Hebrew to
prostrate before it.)

9. Upon the Monarchy of the Pope of Rome.
1. Rome teaches, that the Pope is the Sovereign Judge of the world, a Monarch
assisted by the Princes of his Court, who governs Kings, who makes the greatest
of the earth kiss his slippers, who wears three Crowns upon his head, who can
chastise the States of Christianity with pains not only spiritual but temporal.
How agrees this pretended Power and the manner with which he has exercised it
many years since before the face of Heaven and earth, with that which the Lord
commanded his Apostles, The Kings of the earth exercise Lordship over them,
Luke 25.22.
and those who use authority over them are called Benefactors. But it is not so
with you, but he that is greatest amongst you let him be the least, and he that
governs as he that serves. And with that which St. Peter commands, 1 Pet. 5.3.
Feed the flock of God which is committed to you, etc. not as having Lordship
over the Clergy and people of God, but as being examples to the flock by your
charity.

2. Rome holds, that the Pope is above the Church. The Scripture sends back him
and every Believer having quarrelled with his Brother to the Tribunal of the
Church, and obliges him to submit to her Judgment. Mat. 18.15, 6, 17.
If thy brother has sinned against thee, etc. tell it to the Church, and if he
disdain to hear the Church, let him be to to thee as a Heathan man and a
Publican. And elsewhere, all it says, 1 Cor. 31.21, 22.
that all things belong to the Church; and namely, Paul, Apollos, and Cephas;
and in another place speaking of the Apostles in general, it calls the Servants
of the Church for the love of Jesus.

3. Rome esteems St. Peter the Master and Sovereign Lord over the other
Apostles. How comes it then that the Scripture speaking of him, does not [name
in the first place or rank, 2 Cor. 4.5.
but in the second only, James, Cephas, and John having known the Grace which
was given to me? How comes it that the other Apostles sent him to preach in
Samaria? Gal. 2.9.
How comes it that St. Paul preached three years without communicating any
thing of his design to him? How comes it that even Paul himself said boldly,
Acts 8.14. Gal. 1.17, 18.
that those who were in esteem added nothing to him? and recounts very freely,
that he resisted St. Peter in Antioch to his face, Gal. 2.6. Gal. 2.11.
because he was to be blamed? Are these the terms of a Subject to his Prince?
And would they suffer now adays that the Bishop of Hostia should treat so with
the Pope, or from him.

10. Upon the distinction of Meats.
Rome teaches that the use of flesh is wicked and unlawful two or three days
in a week, and during all Lent. 1 Timothy 4.1, 2, 3, 4.
The Scripture says, that every Creature of God is good; that nothing is to be
rejected when it is taken with thanksgivin; and that God has created food for
the faithful, and for those who have known the truth to use it with
thanksgiving; and calls the Commandment of abstaining from it, a Doctrine of
Devils; and qualifies them who assert it with the terms of teachers of Lies,
and deserters of the faith, abusing themselves with lying Spirits; telling us
particularly that such will come in the last days.

11. Of the unmarried state of the Ministers of the Religion.
Rome teaches, that for the Ministers of the Christian Religion to marry is an
impure and unlawful thing. The Scripture testifies that some of the Aopstles
were married, as amongst the rest St. Peter; Mat. 8.14.
and where it propounds conditions necessary for a Bishop, 1 Timothy 3.2
it requires not that he be not married at all, but only that he be the
husband of one wife.

12. Upon the retrenching of the Holy Cup.
Rome suffers none but him only who has consecrated the Eucharist to drink of
the Cup of the Lord, denying the Communion of it to all others. The Scripture
says to those who Communicate, Mat. 26.27. 1 Cor. 11.28.
Drink all of it: and St. Paul, Let a man prove himself, and so let him eat of
this bread, and drink of this Cup.

13. Upon the Exemption of the Ministers of Religion.
The Scripture says in general, Romans 13.1
Let every man be subject to the Higher Powers, etc. For the Prince is a
Servant of God for thy good; but if thou do evil, fear; for he wears not
the Sword in vain. 1. Pet. 2.13, 14.
Be subject to every order of man for the love of God, be it to the King as
Supreme, be it to Governors as to them who are sent by him, for the punishment
of evil doers, and for praise to those who do well. The Apostle Paul knowing
this order submitted himself to it, Acts 25.10.11.
appearing before the Officers of the Emperorour, and appealing to him. Rome
holds that all her Clerks even the least of them are exempted from this
Subjection.

CHAP. XVI. A Refutation of that which the Adversaries pretend to elude the
passages of the Scripture, contrary to their Beliefs by certain distinctions of
their Invention.
WHosoever will diligently read the Scriptures, will find many other things
there incompatible with the Doctrine of the Church of Rome. But this little
proof is sufficient for our design. I know our Adversaries endeavor to shun
these blows, and to that purpose use many distictions. But for the most part so
strange, that it is not possible to comprehend them; they wrap up things in
inexplicaple contradictions; as it is easy to be seen particularly upon the
Subject of Transubstantiaon, of the Sacrifice of the Mass, of the service to
Saints and their Images. Secondly, All of them presuppose their Opinion, and
live by the passion which they have for it. For example, before ever they had
established Transubstantiation, the world never heard speak of a body which
has its quantity, and not the manner of its quantity; which should be in many
places at a time, which penetrates the dimensions of another body, which has
all its parts confounded under one point, and not distinctly extended the one
out of the place of the other; neither of Accidents which subsist without
subject, a roundness without any thing of a Circle, a whiteness without any
thing of white; neither a changing of Substances; where the terms in which they
were confined was in its full and entire being fifteen or sixteen years before
the change arrived. So before they had established the Service and Prayers to
the Saints, humane-kinde had never heard that the Religious Services of God
were distinguished into Latria, Doulia, and Hyperdoulia; from whence it
follows, that before they employ these distinctions, they are necessarily
obliged first, to ground the Opinion which they have produced, and out of which
they cannot find for them neither in Nature, nor in Scripture any stay where
they may be able to subsist. I show that the Eucharist is not a humane body,
because it has not the quantity of it; that it is not the body of the Lord,
because the body of the Lord is in Heaven. To that these Gentlemen answer, that
the Eucharist has the quantity of a humane body, but it has not the manner of
it, that is to say, it is five or 6 foot long, although all its length is not
extended more than two fingers; that the body of Christ is in Heaven indeed,
but according to its manner of natural existence, and that it is in the same
time substantially elsewhere in a certain manner of existence, the which though
it can hardly be expressed by words, is nevertheless possible to God. Now what
light does these distinctions carry to the Subjects where they are employed? Do
not they confound all our thoughts? Do not they redouble the darkness instead
of dissipating it? And indeed what other things do they, except to repeat the
same thing that is in Question? for when a body has its quantity and not the
manner of it, and that he should subsist in one place in one manner, and in the
same moment should be in an infinite other places in another manner, this I
say, is not grounded but upon the Doctrine of Transubstantiation without which
never any of them would have thought to affirm things so inconsistent. One
ought then to begin by the proof of this pretended Doctrine. For till they have
grounded this well, their distinctions are unuseful, and our proofs clear and
solid. Now we have showed here above, that they cannot prove by the Scriptures
any of the places which they use to this end, nor infer any thing like it.
There is then no need to examine their distinctions. Since it is thus, it is an
injustice in them to make use of them; and it would be lost time to me to stay
to consider and confute them. In a word, we have employed this second means for
the abundance of proofs, and not by any necessity that obliges us to it. For
although the Doctrines of Rome should not oppose (as they do visibly) so many
truths of the Holy Scriptures, it should be always enough for us not to receive
them, since they cannot be proved by Scripture.

Thus have we sufficiently, in my Opinion, justified our faith by the
Scriptures, having showed that they teach clearly the Articles which we
believe, and that they assert neither directly nor indirectly, but rather shake
and destroy those of the Doctrine of Rome which we reject. From whence it
appears that it is against all reason and truth which some of our adversaries
reproach us with, that we cannot prove by the Scriptures, no not one Article of
our controversed faith, instead of acknowledging, that it is upon them that the
blame falls. Being evident that of all the Beliefs which they press us to
believe with them, they have not been able hitherto, nor will they ever be able
to ground any of them upon the Scriptures. Pray God enlighten them, and confirm
us in the knowledge of his truth, and give to both of us the spirit of Peace
and Charity, to treat our Differences with sweetness convenient to the
Profession which we make of being Christians.

FINIS.

