XLIX SERMONS Upon the Whole EPISTLE OF THE APOSTLE St. PAUL TO THE COLOSSIANS.

In Three Parts.

BY THAT FAMOUS MINISTER OF THE REFORMED CHURCH in PARIS, Mr. John Daille,
Author of that Incomparable BOOK, Entitled, The RIGHT USE of the FATHERS.

Translated into English, by F.S.

LONDON, Printed by R. White, for Tho. Parkhurst, and are to be sold at his
Shop at the Bible and three Crowns in Cheapside near Mercers Chapel. 1672.

To the HONORABLE Sr. Will. Courtenay, Of Pouderham Castle, in the County of
Devon, Baronet.
SIR,
THE Divine Epistle of S. Paul to the Colossians was not to rest in their
hands; but by his express order, to be communicated unto the neighboring
Laodiceans; as we read, in the Epistle it self toward the end. It would
therefore seem a little congruous, that these Sermons, which expound it, do
undergo a like disposal; and not confined to the French, to whom they were
originally Preached, be imparted to the neighboring English.

The Author of them was He whom, his Auditors at Charenton did frequently call,
for the beauty, and richness of his Discourses, the Silver-tongue Daille;
Readers here have applauded, and do esteem highly, for his Apology, and that
exquisite Treatise of the use of the Fathers; both which have for some years,
spoke our Language; The learned all abroad do know him, and value him for
diverse other excellent labors. He signalized himself, both at the Press, and
in the Pulpit: and GOD was pleased, to crown him, in His service, with the
glory of a vigorous, and venerable old age.

I confess, I was none of the meetest to represent this Work of his, and
communicate it, as I do: nor did I design it at the entrance. But a private
exercise receiving some encouragement, grew up, and comes at length into a
publication. Neither am I without hope; but that the known English civility for
strangers, will be showed Mr. Daille; though his Interpreter be no more, then
he is.

Yea, while that Reverend man interprets here a great Apostle; and presses
as he does, solid religiousness toward GOD, Loyal Subjection to Princes, and
Superiors; Peace, and Love, and every Virtue among men; I would promise him
Christian attention, and consideration; a calm and generous enduring of little
discrepancies, if any occurr; and all the respect, that befits a Minister of
CHRIST.

Now, Sir, I deem it not improper, to put into Your hand, a piece, which had
its Original in France; when I reflect upon the illustriousness of Your
Ancestry sometime there. I cannot but mind in particular, how the Family was
engraffed into the Royal House it self; Peter a Son of Louis le Gros, espousing
the Inheretrix, a Name, and Arms of Courtenay; so becoming the stock, whence
those Noble afterbranches issued, which did spread forth on this, and on that
side of the Sea.

But the Dominion, and Empire of GOD is equally over all the Kinreds, and
Kingdoms of the World; and unto Him, every one's greatest, and nearest
relation. I tender therefore the present Volume, chiefly, as spent upon the
illustrating, and enforcement of His holy mind and will: and do beseech You, to
accept the gratitude, which it is tendered withal.

That every Divine blessing may descend, and rest upon Your Person, and
Affairs, Your Virtuous Honorable Lady, and all those sweet Branches about Your
Table, is the earnest, and incessant Prayer of

SIR, Your Obliged, and Affectionately devoted Servant. F. S.

TO MONSIEUR, Monsieur du Candal, LORD of FONTINAILLE, Counselor and
Secritary of the KING, House, and Crown of France.
SIR,
I Present You these Sermons; believing, I owe this acknowledgement, not only
to the Friendship, wherewith you honor me: but much more to the edification,
and good offices, the Church where I preached them, receives now a long time
from your piety. For besides the fair example, which your life gives us, a
life full of virtue, and honor; always constant, and equal in the profession,
and holy Exercises of the truth of the Gospel: there has been presented no
occasion of doing service to the people of GOD, either in the one, or in the
other of their times, but you have embraced with zeal, and managed with
prudence.

So likewise we see, that the Good and Merciful LORD, you serve, has crowned
your obedience with the benedictions of His Grace. For in the inequality of
seasons, and the diversity of affairs, He has still rendered You acceptable,
both to those within, and even to them without. And, which is the principal, He
has preserved His Covenant in your house, that neither the vanity of the
world, nor the scandal of the time, has been able to make any of the breaches
there, which we see with grief in other families. To establish this precious
heritage of piety in your blood, His Providence has added to it, by alliance,
persons excellent in knowledge, and in merit, in whose lineage you daily see
your own life renew, and flowrish afresh. It is true, Sir, you have also had
your trials; as no true believers are exempted from them. But those which GOD
has dispensed to you, have been so tempered with his goodness, as I believe
you may truly say, that in this more, than in any other passage of Your life,
He has made shine forth the marveils of His grace toward You. Such was, some
years ago, the bitter, but blessed and happy death, of the late Sir Your eldest
Son, taken away untimely, and in the prime flower, and vigor of His age. This
was without doubt a very dolorous stroke, which cut down in a moment the
sweetest of your hopes, plucking from your embraces, a Son as love-worthy, as
he was loved; and whose deserving, to say all in a few words, was no less, than
the dignity of a Senator, to which he was already arrived, in the chief of the
Parliaments of this Kingdom. But how sensible soever His death was unto you, it
was notwithstanding accompanied with grace of GOD so visible and ravishing, as
I fear not to refresh Your memory of it; well knowing, it is no less dear, and
precious to You for the piety, and the high, and truly Christian constancy, He
showed, in those last, and happy moments of His life; than troublesome, and
bitter, for the mourning, and sadness, which it left on Your whole House. As
soon as His malady appeared to be, what indeed it was, He looked on Death
without disturbance; He prepared Himself for it, with great courage; and His
air, his eyes, and all His discourses, were full of resolution, and
contentment. He comforted us all; and amid the tenderness, and resentments of
such a separation, never expressed ought of feebleness. And though He left on
earth, of the dearest and sweetest, one may here possess or desire; yet He
quitted it, not only without regret, but even with joy; so firm was the hope,
or to say better, so clear and assured the sight, which the LORD JESUS then
gave Him, of the blisses, and delights, to which He called him. He remained in
this graceful, and holy disposition, even to His last breath, with a spirit
clear, and a soul calm, speaking to us of His approaching happiness; and of the
present grace of His LORD; with so much efficacy, as it stopped Your tears, and
in such manner forced the resentments of your grief, that how just soever they
were, You had nevertheless a secret shame, to make them appear in the presence,
and on the occasion of so virtuous a person; as if Laments, and Plaints should
have in some sort offended His piety, and dishonored the victory of his faith.
The same GOD, that loosed Him so miraculously from earth, to raise him up to
heaven, granted You to support the affection of His departure, with a patience
worthy Your vocation. After so rude a blow, He has yet sustained You; and
conducted You to an honorable old age, that few persons do attain. And now I
doubt not, but Your principal consolation, and the agitations of the present
world, and the infirmities of this age, is the assured hope you have, of
arriving also one day at the port of that blessed immortality, where, contrary
to the ordinary course of nature, You have seen this dear Son enter before You.

If in the holy exercises of Piety, by which You daily prepare You for it, the
reading of these Sermons may find place, and be of any use for Your
consolation; I shall therein have extreme satisfaction: at least I can well
assure You, it is one of my most ardent desires; who pray GOD, to preserve you,
with all your Family, in perfect prosperity, and remain inviolably,

From Paris April. 1. 1648. SIR, Your most humble, and most obedient Servant,
DAILLE.

Imprimatur.

Tho. Tomkins.
Ex. AEd. Lambeth. May 15. 1671.
SERMONS ON THE FIRST CHAPTER OF THE EPISTLE TO THE COLOSSIANS.
THE FIRST SERMON
On the I, II, III, IV, V. VERSES. Verse I. Paul an Apostle of JESUS CHRIST by
the Will of GOD, and the Brother Timothy.

II. To the Saints, and faithful Brethren in CHRIST, which are at Colosse.
Grace be unto you, and Peace, from GOD our Father, and from the LORD JESUS
CHRIST.

III. We give thanks for you unto GOD, who is the Father of our LORD JESUS
CHRIST, praying always for you.

IV. Having heard speak, of your faith in JESUS CHRIST, and of the love you
have to all the Saints.

V. For the hope, which is reserved in Heaven for you, whereof you have
heretofore heard by the Word of Truth, to wit, the Gospel.


THE Apostle St. Paul's Assertion is verified, in the afflictions of the
faithful, by constant experience; Romans 8.27.
and they ever work together for good, to them that love GOD. Beside the
excellent fruit, which the afflicted themselves receive from them; such, as
they sooner or later acknowledge, with the Psalmist, That it was good for them,
to have been afflicted; Psalm. 119.71.
they are also serviceable to the edification of others. For as Roses, the
fairest, and sweetest of Flowers, do grow on a rough, and thorny stock; so from
the afflictions of the faithful, rugged and piercing to the flesh, spring forth
examples of their Virtue, and instances of their Piety; sweetest and most
salubrious productions. See, what a rich store of benefits, the trials of Job,
and of David, have yielded us! It Is to them we owe, that admirable Book of the
Patience of the former; and a good part of the Divine Hymns of the latter. Had
it not been for their afflictions, we should not now enjoy after so many Ages,
that inestimable treasure of Instructions, and Consolations. What shall I say
of the sufferings of St. Paul? which did spead the Gospel all abroad, and
convert the world unto knowledge of the true GOD. His imprisonment at Rome
alone under the Empire of Nero, has done the Church more good; than the peace,
and prosperity of all the rest of the faithful, that then were. It gave
reputation to the Gospel; and made it gloriously enter into the stateliest
Court in the world. It inspired an heroic courage into Preachers of the truth.
It awakened the curiosity of some; and inflamed the charity of others: and
filled all that great City with the Name and Odor of JESUS CHRIST. Nor was it
of use unto the Romans only. It imparted its celestial fruit, unto the remotest
Regions, and Generations. For it was in this very confinement, that this holy
man wrote several of his Divine Epistles, which we read with so much
edification to this day: as those to Philemon, to Timothy, to the Ephesians;
and that directed to the Philippians, the Exposition whereof we last finished;
and the following to the Colossians, which we have chosen to explain henceforth
unto you, if GOD permit. Paul's Prison was a common receptacle, whence have
issued out those living Springs, which water, and rejoice the City of GOD, and
will furnish it even to the end of the world with the streams it needs for its
refreshment.

Having then already drawn from the one of these sweet Springs, that Divine
Liquor, wherewith we have endeavored, according to the Ministry committed to
us of GOD, to irrorate the heavenly plants of your faith, and love; we now turn
us, my Brethren, to the other; a no less quick, and plentiful one, than the
former. Bring ye to it, as the Lord requires, souls thirsting for His grace;
and He will give you, as He has promised, living water, which shall quench
your drougth for ever, and become in each of you a Well, springing up to
eternal life.

The Church of the Colossians, to whom this Epistle is addressed, having been
happily planted by Epaphras, a faithful Minister of CHRIST, the enemy failed
not to sow forthwith his Tares within it, by the hands of some Seducers, these
men would mingle Moses with our Savior, and together with the Gospel of the
one, retain, and observe the Ceremonies of the other. To make their error the
more pleasing, they painted it over with colors of Philosophy, subtility of
Discourse, curiosity of Speculations, and other such like Artifices. Epaphras
seeing the danger whereinto this profane medly did cast the faith, and
salvation of his dear Colossians, advertiseth St. Paul of it, then Prisoner at
Rome. The Apostle, to withdraw them from so pernicious an error, takes Pen in
hand, and writes them this Letter: wherein he shows them, that in JESUS
CHRIST alone, is all the fullness of our salvation; in such manner, as that we
should deeply injure Him, to seek ought of it, out of Him; since in His Gospel
we have abundantly, wherewith to inform our Faith and form our manners, without
adding thereto, either the shadows of Moses, or the vanities of Philosophy. At
the entrance He saluteth them, and congratulates them for the Communion they
had with GOD in His Son. Next he draws them a lively pourtrait of the Lord
JESUS, wherein shine forth the dignity of His person, and the inexhaustible
abundance of His benefits. Upon that, he undertaketh the Seducers, and refutes
the unprofitable additions, wherewith they sophisticated the simplicity of the
Gospel. Afterward, from dispute he passes unto exhortation; conjuring these
faithful people to live well, and holy, forming their deportment to a Piety,
Honesty, and Virtue, worthy their vocation. He ends with some particular
affairs, whereof he speaks to them, and with the recommendations he presents
them, both on his own part, and on the part of some other faithful persons,
that were with Him. But you will better understand the whole, by the exposition
of each of the parts of the Epistle; if the LORD grant us to complete the same.
For the present we propose to our selves, to consider only the five Verses we
have read: the two first of which contain the Inscription of the Epistle, and
the other three the joy, and the thanksgivings of Paul unto GOD for the faith
and charity of these Colossians. These shall be (GOD willing) the two Points,
that we will treat on in this action.

The Inscription of the Epistle is couched in these words; Paul an Apostle of
JESUS CHRIST by the Will of GOD, and the Brother Timothy, to the Saints and
faithful brethren in CHRIST JESUS, that are at Colosse. Grace be unto you, and
peace from GOD our Father, and from the LORD JESUS CHRIST. Whereas at this day
the custom is, to put upon Letters the name of those, to whom they are written;
and within, after the body of the Letter, the Name, and Sign of those that
write them; heretofore the use was otherwise: for he that wrote, did set both
the one and the other Name within, at the head of the Letter, with a brief
salutation in these words. Such a one, unto such a one, health; as we learn by
a multitude of Greek and Latin Epistles, which are left us in the ancient Books
of the most renowned Personages of those two Nations. The Apostle that lived in
those Ages, uses the same manner in all his Letters, as you know; saving, that
instead of wishing health, and prosperity, to those to whom he writes; He
ordinarily wishes them Peace, and the Grace of GOD, and of his Son JESUS
CHRIST.

According to this form, the inscription of this Epistle contains, First, The
Names, and Qualities, both of them that write it, and those they write it to;
and Secondly, The good, and happy wish, wherewith they salute them. The Names
of those that write it, are Paul and Timothy; sufficiently known to all, that
are ever so little versed, in the reading of the New Testament. They are here
described, each by certain qualities attributed to them. To Paul, that of an
Apostle of JESUS CHRIST, by the will of GOD. To Timothy, that of Brother
simply. The word ( Apostle) signifies in the Language of the Greeks, one
deputed; a person sent by some one. But in the Scripture of the New Covenant,
it is taken particularly, for those first, and highest Ministers of the LORD
JESUS, whom He sent with a Sovereign and Independent Authority to Preach the
Gospel, and establish His Church in the world. The highest and noblest charge
GOD ever gave to men: And to exercise it, it was necessary, First, To have seen
JESUS CHRIST alive after His Death, that a good and lawful Testimony might be
given of His Resurrection. They must Secondly, Have received their commission
from the LORD himself immediately; and in the Third place, Have the Holy Spirit
in an extraordinary measure, with the gift of Tongues, and Miracles. Whence
appears, how ill founded they are, that attribute the glory of an Apostleship
to the Bishop of Rome, to whom none of those three conditions do agree. It is
also clear, that this dignity is extraordinary, and was not instituted but for
the first establishments of the Church: the government whereof after its
plantation, the Apostles put in the hands of another kind of in feriour
Ministers, which are indifferently called in Scripture, either Bishops, that
is, Overseers, and Superintendents, or Presbyters, that is, Elders.

The History of the Acts informs us, that to the twelve Apostles before
ordained, our LORD added besides, afterward, St. Paul: having miraculously
appeared to Him, and sent Him with the same power the rest had, to convert the
Gentiles. He assumeth therefore here this glorious Title, at the entrance of
this Letter, and says moreover, that He is an Apostle by the will of GOD:
signifying, that it was the express Order, and Mandate of the LORD, which
honored him with this Ministry, and not the suffrage, and authority of men;
differencing Himself by this means, from those false Teachers, and Troublers,
that had not been sent, but by the will of flesh and blood. The declaration of
this His quality was here necessary for Him: First, To maintain His honor
against the calumnies of Seducers, who did disparage, and black Him, as much as
they could, under pretense that He had not lived as the other Apostles in the
company of JESUS CHRIST, during the days of His flesh; and Secondly, To ground
the liberty He took of writing to the Colossians, and of remonstrating to them
their duty, as well in faith, as manners; it being evident that the Apostles
had right to use this authority over all, and every of the Christian Churches.
To His own Name he adds that of Timothy, whom he calls Brother, as having
one, and the same faith; and laboring about one, and the same work: whether it
were to authorize His Doctrine the more, by the consent of this holy man; every
word being more firm in the mouth of two or three Witnesses, than in that of
one alone: Or to recommend Him to these believers; that if he wrote to them, or
ever came to visit them, they might receive Him, as a person worthy of the
fellowship of the Apostles, and whose Name deserved to accompany that of Paul.

As for those to whom He directs this Epistle, He describes them next in
these words. To the Saints and faithful Brethren in CHRIST that are at Colosse.
I pass by as childish and impertinent, the opinion of those, whom it listed to
say, that it is the Isle and City of Rhodes He means; and that He calls it
Colosse, because of that great, and prodigious Statue of the Sun, which the
Rhodians had erected at the mouth of their Haven, and which the Greeks
ordinarily called the Colossus. What need is there of these frigid, and
ridiculous subtilities, since the Ancients show, that there was yerst in
Phrygia a Province of Asia the less, a City called Colosse, not far from two
others, to wit, Laodicea, and Hierapolis, whom the Apostle also mentions in
this Epistle, and recommends expressly to the Colossians, the communicating this
Letter to the Laodiceans, when themselves should have read it. Afterward this
City of Colosse changed its Name, and was called Cone, and to it one of the
famousest Writers of the latter times of Greece, who is called Nicetas
Choniates owed his birth, taking His Surname from the place where he was born:
In Th saur. l. 4. chapter 22.
and himself boasts in one of His Works, that it had been to the inhabitants
of the City of Cone, whence he was, that the Apostle did the honor to write
this Epistle.

S. Paul qualifieth the Christians at Colosse Saints, and faithful Brethren. He
calls them Saints, a name he ordinarily gives to all true Christians, and
which belongs to them indeed: forasmuch as GOD, separating them from the rest
of men by the effectual working of His Word, and by the Sacrament of His
Baptism, cleanses and purifieth them from the filth of Sin, and delivers
them from the servitude of the flesh, and consecrates them to His own name and
service, to be to Him a peculiar people, addicted to good works. Whence it
comes, that the whole body of the faithful is called in the Creed, The Holy
Church. Mark this well, my Brethren, and make account, that you cannot be
Christians except you be truly Saints. Suffer not your selves to be abused by
the deceitfulness of those, who promise you this glorious Name, provided only
you make profession to believe in CHRIST, and that ye will live in the
Communion of their Church, how naught and impious soever ye be other ways; the
body of the LORD is too lively and precious to have dead, and rotten members. I
confess, if you have the industry to hide your Vices under the false
appearances of an outward profession, you will gain thus much; that men will
give you the name of Christians, and reckon you among the members of the
Church; as it might well be, that among those whom the Apostle honors here
with the Name of Saints, and faithful, there were some hypocrites. But GOD who
sees the secrets of our hearts, and upon whose judgment our whole condition
does depend, will never count you Christians, or members of his Son, if you be
not truly Saints. Paul likewise, and the Church, who by a charitable judgment
call you now Disciples of the LORD, will change their opinion, and rank you
with profane men, and worldlings, when they shall discover your Hypocrifie. The
Title, Faithful, which the Apostle gives in the second place to the Colossians,
is common to all true Christians too, and is taken from that Faith they give to
the Gospel of the LORD. The word, Brethren, that follows, signifies the holy
communion they had with the Apostle, and with all other believers of whatsoever
quality, or condition they were: as persons, all begotten of the same Father,
namely, GOD: all born of the same Mother Jerusalem from on high; all partaking
of the same Divine Nature; all nursed in the same spiritual family; bred up in
the same hopes; destined to the same inheritance; consecrated by one and the
same Discipline. In fine, He adds, in CHRIST; because it is of Him, and by Him,
and in Him, that we have all this Sanctity, Faith, and Fraternal union, the
titles whereof he has given to the Colossians.

After having thus denoted, and qualified the persons, He writes unto; He
wishes them, according to His custom, Grace and Peace from GOD our Father, and
from the LORD JESUS CHRIST. By Grace, He means the favor, and good will of
GOD, with the saving gifts, and divine assistance, wherewith he gratifieth
those He loves in His Son. By Peace, He signifies that of GOD, which is
nothing else, but the calm and tranquillity of a soul, that looks to the LORD
with assurance, having remission of its sins by JESUS CHRIST, and is delivered
by the effectual operation of His Spirit from the importune tyranny of the
lusts of the flesh. It may yet well be, that beside this first and chiefest
peace, the Apostle intends also that of men: a sweet, and calm estate; exempt
from their hatred and persecutions: that they might without justling them, or
being troubled of them, lead a peaceable life in all godliness and honesty. You
should also know, that in the style of Scripture the word Peace, signifies
generally all kind of welfare, and prosperity: to which sense, it may without
inconvenience be interpreted in this place. But he wishes them these benefits
From GOD our Father, and from our LORD JESUS CHRIST. From GOD; because He is
the first and highest spring of all good: the Father of lights, from whom
comes down every good gift. From JESUS CHRIST, for that He is as the channel,
by which the benefits of GOD stream down upon us: it being clear that without
the death and resurrection, and in a word, without the mediation of JESUS, we
could have had no part in the least of the Graces of GOD. He calls GOD our
Father; because He has adopted us freely in His Son; and it is properly upon
this relation, that He communicates His Grace, and Peace to us: whence it
comes, that JESUS CHRIST has given us order to call Him our Father in the
prayer He has taught us. He calls JESUS CHRIST the LORD, because he is our
Master, who has all power and authority over us, as well by the right of
Creation, as by that of Redemption. Such is the Inscription of this Epistle.

Let us come now to the second point of our Text, wherein the Apostle
congratulates the Colossians for the part they had in JESUS CHRIST. We give
thanks (says he) to GOD for you, who is the Father of our LORD JESUS CHRIST,
praying always for you, having heard speak of your faith in JESUS CHRIST, and
of the charity you have toward all the Saints, for the hope that is reserved
for you in Heaven which you have before heard of, by the word of truth, to wit,
the Gospel. Here is, as the Preface, or Exordium of the Epistle, which
extends as far as the thirteenth Verse: wherein the Apostle, by the true
praises he gives the piety of the Colossians, wins their benevolence; and
declares to them His affection, to prepare them for a right, and faithful
reception of the instructions, he will hereafter propose to them, as proceeding
from a soul desirous of their salvation. He protests therefore to them,
First, In general, that as often as himself and Timothy prayed GOD for them,
they did it with most humble thanksgivings, for the happy estate, wherein in
Spirit they saw them. Next he touches more particularly the grounds of this
thanksgiving, and proposes three of them. First, The faith of the Colossians:
Secondly, their charity, and in the third and last place, the inheritance
reserved in Heaven for them: Three particulars which comprize all the felicity
of man. The part He takes in the happiness of the Colossians, teaches us one
of the most necessary offices of our charity, which is to interess our selves
in the affairs of our Brethren; to mourn with them that mourn, to rejoice with
them that joy: and be as nearly touched with their good, and evil as our own.
Far from our practice, be the envy and malignity of worldlings; to whom the
prosperity of others gives trouble, and their adversity, gladness, who feed
themselves with their miseries, and are sad at their mercies. But the Apostle
shows us moreover by this his example, that the joy we have for the good of
our neighbors, should be elevated unto GOD, who is the only source thereof, to
render Him thanks for it. This is the just and reasonable Tribute, this liberal
LORD demands of us, for so many benefits, as he communicates daily to our
Brethren and our selves. If our lowness and poverty render us incapable of
other acknowledgement, let us at least faithfully acquit us of this so easy an
one, and so rightful; and say with the Prophet, Psalm 116.12, 13.
What shall I render to the LORD? All his benefits are upon me. I will take the
cup of deliverances, and call upon the Name of the Eternal One. Let us study
with so much the more care to render this sacred due to the LORD, by how much
more black and detestable the ingratitude of men is in this behalf. Far from
blessing Him for the benefits he does their neighbors, they scarce give Him
thanks for those they receive of Him themselves. They impute them to their own
industry or fortune, and (as says the Prophet) Sacrifice to their Drag; for
the good successes that betide them: yea, some so insensible there are, as it
is not godliness it self, but they give the glory of it to their own will, and
the strength of their free determination. But it is not enough to render thanks
to GOD for our Brethren, there must be also prayer for them. For as it is He
that gives them all the good things they possess: So there is none but himself
that can preserve or augment them to them: and thus our thanksgivings should be
ever followed or accompanied with Petitions: as the Apostle shows, in saying
that be gives thanks to GOD for the Colossians, praying always for them. The
Title He gives to GOD, calling Him the Father of our LORD JESUS CHRIST, is not
put here in vain; but to distinguish, and specify the object of our prayers,
and thanksgivings. The appellation of GOD under the Old Testament was The GOD
of Abraham, of Isaac, and of Jacob, the Patriarchs with whom He contracted the
Old Covenant, and to whom He promised the New. Now, His Name is, the Father of
JESUS CHRIST, by whom He has abolished the Old Testament, and accomplished the
New. Besides, hereby St. Paul remindeth us, of that we can never enough
meditate: that it is by the mean of this sweet and charitable Savior, GOD has
communicated Himself to us; and if we have the honor to be His children, it is
by JESUS CHRIST, of whom He is properly the Father, having not adopted Him, as
us: but begotten Him from all eternity, of His own substance; by reason
whereof, that also which He assumed to Himself, in the Womb of the Virgin, has
the same glory; according to what the Angel said, The Holy Spirit shall come
upon thee (said he to the Holy Virgin) and the Virtue of the Highest shall
overshadow thee; Luke 1 35.
whence also that holy thing that shall be born of thee shall be called the Son
of GOD. But the Apostle adds in his process, what were those blessings of the
Colossians, for which himself, and Timothy so assiduously rendered their thanks
to GOD, the Father of our Savior, Having heard speak of your faith in JESUS
CHRIST (says he) and of the charity you have toward all the Saints. He had
never been among them; as He will say hereafter, putting them, after the
opinion of most Interpreters, Col. 2.1.
in the number of those, Who had not seen his presence in the flesh. Therefore
he says, it was by hearing, that he understood of their faith, and charity.
Here is (faithful Sirs) the true matter of our joyings and thanksgivings for
our neighbors; not that GOD has given them vigor of health, abundance of
riches, the favor of the great, the glory of fame, the knowledge of Sciences,
and such other worldly good things; which, to say the truth, are but figures,
dreams, and shadows, that secure no person (as we daily see) either from
diseases of the body, or death: or from trouble, and disquiet of conscience; or
true misery: But indeed for that Heaven has revealed JESUS CHRIST to them, and
shed into their souls, that holiness, without which none shall see GOD. For
these two Graces, Faith and Charity, comprize within their compass, the whole
Kingdom of GOD. Faith is the entrance thereof, and charity the accomplishment.
The one clears our understandings; the other sanctifies our affections. The
one is the light of the soul; the other is the heat thereof. The one believes,
and the other loves. The one begins, and the other finisheth the happiness
of our life.

Now Faith respects indeed generally the whole doctrine of GOD revealed in His
Word, believing it undoubtedly true: but yet it fixes particularly on the
Promise He has made us, to give us Eternal Life in JESUS CHRIST His Son. It Is
this properly, that renders Faith saving, and vivifying. Without this, it would
not differ at all from the faith of Devils, who believe there is a GOD, and
tremble at it. But this love of GOD, which it apprehends, and embraces,
gives it salvation; and enables it to produce in us, all that is necessary for
getting in to the celestial Kingdom; according to the assertions of JESUS
CHRIST and His Apostles in diverse places of the Scripture, that whosoever
believes in the LORD is already passed from death to life. That there is no
condemnation for him; and that being justified by faith, we have peace with
GOD. Hence St. Paul to describe here true faith, adds expressly these words,
Faith in JEVS CHRIST. He shows us in like manner the object of Charity, by
saying, The Charity you have toward all the Saints: that is, as we have
intimated before, toward all Christians, all the faithful.

I confess, that Charity extends it self to all men generally: there being
none, to whom we owe not love, and on occasion the offices which a true, and
sincere affection is apt to produce: since all men are the Works, and Images of
GOD: since in Adam they all have one common nature with us; and all are called
to the participation of faith, and of eternity in JESUS CHRIST by the Gospel,
which, without distinction, or exception, inviteth all Nations, and persons to
repentance and grace. But so it is, notwithstanding, that Charity embraces not
all men equally. It has diverse degrees in it is affections; and loves it is
neighbors more or less, as it perceives more or less in them, the marks of
the hand of GOD, and the tokens of His CHRIST, and Spirit. Seeing therefore,
they appear no where more clearly, than in the Saints, that is, in true
believers, it is evident, these make the first, and principal part of the
object of Charity; Gal. 6.10.
according to what the Apostle says elsewhere; Let us do good to all: but
principally to the household of faith. Besides that Union we have with them, a
much more strict, and intimate one, than with any others: their necessity also
does particularly oblige us thereto; the hatred and persecution of the world,
putting them for the most part in such case, as none of Creatures do more need
the offices of our Charity: neither is there any object worthier of the
affection and succor of a good and generous soul, than innocence hated and
oppressed unjustly: therefore it is, that the Apostle notes here by name the
Charity of the Colossians toward all the Saints.

He joyneth these two Virtues together, Faith, and Charity; because in effect
they are inseparable: it being neither possible, nor imaginable (whatsoever
error list to say of it) that man should believe, and truly embrace GOD, as his
Savior in JESUS CHRIST, without loving Him, and His neighbors for His sake:
or that he should love Him sincerely, without believing in Him. He puts Faith
before Charity, not for that it is more excellent (on the contrary, he
elsewhere openly gives the advantage unto Charity) but because it goes first
in the order of things requisite to salvation. It is the blessed root, whence
Charity springs forth, 1 Cor. 13.
and all other Christian Virtues. It is the foundation of the spiritual
building; the Gate of the Kingdom of Heaven; the first fruits of the
workmanship of GOD, and the beginning of the second Creation. As in the old
Creation, Light was the first thing He created: so in the new one, Faith is the
first thing He produces; which the Apostle divinely expresses to us
elsewhere. 2 Cor. 4.6.
GOD (says he) who commanded the light to shine out of darkness, has shined
in our hearts, to give the illumination of the knowledge of the glory of GOD in
the face of JESUS CHRIST.

After the Faith, and Charity of the Colossians, the Apostle adds in the third
place, the Happiness that was kept for them in the Heavens. For the hope (says
He) which is reserved in Heaven for you. Some knit these words, with what he
had now said of the Faith, and Charity of the Colossians, and understand, that
these faithful people labored with alacrity in the exercise of these Virtues,
for the hope they had of the celestial Crown and reward: according to what the
Apostle says elsewhere of Moses; that He chose rather to be afflicted with the
People of GOD, Hebr.
than to enjoy for a little time the delights of sin, and esteemed the reproach
of CHRIST greater riches than the treasures of Egypt; because (says he) he
had respect to the recompense. And he teaches us in general of all those that
come to GOD, that they must believe that GOD is, and that He is a rewarder of
them that seek him. Ibid. v. 6.
And from hence it follows not at all, either that our works do merit the
glory of Heaven; or that our affection is mercenary. If we should not hope but
for what we merit, our hopes would be very miserable. But knowing that GOD is
faithful, and constant, we hope with assurance for the bliss, which He, of His
mere grace, promises us; and the less we merit it, the more love we conceive
toward GOD, who gives it to us; and the more acknowledgement, and service
ought we to render Him for the same. And for this gratuitous salary, which He
promises us, we look not on it as a prey after which we hunt; and without
which, we would have no love for the LORD: but as an excellent evidence of His
infinite goodness; as a testimony of His admirable liberality; that love of GOD
which shines forth in it, is the thing pleases and ravisheth us most of all:
and which enflameth our faith, our zeal, and our affection to the service of so
good and amiable a LORD, though then we should bind, what the Apostle says, of
the Charity of the Colossians, with the hope they had of the heavenly glory;
there would be nothing in this, but what were conform to Evangelical Truth.

Yet it seems to me more simple, and fluent, to refer it to the third Verse,
where he says, that He gives thanks to GOD for the Colossians, having
understood their faith, and charity; for the hope (He adds now) which is
reserved in Heaven for you. For to consider the condition of these believers on
the earth, it seems, there was no great cause to congratulate them for their
faith, and charity: the afflictions, which they drew on them, rendering them in
appearance the most miserable of men. But though the flesh make this judgment
of it, the Spirit, that sees, above visible things, the Crown of glory
prepared for the faith and charity of the faithful, holds them for the
happiest of all Creatures; congratulates them, and renders thanks to GOD for
the inestimable treasure he has communicated to them. I know (says the
Apostle) that your piety has it is trials, and exercises in this world. But I
forbear not to bless the LORD affectionately, for that He has given it to you.
I know the bliss, that is prepared for you on high in the Sanctuary of GOD. He
takes the word (Hope) here, as often elsewhere, for the thing we hope for, to
wit, the blessed immortality and glory of the world to come. I confess, we
possess it not yet: for hope is the expectation of a good to come. Romans 8.23.
That we are saved, (says the Apostle) is in hope: but hope that a man sees
is not hope: for what a man sees why does he yet hope for? But this good,
though absent and to come, is as assured to us, as if we had it already in our
hands. The Apostle shows it, when he adds, that this Hope is reserved in
Heaven for you. It is a treasure which GOD has set apart, having fully
prepared it already, keeping it faithfully for us in His own bosom. Whence it
is, that we make an assured account thereof; for He has deposited it in the
hands of JESUS CHRIST in whom is hid our life, and immortality; so as if we
make an assured account of things, which a man of probity, and honor keeps
in trust for us; how much more certain should we be, of the life, and glory to
come, seeing GOD has put it for us in the keeping of so faithful, and powerful
a depositary? The place where this rich treasure is kept deposited for us,
confirms yet more the hope, and excellency of it to us: for (says the Apostle)
it is reserved for us, in the heavens. Fear not, ye Faithful. Your bliss is not
on earth, where the Thief steals, or infidelity and violence make spoil: where
time it self ruineth all things: where Crowns the best established, are subject
to a thousand, and a thousand accidents. Yours is on high, in the Heavens, in
the Sanctuary of eternity, lifted up above all the odd variations, and
inconstancies of humane things; where neither our changes, nor the causes that
produce them, have any access. But this same place shows you besides, the
excellency, and perfection of the bliss you hope for: inasmuch as all celestial
things are great, and magnificent. Weakness, poverty, and imperfection lodge
here below: Heaven is the habitation of glory, and felicity.

In fine, the Apostle touches briefly, in the last words of this Text, whence
it is, that the Colossians had conceived so high an hope: Of which (says he)
you have heard heretofore by the word of truth, to wit, the Gospel. This
Sovereign bliss, which is reserved for us in the Heavens, is so highly raised
above nature, that neither subtility of sense, nor vivacity of reason, nor even
the light of the Law could discover it to us, much less give us the hope
thereof. 2 Timothy 1.10.
That same JESUS CHRIST who has destroyed death, has brought to light, life
and immortality by the Gospel. Before this, they were, either entirely
unperceived; or imperfectly known and hoped for. It Is therefore precisely from
the Gospel, that we draw both the faith, and the hope of them. He calls the
Gospel, the word of truth, not (as some will have it) because it is the Word of
JESUS CHRIST, who is the Truth, and the life: (for this exposition is more
subtle, than solid) but because it is the most excellent of all Verities; those
that are learned in the School of Nature, and of the Law, being mean, and
unprofitable in comparison of those which the Gospel does discover to us. It
may well be, that the Apostle would also secretly oppose the doctrine of the
Gospel, to those of the seducers, which still recommended shadows, and figures,
as we shall hear in the following Chapter: whereas the Gospel presents us the
substance, and the truth of things. And it seems to be in this sense, that St.
John after he had said, The Law was given by Moses, adds in form of
opposition; John 1.17.
But grace and truth came by JESUS CHRIST, because the Law had only dark
lineaments, and shadows whereas the LORD JESUS brought us the lively image, the
body, and the truth of celestial things. The Apostle remindeth the Colossians,
that they had already heretofore heard this Word of truth: as it were to
protest unto them, that he would promote no novelty among them; having no other
design, but to confirm them more and more in the holy doctrine they had already
received with faith from Epaphras, and other Ministers of the LORD. See (well
beloved Brethren) that we had to say to you, for the exposition of this Text.

It remains, that we briefly touch at, for you, the principal points we
should gather of it, as well for the instruction of our Faith, as the
edification of our Charity, and the consolation of our souls. As for Faith,
it is for it is security that St. Paul tells us at the entrance, He is an
Apostle of JESUS CHRIST by the will of GOD, advertising us by this quality, He
assumeth, to receive no doctrine into our belief which has not been
annunciated by these great, and highest Ministers of the LORD. Let us examine
the Spirits; and admit only the word of the Apostles. If any one Evangelize,
beyond what they have preached, let us hold him for an Anathema. We have their
Scriptures. Let us assuredly believe all that we read in them. Let the
doctrine, which appears not there, be suspected to us: and praised be GOD, that
according to this rule, we have banished from our Religion, that which error,
and superstition had thrust into Christianity. You know that the GOD, the
CHRIST, the Heaven, the Worship and Sacraments we preach, have been given us by
the Apostles of the LORD established by the Will of GOD, and do appear
throughout in their Gospels and in their Epistles. Whereas the Mediators, whom
our Adversaries invocate, the High Priest they acknowledge, the Traditions they
maintain, the Purgatory they fear, the greatest part of the Sacraments they
celebrate, the adoration of the Host, the veneration of Images, and the
voluntary Worships which they practice, are not found at all either in the Old
or the New Testament. Let us therefore firmly retain our Religion, as
instituted by the Will of GOD, and constantly reject what is beyond it, as come
of man, and not of the LORD; from the Earth, and not from Heaven. But it is not
enough to make profession of it: we must plant this doctrine in our hearts by a
lively belief; in such sort, as we may be able to say with truth, That we have
faith in JESUS CHRIST, and charity toward all the Saints.

We render thanks to GOD, with the Apostle, for that of His great mercies, He
has vouchsafed to communicate this treasure of His Gospel to us; and not in
vain; since there are among us that have truly made their profit of these
spiritual riches. But the life of the greater part renders them unworthy of the
praise, which St. Paul here gives the Colossians. For is this to have Faith in
JESUS CHRIST; to serve Him so loosely, as we do? and testify so little zeal
for His glory? so little respect to His Commandments? so little belief of his
documents? and so little affection for the interests of His Kingdom? As for
Charity, I am ashamed to speak of it, so cooled is ours. For if we loved all
the faithful, should we leave the life of some of them, and the reputation of
others, without succor? Should we injure them, instead of defending them?
Should we take away their substance, instead of communicating to them our own?
Should we black their honor, instead of preserving it? Would their prosperity
offend us? Would their miseries content us? Faithful Sirs, remember, they are
the Saints of GOD, His Children, and the Brethren of His CHRIST. Respect those
so sacred names, and spare persons, that have the honor to belong so nearly to
your LORD. He will judge you by the treatment, you shall give them; and write
on his account, the good and the evil, which they shall receive from your
hands; recompensing it, or punishing, in the very same manner, as if you had
honored, or violated Him in His own person. He will cut you off from His
communion, if you do not carefully regard and practice theirs; and will never
avouch you for His Children, if you acknowledge them not for your Brethren. And
here allege not to me, I beseech you, that you have faith. I know well, that
this divine light cannot be in souls which are cold, and destitute of Charity.
But suppose, that this were possible; I tell you, and declare, that all your
pretended faith, should you have the highest degree thereof, that may be in the
world, without charity would be but a shadow, an Idol, and an illusion; and, as
St. James says, a stinking carcass. James 2.26.
Do all you will: Have as much faith and knowledge as you please, if you have
not charity, you are not a Christian, you are but a false, and deceitful image
of one. Charity is absolutely necessary to the perfection of a Christian. It is
the badge of this holy Discipline; it is the honor, and the glory of it: and
the Apostle as you see, sets it down here among it is essential parts. Faith
shall cease in Heaven, when we shall see instead of believing. But charity
shall remain for ever. Have then a good thing, so necessary for you. If you
have it not hitherto, ask it of GOD incessantly with prayers and tears, and
quit Him not before you have obtained it. If you have it, thank Him for it,
more than for all the goods of the Universe; and make account, that in giving
you charity, He has given you the Life, the Kingdom, and the Crown of Heaven.
Exercise this precious gift continually; let there be none of your neighbors,
without feeling of it; Do good to all. Communicate what you have received: the
light of your knowledge to the ignorant, the succor of your good offices, to
the afflicted; the sweetness of your patience, to enemies; the consolation of
your visits, to the sick; the assistance of your alms, to the needy; the
example of your innocence to all, with whom you converse. But have a particular
care of Saints, the members of the LORD JESUS, who serve Him here with you, and
how poor soever they be, have yet been redeemed with His blood, and
predestined to His glory, as well as you. Dear Brethren, your labor shall
not be in vain: Your charity shall bring forth it is fruits in their season with
a most abundant usury. For terrene, and perishing good things, which you shall
have sowed here below, you shall one day reap on high those that are celestial
and immortal: for a little bread, and a little money that you shall now give to
JESUS CHRIST, you shall receive from His liberal hand the delights of Paradise,
and the treasures of eternity. This is the hope, which is reserved for you, in
the Heavens. It is not the word of weak, and vain men, that has promised it to
you: You have heard, by the Gospel, the Word of Truth, which cannot lie. And as
so magnificent an hope should inflame our Charity; so should it comfort our
patience, and render it invincible, under the Cross, to which the Name of
CHRIST does subject us. Consider a little, what the men of the world do, and
suffer for uncertain hopes, that whirl in the Air, flote on the Sea, and depend
upon the Wind, and Fortune; to how many dangers they expose themselves; to what
travail, and disquiet they condemn themselves; Voluntarily passing nights, and
days in a most laborious servitude, for an imaginary good, that neither yet
is, nor perhaps shall ever be; and which, how happy soever the success of their
designs may be, they shall not enjoy at most, but during some years only.
Christian, shall it be said, that you have less zeal for Heaven, than these
people have for Earth? Their hope is doubtful: Yours is assured. Theirs
depends on the will of men, and the inconstancy of elements: Yours is in
Heaven. Pursue then generously so high and glorious a design. And since your
hope is in Heaven, have incessantly heart, affection, and thought there. Regard
no more either flesh, or earth; it is not here, your bliss is. JESUS CHRIST
has seated it on high at the right hand of the Father, in the Palace of His
holiness. Let this excellent hope, sweeten all the evil, you suffer here below.
If you be not at ease here; if you be despised; if you have no part in the
wealth, or honors of the world: think that in like manner, neither is it here,
that JESUS CHRIST has promised you the rewards of your piety. That Heaven
which you see so constant, and immutable, keeps them faithfully for you. You
shall there receive one day, the honor, the glory, and the dignities, you now
breath after; not to possess them during some miserable months, as worldlings
enjoy their pretended riches, but eternally, with a perfect, and unspeakable
contentment, in the blessed communion of Saints, of Angels, and of JESUS
CHRIST, the Lord of the one and the others: To whom, with the Father, and the
Holy Spirit, the only true GOD blessed for ever, be honor and glory to ages of
ages. Amen.

THE II. SERMON.
COL. I. Ver. VI, VII, VIII. Verse. VI. The Gospel which is come unto you, as
also it is into all the World, and brings forth fruit, as it does also in
you, since the day you heard, and knew the Grace of GOD in truth.

VII. As also you have learned of Epaphras our dear fellow servant, who is a
faithful Minister of CHRIST for you.

VIII. Who also has declared unto us your charity, which you have in the
Spirit.


DEar Brethren; the Gospel of our LORD JESUS CHRIST, is the most excellent, and
most admirable Doctrine, that was ever published in the Universe. It is the
grand mystery of GOD, the wisdom of Angels, and men; the glory of Heaven, and
the happiness of the Earth. It is the only seed of immortality, the perfection
of our nature, the light of our understandings, and the sanctity of our
affections. There is no Philosophy, or other Discipline; but this alone, that
is able to deliver us from the slavery of Devils, and make us Children of the
most High. It is this solely, that truly purifieth us from the filth of sin;
and clotheth us with a complete righteousness; that plucketh us out of the hands
of death, and hell; and gives us access to the Throne of GOD, there to
receive, of His bounty, life and supreme felicity. All other religions,
invented, and followed by flesh and blood, are ways of perdition; disciplines
of error, and vanity: that present themselves to poor men in the thick
darkness of their ignorance, as those seducing fires, that sometimes abuse
Travelers during the obscurity of the Night; leading them into the deeps of
death, and eternal malediction. The Law it self, though come from on high, is
nevertheless, as much beneath the dignity of the Gospel, as Sinai is beneath
Heaven, and Moses beneath JESUS CHRIST. The Law affrighteth Consciences; the
Gospel assures them. The one slays the sinner; the other raises Him up
again. The one makes grace be desired; the other makes it be enjoyed. The one
presented the shadows, and figures of the truth; the other gives us the lively
image, and very body thereof. Whence you may judge, my Brethren, how much it
concerns us to know, so saving and Divine a Doctrine that we may embrace, and
obey it: since the repose, and happiness of our souls stand on it, which we
shall unprofitably seek any other where. It is to inflame us with an ardent
desire of this holy and blessed knowledge, that the Apostle St. Paul proposes
to us so often in His Epistles, the praises of the Gospel; scarce ever naming
it, without adding presently something to its commendation; as the custom is
of those that love ardently, never to speak of that they love, without giving
it some Elogy, that testifies, both its excellency, and their passion. Such is
the manner of Our St. Paul, toward the Gospel of his Master. He has his soul
so full of the love, and admiration of this Heavenly doctrine, that He can
neither pronounce, nor write the name of it, but He accompanies it with
praises, as the just and due marks of its dignity. We have an example of it, in
the Text, which you even now heard. For having said before, that the Colossians
had heard of the hope, which is laid up for us in the Heavens, by the word of
truth, to wit; the Gospel; from thence he takes occasion, to interpose in this
verse, something to its commendation: representing to us, the extention, and
efficacy of this Divine word of life. The Gospel (says he) which is come unto
you as also it is into all the world; and brings forth fruit, as it does also
in you, since the day that you heard, and knew the Grace of God in truth. In
the two verses, that follow, he praises Epaphras, who had by his Ministry
converted the Colossians to the knowledge of the LORD, giving him an excellent
testimony of fidelity, and goodness, and mingling therewith some praises of the
Colossians themselves. As also (says he) you have heard of Epaphras our dear
fellow servant who is a faithful Minister of CHRIST for you, who also has
declared unto us your Charity which you have in the Spirit. This shall be (if
it please the LORD) the matter of this action; And to proceed upon it in order,
we will consider, one after the other, the two particulars that present
themselves, as you see, in the Text of St. Paul; to wit, the praise of the
Gospel in the former verse, and that of Epaphras in the two next: touching at
also upon each, what the Apostle intermixeth to the commendation of the
Colossians.

As to the Gospel, he touches at two points. First, its admirable progress;
and its great, and sudden spread. It is (says he) come unto you, as also into
all the world; and secondly, its divine effectualness to convert men, and
change their manners and life. And it brings forth fruit (says he) as also
it does in you since the day that you heard and knew the Grace of GOD in truth.
He says therefore, first, That the Gospel was come to the Colossians;
secondly, That it is also come unto all the World. About the first there is no
difficulty: For since there was a Church in the City of Colosse, it is evident,
that the Gospel, by which Christian Churches are founded and builded, had been
Preached to them. Only we should observe in this event, the marvels of the
goodness of GOD toward the Colossians. For they were a barbarous, and an
Idolatrous people; very far off from the Country, and the Religion of Israel;
a portion of Phrygia a Province infamous for its abominations; from whence had
issued the mysteries, and infernal devotions of Cibele, called by the Gentiles,
the mother of the GODs; the most detestable of all Pagan Idols; and in whose
service were committed the most unclean, and shamefullest horrors. The
Colossians, as other inhabitants of Phrygia, were plunged in this gulf of
vileness, when the LORD vouchsafed to visit them, and make the light of His
Gospel to arise upon them. Whence appears, that the knowledge He gives us of
His word, is a present from His mere grace, and not the pay of our pretended
merits. For what had the Colossians, in the condition they then were, that
might invite Him to communicate this rich treasure to them? what had they on
the contrary, but might have diverted Him from it; seeing all among them was
full of a profound, and inveterate Idolatrousness? You see also, the Apostle
says, not, that they were come to the Gospel: but that the Gospel was come to
them; to show us, that it is GOD that comes to us, who preventeth us by His
grace, according to the determinate purpose of His good pleasure. The sick do
go, or send to the Physician, and solicit the succor of his art. Here, quite
contrary, the supreme Physician of souls, seeks to the sick. He comes to them
in His benignity. He sends them His Ministers, and presents to them His
remedies, when they dream of nothing less, Luke 19.10.
than of their malady, and the cure necessary for them. The Son of man came to
seek, and save, that which was lost. He dispatcheth His servants to Colosse,
and elsewhere, to bear thither His salvation, to people, that thought not, save
of destroying themselves. He makes Himself be found of them that sought Him
not; Isa. 65.11.
and says unto a Nation, that was not called by His Name, Behold me, behold
me. Let a man search, as much as he pleases; He shall never be able to find
any reasonable cause of this dispensation of GOD, communicating His Gospel at
certain times, and to certain places; but His sole good pleasure. And that we
might the better note this truth, He often directs the light of His word to
those, that governed themselves worst in the state of nature; and hides it
from them, that seemed less defiled than others. He imparteth His Gospel to the
Colossians, to the Ephesians, to the Corinthians, and such like, the most lost
men that were, in all kind of superstitions, and Vices. He says nothing to the
Gymnosophists, or the Brachmans, or to diverse others as well Barbarians, as
Greeks, which were esteemed at that time the most innocent of all mankind: as
in effect there appears much more of justice, and honesty in what is reported
to us of their manners, than in those of any other people. Wherefore has GOD
taken this course? Because if He had done otherwise, if He had called only
those, in whose policy and life, was seen some outward goodness to shine forth;
passing by those whose manners had nothing which was not damnable; we should
have believed, without all doubt, what some cannot yet forbear to say, that it
is the works of men that oblige GOD to call them, and to impart His Gospel to
them: and that if in rigor, they be not worthy of this favor; they merit it
at least in a seemliness of equity, and in congruity; as they speak of it in
the Schools of Rome. Therefore the LORD uses very often a clean contrary
procedure; to make us understand; that those whom He calls, do not, more than
those he leaves, merit ought at all; (as in effect it is most true, that all
men in the corruption, wherein they are born, do nothing that is of value: the
most splendid of their pretended virtues in this estate being but a plaster,
and a deceitful dawbing, which under a fair appearance, hides only deformity,
and filth) and that if He vouchsafe to illuminate any, with the light of his
Gospel, it is of the sole good pleasure of His grace, He does it, and not at
all for merit of theirs. It was therefore a miracle of the Divine goodness,
that this saving Doctrine came to the Colossians, who by their nature, were so
far from it: and the Apostle remindeth them of it, to animate them more, and
more, in sincere gratitude, toward the author of so great a benefit.

But that which he adds is much more strange, and incredible; that the Gospel
was come into all the world. He testifies it too elsewhere; as here a little
after, where he says, that the Gospel is preached to every creature, Col. 1.23.
that is under Heaven; and at the tenth of the Epistle to the Romans, where
applying to the Ministers of the LORD JESUS what the Psalmist had sung of the
Heavens; Romans 10.18.
Their sound, (says he) is gone forth through all the earth, and their words
unto the ends of the World. And elsewhere speaking of himself, he says, That
from Jerusalem, Romans 15.19.
and round about it, even to Illyricum he had made the Gospel of JESUS CHRIST
to abound: and after the time, he wrote those words, He sowed it besides in the
Isle of Malta, and at Rome Now if the other twelve Apostles, and the seventy
Disciples, and the Evangelists did labor, each according to his measure, in
proportion with St. Paul; as it is not to be doubted, but they did; no one will
have cause to be astonished; that all they together should have, by that time,
carried the Gospel through the whole world. We read likewise in the writings of
the first Christians, Justin, Clement, Tertullian, and others, that in their
time, that is, about 130 and 160 years only after the LORD's death, all was
full of Christian Churches: and that there was no Nation either among the
Greeks, or the Barbarians, nay the very Scythians or Tartarians, wherein CHRIST
JESUS had not servants. And though these testimonies cannot be rejected without
extreme impudence; there being no probability, that either St. Paul, or those
other Writers would have spoken of the thing in such sort, if it had not been
true: yet entirely to disarm incredulity, I will add, that the very same
appears by the Books of Pagans of that time, that are remaining. For Tacitus, a
Roman Historian, a passionate enemy of Christianity, Amel. l. 15.
though otherwise a grave man, and of great esteem among his Countrymen, has
left in Writing, that in the eleventh year of Nero, that is, only eight years
after the date of this Epistle of St. Paul to the Colossians, a severe search
having been made after it, there was found a very great multitude of Christians
at Rome. This suffices to justify what the Apostle says. For since that
Preaching was able to penetrate so far on this side, athwart Provinces, that
made, as it were, the heart of the Roman Empire; it might be much more easily
spread toward the East, in the Estates of the Parthians, and in the Indies,
even whither St. Thomas went, as appears, by tracks of it that remain of it to
this day in those Countries; and toward the South in Egypt, and Ethiopia,
where St. Matthew Preached, as the ancients do report; and toward the North,
whither passed some of the other Disciples. This was well nigh the whole world,
then known of the Greeks, and Romans; and thus without doubt, the Apostle
understands it in this place. For as to those great Countries discovered in the
West, about one hundred and fifty years ago; which they commonly call the West
Indies, or the New world; it is evident, the Ancients had no certain knowledge
of them; and it is very likely, that they were not yet peopled in the Apostle's
time; the furtherst memory, which the Nations there have preserved, of things
yerst done among them, being but for four or five hundred years at most. Be it
concluded therefore, that taking the World, as is commonly understood, for
Countries inhabited, and known at that time, the Gospel was then already come
into all the world.

The Apostle mentions it to the Colossians, First to confirm them the more, in
the says they had given to the Gospel. I confess, that its truth depends not
upon the success of the Preaching it; nor upon the multitude of them that
believe it. Though all the world should reject it; though Heaven and Earth
should persecute it, the faith of a Christian ought to abide always firm, and
unshaken; being founded, as it is, upon the word of GOD, and not upon the
consent of men: as on the contrary, though the whole universe should maintain
error, we should not be for this, either obliged to follow error, or
excusable for having followed it; this order of GOD subsisting for ever, that
we must not follow a multitude to do evil. But thoug it be thus, yet it is a
great consolation to a faithful soul, to see the truth spread abroad. And since
the Divine Virtue of the LORD is so much the more powerfully declared, by how
much the more men it converteth unto his Christ; it is evident, that this
extension of the Gospel helps, and confirms our Faith; in as much as it
furnishes us with an excellent testimony of the power of GOD, and of the
efficacy of His word. But I add also, that the success here touched by the
Apostle, contains a manifest argument of the Divinity of the Gospel; and that
in two respects. For first, if you consider the thing in its self, it is so
great, and marvelous, as that it shows sufficiently, that this Doctrine is
not only true, but even Divine, and Celestial. When St. Paul wrote this Letter,
it was not full thirty years that JESUS CHRIST had suffered death in Judea, and
yet the Gospel (as he says) was already come into all the world. How could it
have made so much way in so little time; penetrated so many obstacles, flown
into so many places infinitely distant; if it had not been, both of a Celestial
Original, and carried by a divine force? Certainly, as the extension of the
light of the Sun, who inlightens the whole Hemisphere in an instant, and the
rapidness of its motion, who visits all the Climats of the universe in four and
twenty hours, does evidently show us, that it is a work of GOD, and of a nature
altogether different, from that of Earthly, and Elementary things; In like
manner, this so swift, and sudden course of the Evangelique Doctrine, that
filled the world in so little time, pierced through, and dissipated the
darkness, and made it self be seen so quickly from one end of the Heavens to
the other, invincibly proves, that it is a divine thing, and no humane
production. Look on all the disciplines, that ever had sway in the World. You
shall not find any of them, that was established in this sort, and made such a
progress in so small a time. The religions of the Pagans lived only in the
Countries where they were born; and if sometimes they stretched further, it was
rather the curiosity of strangers, that brought them from the place of their
birth, than their own design, or vigor; all those so famous sects of the
Philosophy of the Greeks, did abide each of them in the soil that bare them.
And the Doctrine, which the Popes of Rome have established in their Communion,
came not to the estate, wherein we see it; but by a long succession of time,
one age gaining one point, and another adding a second, till after many ages it
took, in fine, the consistence and form it has at this day, and wherein it is
maintained, by the terror of Inquisitions, and the pomp of a worldly power,
and the favor of the Great, who find their own interests in it. It is only the
Gospel of the LORD, that from its birth, had the courage, and the force to fly
every way, penetrating with incredible swiftness, all the Regions of the
habitable world in less than five and twenty years. And let none allege unto
me here, the Seduction of Mahomet, which infected the East, and the South, and
a part of the West it self in a very little time. For there is nothing alike in
the progress of the one, and the other of these two doctrines. I pass by other
differences, that may be observed. I will only touch at one of the most
essential: namely, that Mahomet, and his Successors advanced not their
impostures but by force of Arms and dint of Sword: not Preaching, and
establishing their Doctrine, save in the Countries they conquered, and among
the Nations they brought under their Yoke. To say true, it was their Iron, and
not their Alcoran, that ran through, and spoiled the World. What was strange,
or supernatural in their success? That a Troop of Robbers, whom their own need,
or others cowardice, and confusion emboldened to enterprise, could seize them
of some Towns by fraud or force? That puffed up with the good fortune of their
first successes, and by a multitude of people joined with them, they pushed
further on, and issuing out of their Arabia should attempt the outmost quarters
of the Roman Empire, very ill-garded at that time, and in a manner, exposed to
pillage? and that gaining ground by little and little they should fall on
further, and break in on one side, and the other, as the division, and weakness
of their enemies gave them opportunity? so as, in fine, in the space of three
or four score years they saw, by these progresses, the East, and the South in
their hands? Sure there was nothing but humane in all this. Alexander the
Macedonian had yer-while done as much, or more in less than fifteen years; and
Sesostris, and diverse others, both before, and after him. It is then no
Miracle, that the Religion of the Saracens, born (if I may so say) upon the
wings of their victorious Ensigns, saw much of the World, by this means, in
fifty, or sixty years: If any marvel be, it is that of their arms, which did
so great exploits in so small time, and not that of their Alcoran, which never
entered but into places, whose gates fire and sword opened for it. But as to the
Gospel of the LORD JESUS it is quite otherwise, It had not to sustain it, and
advance it in the world, either the aid of force, or the favor of arms, or
the successes of War, or the exploits of any Conqueror. It had not in its
service, either the charms of Eloquence, or the subtilities of Philosophy; in
one word, it had no humane or terrene succor, that you can possibly imagine.
Those that carried it, were twelve, or thirteen Fishermen, with a little number
of others of the same Cloth; without Credit, without Arms, without courage,
without Experience: the offscouring, and sweepage of the world; weakness, and
imbecility it self: who far from enterprising upon ought of other men's, had
renounced all that was their own: who instead of smiting, and slaying; where
whipped and stoned at every turn; instead of attaquing, did not so much as make
resistance to them that ill handled them; living in an extreme humility and
innocence. With this poor equipage the Gospel undertook the world, and though
it met every where with gates shut up, and walls garrisoned with all that was
terrible, to force it back; though the Jews persecuted it, the gentiles derided
it, great, and small had it in abomination; Magistrates banished it, and put it
under the most cruel punishments; though all did rend it with injuries and
reproaches; yet naked, as it was, it made it self room; and in spite of so
many dreadful impediments, ran from East to West, and from South to North; and
so constantly despised all earthly means, as it reigned every where for sixcore
years, before it had one Magistrate, or Captain on its side; disarming and
despoiling them, when it received any; so far was it from making advantage of
their arms, or authority. We may affirm therefore that this progress of the
Gospel is a thing altogether singular, not at any time else seen, or happening in
the world; and with which neither Mahumetism, nor any other Religion has any
community. Consequently, that this is a mark of the truth and divinity of this
holy doctrine; those that are humane, neither having, nor being able to have
that admirable force, and virtue, which appears in it.

But this event proves the same thing yet again, after another manner; inasmuch
as it was a manifest accomplishment of ancient Oracles, yer-while given by the
LORD to His former people, and registered in His Scriptures; which foretell in
diverse places, that the Messiah should spread all abroad, the knowledge of the
true GOD, which was before shut up, within the strait limits of Judea; Isa.
60.3. and 9.1.
that the Nations one day should walk in His light, and that people sitting in
darkness should see a great light, which the LORD JESUS explaining, in the
days of His flesh, had said upon it, Mat. 24.14.
that His Gospel should be Preached in all the world. These predictions
therefore appearing at that time, so punctually, and so admirably, and in so
short a space fulfilled, who can doubt any more, but that the LORD JESUS is the
true CHRIST; since never any, but He, revealed the GOD of Israel, and His
service to the World? and that His Apostles were the servants of this same GOD;
who, having foretold these things, so many ages before; so mightily executed
them by their Ministry, in the fullness of time?

But besides the confirmation of the Colossians faith in general; I account,
that the Apostle would more-over, by this Elogy he gives the Gospel, to be come
into all the world, fortify them in particular, against the new doctrines,
which some seducers were sowing in their Church. For since other Churches
founded here, and their, in diverse parts of the world, had heard nothing of
them, it was a very evident argument, that they were not any part of the
Gospel, that is, of what the Apostles Preached. Whence we may draw, to give you
this advice by the way, an invincible proof, both of the truth of the doctrine,
we believe; and of the vanity of that, which we contest about, with our
adversaries of Rome. For as to that we hold, it is evident, the Apostles
Preached it in all the world, both by word of mouth, and by writing; there
being none of the necessary, positive, and assirmative articles of our faith,
but does appear in all the Monuments of Apostolic Preaching, to wit, both in
the Books they wrote, and in the Churches they sounded. As for our adversaries,
it is no less evident, they can never show, that the Monarchy, or infallibility
of their Pope, or the Adoration of their Host, or the service of their Images,
or their invocation of Saints, or Purgatory, or the trafick of their
Indulgencies, or any other of the points which we debate with them, was
Preached in all the world at the time of the holy Apostle; no track at all of
them being found in any of the Books or Memorials that remain of that age, or
of a long time beyond it: only a man may perceive them, some ages after,
growing up, one in one place and another in another, at diverse times, and in
different Climats; an evident sign, that they are, not parts of the Gospel of
JESUS CHRIST which was Preached entire in all the world, in St. Paul's life
time; but inventions and traditions of men, that came since.

After this sudden, and admirable spreading of the Gospel, the Apostle adds
the efficacy, it had in the places, where it had been preached. It is not only
come into all the world (says he) but which is more, it brings forth fruit
there, as it does also in you. It bears the same fruits there, which it has
produced among you. You discern, that these fruits of the Gospel signify no
other thing, but that faith, charity, honesty, modesty, temperance, and the
other spiritual virtues which it produces in the souls of those, that hear it,
and receive it, as they ought, and in which the Sanctification of men does
consist. It is this power, and efficacy of the Gospel, which the LORD would
represent unto us, in the Parable of the seed, to which He compares it; Matt.
13.
and which according to the diverse disposition of the places where it fell,
brought forth more, or less fruit; in some an bundred fold, in other fixty, and
elsewhere but thirty. Never was seen a thing more mavelous. The Gospel
changed the whole earth in a few years. It crowned plants, with flowers, and
fruits, that were barren, and accursed. It filled the deserts, the plains, and
the most desolate heaths, with exquisit, and delicious trees. That which the
Laws of Nations, that which the most excellent Philosophy had husbanded, whole
ages in vain, no sooner felt the hand of these Evangelique Vine-dressers, and
laborers, but suddenly losing the bitterness of its first juice, was
sweetened, and became laden with Celestial fruits. There was piety, sweetness
and humanity seen to flourish, where never had appeared ought, but the horror
of Superstition, of Atheism, of cruelty, and all other kind of Vices. This is
the change, which the LORD had foretold in Isaiah, Isa. 41.19.
in those Allegorical words, I will make to grow in the Desert, the Cedar, the
Pine tree, the Myrtle, and the Olive. I will set in the Plains, the Firre-tree,
the Elm, and the Box together. And elsewhere again, comparing the Gospel to a
rain, that waters the Earth, and makes it bud, and bring forth corn, and
bread. So shall my word be (says He) it shall not return to me without effect:
Isa. 55.10, 11.
but it shall do all my pleasure, and prosper to the things, I shall send it
for. And this divine fruitfulness of the doctrine of the Gospel, which
miraculously changed the world, is also a most evident argument of it is truth,
and of it is heavenly original: there never having been Religion or Discipline,
on earth, that had so lively, and universal an efficacy.

But the Apostle particularly commends here the fruits it had brought forth
among the Colossians. It fructifieth in you (says he) since the day, that you
heard, and knew the grace of GOD in truth. He praises, both their
teachableness, in that this word had fructified in them, from the first day
they heard it, and their constancy, for that it continued still fructifying to
that time. The earth produces not fruit, as soon as it has received the seed:
there must be time to mollify the grain, to make it thrust forth, and sprout;
to raise it up, and garnish it with fruits. In this spiritual Husbandry, it is
not so. The Gospel, if rightly received into your heart, will fructify there,
from that very moment. Receive it then, faithful Brethren. Defer not till the
morrow. This day, that you hear the voice of the LORD, harden not your hearts.
Psalm 95.
It Is one of the most pernicious artifices of the enemy, to suggest to men,
that they put off their conversion to the future. Give me (says He) this day,
and thou shall give God the next. Give me the present, and Him the future: to
me the flower, and vigor of thy life; to Him the remains, and thine old age.
So they find at last, when all has been given to Satan, and the world, nothing
remains for them to give the LORD: to whom they have left the future only, that
is, what was not theirs: disposing of the present, which alone was in their
power, to the pleasure of their mortal enemy. Christians, take heed of his
wiles, and hasten ye out of his snares. Imitate these faithful Colossians.
Receive the Word of GOD so deep into your hearts, that it may fructify there
from this very day. You cannot be the LORD'S too soon. Put not off the design
of being happy to another time: consider, that time flees, and life runs out,
and death comes, while you deliberate. But if we must begin betimes, to bear
fruit, worthy of the Gospel: it is not meant, that we may cease again soon
after, as forward Trees, which make an end first, as they did begin. The plants
of the LORD begin early, but never cease to fructify. They bring forth fruit
in their through-white old age; and are even then in good liking; and bide
fresh, as the Psalmist sings. Psalm. 92.15.
If you have embraced the Gospel with ardour, retain it with an invincible
constancy. For salvation is not prepared, save for them that shall persevere;
that shall keep the verdure of the heavenly sap in them, in spite of the
scorching heats of Summer, and the coolings of Winter, so as no season, how
rude, and contrary soever, does ever strip them of their mystical flowers, and
fruits. As to what remains, the Apostle calls the faith of the Gospel, The
knowledge of the grace of GOD; because it is not possible to relish this
heavenly doctrine, if a man have not received, and experimented the mercy,
which it offers us in JESUS CHRIST. This grace is the heart, and substance of
the Gospel. Whence appears, that it is a corrupting it, and a changing the
nature of it, to thrust into it the doctrine of the satisfactions, and merits
of men; things, either wholly incompatible with Grace; or such as at least
extremely darken, and enfeeble it. When he faith, that they heard, and knew the
Grace of GOD in truth, he means, either that they received it truly, in
sincerity of heart, without hypocrisy; or that this Grace they knew was
delivered them pure and sincere, without any mixture, either of Pharisaical
Superstition, or Philosophical Vanity: or, finally, so, as it is declared in
the Gospel; not in Error, and in Fictions, and Lies, as in false Religions; nor
in shadow, and in figure, as in the Law of Moses: but nakedly, and simply, as
it is in it self; Of these three Expositions, all good, and convenient: the
First is to the praise of the Colossians; the Second to that of Epaphras their
Pastor; and the third to the praise of the Gospel it self.

But as to Epaphras, he speaks of Him by name in the two last Verses of this
Text, which make the second part of it. And to commend Him to the Colossians,
and win him their hearts, and respect; He gives an excellent testimony, of his
fidelity, his candor, and his goodness. As also (says he) you have learned of
Epaphras our dear fellow servants, who is a faithful Minister of CHRIST for you,
who also has declared unto us your charity, which you have in the Spirit. This
holy Apostle knew how much it concerns Churches, for their edification, to
have a good opinion of their Pastors; and with what artifices the enemy
labors ordinarily to decry the faithful servants of GOD, and ruin their
reputation, among their flocks: therefore it is, that he here exalts
Epaphras, as his piety deserved: and to take out of the Colossians all
suspicion against the purity of his teachings, advertiseth them expressly, that
the doctrine, they had learned of him, was in truth the same Gospel, of which
he had spoken. And from this great care, the Apostle has of Epaphras's
reputation, the Ministers of the LORD should learn, to set themselves, the best
they can, in the Spirit of their people, abstaining not from evil only, but
also from its appearances, and whatsoever might make them to be suspected of
it. It is not enough to approve the goodness of our life to our own conscience;
We must also, if it may be, content the judgment of our neighbors. Innocence
is necessary for our selves, and reputation for others. And since it serves to
edify them, we are evidently obliged to preserve, not our own only, but also
the reputation of our fellow-brethren, whom GOD has settled in the same charge;
for if we bite, and rend one another; who sees not, but the particular reproach
of each one, will be the common infamy, and ruin of us all? But since the
reputation of Pastors is a public good, which tends to the edification of
the whole Church; you see again, that each faithful person owes it a
particular respect; and that the crime of those who violate it unjustly is a
kind of Sacrilege. It Is a robbing of the Church, and stealing from it, it is
edification, to black by calumny, and detractions, the life, and doctrine of
them that serve it: or to expose them to laughter and contempt, by scoffings,
and revilings.

But to return to Epaphras; the Apostle crowns him with two, or three
excellent Elogies. First, He calls him his dear fellow servants. Admire, I
beseech you, the candor, and the goodness, the humility, and the modesty of
this holy man. His candor; for whereas, ordinarily there is jealousy between
persons of the same faculty; St. Paul contrarily acknowledges, and exalts
the Gifts, and Virtue of this servant of GOD. His goodness; for He tenderly
loves Him: as every where else, He plainly shows, that of all men there were
none he more affected, than the faithful Ministers of the Gospel. His humility,
lastly; in that being raised on the Throne of the Apostolic dignity the
highest in the Church, he makes Epaphras, as one may say, to sit there with
Him; owning Him for His fellow. Next He terms Him a Minister of CHRIST. It
was much to be fellow servants with St. Paul: but it is much more, to be the
Minister of CHRIST, the LORD of glory, the Head of the Church, the Sovereign
Monarch of Men and Angels. Judge, with what reason some of our adversaries mock
at the title we assume, qualifying our selves Ministers of CHRIST, or of His
Gospel, since it is the word, that the Apostle uses here expressly, to signify
that holy charge, which GOD has called us unto. But He does not term Epaphras
simply a Minister of CHRIST; He says moreover, that He is a faithful Minister:
the quality of Minister was common to him with many others; the praise of
faithfulness, with few. It Is all that the Apostle did require in a good Steward
of the House of GOD. 1 Cor. 4.1, 2.
Let each one hold us (says he) for Ministers of CHRIST, and Stewards of the
mysteries of GOD. Moreover it is required in Stewards, that each one be found
faithful. To have the praise thereof, the Minister of the LORD must, First,
Seek the glory of his Master, and not his own: and Secondly, Keep close to His
Orders; without hiding from, or envying to His Sheep, any of the things
committed to him for their edification; without setting before them ought of
His own invention, beyond, or against the will of the chief Shepherd. But
though all these good qualities greatly recommended Epaphras to the Colossians,
He adds yet another, which, no less than the rest, obliged them, tenderly to
love, and cherish him; namely, that He employed the Master's talents to their
edification. He is (says he) a faithful Minister of CHRIST for you. They ought
therefore to love him, both for the dignity of his Office, and for the profit,
that came in to them thereby. For though we be obliged to love, and respect all
the faithful servants of GOD in general; yet there is no doubt, but we owe a
particular affection, and reverence to those, who peculiarly consecrate their
Ministry to our edification. In fine, the Apostle tells them, that this holy
servant of GOD, had advertised Him of the pure, and spiritual love they bore
Him. He has declared to us (says he, that is, both to Him, and to Timothy)
your charity which you have in Spirit. I count, that by charity, he means
here, not in general, the Christian Virtue which we ordinarily call by this
name; (for of the Charity of the Colossians so understood, he had already
spoken in the fourth Verse) but the affection these faithful people had for St.
Paul. And He calls it a Charity, or Love in Spirit, that is, spiritual;
because it was founded upon the Spirit, and not upon the flesh; upon the
interests of Heaven, and not of Earth. And here, consider, I beseech you, how
dextrous, and industrious Epaphras was to knit spiritual friendships. The
Colossians had never seen St. Paul; it is he without doubt that had recounted to
them the excellent virtue, and piety of this great man, and by this means
enkindled in their souls that holy, and spiritual charity, they had for Him.
And see again, how by the relation he makes to the Apostle, of the love these
believers bore Him, He possesses His soul with a reciprocal affection toward
them. O holy, and blessed tongue, that sowest nothing in the hearts of the
faithful, but charity, and love; how far now-adayes from thy candor, and
sincere goodness, are those mouths of Hell, that inspire nothing but hatred,
and kindle nothing but animosity, envy, and revenge, in the souls of those,
whom they can breath upon; who busy themselves in making dissentions among
brethren; in dividing, and arming one against the other, such, as nature, or
grace has most strictly united!

But it is time henceforth to conclude this action: that which you have heard,
may, I think, suffice for your understanding of this Text: and so nothing
remains for me; but to conjure you to make in good earnest your profit of it;
and to draw from this Meditation the holy uses it contains, whether for the
correction of your manners, or the consolation of your souls. The Gospel of
JESUS CHRIST is come unto you; the same Gospel, which yerwhile changed the
Universe, which abolished Idolatry, and Paganism, and made the knowledge, and
service of the true GOD flourish every where. The LORD has raised you up
Epaphras's, faithful Ministers of His Word, who have published it to your
Fathers, and to you, with exquisite sincerity, and truth, entirely so, as Paul
preached it to the Nations, without any leaven of superstition, or error;
acquitting themselves in their Stewardship with so upright a conscience, with
so much zeal, and ardour, as I assure my self, that the great Apostle, were he
now on earth, would do them the honor, to own them for his dear
fellow laborers. You have seen, this sacred doctrine renew the proofs of its
divinity, by the swiftness of it is course, and efficacy of its virtue: as
which, in little time, flew through all Christendom, and in spite of the
oppositions of Hell and Earth, raised up every where fair, and flourishing
Churches to the LORD. We may say particularly of yours, that the Gospel
fructified in it, from the day it was heard there. The blood, and the
sufferings of so many faithful ones, as gloriously sealed its truth therewith;
their charity, their zeal, their good and holy works, of which, memory
remains still among us, are unreproachable witness of it. But I know not,
whether I may justly add, what the Apostle says here of his Colossians, that
the Gospel brings forth fruit still in you. For those few fruits, which it
produces here, are choked up with so many thorns, and briars, so many sins,
and vices; that they scarce deserve to be considered. Not that the Gospel is
changed in its self. It has still that immortal force, which GOD gave it; to
bud, and thrust forth, and produce the fruits of righteousness and life. It is
ever the incorruptible seed of GOD, His Word living, and abiding for ever; full
of efficacy, and vigor. Whence then comes this sterility? Dear Brethren, it
comes from the bad disposition of our ground, and not from the weakness of the
heavenly seed. The Gospel fructifieth not among us; because it falls in stony
places; and by the Highways, or among thorns; upon souls, either full of
worldly lusts, and carnal cares; or exposed to the feet, to the going to and
fro of Devils; or frozen up, and hardened with the fear of temporal evils. This
is, Faithful Sirs, the true cause of our barrenness.

Let us then purge our hearts, Hos. 10 12, Jer. 4.3.
and (as a Prophet says) break up our fallow grounds. Let us pluck up the
thorns, which the world has planted there, avarice, the desire, and
deceitfulness of riches, ambition, and the love of our flesh, sensuality, and
vanity. When you shall receive the Gospel into souls, so prepared, it will not
fail to show it is fecundity: It will bring forth it is fruit abundantly, in some
an hundred for one, in others sixty, in others thirty. Without this it is in
vain, that we boast us of JESUS CHRIST, and of His Word: His Word is not given
us, but to fructify. If we abide barren; far from serving us, it will
aggravate our condemnation, and draw upon us a judgment so much the more
terrible, by how much the more plentifully it was communicated to us. Remember
that dreadful threatening, justified by so many sad, and lamentable experiments,
which the Apostle denounced to the Hebrews, The earth that brings forth
thorns, and thistles, is rejected and nigh unto cursing, and it is end is to be
burned. It Is a dreadful thing to fall into the hands of the living GOD; who is
so much the more severe to punish the contempt of His Word, by how much the
more liberal He was, in imparting it to men. These same Colossians, whose faith
and charity the Apostle praises here; and their neighbors the Laodiceans, and
those of Hierapolis, for not having continued to bear fruits worthy their
Vocation, saw some years after their Cities ruined, and swallowed up in an
horrible earthquake. And all those fair Churches of Asia, so much celebrated in
the Acts, and the Apocalypse, are at this day entirely desolate; for not having
made their profit of the Gospel. GOD has already begun too, to avenge this
contempt of His Word, in diverse places of Christendom; which the briars, and
thorns of the old superstition do cover once again, instead of the Gospel, that
lately flourished there. GOD forbid, Dear Brethren, that we should fall into
the like condemnation. To prevent it, let us recover the zeal of our Fathers;
let us do the first works. Let the Gospel fructify again in the midst of us.
Let it bring forth, and make to grow up abundantly, charity, meekness, honesty,
peace, humility, patience, alms, prayer, fasting, sobriety, chastity, and the
other fruits of the Spirit; and above all, a spiritual love of St. Paul, and
the other Apostles, who report the Gospel to us, to respect them, and walk in
their doctrine, concord, and mutual love in one toward another. If we make
this use of it, GOD will take pleasure in the midst of us. He will daily visit
us; He will cherish us, as His Paradise, His Heritage, the Garden of His
delights. He will pour out upon us here below all kind of graces and blessings
in abundance; and after having seen us fructify on Earth, He will one day
transplant us into Heaven, to live, and flourish there for ever, in the Courts
of His own blessed, and eternal habitation. Amen.

THE III. SERMON.
COL. I. Ver. IX. Verse. IX. And for this cause we also, since the day we heard
it, cease not to pray for you, and to make request, that ye might be filled
with the knowledge of His will, in all wisdom, and spiritual understanding.


THE love of beauty and excellency is so natural to us, that we cannot discover
so much as the beginnings, and buddings of it any where, but we take pleasure
in them; and the secret content we thence receive, usually causes us to wish
their growth, and their perfection; unless envy, or some other malign passion,
do check the moving of our hearts. Thus when we see towardly Children, and that
promise well; there is no soul, that has ever so little of humanity, but is
delighted, and makes the like apprecation for them, as Joseph did sometime for
Benjamin, when his Brethren presented him; GOD be gracious unto thee, my Son.
Genesis 43.29.
From such sentiments do flow those benedictions, which we are wont to
pronounce upon persons that are employed in things beneficial, and useful,
whether natural or civil: as, to instance with the Psalmist; when we see the
busy Reapers of a fair Field in Harvest time, and say, The blessing of the
LORD be upon you; Psalm. 129.8.
we bless you in the name of the LORD.

But if this kind of natural beauty, and perfection does engage our affections,
and good wishes to the subjects in which we perceive it: the gifts of divine
grace, which are incomparably more excellent, should much more lively touch us,
my Brethren; and kindle in our hearts greater flames of love, and of desire,
for those that possess them. For as high as Heaven is above the Earth, and as
much as eternity is preferable to time, so much advantage have the beauties,
and perfections of Grace above those of Nature. If therefore we judge rightly
of them, and estimate them according to their worth; it cannot be, that we
should see them shine out in any, without running to them, and fastening
forthwith on them, as holy, and as happy persons. An eminent example of this
motion of Christian Charity, we have in our Text; for the Apostle St. Paul here
shows us, he no sooner understood by Epaphras's report, the Colossians faith,
and love, but his soul was presently seized with ardent love unto them; and his
absence hindering him from giving them other evidences of it, he incessantly
presented prayer, and earnest suits to GOD, for their persevering, and
perfiting in piety; that is, for the continuation, and the perpetuity of their
happiness

The sum of his desires for them, is contained in three Verses, as they
evidently relate to three sorts of benefits: for he wishes them first in the
ninth Verse, the benefits that respect perfect knowledge of the truth, next in
the tenth, those that respect the exercise of sanctity, and finally in the
eleventh such as concern perseverance in faith, and patience in afflictions.
For present, we will meditate only on the first of these three Articles,
remitting the two next to another action. And for this cause (says the
Apostle) we also since the day we heard it, cease not to pray for you, and to
crave, that ye might be filled with the knowledge of His will in all wisdom and
spiritual understanding. For right understanding this Text, we will consider in
it three particulars, by the help of the grace of GOD, which we implore for
this effect. First, The Motive of the Apostle's prayers: Secondly, Their form,
manner, and quality: and in fine, which is principal, and most important, the
subject of them, that is, what He requested of GOD in His prayers.

As for the Motive, that induced the Apostle to pray for the Colossians, He
signifies it to us, in these first words; And for this cause, since the day we
heard it, we cease not to pray for you. For these words sending us back to the
precedent Verses, with which they have a tie, do show us, that the knowledge,
which the Apostle had by Epaphras's relation, of the faith of the Colossians
toward JESUS CHRIST, and of their charity toward the Saints, of their
heavenly hope, and of their other spiritual graces, whereof He spoke before,
that this knowledge, I say, having filled Him with love toward them, made Him
continually pour out His Vows, and prayers before GOD, for the completing of
their salvation. I confess, the affection they bore Him in particular, and
whereof He makes mention, in the Verse immediately preceding, contributed
something also to this care he had to pray for them. But it is principal cause
was their piety, and sanctification; that they had the first fruits of the
Spirit, and the beginnings of the Kingdom of Heaven. Seeing the foundations of
the Gospel, and of the building of GOD, so happily laid, and established among
them, He beseeches the Supreme Master, and Architect of this spiritual work,
to finish it, and powerfully set the last hand to it. The same reason made Him
in like manner, present His prayers to GOD for the Ephesians, as he testifies,
at the beginning of the Epistle, Ephesians. 1.15, 16, 17.
he wrote them, using almost all the same words, that serve Him here. Having
(says he to them) heard of the faith, you have in the LORD JESUS, and the
charity you have toward all the Saints; I cease not to render thanks for you,
making mention of you in my prayers, that the GOD of our LORD JESUS CHRIST the
Father of glory, would give you the Spirit of Wisdom, and of Revelation.
Faithful Sirs, learn by this example of the Apostle, to pray the LORD
principally (...) those, in whom you see the work of His Spirit appear. Rejoice
ye for their faith, and their zeal, and love them for the honesty, and purity
of their life: But remember, that the first, and principal office which your
charity owes them, is the continual succor of your prayers. Object not, that
they are too far advanced to need them. During the course of this life, the
progress of a Christian is never so great; but the prayers of his Brethren are
necessary for him. It Is then, when he is most advanced, that the enemy makes
most attempts, and lays most ambushments for him. The nearer he is to the
Crown, the more need he has of divine assistance. As there is none in the
lists, whom we favor more with our wishes, acclamations, and applauses, than
those that come nearest to victory: so in this carrier of the Gospel, we should
affectionate, and accompany with our vows, prayers, and benedictions those
most, that run best; and are nighest to the mark of the heavenly calling. We
never make more wishes for a Vessel, than when after a long, and dangerous
voyage, it comes upon our Coast, or we see it ready to arrive in the Haven.
When the believer, having escaped the shelves, and tempests of the world,
steers the true course of Heaven, and makes (if we may so say) with Oars, and
Sails to the Port of Salvation; it is then we should redouble our wishes, and
benedictions for his safety; it is then we should fear more than ever, lest some
mishap mar all his progress, and bereave him of the reward of his pains. But
let us now consider the manner, and the quality of the Apostle's prayers; Since
the day (says he) that we heard these good news, we cease not to pray GOD, and
to make request for you. First, He did not pray alone. We cease not to pray,
says he; where you see, he speaks of more praying with him, comprising in this
number Timothy, whom he had expressly named already, at the beginning of this
Epistle; and the other faithful, that were at Rome with him. Being put on by
one and the same charity, animated with one and the same desire, they all
lifted up their hearts, and Votes to GOD, together with the Apostle, for the
spiritual prosperity of the Colossians. As there is nothing on earth more
grateful to the LORD, than this divine consort of many souls, thus mingling
their voices, and supplications together; so there is nothing more effectual to
draw down His blessing, and obtain His graces, in the behalf of our neighbors.
Mat^h. 1^.1^.
If two of you agree on earth concerning any thing they shall ask (says our
LORD) it shall be done for them of my Father which is in Heaven.

But beside that the Apostle's prayers were conjoined with those of some other
believers, that prayed unanimously with him for the Colossians; they had also
two other qualities, which gave them much force; assiduity, and the devotion of
heart, whence they did issue. He expresses the assiduity of them, when he
says, that he cease not to pray for them, since the day he heard of their
piety, of their zeal in the Gospel. As soon as he received the news of it, he
deferred not this duty to another time. He set himself on praying presently for
them, demanding of GOD, the completing of their faith; so ardently did this
holy soul affect, all that bore the badges of his LORD. But he contented not
himself, with praying once or twice for the salvation of these dear Disciples
of his Master. He went on constantly, and ceased not still to solicit the
goodness of GOD for them. For it is not enough, that Moses do lift up his hands
once, or twice for Joshua's victory. To defeat Amalek entirely, this holy man
must hold his hands still stretched out toward Heaven. Whence it comes, that
Isaiah commands the Gards of Jerusalem, that is, it is Pastors, Isaiah.
not to hold their peace, nor give the LORD any rest, until He re-establish,
and set Jerusalem, in an estate of renown on the earth. And our Sovereign
Master teaches us expressly, in one of His Evangelical Parables, that we ought
always to pray, and not faint. Luke 18.1. Col. 4.2. Romans 12.12. 1 Thessalonians. 5.17.
And His Apostle enjoyneth us here beneath, to persevere in prayer, and
elsewhere also, to continue instant in prayer: and again in another place, to
pray without ceasing. So you see, he very carefully practiced himself, what he
commanded others. Think not under shadow of this, that this holy man was on his
knees from Morning to Evening, without addicting himself to ought, but the
reciting of prayers; as was the use of a certain Sect of Heretics in time
past, named the Messalians, or Euchites, noted, and condemned by the ancient
Church; who made profession of being always in prayer, and under this fair
mask did hide a most profound, and infamous laziness: As the greater part of
the Monks of the Communion of Rome at this day; who in the Cloisters, whither
they retire, as in so many refuges of idleness, pass their time in saying
Litanies, and Orisons, most commonly without any attention, or devotion, under
pretext of this vain service, which they pretend to do the public, drawing
unjustly the Tribute of huge Alms, due of right to the true poor, and not to
them, that are so, only of their own will, by a Vow directly contrary to the
command of GOD. The prayer of a faithful man, does not cross his other duties.
The same LORD that commands him to pray, orders him also to labor. To oblige
him to the one, He does not dispense with him for the other. He intends, that
he acquit himself of them both. Let prayer begin, guide, and end his labor;
let his labor seal, follow, and accompany his prayer. Let him pray with his
hand upon his work; let him work with heart and eyes lift up unto prayer. Let
these two exercises fill up his whole life; parting the days, and hours
thereof between them, and keeping faithful and indissoluble company, all along.
St. Paul prayed; but this devotion did not hinder him from preaching to the
present, from writing to the absent, from instructing the teachable, from
reprehending transgressors, from confirming them within, from drawing those
without, from fortifying the faithful, from convincing the adversaries, from
employing his time in a multitude of good, and holy actions. What means he then
by saying, that he cease not to pray for the Colossians? He would only say,
that he is very assiduous at it; that he does it, as often as time, and place
permit it; that there passes neither day, nor night; but he does them this
charitable office: not to allege here, Augustine in Psalm. 37.
what an Ancient elegantly says; that our desires being prayers, these are
continual, when our desires are continual. This example of the Apostle teaches
Pastors in particular; that beside preaching the Word, they owe also to their
flocks, the succor of their prayers, not only the public, but their private
ones also. For how can they without crime, forget persons, that are so strictly
united to them? Their Crown, and their Glory? The ground of their joy, and the
subject of their most precious labor?

But the Apostle, besides the assiduity of his prayers for the Colossians,
shows us also the ardour, and devotion of them, when he says, that he prays,
and demands for them. For the first of those words signifies the elevation
of the soul to GOD; when fixing its eyes on the greatness of this supreme
Majesty, it adores Him, and gives Him the glory of a perfect goodness, power,
and wisdom. This is as the exordium, and Preface of Prayer, to move the LORD,
that He do give us favorable audience. After which comes that, which the
Apostle calls here, The demand; that is, the very request we make the LORD,
beseeching Him to give liberally to us, or to our brethren, the benefits, we
have need of. From which we have to observe by the way, the order we should
keep in our prayers, that they may be legitimate, and grateful unto GOD:
namely, that at the entrance, we present Him an heart, full of humble, and
affectionate respect to Him; that reveres Him, as Almighty, and All-wise; that
loves Him, as infinitely good, and praises, and glorifieth Him, as perfectly
blessed. The requests, which are presented to Him, otherwise, heedlesly, and
without this preparation, are more apt to provoke His wrath, than attract His
beneficence. After this first motion, we should next make our requests, with a
great, and ardent desire; and a filial confidence. It Is thus the Apostle prayed
for the Colossians.

Let us now come to the third point, and see what was the matter, to subject of
his Prayer. We cease not (says he) to demand of GOD, that you may be filled
with the knowledge of His will, in all wisdom, and spiritual understanding. It
sufficiently appears, by the praises he gave the Colossians before, that they
were already much advanced in the knowledge of GOD, and of His Gospel;
therefore he does not simply demand of the LORD, that they may be made
partakers of this knowledge; but that they might be filled with it. For there
are great differences in knowledge. First, in regard of its extent; and next in
regard of its degrees. For its extent, it comprehends the things themselves,
that we can know; which being almost infinite, it is evident a man may know
some, who yet knows not others. And as for its degrees; one self-same thing
is known more clearly and more distinctly by one; more obscurely, and
confusedly by another. It Is the same in this, as it is in seeing: One sees,
and discovers more objects, than another; and of those that see one and the
same object, one sees it much more clearly, and purely than another; and
whatever be the cause of this diversity, whether the inequality of their eyes,
or the difference of their attention, or that of the light which brightens
them, so it is, that their seeing is very different: that of the one being
imperfect, and defective in comparison of the other's. The Apostle therefore
beseeching the LORD, that the Col^ssians might be filled with knowledge,
intends, that they might obtain of His goodness a perfection both of the one,
and the other sort; first, that if there were any points of the Gospel not yet
come to their knowledge, He would grant them the grace to observe, and
apprehend them; and secondly, that if they did not purely enough apprehend the
things, they knew already; He would so shine on them by the light of His
spirit, that they might clearly and distinctly perceive them. For it is in
these two points, that the fullness, or perfection, he wishes them in this
place, does consist: the one, not to be ignorant of any of the necessary
particulars of the mystery revealed to us, by the Gospel of JESUS CHRIST. The
other, to know each of these particulars clearly, and distinctly, seeing the
truth of them, as in a great, and resplendant light. Besides, we must remember,
that as the estate of a believer is of one sort here below, where he travails
for a time; and after another on high in Heaven, where he shall live in the
bosom of GOD; so the perfection of his knowledge is of two sorts, the one
earthly, and the other heavenly. This same is his last, and highest perfection;
that same is but the disposition, and beginning of it: the one is the
perfection of his infancy, the other of his full age. And though the first may
be in a sense, and in some respect, truly termed fullness and perfection, yet in
regard of the other it is imperfect. Whence it comes that the Apostle elsewhere,
putting these two knowledges in parallel one with the other, says that now we
know, 1 Cor. 13.9, 10, 11, 12.
but in part and see but darkly in a glass, whereas in the other World, we
shall see face to face, and know as we have been known. And in the same place,
he compares the knowledge, we have here below, to the thoughts of a child, and
that which we shall have on high, to the thoughts, and judgment of a perfect
man. Then all the arguments of the truth of the Gospel, shall be so
magnificently displayed, before our eyes, that doubt of it shall not be able to
take place any more; and whereas now we see but the images of things; then we
shall touch the substance of them; besides that the light of our understandings
shall be incomparably more clear, and pure, than it is here below. But though
considering the thing in its self, one may call perfect, only the knowledge of
a believer enjoying the vision of his LORD on high in the Heavens; yet
referring, and ajusting it to the state we are now in; there is also on earth a
sort of knowledge, which in this respect may be called perfect: namely the
highest measure a faithful person can attain, while he is here beneath. As,
though the knowledge of a child be far below the lights of a perfect man, yet
this hinders not, but there is a certain form, and measure of knowledge
proportionate to the capacity of this age, which when the Child is come to, we
say it is an accomplished Child, yea most accomplished. For every age has its
perfection, and every greatness, its full height. It Is then of this second sort
of perfection, and fullness the Apostle intends to speak, when he prays the
LORD, that the Colossians might be filled with knowledge; that is, not that
they might see the LORD face to face (this is not given, but in the other
world) but that they might receive, of his goodness, all the light necessary
for the estate, we are in here below; and as high and rich a measure of
knowledge as may, and should be had on earth, for getting one day to the upmost
degree in the Kingdom of Heaven. And note here, by the way, the holy artifice
of the Apostle: By praying GOD, that the Colossians might be filled, he
secretly advertiseth them, that they yet wanted something; that he might render
them teachable, and attentive to the instructions, he will hereafter give them.
For those, that think they are perfect, and have an entire, and accomplished
knowledge, do disdain what any one would add thereto, as a thing superfluous,
and unprofitable. Therefore he timely takes away this imagination from the
Colossians, that they may patiently suffer him to instruct them, and finish in
them what was only rough-drawn. To the same end, does that tend which he
adds, that they might be filled with the knowledge, of the will of GOD. For
by this word he rejects, and removes far from this subject, all the
inventions and doctrines of men; the disputes, and subtilities of Philosophy;
the voluntary devotions, and superstitions, which had been sowed among the
Colossians by the false teachers; as things rather contrary, than useful, to
the perfection, and happiness of man; and restrains all the knowledge he
desires for them, to the sole will of God, as its true object, and its just
measure.

Upon which, we have first to remark; that the word here used by the Apostle in
the Original, and which we have translated knowledge, signifies properly a
great, and ample knowledge; and these holy Authors employ it ordinarily to
express, that knowledge of GOD, which is given us by the Gospel of JESUS
CHRIST. For the Law of Moses, and the Doctrine of the Prophets does indeed
teach, what is the will of GOD. But it has not designed to declare it so
purely, and so fully as the Gospel. Whence it comes, that St. 2 Pet. 2.19.
Peter compares the light of the Prophets to that of a candle shining in a
dark place, and that of the Gospel, to the brightness of the day. And its
hereto St. John has respect, when he says, Joh. 1.18.
that no man has seen GOD at any time, and that the only Son which is in the
bosom of the Father, He has revealed Him. Because the knowledge, which was of
Him, before the manifestation of the LORD JESUS, was so weak; as it is scarce
considerable in comparison of that, which is given us. It Is therefore properly
this Evangelical, and Christian knowledge, which the Apostle wishes here to
the Colossians, opposing it to that of the Law, the rudiments whereof some
endeavored to re-establish among them. Secondly, we must observe, what is the
object of this knowledge, the knowledge (says he) of the will of GOD.

All men naturally desire to know; and I avouch, that every knowledge is
beautiful, and grateful; and there is none truly such, but adds some ornament
to our understanding. Yet it must be confessed, that they are for the most part
incapable of giving us the perfection, and happiness we desire, and which is
necessary for our nature. Such are all mundane sciences, found out, and
cultivated by the sages of the World: not only their Philosophy about nature,
and the motions of the Heavens, and the Elements; and about the properties, and
effects of things animate, and inanimate; but also that part of their Doctrine,
which more nearly respects us, and explaineth, what our carriage should be,
both in particular; and in respect of those that govern us, or are governed of
us, either in the family, or in the State. For, to say nothing of the variety,
and extreme uncertainty of their opinions, which change every day, and float
continually in infinite doubts; after having passed an whole life in this
study, and made the greatest progresses that may be, no man is by it, either
more content, or more happy, or more assured. All the pretended light of their
School, will not be able to dissipate in us, either the horror of death, or
the fear of the Judgment of GOD. It is only the knowledge of the LORD, that
can free us of it; and by consequence, it alone is necessary for us: the rest
will not render us either more happy, if we have them; or more miserable, if we
have them not. It Is then this alone, which the Apostle wishes unto the
Colossians. But we must yet consider, in the Third place, that He wishes them
the knowledge, not of the nature, or the Majesty, or the other essential
properties of GOD; but of His will. For as to the essence of this supreme, and
incomprehensible LORD; as to the infinite, and immense greatness of His power;
as to the ineffable manner of His understanding, and the marvels of His
judgment, it is not necessary for us to know them clearly. It is sufficient
for us, to adore them, and many have lost themselves, in lusting to sound them.
It is His Will, that we must know, to attain salvation, as the true rule of our
duty, and His judgment. He has fully declared it to us, by the Ministry of
His Heralds, the Apostles and Prophets, who have published it by word of mouth,
and configned it in writing, in the Holy Books, which they have left us. There
it is, that we must seek it, and not in the discourses of vain men. There we
shall find it manifested, as far as is necessary for us to know, and do it. It
has two principal parts, faith, and obedience. For the will of GOD, as the
Apostle understands it here, is nothing else, but that which GOD would have us
believe, Joh. 6.40.
and do, to be happy. For faith, His will is (says our LORD) that whoever
sees the Son, and believes in Him, have eternal life, and be raised up at the
last day. 1 These. 4.3.
For action, This is the will of GOD (says the Apostle) even your
sanctification. These are the two first, and principal heads of the will of
GOD, to which all other instructions in Scripture do referr. It Is in the
knowledge of these things, that St. Paul prays GOD, the Colossians might be
perfect, and accomplished.

He adds, in all wisdom and spiritual understanding. We call them Wise men,
in the world, that know how to compass their ends, that use means fit for this
purpose, and skilfully avoid all that might put them from it; so dexterously
conducting their affairs, that of two things, the one follows; either they
finish that which they desire; or if they prosper not in it, it is some mishap,
and not their fault, that is the cause of such ill success; But because they
propose unto themselves, ends vain, and evil, and unprofitable to their
happiness; thence it comes, that how wise soever they be esteemed by the world;
all their industry yet is, to say true, but folly, and error. Those then, on
the contrary, are wise after the Spirit, who constantly hold the right course
of piety, guiding themselves in it with such skilfulness, that they beware of
scandals, and all that might set them off from their mark; avoiding what is
contrary to it, and practicing what is useful. And though the world commonly
account them extravagant; yet so it is, that their conduct proves to be true
wisdom; since at the end, and after all, it will be found, that none but they
attain unto salvation. It is then this skilfulness, which the Apostle terms
here, a spiritual wisdom; both because it respects the things of the Spirit,
that appertain to a Celestial, and spiritual life; as also for that it is a
gift of the Spirit of GOD, coming from on high, from the Father of lights;
neither the sense, nor the reason of Nature being capable of giving it to any
knowledge of the Divine will, is, as it were, the matter, and subject of
wisdom; Wisdom is, as it were, the use, and employing of the knowledge of GOD.
For to be wise after the Spirit, it is not enough to know what is the will of
GOD, There must be use of this knowledge; first by laying down for a certain
and unmovable maxim, that it is in it our bliss consists: and consequently,
that therein we must bound our desires. Secondly by practicing what we know of
this Divine will, aiming at the mark it shows us, and employing to attain it,
the means it prescribes us, watching and laboring continually thereto. For
certainly that servant in the Parable, who knew his Masters will, and did it
not, was nothing less than wise. As for the spiritual understanding, which the
Apostle wishes, in the last place, to the Colossians; it is a quick, and
exquisite prudence to judge aright of things that are presented, and discern
the good from the evil, the true from the false, and the real from the
apparent: and this gift (as you see) is also a fruit of the knowledge of GOD:
and consists only in an exact application of what we know of His will; to the
doctrines, and counsels, which the flesh, and its Ministers set before us, to
turn us out of the way of salvation. It Is this, was wanting to Eve, when she
was seduced by the Serpent; and to the Galathians, when they were abused by
those impostors: the Apostle fearing lest the same should betide the
Colossians, to divert this fatal blow, supplicates the LORD to give them
understanding necessary for the happy severing the false colors, the
paintings, and baits of untruth, from the simplicity that is in CHRIST.
Therefore he demands not of Him only, that they might be filled with the
knowledge of His will in wisdom, and understanding; but in ALL wisdom, and
understanding: that is to say, very abundantly, and in so great and (...) a
measure, as none of the parts, none of the operations of this divine ability,
be wanting to them: after the same manner, as when He says elsewhere, have all
faith, to signify so high and raised a measure of it, as no kind, and no
degree of faith is wanting. Such is, well-beloved Brethren, the ardent, and
affectionate Prayer, which the Apostle made continually for these Colossians,
That they might be filled with the knowledge of the will of GOD, in all wisdom,
and spiritual understanding: that is, in such sort, as this knowledge might
form in them an exquisite sageness, and spiritual prudence.

It Remains, that, to end, we briefly touch at the principal lessons, we are
to take out of it, for the instruction of our faith, and the amendment of our
manners. First, you see, how far the judgment of the Apostle is from the
doctrine, and practice of Rome. The Apostle wills, that the faithful do know
the will of GOD, that they be filled with this knowledge. Rome teaches, that
their faith is better defined by ignorance, than by knowledge, and that it is
sufficient for them to have, and I know not what implicit faith (as they call
it) which without knowing ought its self, referrs its self to the faith of
another. The Apostle wills, that the faithful be endowed with all wisdom, and
spiritual understanding. Rome seareth nothing so much, as this; and desires
that without knowing, or understanding ought themselves, they leave this whole
study to their Curates; contenting themselves with saying, they believe, what
the Church believes: not knowing mean time what it believes indeed. Darkness
is not more contrary to Light, than this pretended faith to wisdom, and
understanding. Their practice is conform to their doctrine. For they hide the
Scripture from their people; the sacred, and authentic evidence of the Will of
GOD, the living and teeming source of all wisdom, and heavenly understanding;
and if in their service they repeat any passages of it, they repeat them in a
strange language, that their people may hear it, and not understand it.
Faithful sirs, thank GOD, for that He has withdrawn you from this Kingdom of
darkness: Enjoy with gratitude the light He has set up in the midst of you.
Learn in the brightness thereof, what is the will of the LORD, the head, and
the foundation of true wisdom. Make account, that this knowledge is the gate of
Heaven, the entrance of eternity, the seed of the divine nature, and the
principle of Celestial life. Without it, how will you love GOD; since none
loves, what he knows not? Without it, how will you obey GOD, since to obey Him
is no other thing but to do His will? Without it, how will you resist the
enemy? how will you free your selves from his wiles? how will you discern his
impostures from divine truth? Judge what account the Apostle makes of it,
since it is the first thing he asks of GOD for these Colossians, whom he so
ardently affected. If you will attain the salvation, to which he directs
them, have that which he with so much passion desires in them. Remember, you
are the people of the Sun of righteousness, of the eternal wisdom, and word,
the workmanship of His Comforter, who is a Spirit of wisdom and of
understanding: Deuteronomy. 33. Isai. 1.
and that one of the greatest reproaches GOD ever made to His Israel, is, the
calling them a foolish people, and unwise: that has neither knowledge, nor
understanding. And since you see that the Apostle demands of GOD this divine
wisdom for the Colossians, address your selves also to that Father of lights,
from whom comes down hither every good gift. Press Him; importune Him; quit
Him not, till He have revealed His mysteries to you; till He have lightened your
eyes, and your hearts, to make you see the wonders of His wisdom. But unto
prayer add also study; Read, and hear His word carefully; meditate it both
here, and at home; render it familiar to you; commune of it with your
neighbors, and instruct your Children in it. As I grant, this labor is
unprofitable: without the grace of the LORD; so I maintain that with it, it is
most efficacious. Paul would Preach to Lydia in vain, if GOD did not open her
heart. But if GOD set to His hand, it is not in vain that Paul labors for it.
And to attract this saving hand of the LORD, join unto prayer the Offerings of
your alms, the perfume of a good and holy life. Make use of what you know.
Manage these first fruits of light, which you have received already. Employ
the Talent that has been given you; and the Master will give you on it, others
greater. How would you He should communicate new graces to people, that so
vilely abuse the first? You know His will, and do that of the Devil, and the
Flesh. He ^^th made you a present of the Gospel; and you drag it in the dirt.
He has marked you with His seals, and you foul them in the ordures of vice.
You impudently bear His Liveries into the debauches of the world; and the
Disciples of Heaven are as ardent as the Children of this Generation, after the
dissoluteness of the time. GOD forbid, that wisdom, and spiritual
understanding, should lodge in hearts so profane. It Is a jewel too precious to
shine otherwhere, than in Heaven, that is in pure, and holy souls. So far will
you be from increasing your light, if you change not manners, that GOD will
take away this little which remains, and let you return into Egypt, to live
once more in its miserable darkness. But GOD keep us from so great an
unhappiness, my Brethren, well-beloved: and to prevent it let us in good
earnest convert us unto Him; renouncing the lusts of the world, and the filth
of the flesh, living in an exemplary purity, and honesty, that the LORD may
take pleasure in the midst of us; that He may make the knowledge of His will
abound in us, in all wisdom and spiritual understanding: and after the faith
and hopes of this life, receive us, in the eternity of the other, unto the
Vision, and fruition of His glory. So be it: and unto Him, Father, Son, and
Spirit, the true GOD blessed for ever, be all honor and praise. Amen.

THE IV. SERMON.
COL. I. Ver. X, XI. Verse. X. That ye may walk worthily, as is beseeming the
LORD, unto the pleasing of Him in all things, fructifying in every good work,
and increasing in the knowledge of GOD.

XI. Being strengthened with all might according to the power of His glory, unto
all sufferance, and patience of mind with joy.


PHilosophers, both Pagan, and Christian, do commonly divide the Sciences into
two sorts; The Speculative, which seek only the knowledge of their subject,
resting in it, when they have once acquired it, without pretending any further;
and the Practical, which aim at action, and consider things only for the
sitting us to do them. Of the first sort is Astronomy, which has no design,
but to comprehend the motions of the heavenly bodies; and the Mathematiques,
which are busied in the study of magnitude, and number, without having other
end, than to know the nature of them. Of the second sort is Science Moral, or
the Ethiques; which teach us, but in order to action; and show us what each of
the Virtues is, to the end we may practice them, and live according to the
rules this Science gives us. It Is disputed in the Schools, to which of these
two kinds of Sciences belongs Sacred Theology; that is, the doctrine of Divine
things revealed to us in the Gospel of our LORD JESUS CHRIST. For on one hand
it teaches us diverse things of the nature of GOD, and of Angels, and of the
World to come, and such other mysteries, which seem to be objects of
contemplation only, and not of action. On the other hand it gives us diverse
Rules for practice: and this mixture has induced some to think, that it is a
discipline, not simple, and uniform; but miscellaneous, and composed of the
one, and the other kind. Our Apostle, in my opinion, clearly decides the
question in this place. For having before, wished the Colossians a rich, and
full knowledge of this divine doctrine in all wisdom, and spiritual
understanding, he stays not there, but adds, in the Text we have read, the end
it is subservient to. To the end (says he) ye may walk worthily, as is
beseeming the LORD, unto the pleasing Him in all things, fructifying in every
good work. Here you see, he states it expressly, that the end of knowledge is
practice: holy walking, and fructifying in every good work, being evidently
doing. Whence follows, that it ought to be placed among the Active Sciences;
since their end is the Character of their nature, and that which properly gives
them the rank they are to hold. I grant, it treats of the Essence, and
Attributes of GOD; but it is with design, to carry us thereby unto the love and
service of His Majesty, that is, unto action. Whence it comes, that in
Scripture, to know GOD, is almost always taken for to serve Him, according to
that light of the knowledge of Himself, which He has given us.

But it is of no great importance for us to know, what rank this heavenly
discipline is of among the Sciences; provided we hold fast this principle of
the Apostle's, that the end, why we should be instructed in the knowledge of
GOD, is a godly life; and not the soothing of our minds, or the contenting our
curiosity with a vain delight: much less, the being able to entertain, with
such high mysteries, the company we chance to be in. For as we call that man an
Architect, not who can handsomely discourse of buildings; but that has the art
to erect them; and as we give not the name, and glory of a Captain, to one that
can elequently speak of War, but to him that can manage it, and is of capacity
to conduct an army skilfully, and can withstand, and fight an enemy; and acquit
himself in all the functions of a military command; so we must hold for a
Christian, not him who knows, and can pertinently explain the duties of the
faithful; but him that performs them. It Is in the life, and not in talk, that
this Science does consist, in the heart, and in the conversation; not in the
brain, and in the tongue. Let this then be effectually the end of this holy
study. Let us learn, not simply to know, or to speak; but to do, carefully
reducing into practice, all the prescriptions of this heavenly doctrine. And
that we may rightly comprehend this legitimate end of our knowledge, let us
meditate the lesson which the Apostle now gives us concerning it. It contains
two Heads: First, The very life, and actions, which we are to endeavor, and
Secondly, The firmness, and patience wherewith we should persevere in them.
These shall be (GOD willing) the two subjects, we will treat of in the present
action. The Apostle explaineth us the former of them in the tenth Verse, That
ye may walk worthily, as is beseeming the LORD, unto the pleasing of Him in all
things, fructifying in every good work, and increasing in the knowledge of GOD.

In these words, as you see, he shows us, first the end of the knowledge of the
Gospel, in general, which is, a walking worthily, as is beseeming the LORD.
Next, he sets before us the principal parts of this worthy walking. The first
respects the scope, it proposes to its self, even the pleasing of GOD in all
things. The second, the actions, wherein it ought to be employed; which are a
fructifying in every good work. The third, its progress, and advancement, which
is, to increase in the knowledge of GOD. Here then, Christian soul, is the
true, and only end of that heavenly light, which has been communicated to you;
that you walk worthily, as is beseeming the LORD. You know, the Scripture
ordinarily compares the life of man, unto a journey; and the actions and
designs, and employments, he passes it in, unto a path, or way. In effect,
after we are once entered the world, we incessantly eloign us from the point of
our Nativity, as from the place whence we departed, and advance toward death
as a common habitation, where all do meet alike, some sooner, others later. As
for other travellours, they may stay if it seem them good, or return unto the
place from whence they came. But we cannot possibly do the one, or the other.
Time enwrapping us about from the first point of our life, carries us away
still forward; whether we wake or sleep; whether we consent to it, or strive to
the contrary; without permitting us to turn back, or to repose our selves, one
single moment; just as he, whom the Sea, and the wind carry on in a Vessel, so
as his own particular motion serves not at all, either to stop, or to slack
his course. But as the ways, and designs of travellors are very different: so
there is an huge diversity, between the forms, and manners of the life of men.
The way, that the wicked follow, is one; and that of good men, another. The
Pagan steereth one course; the Jew, and the Mohammedan another; and the
Christian another, wholly different. This is that the Scripture calls, The way
of man; understanding by this word, the form, and institution of life, which
every one does follow. And suitably to this dainty figure, it often makes use
of the word Walking, to signify directing, forming, and composing the life
after some certain manner, whether good, or evil: intending thereby the tenor
of life we lead; and the deportments, and actions to which we addict our
selves. There is nothing more common in the Psalms, and in the Proverbs, than
these forms of speech; to walk in Integrity; or on the contrary, in Fraud, and
Iniquity; and in the Writings of the New Testament, to walk in Light, or in
Darkness, after the Spirit, or after the Flesh; and other like Phrases; which
all signify a certain form, and condition of life, good, or evil, as it is
qualified. According to the style of Scripture, the Apostle says here, to the
end, that you may walk; meaning, that you may live, that you may direct, and
form your lives.

But how will he, that we walk? worthily (says he) as is seemly toward the
LORD. It is word for word in the Original, worthily of the LORD; or in a
fashion worthy of the LORD. But our French Bible has faithfully represented
the sense of these words; it being evident, that the Apostle intends, we
should lead a life, that answers to the honor we have, of being Children,
and Disciples of JESUS the LORD; His coheirs, and heirs of His Father. He
elsewhere often uses this manner of speaking, or others altogether like it.
As when he exhorts the Philippians to converse in such sort, as may be worthy
of the Gospel; Phil. 1.28. Ephesians. 4.1. 1 These. 2.12.
and the Ephesians, to walk worthy of the Vocation wherewith they had been
called; and when in like manner he adjureth the Thessalonians, to walk worthy
of GOD, who has called them to His Kingdom, and Glory. The teachers of merits
have drawn from these passages, that proud name, which they ordinarily give
them, calling them, merits of condignity; pretending, that to walk worthy of
GOD, signifies, meriting of life by their works, properly, and in the account
of exact justice. But they are evidently deceived. For not to speak of the
vanity of this presumption, which Scripture, and reason it self do
thunder-strike a thousand ways; it is clear, that to be worthy of any thing,
signifies not at all in these passages, the meriting it properly, and exactly.
For who is there, that would thus interpret the Apostles saying, walk worthy of
GOD, that is, lead a life that merits GOD? There are people found, that have
opinion of themselves good enough, to imagine, they merit Heaven, and the glory
of the life to come. There has none been yet seen, that I know, who vaunted
Himself to merit GOD. This language would be monstrous, and surpass the pride
of Devils themselves. It Is too much presuming, but to affirm, that any merit
the gifts of GOD. Common sense permits not a man to think, or say, that he
merits GOD. As ill, does, what the Apostle says elsewhere, suffer this gloss.
Converse in a fashion worthy of the Gospel, and live in a fashion worthy of the
Vocation of GOD. For who ever heard say, that our works do merit, either the
Gospel, or the Vocation of GOD? a thing past, and which we have already
received from the liberality of the LORD, before the having done any one good
work? It is clear, that in all these places, the worthiness, whereof the
Apostle speaks, is nothing else, but a certain well-beseemingness, arising
from the correspondence, that is found between us, and the subjects, whereof he
says we are worthy. Just as when St. John Baptist exhorts the Jews to bring
forth fruits worthy of repentance, he means, not that merit repentance, but
that answer thereto; that are suitable to the sense we have of our own sin, and
of the Grace of GOD. In like manner here, a life holy, and full of piety, and
of good works, is worthy of GOD, not because it merits Him; but because it has
some suitableness with His sanctity and glory. It is worthy of the Gospel;
because it is correspondent to it, and conform to what it requires of us. It
is worthy of the Vocation of GOD, because carried to things, to which He
calls us, and produces the fruits, which He demands of us.

Would you then know, Christian, what your life should be? let it be worthy of
the LORD. St. Paul has comprised all in these few words. And as sometime a
Prince, fallen into the hands of his enemy, who demanded of him, how he should
treat him, answered, as a King, signifying by that one word all the moderation,
and generosity he desired should be used toward Him: So the Apostle, in these
two words, embraces the whole form of our carriage. How shall we live? Lead
(says he) a life, that may be worthy of the LORD. This is enough to let us
understand, that neither avarice, nor cruelty, nor hatred, nor envy, nor any
other of the passions of the world, must have any place in our manners; but
that justice, charity, and all other pure and celestial affections should shine
forth in them: that there should be mixed in them, nothing base, nor abject:
but that all should be great, and generous, and elevated above the dunghills of
the Flesh. Have then, Believer, this supreme LORD continually before your eyes.
Interrogate your Conscience upon each of the things, that are presented to you,
whether they be worthy of Him; and do not any, that may not be put in this
rank. Flee all that crosses the quality of His disciple; all that swerveth
from the rule, which He has given you; all that diverts you from the Kingdom,
to which He conducteth you. This LORD is purity, and sanctity it self; He is
entirely separate from sinners; He never had any communion with vice. This LORD
is soveraignly good; He hates no man; He prayed even for them, that Crucified
Him, and did infinite benefits to them, that injured, and blasphemed Him. This
LORD neither possessed, nor coveted the honors, and grandeurs of the earth.
All His glory is divine, and His grandeur celestial. His discipline is like His
life; He enjoyneth us throughout, nothing but a singular innocence, sanctity,
and goodness; and the good things He promises us are spiritual, and not
carnal: the inheritance He has purchased for us, and to the possession whereof
He leads us, is in Heaven, and not on the earth. Upon this it is easy to
judge, what is this form of life worthy of Him, which the Apostle commands
us. It is a life, that has resemblance with His; wherein shine forth, both the
examples of His Divine Virtues, and the marks of His doctrine, and the badges
of His house, and the first fruits of His glory. It is a life, that treads
under foot the baseness of all vices: that disdaineth what the flesh, and the
world do promise to their slaves: and beholding with contempt, all that the
earth adore, has no passion but for Heaven. It Is a life sweet, and humble, and
innocent, that obliges all men, and injures none at all; that without turning
to the right hand, or the left, runs on, and advances incessantly, toward the
mark of the supernal calling. It Is thus you must live, faithful soul, if you
would satisfy the light you have received of the knowledge of GOD. I confess
it is an high design. But neither is it for low, and common things, that GOD
has given you His Son, and His Spirit. If our infirmity makes fear, let the
power, and the might of the LORD assure us. And if there escape us sometime any
act unworthy of Him; as in this flesh, wherewith we are clothed, there do
escape us but too many; let us combat our own weaknesses; and have recourse
unto the grace of GOD, who pardoning us, what is past, will fortify us for the
future.

But the Apostle, after having enjoined us in general, that our life be worthy
of the LORD, touches next the principal duties, whereof we must acquit us, to
live in this sort; and adds first, that we do please Him entirely: that is,
that in all things, we seek to please the LORD, endeavoring nothing but what
may be acceptable to Him; that this be the aim of our life. Whence appears,
that the first point of a life celestial, and truly worthy of the LORD, is to
take His will for our supreme rule, by it squaring all our thoughts, words, and
actions. For this is that the Apostle signifies, when He says, we must
entirely please Him: that is, in all things, in all the parts of life; both in
what respects the sentiments of our hearts, and in what concerns the words of
our mouths, or our other external actions. This is as the soul of the service
of God. You serve a man, or your selves, and not the LORD, when it is to
content your selves, or some other, that you act. The best action, and in its
self most holy, loses its worth, and value, when the design of pleasing GOD is
wanting in it. Let us then banish from our life, first, all those things which
GOD has not instituted. For how fair an appearance soever they have, we cannot
assure our selves, that they please the LORD, if He has not ordained them. Let
us not suffer our selves to be beguiled by the paint, and false luster of
humane devotion. Since the question is of pleasing GOD, we must give our selves
to the study, and practice of that, which Himself has expressly commanded us,
in His word. As to this, I am most certain, it is a thing acceptable to Him. But
for that which superstition, or the pretended wisdom of men has invented, I
cannot be assured, whether it please the LORD, or no. Then next, in the very
performance of the things He has commanded us, let us have regard still to
please Him. Offer we not our Sacrifices, but to His Deity alone. If our actions
be also acceptable to men, in good time be it: It is gain we may take with
contentment. But how ever they take it, have we still for our end, to please
the LORD. Provided that our oblations are grateful to Him, let the world judge
of them, as it will. We have that we sought, and it suffices us to have
contented the eyes of our Master. Let us renounce our own wills, and regard His
only, wishing daily, that it might be done of us, and all other Creatures, as
the LORD JESUS has commanded us.

The Apostle adds in the second place, the productions of Christian life,
Frustifying (says he) in every good work. This necessarily follows from the
affection, he but now recommended to us. For if we study to please the LORD
entirely, since it is only good works that can be acceptable to Him, it is
evident, we shall give our selves to them continually. But the Apostle uses in
it a remarkable term, saying to signify this production, that we fructify in
every good work. The Scripture often compares the faithful, to Trees; because
they are planted by the hand of GOD, sprung from His celestial, and
incorruptible seed, that is, His word; and you know how the Prophet, in the
first Psalm represents us, a good man, and one fearing GOD, under the image of
a Tree, planted by a stream of living water, yielding its fruit in its season,
and crowned with a green, and grateful feuillage, which never fades, And
elsewhere he compares him to a flourishing, and fruitful Palm Tree, Psa. 92.13,
14, 15. Joh. 15. Romans 11:
in the Courts of the LORD. JESUS CHRIST says in St. John, That He is the
Vine, and we are the Branches, and St. Paul compares the Israel of GOD, that
is, the whole Society of His children, to a true Olive, whereinto each of them
is grafted, to partake of its sap, and fatness. Sutably to these Allegories,
it is with much grace, and reason, that the Apostle makes use of the word,
fructify, to signify the production of our good works. That immortal juice,
which has been shed into us from on high by the Word and Spirit, obliges us
to this secondity; it not having been communicated to us, but to produce in us
the fruits of righteousness, and holiness. It Is this the LORD expects from His
mystical Vineyard, demanding of it this just recompense of the care He takes to
husband it. And as we love trees, which do not unprofitably take up our ground,
but besides leaves, and blossoms bear us a quantity of fruits: so is it with
the heavenly Vineyard-keeper. He seeks for fruit on His mystical trees: He
condemns to the fire, the fig tree that bears none; He loves, and purges
that which bears any. Good works are the fruits, He requires of us; yea
every sort of good works: Fructifying (says the Apostle) in every good work.
Nature gives not, to any of the Trees (...) it produces, the faculty of
bringing forth more than one kind of fruits only; because the seed of which
they grow is earthly, and material. But grace, which generateth the LORD's
mystical plants of a seed spiritual, and divine, makes them capable of bearing
infinite fruits of every sort. This the Apostle calls good works, commanded of
GOD in His word, useful to the advancement of His glory, and the edification of
our Neighbor. Let no one flatter himself, as if the vain greenness of leaves,
the outward profession of Christianity, would suffice Him to be numbered among
the plants of the LORD. He acknowledges for His, the trees only that bear
fruit. There is more yet. It Is not enough to bear one certain kind of fruits:
there must be fructifying in every good work. Your alms will serve you for
nothing, if they be not accompanied with the fruits of honesty, and
sanctification. In vain shall you have been adorned with meekness, and
gentleness; if you have not also chastity, and beneficence.

In fine, the Apostle wills in the third, and last place; that we increase in
the knowledge of the LORD. See, faithful Brethren, how this Holy man every
where joyneth together knowledge, and action; faith, and charity. He begs of
GOD, that the Colossians might be completed in wisdom, and spiritual
understanding; to the end, says he, that they may walk in a fashion worthy of
the LORD, and fructify in every good work. But for fear they should imagine,
they had no more need to study after knowledge, He comes to it yet again, and
adds, increasing in the knowledge of God. For as our sanctification is never
perfect here below; so there wants always something in our knowledge. There
must be endeavor equally after the one, and the other; And as the light of
knowledge carries, and fitteth us to the practice of good works; so the
exercise of good works, cleanses the eyes of our understandings, and
increases true wisdom: on the contrary, the neglect of sanctification,
diminishes this divine clearness in us; and brings back by little, and
little the darkness of ignorance upon us. For as the LORD gives new graces, to
him that faithfully manageth His first presents; so takes He away His Talent
from Him, that abuses it. Those that cast away a good conscience, make
shipwreck also of Faith; and they that withhold the truth in unrighteousness,
are given up to a mind disfurnished of all judgment; and GOD sends the
efficacy of error to those, that receive not his Holy doctrine with love. On
the contrary, He reveals His secret, and augmenteth His light to them, that
seek His commandments, and are bent to do His will. Let us hold fast therefore
these two precious gifts of the LORD, knowledge, and good works; Faith, and
Charity; and studiously apply us to increase the one by the other; meditating,
and learning the mysteries of GOD, that we may obey His will; and obey His
will, that we may confirm our selves more, and more, in the knowledge of His
mysteries.

Dear Brethren, That which the Apostle has desired for His Colossians is very
much, an accomplished knowledge of the Divine will, a life worthy of the LORD,
a spiritual secondity, fructifying in every good work, and a continual
advancement in heavenly wisdom. Yet this is not all. For how great and
excellent soever these things be, they suffice not without perseverance, to
conduct us to salvation, and it is impossible to persevere in them without a
supernatural strength, and firmness. Therefore St. Paul wishes again, in the
last place, for these faithful people, that they may be strengthened in all
might, according to the power of His glory, in all suffering and patience of
mind with joy. This succor is necessary for us, as well because of our own
infirmities, as for the multitude, violence, and obstinacy of our enemies. For,
as to our selves, though that celestial spirit, wherewith GOD baptizeth us at
the beginning of our vocation, does invest us with a new vigor; yet so it is,
that there remains much weakness in us, while we live on earth; our inward
man being yet but in its infancy; a weak age, and which easily lets it self
sink, if it be not sustained. And as for our enemies, we have a vast multitude
of them, that watch night, and day to destroy us, and ranged in diverse bands,
under the ensigns of the Devil, the world, and the flesh, the principal heads
of this black Army, conjured to our ruin, cease not to trouble us, leaving nor
wile, nor forcible attempt, nor malice, nor violence, nor threatening, nor
promise, un-employed against us. If we have repulsed one of them, (...) return
again upon us diverse others, which essay us on all sides; espy where (...)
weak, and oftentimes turn our own weapons against us. If we have overthrown
avarice, voluptuousness sets its self on foot. If we defeat it also, ambition
enters in its place. Hatred unites with it; Desire of revenge pusheth us on;
Wrath provokes us; Envy seizes us; Persecution troubles us; Prosperity
pusseth us up; the success of our own combats tickleth us. Oftentimes that
which helps us on one hand, hurts us on another; as in a complicated disease,
in which the remedies cross one another: or that which is good for the liver,
is dangerous for the Stomach. Who sees not, that to preserve our selves in
such a mingled Combat, and against so many charges so confused, and so
obstinate, (for they last as long as our lives) we have need of an
extraordinary might, we who of our selves have so little, that we are
insufficient even for one good thought. But GOD armeth us with the power of His
Spirit, as with an impenetrable buckler; under which we stand in covert, amid
that thick hail of blows, that falls continually about us. It Is this Divine
power, the Apostle wishes here to the Colossians, when he prays, that they
might be strengthened in all might; that their souls might be confirmed, their
hearts hardened, as a Diamond to resist all assaults; their courages vested with
an heroic ardour, and firmness, which all the rages of Hell, or earth, may
never be able to overcome. He prays they may be strengthened in all might;
because as we have to do with diverse enemies, and are sick of diverse
infirmities, we have need to receive, not one or two kinds of strength only,
but many different ones. For even as in nature you see, the strength of bodies
is different; one resisting one thing, and yielding to another; one having the
virtue to repulse the force of one element, but not to guard it self from
another. So in a manner is it in the souls of men. Such a man will bravely free
himself from the tentation of one Vice, that will not be able to defend himself
from another. Such a man shall resist the violences of the world, as will yield
to the charms of its caresses. Since that to lose a Victory, it is enough to be
overcome, though by but one of their enemies; it is with great reason, that the
Apostle for preserving to these Colossians the honor of their Crown and
Triumph, wishes them all strength; that is, a perfect strength; which may be
of proof against all the strokes of the enemy; which may boldly undertake good
and holy actions, how high and difficult soever they be; which may valiantly
combat vices; resolutely despise earthly things: vigorously repel tentations,
and generously suffer afflictions. He shows us also by the way the source of
this heavenly might, when after having wished, that the Colossians might be
strengthened in all might, he adds, according to the power of the glory of
GOD; that is, according to His glorious power; by a manner of speaking ordinary
in the style of the Hebrews. Whence is it, that these faithful people do
receive this admirable strength, necessary for their salvation? From the
glorious power of the LORD, says the Apostle; that is, from that immense, and
efficacious puissance of GOD which nothing can resist. The Holy Spirit is so
named in St. Luke, L^k. 24.49.
where the LORD commands His Apostles to tarry at Jerusalem, until they be
endued with power from on high; that is, the Spirit he had promised them. And
St. Paul elsewhere, making for the Ephesians, a petition altogether like this,
which he here presents to GOD for the Colossians, clearly terms that the
Spirit of GOD, Ephesians. 3.16.
which in this passage he calls the Virtue, or Power of His glory. GOD grant
you (says he) that you may be powerfully strengthened by His Spirit in the
inner man. He calls this Virtue of the Spirit of God, glorious, to express
its admirable, and unsurmountable force, which triumphs magnificently over
all that opposes its action; which with the weakest means accomplisheth the
greatest things; which changes, when it will, Shepherds into Lawgivers, and
Kings; Cow-heards into Prophets, and Persecutors into Apostles; which beats
down the proudest fierceness, and preserves invincible the most despicable
weakness: which hardneth the bodies of it is humble Warriors, as Steel;
maintains them in the flames, and confounds with their lowness, the fury of
Elements, of Men, and of Devils. For this is that the Sacred Writers ordinarily
call glory; even an abundance of beauty, of power, and perfection, so rich, as
it over-bears our senses; and makes to bend under it, all the vigor of our
Spirits, reducing them to admiration, and astonishment. And St. Paul somewhat
frequently uses this word in this sense; as when he says, that CHRIST was
raised from the dead by the glory of the Father, that is, by His great, and
unspeakable power. Whence it appears, that the Virtue which converteth us to
GOD, and that which conserveth us in His grace, is not a common, and ordinary
might; but an invincible efficacy, which nothing can resist. Seek it not in
your own nature, Christian soul; seek it in GOD, and acknowledging your
weakness, ask of Him the remedy of it. If it betide you to resist the enemy,
and to remain victorious in any combat; render all the glory of it to this
Sovereign LORD, without attributing ought of it to your self.

But the Apostle shows us in what follows, what is the use and effect of the
succor, which the glorious power of the LORD gives us; who strengthens us,
unto all suffering, (says he) and patience of mind with joy. These are the two
productions of the Spirit of GOD in a faithful soul, patience, and long
waiting, in which principally our strength consists. These are as the two
hands of Heaven, that sustain us in perils, and keep us from sinking under the
weight of those evils, wherewith we often find our selves surcharged. And
though both the two are of a very like nature; yet they have each of them
something particular. Sufferance bears the evil without bending, submitting
to it at its inflicting, humbly, and standing firm under this rude load. The
Spirit patient, or long-waiting (for so the term used here in the Original,
does properly signify) lends it the hand afterward, and attends without
murmuring for deliverance, from the evil it suffers, and for enjoyment of the
good it hops. Sufferance respects the very weight, and heaviness of the
affliction. The long-waiting of the patient Spirit, respects the duration of
it. These two virtues are absolutely necessary for a Christian: For without
them how should he support, either the chastisements of GOD, or the
persecutions of the world? How should he be firm, in the exercise of other
virtues, to discharge the Offices of them, against the impediments that thwart
them every hour? Tertull. de patient.
Patience, (says an Ancient) is the Superintendant of all the affairs of GOD,
and without it, it is not possible to execute His commands, or to wait for His
promises. It Is it, that defeateth all its enemies without toil. Its repose is
more efficacious, than the motion, and action of others. It Is it that makes
healthful to us, things, of their own nature most pernicious. It changes for
us, poisons into remedies; and defeats into victories. It rejoices the Angels;
it confounds Devils; it overcomes the world. It mollifieth the hardest
courages, and converteth the most obstinate hearts. It is the strength, and the
triumph of the Church, according to the saying of the ancient Oracle. By
keeping you quiet, and by rest you shall be delivered; your strength shall be
in silence and in hope. But the Apostle to show us, what this patience is, to
which the Spirit of GOD forms His children, says that it is with joy. This
is the true Character of Christian patience. The Hypocrite suffers sometimes;
but it is murmuring: And the Philosophers year while made a great show of their
patience: but it was only an effect, either of their stiffness, or of their
stupidity; which was no ways accompanied with the joy, which the Holy GHOST
sheds into the souls of those, that suffer for the name of GOD. Not that they
are insensible, or that they receive the evil on them without grief. But if the
evil they suffer do sad them, this very thing rejoices them; that by the grace
of their LORD, they have the strength, and the courage to suffer it; and do
know, that their suffering shall turn to their good; and that from these
thorns they shall one day reap the flowers, and fruits of blessed immortality.
To which may be added the sweetness which is then shed into their heart, by the
vive, and profound impression of that only Comforter, who communicates himself
to them, on such occasions, more freely than ever; and can by the ineffable
Virtue of His balm, their most bitter wounds. This is that, Dear Brethren,
which we had to say to you, on this Text of the holy Apostle.

Let us receive his doctrine with faith, and religiously obey his voice. He
shows us what our task is here below. Let us acquit our selves in it with
care. GOD of His Grace has raised up among (...) a great light of knowledge;
let us employ it to its true use; and walk with it in such a sort, as may be
worthy of so holy, and merciful a LORD, whose name we bear. Let this great Name
awaken our senses, and affections; let it pluck them off from the Earth, and
elevate them to Heaven, where He reigns, who has given it to us. Let this
Name put into our hearts a secret shame to do, or think ought, that may be
unworthy thereof. Faithful Sirs, remember, you are Christians, as often as flesh,
or earth sollicits you to evil. Put the world by. It Is not to please it, that
you have been regenerated by the Spirit from on high. The World is so unjust,
so humorous, and so changing, that it is impossible to content it. See in what
pain, and torment, they continually live that attempt it. And though you should
compass it, the success would cost you dear. By pleasing the world, you would
displease your own Conscience; the contenting whereof, is infinitely more
important to you than any thing else. But with GOD it is quite otherwise. His
will is constant, and still the same, without any variation, or change. Nothing
is pleasing to Him, but what is just, and reasonable. Your Conscience will find
in it, its entire satisfaction; and never reproach you, for having served so
good a Master. Not to allege to you, that the World, after you shall have
killed your self to serve it, will pay you only with ingratitude, and contempt,
as experience daily shows us; whereas the LORD will magnificently reward the
care, you shall have taken to do His will; comforting, and blessing you, in
this world; Crowning, and glorifying you in the other. If you demand, what must
be done to please Him, the Apostle shows you in a word. Fructify (says he) in
every good work. As often as the LORD shall cast His eyes on this Vineyard, let
Him see it still laden with good fruits. Let Him never have cause to complain
of it, as He yerst did of that of Israel. I expected (says He) it should bring
forth grapes, and it brought forth wild grapes. Sure, He has had no less care
of ours, than of theirs. He has planted it, in like manner, with choice Vines;
He has also environed it, with a brave and admirable hedge. He has watered
it, with the rain of His Clouds, and made the beams of His Sun of
Righteousness, to shine on it, and may justly say of it, What was there more to
be done to my Vineyard, that I have not done to it? Be we not ungrateful to so
sweet a Master. Let not our sterility confound His expectation. Let our fruits
be answerable to His cares, and our secondity to His husbandry. Let there be no
soul barren, and unprofitable among us, Let each one Fructify of that He has:
each one improve the dressing, and sap, the LORD has given us. Let the sinner
present Him his repentance; the Just, his Perseverance; the Rich, his Alms;
the Poor, his Praises; Old Age, its Prudence; Youth, its Zeal. Let the Knowing
abound in Instruction; the Strong, in Modesty; the Weak, in Humility; and all
together in Charity. And since it is the good pleasure of our Heavenly Father,
that we have here diverse combats; as, none may live piously without
persecution; prepare we also for this other part of our duty, and supplicate
the LORD, with the Apostle, that He do strengthen us with all strength,
according to the power of His glory: that He do give us a firm, and unmovable
patience, to persevere constantly in the Holy Communion of His Son; so as,
neither the promises, nor the threatenings of the World; neither the Lusts, nor
the fears of Flesh, may be ever able to debauch us from His Service. O GOD, our
task is great, and we are feeble. Our enemies are Giants, and we but Dwarfes.
Therefore thy self work in us, merciful LORD, the work, which thou command
us. Perfect thy glorious power, in our weaknesses. Strengthen our hands, and
confirm our hearts; that we may combat vigorously, and atchieve great things in
thy Name, and after the trials, and tentations of this life, may one day
receive in the other, from the Sacred, and Sweet hand of thy Son, the glorious
Crown of immortality, which we breathe after. So be it.

THE V. SERMON.
COL. I. Ver. XII, XIII. Verse. XII. Giving thanks unto the Father, who has
made us capable to partake of the inheritance of Saints in light.

XIII. Who has delivered us from the power of darkness, and translated us into
the Kingdom of His well-beloved Son.


DEar Brethren, Though the first Creation of man be a most illustrious master
piece of the goodness, power, and wisdom of GOD; this great worker then making
Adam of the dust, and forming Him after His own image, to live, and reign on
earth in a sovereign felicity; Yet it must be confessed, that our restoration
of JESUS CHRIST is much more excellent, and admirable. For whether you consider
the things themselves, which have been given us; or have respect to the quality
of those, to whom they have been communicated, or to what the LORD did, for the
communicating of them; you will see, that the second of these two benefits of
His does surpass the first every way. The first gave us an humane nature; the
second has communicated to us a divine one. The first made us a living soul,
the second makes us a quickening spirit. By the one we had an earthly, and
animal being; by the other we receive a spiritual, and heavenly one. The one
seated us in the garden of Eden; the other elevateth us to the Heaven of Glory.
There we had a Lordship over living Creatures, and the Empire of the Earth;
here we have the fraternity of Angels, and the Kingdom of Heaven. There we
enjoyed a life full of delight; but infirm, and depending, as that of other
living Creatures, on the use of meat, and drink, and sleep: Here we possess one
full of vigor, and strength, which like that of blessed spirits, is sustained
by its own virtue, without need of other nourishment. The one was subject to
change, as the event has declared; the other is truly immortal, and immutable,
and above the accidents, that altered the first. The advantage of the first man
was, that he might have not dyed; the privilege of the second is, that he
cannot dye. But the difference will appear no less, in the disposition of the
persons, to whom the LORD has communicated these benefits; if you attentively
consider it. I confess, that dust which GOD invested with an humane form,
merited not a condition so excellent; and received it from the mere liberality
of the Creator. But if it were not worthy of such a savor; at least it had
nothing in it, which rendered it incapable thereof, in the rigor of justice;
Whereas we, not only have not merited the salvation, which God gives us in His
Son; but have over and above merited that death, which is opposite to it. If
the matter, upon which the LORD wrought, in the first creation of man, had no
disposition for the form, He put in it; so neither had it any repugnancy
thereto: whereas in our second Creation, that is, in our redemption by JESUS
CHRIST, He finds in us souls, so far from complying with His operation, that
they potently resist it. So you see, that to effect the first work, He employed
only the single out-going of His will, and word: whereas for creating the
second, it was necessary, He should shake the Heavens, send down His Son to
earth, deliver Him up to death, and do miracles, that astonished men, and
Angels. It Is with this grand, and incomprehensible mystery of GOD, that the
Apostle entertaineth us, my Brethren, at this time, in the Text, which you have
heard. For having finished the exordium, that is, the Preface of this Epistle;
and intending from thence to enter on His principal subject; to slip the more
gently into it; after representing to the Colossians the Prayers, he made to
GOD for them; he now adds the thanks; he offered Him, for their common
salvation; and by this means, opens the entry of his dispute, touching the
sufficiency, and inexhaustible abundancy of JESUS CHRIST, for saving of
believers; which leaves no need of making any addition to his Gospel. Giving
thanks unto the Father, (says he) who, etc --. As this Text consists of two
verses; so it may be divided into two articles. In the first, the Apostle
gives thanks unto GOD, for His making us capable of entering into the
inheritance of His Saints. In the second is proposed, what he has done to make
us capable of this happiness; namely, delivered us from the power of darkness,
and translated us into the Kingdom of His beloved Son. These are the two
points, we will handle, (if it please the LORD) in this action: humbly
beseeching Him, to guide us in meditating so excellent a mystery, and touch
our hearts, so vively with it, as that it may effectually further our
edification, and consolation.

The benefit of our redemption being very great, and most admirable in all
respects, (as we even now intimated) it is with great reason, that the Apostle
begins his discourse of it, by giving of thanks unto GOD. And in his
Epistles ordinarily, he scarce ever speaks of it, but praising withal, or
admiring the goodness of the LORD. He directs his thanksgiving to the Father,
as the first, and supreme author of this excellent work. Think not, that he
denies the Son, or the Spirit their part in it; or that he would deprive them
of the glory, due to them for it. For since these three persons are but one
only, and the same GOD, it is evident, that the works of the Deity appertain to
them all three. But as they subsist in a certain order, the Father of Himself;
the Son of the Father, who generated Him; the Holy Spirit of the Father, and
the Son, of whom He proceeds, from all eternity: so likewise do they act in
the same disposition. And forasmuch as the Father is the first, in this order
of their subsistence, and operation; thence it comes, that He addresseth His
benedictions particularly to Him, as the prime, and the sovereign source of the
Deity from whence originally has streamed down upon us, all the good, and
grace, that we have received, in our redemption. But let us see, how the
Apostle describes this work of our salvation, for which he gives the LORD
thanks. He has made us capable (says he) to partake of the inheritance of
Saints in light. After that Sin had made a separation between GOD, and us, it
was naturally impossible for us, to have part in any of His blessings: The LORD
therefore designing to save us, took care first of all to remove this obstacle
of our communication with Him. This He did, satisfying His justice, by the
expiation of sin, through the death of His Son JESUS CHRIST; and by that means,
the liberty of that commerce, between His goodness, and our poor nature, which
our sin had interrupted, was opened again: so as henceforth nothing hinders,
save on man's own part; but he may make his approaches to GOD, and partake of
his Grace, through faith, and repentance. Yet this is not the thing, which the
Apostle intends in this place, when he says, that the Father has made us
capable of having part in His inheritance. For, this grace by which He has
opened the Throne of His beneficence, through the expiation of sin, does
generally respect all men; nor is there any, but access thither is free for
him, if he present himself with faith, and repentance; whereas the Grace,
whereof the Apostle speaks here, is appropriate to him, and the Colossians,
and such as resemble them; that is, in a word; it is peculiar to true believers,
and not common to all men. It must be observed therefore in the second place,
that besides this first impediment, which did shut up the gate of the House of
GOD against us, to wit, the inexorable severity of His avenging Justice; there
is yet another, no less difficult to be surmounted, than the former; though it
be of another kind, and a different nature. It is, the naughtiness, the
hardness, and the blindness of our corrupt nature. For as the justice of GOD
would not permit, that a creature foul with sin should approach Him, except its
sin were expiated: so His wisdom could not suffer, it should finger any of His
divine favors, except it repented of having offended Him, and believed His
promises. But in the estate we lie in since our fall, our soul is so depraved
by sin; that it is not capable of its self, either to consider GOD, or to put
affiance in His goodness: and so this great Miracle of the love of GOD toward
us (I mean) the expiation of sin by the death of His Son) would remain without
any saving effect, in respect of us, if leaving us in the condition we were
born, He did but simply present the declarations of His grace, in external
means, to us. For this cause therefore, this kind, and compassionate LORD, not
content to have opened the gate of His bounty, by the Cross of His CHRIST, does
also fetch us up from the grave of our impiety, and gives us the will, and the
strength to come to Himself. It is properly this second benefit, peculiar to
those that believe, which the Apostle means here, when he says, that GOD
has made us capable to partake of His inheritance. The first gift of the
Father did capacitate His hand, to communicate His treasures to us; and the
second does capacitate us to handle them. Without the death of His dear Son, He
might not give us life; and without H^s effectual calling, we could not receive
it of Him. Faithful Sirs, mark well this lesson of the Apostle: Who gives
thanks to GOD, for that He has made us capable of partaking of His
inheritance. He first brings down thereby the pride of those, that give this
glory to free will; boasting, that they have made themselves capable of
salvation; either by some kind of pre-dispositions, which oblige GOD, at least
by the way of decency, to give them His grace; or by the due using and menaging
of afflictions: the pride, I say, of all those in general, who pretend, that it
is in a man's own power, to prepare himself for the heavenly inheritance. No,
says the Apostle, This wholly appertains unto GOD. It is He, that has made
us capable. 2 Cor. 3.5.
Of our selves we cannot so much as think a good thought: so he affirms
elsewhere. I confess, that this impotency of man is voluntary, and
consequently, criminal: it proceeds from the extreme badness of his heart; and
from no defect of any of those things, which are necessary, from without, for
this effect. (For, what else, besides his own rebelliousness, does hinder him
from believing in GOD, and embracing with repentance, the exhibitions of His
grace, which are presented to him, either in the course of nature, or in the
Law, or by the Gospel?) Yet so it is, that how voluntary soever this His
naughtiness be, it is invincible, and altogether refractory. It is no longer a
weakness. It Is a formed impotency, which nature is not able to correct. And the
Scripture speaks of it every where, in this sense. 1 Cor. 2.14. Romans 8.5.
The carnal man (says the Apostle) cannot understand the things of the Spirit
of GOD; because they are spiritually discerned. And elsewhere, The affection of
the flesh is enmity against GOD. For it renders not its self subject to the
Law of GOD, Joh. 12.39. Jer. 6.10. and 13.23.
nor indeed can. And St. John, speaking of the Jews, They cannot believe, says
he. And Jeremiah of their Ancestors, Their ear (says he) is uncircumcised,
and they cannot hear. Will the Ethiopian change his skin, and the Leopard his
spots? so can you do any good, who have learned to do only evil? such is the
miserable state of all men naturally. Let us learn then in the second place, to
give the LORD alone the whole glory of all that we are, in His Son: as in
reality, it belongs to none but Him. He has not only given us this rich
inheritance, the purchase of the blood of His Son CHRIST, He has even given us
the capacity to enter into it; and possess our part of it. Besides His making
us the present; He has also given us the strength to receive it. For it is not
with the inheritance of GOD, as with the honors of earthly Princes: these fall
often into the hands of persons most incapable to possess them. That Divine
honor of the Heavenly inheritance is given to none but those that are capable
of it; that is, who have the conditions requisite for having part in it, to
wit, faith, and repentance. But the same GOD, who has prepared the heritage
for us, gives us also the preparation which is necessary for entering into it;
according to what the Apostle says elsewhere. 2 Cor. 3 5. Joh. 6 44.
It is GOD who is our capacity, or sufficiency; and what our LORD Himself
averreth in St. John; No man can come unto me, except the Father who has sent
me draw him. This again is that, which the Apostle intends, Phil. 2.13.
in the Epistle to the Philippians. That it is GOD, who produces in us with
efficacy, the will, and the deed, according to His good pleasure. 2 Cor. 5.5.
Ephesians. 2.10. 1 Cor. 3.9.
And elsewhere he compriseth this whole work of the grace of GOD, in one only
word, saying, It is He that forms us for the self same thing. Therefore he
calls us, in one place, the workmanship of GOD: and His Creation in JESUS
CHRIST: and in another, His husbandry, and His building. Whence it does appear,
that the offer of grace, which is made to all by the Gospel, if there be
nothing else, does not give us part in the heavenly inheritance. I grant, it is
sufficient in its self, and would produce its effect in man, if the badness of
his heart had not blinded him. But this deplorable blindness he has,
obstructeth the effect, which these offers of the divine Grace should produce.
Wherefore GOD himself makes us capable of them, by that inward operation of
His Spirit, wherewith He accompanies the preaching of the Gospel, in the
hearts of His elect; by reason whereof they are called, the taught of GOD. Joh.
6.45.
It Is this teaching, which renders them capable of entering into the communion
of His Son, according to what He says in St. John, Whoever has heard, and
learned of the Father, Ibid.
comes unto me. Thus He made Lydia capable of having part in his inheritance,
opening her heart to understand the things Paul spoke, as the sacred History
does report. It Is without doubt, in the same manner, He also made, both St.
Paul, and these Colessians, and all the rest of the faithful, capable of the
same effect, enlightening them within, and leading captive their hearts into the
yoke of the Gospel. In fine, we may again observe, how contrary to Apostolic
doctrine, the presumption of those is, who vaunt them, of meriting salvation.
If there be any thing in us, to which merit is attributed, without doubt it is
our capacity and sufficiency, that we are meet to partake of the Kingdom of
GOD. But this very thing is a present from GOD, for which we owe Him most
humble thanks. How then, and by what right can we in justice demand pay, and
wages for it? Would it not be altogether, as if a patient should enter action
against his Physician, and compel him to recompense the being cured by his art?
Or a poor man demand wages of us for receiving our alms? or a prisoner for
having been redeemed with our money? Let a man turn, and transform things, as
much as he will; it is clear, that gratification and merit are incompatible;
and that He, who is of right obliged to render thanks, cannot, without folly,
pretend to have merited, by that very thing, for which he renders thanks. Our
sufficiency, and capacity, is a gift of GOD, or it is not. If it be a gift of
His, why pretend you, that it is meritorious? If it be not; why does the
Apostle thank our LORD, for having made us capable to have part in His
inheritance? The word, Inheritance, which the Apostle employeth here, evidently
confirms the same truth, as an ancient Doctor of the Church has well observed.
Chrysostom. it loc.
Why is it, (says he) that the Apostle uses the word, Inheritance? To show
us, that no man obtains the Kingdom of Heaven by his own works or
performances. But as an Inheritance, depends upon happiness, and not upon
merit; so is it, in this matter. None can exhibit a form of life, and
conversation exquisite enough, to be worthy of the Kingdom. The whole
proceeds from the gift of GOD. To proceed; I doubt not, but St. Paul took
this term from the Old Testament: wherein the Land of Canaan, destined, and
given to the Children of Israel for an inheritance, according to the promises
made to their Fathers, was the figure of this blessed, spiritual, and divine
life, in possession whereof GOD puts us, by the Gospel of His Son, beginning
it here below by the consolation, and sanctification of His Spirit, and
reserving to complete it on high one day, in the Heavens, by the communication
of His immortal glory. For as each Israelite had his portion in the Land of
Canaan, the same in substance, with the rest; but diversely qualified: so each
believer has his share in celestial life; yet after such a manner, as though,
for the main, they all possess the same life; nevertheless it is diversely
proportioned, and relished to each of them. Again, as none but the Children of
Abraham had right, and title to that ancient inheritance; So there are none,
but the Children of the promise, which are born of the word of GOD, and not of
flesh, or of blood, that have part in the new. For this cause, the Apostle
entitles it, The inheritance of Saints. Away, ye unbelieving, and profane. It
is not for you that GOD has prepared this glorious inheritance. Deceive not
your selves. 1 Cor. 6.10.
Neither Fornicators, nor Idolaters, nor Adulterers, nor the Effeminate, nor
Thieves, nor Covetous persons, nor Drunkards, nor Revilers, nor Extertioners,
shall have part in the Kingdom of GOD. It is designed for Saints alone. The
portion of the profane, and ungodly is elsewhere; during this generation, in
the world, and in its wretched delights; and when it shall pass away, in the
lake of fire, and brimstone.

But the Apostle having styled that salvation, which GOD communicates to us in
His Son, the Inheritance of Saints, adds further, in light. As light is in
Scripture the symbol of two things, knowledge, and glory; so it may be taken
here two ways; either for the knowledge of those divine things, which GOD
reveals in His Gospel; or for that sovereign joy, and felicity whereof we
shall be seized on high in the Heavens. It is best, in my opinion to join these
two expositions together; that we may so comprehend the entire state of the
whole inheritance of Saints; who after they are once united to JESUS CHRIST, do
always live in light; first, in that of grace during their pilgrimage on
earth; afterward, in that of glory; Rev. 21.23.
when they shall be raised up to that blessed City, which has no need of the
Sun, nor of the Moon; because the brightness of GOD has illuminated it, and
the Lamb is the light thereof. 1 These. 5.5. Phil. 2.15. Mat. 5.14.
For this cause all the divine denizons of this heavenly State, are called
Children of light, and of the day; which should shine, as lights, in the midst
of a perverse generation; and be the light of the world: as persons born of the
light of the Spirit, and of the word of God; who being led by the rays of
their Sun of Righteousness, walk on straight toward the supreme source of
lights; where arrived, they shall eternally dwell in that shine, which will
transform them into the image of their LORD, from glory to glory, by the power
of His Omnipotent Spirit.

But it is time, to come to the other verse: in which the Apostle adds, what
the Father has done, to make us, thus capable of partaking in the inheritance
of Saints in light. He has delivered us, (says he) from the power of
darkness, and translated us into the Kingdom of His well-beloved Son. By
darkness the Scripture ordinarily understands, ignorance, and misery; the two
contraries of knowledge, and joy; which it signifies by light, as we said even
now. For ignorance, and error do hide the true, and natural form of things,
from our understandings; just as darkness does wrap up visible objects, from
our bodily eyes. And forasmuch as there is nothing more unpleasant to men; nor
more affrighting, than the obscurity of darkness; thence it comes, that the
term is also made use of, to represent horror, trouble, and misery. So the
power of darkness, is nothing else, but that tyranny, which the Devil, and sin
do exercise over their slaves, filling their spirits with deadly errors, and
brutish ignorances; and their consciences, either with affrightment, or
insensibility; and training them on by little, and little, under this dismal
yoke, into the horrors of eternal death, which our LORD often calls,
outer-darkness, where is weeping, and gnashing of teeth. For as knowledge, and
truth, is a light, necessary for the attainment of salvation; so error, and
ignorance infallibly lead to death. Therefore the Devil, the sworn enemy of our
good, blinds men the most he possibly can, spreading before them gross, and
thick mists, which hide Heaven, and its blessed brightness from them. This is
the sum, of his craft, and subtle operation. The deep of his abyss does ever
vomit forth into our air, a black vapor, for the rendering of our senses
useless. By this means, he turned heretofore, the Nations of the Earth, from
the service of their Creator; obscuring, and smothering by his illusions, those
sparkles of the knowledge of Him, which they had; and plunging them, and
holding them down in so deep ignorance, that these miserable men were not
ashamed, Romans 1.23.
to adore the work of their own hands, and change the glory of the
incorruptible GOD, into the resemblance, and image of corruptible man, and of
birds, and of four-footed beasts, and creeping things. As for justice, and
honesty of life, this impostor had so extinguished the lights, which Providence
had kindled for them, in their hearts, and so disordered all their knowledge by
his seductions, that the vilest abominations passed among them for indifferent
things. Walking on in so thick darkness, it is no wonder, if they were in
continual fear; they knew not where they went, nor whither they should come;
and fell at last, after having pitifully stumbled, and staggered, into the
precipice of eternal perdition. And would to GOD, the Prince of error did not
yet still abuse the world, in the same manner! Certainly the darkness of the
old Paganism was not more gross, nor shameful; than that, which covers the
greater part of the earth, at this very day. But whereas, that error, wherein
the Devil keeps men, is called by the Apostle, the power of darkness, and not
simply darkness, this teaches us, that that accursed one works effectually
in them; doing with their hearts, what seems Him good; and planting all
deceit, and ignorance in them at his will; so as these wretches cannot defend
themselves therefrom. This is one thing, the Apostle teaches us elsewhere; as
when he says, that this evil Spirit now works, with efficacy, Ephesians. 2.3.
in the children of rebellion. Not, that he has naturally any just Dominion
over the souls of men: but their sin brings them under His Scepter; and their
hearts being of themselves full of unclean, and unjust affections, it comes to
pass through the excess of their corruption, that he never tempts them in
vain. And all this imperial force he has upon them, is founded merely on
imposture, on error, and ignorance: so as, it is with a deal of truth, and
elegancy, that St. Paul calls it here the power of darkness. This is,
Faithful Brethren, the sad, and pitiful estate, in which naturally men lie.
Let not the paint, and luster, of their pretended wisdom, and justice, dazzle
your eyes. In the sight of GOD, it is but darkness; whence it comes, Ephesians. 5.8.
that the Scripture calls them, darkness it self. Ye were sometime darkness,
says the Apostle to the Ephesians. Judge hereby, how horrible the error of
those is, who dogmatize, that liberty is so very natural to man, as they cannot
conceive, that they can be men without it. Let them Philosophise upon this
subject, as they please. They shall never be able to show, that a man can be,
all at once, both at liberty, and under the power of darkness. He that is under
the power of another, is not free. It Is GOD alone, that can enfranchise men,
and take them from this miserable servitude, and bind that strong Tyrant, who
did hold them Captive. It is to this Sovereign LORD, that the Apostle here
gives the glory, both of his own liberty, and of the Colossians theirs. (...).
He (says he) has delivered us from the power of darkness. Yet the Greek
word, which he uses in the Original, has more Emphasis, signifying, that He
delivered us by an exerting of power; drawing us, and, if I may so speak,
plucking us out of the irons, we were in: whereby he represents to us, on the
one hand, how strong, and strait the bonds of our slavery were; and on the
other hand, how excellent, and admirable the power is, which GOD has
displayed, to bring us out of this spiritual Egypt. For we experiment it daily,
that though nothing be more sordid, and shameful than the tyranny of error, Yet
we all, naturally love it; so horrible is our corruptness. The most adore their
fetters; and quit not the darkness of Egypt, and horrors of Sodom, but with
regret. To fetch them thence, GOD must descend from Heaven, and take them by
the hand, as yer-while Lot and his Children. You know, He does deliver them
from this black power of darkness, when He dissipates their error, and
ignorance, causing His Sacred truth to shine into their hearts, after so vive,
and so glorious a manner; as they discern it, notwithstanding all the illusions
of Satan, and the world. Then, the Empire, which this impostor exercised over
them, vanishes away. They wonder, how so weak clouds could hide from them, so
resplendent a light; and this new flame, or to say better, this new Sun,
discovering to them the true countenance of things; the false colors,
wherewith the Devil, and the Flesh endeavor to disguise them, have no more
force upon them. They then see, as uncovered, and nakedly, the turpitude, and
horror, of idolatry, of superstition, and of Vice: and on the other side,
clearly perceive the verity, the beauty, and the excellency of piety, and
sanctity.

This deliverance is absolutely necessary, for having part in the inheritance
of Saints: unto which none is received, who is not a child of light, and has
not renounced the servitude of error, and of vice. And I profess, it is much,
to have shook off the yoke of darkness, and be gone forth from its power. Yet
this is not all. If the LORD should stop there, we, for all this, should have
no share in the divine glory of the heavenly Canaan. It is of absolute
necessity for admission there, that we bear the marks of the Lamb, and at our
going out of darkness, enter into His Holy light. For this cause, the Apostle
after he had said, that the Father has delivered us from the power of
darkness, immediately adds, and translated us into the Kingdom of his
well-beloved Son. For though, in effect, these two benefits of GOD are
inseparably joined together; yet notwithstanding they do constitute two
different graces. It is his goodness, and not their nature, that has thus tied
them each to other. Had not the counsel of His love otherwise ordered, it might
have come to pass, that a man should be delivered from the power of darkness,
and yet not enter into the Kingdom of His Son; but remain in such a liberty, as
Adam's was before he fell. But now, since no man has remission of His sins,
without becoming a member of JESUS CHRIST by Faith; and since all that have
this honor, are predestined, by the good pleasure of the Father, to be
conformed to the image of their head, and consequently to have part in His
Kingdom, and Glory; there must of necessity, be entering into his Kingdom, or an
eternal abiding under the power of darkness. The Apostle, by the Kingdom of the
Son of GOD, means that very thing, which the Evangelists ordinarily call, the
Kingdom of Heaven; that is, the Church of our LORD JESUS CHRIST; that blessed
City builded by the ministry of the Apostles, and Prophets upon the Son of GOD,
it is only, eternal, and unmovable foundation, the state of the Messiah; the
new republique of GOD, His royalty, and priesthood. It is very pertinently,
that he calls it here, the Kingdom of the Son of GOD: because the inheritance
of Saints, being the matter in hand, which none but a child of GOD can have
part in; this informs us, that we may not obtain this right and title, but in
the Kingdom of JESUS CHRIST alone; since none but He the true, and proper Son
of GOD is able to convey divine adoption to us: and it is for a like reason,
that He styles Him the well-beloved Son of GOD; even to the end we might
confidently hope for all the grace, and glory, which the Father promises us:
inasmuch as we pertain to His wel-beloved, Him in whom He is well-pleased; whom
He singularly affects, and as perfectly as Himself; His eternal delight, and
love. Besides I doubt not, but the Apostle had some aim to heighten the grace,
which the Father has showed us, by this apt, and clear opposing of the Kingdom
of His well-beloved Son, into which He has transported us, to that power of
darkness, the Empire of His enemy, from which He has delivered us. GOD brought
us into this blessed Kingdom, when He gave us the faith of His Gospel, the
righteousness of His Son, and the consolation of His Spirit, signing us with
the badges of His House, and sealing us with His holy Baptism. But the word
transport, or translate, which the Apostle uses, represents also the strength
and virtue of this action by which GOD has brought us into the Communion of
His Son. I acknowledge, the operation of this grace of His, is sweet, and
pleasant: for it persuades, it gains the heart, it is accompanied with the
very great joy of him, that receives it: But withal it is potent, and
efficacious. Nothing can resist it. There is no rebellion, nor hardness of
heart, but it subdueth; Joh. 6.44.
it draws men to JESUS CHRIST, as Himself expresses it; or as His Apostle
says here, it translates them into His Kingdom,

This is that, Beloved Brethren, which we had to deliver you, for the expositon
of this Text. I wish, that the same spirit which yerst indicted it to the pen of
the Apostle, would please to engrave it in the lowest depth of our hearts, with
the point of a Diamond, in uneffaceable Characters; that we might have it day,
and night before our eyes: that we might carefully peruse it, and consult it,
in all the occurrences of our life! This meditation would suffice, to conserve
in a constant, and happy exercise of Christian piety, and to guard us from all,
that disturbeth our sanctification, or our comfort. First, it would inflame us
with an ardent love of GOD, and excite us to a sprightful, and sincere
acknowledgement of His benefits. For what love, what respects, and what
services do we not owe to this Sovereign LORD, who has vouchsafed to display
so much mercy, and goodness upon us? who has called us, from that eternal
death, wherein we were sunk with the damned, unto the possessing of the
inheritance of His Saints? Who has made us meet to enter into the fruition of
His light? Who by a miracle of His power, and wisdom, has plucked us from the
yoke of the Devil? has delivered us from the unrighteous, and murtherous power
of darkness, and to complete His graces, has translated us into the blessed
Kingdom of the Son of His dear love? Who from brands of Hell, that we were,
has changed us into live, and lightsome Stars, in His Firmament? of dead
dogs, has made us first fruits of His Creatures; and from slaves of Demons,
transformed us into Angels, and from the accursed state of Satan, raised us to
the Sacred Fellowship of His Son; to be henceforth His freemen, His brethren,
and His members? O love! O goodness incomprehensible! How have we the heart to
offend still, a LORD so charitable, so admirable? How is it, that His so divine
beneficence does not transport our spirits? does not win to His service all the
thoughts, and affections, and motions that we have? Christians, all the
acknowledgement He demands of you, for so much good done you, is but that you
live holy. Refuse Him not so just, and so reasonable a due. He has made you to
partake of the inheritance of Saints; Be not ye so ungrateful, as to mix with
the profane. Be ye separate from them, and have no communion with the impurity,
and ordure of their vices. Despise not, as Esau, the title you have to so
precious an inheritance; Let it be dearer to you, than all the perishing
provisions, and delights of the earth; none of which is better, than that
pitiful pottage of Lentils, for which the profane man did truck away His
birthright. This inheritance is in light. Live then, as children of light. Let
your conversation be all radiant with those divine, and heavenly virtues, which
the Gospel of your Savior recommendeth unto you. The darkness is now passed.
The Sun of righteousness is at his full height. Let that infamous power of
darkness, under which you sometime groaned, have no more authority over you.
Open all your understanding, that you may perceive the glory of the LORD; and
suffer no more abuse by the illusions of error. Labor to increase your light,
being still at the Scriptures of GOD, the living spring of all spiritual
illumination; the inexhaustible treasure of saving knowledge. But let this
light shine also in your manners: For it is to no purpose, to renounce the
darkness of superstition; if you remain in that of vice. 1 John 2.11.
He that hates his Brother, (says St. John) is in darkness, and walks in
darkness, and knows not whither he goes; for darkness has blinded his eyes.
Remember, you are no longer in the School of Satan, the Prince of darkness. You
are in the Kingdom of the Son of GOD. Have thoughts, and do actions, worthy of
so glorious a condition. Let it purify your life of all stench, and
sordidness. Let it elevate your hearts above mortal things, and set them in
Heaven, the residence of this Divine royalty. But, Dear Brethren, as this Text
does oblige us to a singular studious pursuit of Sanctification; so opens it
to us a living source of consolation, and joy. For if we knew our blessings,
and that wonderful grace which the Father has showed us, what were there more
happy than we? We have part in the heritage of Saints. The kingdom of the
beloved Son of GOD has been given us. O great, and magnificent portion! Let
the world boast of, and adore, its gold, its honors, and its delights, as much
as it lists: we have that better part, which alone is sufficient to make us
eternally happy, though we should be deprived of all the rest. Christian, if
the world bereave you of what you have in its fee, and jurisdiction; consider,
it cannot take from you the inheritance of Saints. If it deny you its Leeks,
and Onions, and Fleshpots; it shall not be able to debarr you, from that
divine light, which shines on you, and which, in spite of all its attempts,
shall conduct you to your bliss-ful Canaan. If it take from you its honors, if
it drive you even out of its earth, it shall not be able, to wrest the Kingdom
of the Son of GOD from you, nor sequester that dignity, and glory, which you
possess in it. This is not a corruptible Kingdom; it is not like those of the
earth, that are subject to a thousand, and a thousand disgraces, miseries, and
mutations. It Is an immortal Kingdom, firmer than the Heavens; so abundant in
glory, and in goodness, that it changes all those, who have part in it, into
Kings, and Priests. Faithful Brethren, content we our selves with so
advantageous a portion. Let us enjoy it for the present by a lively, and an
established hope, sweetly bearing the incommodities of this small journey we
take, to get to it, and patiently expect that blessed day, on which our
Heavenly Father, having finished the work of His grace, will raise us all up
into His glory, and put on our heads, the crowns of life, and immortality,
which he has promised us in the eternal Communion of His well-beloved Son. To
whom with the Father, and the Holy Spirit, the true, and only GOD, blessed for
ever, be all honor, and praise, to Ages of Ages. Amen.

THE VI. SERMON.
COL. I. Ver. XIV. Verse. XIV. In whom we have redemption by His blood, to wit,
the remission of sins.


DEar Brethren, As the true, and thorough knowledge of that great Redeemer,
whose remembrance we are at this day to celebrate, is the only foundation of
the piety, and salvation of men: in like manner on the contrary, ignorance of
His person, of His offices, and of His benefits, is the source of those errors,
and abuses, which have corrupted religion, and consequently, of that
unhappiness, into which the unbelieving, the profane, the superstitious, and
the heretical, do fall. We may say to all these people; Joh. 4.10.
as our LORD sometime did to the woman of Samaria, If you knew, who He is, that
speaks to you, in our Gospel, you would ask of Him, the refreshment, and
consolation of your souls; and He would give you living water, 1 Cor. 2.8.
springing up to everlasting life. And as St. Paul said of the ancient Jews;
that if they had known the wisdom of GOD, they would never have crucified the
LORD of glory. So may we say, to all the enemies of Godliness in general; that
if they knew JESUS, the Wisdom, and Word of the Father, they would not wrong,
either His truth, or those that make profession of it. JESUS, rightly, and
thoroughly known, believed, and apprehended, is enough to expel error, doubt,
superstition, vice, and death, from our hearts; and to establish truth, peace,
joy, holiness, and salvation, in them. Accordingly you see, that Paul, the
master of the whole world, the Minister of truth, the teacher of life, and
happiness, for the executing of this high commission, and opening the eyes of
His gentiles, and bringing them from the power of Satan unto GOD, protests,
he determined to know nothing among them, but JESUS CHRIST Crucified. He
finds, in this rich, and inexhaustible subject, all that was necessary for
him, to convert Infidels, to confirm believers, to comfort the afflicted, to
reduce the strayed, and recover such as had erred. He finds in it, wherewith to
confute the Philosophy of the Pagans, wherewith to abase the presumption of the
Jews, wherewith to instruct the ignorant, and to convince the intelligent. It Is
with the sole science of this JESUS, that He plucketh men off from idolatry,
and sets them free from the slavery of vice. It Is with the same again, that he
reformeth the abuses, and cures the wounds which error has caused in the
Church. It is his weapon, against enemies without, and against the seditious
within. It Is with this Science he builds the House of GOD; it is with the
same also, that he cleanses, and keeps it pure. Whatever the enemy be, that
appears, he sets against him nothing at all, but his Crucified JESUS. For even
as in nature, no sooner does the Sun appear in our horizon, opening its
beautiful, and brightsome visage to the world, but the shade, and cloudiness,
that filled the air, does immediately vanish away; so in the Church, when the
LORD JESUS arises in the hearts of men, there shedding abroad the riches of
His saving light, and showing His fairness to open view; at the same instant,
error and abuse do disappear, being unable to sustain the force of this divine
brightness: and as the Psalmist sings on another occasion; If He arise His
enemies are dispersed, and they that are against Him, flee before Him. He
drives them away, as wind does the smoke. This then is the only assured means,
either to preserve, or recover truth, and the purity of heavenly doctrine, even
to propose JESUS CHRIST incessantly to the faithful, and diligently show them,
all His riches, all His Virtue, and His Grace. This is the Apostle's method.
Thus he does on all occasions, still reducing his Scholars to JESUS CHRIST. So
you see in the Epistle to the Hebrews, that he might put-by the shadows of the
Jewish Law, wherewith some of that Nation endeavored to darken the Gospel; he
shows them, at the beginning, the majesty, and divinity of the LORD JESUS,
setting Him up above men, and Angels, on the Throne of a super-eminent glory.
Thus he does in this Epistle, and indeed, he combateth here a like error. For
after he had saluted the Colossians, and given them some tokens of the
affection he bore them, as you heard before, he now begins to speak to them
of JESUS CHRIST, discovering His Divine glory, and the fullness of His goodness,
to them; that being content with so rich a treasure, they might not go beg,
either the succor of Moses, or the assistance of Philosophy, for the saving of
their souls. It is precisely at the Text we have read, that he begins this
excellent discourse. For having before thanked GOD for the grace, He had showed
the Colossians, in translating them into the Kingdom of His well-beloved Son,
he takes occasion from thence to speak of Him, adding, In whom we have
deliverance by His blood, to wit, the remission of sins. This is the great
benefit, we have received from GOD, by means of JESUS CHRIST. Then he
describes, in connection herewith, the excellency, and divinity of His person,
Who is, says he, the image of the invisible GOD, the firstborn of every
creature. But, for this time, we will content our selves with the first point,
the meditating whereof, as you see, My Brethren, is very suitable to the action
of the Holy Supper, to which we are invited; wherein, the remission of sins,
which we have in JESUS CHRIST, is sealed to us by His Sacrament; wherein the
blood, by which He has purchased it, is represented, and communicated to us;
wherein JESUS, the Author of this benefit, is pourtrayed before our eyes, as
broken, and dead for us, and as feeding us to everlasting life. Lift we up then
our hearts, with religious attention, that having rightly comprehended, both
the greatness of the grace of GOD, and the excellency of His CHRIST, we may
present Him, souls lively affected, with sense of His goodness; and may
receive, in consequence of it, that joy, and blessed life, which He promises
to all those, that shall approach Him, with such a disposition. To aid you in
so necessary a meditation, I will examine, if the LORD please, what the Apostle
teaches us, concerning the benefit, which we receive of God, in His Son,
saying, that we have in Him deliverance by His blood, to wit, the remission of
Sins.

In these words, he briefly points out, who is the Author of deliverance even
JESUS CHRIST; what is the deliverance it self, namely, the remission of sins;
what the means is, by which JESUS CHRIST has obtained it for us, even by His
blood; and lastly who they are, that receive it from GOD, namely, we: that is
to say, the Faithful. He had said before, that GOD has delivered us from the
power of darkness, and translated us into His Kingdom. Now he shows us, by
whom, He effected that great work, adding, that we have deliverance in JESUS
CHRIST. He is the Author of our redemption, our only deliverer, the Prince of
our salvation. But whereas the Apostle says, that it is, in Him, we have
deliverance, this may be taken two ways, both of them good, and commodious:
First, as signifying, that it is by Him, we have been delivered. For it is an
Hebrew manner of speech, frequent in Scripture, to say, in, instead of, by.
And, after this sense, the Apostle declares, how it is, by JESUS CHRIST His
Son, that GOD has accomplished the work of His good pleasure toward us,
having constituted Him the Mediator of mankind; who according to the will of
Him that sent him, perfectly executed all those things, that were necessary to
put us in possession of salvation. But this word, in, may also be taken in the
sense it has in our vulgar language, as signifying our spiritual communion
with the LORD, by reason whereof we are said to be in Him, and He in us. 1 Jo.
2.2.
For though He be the Propitiation for the sins of the whole world, and the
worth of His sacrifice so great, as that it abundantly suffices to expiate all
the crimes of the universe; and although the salvation obtained by Him, be
offered in effect, and by His will, unto all men: yet none actually enjoy it,
but those, that enter into His communion, by Faith, and are in him by that
means; as that clause of His covenant expressly imports, Joh. 3.16.
GOD has so loved the world, that He gave His only Son, that whosoever
believes in Him should not perish but have everlasting life. 1 Jo. 5.12.
When it is, that St. John protests aloud, He that has the Son, has life;
He that has not the Son of GOD, has not life; which is as much, as if He had
said, He that is in JESUS CHRIST, has life; and he that is not in Him has not
life; according to what our LORD Himself said to His Apostles. Joh. 15.3.
Out of me, ye can do nothing. So you see, this sense is good, and clear, and
contains an excellent doctrine; That to enjoy salvation by JESUS CHRIST we
must be in Him. Nevertheless, because the Apostle, in this place, designeth to
show us, what the LORD has done for our salvation, rather, than what He
requires of us, for our participating thereof: I would more readily take the
words, the first way, in whom, that is, by whom, we have deliverance. And this
indeed is the commonest exposition, which the most and best Interpreters, both
ancient, and modern do follow.

Let us next consider, what the benefit of GOD is, which we have by JESUS
CHRIST. It is Deliverance, says the Apostle. The word he uses in the
Original, (...).
particularly signifies a deliverance, effected by some ransom, given for
bringing the delivered, out of the bast estate, he was in; and it is properly
that, which we call Redemption. For a man may be delivered diverse ways, either
by being simply put out of the affliction, he was in; as when a master
enfranchiseth his slave, setting him at liberty, of His good will: or when a
Creditor lets his Debtor out of prison, forgiving him the debt: or by exchange,
as when one prisoner of War goes for another: or by forcible recovery, as when
Abraham delivered Lot, by defeating his enemies, and David his people, that had
been taken by the Amalekites. The deliverance, we have by JESUS CHRIST, is not
of this sort. He has procured it, by the ransom, He gave for us; and it is
this, that the word Redemption, here used by the Apostle, does signify. But
the same term informs us also, that the benefit, which we have received of
Him, is not simply the gift of life. It is a deliverance; which brings us out
of some misery. GOD gave life, and immortality to the Angels; but He gave them
no deliverance, since they never were in sin, or misery; and before Adam's
fall, He promised Him life, it is true; but not salvation, and redemption;
because man was then in his integrity, without sin, and misery, likewise. The
benefit, we receive of Him by JESUS CHRIST, is not simply life, and
immortality; it is a deliverance, a salvation, a redemption, that not only
conferreth some good on us; but takes us out from sin, and freeth us from
misery. The Apostle explains it us more particularly, when he adds, That this
redemption, which we have in JESUS CHRIST, is the remission of sins. True it
is, the word, Redemption, is general, comprising under it deliverance, from any
evil whatsoever; certain it is also, that the number of our evils is great, and
that JESUS CHRIST has delivered us, not from one, or two evils only; but from
all. He has delivered us from the ignorance, into which we were naturally
plunged. He has delivered us, from the bondage of the Flesh, the lusts whereof
did exercise an horrible tyranny in our members. He has delivered us from that
death, which we were made subject unto, and from the curse of the Eternal
Father, which we had deserved. For which cause, the Apostle elsewhere says,
that JESUS CHRIST is made unto us, not simply righteousness: but also wisdom,
sanctification, and redemption; and in a multitude of places, that He has
brought us out of darkness, and delivered us, from the (tyrannous) power of sin
and death. But though all this be very sure; yet, in this place, he
restrains, the Redemption, we have in JESUS CHRIST, to the remission of sins;
and that, in my opinion, for two reasons. First, because remission of sin is
the first, and the principal of His benefits; the basis, and foundation of all
the rest; which necessarily leads them on, and without which, it is not
possible to reach any of them. For sin, as you know, is expressly that, which
makes separation between GOD, and us. The cause, why this most merciful, and
all-powerful Ruler of the world, takes from us, the light of His knowledge,
and the communication of His goodness, leaving us in the darkness of error,
and in misery, is neither hatred, nor contempt, nor disdain of His creatures.
It Is nothing, but our Sin, His justice, and sovereign equity permitting Him not
to crown, with His blessings, people that are criminal. JESUS CHRIST therefore
intervening, and procuring for us the remission of our sins, thereby brings
us out of the ill case we were in; and opens the fountain of celestial good,
which was before shut up by Justice. This obstacle being removed, this sluice
(if I may so say) opened, Divine goodness, recovering its natural course,
flows forth upon us, and pours into us light, peace, holiness, and life. It
is not then, to exclude these other benefits of the Redemption, which is by
JESUS CHRIST, that the Apostle defines it hereby, the remission of sins; (For
it compriseth them all; none having this remission, but they have also, upon
it, all the LORD's other graces:) but to show us the due order of all the parts
of this deliverance; of which, remission of sin is the first, and principal.
Secondly, the Apostle does this, because the ransom which the word,
Redemption, does imply, was not properly necessary, save for obtaining the
remission of sins. Except for this, there was no need, that JESUS CHRIST should
lay down His life for us. For supposing, that a pure, and sinless creature
should have lain in ignorance and misery, and, if you will, even in death it
self. There would have been no necessity, that the Son of God should have shed
His blood, or suffered death, to bring it up thence. It would have sufficed, He
had loved it. His good will would have immediately moved His power, to display
it self, in its behalf, and fetch it out of its distress; there being nothing
to hinder this natural operation of His goodness; and so the happiness of such
a creature would have been simply a deliverance, and not a redemption. But
forasmuch as we were sinners, it was necessary for our recovery, that JESUS
CHRIST should make His soul an offering for sin, and pay the ransom of our
liberty. Whence it follows, that to speak properly, and exactly, there is
nothing but the remission of sins, that should be called redemption, as the
Apostle defines it in this place; the other deliverances, which we obtain by
our LORD, being only fruits, and consequents of the remission of sin. This then
is the grand achievement of the Son of GOD, the miracle of His goodness, and
love, that He has procured, and obtained for us, the remission of our sins.
This is our true redemption. Without this redemption we should still be enemies
of GOD. We should not have any part, either in His grace, or in His glory. Be
even what you can desire, in other respects; Have all the goods of the earth,
all perfections of body, and mind; Be Monark of the whole world; Have (if it
were possible) the lights of Angels, and the riches of their knowledge: If you
have not the remission of your sins you are a bondsman, and a wretch; a slave to
Devils, and vanity, and death; since true redemption is the remission of sins.
But as without it, it is impossible to be otherwise, than infinitely wretched;
so with it, it is not possible, to be otherwise, than infinitely happy. The
repose of the conscience, the illumination of the understanding, the jewel of
sanctification, the Graces of the celestial spirit, life, and immortality, do
inseparably follow it. Go in peace (said the LORD JESUS to those whose sins He
pardoned) as if He had said, thou have nothing more to fear, since thy sin is
forgiven thee. There is no longer, either evil, that can hurt thee, or good,
that can be denied thee, if it be profitable for thy salvation. Away with that
cruel, and extravagant doctrine, which will have it, that GOD remitteth the
fault, without remitting the punishment. This is to oppose even natural sense,
and common reason: For what is it to remit a sin, save to punish it not, and
treat him, that committed it, as if He had not been culpable? This is to give
the Apostle the lie, who proclaims, both elsewhere, That there is no
condemnation to them, Romans 8.1.
that are in JESUS CHRIST; and here, that the remission of our sins is a
redemption. For if GOD punished the faithful, as is pretended, He would do it,
after having condemned them to suffer: since being most just, He neither
punishes, nor absolveth any, without judgment. And if notwithstanding our
remission, we escape not burning in the pretended Purgatory fire, how is our
remission a redemption? Is this to ransom a criminal person; to make Him be
burned? I grant, the faithful after this remission obtained, are not freed from
diverse afflictions during their temporal abode here below. But I affirm that
their sufferings are exercises or chastisements, and not properly punishments
of their sin. The LORD sends 'em them, not in His wrath, but in His grace; not
to punish them, but either to amend them, or to prove them, and render them
conform to the image of His Son, who was consecrated by afflictions, in the
days of His flesh. Such is this remission of sins, the redemption we have in
JESUS CHRIST.

Let us now see, by what means He has obtained it for us. The Apostle teaches
it us, in saying, That we have it by His blood. We have already said, how the
word, Redemption, here used, does signify, that our deliverance was effected,
by the payment of a ransom. This he expressly notes elsewere, saying, 1 Cor.
6.20.
that we have been bought with a price. Now therefore he declares what this
price is, what this ransom of our deliverance; even the Blood of JESUS CHRIST.
1 Pet. 118, 19.
St. Peter insisteth likewise on the same consideration. We have been redeemed
(says he) not with corruptible things, as silver, or gold: but with the
precious blood of CHRIST, as of a Lamb without blemish, and without spot. And
the LORD JESUS informs us plainly of the same thing, when speaking of the end
and design of His mission, Mat. 20.28.
He says, that He came, not to be served, but to serve, and to lay down His
soul, a ransom for many. Semblably St. Paul, 1 Timothy 1.6.
that JESUS CHRIST gave Himself a ransom for all. And in this same sense it
is, that we must understand, what the Spirits of the Blessed, do say, Rev. 5.9.
Act. 20.28.
when they glorisie the Lamb, for that He has redeemed them to GOD by His
blood; and St. Paul in the Acts, that GOD has purchased the Church by His own
blood. By these passages, and a multitude of others of like import, it is
evident, that the Apostle, both in this place, and in the first Chapter to the
Ephesians, where He repeats the same words, by the blood of CHRIST, understands
the violent death, He suffered on the Cross with effusion of His blood; which
He did shed forth in great abundance, through the wounds of His feet, of His
hands, and of His side. And it is a thing common in all languages to signify
life, by blood, and the loss of life by effusion of blood. But the Holy Ghost
particularly uses this manner of speaking, when there is reference to a
Sacrifice. For in such cases, the blood of the Victime is almost always put
for the life it loses, when offered: so as it need not be thought strange,
that these divine authors say, the blood of CHRIST, (who is the only Lamb, and
most perfect oblation, which all the old Sacrifices did typifie) when they
mean, the life, He spent for us on the Cross; offering it to the Father, as the
propitiation for our sins. This now, is the great mystery of the Gospel; which
was not known to men, or Angels; nor could have been ever thought on, or
conceived by any, but the supreme, and infinite wisdom of GOD: that JESUS
CHRIST the wel-beloved of the Father, the most Holy one, should lay down His
life for us, be set in our stead, and bear our sins in His own body on the
tree, and suffer in His sacred flesh, and in His most holy soul, the pains, and
sorrows we had merited, to exempt us from them.

It Is this precisely, that we mean, when we affirm; that He satisfied the
Justice of GOD for us. And the Apostle, in these words, furnishes us, to
preserve this glory to our LORD, against two sorts of adversaries: one, of them
that impudently deny His having satisfied for us at all: another, of those, who
grant His satisfaction, but do extend this honor unto others also, and will
have it appertain likewise to Saints, and even to our selves. As for the first,
they deserve not to be accounted Christians; since they reject a truth, so
clearly, and so frequently asserted in the Gospel, confessed by all the Church;
and which besides, is the source of our comfort, both in life and death: and
the only foundation of all our hopes. For if JESUS CHRIST satisfied not for us,
what mean the Prophets, and Apostles, who proclaim at the beginning, in the
midst, and at the end of all their Preaching, that He dyed for our sins, 1 Cor.
15.3. Isa. 53.5, 10. Romans 3.24. Joh. 1.29. Heb. 9.27, 28. and 10.10. and 1.3.
was wounded for our trespasses, and bruised for our iniquities? That the
chastisement of our peace was upon Him, and by His stripes we are healed? that
His soul was made an offering for sin? That He is our propittaion, through
faith in His blood? That He is the Lamb of GOD, which takes away the sins of
the world? That He offered up Himself a sacrifice for sin, and sanctified us by
this oblation, and purged away our sins by Himself? I omit, at present, other
places, the number whereof is infinite, These are sufficient to settle the
truth. For first, since our deliverance is called a Redemption, it must needs
be, that JESUS CHRIST has purchased it for us, by some ransom, He gave in our
behalf. But He gave none at all, except in dying, He laid out His life, and His
blood for us, and in our stead. Again, if it be not thus, why says the
Apostle, it is by the blood of CHRIST, that we have the remission of our sins?
If it be not a satisfaction for our sins, it is evident, it is of no use at all,
to obtain us the remission of them. In this case, we should have it, not by the
blood, or death of CHRIST, which, after this account, would have contributed
nothing thereunto, but by the sole goodness, either of GOD, or of His Son. For
to say, that the remission of sins is attributed to the blood, and death of our
LORD, because He, by dying, sealed the truth, of what He preached, in His life;
this is evidently, to mock the world. His miracles also confirmed His doctrine,
and yet neither Scripture, nor any wise man, ever said, that we have remission
of sins by His miracles, as St. Paul says here, and elsewhere often, that we
have it by His blood, and by His death. Besides, if this reason must take
place, since the Martyrs suffered to seal the same doctrine, it may be also
said, that we have redemption, and remission of sins, by their blood, which is
not read at all. On the contrary, the Apostle vehemently denies, that either
himself, or any other, was crucified for us, but CHRIST alone. These reasons do
destroy another shift these people use; to wit, that we have salvation by the
death of JESUS CHRIST, because in dying, He gave us example of patience, and
perfect obedience. For by this account, the Martyrs, whose sufferings had in
them the like patterns, should have saved us as well as CHRIST. We add, that
patience, and obedience do constitute part of our sanctification; whereas the
Apostle says, we have in JESUS CHRIST, by His blood, the remission of sins,
and not simply sanctification. What they say, for a third evasion, is no
better: that CHRIST has acquired by His death the right of pardoning sins. For
either their meaning is, that the LORD has rendered sin remittable, by the
satisfaction He has made for it; or they simply intend, that CHRIST obtained,
by His death, the power of pardoning sins, which He had not before. If they
answer, the first, they grant us the very thing that we demand. If the second,
they do thwart the Gospel, which testifies, that our LORD often remitted sins
unto men, while He lived; and said expressly, that He had authority on earth to
forgive them. In fine, that, which despair of so bad a cause suggesteth to
them, in the last place; is of no more validity; namely, that the remission of
our sins is attributed to the death of CHRIST, because it preceded His
resurrection, the glory whereof lights up faith, and repentance in us, the
true causes of that remission. But they cannot produce any one example of so
strange a manner of speaking: and to say, that the blood of CHRIST washes away
our sins, because the effusion thereof preceded His resurrection, the cause of
that faith, by which we obtain the pardon of them; this is as much, or more
absurd, than if you should say, that it is by the darkness of the night, we are
enlightened, by day; because the light of the Sun, which then shines on us, had
the darkness of the night preceding it. After this account, the remission of
our sins should be everywhere attributed to the resurrection of CHRIST JESUS,
to His ascension up to Heaven, and to the miracles of His Apostles, and not to
His Death; whereas quite contrary, it is ever constantly referred to the death,
to the blood, and to the Cross of the LORD, as to its true cause, and not ever
to His resurrection. For as to that, which the Apostle somewhere says, viz.
that CHRIST rose again for our justification, his meaning is, not that our sins
obliged Him to rise, as they had obliged Him to dye, Romans 4.25.
according to what he had affirmed, that He was delivered for our offenses: but
that He might apply to men the fruit of His death, in justifying them by the
Virtue of His blood; therefore was He raised from the grave, and crowned with
highest glory: this being necessary, for the production of those divine effects
in the world. Say we then, that the LORD, by pouring out His blood, and His
life on the Cross, did truly satisfy the avenging Justice of the Father,
undergoing for us, and in our room, that death, which we deserved: and without
this laid down, there can be no rational asserting, what the Apostle says
here, and in diverse other places, to wit, that we have remission of sins, in
JESUS CHRIST, by His blood.

But from the same Apostolical assertion, it is also very evident, that none
other, but our LORD alone, is capable of satisfying for us. For since the
remission of sins, is our Redemption, who sees not, but that if any one
procure it for us, he must be our Redeemer? a title, which, by the unanimous
consent of all Christians, appertains singly to JESUS CHRIST. Moreover, it is
by the blood of our LORD, that this remission has been purchased: so as,
neither Paul, nor Cephas, nor any other, having been Crucified for us, it
likewise follows, that no one of them has, either satisfied GOD for us, or
merited the remission of sins. ^eo Mag. Sermon. 12. de Passion.
Though their death be precious in the sight of GOD (said an Ancient long
since) yet there was none of them, how innocent soever he might be, whose
suffering could be the propitiation of the world. The just have received
crowns, not given them: and from their constancy, and stedfastness in the
faith, have grown up examples of patience, not gifts of righteousness. This
glory is due to nothing, but the blood of CHRIST. And as He is the only
victime, that was offered up for our sins; so is it sufficient to expiate them
all. Never man found favor, but through this sacrifice. Never did the sword of
GOD spare any, but for the sake of this blood. St. Paul teaches it us in this
Text, and it is the last particular we have to observe upon it. For when he
says, We have redemption in JESUS CHRIST, by His blood, he intends not to
speak singly of himself, and the Colossians: but of all the faithful, that were
on earth, and even of those, that had lived, from the beginning of the world,
unto that time. There neither was, nor ever had been salvation in any other,
but in Him. And as sin, and death descended from Adam upon all men; so the
righteousness, and life of all the faithful comes from JESUS CHRIST. Rev.
13.8. Heb. 9.15.
He is the Lamb, that was slain from the foundation of the world; and His death
intervened for a ransom of the transgressions, that were under the Old
Testament, as well as of those, that are committed under the New. His blood is
the remission of the sins, both of the one, and the other people. It Is being to
be shed in due time, gave it the same efficacy, for the generations, that
preceded His Cross; as it had afterward, by its actual effusion, in those that
succeeded it. GOD the Father, appeased by this sacrifice, ever present in His
sight, as well before, as after its oblation, did communicate the fruit, and
merit of it, that is to say, grace, and remission, to all those, that believed
in Him, under the one, and the other Testament.

Behold, Beloved Brethren, that which we had to say to you, concerning the
Redemption, we have in JESUS CHRIST. The Text of the Apostle teaches it us,
and the table of the LORD represents it to us. This is the mystery of the
bread, we there break, and of the cup, we there bless, in remembrance, and for
the communicating, of that sacred body, which was broken for us, and of that
divine blood, which was shed, for the remission of our sins. Let us carefully
improve a doctrine so necessary, and which is so diligently inculcated on us,
in the word, and in the Sacraments of our LORD, referring it to our
edification, and comfort. Learn we from it, first, the horror of sin; a spot
so black, as could not be washed out, but by the blood of JESUS CHRIST. That
remission of it might be given us, it was necessary, the Father should deliver
up His dear Son to dye, and the Son give His blood, the preciousest jewel of
the universe, a thousand times more worth, than heaven, and earth, and all the
glory of them. From this meditation, conceive a just hatred against Sin; since
it is so abominable in the eyes of this Sovereign LORD, on whose communion
alone depends all your bliss, shun it, and pluck it out of your Consciences,
and your hearts. As for sins already committed, seek the remission of them, in
the blood of CHRIST. Give your selves no rest, till you have found it; till you
have obtained grace; till it be exemplified in your souls, by the hand, and
seal of the Holy Ghost. Lay by the pretended satisfactions, and merits of men.
Have no recourse, but to the righteousness of JESUS CHRIST, which alone is able
to cover our shame, and render us acceptable to GOD. But having once obtained
pardon for the time passed, return not into it, for the future. When sin shall
present it self to you, repel it courageously; opposing to all its
temptations, this holy, and healthsome consideration. It Is my Master's the
murderer of the LORD of glory; It Is the accursed Serpent, that separated man
from GOD, that put enmity between Heaven, and earth; that sowed misery and
death in the world; and obliged the Father, to deliver up His Son, to the
sufferings of the Cross. GOD forbid, I should take into my bosom, so cruel, so
deadly an enemy.

But from this same source, we may also draw unspeakable consolation, against
the gnawing guilt of sin, and the troubles of Conscience. For since, it is by
the blood of the Son of GOD, that we have been redeemed, what cause is there to
doubt, but that our remission is assured? The superstitious has reason to be
in continual affright; since man, in whom he puts his confidence, is but
vanity. The propitiatory, I present you, Faithful soul, is not the blood of a
man, or of an Angel, creatures finite, and incapable of sustaining the eternal
burnings of the wrath of the Almighty: It is the blood of GOD's own Son, who
also is Himself, GOD blessed for ever. It Is a blood of infinite value, and
truly capable of counter-poising, and bearing down the infinite demerit of your
crimes. Come then, sinner, whoever you be. Come with assurance. How foul soever
your transgessions be, this blood will cleanse them away. How ardent soever the
displeasure of GOD against you be, this blood will quench it. Only, bedew your
soul with it. Make an aspersion of it on your hearts, with a lively faith, and
you shall no more need to fear the word of the executioner of the avenges of
GOD.

But, Faithful Brethren, having thus assured your Conscience, by the meditation
of this divine blood of our LORD; admire ye also His infinite love, which He so
clearly shows us, and confirms to us. This King of Glory has so loved you,
that when your sins could not be pardoned, without the effusion of His blood,
He would dye upon a Cross, rather than see you perish in Hell. He poured out
His blood, to keep in yours; and did undergo the curse of GOD, that you might
partake in His blessings. O great, and incomprehensible love! the singular
miracle of Heaven; which ravishest men, and Angels! What should we fear
henceforth, since this great GOD has so loved us? Who shall condemn us, since
He is our surety? Who shall accuse us, since He is our Advocate? He has given
us His own blood; What can He any longer refuse, to bestow on us? He has laid
down His soul for us, how much more will He grant us all other things, that may
be necessary for our salvation? But as this thought does comfort us, so ought
it to sanctify us. Of what Hells shall not we be worthy, if we love not a
LORD, who has so passionately loved us? If we obey not His commandments, who
has blotted out our sins? If for this precious blood, which He has given us,
we do not render to Him ours, and consecrate to His glory a life, which He has
redeemed, by the offering up of His own in sacrifice, for our salvation? And
after an example of so ravishing goodness, how can we be ill affected to any
man? Christians, GOD has forgiven you a thousand, and a thousand most-enormous
sins; how have you the heart to deny your neighbor the pardon of one slight
offense? He has given you His blood, you, that were His enemy; How can you
refuse a small alms, to him that is your Brother, and that upon the account,
both of nature, and grace? Let the goodness of the LORD JESUS mollify the
hardness of your heart; let the virtue of His blood melt your bowels into
sweetness, into charity, and into love both toward Him, and toward His
members. Discharge you, this very day, at His table, of all the bitter passions
of your flesh. Put off there pride, hatred, and envy: and clothe you there with
His humility, and His gentleness. Do him new homage; and give Him oath, to be
never any others, but His alone; presenting your selves with deepest respect,
before this Throne of His grace. Remember, both at this time, and ever after,
that blood, by which He has obtained Redemption for you, that is, the
remission of your sins. This blood is the peace of Heaven, and of earth. This
blood has brought us out of Hell, and opened Paradise unto us. It has
delivered us from death, and given us life. This blood has blotted out the
sentence of our curse, that stood registered in the Law of GOD, it has stopped
the mouth of our accusers, and pacified our Judge. This blood has effected a
renovation of the world. It has quickened the dead, and animated the dust, and
changed our mortal flesh into a celestial, and divine nature. Dear Brethren,
GOD forbid, we should tread under foot, a thing so holy; or account such
precious blood profane or common. Let us reverence it, and receive it into our
hearts, with an ardent devotion. And may it display its admirable efficacy in
them, causing the royal image of GOD, even holiness, and righteousness, to
flourish there, to the glory of the LORD, and our own consolation, and
salvation. Amen.

THE VII. SERMON.
COL. I. Ver. XV. Verse. XV. Who is the image of the invisible GOD, the
firstborn of every Creature.


DEar Brethren, As the salvation of mankind, the true end of the coming of our
LORD JESUS CHRIST into the world, did oblige Him to expiate sin, and destroy
the Dominion of Satan: so the performing of these great works, did require an
infinite dignity, and power, in His person. For as it was not possible, He
should give us eternal life, without voiding our guilt, and satisfying the
justice of the Father, and delivering us from the hold of Devils; so it was
alike impossible, that He should perfect these effects, without an infinite
merit, and a divine strength; that is to say, without being GOD; none but a
true GOD being capable of having an infinite, either dignity, or power. As then
the streams conduct us to their spring; branches to their stock, and root; the
house to the foundation, that sustaineth it. So the salvation, which is of the
LORD JESUS, leads us to the acts, by which He obtained it for us: and from
thence, to the quality, that was necessary in His person, for the executing of
those acts. Salvation is the fruit of this tree of life. The infinite merit of
His cross is as the branch, that bore this noble fruit, and His almighty, most
holy, and most divine person is the stock, or root, that did shoot forth this
beautiful, and blessed branch. This order, the Apostle observes here, in the
consideration of our LORD JESUS CHRIST. He sets forth to us, first, His fruit,
that is, our salvation, or redemption; the last end of His whole mediation.
Next He represents the means, by which He acquired this salvation, for us, to
wit, the effusion of His blood, for the remission of our sins: from thence He
now ascends to the Quality of His person, which he magnificently describes,
in the Text, that you have heard, saying, that He is the image of the invisible
GOD, the first born of every creature; forasmuch as by Him all things were
created. Wonder not, Faithful Brethren, that JESUS should give us life, and
eternity, Us I say, poor sinners, that had deserved death, and the curse of
GOD. For He purchased remission of our sins, by His blood; and did, by the
sweet savor of His sacrifice, perfectly appease the wrath of GOD, which alone
withstood our entering into His heavenly Kingdom. Neither account it any more
strange, that this JESUS, so infirm, clothed with frail flesh, subject to all
our sufferings, should be able to offer so great, and so precious a sacrifice
to GOD. For how weak, and despicable soever that form was, under which He
appeared here below, He is nevertheless in reality, the true Son of GOD, His
wisdom, His word, and His power; the perfect pourtrait of His person; His
living, and essential image, the sovereign Lord, and Creator of the Universe.

In this description of the dignity, and excellency of the LORD JESUS, the
Apostle compares Him, first, with GOD the Father, saying, that He is the image
of the invisible GOD. In the second place, with the Creatures, saying, that He
is the firstborn of them, and adds the reason of it, in the two following
Verses; which is taken from His having made, and established them all, as their
Creator, their preserver, their last, and highest end. Afterward He finally
proposes the relation He has to the Church saying in the eighteenth verse,
that He is the Head thereof, the beginning, and the firstborn from the dead,
having the first place in all things. In these three points the sovereign
dignity, and excellency of the Savior of the world, is, as you see; comprised.
But because it would be difficult, to explain them all three in one only
action; the richness, and profoundness of the matter constrains us, to fix
for this time, on the two first, and remit the remainder to another season. We
shall then have to handle, in this exercise, the two heads, that are contained
in the verse, which we have read. One, that JESUS CHRIST is the image of the
invisible GOD; the other, that He is the firstborn of every creature. The same
LORD, who shall be, by His grace, the subject of our discourse, please to be
the direction, and light thereof too; inspiring us with conceptions, and
expressions worthy of Him; illuminating our understandings with the knowledge
of His high, and supereminent Majesty; and enfl^ming our hearts with a fervent
love to Himself, for the glory of His own great Name, and our salvation.

As for the first Head, the Apostle tells us two things in it; the one, that
JESUS CHRIST is the image of GOD: the other, that the GOD, whose image JESUS
CHRIST is, is invisible. For understanding aright, how the LORD JESUS is the
image of GOD, we must observe at the entrance, that the word, image, is of
great extent, signifying generally every thing that represents another: so as
things being very variously represented, it comes to pass, that there is great
variety, and difference of images. Some are perfect, which have in them an
entire, an exact, and adequate resemblance of the subjects, which they
represent: others are imperfect, and express but some particular, nay, that too
with some defect: having not properly in them the same features, and same
essence which is in their original. I place, in this second rank, all
artificial images, whether drawn by Painters; or engraven, or cut by Carvers,
or fashioned by Founders; or woven by Embroiderers, and workers of Tapistry;
which represent nothing, but the color, the figure, and the lineaments of men,
and animals, and plants, and such like subjects; and, to say true, have nothing
in them of their life, and nature. To this same order must be reduced, that
which Moses writes; that Adam was made after the image of GOD. It Is not to be
thought, he had such an essence, as that of GOD is: but this is said, because
the conditions of His nature had some resemblance, of the properties of GOD:
namely, in that He was endowed with intellect, and will: and had the dominion
over animals, and earthly creatures. In the same manner must we take, what St.
Paul says, when comparing the two sexes of our nature, 1 Cor. 11.7.
he terms the man, the image, and the glory of GOD; whereas the woman is the
glory of the man. He calls the man, the image of God, because of the
advantage, and superiority he has over the woman; having nothing above
himself, but GOD, who is His head: whereas man is the head of the woman,
because she was created of him, and for him, as the Apostle teaches. But
beside these kind of images, which represent their originals but imperfectly;
there are others, that have a perfect resemblance of them. Thus we call a
Child, the image of His Father; a Prince, the image of His Predecessor. For a
Son has not merely the shadow, or the color, or the figure of his father; he
has his nature, his qualities, and properties, and, if we may so say, the
whole fullness of his being; a soul, a body, a life, the same with those, his
Father has. A Prince, in like manner, has not only the shadow, or the
appearance of the authority, and power of his Predecessor. He has the whole
substance, and reality of it. Genesis 5.3.
Thus it is, that Moses says, Adam begat Seth his son, in his own likeness,
and after his image. He signifies thereby, that Seth had a nature, the same in
all things, with Adam's own. Now the question is, in which of these two senses,
must we take the word, Image, when the Apostle says here, and also elsewhere,
that JESUS CHRIST is the image of GOD. 2 Cor. 4.4.
The very quality of the subject in question, shows us so clearly, that we
must apprehend it after the second way, and not the former; as even those that
quarrel it, dare not say, that JESUS CHRIST is, an imperfect image of His
Father. For where is the Christian ear, that could suffer a blasphemy, so
horrible, and so contrary to all the Scripture? Sure, when the Apostle says of
our LORD, that He is the image of GOD, he thereby means quite another thing,
then what he signifies elsewhere, when he says, that man is the image of GOD.
For intending here, to exalt the LORD JESUS, and to demonstrate, that His
dignity is so high, as capacitateth Him to save us; He would ill suite this
design, if he attributed nothing to Him, but what agrees to any man, whoever
he be. And yet if you do not understand it, that JESUS CHRIST is a perfect
image of GOD; the Apostle will affirm no other thing, of Him here, then he
asserts elsewhere of man, when he says, he is the image of GOD. Beside the
Apostle's end, the thing it self he speaks of, does evidently show it us also.
For our LORD informs us, that He who has seen Him, has seen the Father; and
that; Joh. 14.9. and 12.45.
who beholds Him, beholds Him, that sent him. Where is the pourtrait, of
which it may be said, that he who has seen it, has seen the subject, which it
represents? It Is clear, this is not found, but in such an image, as is most
perfect, and contains fully in it, all the being of its original. Whence it
appears, that it is in this sense, that JESUS CHRIST is the image of GOD. And
to make us conceive it the better, the Apostle has a passage, in the Epistle
to the Hebrews, the scope, the terms, and sense whereof, have very much
resemblance with this here; there he says, Heb. 1.3.
that JESUS CHRIST is the resplendency of the glory of His Father, and the
Character, or engraven Stamp of His person. Terms exceeding elegant, and
expressive, and such as clearly decide this case, that the LORD is the image of
GOD, in another manner, than man; and that the same glory, which shines in the
Father, is respendent also in the Son; and that the same nature, which is in
the person of the one, is likewise in the person of the other. Say we
therefore, according to the Analogy of this Doctrine, and the reason of the
thing it self. That JESUS CHRIST is the image of GOD His Father, but a perfect
one; yea the most perfect, that an image may be. An image, which exhibiteth
unto us, and represents, not the color, or the shadow, but the truth, and
substance of the Deity. The Scripture, our only guide in these high mysteries,
teaches it clearly. And to aid you, in the comprehending of it; though the
Godhead be most simple, in it self, exempt from all mixture, and composition;
yet speaking of it, according to the weakness of our understanding, to which
GOD has not disdained to accommodate Himself in His word, we will consider
three things of Him; the nature, the properties, or qualities (which Divines
commonly call, His Attributes) and His works.

As for His Nature, it is most perfectly represented in JESUS CHRIST; forasmuch
as He has really, and veritably, the same being, and same substance; with GOD
the Father. As a child, whom we call, the image of His Father, has the same
nature with Him, being truly of mankind, as He. The Scripture teaches us this
truth, in very many places; where it says, Joh. 1.5. Tit. 2.13. Romans 9.5. 1
Cor. 10.9. Joh. 12.41.
that JESUS CHRIST is GOD; that He is the true GOD. Our great GOD, and Savior.
GOD blessed above all. Jehovah, yerst tempted by the Israelites in the desert.
He whose glory, Isaiah saw in the vision described, at the sixth Chapter of His
Prophecy. It lays down the same thing also, as often as it represents Him to
us a due object of our adoration; saying, that all ought to honor Him, as they
honor the Father; Joh. 5.23. Heb. 1.6.
and that the very Angels worship Him: it being evident, that according to
Scripture, there is nothing, but a nature truly divine, to whom adoration may
be lawfully given.

But the LORD JESUS no less perfectly represents the Father, in His Properties,
then in His Nature. The Father is eternal; so is the Son; and Isaiah calls
Him upon this account, The Father of eternity. Before Abraham was, He is. Joh.
8.58.
He was from the beginning with GOD; and before the world was created, even
then He was in the bosom of the Father, His love, and His delight. The Heavens
shall perish, but He is permanent. The Heavens shall wax old as a garment, and
be folded up as a Vesture, and be changed. But JESUS is the same, Heb 1.11, 12.
and His years shall not fail. The Father is immutable, without ever receiving
any alteration, or change, Heb. 13.8.
either in His being, or in His will. The Son is the same, both yesterday, and
to day, and for ever. The Father is infinite, filling Heaven, and earth:
neither is there any thing within, or without the world, that boundeth the
presence of His being. Joh. 3.13.
The Son is in like manner infinite. He is in Heaven, whiles He speaks to
Nicodemus on earth. He is here below on earth, in our hearts, and in our
assemblies, the same instant, that He is fitting at the right hand of the
Father, in the highest room of the Universe: and though the Heavens contain
that body, and humane nature, which He did assume: yet they do not enclose His
Majesty, and all-present Divinity. The Father has a sovereign understanding,
knowing all things, present, past, and to come. The Son is Wisdom it self. He
knows all things; and if He say somewhere, that He knows not the day of
Judgment, this is not to be understood, but in respect of His humane nature,
and not in respect of His divine intelligency. Rev. 2.23.
He sounds the reins, and knows the heart of man; a quality which the
Scripture notes to us, as the character, and specifique mark of the knowledge
of GOD, asserting, that there is none but He only, who knows the hearts of
men. The Father knows Himself, and no man, or Angel, to speak properly, ever
saw Him. The Son so perfectly knows Him, that He has even declared, and
revealed Him unto men. The Father is almighty, and does whatsoever He will. The
Son has all power in Heaven, and in Earth, and there is nothing but is facile
to Him. The Father is super-eminently good, hating evil, and loving rectitude
and justice. The Son is the Saint of Saints, entirely separate from sinners,
goodness, and justice it self. The Father is merciful, and inclined to pity.
The Son is the bottom of His compassions. The Father makes His Sun to shine
on, and His Rain to bedew, even the men that blaspheme Him. The Son dyed for
His enemies, and prayed for those that crucified Him. In short, the Father has
not any other essential quality, but the Son has it likewise, and in the same
measure, with the Father.

I come to His Works. Certainly the Son Himself informs us, how perfectly He
represents the Father in this respect: Joh. 5.19.
saying in general, that what thing soever the Father does, the same does the
Son likewise. The Father created the Universe. The Son founded the Earth, Heb.
1.10. Joh. 1.3.
and the Heavens are the work of His hands. All things were made by Him, and
without Him nothing was made of all that was made. The Father conserveth the
world by His providence; the Son sustaineth all things by His mighty word. The
Father has set up the Princes, and Magistrates, who govern mankind: Prove. 8.15.
and there is no power but of Him. It Is by the Son, that Kings Reign, and
Princes decree justice. The Father saved, and redeemed the Church; the Son is
our righteousness, our wisdom, and our redemption. The Father loved us, and
delivered up His Son to death for us; the Son gave Himself a ransom for our
sins. If the Father raised up the Son; the Son also raised again His own
Temple, when the fury of the Jews had beaten it down. If the Father quicken the
dead, the Son quickneth them likewise; and the last judgment, the punishing of
the wicked in Hell, the glory of the Faithful in Heaven, and all, that refers
to it, is the work, both of the one, and the other. The Father has elected us;
so likewise has the Son. Joh. 13.18.
I know (says He) whom I have chosen. It is the same in all the other actions,
and operations of the divine nature. If you read the Scriptures exactly, you
shall not see any of them attributed to the Father, but is likewise attributed
to the Son. And as for that right, and sovereign authority, which accreweth
unto GOD, over all things, from these great, and high qualities, and
operations, this glory shines in the person of the Son, as it does in the
person of the Father. If the Father be Judge of the earth, King of ages, and
Monarch of the world; the Son is in like manner, the LORD of glory, the head of
the Armies of Heaven; the Prince of men, and Angels; the Judge of all flesh. If
the Name of the Father be great and dreadful, that of the Son is above every
name, which is named in this world, or in the world to come. If all creatures,
both superior, intermedial, and inferior, do owe a sovereign homage to the
Father, and cast down themselves before Him, adoring His Majesty, with the
profoundest respect, they are capable of: so it is clear, that before JESUS
every knee does bow, both of things in Heaven, and things on earth, and things
under the Earth, the Father Himself proclaiming, when He brings Him into the
world, Let all the Angels of GOD worship Him. So you see, Dear Brethren, that
the LORD JESUS is truly the image of His Father, since He has, and discovers
perfectly in Himself, the Nature, the Properties, and the Works of the Father.
An admirable, a singular, and a truly Divine image, which possesses the whole
form of its original, without any variation; and faithfully, and naturally
represents all the features of it, in their true, and just greatness,
measure, and nature. I confess, there are among men, sons, that resemble, in
some sort, their Fathers: but there are none, in whom such resemblance is
comparable with that of the Son of GOD to His Eternal Father. If our Sons
represent our nature, and manners, it is always with some difference, which a
piercing, and a clear-sighted eye may easily observe; and after all, there are
none, that in their life, do express the lives of their fathers totally entire,
with every one of their actions, and operations. Whereas the Son of GOD is a
most complete image both of the nature, and the life of His Father, (if we may
speak in this manner of these mysteries) all the works of the one, whether
small, or great, being also the works of the other.

This sacred Verity, taught here by the Apostle, overthrows two heresies,
which, though contrary, and opposite to one another, did sometime equally
trouble the Church of GOD. I mean, that of the Sabellians, and that of the
Arians. The former confounded the Son, with the Father; the latter rent them on
sunder. Those took from the Son His person; these His nature. For the
Sabellians did dogmatize, that the Father, and the Son were but one, and the
self-same person, who according to the diverse ways, and ends of his
manifestations did assume, sometimes the name of Father; sometimes the name of
Son. So as in their account, it is the Father, who suffered on the Cross; and
it is the Son, who sent, Him that suffered. St. Paul breaks their error, by
saying, that JESUS CHRIST is the image of the Father, For no one is the image
of himself, and how great and exact soever the image's resemblance of its
original be, it is of necessity, that it be another subsistence than its
original. A child has the same nature, with the Father, whose image it is said
to be: but nevertheless the person of the Father is one, and that of the child
another. Since then the Apostle declares here, and elsewhere, that JESUS
CHRIST is the image of GOD, (that is to say, of the Father) we must either
desert His doctrine, or acknowledge that JESUS CHRIST is another person than
the Father. But if you distinguish their persons, it does not follow, that you
must divide their nature, as did the Arians; who made it their position, that
the nature of the Father is another, than that of the Son: the one increated,
and infinite; the other created, and finite. These are two shelves, which we
must equally avoid, steering our course straight in the midst; shunning on one
side, the confusion of Sabellius; and on the other, the division of Arius.
JESUS CHRIST (says the Apostle) is the image of GOD His Father. He could not
be the image of Him, if He were one same person with Him. He could not be His
Perfect image, if He had a nature differing, from the nature of the Father. How
should He represent His eternity, if He had been created in time? How His
immensity, if He had a limited essence? How His Majesty, and glory, if He were
but a creature? Let us then hold fast this truth, full and entire; and
believing, that the Son of GOD is another person than the Father; let us
confess, that His Divine nature is the same, with that of the Father: that is
to say, that He is one only, and the same GOD with Him, blessed for ever: since
without this, the doctrine of the Apostle, that JESUS CHRIST is the image of
GOD, cannot be fully, and firmly established.

But let us now consider, how, and why, he here terms GOD the Father, whose
image JESUS CHRIST is, invisible. Sure the Divine nature is spiritual; as our
LORD said to the woman of Samaria, that GOD is a spirit; And every spiritual
nature is invisible; it being clear, that the eye sees no objects, but such as
are corporeal; such as have some figure, and color; and do cast forth from
them, some kind of species, into the air, and into other diaphanous, and
transparent bodies; through which they gliding with incredible swiftness, come
to strike our senses; things these, that have, none of them, any place, in
spiritual, and immaterial substances. For this cause, Moses, when He would
yer-while teach the Israelites, that GOD had nothing gross, or material in His
essence: nothing that might be represented by the workmanship of the pencil, or
the chizel, in visible images; does expressly remonstrate to them, that on the
day He manifested Himself, giving them the Law upon Mount Sinai, Deuteronomy. 4.12.
Deuteronomy. 4.15, 16.
they heard indeed a voice speaking, but saw no likeness at all, beside that
voice. Whence he concludes, that they should take good heed, they made no
graven image, or likeness, representing any kind of thing; no effigies of any
form whatsoever, to be of religious use to them, as a pourtrait of GOD; as most
Nations then did, and to this day still do. This truth is clear, and undoubted;
nor was it ever contested, but by the Anthropomorphites, who attributed to GOD
an humane body, and members; an extravagancy, long since condemned, and
abolished, in all Christendom. But the Apostle here terming GOD invisible,
does not merely intend, that neither our eyes, nor our other senses can
apprehend the form of His nature. He signifies also, that our very
understandings cannot comprehend it, and that it is hidden from all our
conceptions. For it is frequent in Scripture to put seeing, for knowing, and to
signify the apprehensions, and conceptions of the mind, by the names of the
senses of the body. And it is thus, we must take, what the Apostle says
elsewhere, that GOD, the King of ages, 1 Timothy 6.16.
is invisible: and in another place, that He dwells in inaccessible light;
and that, no man has seen, nor can see Him. The Angels themselves, how high
soever their understanding be above ours, yet cannot comprehend the true form,
and nature, of this supreme, and most glorious Majesty; because His essence is
infinite, and no finite subsistence is capable of conceiving an infinite being.
And therefore the Seraphim, Isa. 6.2.
in Isaiah, standing before GOD, covered their faces with two of their wings;
to testify, that they could not bear the splendor of His glory. I grant, that
through His grace, we do know something of His nature; and it is this the
Scripture means, when it says of Moses, and other believers, that they saw,
and beheld Him, more, or less, according to the diverse degrees of the
knowledge. He gave them, of Himself; the highest of which degrees will be that,
we shall attain unto, in the Kingdom of Heaven; and the Holy GHOST, to express
it to us, 1 John 3.2. 1 Cor. 12.12.
says, that we shall see GOD, as He is; that we shall see Him face to face,
and know Him, as we were known. But how fair, and clear, and excellent soever
all this knowledge be, which faithful men, and holy Angels have of GOD, either
in this world, or in the other; it is not to speak strictly, a seeing; that is
an apprehension, which reaches, and conceives: the true, and proper form of
it is object: so as this remains still firm, that GOD, to speak properly, is
invisible. But why does the Apostle ascribe this quality unto GOD the Father,
particularly in this place? Dear Brethren, he does it very pertinently; and
thereby shows us, how it is by JESUS CHRIST His Son, that GOD has manifested
Himself to us. For there is a secret opposition between the word image, and
invisible. GOD is invisible, (says the Apostle) but JESUS CHRIST is the image
of Him. This eternal Father has a nature so sublime, and so impenetrable by
any sense of ours, that without this His image, which shines forth in His Son,
neither men, nor Angels would have known ought of Him; He had remained
eternally veiled up, in that inaccessible light, in which He dwells, without
being known of any, but Himself. But now He has vouchsafed, to manifest unto
us, that which may be known of Him, by this eternal, and most perfect image of
His person, that is to say, by His Son. For first, it is by Him, He made the
world, the Theater of His wonders. And it is by Him also, He conserveth it, and
governs it, in so admirable a manner. It is to Him likewise, that we must
refer the revelations of GOD, under the Old Testament. It Is the Son (as most of
the ancient Doctors of the Church have very well observed) that appeared unto
Abraham, and the rest of the Patriarchs; that led Israel through the
wilderness, and inspired its Prophets. But the Apostle, in this passage, has
respect particularly, and propery, to the manifestation of GOD in the fullness
of time, when his eternal, and essential image did discover all His glory, to
the Jews first, and afterward to the other Nations of the world, rendering it,
of invisible as it was in it self, visible in that flesh, which He vested
Himself with, in the Blessed Virgins womb. It was then properly, that the Son
appeared before our eyes, as He is in reality from all eternity, the image of
the invisible. GOD, the resplendency of His glory, and the engraven mark of His
person. For the office of an image is to represent that to us, which it is the
figure of. Now it was principally, in this last manifestation, that the Son
made us see all the wonders of His Father; the abysses of His justice, and of
His mercy; the depths of His wisdom, and His infinite power, which the world
knew not before. The Creatures of this universe do show us, only the edges, as
it were, and the footsteps, and the bigger lincaments of them; JESUS CHRIST
has unfolded, and laid open to our view, the whole substance, and form of
them. The world, and the Law it self, were but imperfect draughts, and obscure
shadows. JESUS CHRIST is that enlivened image, in which the Majesty, the
nature, and the goodness of GOD do appear, with all their fullness.

But it is high time now, to come to the other point, wherein the Apostle,
having compared JESUS CHRIST with GOD His Father, of whom he is the image,
considers Him with respect to the Creatures, and expresses the relation He
has to them, by saying, that He is the firstborn of every Creature. This
passage has diversely exercised the Heretics. Those of them, who deny, that
the Son of GOD subsisted at all in nature, before His being born of the Holy
Virgin, perceiving, that these words place Him before all the Creatures, to
salve their error, do corrupt the word Creature, and will have it signify, in
this place, the faithful, that believed the Gospel of our LORD. Wretched
unbelief, to what extravagancies do thou lead miserable men! For, what
deliration can produce, a thing more empty within, and even less apparent
without, than this exposition? First, it renders the Apostles conception,
frigid, and impertinent. If you believe these people, the Apostle advertiseth
the Colossians, that JESUS CHRIST was born, before men believed what He
Preached; Is not this a great secret, and highly conducing to the Apostles
design? Then again, who gave them the Authority, they assume, to change the
sense of the words of GOD? St. Paul says, that the LORD is the firstborn of
every creature. By what right, do they restrain, a subject of so great, and
vast extent, to the faithful alone? The faithful (say they) are created anew,
of the LORD! Who doubts it? St. Paul teaches us, Ephesians. 2.10. 2 Cor. 5.17.
that they are the workmanship of GOD, created in JESUS CHRIST unto good works:
and elsewhere, that if any one he in CHRIST, he is a new creature. But it
follows not thence, that the word, Creature, put purely, and singly, as here,
must be taken, for the disciples of JESUS CHRIST, and His Apostles, only The
Scripture never uses so to speak. As for the eighth Chapter to the Romans,
where they pretend, that the Apostle signifies the faithful alone, by all the
Creatures, which sigh, Romans 8.21.
and are in travel together; this is a new dream, no less absurd, than the
former; it being clear, by all the circumstances of the passage, that those
creatures there are not the children of GOD, but of another sort. St. Paul
plainly distinguishes them, saying of those, that they also shall be
delivered, Romans 8.^2.
that they may have part in the glorious liberty of these: and that not only
they, but we also, (that is, all the faithful) who have the first fruits of the
Spirit, do sigh in our selves. All those Creatures are no other, than the
Universe, the Heavens, and the Elements, which shall one day be set free, from
the vanity they now groan under, and which they were made subject to by sin.
That which they allege, out of the third of the Revelation, is no whit more to
the purpose; JESUS CHRIST styles Himself there, the beginning, Rev. 3.14.
or principle of the Creature of GOD. But nothing obliges us, to take the
creature of GOD, in this place, for the faithful alone, any more than in the
other. The LORD means all the things, which GOD has created, either in the
first, or in the second world. He being the principle of the one, and the
other, according to what he had said in the same Book generally, and
indefinitely. I am Alpha, Rev. 1.8.
and Omega, the first, and the last. Besides, though the Creature of GOD should
signify the faithful in this place; yet it would not follow, that the words,
every Creature, here, must be taken for the faithful alone; as when the
Scripture calls them sometimes, men of GOD, it follows not from thence,
that to signify the faithful alone, a man may say, All men. The term, of GOD,
is put there for an adjective Epithet, as the Grammarians call it, according to
the use of the Holy tongue: the creature of GOD, that is, a divine, and
celestial creature: a quality, which evidently restrains the sense of the
word Creature, to which it is annexed, unto the most excellent kind of
creatures, that is the faithful. Whereas St. Paul says here simply, every
creature, without adding, of GOD, or divine, or any other word, that might
contract, and limit the signification of the general term, Creature, to one of
its species only, that is the faithful. Rejecting therefore these men's gloss,
as impertinent, and contrary, both to the Apostles scope, and style, we say,
that by every creature, he means, what the Scripture, and all the languages
of men, do ordinarily signify, by these words, namely, created things, the
Heavens, and the Earth, and all that in them is.

But here rise up the Arians, another sort of Heretics, who infisting upon
this interpretation, conclude hence, that the Son of GOD is a creature, since
He is called, the firstborn of them; alleging, that the firstborn is of the
same nature, with His brethren; and adding, to fortine their pretention, that
in effect, the supreme wisdom, Prove. 8.22.
which is no other, than the Son, says in the Proverbs, that GOD created it,
in the beginning of His ways, before He made any of His works; which is
nothing else, as they affirm, but what St. Paul says here; that the Son is the
firstborn of every creature; and they adjoyn also, that which is said in the
Epistle to the Hebrews, Heb. 3.2.
that JESUS CHRIST is faithful to Him, who made Him, that is, as they pretend,
to GOD, who created Him. But GOD forbid, we should rank Him with creatures, to
whom the Scripture ascribes the glory of having created them all, and unto
whom, it commands us, to give that supreme adoration, which is due to GOD
alone, and not to any creature. The Apostle, in this very place, which they
abuse, puts a most evident distinction, between the Son, and other things,
For whereas he calls them creatures, he says of the Son, that He is, not the
first-created (as should have been said, if He were of their order) but the
firstborn; an evident sign, that He received His being, of the Father, by a
divine, and ineffable generation; and not by creation. As for that which they
cite out of the Proverbs, not to urge another exposition of it, the original
text imports, that GOD possessed wisdom in the beginning of his ways (as our
Bibles have well rendered it) and not that He created it, as the Greek
interpreters have unrightly taken it. And whereas St. Paul says in the Epistle
to the Hebrews, that GOD did make CHRIST, he means, not that He Created Him,
(a conceit, which would be quite beside his purpose) but that He ordained, and
set Him up High Priest in His Church. 1 Samuel 12.6.
Even as when Samuel says, that GOD made Moses, and Aaron; He signifies, that
He established them in the charges, they bore among His people. And it is in
this sense, we must understand St. Peter's language in the Acts, Act. 2.36.
that GOD has made JESUS, both LORD, and CHRIST: that is, has ordained Him
unto these great dignities. And so from these passages it duly follows, that
the Son of GOD, was called the Anointed, and settled in His office of M^diator
(which we do confess) but not that His Divine nature was created, (which is
that, we utterly deny.) In fine, for the words of St. Paul in this place, some
answer, that by saying, JESUS CHRIST is the first born of every creature, he
only signifies, that He was born before all creatures, and perhaps, it would
be very difficult, that I say not impossible, to refute this exposition. Yet
there is another, which I judge more fluent, and indeed more suitable, both to
the scope, and to the sequel of this Text: It is, to understand by the first
born, the owner, the Lord, and the Prince of every creature. That which the
Apostle adds For by Him were created all things in Heaven, and in earth,
perfectly accords with this sense; it being clear, that the creation of
things is a true and solid title, to that power and Lordship, which GOD has
over them. Why is the Son of GOD, the Lord of every creature? Because there is
not any of them, but He did create the same; and it is good reason, He should
dispose of them, and govern them at His pleasure, since He gave them all the
being, or life, that they have. And that the word, Firstborn, may be taken, to
signify, Master, and Lord, is evident, both by examples in Scripture, and by
the reason of the thing it self. For the LORD promises, in the Psalms to make
David, the firstborn of the Kings of the earth; that is, Psalm. 89.27.
as every one sees, to make Him Master, and the chief of Kings; it being
evident, that, to speak properly, he was not their elder brother; being neither
brother unto other Kings, nor more aged than they. Isaiah says also; in His
Prophecy, Isa. 14.30.
the firstborn of the poor, to signify, the chiefest poor, those that, (if I
may so say) do carry away the prize for poverty; though otherwise, they were
born, neither before others, nor of the same family with them. But the passage
in Job is more remarkable, than any other; where mention is of the firstborn
of death. He is meant, Job 18.13.
that has the power, and the administration of death, the Angel, and Prince of
death, and (as the Epistle to the Hebrews speaks) he that has the dominion of
death. The reason of this manner of speaking is also thoroughly evident. For the
eldest-born, by the law, and custom of most Nations, heretofore were, and to
this day are, the principal of the family, the heads, and in a manner the
LORD's as well of their brethren, as of the slaves, and goods: whence has come
this kind of language, even the putting eldest or firstborn, to signify the
head, the Lord, and the Master. We say therefore, that it is in this sense, we
must understand the Apostles saying, that CHRIST is the firstborn of every
creature, to wit, the Master, and Lord of them. Which no way infers, that
himself is a creature; Lords not being always of the same extraction, and
lineage with their subjects, but most frequently of another very different. And
as it would be ridiculous reasoning, to conclude, that he that has the
dominion of death, is death it self, under the color that Job terms him, the
firstborn of death: so is it most impertinent arguing, to infer, that the LORD
is a creature, because the Apostle says here, that he is the firstborn of
every creature. We have a passage, exactly parallel with this, in the beginning
of the Epistle to the Hebrews, where the Apostle says, Heb. 1.2
that GOD has established His Son heir of all things, by whom also He made the
worlds. There you see, first, that he expresses the Lordship, which JESUS
CHRIST has over all the creatures, by a figurative word, stiling Him the Heir
of them. For that the word, Heir, was taken by the ancients, to mean Lord, and
Master, Instit. l. 2. tit. 19. S. ult.
the Civilians themselves have observed. And secondly, you see further, that
the Apostle, after the same manner, as in the Text, does found the dominion
which JESUS CHRIST has in the whole universe, upon His being the Creator of
it. For it is this he means, when he says, that by Him, GOD made the worlds.
Be it then concluded, that this Primogeniture of the LORD JESUS over every
creature, is nothing else; but that glorious, and sovereign Empire, which He
has over the whole world, and every of its parts, by the right of creation;
being the supreme, and absolute LORD thereof, as He that brought all creatures
out of nothing, and gave them every degree of that being, which they have.

Thus you see, Dear Brethren, that which we had to say to you, for the
exposition of this Text. Let us make our profit of it, and extract the uses it
contains, and the succor it may give us against sin, and error. First, it
furnishes us with what to answer those, that blame us, for having no images
among us. Tell them, that JESUS CHRIST, the only most perfect image of GOD
suffices us. This is an image, we securely honor, without fear of offending
GOD; because it is a true one, and shows us to the life, and in reality, all
the perfections of the Father: whereas the others that are offered us, are the
work of men's hands, inventions of their superstition, and images, not of GOD;
but of their own vain imaginations. Their very being visible, does discover
their falsity; since that GOD is invisible. For to represent an invisible
nature by colors, is to do much worse, than if you should paint whiteness,
with a cole; or light with darkness. Your images, O adversaries, are dead, and
insensible; destitute of the advantages, which nature has given to the least,
and lowest animals. Ours is alive, and intelligent: the source of life, and
wisdom. Yours are incapable of seeing, or rewarding the service you do them.
Ours knows our hearts, and has an infinite goodness, and power. For JESUS,
the image of GOD, that we adore, is the firstborn of every creature, the
Sovereign Master of the universe. Let us boldly address our most religious
services to Him. And since it is in Him, that GOD manifests Himself to us,
have we Him still before our eyes, seeking the true knowledge of GOD, in Him
alone. There, we shall see Him, as He is. But let this seeing, by no means be
idle; He does not set before us this most full-wrought table of His
perfections, which he has drawn to the life in His CHRIST, that we should
unprofitably feed our eyes therewith; but that we should imitate Him, each one
according to our small ability; should express in our souls some draughts of
that perfect goodness, and sanctity, which shines so gloriously in Him; and
become, every of us, by little, and little, a pure, and lively image of our
LORD. Consider, how He was obedient to the Father, charitable to men, helpful
to the afflicted, compassionate to sinners, sweet, and kind to enemies. There
is, Christian, the pattern of your life. Follow these sacred examples. Serve
GOD, like Him, patiently bearing all that He lays on you, marching
courageously, where He calls you. Love men, as He loved them, cheerfully
employing all that you are, or can do, for their edification; communicating
your goods to the poor, your light to the ignorant, your assistance to the
oppressed. Let not their badness withhold you, from being good. If they offend
you, pardon them, and pray for them; and conceive, as the LORD said, that they
know not what they do; neither their injuries, nor their soothings of you,
turning you ever from piety. Fear not the hatred, nor the force of the world.
Remember, that as this JESUS whom you serve, is the image of GOD; so He is
likewise, the firstborn of every creature. He has them all in His hand. He
commands the Heavens, and the Elements; He governs men, and beasts. All the
parts of nature owe Him, and render Him a prompt obedience; and will they, nill
they, do nothing against His orders. Having the Master of all things for Head,
and Savior, how is it, you are not ashamed of your timidity? The wind makes
us to shake, as the leaves of the wood. The least sound affrighteth us; and
instead of glorifying the LORD here, in His palace, in peace, and joy, while
His voice makes the world tremble; we tremble, while the world is in repose.
Is it this, that we promised JESUS CHRIST? Is this to bear His Cross with
patience, and resist, for His salt, even unto blood? Is this that lively, and
unmovable faith, whereof we make profession, which should carry us through
waters, and through flames, without appalling? If the Providence of the LORD
were unknown to us, our weakness would be less inexcusable: but now that we
have lived, for so long a time, by continual mere miracles of His goodness; why
doubt we so easily of a carefulness, and fidelity, we have so many a time
experimented, and had proof of? You see, on the present occasion, what
thoughts, for us, He has inspired, into the sacred powers, that govern us; and
even the supreme among them: what order they have taken for our safety, and
what care they declare themselves resolved to take of it, for the future,
receiving us under the protection of their edicts. Dear Brethren, it is an
admirable effect of the love, which the LORD bears us. Let us enjoy it with
perfect thankfulness, both toward Him, and toward His Ministers, the Princes,
of whom He is the firstborn in a particular manner. Let us not disturb the
work of His grace, by our fears, and diffidences; but assured of His infinite
goodness, and power, let us rely upon the truth of His promises, and rest upon
His favorable Providence, quietly, and comfortably finishing this short
journey which we have begun; waiting, till this holy, and merciful LORD, after
having conducted, and comforted us in this desert, do raise us up on high to
the mountain of His holiness: where far from evils, and from dangers, and from
fears, we shall glorify Him eternally with the Father, and the Holy Spirit,
the true, and only GOD, blessed for ever. Amen.

THE VIII. SERMON.
COL. I. Ver. XVI, XVII. Verse. XVI. For by him were all things created that are
in Heaven, and that are in Earth, visible, and invisible, whether Thrones, or
Dominions, or Principalities, or Powers. All things were created by Him, and
for Him.

XVII. And He is before all things, and by Him all things subsist.


AMong all the reasons, for which we have a right to the things, that we
possess, there is none more just, or more natural, than that, which arises
from the production of them; it being evident, that what issues from us,
should depend upon us; and that it is just, every one should dispose of what he
has made. Thus you see, that among all the Nations of the earth, children do
belong to the Parents, who begat them; and works, either of the mind, or body,
are theirs, that formed them, and set them forth. This right is the first, and
the most ancient foundation of all the possessions, and dominions of mankind;
the power, which men have, to give, to sell, or exchange things, proceeding
from hence, that either themselves, or those of whom they received them, did
give, or preserve, that being which they have. For if you go back to the first
sources of humane laws and institutions, you will find, that men assumed not
Dominion or possession, save of the persons, whom they had either naturally
begotten, or saved in war, by preserving, and giving the life they might have
taken from them; and of things, which they had, either made, and composed, as
buildings; or at least improved, and cultivated, as the grounds they cleansed,
and tilled. It Is from thence that were formed by little, and little, those
good, and just establishments, of Families, of Cities, and of States, and of
Laws necessary for their government, which have maintained mankind to this
present time. You see likewise, that GOD our Sovereign Lord, to justify, both
the right He has to dispose of us, as seems Him good; and the obligation we
have to serve Him, ordinarily urges this reason, that He has created us. It
is He, that has made us (says his Prophet) and not we our selves. Psalm. 100.3.
We are His people, and the flock of His pasture. It Is by the same
consideration, that He silenceth the refractory, and profane, who have the
insolence to blame His disposals. Shall the thing formed say to Him, that
formed it, Romans 9.20, 21.
why have thou made me thus? Has not the potter power to make diverse vessels
of the same mass? It Is further by the same reason, My Brethren, the Apostle
proves in this place, that JESUS CHRIST, the Son of GOD, is the Lord of all
things. Having said before, that He is the firstborn, (that is the Master) of
every creature, he now alleges us the proof of it, taken from his being the
Creator of all things. For by Him (says he) all things were created, that are
in Heaven, and that are in earth, visible, and invisible, whether Thrones, or
Dominions, or Principalites, or Powers. All things were Created by Him, and for
Him. And He is before all things, and by Him all things subsist. This reason is
clear, and invincible. For, if man, who gives, to the things He makes, only
the form of their being, working in all his operations upon borrowed matter; do
yet acquire thereby a right of dominion over them, as we said even now; so that
He may dispose of them as He will: How much more justly is the Son of GOD, the
Master, and Lord of all the Creatures, since He created them, that is, gave
them the whole being, which they have, not the form only, but the matter also,
whereof they consist? having brought them out of nothing; having entirely made,
and formed them by the sole might of His power, without any subject, for His
displaying it upon, existent, when He first created them? And this proof
clearly infers, that which we laid down, in the precedent action, to wit,
that when the Apostle there calls JESUS CHRIST, the firstborn of every
creature, He simply means, that He is the Master of them, and not (as the
heretics pretend) that He is a Creature, as they are, and only created before
them. For the reason which St. Paul annexeth, taken from His having created
them, concludes rightly, that He is Master of them; but not, that He was
created Himself. Otherwise it must by the same means be said, that the Father,
who created all things, was also created Himself; a blasphemy, which the most
shameless heretics would abhor. For if the Apostles discourse be good, and
pertinent (as all Christians confess) thus must His reasoning be; Whoever has
created all things, the same is the firstborn of every creature; But the LORD
JESUS has created all things. He is therefore the firstborn of every
creature. There you see clearly, that this first proposition, Whoever has
created all things, is the firstborn of every creature, cannot be true, save
in this sense, that He is the master of every creature; but it is evidently
false in the sense, that the heretics take the words firstborn of every
creature, that is, created before every other creature: it being clear, that
the Father, who created all things, is eternal, and sure was not created. It
must therefore of necessity be said, that the Apostle, by the firstborn of
every creature, does mean, their LORD, and Master. Otherwise His discourse
would not be pertinent. But having sufficiently justified, in our last action,
and cleared this conclusion of St. Paul's, that the Son of GOD is the firstborn
of every creature, let us consider now the reason of it he alleges, drawn
from hence, viz. that He created all things, and that they are all for Him, and
all subsist by Him: that is to say, He is the Author, the End, and the
Conserver of them. It is a truth of infinite importance in Christian Religion,
both of it self, and for its own merit; as also for the great contradictions,
it has suffered, at all times, from the enemies of the Divinity of JESUS
CHRIST both ancient, and modern, who have put to it all their force, that they
might either overthrow, or at least shake it. For this cause, we are obliged to
examine the present Text, wherein it is so statelily founded, with so much the
more care; and that we may omit nothing, which is necessary for the clearing of
it, we will consider, in the first place, what the Apostle says of the Son of
GOD: that All things were created by Him, and for Him; and that He is before
all things, and that they all subsist by Him. Next we will view, in the second
place, the division he makes of all these things, which the LORD created:
some, they that are in Heaven, others, they that are in earth; some, visible,
others, invisible, as Thrones, Dominions, Principalities, and Powers. These
shall be, if the LORD will, the two parts, and as it were, the two Articles of
this Action. May it please GOD, to guide us, by His Spirit, in so sublime a
meditation, and to enable us, by His grace, to refer it, to His glory, and to
our own edification, and consolation.

In the former of these two Articles, the Apostle (as you see) says, first,
that All things were created by JESUS CHRIST; secondly, that they were all
created for Him; in the third place, that He is before all things; and lastly,
that they all subsist by Him. For though these four points be near a kin, and
necessarily linked the one with the others, yet they are distinct at the
bottom, and ought to come under consideration severally; there being neither
of them, but does contribute something particular, to the glory of our great
GOD, and Savior JESUS CHRIST. The first is plain, that All things were created
by JESUS CHRIST. For where is the Christian, who understands not this, and
knows not, that to create, does signify, in the use of Scripture, to make a
thing, either of nothing, or of a matter, which had no disposedness to the
form, that it receives. And forasmuch as there is none, but the Divine Power,
that is capable of such an action, or operation; thence it comes, that this
word is never attributed to any, but GOD only. There Is none but He that does
create things. For this cause, among the other Titles which are given him for
marks of His glory, He is styled, The Creator; this Title appertaining unto Him
alone. When the Apostle then says here, and twice repeats it, That all things
were created by the Son, he signifies, that it is of Him they received all the
being they have; that it is He, who by this Noble and Divine manner of working,
which the Scripture calls Creation, brought them from non-being, to a being;
who by His infinite power, produced the matter of which they consist; prepared
it, and fitted it as it now is, investing it with those forms, and admirable
qualities, on which all the motions of their nature do depend; that is to say
in one word, The LORD JESUS is the Creator of the Universe. It was not possible
to express this truth more clearly. And thus it is, that all Christians always
understood this passage, until those new Enemies of the Divinity of our LORD,
who blasphemously say, that He has no actual subsistence in the world, but
since His birth of the holy Virgin; they not able to bear so respendent a
light, have endeavored to obscure it by the fumes of their frivolous and false
glosses. They say therefore, that the word Create signifies in this place,
mearly to reform and re-establish things; to put them in a better estate than
they were in; and not to bring them out of nothing, and give them their whole
being. They will have it, that the Apostle by saying, All things were created
by JESUS, does intend, not the first Creation of the World, when arising out of
nothing, it received its natural being and form from the Creator: But the
Renovation of the World, wrought by the Preaching of the Gospel, and by the
word of the Apostles, whom the LORD sent to reform the Nations, and to put
things in an incomparably better and more happy estate, than they were in
before. Enslaved they were to the Empire of Sin and Satan; whereas by the
Doctrine and Power of the LORD JESUS they have now been consecrated to God, and
sanctified to His glory. Unto this I answer, That it is true, the World was
renewed by the Gospel; inasmuch as this holy Doctrine did abolish both the
Ceremonies of Moses's Discipline, and the false Religions of the Heathen, and
formed in the whole earth a new people that serve God in Spirit and in Truth,
being created in righteousness and holiness. I acknowledge also, that this
Renovation is the work of a Divine Power, and could not have been effected by
any Humane or Angelical strength; by reason whereof it may and ought to be
called a Creation; it being evident, that there was need of no less virtue to
reform the World. than to create it. And finally, I grant likewise, that JESUS
the Son of GOD, is the true and single Author of this second Creation. But to
this I adjoyn two things; first, That though this passage might be understood
of this Reformation of the World; yet it would of necessity infer, That JESUS,
to whom it is attributed, is the true Eternal GOD. For since this work is no
less, nay since it is greater than that of Creation; it is evident, that none
but a true GOD could be the Author of it: It being clear (as we shall say anon)
that Creation is set before us in Scripture, as an Argument of true and eternal
Divinity. And the thing speaks of it self. For since a Divine and Infinite
Virtue is requisite, to regenerate men and destroy the servitude of Sin and
Satan; it must of necessity be acknowledged, That JESUS the Author of this
great work, has an infinite power; that is to say, is truly GOD; no finite
subject being capable of an Infinite power, and none being infinite but GOD
alone. Thus you see, it is in vain that the Heretics do toil them; their own
Interpretation (though it were admitted) necessarily inferring the thing which
they oppose; to wit, That JESUS is true GOD, Infinite and Eternal, and
subsisting before all ages. But I say, in the second place, that this Text
cannot be understood of the Reparation, or second Creation of the World. First,
because the Apostle will by and by speak of that in the three Verses
immediately following; where He loftily describes it, saying, That JESUS
CHRIST is the head of the body, the Church, the beginning, and the firstborn
from the dead: By whom the Father has reconciled all things to Himself, as
well Celestial as Terrestrial, having made peace by the blood of His cross. By
means hereof, unless we will render S. Paul guilty of vain babbling, and useless
repetition; we must confess, that as in this second place, he speaks of the
Reparation and Renovation of things; so in the former, he spoke of their first
Creation. Secondly, this same appears again, from his reckoning the Angels
expressly among the things created by JESUS CHRIST, yea, he insisteth on them
more than on the rest (as we shall see hereafter). saying, That by Him were
created things in heaven, Thrones, Dominions, Principalities and Powers. But
the Angels were not renewed, nor repaired by JESUS CHRIST, since that sin
neither ruined their nature, nor made it wax old, nor subjected it to vanity.
It must therefore be concluded, that the Apostle speaks here, not of the
reparation of things, but of the first creation of them; it being most certain,
that the Angels were created, their nature, though holy, yet being not, for all
that, eternal, and without beginning, I grant, that by the Salvation which we
have received from JESUS CHRIST, the Angels have been reunited to us, and
settled again in peace and good intelligence with us, from whom our sin had
separated and estranged them; and this is that the Apostle means, when he
says here beneath, Col. 1.20. Ep^hs. 1.10.
That GOD has reconciled things in heaven, and things in earth by the death of
JESUS CHRIST; and elsewhere, that He has recapitulated, or gathered together
again in CHRIST, both that which is in heaven, and that which is on earth. But
this is not to be called a creating of the Angels; nor can any example of such
extravagant language be produced, that creating of persons was put, to signify
a reconciling them with those they hated, and whose communion they avoided,
Otherwise, since JESUS CHRIST reconciled us also with GOD the Father,
incorporating us into His family, so as He is thereby become our Father, and we
His children, in the same manner that we are brethren with the Angels; it
might, to express this, be also said, That JESUS CHRIST created GOD the Father;
which no ear, I say not Christian, but that is ever so little rational, could
possibly endure. Finally, the contexture it self of the Apostles words does
evidently show, that they must be understood necessarily, of the first, and not
of the second creation of things. I confess, the Holy GHOST sometimes uses the
word Create, (...) signify the Production of the second work of GOD; that is,
the work of His grace in JESUS CHRIST. But He never does it without some
addition and restriction, that evidently limitteth the word to such a sense, as
for example, Isa. 65.17.18.
when He says in Isaiah, that he is about to create new heavens, and a new
earth; and that he is about to create Jerusalem to be a joy, and her people
gladness: The very form of this language, ordered in the Future Tense, as you
see, and those New Heavens, and that Jerusalem, which He says he is about to
create, do evidently show, that it is not of the first creation of the world He
intended to speak. So when the Apostle says, that GOD has created them both
(that is, the Jews and the Gentiles) in Himself into one new man: This latter
word New, leaves no place for doubt, but that he means here, the second
Operation of God, by which Jews and Gentiles were united into one only people;
and not of the first, whereby they were brought forth into their natural
existence: And likewise, when he says in the same place, Ephesians. 2.15, 26.
that we are created in JESUS CHRIST unto good works, which GOD has prepared,
that we should walk in them. The persons of whom he speaks Us, that is, the
faithful, distinquish'd from other men; and the end of this work of GOD, to
wit, good works; these do sufficiently clear it, that the Creation there meant,
is the second, and not the first: Nor can any reasonable man doubt of it. In
these places, and others like them, if there be any, the word Create is still
limited and circumstantiated. Otherwhere, when it is used simply and
absolutely, it is not to be taken, but for the first Creation; as when Isaiah
says, Isa. 42.5. Rev. 4.11.
that GOD has created the Heavens; and S. John in the Revelations, that the
LORD created all things, and in a multitude of the like places: Neither can
there be brought so much as one to the contrary. For as to that, which the
Adversaries allege, out of the Epistle to the Ephesians, where they pretend,
that the Apostle's saying, Ephesians. 3.9.
GOD created all things by JESUS CHRIST, must be expounded of the second, and
not the first Creation; in this they do not prove, but presuppose the thing in
question; nothing obliging us to depart, in this place, more than in the
others, from the common signification of the Word. Forasmuch then as in this
Text upon which we are, this term Create, is used simply and indefinitely,
without any limitation or restriction, the Apostle saying, and twice repeating,
that all things were created by the Son of GOD; nay, adding, to show the extent
of this subject more fully, both things which are in heaven, and things which
are in earth, visible and invisible, Thrones, Dominions, Principalities and
Powers; let us conclude, that it must be taken as in other places, where it is
couched after the same manner simply and absolutely; that is to say, taken for
the first, and not the second Creation. If there be liberty to do otherwise,
and to give it, any where, the sense we please, without other reason, then that
of our own fond imagination, who sees not, but that by such an overture, there
will be no longer, any thing certain or assured left in Scripture? For as these
Heretics, by this cavilling gloss, would deprive the LORD JESUS of the glory
of the first Creation; another might bereave the Father of it, by the same
means; interpreting the passages of Scripture, which affirm, that GOD created
the world, not of its first Production, by which it came out of nothing into
being; but mearly of a Reparation, or a Renovation of the Universe; and in
consequence hereof pretend, with some Philosophers, that it was surely long
before it was created; but not in the condition, and the form, it afterward
obtained. But GOD forbid, that Christians should ever suffer impiety to have
such a license over the Word of GOD. Let us keep religiously to the truths
which the Scriptures teach us, and receive their language with a candid and and
sincere belief. Let Heresy rise in commotion, and be as unquiet as it will,
since the Apostle, the mouth of Heaven, and the trumpet of GOD proclaims,
That all things were created by the LORD JESUS, receive we this sacred Verity;
believe it and confess it, so much the rather, for that it is not here alone,
but in diverse other places beside, that the Scripture teaches it us. For, not
to repeat here, that which we touched before, out of the Epistle to the
Ephesians, where it is said, That the Father created all things by JESUS
CHRIST; what can be said more expressly or directly, then that we read in the
beginning of S. John, where this Divine Author speaking of the Word, which was
made flesh, and whose glory himself and his Fellow-brethren saw, and who was in
the beginning with GOD, says aloud, That all things were made by Him, and
without Him was not any thing made, that was made: and that the world was made
by Him? What can be uttered, or conceived more clear, than what we read in the
Epistle to the Hebrews; where the Apostle, not content to have said at the
entrance, That the Father made the Worlds by his Son; does say of the Son a
little after, what the Prophet sings, LORD, thou have founded the earth in
the beginning, and the heavens are the works of thine hands. Hebr. 1.10.
Certainly this proof is so firm, that all the Devils of Hell shall never be
able to pluck it from us. And nothing can be imagined more brutish, than that
evasion which despair has here inspired the Heretics withal; Though, say
they, the Apostle have alleged these words of the Psalm, yet his intention was
not to apply them to CHRIST, but the following words only, Thou remainest, and
art the same, and thy years shall not fail: For is not this a plain giving the
Apostle the lie, who directly affirms, that it is to the Son: the holy Spirit
says, LORD, in the beginning thou have laid the foundations of the earth?
Besides, if this alleging of the Psalm do infer nothing else, but that the Son
is permanent, and shall not fail, it will be impertinent, and not at all
suffice for the Apostle's design in this place. For his aim is to exalt the Son
above the Angels; but if the passage he brings for this purpose, do conclude
only, that the Son is immortal, and immutable; who sees not, that by this
reckoning, he attributes nothing to Him, but what agrees to the Angels also,
whose nature is likewise incorruptible and immutable. Since then the Scope of
the Apostle is to show, that JESUS CHRIST has qualities, which appertain not
to the Angels; and since on the other side, the passage he alleges does
represent nothing of that kind, but the creating of the world, it must of
necessity be acknowledged, that it is the holy Apostle's intention to apply to
the LORD principally, this first part of the place, wherein is said, That He
has founded the earth, and that the heavens are the work of His hands. And so
you see, that the Supreme Wisdom, begotten of the Father before all Ages, which
neither is, nor can be any other than the LORD JESUS, does protest in the Book
of Proverbs, that it was with GOD, its Eternal Father, Prove. 3.
when He created the World; to show us, that it was the Governess and
Superintendant of that great work. And Moses represents it to us in the
beginning of Genesis, as far as the nature of the time, and of the Old
Testament would suffer. For he reports GOD, not creating any thing, but by
his Word, He shows Him speaking at every part of His Work. GOD said, Let
there be light. GOD said, Let there be a Firmament. GOD said, Let the waters be
divided, and let the day land appear, and so in all the rest. Whence comes it,
that so sage a Writer, makes this Supreme and unspeakable Nature speak thus,
for the creating of each of His Works. Let the Jew toil himself to the utmost,
he will never be able to give us a good and pertinent reason of it, John 1.1.
such as may content our minds. But S. John calling the Son of GOD the Word,
unvails this secret to us; showing us, that it is by this His Word the Father
did create the world. And Moses, to signify it mystically, and in such sort as
became that time, represents GOD not creating ought, but by speaking. Be it
then concluded, against the obstinate fury of Heretics, that the LORD JESUS is
the Creator of all things.

And this is so clear, that the most part of those very men that deny His
Eternal Divinity, have not refused to acknowledge it: as they in particular,
who after the name of their old Leader, are commonly called Arrians: these
avouching, that it is by Him the Father created the Universe at the beginning;
yet forbear not to deny, that He is Eternal GOD, of the same Essence with the
Father. Wherein, as I confess, they show more modesty than the rest; not having
the forehead to reject, what the Scripture does so clearly exhibit: So I must
needs say, they discover less perceivance and acuteness; admitting a truth,
incompatible with the error which they hold. For if the LORD JESUS did create
the world, as they say, in concurrence with the Scripture, do confess, it must
of necessity be granted, that He is very JEHOVAH, whom in time past Israel did
adore; which notwithstanding, is the thing that they oppose. This consequence
appears, first, from what we noted before, That the Scripture never ascribes the
action of Creating to any, but GOD only. Secondly, from that in Isaiah, the
title of Creator is given to the true GOD, to distinguish Him from creatures,
as being incommunicable to any other besides Him. Isa. 42.5. and 45.12. and
48.13. and 51.13.
It is I (says He) who have made the earth, and who have stretched out the
Heavens. Finally, the thing speaks of it self. For the Power requisite for the
creating the world (that is, to make it of nothing) is so great and so
infinite, that the Philosophers, with all the light of their Reason, could not
comprehend it; but were so far from attributing it to any Creature, that they
denied it unto GOD Himself. Whence it follows, that if there be any part of
Divine Glory proper and essential unto GOD, it is this same without all doubt.
Seeing then it is found in the LORD JESUS, we must necessarily confess, that He
is in truth the Great GOD, most High, Eternal, and Blessed for ever above all
things. As for the distinction they advance to cover their error, alleging,
that the Son was but the Instrument and Minister of the Father in the work of
Creation; not the first and principal cause, it is vain and frivilous. For this
creative virtue being infinite, it cannot be but in an Infinite subject, and in
a Sovereign and principal Agent. It cannot be communicated to an Instrument,
seeing that every Instrument being finite, is consequently incapable of
receiving, and containing an Infinite virtue; so as, since it is in the person
of the Son, it unavoidably follows, that He is not the instrumental, as they
say; but the first and the principal cause in the work of Creation. Rev. 1.
And S. John clearly shows it in the Revelation, where he says, That He is
Alpha and Omega, the first and the last; a thing that cannot be said of an
instrumental cause, which has necessarily above it another Agent of a diverse
nature. The Apostle also clearly refuteth this gloss, when he appropiates that
to JESUS CHRIST, which the Prophet uttered evidently of the first, the
principal and supreme cause of the Creation; LORD, thou have founded the earth
at the beginning and the Heavens are the works of thy hands: An Application,
which would be evidently false and impertinent, if JESUS CHRIST were only the
instrmental cause of the Creation. The observation upon which they pretend to
ground this distinction, is no whit more solid, to wit, that the Scripture
says indeed, the world was created by the Son; but not that the Son did create
the world. For first, S. Paul says in express terms, that the Son founded the
earth, and though he had not said it, who sees not, but that the one and the
other do amount to the same thing? and that His saving, All things were created
by the Son, is all one, as if he had said, That the Son created all things: But
if this form of Speech would infer, that the Son is not the first and principal
Efficient of the Creation, the same must be concluded also of the Father, since
S. Paul speaking of Him, says in like manner, That All things are of Him, and
by Him, and for Him. But that which he says here of JESUS CHRIST, in the
second place, That all things were created for Him, does further demonstrate
the same truth very clearly. For these words do signify, that the Son is the
last and supreme end of the Creation of things; a matter which pertains only
to the principal cause, and not to the instrument it uses for the effecting of
its work. Sure it is clear, that it is the true GOD, who is the ultimate end for
which all things were created, that the glory of His Divine Virtues might be
manifested, so as He might be known and served as He is worthy. This falls not
under contest. Since therefore it is for the Son, that all things were created,
it must be acknowledged, that He is the true Eternal GOD; it being not possible
that a Creature should be the end, for which all things were created. From
thence the Apostle concludes in the third place, That JESUS CHRIST is before
all things. For since He created them all, it must of necessity be, that He
should subsist, before they were. And he notes it expressly, that none might
suspect Him of novelty, as if he He had not been, but since Moses, under color
of His having not been manifested, till the fullness of time. John 8.
He is not only before Moses and Abraham (as Himself says in S. John) but
before all things, from the beginning, before there was any thing created,
before the mountains were settled, Prove. 8.
and before the hills. As says Wisdom, that is, the Son himself, in the Book
of the Proverbs. But the Apostle, after having thus given to the LORD JESUS,
the glory of creating all things, passes on further, and attributes to Him
the preservation of them. All things (says he) subsist by him. It Is this,
which he expresses otherwhere, in other terms, when he says, Hebr. 1.3.
That he sustaineth all things by His powerful word: that is to say, He
preserves them by His Providence, as He created them by His virtue; their
being, their life, and their motion, so depending on Him, that when He hides
His face they are troubled, and fail utterly, and return unto their dust, or
their nothing, as the Prophet sings. Whence yet again appears, Psalm. 104.29.
that He is the true GOD, the Eternal one, blessed for ever, with the Father;
forasmuch as this preservation of the Universe, is one of the highest and most
incommunicable glories of the Deity.

Let us now consider, what are those things, whose Creation and Conservation
the Apostle does attribute to the Son of GOD: All things (says he) were
created by Him; those that are in heaven, and those that are in earth; visible
and invisible, whether they be Thrones, or Dominions, or Principalities, or
Powers. He leaves not any Creature, of higher, or of middle, or of lower rank,
without the reach of his assertion; and for the enclosing of them all within
it, he makes use first of a division taken from their elements, I mean, the
places where their natural abode is, saying, Things in heaven, and things in
earth. The Scripture speaks often of them, in the same manner. As when we are
forbidden in the Decalogue, to make Religious use of any Image, or the likeness
of any thing whatever, Thou shall not make thee (says the LORD) any image, of
things that are in heaven above, or in the earth beneath, or in the waters
under the earth. By Heaven he means, not only that vast Region, where we see
the Sun and the other Stars to be lifted up: But also Paradise, the Habitation
of Angels, and of the souls of Saints above: and this void space, where the
Fowls do fly, and where the Showers, and the Thunders, and the other Meteors,
are formed below. By Earth, he means this whole Globe wherein we live, with
the waters that run in stream, or do float here. There being then no creature,
but is in one of these two places; it is evident, he does comprize them all, by
saying, The things that are in heaven, and those that are in earth. But he
adds yet another division no less general, taken from the quality of the
things themselves; which all are, either visible, as the Heavens, the Elements,
the Plants; and the living Creatures; or invisible, as the Devils, and the
Angels, and the souls of men. And to the end none might imagine that the good
Angels, by reason of the excellency of their admirable nature, were excepted
from this number, the Apostle makes expressest mention of them, giving a touch
at the false Teachers thereby, who taught the worshipping of Angels, as he will
show hereafter. To refute this error, he ranketh them by name, among the things
that were created by JESUS CHRIST, and that depend on Him, and were made for
Him. For there is no doubt, but they are the holy Angels, whom he calls here
Thrones, Rom 8.37. Ephesians. 1.21.
Dominions, Principalities and Powers: And he uses these words so often in
this sense, as in the Epistle to the Romans, and to the Ephesians, and
elsewhere, that I wonder not a little at some Expositors, who give them here
another reference. There is great likelihood that this diversity of names does
signify a great difference among the Angels. Indeed, there is no sort of
Creatures in the whole Universe, but an admirable variety is found among them;
that Sovereign Wisdom which has formed them, having pleased to set forth the
infinite riches of His power and understanding, in the diversity of those
ranks, qualities and functions by which He has distinguished things, which are
otherwise of a like, yea, of the same nature. To pass by the rest, who can
reckon up the differences of estates, of conditions, of temperaments and
inclinations, which are observed among men? All of them have the same nature,
none have the same form, nor the same countenance. We may not doubt, but that
there is something semblable among the Angels, and that in their intelligible
World, there is some image of that variety, which renders our visible one so
beautiful, and so mervellous. The Apostle to express this difference of their
Orders, uses the names of those diverse degrees which are found in the States
and Polities of the world; where are Thrones; that is, Monarchs and Kings;
Dominions, that is, Dignities, which though very high, yet art beneath Kings,
as Dukes and Archdukes; then Principalities, as the Governors of Cities and
Provinces; and lastly, Powers, such as inferior Magistrates are, whom the
Latins in the Apostle's time, did call by the very name that we read here, and
it is yet in use Il podesta.
among the people of Italy. From whence, in my opinion, it may be with reason
concluded, that there is a diversity of charges and Ministries among the
Angels. If you ask me, what the Orders of them be, and how many, and what the
difference between them is, and whether it consist in qualities of their
nature, or only in the employments GOD has given them; I am not ashamed to
confess unto you freely, with Exchir^d. c. 58.
S. Augustine, that I cannot tell; the Scripture, which alone could inform us,
having declared nothing about it to us. As for that which the Roman Schools do
sound withal upon this matter, of nine Orders of the Celestial Hierarchy; it is
but the fansyings of a man, that having overmuch leisure, amused himself to
fashion the same, with the least unhandsomness he could, in imitation of some
fond Jewish imaginations of like nature; and to make them weigh the more, did
set them forth under the holy and venerable name of Dionysius the Areopagite;
the frigid frothiness of his pufft-up style, his quirks, and his vanity, and
his whole air, being infinitely far from the gravity, modesty and simplicity of
the Apostles Scholars, do sufficiently show, that he is nothing less than what
he affirms himself to be: and indeed, long since, some testimonies urged out of
his Books by Heretics, Council. tom. l. 855. Ep. Joan. Maro^ia Ep (...). A. C.
^32.
have been rejected by the Orthodox, as Apocryphal and uncertain, and such as
were not S. Denys's at all. Laying aside therefore, beloved Brethren, the empty
and vain Authorities of an humane spirit, let us content our selves with what
the Apostle has told us in this subject, and let us diligently make our profit
of His Divine instructions.

Let us learn from them first, to adore the LORD JESUS as Creator of the
Universe; and to acknowledge by this work of His, His true and eternal
Divinity. Let no objection, or carnal difficulty; let no Heretical subtilty,
ever pluck up this sacred truth out of our hearts. Let us oppose the Apostl's
Authority, against all that men and Devils can say or invent to the contrary.
And admire we constantly, the goodness, and the wisdom of the Father, who gave
us such a Savior as our necessity did require. For none was able to repair us,
but He that first made us; and the hand alone which created us, could restore
us to that blessed state, from whence we had fallen by sin. And since GOD has
given us for Mediator, and the Prince of our Salvation, the same whom this
great frame had for its Creator, let us embrace Him with a firm belief. Be we
content with His fullness, and regard none beside Him, in heaven or in earth.
The Angels, how sublime soever their nature and their dignity be, after all,
are but creatures: not to speak of men, who beside the infirmity of their
being, were all conceived in sin. But it is not enough to confess, that the
LORD JESUS is the Creator of all things, and to acknowledge Him for our only
Savior and Mediator; this Faith must work and fructify in us, it must spread
it self into all the parts of our life, must sanctify our affections and
actions, arm us against all the temptations of the enemy, comfort us in
affliction, and assure us against every fear. For since JESUS has created this
grand Universe; since Thrones and Dominions are the work of His hands; since it
is by His Providence, that this All subsisteth in the state it is; who sees
not, with what Devotion we should serve so Puissant a Monarch? This earth, that
bears you; this air, that you breath; these heavens, that shine on you; these
plants, and these living creatures, that nourish or refresh you; and these
Celestial Powers, which encamp about you; all these things are productions of
His power, and presents from His bounty. In like manner, your own nature; this
body so skilfully composed, and that soul which enliveneth it, are works of His
Providence, which neither were created, nor do now subsist, but by Him. Is it
not reasonable, that you should consecrate to His glory, what you do hold only
from His Grace? Remember also what the Apostle adds, That as all things were
created by Him, so they were made for him. Do not frustrate your Creator of His
intentions. Live for His glory, since it was for it you were created. For if
the Heavens and the Elements, and the Winds, and the Meteors, and the Plants,
things deaf, and dumb, and inanimate, do preach and celebrate the wonders of
their LORD, all of them obeying His voice, and faithfully serving His designs;
what will our ingratitude be, if with these senses, and this excellent reason
He has given us, we alone of all His creatures, should cross His counsels, and
dishonor His Name, instead of glorifying it? The glory He requires of us, is
only that we walk in His Commandments; that we abound in good, and holy works;
that we depart from all evil, and live in such manner, as may oblige our
neighbors to acknowledge, that this JESUS whom we serve, is truly a great GOD.
Acquit we us then faithfully of these duties; and assure our selves, that if we
advance His glory, He will provide for our bliss, and guard us from all that
opposes the same. For since all things, Celestial and Terrestrial; visible and
invisible, were created, and do still subsist by Him, there is nothing in the
whole world, that should make us afraid: All the Armies of Heaven, of the
Elements, and of Nature, are in our Masters pay, and neither war nor work, but
for His interests, and by His order. These very Thrones, these Principalities,
these Powers, and these Dominions, which He has exalted above all His other
creatures, do not employ the mightiness, and the glory of their nature, but for
Him, and for those that fear Him. They are ministering Spirits, sent forth to
serve for their sakes, that shall receive the inheritance of Salvation. They
keep us in all our ways. They defend us in life, they assist us at death, and
convey us up into the bosom of our true Abraham. Let us live in assurance,
under the protection of so good, and so great a LORD, that we may one day
receive at His hand blissful Immortality, the great and last Donative His
Benignity conferreth. To Him with the Father, and the Holy Spirit, the true
GOD, blessed over all things, be for ever Honor, Glory, and Praise. Amen.

THE IX. SERMON.
COL. I. Ver. XVIII. Verse. XVIII. And it is He, who is the head of the body of
the Church, and who is the beginning, and the firstborn from the dead, to the
end He might have the first place in all things.


IT is not without just cause, Beloved Brethren, that the Apostle St. Paul,
speaking of the union of JESUS CHRIST, and His Church, which was represented at
the beginning of the world, Ephesians. 5.32.
by the marriage of Adam, and Eve, does pronounce it aloud, to be a great
secret. For in effect, there is nothing in this mystery, which way soever you
take it, but is very great, and worthy the admiration of men, and Angels.
First, if you weigh the thing it self, is it not wonderful strange, and unheard
of in the world, that the Creator should unite Himself with the creature? The
LORD of glory, with worms? The King of Heaven, with dust, and ashes? The Saint
of Saints, with sinners? Then again, if you consider, the foundation of this
Union; what can be conceived of a more ravishing nature, than the birth, and
the death of the Son of GOD, upon which this Divine allia^^e was contracted,
this mystical Spouse having had so vehement a passion for the Church, that to
make her His, He made Himself a man like us, and shed out all His blood upon a
Cross? If you contemplate the form, and manner of this Union; it is so strict,
and intimate, that it perfectly mingleth together the parties, whom it does
unite, and makes them one only body, one flesh, and one Spirit; joining both
their persons, and their affairs, and in such manner confounding their
interests, that JESUS CHRIST is wholly His Churches, and the Church wholly Her
CHRIST's. The firmness of this Union is no less admirable; being such, as all
the powers of the Earth, of Hell, or of Heaven, are not able to dissolve it;
and whereas Nature has bound nothing, in the whole Universe, but time does
lose it in the end; the sacred clasps of this, the Churches eternal Union with
her LORD, shall never be undone, either in this world, or in that which is to
come, by any of those innumerable ages, that shall roll forth. Finally, if you
respect the effects of it; what can be mentioned of more glorious, and saving
import, than the fruits, this Union does produce? It fills our understanding
with light; it purifies our affections; it sanctifies our hearts; it keeps
the peace of GOD in them; it changes slaves of Devils, into Children of the
most High; it transformeth Earth into Heaven; and instead of that death, and
curse, which we deserved, it gives us eternity, and glory. For it is from it
alone, that all those Divine graces do flow down, which we enjoy in this world,
and all the advantages, and felicities, we hope for, in the other. It need be
no wonder therefore, that the Scripture does make use of so many different
resemblances, to figure out to us so excellent, and so rich a subject, there
being to be found, no one so accomplished, as might singly suffice to represent
us all the marveils of it. For this cause it borrows, to express this same
one, all the unions that nature, or art, or humane society does afford us;
comparing it sometimes, to the Union of a Vine, with its branches, or of an
Olive, with the graffs, that are set into its slock: sometimes to the knitting
of a Foundation, with the building, which it bears; or of a corner stone,
with the two walls, which it binds together; sometimes to the conjunction of a
Prince, with His subjects, or of an elder brother, with the younger, or of an
husband with his wife. But among all these sacred pictures of our union with
the LORD, there is hardly any more proper, or more genuine, than the two
similitudes, which the LORD, my Brethren, now sets before you; the one, in
those words of His Apostle, which we have read to you; and the other, on that
sacred Table, whither you are invited to the feast of His Lamb. The first is
drawn, from the natural union of the head, with its members; and the second,
from the union of bread, and drink, with the bodies, which are nourished
thereby. By reason of the one, CHRIST is our head, and we His body. By reason
of the other, He is called our bread, our meat, and our drink, and we the
creatures, whom He feeds, and quickneth. And though in other respects, these
two images be very different, yet in this particular, they agree: that they
excellently represent to us, both our union with the LORD, and the life, which
is thence derived to us: it being clear, that as well the head, as the food,
does, each of them, give life, to the bodies, with which they are united. This
has induced me to believe, that the meditation of this Text will be useful,
for the Sacrament of the LORD's Supper; for which we prepare our selves; since
for the main, it sets before our eyes, though under a different resemblance,
that same mystery of our union with the LORD, which is represented, and
communicated to us, at His holy Table. For the Apostle, to accomplish his
design, and fully show us the infinite excellence, and dignity of JESUS CHRIST
our Savior; after He has told us, what He is, in regard of the Father,
namely, the image of the invisible GOD; and what, in regard of the works of the
first Creation, to wit, the firstborn (that is, the Prince, and Master) of all
the Creatures, as having created them all, made, and formed them, from the very
lowest, to the highest of them: the Apostle, I say, after this dispatched,
considers Him finally, in regard of the new Creatures that be, that is to say,
the Church; and informs us, that He is the head thereof, and the Church His
body: and for the greater illustration of it, adds moreover, that He is the
beginning, and the firstborn from the dead; whence he deduceth this
conclusion, that so He has the first place in all things. These are the three
points, which we purpose, the Grace of GOD assisting, to treat of, in this
action, for the exposition of this Text, and your edification; The first, that
JESUS CHRIST is the head of the body of the Church. The second, that He is the
beginning, and the firstborn from the dead; and the third, and last, that He
has the first place in all things.

As for the first of these three points; it is not here alone, that the Apostle
calls JESUS CHRIST, the head of the Church. He uses the same language, in
diverse other places of His Epistles; as in that, he writes to the Ephesians,
Ephesians. 1.22, 23.
where he says, that the Father has set His Son above all things, to be head
of the Church; which is His body, the fullness of Him that fills all in all;
and elsewhere again, that CHRIST is the head, from whom the whole body fitly
joined together, Ephesians. 4.15, 16.
and compacted, by that which every joint supplyeth, according to the effectual
working in the measure of every part, makes increase of the body, unto the
edifying of it self in love. And a little after, in this Chapter of our Text,
we shall find him repeating, that the Church is the body of CHRIST; and in the
first to the Corinthians, Col. 1.24.
speaking to the faithful, You are (says he) the body of CHRIST, and members,
each one on his part. In truth, it is a figure very common in all languages, to
call him, the Head of a Society, who guides, and governs it; or who at
least, possesses the first place in it. As you see, that every one calls a
King, the Head of His Estate; and a General, the Head of the Army, wherein he
commands; and those, the Heads of their Regiments, or Companies, who have the
leading of them. Whence comes our vulgar word Captain, which, according to its
derivation, signifies naught else, but the Head. The master of an household, is
in like manner termed the Head of it; and so in all other societies of what
nature soever they be. But this manner of speaking is exceedingly familiar with
the Hebrews, as you may see in very many places of the Old Testament, where
every thing, that has the first place, whether i^ be for its authority, or for
its excellency, or even for its birth, and mere precedence in time, is called
the head of other things of the same kind. And the reason of this figure is
evident. For the head standing highest, of all the parts of the body of man;
and having the conduct of it; because it is the seat of the eyes, and other
senses, upon which the directing of our life depends; the name thereof is
very justy used, to signify, by way of similitude, whatsoever holds the
first place in any society, and which consequently has, in this respect, a
manifest resemblance of the Head, properly so called. It need not therefore be
thought strange, that this holy Apostle, makes use of this figure, to express
the superiority, the dignity, and imperial power, which JESUS CHRIST has over
the Church, saying, that He is the Head thereof. And sure if there be a
superior in the whole universe, who may, and ought to be called, head of the
society which is under him, JESUS CHRIST does merit it infinitely beyond any
other; there being none at all, in whom the reasons, and respects, which are
necessary for the founding of this appellation, are so clearly found, as in
Him. For all the qualities, actions, and functions proper to the head of the
body of man; which give it its name, and dignity, JESUS CHRIST has, and does
exercise them much more nobly, and magnificently, than any General in reference
to His army, or any Monarch in reference to His State. The first, and most
known office, which the head does the members, is that it directs, and guides
them in their operations; and governs their motion, and their rest, by the
light of its eyes, and the perceptions of its other senses, Now Princes, and
Captains have some shadow of this perfection, in that, they discover, and
observe, and sent at distance, the things that concern those bodies, over which
they preside, watching, and viewing all, that respects their interests; while
their people, mean time, quietly labor, each of them in his own employment.
But JESUS CHRIST does these offices to His Church much better, and more
perfectly. For it is in Him, that all the light of this mystical body does
reside. He considers, not only its interests in general; He knows all, that
concerns the least of His members. He never slumbereth, nor sleeps. He has
eyes, and senses always open. He sees all the parts of this His State; and
discerns the posture, and disposition of all, that is its friend, or foe, be
it nearer hand, or further off. He charily preserves it, by this Providence of
His; governing it so prudently, that there is no danger, from which He does not
deliver it; nor any difficulty, but He surmounteth it. It is He that orders
His people wars, and over-ruleth their fights, and dispenses their truces,
and will one day give them an entire, and eternal peace. The second duty, the
Head performs to the body, is, that it influxeth into all the members of it,
all the motion, and sensation, that they have, by means of the animal spirits,
which from the head, as from their spring, do spread themselves through the
whole body, flowing in the nerves, as in so many channels, which nature has
cut out, and laid forth for the maintaining of this communication. And I
acknowledge, that the authority, and powers, which a Prince distributeth into
all the parts of His State, and which cause His subjects to act diversely, each
one according to the degree; they receive thereof, I acknowledge; I say, this
is a very good resemblance of the way of the heads governing the body. But it
is far beneath, what we find in the LORD JESUS His conduct, toward His Church.
For He enliveneth all the members of it, from the greatest, even to the least;
and gives them, not the power, and authority only, as Princes give their
subjects; but the very strength, and ability to act; communicating to each of
His faithful ones, such a measure of His Spirit, as is necessary for sensation,
and motion, and all the other functions of heavenly life: as St. Paul teaches
us, in the Epistle to the Ephesians, and more at large in the First to the
Corinthians. Ephesians. 4. 1 Cor. 12.
Moreover, the Head has this advantage, above the rest of the body, that it is
of a more exquisite constitution, and temper, than the other members, according
to the rule, that nature prudently observes in general, which is, to frame
those things best, that are designed to the choi^est employments. Kings, and
Captains do deserve also the name of Heads, in this respect, their dignity
being very high-raised, above their subjects. But their advantage, in this
particular, is nothing, in comparison of that, which JESUS CHRIST has, above
His Church; not only, by His being incomparably more holy, more wise, and more
powerful, than any of all the faithful: but especially, in that He is GOD
blessed for ever. Finally, as you see, the Head is placed highest in the body
of man; this situation being necessary, for its commodious exercising the
functions of its government; a thing, that Kings, and Princes imitate, dwelling
ordinarily in Palaces, and sitting on Thrones, raised above the houses, and
seats of their subjects: so JESUS CHRIST has this advantage, but in a far
greater degree; sitting on high, in the Heavens, upon the Throne of GOD, above
the whole Church, both militant, and triumphant. And whereas He conversed
sometime on earth, that was only for a while, and by dispensation, for the good
of His body, which obliged Him to do it: even as the head boweth down it self
sometimes, when the necessity of any of its members does require it. But the
proper, and natural place of JESUS CHRIST is that lofty Sanctuary of
immortality, where He now appears in highest glory; from thence governing, by
His Spirit, all the parts of this mystical body of the Church, both those that
are in Heaven, and those that are yet on earth. Thus, My Brethren, you see,
wherein this dignity of our LORD JESUS does consist, and with how much reason,
St. Paul expresses it here, and otherwhere, by saying, that He is the head of
the Church. Whence evidently follows, what the Apostle also evidently says,
that the Church is the body of CHRIST. For if JESUS CHRIST be called the Head
thereof, for having, and exercising toward it, all the functions, and
prerogatives of a natural Head toward its members; it is clear, that the
Church must also be called His body: since this whole Divine society depends on
JESUS CHRIST and receives of Him all the light, all the aptitude, all the
sense, and motion that it has.

Upon this doctrine of the Apostle, we have diverse things to consider, before
we pass any further. First, by fixing this position, he timely fortifies the
Colossians, against that error, which we shall find Him expressly opposing
hereafter; the error of those, that would subject the faithful to Angels, and
to Moses, introducing into the Church, the worshipping of the one, and the
Pedagogy of the other. For since the Son of GOD is the Head of this sacred
society, who sees not, that it ought to depend on Him alone? that it is to Him,
it owes its obedience, and service? and of Him, it ought to receive, its
discipline, and guidance? But it must also be observed, that the Apostle gives
this title to JESUS CHRIST, with a design to glorify Him, enroling it among
the other praises of His Sovereign dignity. Indeed, since the Church is the
most Divine society in the world; since it is acompany of Kings, of Priests,
and of Prophets; the Assembly of the first fruits, and a new world much more
excellent than the old, a world immortal, and incorruptible; it is evident,
that to be the Head thereof, is a quality more sublime, then to have been the
Creator, and Prince of the Universe at first. Whereby you see, in the third
place, how unrighteous (to say no more) the rashness of those is, who give this
name to another, beside JESUS CHRIST acknowledging a mortal man for the true
Head of the universal Church. Let them color this usurpation, how they will;
they shall not be able to justify it. This is evidently to despoil JESUS
CHRIST of His royal robe, and to take the Diadem from Him, which none but He
can bear. They allege, that the Scripture verily communicates to others,
beside JESUS CHRIST, the names of Pastor, of Priest, and of Teacher, and of
Light, and such others. It is true; but it never gives that of Head of the
Church to any but Him, And the difference of these titles is evident; the
former signifying charges, whereof the faithful do exercise some portion, and
some shadow; whereas that, of Head of the Church signifies, the Supremacy,
which is incommunicable to any other, but the Son of GOD. As you see, that in a
State, the name of Prince, and of Governor, and Captain, and others of like
sort, are not given to the King only; they pertain to others also: But no other
may be called the Sovereign, or the Head of the State, besides Him, without
incurring the guilt of Sacrilege, or Treason. Yet they endeavor to excuse
them, and say, they make the Pope but the ministerial, and subordiate Head, not
an essential, and sovereign one. But this is nothing, but words arising from
their interest, and not founded in the truth of things. There is no Prince,
that would be satisfied with such language, if any one of his subjects, that
had made himself the head, and Monarch of His State, should allege for his
excuse, that he had no intention, save to pass for a ministerial head. In the
nature of men, whence this similitude is taken, we see no bodies, that have two
heads of a different rank: and if any such be found at any time, they are
accounted for monsters; which cannot be said of the Church, the most perfect
masterpiece, of all the works of GOD. In a word, it is not enough to say, that
the Pope is the ministerial head of the Church; it must be proved. We plainly
read in Scripture, that JESUS CHRIST is Head of the Church. Let us believe it,
and adore Him under that quality. But that there is another head in the Church,
be he visible, or invisible, be he ministerial, or sovereign; this we meet not
with at all, in the writings of the Apostles; not to say, that we meet with
diverse things in them, wherewith such a doctrine is incompatible. Faith is by
hearing, and hearing by the word of GOD. Let it therefore be permitted us, to
suspend our believing this other pretended head of the Church, since we have
heard nothing of it, in the word of GOD. But that, which the Apostle adds,
namely, that the Church is the body of CHRIST, this further clearly shows,
that none but CHRIST is the Head of it. For if the Pope, for example, were head
of it, the universal Church, should be the Popes body, as it is the LORD's. But
where is the Christian ear, that does not tingle at so strange, so unheard of,
and so profane language? And so we see, how vehement, and inordinate soever the
passion of men has been, for this title of Head of the Church, no man has
ever hitherto called the Church His body; every one confessing, that it is no
ones body, but JESUS CHRIST's alone. They should then grant in like manner,
that none is its Head, but He only, Since it cannot have any for Head, but Him,
whose body it is. In the next place, note I pray, in opposition to another
error of the same adversaries of ours, that CHRIST His being Head of the
Church, does not at all infer, that the Church touches Him corporeally, or
that the bodies of the faithful are properly, and substantially joined to Him;
as the members of a natural body are joined to their head: Every one
confesses, that this must be understood figuratively, and mystically; and
after the same manner, all men take the other expressions for the most part, by
which our union with the LORD is represented; as when He is called the
Foundation of the Church, the corner stone, the vine-stock of the Faithful, and
their raiment. No one concludes, that it is necessary, for the verifying of
these passages, our bodies should really touch His substance. Why then will
they infer it, from other places, where, to set forth the same mystery, it is
said, that He is our bread, our meat, and our drink? If He be our Head, if He
be our Raiment, if He govern, and clothe us, without touching our bodies with
His; why may not He be our bread, and nourish us, without real entering into our
bodily throat, and stomach? If the one be mystically, and figuratively
understood; why will you force me, to take the other corporally, and literally?
I say the same, upon the Apostles express declaring, that the Church is the
body of CHRIST. Our adversaries do conclude no Transubstantion from hence; and
they confess, that for salving the truth of these words, there is no need, that
either the Church should lose its own substance, and nature; or be really
changed into the substance of the body of CHRIST. Nevertheless, they will by
all means have it, that the same words, when the Gospel says of the bread,
which our LORD took, that it is the body of CHRIST. As if it were not rational,
and easy to say, that the bread, as well as the Church, is the body of CHRIST
figuratively, and in a mystical way. If they admit this sense, in one of these
places, why do they reject it in the other; where the nature of things
themselves, and the truth of heavenly doctrine does no less necessarily require
it? In fine, not to make any longer stay here, St. Paul clears up to us, in
two words, another question, which the passion of Rome has so horribly
embroyled, in these latter times, namely, what is the nature, and the true
definition of the Church. The Church is, (says he) the body of CHRIST. These
two words overthrow, all the Philosophizing of our adversaries, about this
subject, in order, either to the straitning, or enlarging, the Communion of the
Church, beyond what ought to be. I say, the straitning; For they admit to the
possessing of this name, those only, that acknowledge the Bishop of Rome:
whereas St. Paul allows it to all those that belong to JESUS CHRIST; and that
have His Spirit; no one of these, but being of His body, and by consequent of
His Church, in whatever place, and under whatever Pastors, he live. I say also,
the enlarging it: For these Doctors, who are so severe on one hand, as that
they give the name of the Church, only to the Roman Communion; are so loose,
and so very indulgent on the other hand, as they yield it up to the most
desperate, and profane Hypocrites that are, provided, they addict themselves
to their Pope; not requiring, as they affirm, Bellarm. 3. de Eccl (...). 2.
as any interior virtue in them to be members of the true Church, but only an
exterior profession of the Roman belief, and Communion, But St. Paul
fulminates down this, no less impious, then extravagant doctrine, by saying,
that the Church is the body of CHRIST. For no one can be of His body, without
being quickened by His Spirit. Romans 8.9.
He that has not the Spirit of CHRIST, (says the same Apostle elsewhere) is
none of His. Certainly then, it is not true, that the profane, or
hypocritical, are parts of the Church. There is no communion between CHRIST,
and Belial. The body, and the members of the one, cannot be the body, and
members of the other. Forasmuch as the Church is the body of CHRIST, it must of
necessity be concluded, that these people, of whom our adversaries compose
their Church, which have not, as they say, any piety, or internal virtue, and
by consequence are members of Belial, may well be, since they will have it so,
true members of the Roman, but assuredly not of the Christian Church; And if
the Pope do own them for his sheep; we are very certain, that the LORD JESUS
will never avouch them for His.

But it is time, to come to the two other titles, which the Apostle here
gives, in the next place, to our LORD JESUS CHRIST, adding, that He is the
beginning, or the principle, and this firstborn from the dead. Even as, when
he had said before, that JESUS CHRIST is, the firstborn, (that is, the Lord)
of every creature, he presently brought the reason of it, taken from thence,
that all things were created by Him. In like manner now, having said, that He
is the Head of the Church, he foundeth this truth upon His being, the author of
the Church; He that formed, and constituted it, and the Prince of this new
generation, He that will give it the true, and utmost perfection of its being.
For the word, which we have rendered, the beginning, signifies also, the
principle, that is to say, the cause, and origin of a thing; and firstborn
denotes likewise, both Him, who is born before the rest, and him who is the
Master, or the Prince of the rest: he says therefore first, that the LORD
JESUS is the beginning, or the principle. Certainly this appertains unto Him,
upon the account of the first creation, inasmuch as He is the Author of it; the
word, and wisdom, which did produce the Universe; and it may be, it is in this
sense that He calls Himself, in the Apocalypse, Rev. 3.14. and 1.8 and 21.6.
and 22.13.
the beginning of the creation of GOD; and elsewhere in the same Book, Alpha
and Omega, the beginning, and the end. But speech here, being of the Church,
and the resurrection; the word, beginning, must be restrained to this matter;
and we are precisely to understand, that He is the beginning of this second
work of GOD. JESUS CHRIST, the eternal wisdom, may say in respect of this
second creation, what it says of the first, that the Father possessed Him in
the beginning of His ways: and that it is the same wisdom, that projected,
prepared, and executed, all this great design of the renovation of the world.
First, it is the Son of GOD, who intervening, at the beginning, in the counsel
of the Father, took upon Him the expiating of Sin; without which, it was not
possible to found this second Frame; And though he actually did it not, till
the fullness of time; yet His engaging His word for it, being once accepted of
the Father; it had as much efficacy, as if the thing it self had been then
already executed, and performed; which makes the Apostle elsewhere say, that
JESUS CHRIST is the same, both yesterday, and to day, and for ever. He has the
same efficacy always; as well before, as after His manifestation. Without this
not a man could have been called into the state of Grace. Therefore St. Paul
says in another place, that GOD has chosen us in JESUS CHRIST; considering
Him, as the foundation of our election, because out of Him there could not be
salvation, or happiness for any one of us. He is therefore truly the beginning
of this work; since His merit is the foundation of the counsel, GOD has taken,
to make, and form it: as St. Peter also observes, when speaking of the
redemption wrought by the blood of the Lamb, he says expressly; that He was
foreordained before the foundation of the world. But beside the merit of His
Cross, which was, from all time, present in the counsel of GOD, He is further,
the beginning or the principle of the Church, another way; even by the
operation, and efficacy of His power, having called unto GOD all the faithful,
that ever were. It Is He, that brought Abraham, out of Chaldea: It Is He, that
appeared to the Patriarchs, and that led Israel in the desert, and that
inspired the Prophets. Psalm. 110.1.
Whence it comes, that David calls Him, his LORD. He builded, and kept up, that
whole ancient Church, as well as the latter, by the virtue of His word, and
Spirit. But He is again, the beginning of the Church, in the quality of a
pattern, and an exemplary cause; the faithful of all ages, having all been, as
it were, cast into His mould, as the Apostle teaches, at the eighth Chapter of
the Epistle to the Romans; saying, that all those whom GOD has fore-known, He
has predestined to be conformed to the image of His Son. And it is to no
purpose to object; that this cannot be said of that time, when He had not yet
assumed that humane nature, tempted on earth, and crowned in Heaven, unto which
we are conformed: For to this, I answer, first, that though that nature were
not really yet in being, it is enough, that its idea, and image was in the mind
of GOD, for the assimilating, and conforming His work thereto. This suffices,
to show, that He is the beginning, and principle of it. But I adjoyn in the
second place, that this work, the Church, may be considered two ways: either
in its beginnings, while it is yet but forming; or in its perfection, as
finished; when it has all the touches requisite to set it in the highest
degree of excellency, which it must abide in. I confess, the Church, under the
first consideration, had its being before the Son of GOD was made man, and
raised up to Heaven: But if you take it under the second, it is evident, that
in this respect, He is truly the beginning of this Divine work. For no one was
perfect before Him. He is, if I may so say, the first piece fully ended, that
ever came out of the Fathers hand, and His own. No one of the rest is
absolutely completed. Their bodies are yet under the power of Death, the last
of our enemies. CHRIST is the only one, that has altogether broken its bonds,
and raised up His body from the grave, and clothed it with glorious
immortality. He is the first man of the new world, that the universe ever saw;
and it is in Him, has been showed us the true form of that second nature, which
we hope for in the time to come; but which none has, or shall have for the
present, save JESUS CHRIST alone. It seems to be this properly, that the
Apostle here intends, when he calls Him the beginning, or principle;
because he adds, the firstborn from the dead: which words, as you see, do
evidently correspond, with this sense. St. John also gives this quality to the
LORD. Rev. 1.5.
Grace be unto you, and peace, (says he) from JESUS CHRIST, who is the
faithful witness, 1 Cor. 15.20, 23.
the firstborn from the dead. And St. Paul illustrates this expression
elsewhere, saying to the same purpose, that JESUS CHRIST being raised from the
dead, was become the first fruits of them that sleep. And a little after, In
JESUS CHRIST (says he) shall all be made alive: But every man in his own
order. CHRIST the first fruits; afterward they that are CHRIST's. And
otherwhere yet, Act. 26.23.
in the Acts, he says, it was necessary, that CHRIST should be the first that
rose from the dead, who might show light to the people. From all these places,
does sufficiently appear, what the Apostle signifies, when he says, that
JESUS CHRIST is the beginning, and the firstborn from the dead: to wit, that
He is the first of all mankind, who was raised from the state of the dead, and
settled in glorious immortality; that He is the first ear of this blessed
harvest, that was carried up into the Sanctuary, and offered in due season to
the eternal Father, until the rest do become ripe. This truth is thoroughly
evident. For of what other man, but the Lord JESUS, was it ever heard say, that
he arose from the dead, and ascended into Heaven? I know, the Scripture tells
us, of some dead, that were raised before the resurrection of the LORD; But
this deprives Him not at all of the glory, which the Apostle here gives Him.
For, that I may not allege, that those persons were raised from the grave, not
by their own force, and virtue, as JESUS CHRIST, but by the touching, or prayer
of Eliah, and Elishah, and by GOD's command; I say, that the resurrection which
St. Paul understands, is the rising again unto glory, and immortality. It Is a
being born again, not to the former life, which is terrene, and fading: but to
the other, which is celestial, and incorruptible. Who sees not, that in this
sense, there never was, nor yet is any raised again, except the LORD JESUS
alone? For the Son of the Shunamite, Lazarus, and the others of like quality,
at their coming forth of the grave, did reassume that same natural, and
perishing life, which they had laid down; a life subject to the same
infirmities, and to the same necessity of dying; and indeed, they dyed after
they had lived again awhile. Their death was rather deferred, than abolished.
Their bodies did corrupt, and in the end, return to that dust, from which they
were preserved for some years. But with JESUS CHRIST it is not so. He in coming
forth from the dead, retook not the life He had quitted, that is the life of
the first Adam, that infirm, natural, and earthly life, a life still subject
unto death. He left it in the Sepulcher, where it must remain, as in eternal
oblivion. He put on a new life, and nature; such as is spiritual, and
celestial, as the Apostle elsewhere terms it; a life wholly full of strength,
and glory; that is not subject, either to the use of meat, or sleep: not
subject to dolor, or death; a life appropriate to the second world, and not to
the first; a nature peculiar to the future age, not to the present. Accordingly
you see, that being vested therewith, he remained not on the earth; This is the
old Adam's element; the habitation of corruption, and death: But having only
sojourned there forty days, so long as was needful, to assure His Apostles, of
the truth of His resurrection, and to show them, in His own person, the
first fruits of the mystical Canaan; He ascended up above the Heavens, to the
true element of the new man, and the Sanctuary of eternity. Conclude we then,
that He is truly, the beginning, and the firstborn from the dead; since He is
the first of all the dead, that was born, and raised again in incorruption. But
these titles signify yet another thing, namely, that it shall be He, who shall
raise again all the members of the Church in like glory; that He is the master,
and the Lord of the dead, for the investing them one day, in their order, with
a nature resembling His own; according to what St. Paul elsewhere says, that
He will make our vile body, Phil. 3.
like unto His own glorious body. For He would not be, the firstborn from the
dead; if He did not communicate the privilege, and the possession of this
second birth, to all His brethren, that is to say, all the faithful. The
Apostle adds, to the end, that He might have the first place in all things.
Those, that are well versed, in the reading of these divine Books, do know,
that the word, to the end that, is often put in them, for so as that, or in
such a sort as; even to signify the event, and consequence of an action,
rather than the intention, or design of the agent; I account, that it must be
so taken in this place. For the intention of our LORD, in being made Head of
the Church, and the beginning of the new life, was rather to Save us, and
glorify His Father; then to obtain unto Himself, the first place in all
things. Yet true it is, that such was the success of this His undertaking, as
He actually has the first place in all things. For there are but two sorts of
things, one of those that pert^^^ ^o the first world, and its creation: the
other of those that are of the second world, and of the regeneration. CHRIST
therefore being already the Master and Creator of the former, it is evident,
that having been also established, Head of the Church, (which is the State,
that consists of the latter) and the beginning, and firstborn of the
resurrection of the dead. He does obtain, by this means, the first place in all
things, that is to say, both in those of the first creation, whereof He is the
author; and in those of the second, whereof He is the Head. This is the
conclusion, which the Apostle deduceth, from his whole precedent discourse;
there he said, that the LORD is the image of the invisible GOD, the firstborn
of every creature, the Creator of the Elements, and the Angels: and moreover
the Head of the Church, the principle, and the first fruits of the new
Creation; now he adds, so as He has the first place in all things. This
being, as seems to me, from hence, clear enough, there is no necessity, we
should make any longer stay upon the exposition of this Text.

It remains, that, to conclude, we do briefly touch at, the duties, to which
the doctrine of the Apostle does oblige us; and the comforts, which it does
afford us. JESUS CHRIST (says he) is the head of the body of the Church. These
few words, if we meditate them, as we ought, will teach us all that we owe,
both of obedience to the LORD, and of charity to our brethren, and of care, and
respect to our selves. As for the LORD, since He has vouchsafed to become our
Head, it is evident, we ought to honor Him, with utmost devotion, and submit
all the actions of our life, to His conduct. See, with what promptitude, the
body obeys the head, and with how absolute a submission it follows all its
movings. The body neither stirs, nor rests, but as the head orders. It
depends entirely, on its guidance, and never crosses its orders, or resists
its commands. The head has no sooner conceived a thing, but the spirits
forthwith present themselves at the place, it desires, and each of the members
employeth all the vigor, and strength it has, to execute its will. This is an
image of that obedience which the LORD, our mystical Head, demands of us: and
this is that, which the Apostle means elsewhere, Ephesians. 5.24.
when he says, that the Church is subject to Him. It Is in vain therefore, that
they boast themselves, to be the Church, who do contrary to what the LORD
ordains; who are subject to another, beside Him, and instead of His orders,
follow the will of a mortal man; owning another head, adoring another oracle,
keeping, what He has forbidden. Blessed be His Name, for that He has granted
us, to disclaim their error, and to hang all our religion upon His sacred
lips, believing only that truth, which He has revealed to us, in His Gospel,
and engraven in our hearts by His Spirit. But what will it profit us, to follow
Him in our faith, if we resist, in our manners? How can he avouch for His
Church, a body subject to Mammon, to pleasure, to ambition, and other idols of
the world? a body wholly bended down to the earth, whereas this divine Head is
lift up above the Heavens? Dear Brethren, let us not deceive our selves. We
cannot be the Church of CHRIST, except we be His body; and we cannot be His
body, except we depend absolutely on Him: except we cast out of our members,
the spirit of the Flesh, and of the world, and take in His, to follow it is
light, and obey it is movings. Henceforth then let us so compose our life, that
it do not contradict our profession. Let the LORD JESUS be, truly our Head; let
Him be still above us; let Him preside in all our designs; let Him conduct our
steps, and govern all our motions, and inspire into us all the sentiments we
have, Let there appear nothing in our words, in our affections, or our works,
but what is His.

But this lesson of the Apostles, does no less recommend to us, charity toward
our neighbor, than submission toward JESUS CHRIST. For since the Church is a
body, and even the body of CHRIST: that is, the fairest, and most perfect body,
in the world; judge ye, what ought to be the union, and the love of all the
faithful, that compose it? Look upon the body of man, from which this
resemblance is taken; how great is the zeal of all the parts, for the
conservation of the whole? How do they love it, and conspire for it is good; how
do they do, and suffer all things: and each in it is rank, expose their life,
and being for it? Such, ye Faithful, ought to be your affection for the Church;
this Divine body of the LORD, whereof you are members. Its peace, its
preservation, and its glory, should be the object of your highest, and most
urgent defires. There is nothing, that should not be cheerfully employed in so
brave a design. Woe to them, that have no feeling of the wounds of this sacred
body; that are not affected with its bruises, and look upon the breaches of it,
unmoved; who are so far from groaning at them, and endeavoring to repair them:
that themselves make more; rending with extreme impiety, and inhumanity, the
most innocent body in the world, and most beloved of GOD; the body of His Son,
which He has redeemed, at the price of His own Blood. But besides the
affection, we ought to have, for the Church in general, this similitude
advertiseth us also, to love ardently each of the faithful in particular. St.
Paul touches at, and treats of this advice expressly, in another place; There
is no division in the body, 1 Cor. 12.25, 26.
(says he) the members have a mutual care one of another; and if one of the
members suffer any thing, all the members suffer with it: or if one of the
members be honored, all the members rejoice together in it. Now ye are the
body of CHRIST, and His members each one on his part. O GOD! how great would be
our happiness, and our glory, if the union, and concord of our flock did answer
this fair, and rich picture? if knit together by an holy, and inviolable love,
and having but one heart, and one soul, as we have, but one Head, we did
amiably converse together, tenderly resenting the good, and evil of each other,
and each of us putting forth his power to conserve, and increase the good of
our brethren, and to comfort, and cure their evils? But alas! instead of this
sweet, and grateful spectacle, which would ravish heaven and earth, we behold
nothing among us, but quarrels, and coldness, and hatred, and animofities. The
welfare of our brethren displeases us, and their ill case touches us not at
all. The former raises our envy, and the latter stirs not our compassion.
Vanity, and the love of our selves, make us either disdain, or hate all others.
There are no bonds, which our fierceness does not break; it equally violates,
both those of nature, and those of grace. Is this that great name, of the body
of CHRIST, which we glory to be called by? CHRIST is nothing but sweetness, and
love. He has laid down His life for His enemies. How are we His, we that hate,
and persecute our brethren? And how are we His body, since we rend one another?
Were ever the members of the same body, seen at war together, the hand
assaulting the foot, and the teeth falling on the hand? If any such thing
appear, is it not taken for the effect of an extreme rage, or for an horrible
prodigy? Oh! how ordinary is this rage, and this prodigy among us? who being
members of the same body, and (which infinitely augmenteth our shame) of the
body of CHRIST, the Savior of the world, have yet no horror at the biting,
and consuming of one another, as if we were an herd of Canibals, and not the
flock of the Lord JESUS. I well know, we do not want plausible reasons, to
palliate each of us our faults, passion it self making us witty, in the defense
of this bad cause. But let our own conscience be our judge, let it remember, it
has to do with JESUS CHRIST, and not with men: if it beguile us, it cannot
deceive GOD. Renounce we then unfeignedly, all this kind of vices; and
cordially loving our Brethren, succouring the afflicted, assisting the poor,
comforting the sick, and living in concord with all, let us truly be, as we say
we are, the body of our LORD JESUS CHRIST. It Is this in particular, that the
bread, and the wine, of our LORD, the sacred emblem of our mystical union, do
require of us: they mind us, that we are but one bread, and one body, as the
Apostle represents it, Chap. 10.
in the first Epistle to the Corinthians.

Finally, this doctrine further shows us, with what purity, and sanctity, we
ought to keep our own persons, since all being the body of CHRIST, we are, each
one, members of Him. Against every temptation, that sin shall let fly at us,
let us take up this consideration, for our succor: say, shall I take the
members of CHRIST, to make of them members of Satan? Shall I defile that body,
in the ordure of incontinency, or of drunkenness, or any other debauches, which
the Son of GOD has cleansed with His blood? which He has united, and joined
to Himself? and whereof He is become their Head? Far be it from me, to commit
so vile a fact. It Is thus, My Brethren, that we ought to regulate our whole
life, for the being truly, the body of CHRIST. And if we so be, this Divine
Head (doubt it not) will love us, and tenderly preserve us. For no one ever yet
hated his own flesh; He will feed us, and set us at His own Table, and give us
the bread, and wine of Heaven; and after the combats, and trials of this life,
will clothe us with His own glory, and immortality, as being the firstborn
from the dead. To Him with the Father, and the Holy Spirit, the true GOD,
blessed for ever, be honor, and glory to ages, of ages. Amen.

THE X. SERMON.
COL. I. Ver. XIX, XX. Verse. XIX. For it was the good pleasure of the Father,
that in Him should all fullness dwell.

XX. And by Him to reconcile all things to Himself, having made peace by the
blood of His cross, viz. as well the things that are in Earth, as those, that
are in Heaven.


EVen as in the frame of Nature, GOD has set up one only principle of light,
namely the Sun, and has united, in the body of this admirable luminary, all
the brightness, that was spread through the universe, that it might enlighten
the Heavens, and the earth, and that from it, as from a common source, might
stream forth into all things, all the flame, and warmth they do receive: so
likewise in the Kingdom of Grace, the same GOD has given us one JESUS CHRIST
alone, the true Sun of righteousness, whom He has filled, with all the
treasures of wisdom, and life, that He might be as an exceeding abundant, and
inexhaustible fountain of joy, and immortality; whence are diffused, upon all
the parts of the new world, which is created in righteousness, and in holiness,
all the spiritual perfections, and benedictions they have. This is that, Dear
Brethren, which the Apostle divinely teaches us, in the Text, you have now
heard: wherein, speaking of the LORD JESUS, he says, it was the good pleasure
of the Father, that in Him should all fullness dwell. He represented to us, in
the precedent words, the excellency of the Lord JESUS's person; in that He is
the Image of GOD, the Lord, and the Creator of all things, visible, and
invisible; then next, His dignity, in that He is the Head of the Church, the
beginning, and the firstborn from the dead; concluding, that He has the first
place in all things. The Apostle now produces the reason of it, taken from the
decree, and will of the Eternal Father. For it was His good pleasure, (says
he) that in Him should all fullness dwell. And that we might discern, the wisdom
of the Father, in this disposal of the thing, he sets before us, in the words
following, the work, for the effecting whereof, He defigned, and sent His Son,
a work so great, and so wonderful, as it is evident, that without this fullness,
which He caused to dwell in Him, it was not possible, it should be brought to
an end. For it is by Him, that He purposed to reconcile, and actually did
reconcile all things in Himself, as well those, that are in Heaven; as those,
that are in earth. And for the more full discovery, of the greatness of this
Divine masterpiece, he touches also at the means, by which it was
accomplished, to wit, Peace, which he made by the blood of His Son's Cross. It
was not possible, to reunite Heaven, and Earth, and reconcile these parts of
the Universe, that were divided each from other, but by making peace, by
extinguishing their hate, and removing the cause of their enmities; Neither was
it any more possible, to procure this peace, otherways, then by the shedding of
a Divine blood, and the offering up a sacrifice of infinite worth, and by the
intervention of a Mediator, who should have in him, all the perfections, and
excellencies of the parties, that were to be reconciled. The greatness of the
work, shows us the quality of the means, that was requisite to finish it; and
the quality of the means, does regulate the faculties, and nature of the
person, that was necessary to do it. To reconcile earthly, and heavenly things
in GOD, there was need to make peace; To make peace, there was need of a blood,
and a sacrifice of infinite value; To offer such a sacrifice, there was need of
a person, in whom all fullness dwelt; that is, who had in Him fully and
perfectly, all the graces, and excellencies of Heaven, and Earth. Certainly
then, it was an order highly reasonable, and most worthy of the Divine wisdom
of the Father, to make all fullness dwell in His CHRIST for the reconciling of
Heaven, and earth by making peace through the blood of His cross. That we may
have the fuller view of it, for His glory, and our own consolation, we will
consider, by His grace, in this action, those three points, that are distinctly
proposed us, in the Apostles Text. First, the good pleasure of the Father, that
all fullness should dwell in CHRIST. Secondly, the work He has wrought, by the
hand of His CHRIST thus furnished; namely, the reconciling of all things in
Himself, as well those, that are in earth, as those, that are in Heaven; and
finally, the means, by which He has executed this great design, to wit, making
peace, by the blood of the cross of His well-beloved Son.

For a right understanding of the first of these three points, we must enquire,
at our entrance, what this fullness is, which the good pleasure of the Father
has made, to dwell wholly in CHRIST; especially seeing that Interpreters do
not well accord, about it. Some referring it, to the Divinity of our LORD:
others, to the graces which were accumulated on Him, after His manifestation in
our flesh. It is certain, that the word, Fullness, is variously taken in the
Scripture; and not to speak of other senses it has, which are beside our
purpose, it is sometimes referred to the greatness of things, and signifies,
their just; their whole, and due measure. As when it is said, that Saul fell on
the earth, to the fullness of his stature; that is, all along, 1 Samuel 28.2^.
so as his whole body lay stretched out on the ground; and it is very likely,
that it is thus, that St. Paul calls the Church, the fullness, or the
compleatness of CHRIST; Ephesians. 1.23,
forasmuch as being His body, it is in it, that His just, and due magnitude
consists. Without the Church, He would be an Head without a body, that is,
withot a magnitude, and a stature proportionate to His supereminent Majesty. It
seems, we might so take, the Fullness, mentioned in this Text; even, as
signifying all the graces, and excellencies requisite to the full, and entire
greatness, that becomes the CHRIST of GOD; but the word, Dwell, which is
annexed to it, does not comport with it. For it would be an harsh phrase, and
without example in any language, to say, that a man's stature dwells in him.
Upon the same consideration, I exclude hence another sense, which else would
suit not ill, with the matter; I mean that, which the term fullness has, when
it is put for a full, and whole measure, and such as wants nothing. We are to
observe therefore, beside what has been said, that the word, fullness, does
very commonly, in Scripture, set forth that, which fills any thing; as when
one Prophet calls men, and other creatures, which the earth is full of, the
fullness of the earth; and another, the fullness of a City, all the people, Psalm.
24. ^. Amos 6.8. Isa. 4^.10.
that dwell in it; and again another, the fullness of the sea, the Isles,
whereof it is full, with all their inhabitants. And because the forms of
things, as Philosophers speak, their perfections, and qualities, do fill them
up, and give them all the beauty they have, like as plants, and living
creatures, are the ornament of the earth; people, the glory of Citys; and
Isles, so many crowns of the Sea; thence it comes, that by a very elegant
figure, the graces, and, perfections of such, or such a subject, are termed the
fullness thereof; for that, without them, it would be empty; and of such a
condition, as that rude and uncouth mass, that Moses describes, in the
beginning of Genesis; the earth (says he) was without form and void; Genesis 1.2.
before the LORD clothed it, with these stately ornaments, and filled it, with
that rich abundance, which we now behold upon it. Its in this sense, that the
Apostle St. John gives the name of, the Fullness of CHRIST, to that total
abundance of perfections, and divine graces, which dwelt in Him, His wisdom,
His justice, His sanctification, and His redemption, when he says, that of His
fullness, we all have received. Joh. 1.16.
And it is after the same manner, that S. Paul hereafter, by the fullness of the
Godhead, means all the qualities or properties of the Divine Nature; its
Understanding, its Wisdom, its Omnipotency, it is Goodness, and Infinite
Justice, saying, That in JESUS CHRIST dwells all the fullness of the Godhead
bodily. Col. 2.9.
It is therefore in this sense also, as seems to me, that we must take the word
Fullness in this Text; referring it to the things whereof the Apostle had even
now spoken, when he affirmed, That JESUS CHRIST is the Image of the invisible
GOD; the Firstborn of every creature, by whom all things were created, and do
subsist; the Head of the Church, the Beginning, and the Firstborn from the
dead, holding the first place in all things. For these qualities, as you see,
are the perfections and excellencies partly of the Divine Nature, and partly of
the Humane; the former, namely, His being the Image of GOD, and the Master and
Author of the Creatures, pertaining to the Divine; the latter, to wit, His
being the Head of the Church, and the Firstborn from the dead, to the Humane;
so as when the Apostle, after these things, adds now, For it was the good
pleasure of the Father, that in Him should all fullness dwell, it is as much as
if He had said, For it was the Fathers will, that there should appear in His
CHRIST a rich, and a complete abundance of all? Divine and Humane perfections;
all the beauty, dignity and excellency that replenisheth heaven and earth, that
adorneth the nature of GOD, and of men. And so the question which Interpreters
debate, whether this Fullness should be referred to the Divinity, or to the
Humanity of our LORD, is cleared; for this Exposition comprizeth them both, the
eternal Wisdom and Power of the one, with all its attributes; the Sanctity and
Charity of the other, with all the graces which have been given it, without
measure. This is the All-fulness that dwells in JESUS CHRIST. And the word
Dwells, has here a great deal of Emphasis. For in the style of Scripture, it
signifies an abode, not transient, and for a time only; but such as is firm,
constant and durable: So that the Apostle saying, That all fullness dwells in
CHRIST, does thereby show us, that this rich abundance of all Divine and Humane
perfections, shall eternally be in Him; not as the Divine Glory and Majesty
erewhile, was in the Tabernacle of Moses, and in the Temple of Solomon, where
it lodged but for a space; not as the irradiations of the Deity in the souls of
the Prophets, which they filled but for some hours; finally, not as the graces
and perfections, that do for some years only, enrich the bodies and spirits of
mortal men, old age, and a thousand other accidents, and in the end death it
self, quickly despoiling them of the same; which makes the sacred Writers say,
that the comeliness of flesh, and the fashion of this world passes away, and
that it is like to flowers and herbs, in whom beauty tarrieth but a few days;
time, without delay, plucking it from them, and defacing all the lineaments of
it. Our CHRIST is an eternal Temple, which the Glory of GOD fills both
continually, and for ever. It does not merely lodge there; it dwells there as
in its true and incorruptible Sanctuary. Never shall the same be void of it.
This Fullness shall abide eternally in Him. But the Apostle says, That it was
the good pleasure of the Father, that this fullness should dwell in Him.

By the good pleasure of the Father, he means, according to the ordinary
style of Scripture, the determination and order of the Eternal wisdom of GOD.
For CHRIST did not violently snatch up this glory, nor did He assume it to Him
of Himself. He received it by the will of the Father, who gave Him, and sent
Him into the world, pouring into Him all the treasures of His graces, that we
might draw from His fullness, all the good we need for our happiness: But
further, it must be remembered, that the Apostle considers the LORD JESUS
here, as CHRIST, and Mediator, and not simply as the Son of GOD; he considers
Him, in regard of His Office, and not in respect to His first and original
nature; for if you look upon Him this second way, it is clear, that being GOD
Eternal with the Father, He received of Him His Divine Essence, with all its
fullness, not by any Decree of His will, or of His good pleasure, but by a
natural communication, that is to say, by an Eternal, Ineffable, and
Incomprehensible generation. The Creation of the world, is a work of the good
pleasure of GOD; the Generation of the Son is a natural act of the Person of
the Father. The first was done in time, the other is before all time. The
world, which is the effect of Creation, had a beginning of being; the Son, who
is the fruit of the foresaid Generation, is Eternal, without beginning, as well
as without end of days. But this Son, who is GOD by nature, is CHRIST by the
will of the Father, for the name CHRIST, signifies an Office, and not strictly
an Essence, or a Nature. Originally, this Office was not fastened to the Person
of the Son. He might have been the Son, without being our Mediator; and had
subsisted so indeed, if the sin of man had not intervened; or if the Justice of
GOD had left us in the misery, whereinto sin had precipitated us: But this good
and gracious LORD having had compassion on us, and resolved thereupon, to bring
us up from those deeps of death in which we lay, did ordain a Mediator who
might effect this great work; and invested Him with all the qualities and
perfections that were necessary for this end. It Is therefore precisely under
this respect, that the Apostle considers JESUS CHRIST here, when he says, It
was the good pleasure of the Father, that in Him should all fullness dwell: He
thereby means, it was the Fathers will, that in this Sacred Person of the
Mediator, who was established and destinated for our salvation, all perfection,
richness, grace, and excellency, should meet together; Divinity and Humanity,
filled with the infinite abundance of all the qualities and properties, that
pertain to them, concur. Such being His good pleasure, He chose His Son, GOD
coeternal, and co-essential with Himself, who uniting all the riches of His
Deity, with the Humane nature He assumed, constituteth one only person; in the
bosom of which, dwells all this fullness that is necessary for the charge of
Mediator. Whence it appears, how vain the cavil of Heretics is, who conclude
from this passage, that the Deity of the Son is not Eternal, and co-essential
with the, As the whose Church believe^.
Fathers, but created, and made, by the will and good pleasure of the Father.
For the Apostle does not speak here, of the original of the perfections that
are found in CHRIST, but of their being united and met together in one and the
same subject. I acknowledge, it is by the good pleasure of the Father, and by
the order of His will, that the Godhead of the Son dwells in the Mediator.
But it thence follows, that this Godhead of His, is an effect of the Fathers
will. It was, before it filled the Mediator. The same Father, who by His will,
united it to our flesh, for the making up, together with that flesh, the person
of CHRIST, had communicated it to His Son from all Eternity, by a natural act
of His Eternal understanding, that is to say, by a Divine Generation. Now it is
not in vain, that the Apostle here advances this assertion, That it was the
good pleasure of the Father, all fullness should dwell in HIS CHRIST: But he
does it, with design to Or settle.
confirm our Consciences, in the Religion of the LORD JESUS only. For these
Colossians (as we shall see hereafter) were tampered with by Seducers, who
mingled the Mosaical Ceremonies with the Gospel, and the worshipping of Angels,
with the service of the LORD; the Apostle therefore, does here timely fortify
these Believers against this error; and that by two excellent Reasons; the
first taken from the dwelling of all fullness in JESUS CHRIST. Poor men, says
he, what seek you for, either in Moses or in Angels? we have all in JESUS
CHRIST. There is no good, no perfection, nor excellency, either in GOD, or in
the Creature, but dwells in this Sovereign LORD. Having Him, we have no need
at all to go unto others; since in Him we find all. The other Reason is taken
from the Will of GOD, the supreme rule of Religion; the only thing that is
sufficient to settle the agitation, and natural distrust of our Consciences. As
for JESUS CHRIST (says he) it was the good pleasure of GOD, that in Him should
all fullness dwell. The Father has set up Him, to be the spring of our
salvation. But as for Moses and Angels, we do not see, that ever it was the
will of the Father to give them such a dignity. Dear Brethren, now that our
faith is fought against with the like errors, let us arm it also with the same
reasons. If the Adversary send us to Angels and Saints; let us answer him, that
the LORD JESUS suffices us; that having Him, we can want nothing; since all
fullness dwells in Him. I will not enquire for the present, what these Angels
and Saints are, whom you recommend to me; whether they have indeed that merit,
and that righteousness, and that authority which I need for the expiation of my
sin, and for opening the house of GOD to me. How rich, and how abounding soever
you represent them to me, I may let pass their store; this CHRIST, whom I
embrace, having all fullness dwelling in Him. Let them be all that you please,
they will want however some part of that infinite plentifulness, which
overfloweth in our CHRIST, And how zealous soever you be for their glory, yet
you durst not presume to say, that all fullness dwells in them. How great is
your imprudence, to go hither and thither a groping in pits and cisterns, while
you have near you such a living and inexhaustible fountain? Grant, that the
worshipping of Saints is not criminal (which yet it evidently is) it is
notwithstanding superfluous; forasmuch as it has nothing in it, but we find
the same better in the fullness of JESUS CHRIST. But the other consideration
which the Apostle sets before us here, is of no less force, That it was the
good pleasure of the Father, all fullness should dwell in His CHRIST. My Faith,
yea our Adversaries attends on the will of GOD. This will is its object, and
its rule. I cannot relish either Doctrine or Service, that is not conform
thereto. Tell me, how you know it is the good pleasure of GOD, that this
fullness of merit and power, which you ascribe sometimes to Saints departed,
sometimes to your Pope and his Ministers, does indeed dwell in them? As for the
LORD JESUS, whom I adore, and in whom I seek all my bliss, the Father has
proclaimed from Heaven, That He is His welbeloved Son; His Scriptures declare,
That He has committed all judgment to Him; and, That all fullness dwells in
Him. But as for those others, whom you have taken for objects of your Devotion,
and to whom you have recourse for your salvation; you cannot show me any thing
semblable of them. Certainly then, it must be vouched, that all your Devotion
in this behalf, is but a Will Worship, founded only on your own passion, and
the fancy of your Leaders, not upon the good pleasure of the Father. It is
strange fire, that has issued out of the earth, and not been kindled from
Heaven: Such as cannot, without crime, either enter into, or be used in the
Sanctuary of GOD.

But I return to the Apostle, who having said, That it was the good pleasure of
the Father, all fullness should dwell in CHRIST; does add, And by Him to
reconcile all things in Himself; both those that are in Heaven, and those that
are in the earth. This is the great Masterpiece of the good pleasure of GOD:
the end for which, His will was, that the fullness of all Divine and Humane
perfections should be seated in CHRIST. And this is that, which the particle,
and, used by the Apostle, does signify: It does not merely connect the two
parts of his discourse; but imports moreover the consecution, and the
dependence of the latter on the former; as if He had said. It was the good
pleasure of the Father, that in JESUS CHRIST should all fullness dwell, and so
reconcile, or to the end that He might reconcile all things by Him. For all
this fullness, which the Father would that His CHRIST should have dwelling in
Him, was necessary for His effecting this Reconciliation. There needed he
should have the power, and the holiness, and the wisdom of the Divinity; and
together with it, the humility, and the obedience, and the meritorious
sufferings of the Humanity, that he might finish this design: He could not have
been able, to reunite Heaven and Earth with less preparations.

Let us see then what this work is, this Reconciling, the Apostle speaks of, of
all things Terrestrial and Celestial, in GOD, by JESUS CHRIST. It is clear by
the Scriptures, that JESUS CHEIST has, by His death, reconciled men unto GOD,
so as He has appeased His wrath, and opened to us the Throne of His grace, as
the Apostle teaches us in diverse places, and particularly in the Epistle to
the Romans, Romans 5.10, 11. 2 Cor. 5.18.
where he says, That we have been reconciled to GOD by the death of His Son,
and elsewhere, That GOD has reconciled us to Himself by JESUS CHRIST. But it
seems, that this is not precisely that Reconciliation which S. Paul means
here: First, because the things in heaven, which he expressly puts among the
parties reconciled, have no part therein; the Angels, that dwell in the
Heavens, pure and holy as they are, having never fallen into any alienation
from GOD. Secondly, because of that Reconciliation the Apostle will speak
instantly, in the words immediately following, in which he says, Having made
peace by the blood of His cross, so as the former words must of necessity be
referred to some other Reconciliation; except we will render the language of
this Divine Writer, culpable of a vain and fruitless repetition. The truth is,
they that understand these words of Reconciliation with GOD, do find themselves
much entangled in the matter, and have recourse to diverse means, for clearing
them of this difficulty. Some affirm, that though the Angels be holy and
blessed, yet they were not exempt from needing the death of JESUS CHRIST, to
merit and obtain their confirmation and perseverance in the estate they had; a
bold Doctrine, and such as it is hard to find any foundation for in the
Scripture. For by this reckoning, JESUS CHRIST should also be the Mediator of
Angels; a thing, that seems to cross the end, and the true nature of this
Office; First, because a Mediator should partake of the nature of the parties
whom he reconcileth, as you see, that JESUS CHRIST, the Mediator between GOD
and men, is GOD and man; whereas He took not the nature of Angels. Secondly,
because every Mediator interveneth between parties that are at difference;
whereas the Angels are, and ever were at perfect accord with GOD, holily
obeying His will. Lastly, because the blood of JESUS CHRIST was shed, only to
wash away sin; and the Scripture every where represents, the people of GOD's
Covenant, His redeemed ones, and those whom He has saved, as justified and
cleansed from their filth; for which there was no place in the nature of
Angels; they being pure and clean from all sin. For as to that of Job, That GOD
puts no trust in His servants, Job 4.18.
and does set light by his Angels; it is evident, and acknowledged by all
Christians, that this is not said, to accuse those blessed Spirits, or to
suggest, that if they were tried by the ordinary and legal justice of GOD, they
would be found guilty, and have need of pardon; but rather to signify, either
that the Authority of GOD over His creatures, is so great and so absolute, as
He owes nothing to the Angels themselves, how exquisite soever their Sanctity
be; the light of glory wherewith He crowns them, being a gift from His own
bounty, and not the due reward of their merit; or else, that the infinite
purity of this Supreme Majesty, is so splendid and so glorious, that the light
of the most holy Spirits fades before Him, and is found dusky and defective,
in comparison of Him: as the shining of our lights, and of the Stars
themselves, does disappear at the brightness of the Sun. Others therefore not
able to savor (and for just cause, I think) this Doctrine, that the Angels
were reconciled to GOD by JESUS CHRIST; to exclude them from this passage, do
restrain the Apostle's words to men only, understanding by the things that are
in Heaven, the already hallowed spirits of the faithful, which death had taken
out of this world; and by the things that are on earth, the faithful that yet
live here beneath in flesh. But, not to dissemble, this Exposition seems both
forced and frigid. Forced, because the Scripture, by things in heaven,
ordinarily means the Angels, whose element, and natural habitation (as you
know) the heavens are; whereas souls separated from their bodies, are received
in and lodged there, by a Supernatural grace and dispensation. Frigid, because
the sense it attributes to the Apostle, no way answers the sublimity and
dignity of his words. For if his aim were to express nothing, but that the
faithful are reconciled to GOD, what need was there to divide them into two
ranks; some, that are on the earth; others, that are in the heavens? Who
doubts, but He reconciled these, as well as those? But without question, he
purposed to magnify this work of GOD by JESUS CHRIST; and to this end, says,
that it extends not to men alone, that are reconciled to the Father, by the
efficacy of the cross of the LORD; but that it has effect in heaven it self,
re-uniting and reconciling the things that are there. What shall we say then to
these difficulties? and in what sense shall we take the Apostle's words, That
GOD has reconciled all things in Himself, both those that are on earth, and
those that are in heaven? Dear Brethren, we will leave them in their genuine
and ordinary sense, and say, that these expressions do signify, the
recomposing and re-uniting of the creatures, both Terrestrial and Celestial;
not with GOD, but among themselves, with each other. For as in a State, the
Subjects have a twofold union; one with their Prince, on whom thy all depend;
another among themselves, being as members of the same Political Body, joined
together by the bond of mutual concord, amity and correspondence: In like
manner is it with things Celestial and Terrestrial; the two principal parties
of this great State of GOD's, which we call the Universe. Besides the union they
have with GOD, as their Sovereign Monarch, from whose bounty they receive the
being and the life they enjoy; they have another alliance and conjunction one
with the other, as parts of one Corporation, having been formed and qualified
for mutual commerce. It Is in this relation, and in this union, that the beauty
and perfection of the Universe does consist, when Heaven and earth have
amicable intercourse, and conspire to one and the same end, with an holy, and a
reciprocal affection. Sin having broken the first union, and separated man from
his Creator; by the same means dissolved the second, loosning us from the
creatures. For, as again in a state, when one part of the Subjects rises
against the Sovereign, the rest that remain in their duty, presently break with
the Rebels; and instead of the commerce they held before with them, do make
cruel and implacable war upon them, while they continue in their disobedience.
Such has the event proved in the world. Man had no sooner rebelled against
GOD, but heaven, and all that remained in His obedience, brake with man. Whole
Nature took up arms against this Rebel, and would have even then utterly ruined
him, if the Counsel of GOD, who would not destroy us, had not hindered it. And
as from one disorder, there never fail to spring up diverse others; this first
rupture of man with GOD, and the good Creatures, brought forth diverse others
indeed, rending mankind it self into several pieces; the one, divided from the
other by diversity of Religions, and the aversions and animosities that attend
it. Such was the sad and dismal estate of the world; the end whereof could be
nothing else, but ruin and eternal perdition: Therefore GOD to restore its
primitive beauty, yea to raise it to a perfection higher than that of its first
original, reconciled all things by His CHRIST, both Terrestrial and Celestial.
He took away the wars, the hatreds, and the aversions that divided them; and
reduced them all into that union which they ought to have, for His glory, and
their own good. As to things on earth, you know what was the enmity, and the
separatedness of the Jews and Gentiles, whom the Law, as a partition wall, did
bar off from the fellowship of the people of GOD. CHRIST laid this enterclose
even with the ground, and recalling the Gentiles, associated and rea-allyed
them with the Jews, to make them thenceforth one only and the same people. He
did as much to the distinctions that separated, the more Polite Nations, from
the Barbarous; the Latins, from the Greeks; the East, from the West: the
North, from the South. He removed all these marks and differences, and united
all Nations, Sects and conditions into one only people, into one only body,
namely His Church. It Is thus, that things on earth were reconciled. As for
things in heaven, it was the good pleasure of the Father, to reconcile them
also by His Son. For the Angels, the true Citizens of heaven, were our foes,
after sin; whereas they are henceforth our Friends, and our Allies, united with
us under JESUS CHRIST, our common Head. Aforetime they were armed against us
with flaming sword; now they fight for us, and encamp about us. They did drive
us off, from the entrance into Paradise: Now themselves do bear our souls
thither, at their departure out of this life. They take part in our interests,
they are sad at our disasters, and rejoice at our amendment. And to testify
how delightful this Reconciliation is to them, they saluted the birth of our
Lord, who came to make it, with their songs and melodies. For it they glorified
GOD, and blessed and congratulated men. But as the mischief of our sin
communicated it self to all the parts of the Universe, even those that are
without life, putting them all in disorder, and subjecting them unto vanity; so
I account, that this blessed Reconciliation must be extended even to them also.
The will of GOD was to comprehend them also in it, re-uniting the heavens with
our earth, and all the Elements with us. For heaven, which had nothing but
Lightnings and Thunder for us, and that would rather have been reduced to
nothing, than receive us into its courts, is now liberal toward us of its
comfortable light, and opens to us the most secret Sanctuaries of its glory.
Life is at accord with us, Immortality is in good intelligence with our flesh,
the Grave is no longer our enemy, the Elements shall be serviceable to our
welfare: they shall work no more against us. And so you see, how the will of
GOD was, to reconcile things on earth, and things in heaven by His Son; and
reduce all the parts of the Universe unto good terms, each with other. This
great work is begun, the foundations of it are laid, the pledges of it are
given us. But it will not be perfectly accomplished until the latter day; when
the world, freed from the bondage under which it yet groaneth, shall appear
entirely changed; its new heavens, and its new earth, and its new elements,
with the Angels, and the Saints, and all its other parts, conspiring together
in an eternal concord, and an inviolable correspondence, to the glory of their
common Creator, who shall then be all in all, 1 Cor. ^^.
as the Apostle elsewhere says. And it is this, in my opinion, which he means
in this place, when he says, That the Father would reconcile all things in
Himself (as the Original precisely runs.) For these words signify, not the
term, but the end and event of this Reconciliation; that is to say, that it
shall be made, not with GOD (as the greater part of Expositors have understood
it) but for the glory of GOD. For it is plain, that heavenly things were not
reconciled with GOD; for they never were at odds with Him. But it is no less
evident, that their Reconciliation with us, in the sense we have explained it,
will redound to the glory of GOD, when this whole Universe shall return
entirely to its true and due union. It Is this therefore the Apostle intends,
when he says, That it is the good pleasure of the Father to reconcile all
things in Himself; that is, for Himself.

It remains now, that we speak of the means which GOD made use of, to bring
this great work of the Reconciliation of the world to its end. S. Paul shows it
us, when he adds, Having made peace by the blood of the cross of CHRIST. The
war that man had with GOD, in consequence of his sin, was (as we said before)
the true and only cause of the bad intelligence we were in with the Angels, and
the other parts of the World. Whence it is clear, that to make the latter
cease, there needed only an extinguishing of the former: that is, to reconcile
us with the Creatures, there needed only a recovering us to the favor of the
Creator. This is the means that the Father, in His Sovereign Wisdom, made use
of. And it is this the Apostle means, when he says, That He made peace; that
is, ours, having pacified His own Justice, and quenched all the burning of His
wrath against us. It Is by the Sacrifice that JESUS CHRIST, offered on His
Cross, that this miraculous change was wrought. This precious blood contented
the Justice of the Father, and the odor of this Divine Burnt-offering sweetened
His Spirit, and of severe and inexorable as He was, rendered Him propitious and
favorable to us. Instead of fulminating His avenges, He tenders us the arms of
His love; and no man is so wretched, but He is ready to receive him, provided
he accept the promise of His mercy with an humble faith. It is not long since,
that upon one of the Texts foregoing, we treated of the reality, the worthiness
and necessity of this Satisfaction, by which the Lord JESUS made our peace with
the Father, through the shedding out of his blood on the Cross, and the
voluntary suffering there for us, and in our room, the curse which our sins
deserved. Therefore we will dispense with our selves, for speaking more of it
at this time; and to conclude the Exercise, will content our selves with the
noting briefly, upon each of the three Points explained, the principal heads of
Consolation and Edification which they contain.

And here, dear Brethren, which shall we most admire? the goodness of the
Father, and the will He had to raise us up from our fall, and to reconcile us
with the whole Creation, whose hatred and aversion we had incurred; or His
unspeakable wisdom, in the ordering of this great work, and in the means he
elected and employed to compass it; or the love of the Son, who for our
welfare, spared not his own blood? Sinner, approach the Throne of GOD with
boldness. He is no longer environed with flames, and Lightning flashes. He is
full of grace and clemency. Fear not His indignation or His severity, Peace is
made. Your Rebellions are expiated. your sins are purged. GOD requires nothing
of you but Faith and Repentance, His Justice is contented; and doubt not, but
the satisfaction it has received is sufficient. He that made it for you, is
the Well-beloved of the Father, the Lord of glory, in whom all fullness
dwells. You will find abundantly in Him all the good things that are
necessary for your felicity; the light of wisdom, to dissipate your darkness,
and illuminate your understandings, unto a perfect knowledge of Divine things,
a righteousness most complete, and of proof every way, to justify and exempt
you from the Curse of the Law, and to open the entrance of the Tribunal of GOD
to you: A most efficacious Sanctification, to mortify the lusts of your flesh,
and fill you with Charity, Honesty and Purity: And a most plentiful Redemption,
to deliver you from death, and from all the evils that have connection with it,
and put you in Eternal possession of Immortality. Make your advantage of this
Divine Well of Life. Give no ear to them that call you any otherwhere. You are
happy enough, if you possess the LORD JESUS. He is the only Prince of
Salvation, the Way, the Truth, and the Life. And as for Creatures, whether
Earthly or Heavenly, fear them not. If you are JESUS CHRIST's they shall do you
no evil. He has reconciled them all to you. He has taken out of them, all the
will, and all the power they had to hurt you. They desire your good, and
secretly favor you, owning you for their Friends and Allies. Heaven looks down
on you in peace, and calls you up into its holy place. The Angels bless you,
and direct all your ways. This Earth will hold you no longer, than your common
LORD shall judge expedient, for His own glory, and your salvation. But if this
general peace which you have now with GOD and the World do rejoice you, the
means by which it was procured, should no less ravish you; even that blood of
CHRIST shed out upon a Cross, the grand Miracle of GOD, the price of your
Liberty, the Salvation and the Glory of the Universe. What, and how ardent was
that love, which gave so rich, and so admirable a Ransom for you? What will He
deny you, who has not kept back His own blood from you? who to make you happy,
abhorred not a Cross, the most infamous of all punishments? who to raise you up
to the most eminent Contentments, underwent the extremest Dolours? the lowest
disgrace, to bring you unto highest glory? the Malidiction of GOD, to
communicate to you His Benediction? O over-happy Christians, if you could
discern your blisses! Where is the anguish of Spirit, or the trouble of
Conscience, or the loss, or the suffering, or the reproach, which the
meditation of this love should not consolate? Who shall condemn us, since the
Son of GOD dyed to merit our Absolution? Who shall accuse us, since His Blood,
and His Cross defend us? Who shall take from us the Benevolence of the Father,
since He has obtained it for us, and conserves it toward us? Who shall pluck
out of our hands a life, He has given us? a Salvation, that He has so dearly
bought? But, dear Brethren, these considerations, which open to us so rich a
Source of Consolation, oblige us also to a singular Sanctification. For how
great will be the hardness of our hearts, if these great evidences, which GOD
has given us of His love, do not affect us? if they kindle not in us an ardent
affection toward a GOD, who has so loved us? a sacred and inviolable respect
toward a Redeemer, who has done so much for us? He has reconciled and
reunited all things in Him, both Terrestrial and Celestial. Let us live then
henceforth in such sort, as may answer this happy alliance. Let us no more
afflict heaven, no more scandalize the earth, by the impurity of our
deportments. Let us labor, in conjunction with all the Creatures, for the
service, and to glory of our common LORD. Imitate we the purity, the zeal, and
the obsequiousness of those Celestial Spirits, into whose Society we are
entered, by the benefit of this Reconciliation. Let us be clothed, as they are,
with a beautiful and pleasing light. Our lot is, to be one day like them, in
Immortality; let us be so, for the present in Sanctity. Our peace is made with
GOD. Let us not make war upon Him any more. He has pardoned us all the
exorbitancies and rage of our Rebellion; never turn we to any of them again. He
will be our good LORD, and gracious Master. Be we His faithful Subjects, and
obedient Servants. Let the Blood of CHRIST wipe away both our guilt, and our
filth. Fasten we our old man to His Cross; Let the nails that there pierced His
flesh, pierce also the members of ours. Let the Cross that made Him dye, make
to dye all our lusts; and extinguish by little and little in us, that earthly,
carnal and vicious life, which we derive from the first Adam, to regenerate and
raise us up again with the second, unto a new, an holy, and spiritual life,
worthy of that Blood, by which he He has purchased it for us, and of that
Spirit, by whom He has communicated the beginnings of it to us, and of that
Sanctuary of Immortality, where He will fully finish it one day, to His own
glory, and our eternal blessedness. Amen.

THE XI. SERMON.
COL. I. Ver. XXI, XXII. Verse. XXI. And you who were sometime estranged from
Him, and who were His enemies in your understanding, in wicked works.

XXII. Yet now has He reconciled, in the body of His flesh, by death, to
render you holy, and without spot, and unreprovable before Him.


DEar Brethren, It was long since observed by Philosophers, and we still find
it by experience, that general things do move the spirits of men very little.
The cause is, that being naturally glewed up too close, every one to his
particular interests, they mind only that, which touches the same, and are not
sollicitous about a common concern, till they are made some way smartly
sensible, that themselves have part in it. The ministers of the Church
therefore, should not content themselves, with proposing the maxims of heavenly
doctrine, in gross, and in general only, to the souls, whose edification is
committed to them; that they may get hold of them, and produce some good effect
upon them, they must apply to them in particular, each of those Divine
verities. St. Paul, whose example should serve for a rule, to all the true
servants of GOD, takes this course in diverse places of His Epistles; and
particularly, in the Text, we have now read you. For having before represented
to the Colossians, the reconciliation of things on earth, and things in heaven,
by means of the peace, which was made through the blood of CHRIST, according to
the good pleasure of the Father; he now descends from general things to
particular cases, and to excite, in the hearts of these faithful persons, a
more lively feeling of this grace of GOD, he puts them by name, in mind of the
part they had in it; forasmuch as the efficacy of this goodness of His, had
been displayed upon them, and drawn them out from perdition, and advanced them
to highest happiness. And you, (says he) who were sometime estranged from him,
and who were His enemies in your understanding, in wicked works. Yet now has
He reconciled, in the body of His flesh, by death, to render you holy, and
without spot, and unreproveable before Him. In these words (as you see) to
heighten the excellency of the benefit GOD had done them, he first sets before
their eyes, the miserable estate, they were naturally in, before the Gospel was
preached unto them. You were (says he) sometime estranged from GOD, and His
enemies in your understandings, in wicked works. Next, he sets forth the
favor, GOD had showed them in the sequel, notwithstanding all their
unworthiness. And yet now (says he) he has reconciled you, in the body of His
flesh, by death. Finally, to sway them unto the pursuance of an exquisit
sanctification, he represents unto them, the purpose, or end of their
reconciliation with GOD. To render you holy (says he) and without spot, and
unreproveable before Him. These are the three points, we will handle, (GOD
willing) in this action, distinctly, one after the other. The first, and
natural estate of the Colossians, before grace. Their reconciliation with GOD,
made in the body of the flesh of CHRIST, by His death; And the end of this
reconciliation, to be holy, and unreproveable before Him.

Certainly, since the sin of Adam corrupted, and infected our nature, there are
no men born into the world; but their condition of it self is most wretched.
Yet their misery is no where so clearly discovered, as in the Heathen, who are
born and live, without the Covenant of GOD. For as to those, whom He preventeth
with His grace, breeding them up in His Church from the beginning of their
life, His light, and His goodness encompassing them from their nativity, do
hinder the discerning so fully in them, the horrid corruption of our nature.
Whereas Heathens, having no other guide, but that nature; in them, its state,
and strength is to be manifestly seen. The Colossians, to whom St. Paul
writes, were of this rank; Gentiles by extraction, by religion, and in
manners, before JESUS CHRIST enlightened them. Let us behold in them, an image
of the condition, which we should be in, if GOD had not separated us from the
rest of men, and timely drawn us out of our original misery. The Apostle says,
first, that sometime, that is, before their conversion, they were estranged,
alienated; namely, estranged from GOD, from His covenant, and from His people;
as he explaineth it more largely elsewhere. Remember, (says he to the
Ephesians) that at that time, Ephesians. 2.12.
ye were without CHRIST, having no communion with the commonwealth of Israel;
being strangers from the covenants of promise, having no hope; and being
without GOD in the world. They had no communion with the true GOD; were so far
from adoring Him, that they not so much as thought on Him; and did deride the
only nation in the world, that knew Him, and served Him. This is clear, by the
Books of the ancient Heathens, that have remained to our time; as also by the
ignorance, and idolatry of the modern. But the Apostle goes further yet, and
adds, that at that time, they were enemies of GOD; which comprehends two
things; the one, that they hated GOD, and warred against Him: the other, that
GOD accounted them, and pursued them, as His enemies. For the first; St. Paul
speaks it expressly of the Heathen, in the Epistle to the Romans; where among
other characters He gives them, He sets down this for one; they are (says he)
full of envy, murder, debate, Romans 1.29, 30.
deceit, malignity, whisperers, back-biters, haters of GOD: upon which a
question arises; how it is true, that the heathen hated GOD? For either they
knew Him, or they knew Him not. If they knew Him not, how did they hate Him,
since love, and hatred are two passions, which cannot be exercised, but toward
objects known, it being no more possible to hate, than it is to love, what we
know not? And if they knew Him; seeing He is the chief good, how is it possible
they should hate Him; since our will is not capable of hating good known? To
this I answer first, that when the Scripture says, the Heathen hated GOD, it
means not, that GOD was the proper, and formal object of their hatred. For it
is certain, that in this sense, the Deity can neither be hated by them, that
are ignorant of it; nor unloved by those that know it. But the Holy GHOST thus
speaks, for that these wretches do altogether, as if they hated GOD; It Is a
manner of speaking, familiar enough; to say the cause, for signifying the
effect; and the antecedent, for expressing of the consequent. Now these people,
in their blindness, defaced the glory of GOD the most they could. They battered
down the most illustrious marks of His Godhead; They blasphemed His
Providence; They reviled His nature. They robbed Him of the honor of creating,
and conserving the Universe, and gave it to monsters. They despised His Will,
and contraried all His orders. They passionately loved, what He most abhorred;
and abhorred, what He is best pleased with. Are not these ordinary, and natural
effects of hatred? It Is therefore with much reason, that the Scripture, to set
forth this impiety, and fury of the Heathens, says that they hated GOD: since
they treated Him, in the very same manner, as if they had directly hated Him.
As when the Wise man says somwhere, Pov. 29.24. and 8.36.
that the wicked hate their own soul, or their own life; it is not to signify,
that their will has properly in it, any aversion for their own life; (on the
contrary, they but too much love it) But to declare, that they carry
themselves, just as if they expressly hated it, affecting, and practicing with
an extreme vehemence, the things that cause their ruin; and neglecting, and
abhorring those, that would lead them to salvation. Secondly, I say, That
though the Heathen have some knowledge of GOD, yet because they fancy Him
quite another, then in effect He is, they may be said, in propriety of speech,
to hate Him* For though it be not possible for us to hate good, so far as it is
good; nevertheless it often happens, that error representing things to us,
quite otherwise, than they are in themselves, we love, what is indeed worthy of
hatred; and we hate, what is in truth, most worthy to be loved. From such an
illusion, did the Pagans hatred of GOD arise. For imagining Him as a Tyrant,
full of cruelty, and injustice; or as an idle King, that has no care of His
State; it need not be wondered at, if their understanding falsely conceiving
Him, under so monstrous a likeness, their will was swayed to hate Him, rather
than love Him. And those among them, that had a better opinion of Him, yet for
all that loved Him not. For by an extreme error of mind, placing their supreme
happiness in the enjoyment of pleasures, and vices; and being not ignorant,
that GOD hates them, and punishes them; they considered Him as an enemy to
their contentment. So the love of vice induced them to hate Him. Whence it
followed, that GOD on His side, as being soverainly good, and just, condemned
their impiety, and had a will to punish it; which is the thing, that the
Scripture figuratively calls, GOD's hatred. This is that the Apostle means,
that the Colossians in their Paganism were enemies of GOD. But to show us, how
deeply this enmity was rooted in them, having said, that they were enemies, he
adds, in their understanding. This is the principal, and highest faculty of
our soul, that moves, and guides our wills, and our affections, and is by
consequent, the regent of our whole life. The Apostle says therefore that
rebellion, and enmity against GOD, have taken up their seat, in the
understanding; seizing (if we may so say) on this grand Tower of our nature,
and thence continually making war against GOD. This war, the Apostle intends,
when he adjoyneth, in wicked works. I should never have done, if I would
attempt now to represent all the horridness of the heathens lives. St. Paul
shows us an Epitome of it, in the first chapter of the Epistle to the Romans:
he there lays forth the principal fruits of their impiety, their injustice,
their uncleanness, and their abominations; vice being grown to such an height
among them, that they did not only commit it; but also favor it, and took no
shame to adore the very persons, whom they confessed to have been extremely
commaculated with it. This dissoluteness, and being given up to wicked works,
was a clear conviction of their enmity against GOD, which renders them
altogether inexcusable; Romans 1.32.
because how great, and universal soever their corruption was, yet they were
not ignorant, that they that do such things are worthy of Death, as the Apostle
says there, a little after.

This doctrine of his, touching the estate of Heathens, deserves great
consideration. For it teaches us two points, of very much importance; First,
the quality, and Secondly, the extent of the corruption of our nature by sin.
As for its quality, you see it is, so horrible, that it sets us far from GOD,
and makes us strangers to Him, and His enemies: so deep, that it has soaked
into all the faculties of our souls, even the understanding it self, the
noblest of them all; and finally, so contagious, that it infecteth all our
works with its venom; none issuing forth, but wicked ones. Whence appears,
first how false, and pernicious, the imagination of those is, who place this
corruption in the lower part of the soul only, in the affections, and sensual
appetites, and in their resistance of reason; and will have it, that the
understanding has remained in its integrity. St. Paul does loudly pronounce
the contrary, lodging enmity, and rebellion against GOD, in the heathens
understanding: and he elsewhere testifies the same truth in diverse places; as
when he says, 1 Cor. 2.14.
that the natural man comprehends not the things of the Spirit of GOD; that
they are foolishness unto him, and he cannot comprehend them: and otherwhere,
that the sense, Romans 8.7. Ephesians. 4.18.
or wisdom of the flesh, is enmity against GOD; that it yields it self not
subject to the Law, nor indeed can. And in the Epistle to the Ephesians, that
the Gentiles have their understanding darkened. Confess we then, that this evil
is universal; that it has depraved our whole nature, and left nothing sound,
or whole in us, from the sole of the foot, to the crown of the head. It has
extinguished the light of the understanding, and filled it with thickest
darkness. It has made irregular the motions of the will, and put a dreadful
disorder into all the passions, and affections. And so palpable is this, that
the two Masters of Pagan Philosophy have in some sort perceived it, and as it
were felt it, while they were groping in their darkness: they have left in
writing; the one of them, Plato in Soph. Aristotle, Ethic. l. ^.
that the soul of man is sick of two maladies, ignorance, and naughtiness: the
other, that there is in our nature, I know not what, that resists right
reason. From the same ground you may see again, how vain the conceit of those
is, that ascribe, I know not what merits of congruity (as they call them) to
men, out of the state of grace. Would you know, how the Colossians invited GOD,
to gratify them with the light of His Gospel? They were (says the Apostle)
estranged from GOD, and enemies in their understanding, in wicked works. If a
subject do merit the favor of his Sovereign by turning His back upon Him, and
departing from Him; if rebellion, and enmity do oblige to show graciousness? if
wicked works do incline the goodness of GOD to communicate it self to men, then
I confess, they that are out of His covenant, may merit His grace. But since it
is quite contrary, and every body well knows, that such carriage is a plain
provoking of justice, and does enforce punishment; who sees not, that man,
while he is in the corruption of his nature, does merit nothing, either by way
of condignity, or of congruity; but the curse of GOD, according to what the
Apostle elsewhere says, even that by nature we are children of wrath? Ephesians. 2^
I said in the second place, that this Text discovers also to us, the extent of
this corruption. For if any sort of men could be found exempted from it, in all
probability it should be the Greeks, the most polite, and best civilized of all
people. Nevertheless you see, the Apostle involves them here in this universal
misery. Whence appears, how much some of the ancientest writers of Christianity
were mistaken, whom the love of learning, and secular erudition, did so charm,
Clem. Alexand. Strom. 6.
as they stuck not to say, that the Gentiles, by means of their Philosophy,
might become acceptable to GOD, and attain salvation. I grant, they had a very
quick understanding, as we see by their Books, in which they have left us
admirable marks of the acuteness of their minds; Neither do I deny, but GOD
presented them, both in the nature of this vast universe, and in its
government, with very clear, and most illustrious arguments of His power,
wisdom, goodness, and providence; as St. Act. 14. Romans 1.19, 20.
Paul elsewhere says, that this supreme LORD never left Himself without
witness; and that He has made manifest in His works, what may be known of Him.
But all this light does only show us the greatness of their corruption. For
they, with all the vivacity of their spirits, made no proficiency in the School
of Providence, unto the fearing of GOD, and serving Him: but became vain in
their reasonings, and miserably abused the gifts of Heaven; so as the whole
success of this dispensation, was naught else on their part; but that they were
thereby rendered inexcusable. Conclude we then, that all men generally, not one
excepted, are of their own nature such, as the Apostle here describes the
Colossians, strangers, and enemies to GOD, in their understanding in wicked
works. There is nothing, but the word of the LORD alone, which is able to bring
them out of this estate; by the saving grace of His Spirit, wherewith GOD
accompanies it. And this the Apostle represents here to the Colossians, in
the second place. For having minded them of their former condition, he adds,
Yet now has GOD reconciled you, by the body of His flesh, that is, the flesh
of JESUS CHRIST, by His death.

The condition, they were in before, was very miserable. For what can be
imagined more wretched, than men far from, and strangers to GOD, in whose
communion alone, all their welfare consists? men, enemies to Him, without
whose love, they can have no true good? yet besides misery, there was horror
also in their case. Misery does ordinarily stir up pity: their's was worthy of
abhorring, and hatred. For what is there in the world, that less deserves the
compassion of GOD, and men; or is more worthy of the execration of Heaven, and
Earth, than a Subject that withdraws from His Sovereign? that hates Him, and
Wars against Him? that insolently violates all His Laws, and abandons himself
to all the crimes, He has forbidden? especially, if the Sovereign be gracious,
and beneficent, as the LORD is, the only Author of all the being, life, and
motion, that we have? Nevertheless, Oh inestimable, and incomprehensible
goodness! GOD, for all this, forbore not to have pity on the Colossians. He
sought to them, when they were alienated from Him; He offered them peace, when
they made War upon Him; He took them for His friends, and chose them for His
Children, when they showed Him, the greatest hatred, and enmity. Their wicked
works deserved His curse; and He bestowed on them, His grace. Their rebellion
deserved His direful flashes, and He sent them His comfortable light. This
opposition the Apostle indicateth here, when he says, And yet you has God
reconciled. A like opposition, he expresses elsewhere, Romans 5.8.
in the same matter, saying, GOD altogether commends His love to usward, in
that while we were but sinners, CHRIST dyed for us. For the setting forth, of
this great grace of GOD, toward these faithful people, he says, that GOD has
reconciled them. Having spoken of their estrangement, and of their enmity with
GOD, He does with good reason, make use of the word, Reconcile, to signify the
setting of them again, in His good liking, and favor. It happens sometimes, in
the misunderstandings of men, that the averseness, and hatred is, but on one
side; one of the parties seeking the favor of the other. Here, as we have
yerst intimated, the aversion was mutual. For we hated GOD, and He because of
our sins, hated us. It was necessary therefore, for the restoring of us, that
both the one, and the other of these two passions should be remedied: that is,
that the wrath of GOD against us, should be appeased, and our hatred, and
enmity against Him, extinguished. The word, Reconcile, does of its self,
comprehend both the one, and the other: But in the Apostle's writings, it
refers principally to the first, that is, the mitigation, and appeasing of
the wrath of GOD. As indeed this is the principal point of our reconciliation.
For GOD being our sovereign LORD, it would not benefit us at all, to change our
will toward Him, if His did not operate otherwise toward us: as the
repentance, and tears of a subject are vain, if his Prince reject them, and
remain still angry with Him. Furthermore, the word Reconcile, as also the most
part of other words of like form, and nature, is taken, two manner of ways. For
either it signifies simply the action, that has such virtue as is necessary to
make reconciliation; or it compriseth the effect of it also. It Is in the first
sense that the Apostle used it before, where he said, that GOD has reconciled
all things, celestial and terrestrial, in Himself, or for Himself, having made
peace, by the blood of the cross of CHRIST. For he means simply, that GOD
has taken away the causes of hatred, and enmity, and opened the way of
reconciliation; not that all things are already actually reconciled. It Is thus
again, that we must take, 2 Cor. 5.19.
what he says elsewhere, that GOD was in CHRIST, reconciling the world unto
Himself, not imputing unto them their trespasses. But the Apostle takes the
word, Reconcile, in the second sense, when he says, that we have obtained
reconciliation by CHRIST; and when he beseeches us to be reconciled to GOD: it
being evident, that in these places, he intends not the right, and power
only; but the very effect, and actual having of reconciliation. It Is after this
second way, that we must take the word, reconcile, in the Text. For again, this
Reconciation may be considered two ways; first, in general, as made by JESUS
CHRIST on the Cross; and secondly, in particular, as applied to each of us by
Faith. In the first consideration, it is presented to all men, as sufficient
for their salvation, according to that doctrine of the Apostle, Tit. 2.11. 1 John 2.2.
that the Grace of GOD is saving to all men: and that also of St. John, that
JESUS CHRIST is the propitiation for our sins, and not for ours only; but for
the sins of the whole world. Under the second consideration, it appertains
only to the faithful, according to that clause of the covenant, which
declares, That the only Son was given to the world, that whosoever believes
in Him, Joh. 3.16.
should have eternal life. It Is precisely in this sense, the Apostle says
here, that GOD had reconciled the Colossians: he means not simply, that GOD
had given them, through the cross of His Son, that they might be reconciled to
Him by believing; but also, that He had effectively reconciled them to Himself,
and put them in real possession of the benefits, that were purchased for us by
the merit of CHRIST; embracing them as His children, pardoning them all their
sins, and obliviating all His wrath, and the aversion, their offenses had given
Him, toward them. But the Apostle mentions to them, yet again here, the means,
by which this reconciliation was effected; as being a thing of infinite
importance, both to the glory of GOD, and their edification. He has reconciled
you, (says he) by the body of His flesh, (that is to say, of the flesh of His
CHRIST) by His death. There is no one of these words, but is of very great
weight. First, mentioning here, the body of our LORD, he intimates to us, the
mystery of His Incarnation. As if he had said, that GOD loved us to such a
degree, as He would have His own Son become man, to reunite, and reconcile us
with Himself. He would have this Divine person, whose essence is spiritual, and
infinite, assume a visible, and finite body. He shows us also, by this word,
the sacrifice, by which the wrath of GOD was appeased, and our crimes expiated.
For it is properly for this, that the Son of GOD had a body, as the Apostle
teaches us, when opposing this body of the LORD, to sacrifices of living
creatures, that were unprofitable, and incapable of satisfying the Justice of
the Father, he brings Him in saying, Sacrifice, and burnt-offering, thou
would not have; Heb. 10.5, 10.
but a body have thou prepared me; and adjoyneth, that it is, by the once
offering up of this body, we have been sanctified. But the Apostle does not say
simply, the body of CHRIST: he adds, the body of His flesh, that is,
according to the style of the Hebrews, His fleshy body; His body of flesh. At
first blush, you may seem, that this addition is needless, and to no purpose.
But it is much otherwise. For in the language of Scripture, every Body is not
flesh. It gives this name only to an infirm, a passible, and mortal body. He
means therefore, that the LORD, to reconcile us, not only assumed a body; which
yet is very marvelous; but that He took a feeble, and mortal body; a body
sustaining it self by meat, and drink; a body like ours, and subject to all
their meannesses, and infirmities. A consideration, that as you see,
exceedingly heightens, both the excellency of His love toward us, and the
value of the means, by which He reconciled us; it so being, that the King of
glory, who is the Author and Mediator of this work, vested Himself with poor
Flesh, to compass His design. And this is the reason, why the sacred writers so
often use this word, to signify our LORD's humane nature; as when they say, 1 Timothy 3. Joh. 2. Heb. 2.14.
that GOD was manifested in the flesh; that the word was made flesh; that the
Son did partake of flesh and blood. Indeed, this qualification of the body of
CHRIST, was necessary for the expiating of our sins, since this could not be
effected, but by sufferings, of which, only a fleshy body is capable. Whence it
comes, that in the sixth Chapter of St. John, where Himself speaks of the
virtue He has to quicken us, He also uses these very words, saying, that His
flesh is meat indeed, and His blood drink indeed; and that He will give His
flesh for the life of the world. This word is the cause, that I understand this
passage of the natural body of CHRIST, and not of His mystical body, to which,
it seems, some do refer it. I acknowledge, that the LORD receives, into the
union of His mystical body, (that is, of His Church) all those, that applying
to themselves the promises of His Gospel, by Faith, are effectually reconciled
to GOD. Yet this is not the body, the Apostle means here; since the body, he
speaks of, is the body of the Flesh of the LORD; which cannot be affirmed of
His mystical body. His saying therefore, that GOD has reconciled us, in His
body, must be taken, as if he had said, by His body. For as we have often
informed you, it is ordinary in the style of Scripture, to put in, for by. And
hence appears, how extravagant the imagination of some ancient heretics was,
who did dogmatize, that JESUS CHRIST had but a vain, and false appearance of a
body, and not a real, solid, and true body, as also the error of those, who
confessed He had a true body, but held it to be celestial, and of a quite other
matter, and substance, than ours are. The Apostle confounds these foolish
phancies, by terming the body of our LORD, the body of His flesh.

In fine, having said, that we were reconciled by the body of His Flesh, the
Apostle adds, in the last place, by His death. It was not enough, oh faithful
brethren, that the King of glory, the Prince of life, assumed to Himself a
body, and even a body of flesh, vile, and infirm, as yours. To reconcile you
unto GOD, it was necessary He should dye. His flesh would have profited you
nothing, if it had not suffered that death, which you deserved. But of this
death of the LORD, and of its necessity, and of its efficacy, we have spoken
largely, upon the Texts foregoing. Here, we will only remark two things, before
we go further. The first is, that CHRIST did satisfy the Justice of His Father
for us, since it is by His death, that He reconciled us; For except this be
asserted, it is evident, His death will have contributed nothing to our
reconciliation: in respect of that, he would have dyed for naught. Grant, that
there was need He should dye, for the confirming of His doctrine, and to give
us an example of patience; though to say true, this reason, if there were no
other, seems not so necessary, that it should have obliged the Son of GOD to
dye. Yet still, after this account, His death will have contributed nothing, to
our reconciliation with the Father. Him, His own mercy alone, and not any
consideration of this death, would have appeased, toward us. And nevertheless,
the Apostle says expressly, we were reconciled by that death, which the LORD
suffered, in the body of His flesh. Sure then it must be acknowledged, that it
quenced the wrath of the Father, that is to say, satisfied His justice for us.
The other particular, which I would remark here, is, that the body of the LORD
made propitiation of our sins, only as it was infirm flesh, that suffered
death. Every one confesses, that now He dies no more; yea, that He is
invested with a sovereign glory, having for ever put off the infirmity, and
mortality of the flesh. Certainly then it is vainly, and without reason, that
some do imagine. His body is offered still to this day, for the reconciling of
sinners unto GOD. It Is by death, Rom 6.9.
that He has reconciled us, says St. Paul; And being now raised from the
dead, He dies no more, says he elsewhere.

But I come to the third, and last article of our Text, wherein the Apostle
says, that it is to make us holy, and without spot, and unreprovable before
Him, that GOD has reconciled us, by the death of His Son. It is strictly in
the original, to present us, or to make us stand, and appear, before Him holy,
without spot, and unreprovable; which has given occasion to some of our
Expositors to referr these words also, to our Justification before GOD; as if
the Apostle meant, that He made our peace, and abolished the enmity, to the end
that being purified by the virtue of the Sacrifice of His Son, and clothed with
His righteousness, by faith, we might appear before the Tribunal of His grace,
without condemnation, and without confusion. But nothing compels us to pitch
on this: It is much better, in my judgment, to understand it of our
sanctification, than of our Justification. First, because the words themselves
agree much better with it; the Scripture (as you know) ordinarily expressing,
the gift of Regeneration, by the word, Holiness; whereas it uses the word,
Justify, or pardon of our sins, and not imputing them unto us, when it would
signify the first benefit of GOD, which we obtain, by the imputation of the
righteousness of CHRIST. Secondly, because the Apostle having already
represented it unto us, in those words, that GOD has reconciled us, by the
body of the flesh of His Son, by death, which do signify, that He has
received us into favor, pardoning us all our sins, as we have explained them;
it seems needless, to repeat the same thing again. In fine, because both St.
Paul, and the other sacred writers, are wont, to join those two gifts of GOD,
our Justification, and our Sanctification, together, as two graces, that are
inseparable, and never go, one without the other; so as having spoken to us of
the one, it was not only convenient, but also in some sort necessary, 1 Cor.
1.30. 1 Cor. 6.11.
he should annex the other; just as elsewhere, having said, that CHRIST is made
unto us righteousness, he immediately adds, and sanctification; and again in
another place, where having touched the filthiness of the former life of the
Corinthians, as here that of the Colossians, he says, But ye are washed; but
ye are sanctified. Here the Apostle does not only knit these two graces
together: but moreover shows us, the order, and relation which they have, the
one to the other; that the second, to wit, Sanctification, is the end of the
former, that is, of Justification. He has reconciled us (says he) by the
death of His Son, to render us holy, without spot, and unrebukable before Him.
The Scripture teaches us the same thing in diverse other places; as in St.
Luke, where Zachary says, that GOD shows us mercy, and delivers us out of
the hand of our enemies, that we might serve Him without fear, in holiness, and
righteousness, before Him. And St. Peter, in his first Epistle. Luke 1.74, 75.
1 Pet. 2.24.
CHRIST, (says he) has born our sins, in His own body, on the tree, that we
being dead to sin, might live unto righteousness. And our St. Paul, that JESUS
CHRIST dyed for all, that they which live, 1 Cor. 5.15.
might not henceforth live unto themselves, but unto Him, who dyed, and was
raised again, for them; and elsewhere again, that CHRIST gave Himself for us,
Tit. 2.14.
that He might redeem us from all iniquity, and purify us, to be unto Him, a
peculiar people, addicted to good works; and in another passage, altogether
like that, which we are upon. Ephesians. 4.5.
He loved the Church, (says he) and gave Himself for it, that he might
sanctify it, have cleansed it, by the washing of water, by the word; and might
present it to Himself a glorious Church, having neither spot, nor wrinkle, nor
other such thing: but that it might be holy, and unreprovable. I insist upon
this point; because it is of exceeding great importance. First, you see by it,
what the dignity of Holiness is. For since the end, of necessity, is always
more excellent, than the means, which are used to compass it; it is clear, than
sanctification, being the last end, of all the things, that the LORD employs
for our salvation, is the greatest, and most excellent, of all His graces. And
so you know, St. Paul positively declares, that Charity (which is for
substance, no other thing but sanctity) is more excellent, than either, faith,
or hope; and he proves it, because neither the one, nor the other of these two
virtues shall have any place in Heaven, as being but means, and helps, for our
conducting thither; whereas Charity, as the last, and highest perfection of our
being, shall eternally remain. Secondly, from hence appears, how much carnal
Christians do deceive themselves; who pretend to salvation, without
sanctification. Wretched men, what do you? Your pretention is a vain Chimera.
You pursue an impossibility. For that salvation, which you do desire, is
nothing for the main, but that very holiness, which you do refuse. Both that
faith, and those other qualities, which, as you say, you have, serve only to
sanctify men; Without this they are unprofitable things. Suppose then that you
have them; if they do not change you; if they do not fill your heart, with love
to GOD, and with charity toward your neighbor; in a word, if they render you
not, holy, they will advantage you nothing. So far will they be, from giving
you immortality; that they will aggravate your misery; and sink you deeper into
the abyss of death. Never believe, that GOD gave us His own Son, clothed Him
with a body of flesh, delivered Him up to the death of the Cross, that He
reconciled us by such precious blood, and wrought all these grand wonders,
which ravish Heaven, and Earth, that He might acquire us the privilege to sin
freely; For, far be it from so wise, and so holy a Deity, to be thought to have
ever had, such an extravagant, and infamous a design. He has laid forth all
the marvels of grace, and love upon us, that He might restore His own image in
our nature; that He might abolish sin out of it, and transform us into new
creatures, pure, and holy, and in some sort like Himself, and His Son, in this
respect. I confess, the description, which the Apostle here gives us, of this
grace of GOD in us, is high, and magnifique; and that it seems, to surmount the
reach of believers, while they are in the present life. For of which of them,
can it be truly said, while he remains in this world, that he is Holy, and
without spot, and unreprovable before GOD? But to this I answer, first, that
neither does the Apostle affirm, that this great work of the LORD's in us, is
completed in this life; He shows us only what His purpose is; and what the
end of His grace; and how good, and glorious, that holiness is, wherewith He
will cloth us. For if we be truly His, He will not leave us, till He has made
us such, as the Apostle's Text imports, even holy, without spot, and
unreprovable. Secondly, I say, that though the highest degree of
sanctification, in this life, be much beneath that, which shall adorn us in the
next; and that in comparison of it, the same is defective, yet it fails not of
being true, and of having all its parts, though in a weak degree. It is
sincere, and without hypocrisy, and such in sum, as the words of the Apostle,
in some sort, agree to. For true believers, while here below, do put off the
habitudes of vices, and put on those of Christian virtues; by reason whereof,
they are justly called holy; though, through infirmity, there slip from them
sometimes, some actions contrary thereto. They are washed, from those foul and
ugly spots, that yerwhile deformed their whole life; and an adversary connot
note, or reprehend ought in their deportments, that is contrary to the
profession they make of the Covenant of grace. As for what the Apostle adds,
that they are such, before GOD, it is only to signify that their piety is
true, and real, not feigned, nor dissembled; that it is not a mask, which
cheateth the eyes of men: but a disposition of heart, which GOD discerns within
them, as men do behold, the evidences of it without, upon them; in the same
sense, that St. Luke said of Zachary, and Elizabeth, that they were both
righteous before GOD. Lo there, Beloved Brethren, what we had to say to you,
upon this Text.

The rigor of the season obliging us, to conclude this action; I will only
touch at, in a word or two, the uses we should deduce from it, for our
edification; referring it to your diligence, to dilate each of them; and above
all, to reduce them carefully into practice. Remember, first, the miserable
estate, wherein you were, before GOD prevented you by His grace; and think,
that it is to you also, the Apostle says, ye were sometime estranged, and
enemies in your understandings in wicked works. For our ancesters, before the
Sun of Righteousness shone on these countries, were in such a condition, as the
Colossians, or rather a worse. Our Fathers were Hittites, and our Mothers
Amorites, living in the darkness of Paganism, serving an Hesus, and a Belenus,
and a Tautates, and I know not what other vanities; sacrificing men to them,
and weltring in the filth of the most infamous vices. Being, by the great
benignity of GOD, drawn out of this gulf; we were yet cast into another; in
which, under other names, we committed the like crimes; adoring an insensible,
and inanimate thing; and bending down our selves before wood, and stone, and
dumb images, and giving to a mortal man, the glorious names, which belong only
to the Son of GOD: being corrupted, both in our thoughts, and in our deeds.
These faults were so much worse, than the former, by how much less ignorant we
were of our master's will, than we had yerst been. Admire next, the goodness of
GOD, who seeing us in this abyss, though our ingratitude, and rebellion merited
His heaviest avenges; yet had pity on us, and visiting us in His infinite
mercies, has reconciled us, by the body of the flesh of His Son, through His
death. He has sent to us Epaphras's, as He did to the Colossians, Ministers of
His word, who have made the voice of Paul, and of the other Apostles to resound
among us. He has purified us, and washed all our filth in the blood of His
CHRIST. He has bedewed our hearts therewith, and abolished the enmity, and
extinguished the hatred, and reunited us unto Himself; communicating to us the
Divine body of His Son, nailed for us to the Cross, the source of our
salvation, and the treasury of all the good things of Heaven. His death has
been our life; and His malediction our benediction. Acknowledge we this great
goodness of our GOD, with a profound gratitude. Give we Him the glory of all
the good that may be in us. If there be any light in our understandings, any
peace in our consciences, any pureness in our affections, any rectitude in our
ways, bless we the kindness of this Sovereign LORD, who has vouchsafed to
illuminate us, to reconcile us, and to cleanse us. Without this favorable
beaming forth of His grace, we should be yet strangers, and enemies, in the
bondage, and darkness of Egypt, or under the yoke and in the captivity of
Chaldea. Make we use now of the benefits, He has conferred on us. Let us abide
fastened to Him, so as nothing may set us at distance from Him. Love we Him
fervently, and serve Him diligently, lest we become yet again His enemies. Let
those understandings, which were sometime the heads of that wicked war, we made
against Him, religiously maintain that holy, and happy Peace, which He has
vouchsafed to conclude with us. Banish we thence all thoughts of rebellion.
Have we still before our eyes, that sacred flesh, which the King of glory was
clothed with, for us; the blood, wherewith He purchased our peace; the death He
underwent, to bring us in again, with GOD His Father. Let us not profane a
blessing, that cost Him so dear. Imitate we also His goodness. Treat we our
neighbors, as He treated us; If they avoid us, let us seek to them. For we
also were enemies to GOD, and warred against Him, when He called us to the
communion of His grace. Above all, remember we, that the end of all the
miracles, GOD has done, on our behalf, is to make us holy, without spot, and
unreprovable before Him. Let not us betray so admirable, and so reasonable a
design. Let us not frustrate so good, and so merciful a LORD, of His
intentions. Dear Brethren, I might here make large complaint of the profaneness
of some, of the looseness of others, and of the faltrings of us all, who labor
after nothing less, than that high, and accomplished sanctification, to which
GOD calls us: but I had much rather end with entreaties, than with
complaints, and do conjure you in the Name of the LORD, and by your own
salvation, that you would judge your selves, and that renouncing all the faults
of the time past, all the impieties, and lusts of this world, ye would live
henceforth soberly, righteously, and godly; and keep your selves holy, pure,
and unreprovable, to the glory of GOD, the edification of men, and your own
salvation. Amen.

THE XII. SERMON.
COL I. Ver. XXIII. Verse. XXIII. If indeed ye continue in the faith, founded
and firm, and be not moved away from the hope of the Gospel, which ye have
heard, and which was preached to every creature, which is under heaven, whereof
I Paul have been made a Minister.


OUr LORD JESUS CHRIST, in the Gospel according to S. Matthew, tells us of
two sorts of people, which hear His Doctrine, and frequent His School; the one,
they that put His words in practice, that is, those, who embracing the Gospel
with a true and lively faith, do render Him the obedience He demands of them;
the other, they that hear, but put not in practice what He says unto them,
that is, those, who giving but little or no belief to His Divine truth, take no
care to perform what He commands, but content themselves with a vain outside
Profession, and are not inwardly affected and changed, as they ought to be. He
compares the former, to a wise and prudent man, that has built his house upon
a Rock; and when the rain fell, and the floods came, and the winds blew, and
beat upon that house, it fell not for all this; for it was founded upon a Rock.
But on the contrary, he compares the second sort, to a foolish man, that built
upon the sand; And (says he) when the rain fell, and the torrents came, and
the winds blew, and smote upon this house, it fell, and the fall thereof was
great. Dear Brethren, this is an excellent Parable, and worthy to be deeply
engraven on the hearts of the truly faithful. For it shows us, first, That to
have part in the LORD's salvation, it is not enough to call Him our Master, and
make Profession of His Discipline. They that have but this, will fall sooner or
later, and be infallibly ruined. Secondly, It further teaches us, That it
suffices not to have begun, except a man do presevere to the end, without ever
giving back. And lastly, It declares to us, what the cause is, both of the
perseverance of some, and of the revolting and fall of others; those that are
founded on the rock, do stand firm, and resist the scandals, with which the
Devil and the world do combat the truth; those that are built only on the
sand, are easily born down, even at the first assaults which the adverse powers
make upon them. This Doctrine S. Paul yerst represented to the Colossians in
the Text, we have now read to you. In the words foregoing, as you heard in its
place, he did set before their eyes, the wonders of the love of GOD, which had
been gloriously showed upon them by JESUS CHRIST their Savior, who had called
them to His Communion, and of strangers and enemies, as they were, made them
friends of His Father, reconciling them by the body of His flesh, through His
death, to render them holy, without spot, and unreproveable before Him. But the
Apostle knowing, there were Seducers and deceitful workers among them, who
labored to turn them away from the purity and simplicity of the Gospel; that
they might be preserved from those men's poisons, he now advertiseth them, that
this great salvation whereof he had spoken, could not be assured to them
without perseverance. For qualifying, and in some sort, correcting His simple
and absolute assertion, That GOD had reconciled them to Himself; he adds the
condition, upon which this Divine grace was promised them. If indeed (says he)
you continue in the faith, being founded and firm, etc. -- This Lesson, my
Brethren, is no less necessary for us, than it was erewhile, for the
Colossians; since the floods, the winds and storms, that were then raised
against the Edifice of their faith, do in like manner at this day, beat upon
ours; diverse deceitful workers, both without and within, endeavoring to
overthrow it. Take we therefore this sacred Preservative against their malice,
which the Apostle here gives us; and that we may the better make our profit of
it, let us meditate in order, the three particulars which his Instruction
contains. For, to confirm the Colossians in perseverance, he shows them,
first, The necessity, and the manner of it, in those words, If indeed you
continue in the faith, being founded and firm, and be not moved away from the
hope of the Gospel which you have heard. Secondly, He sets before them an
excellent Argument, of the truth of that Gospel which they had heard; to wit,
That it was preached in all the world. And lastly, He further alleges a
second proof of its verity, taken from his own Ministry; of which (says he) I
have been made a Minister. These are three points we will handle, if it please
GOD, in this action; noting briefly upon each of them, what we shall judge most
proper for our Edification and Consolation.

As for the first, the Apostle explains himself about it in those terms, If
indeed ye continue, etc. -- Where you see, he lays down first, [As Above.]
That Faith is the means by which we enter into possession, and use of the good
things of OOD, which He promises us in His Son. The old Covenant had also its
good things; but the condition, which it required of men, for their obtaining
the same, was quite different. For it demanded of them an exact and perfect
obeying of the Law, and upon any failure of an entire accomplishing of the
same, threatened a curse, leaving the sinner no hope of life at all: according
to that dreadful clause, Do these things, and thou shall live; and, Cursed is
every one that does them not. But the Gospel, beside that the good things which
it sets before us, are much greater, and more Divine than those of the Law,
differs moreover from the Law, in this especially, that it demands of men, for
their having them, nothing but Faith Only. 1
alone; according to the sentence of our LORD, GOD so loved the world, that He
gave His only Son, that whosoever believes in Him, should not perish, but have
everlasting life. This the Apostle shows us here with much clearness; when
having said, That GOD has reconciled us to Himself, by the body of the flesh
of His Son, to render us spotless and unreproveable; he adds, If indeed ye
continue in the faith. This Connection of the two parts of his Discourse, does
evidently infer, that it is Faith, which makes us to have part, in the
Reconciliation and Peace of GOD, and in the holiness which is by the Gospel. So
likewise you know, that in a multitude of other places, the Scripture informs
us expressly, that it is by Faith we are justified, and have peace with GOD; and
that it is by Faith, our hearts are purified. Faith is the means of our union
with GOD; it is the root of our Charity, and the Source of our comfort; and in
a word, the only cause of our felicity. For as a Medicine, how excellent and
healthful soever it be, does no good, save to those that take it. So the LORD's
Redemption, and the virtue of His Sacrifice, how great and infinite soever,
though able to heal all our sins, and to give us Eternity, yea, not us alone,
but to all the men in the world; yet notwithstanding, will communicate none of
those benefits to us, except we receive it by Faith. It is Faith that applies
it to us, and sheds abroad the efficacy of it, into all the parts of our
nature. But because very many deceive themselves in this matter, and take that
for true Faith, which has but the shadow and name of Faith; the Apostle
tells us, that to have part in the salvation of JESUS CHRIST, our faith must
be constant, and such as we do abide, and persevere in. For as in Games and
Combats for Prizes, none are crowned but they that hold out to the end: So in
the heavenly Lists or Race, GOD glorifieth them only, which run with constancy,
home to the mark. Those that turn aside, or stop in the midst of the course,
lose their labor; according to that the LORD did declare, Whoever shall
persevere to the end, shall be saved. And therefore the Apostle in another
place, assuring himself of the Crown, among other causes on which he grounded
this assurance, ^ Tim 4 7.
says particularly, That he had kept the faith. Whence appears, that there are
two sorts of persons which shall be excluded from the salvation of GOD,
purchased by the merit of JESUS CHRIST. First, all the rebellious and
unbelieving, that give no faith to the Promises and Declarations of the bounty
of GOD; as our Savior said, He that shall not believe, shall be condemned;
Mark 16.16. John 3.36.
He that disobeyeth the Son, shall not see life: but the wrath of GOD abides
on him. Secondly, they that believe, but it is for a time only; such as abide
not in the faith, but having received it at the beginning, afterward quit and
reject it. Whether it be, that the scorching heat of persecution does dry up
and consume the tender bud: or the overflowing irruption of pleasures, or of
worldly affairs, does carry it away: Whether it be, that the cares of
covetousness or ambition do suffocate it; or the deceitfulness of error, and
the hand of false Teachers, do pluck it up out of their heart. The Apostle
therefore requires of the Colossians, that to the end they might partake of the
salvation of GOD, they not only have faith, but do persevere in it. If indeed
(says he) you continue in the faith.

Yet this is not all; he wills moreover, That they be founded and firm. I
grant, it seldom happens, that this vain and feeble faith, which consists only
in a naked profession, and some slight movings of heart, does endure to the end
in those that have it. Scandal or tentation most commonly plucketh off their
mask, and openly carries them out of the fellowship of the Church. Yet it
seems not impossible, but they may continue, even to the last, in this
estate. As a little chaff may abide in the floor, if the wind blow not: So
there is some probability, that these same persons, in like manner, may remain
mingled with the truly faithful even until death, if persecution or offense do
not fasten on them. But suppose that this do happen, for all that, they shall
not be saved; because the faith they have, and in which they will have
persisted, is a nullity; to which GOD has promised nothing; its the shadow,
and the Idol; not the substance and reality of faith. Whence it follows, that
as chaff, though it remain in the floor, yet is not locked up in the Granary
with the Wheat, but left out or burned, as an useless thing. So likewise these
people, that have but this vain faith, suppose they do abide in GOD's floor,
that is, in the external Communion of the Church unto the end; yet shall not
for all this, enter into His heavenly Garner, that is, His Kingdom; but be
excluded thence, and rejected, as having no lot or portion with true Believers.
They will think it fair to allege, that they have lived in the Church of
CHRIST, that they have, perhaps, even prophesied and cast out Devils, and done
wonderful works in His Name; the LORD will openly tell them, I never knew you,
Depart from me, ye that make a trade of iniquity. Mat. 7.22.23.
The Apostle therefore, to show that he speaks of perseverance, not in this
vain shadow of faith, but in true faith, does not simply say, If ye continue in
the faith, but adds, being founded and firm. If the Hypocrite, or the
Temporary, do continue in the Profession, or in the rudiments of Piety; it is
not, because they are founded, but because they are not tempted; as a woman
that remains chaste, only for not having been solicited to evil. They ow
their perseverance to the enemies favourableness, and not to their own
firmness. This false constancy may deceive a man, who sees but the outside,
and the event of things. But it cannot deceive GOD, who knows the inside of
it, and who sounds hearts, and judges of things, by what they are; not by
what they appear, or by the events they have. The Apostle therefore wills,
that for partaking of His salvation, we have true perseverance; and do continue
in the faith, not simply, and in any sort whatever; but through, being founded
in it, and firm. GOD does save such only. It is but for them, that He has
prepared His Kingdom. The former of these two words, here used by the Apostle,
is taken from buildings, which being founded deep in the earth upon a rock, are
firm and solid, and of proof against time and storms; whereas buildings which
have no foundation, or but on sand, are feeble and unable to resist the shock.
The LORD made use of this same comparison in the Parable we touched, at the
beginning; and He re^^^ects on it too in that famous promise, which He made S.
Peter, of building His Church, in such manner, on the stone, that the gates of
Hell shall not prevail against it. The other word which the Apostle uses, has
the same meaning, and properly signifies in the Original, a thing in such a
settlement, as it is difficult to move and stagger it: A thing that is fixedly
seated and placed, and neither branleth nor changes. This is the settlement of
true Believers, who shall have part in the salvation of GOD. Their faith
founded on the Eternal Rock, JESUS CHRIST their Lord, seated and placed upon
this immovable Basis, abides firm, and not to be shaken. The torrents and the
winds do shock it in vain; the tempests and the floods may beat upon it, they
cannot overthrow it.

Upon this Doctrine of the Apostle, we shall raise two Observations. The first
is, That the faith of those who persevere in the sense he intends, does
differ from the faith of them, who revolt, not only in the event, for that the
one fails, and the other persisteth and abides: but also in the nature of
the thing it self. For the one are founded and firm; and the others are not so.
Who sees not, that there is a great difference, between a house which is well
founded, and an house which is but built upon the sand. JESUS CHRIST and His
Apostle expressly declare, that such as stand are founded; and that such as
fall, are not. Certainly then, the faith of the former is quite different from
the faith of the latter; and this different success of the one, and the others,
in that the one do fall, and the others bear up, does indeed discover to us the
difference which is between them, but does not make it. It is the effect of it,
not the cause; an argument of it, not the original. The same thing appears
also, from the comparing of the one elsewhere to wheat, and the others to chaff,
The wheat is not wheat, because it abides in the floor: but clean contrary, it
abides in the floor, because it is wheat; and in like manner, the chaff
becomes not chaff, because it goes out of the floor; but on the contrary, it
goes out thence, because it was chaff. This diversity of events, does evidence
the weightiness and firmness of the one; and the levity of the other. Even such
is the case of true Believers, and such as are but temporary. Persecution and
offense do not make the difference which is seen between them, when the former
do retain the Gospel, and the others quit it. This event only shows, that the
one were GOD's wheat, and the others but chaff; according to what S. John says
of Apostates, They went out from us, because they were not of us, 1 John 2.19.
that it might be made manifest, that all are not of us. The same is to be
further seen evidently in the Parable of the Sower, where the LORD says
expressly, Mat. 13.13, 19, 21.
that he that persevereth had heard the word, and understood it, and received
it in an honest and good heart. Whereas He says of them who do revolt, that
one heard, but understood it not; another had no root in himself: An evident
sign, that their disposition was different at first, before the perseverance of
the one, and the fall of the others. Whence appears, how impertinent the
Argument is, which our Adversaries draw from the Apostasy of the latter, to
prove that the faith of the former may fail; and on the contrary. For if the
wind carry away the chaff, it does not therefore follow, that it shall also
bear away the corn; and if the storm beat down an house that is planted on two
or three stakes, it is not to be said, it may do as much to an House that is
founded on a rock. If the blade that shoots forth, and grows up suddenly in the
sand, without any bottom, happen to wither at the first extreme heat that
smites it; this implies not, that the like may betide the corn which is deeply
rooted in a good and fertile soil. The other point which we have to observe is,
the assurance of true faith, excellently represented here by the Apostle in
these words, which are full of a singular Emphasis, If you continue in the
faith, being founded and firm; contrary to what is taught in the Church of
Rome, that faith is in a continual agitation, so as a Believer can have no
assurance, that he is for present in the state of Grace, and much less yet that
he shall persevere in it for the future. In Conscience, can it be said of these
people, as the Apostle says here of the LORD's true Disciples, that they are
firm and founded? How may it be, seeing they incessantly float in doubt and
uncertainty? and are miserablely in suspense between the hope of heaven, and
the fear of bell? I pass by that other error of theirs, which is yet more
contrary to the Apostle's Doctrine, namely, their maintaining that the choicest
faith may fail. If it be thus, how can it be affirmed, that those that have it,
are founded and firm? Let us then hold fast the truth that is taught us here,
and in diverse other places of Scripture, to wit, that true faith abides
always; and being founded on the Merit, and the Death, and the Intercession of
JESUS CHRIST, does never fail. The wind makes but the chaff to fly away: it
prevails not upon good grain. It overthrows only the trees that are feeble, and
ill grounded. It leaves in their place, those that stand upon good and deep
grown roots. And as an Ancient sometime said, Tertul. de Paersc.
We may not account them prudent or faithful, whom Heresy has been able to
change. None is a Christian, but he that persevereth to the end.

But I return to the Apostle, who for the fuller Explication of this firm, and
not to be shaken faith which he requires in us, for the obtaining of
salvation, adds further, And if ye be not moved away from the hope of the
Gospel. Justly does he join Hope unto Faith, these two virtues being so
straightly linked together, that they mutually succor each other, and one cannot
be had or lost without the other. For first, Hope is the suit of faith,
expecting with assurance, the fruition of the the things that we believe; so as
when the persuasion that we have of them, comes to totter, it is not possible,
but the hope which was founded on it, must come to ruin. Again, in the combats
which we sustain for the faith, hope is one of our principal supports: while it
is firm and vigorus in us, it repelleth without difficulty, all the strokes of
the Enemy, opposing to the fear of the evils, wherewith he threatens us, and
to desire of the good he promises us, the incomparable excellency of the glory
and felicity which we look for in the other world. He that hopes for heaven,
cannot be tempted by the paintings and appearances of the earth. For this
cause, the Apostle in another place, compares hope to an Anchor, which
penetrating within the vail, fastened and grounded in Heaven, holds our vessel
firm and steady, amid the waves and agitations of this tempestuous Sea, whereon
we sail here below. And it is this, in my opinion, which the Apostle aims at
here, that the faithful might be established in the faith, he wills them, to
have still in their hearts, the hope of heavenly bliss, and never to suffer
this Sacred and Divine Anchor to be taken from them. They are in safety, while
it holds them fast. But for the better expressing it, he calls it peculiarly,
The hope of the Gospel; that is, the hope which the Gospel has wrought in us:
the expectation of those good things which it promises. And so, you see, he
refers Hope to the Gospel, as to its true and genuine object. All the hopes
that we conceive from other grounds, are vain and failing. There are none but
those which embrace the promises of JESUS CHRIST, that are firm and solid; and
such as never confound them that wait for them. The Gospel promises us, first,
the entire expiation of our sins, and the peace of GOD in JESUS CHRIST His Son.
They therefore that seek this benefit in the Ceremonies and Shadows of the Law,
as the Galatians sometime did, and the false Teachers, who would have seduced
the Colossians; or that seek it in their own merits, and the merits of
Creatures; they all, I say, and all that are like them, let themselves be
carried away from the hope of the Gospel. Then again, the Gospel promises us
eternal life in the heavens, by the grace of GOD in His Son. Those therefore
quit the hope thereof also, who seek their felicity either in the, earth or in
heaven otherways, than by the sole mercy of the LORD. Whereby it does appear,
how very pertinently S. Paul does recommend this hope of the Gospel unto the
Colossians. For in the combat wherein they were engaged, it was sufficient to
preserve them from all the attempts of the Impostors. What have I to do (says
this Hope) with the observation of your Disciplines, or the quirks of your
Philophy; since I abundantly have in my Gospel, all the good things which you
vainly promise me? But because it is ordinary with false Teachers, to abuse the
name of the Gospel, and to give it to the Fopperies and Vanities which they
preach; S. Paul to put the Colossians out of all doubt and ambiguity,
indicateth expressly to them, what this Gospel is of which he speaks, That
(says he) which you have heard, namely, of Epaphras, who had preached it among
them, and to whom he gave before an excellent Testimonial for fidelity and
sincerity. I mean (says he) the Gospel which you received at the beginning,
from the mouth of true Servants of GOD, and not these vain and dangerous
Doctrines, which evil workers would make to pass with you for the Gospel of
CHRIST, though they be nothing less then so. But to confirm them the more in
the faith, he sets before them in the second place, an excellent encomium of
the Gospel, which contains a clear proof of its truth, saying, That it is the
Gospel which was preached to every creature under heaven. It is not the
Doctrine which these false Apostles sowed here and there in some out quarters,
whispering, and privily advancing the same among light and unstable spirits. It
is the true Word of the Son of GOD, which had been proclaimed through the whole
Universe, by His command, and according to the Oracles of His ancient Prophets:
That Word, which going forth from Jerusalem, did spread its self every way in a
very little time; and being accompanied with the power of its Author, made it
self be heard and believed in all the Provinces of the habitable earth, in
spite of the contradictions of Hell and the world. His assertion, that the
Gospel was preached to every creature which is under heaven, may be expounded
two manner of ways; but both of them amounting to the same sense. First, by a
Figure, very common in Divine and Humane speech, the word Creature may be taken
for Man, the noblest and most excellent of all the Creatures. And the LORD had
so used the word before in the same matter, when He commanded His Apostles to
do what S. Paul does magnify in this place. Go ye forth (said He to them) into
all the world, and preach the Gospel unto every creature: Where it is evident,
that by every creature, He understands men, who alone are capable of hearing
and receiving what is preached. In this sense, when S. Paul says, that the
Gospel was preached to every creature; it is as much as if he had said, to all
mankind, and among all sorts of men; agreeably to what he says here a little
after, speaking of himself, that he admonishes every man, Col. 1.28.
and teaches every man in all wisdom. Secondly, these words, To every
creature, may in my opinion, be taken also, as signifying, in all the world;
and this the rather, because it is literally in the Original, in all the
creature, with the Article the, and not simply, to every creature. Now that S.
Paul sometimes uses this term, the creature, to signify the world, this great
body and collection of all things which GOD has created: this is manifestly to
be seen in the Epistle to the Romans, where he says, Romans 8.19, 20, 21.
That the great and ardent desire of the creature waits for the manifestation
of the children of GOD; and again, That the creature was made subject to
vanity; and more a little after, That all the creature groaneth and travelleth
in pain together until now, where it is clear and confessed by the greatest
part of Interpreters, that the creature, signifies the world; and our Bibles to
make us understand it the better, do change the singular number into the
plural, rendering it ( les creatures, and toutes les creatures) the creatures,
and all the creatures; whereas the Original reads simply, the creature, and
all the creature. Taking it thus therefore in this place, when the Apostle
says, the Gospel was preached in all the creature which is under heaven, he
means, in all the world wherein we dwell; wherein GOD has seated mankind
beneath the heavens. I will make no stay here now, to show you how it might be
truly said in S. Paul's time, that the Gospel of our LORD was then preached to
all mankind, or in all the habitable world; or how this event is a clear and
solid proof of its truth. We have already heretofore handled, both the one and
the other of these two particulars, in expounding (if you remember) the sixth
Verse of this Chapter, which affirmed, that the Gospel was come unto all the
world. Upon that Text, which signifies no other thing than what the Apostle
says here, namely, that the Gospel has been preached in all the creature
which is under heaven: We showed first, by good and irrefragable testimonies of
Ancient Writers, both Christian and Pagan, that the heavenly Word had been
preached within the Apostles days, in all Countries then known either to Greeks
or Romans, and received for the most part with fruit; so as taking the word
World (according to the style of all Languages) not simply and absolutely for
all the parts of the Terrestrial Globe, but only for those which at that time
were known to men, and which they understood to be inhabited; it might be said
with truth, and without any overreaching Hyperbole, as S. Paul declares here,
that the Gospel had been preached in all the creature which is under heaven,
that is, in all the world. And in the second place we proved, both by the
importance of the thing it self, and by the respect it has to the Oracles of
the Old Testament, which had predicted it many ages before its event, that this
so swift, so sudden, and so admirable running of the Gospel through all the
world, in so few years, is a certain and infallible evidence, of the verity and
divinity of this holy Doctrine, obliging consequently, both the Colossians
heretofore, and us at present, to hold fast, and persevere in the faith which
we have given to it, without suffering our selves to be ever moved away from
it, either by the cheating arts of false Teachers, and their crafty
Seducements, or by the Threatenings and Persecutions of the world. These things
having been heretofore largely deduced and opened to you, lest the repition of
them should be irksome, I will pass to the third head of our Text, wherein the
Apostle sets before the Colossians another Character of true Christian
Doctrine, to wit, that it is the Word, the Ministry whereof was committed to
him. It is (says he) the Gospel, of which I Paul have been made a Minister.

He opposes his heavenly call, to the temerity of the false Teachers, who ran
without having been sent; and preached not what Heaven commanded them, but what
earth inspired them with; their impulsions and instructions being from flesh
and blood, and not from the LORD JESUS. It was otherwise with Paul; all the
faithful knew him to have been called from heaven, and suddenly changed by the
efficacy of Divine power from a Wolf into a Pastor; made an Herald and witness
of the Gospel, immediately by the LORD JESUS, instructed in His miraculous
School, illuminated and consecrated by His Spirit. Who could doubt, but that it
was from the mouth of this holy man, that the Mysteries of GOD should be
learned; and that what was contrary to His Doctrine, ought to be judged false
and vain. I confess, his Mission was extraordinary and miraculous, and is not
to be made a precedent for others. Yet notwithstanding what he here says of
it, affords us two Instructions, which reach all Pastors generally. The first
is, that they should never intrude themselves into this Sacred Office, if GOD
call them not; so as they may say with good conscience, as Paul does in this
place, that they have been made Ministers of the Gospel. It is true, JESUS
CHRIST now speaks not to men from heaven, as He yerst did to S. Paul, to call
them unto His work. But so much He does, that He makes us perceive His will;
first, by the moving of His Spirit within us, which never fails to incite us
to His work, when GOD calls us thereto: and secondly, by the voice and
authority of His Church, that is to say, of His faithful people, to the Body
and Community of whom, He has given the power to apply the right of this
Ministry to such as they discern meet for it; as the examples of the primitive
Church, registered in the Book of the Acts, and elsewhere do show us. And as for
Ordination (as it is called) which is done by the Imposition of the hands of
other Ministers already established, I confess it also ought to intervene for
the completing and crowning of the call; accordingly you see it is seriously
practiced among us: But I add, that it is not yet so absolutely requisite, but
that in case of extreme and invincible necessity, as in places and times, when
there are no true Ministers of JESUS CHRIST found to give it, the call of the
Church, that is, of a body of faithful people, may suffice to a valid
instituting of a Pastor; the person supposed, to have the ability and
inclination requisite for such a charge. The other particular that we have to
learn here is, That all Pastors, of what rank soever they may be, are
Ministers, and not Masters of the Gospel. It Is the title which the Apostle here
assumeth, according to the Declaration he makes elsewhere, that he has no
dominion over the faith of believers; 1 Cor. 1.24.
but is an helper of their joy. The duty of a Minister is to propose, what has
been committed to Him; what he has received of the Master. If he go beyond it,
and will have his own will, and his private imaginations bear sway, he is no
longer a Minister; he does the act of a Master; and consequently sets up a
tyranny, since the Church neither has, nor can have any lawful Master, but
JESUS CHRIST. This, dear Brethren, is the which we had to deliver, upon this
Exhortation of the Aposile to the Colossians. Make account, that it is to you
also he directs it. Amid the scandals which Satan casts in the way of your
faith, and the temptations he offers to turn you out of it, have still in
your hearts, and in your ears this Sacred voice, that says aloud from heaven to
you, Continue in the faith, being founded and firm, and be not moved away from
the hope of the Gospel, which ye have heard, and which has been preached to
every creature under heaven, whereof I Paul have been made a Minister. Oppose
the authority of this Divine command, to the Seducements and illusions of the
world; to the flatteries and babble of Sophisters; to the suggestions and lusts
of the flesh. From what Coast soever, counsels contrary to it do come, whether
from within, or from without, judge them impious and abominable. And blessed be
GOD, who hitherto so settled you in the belief of His Word, that neither the
forcible attempts of open Enemies, nor the fraud of false friends, has been
able to remove you at all. But dear Brethren, it is not enough to have stood
fast hitherto. There must be preparing for more combats to come after those
that are past. For we have to do with Enemies, with whom we must look for,
neither peace nor truce. They will be still setting on work, one Engine or
other; and if repulsed on one side, will not fail to attaque us immediately on
another. Be we therefore, in like manner, still upon our guard. Let us have no
less zeal and constancy for our our preservation, then they have rage and
resoluteness for our ruin. Fortify we our faith daily. Arm it with Armor of
proof. Found it on the Eternal Rock, and so fasten it, that nothing may be able
to pluck it out of our hearts. To this purpose, let us continually read and
meditate that heavenly Word, whence we have drawn it. Let us fill our souls
with this Divine wisdom, and render it familiar to us. Let us instruct our
youth in it. Let us make it to abound on all hands among us. Let it be the
matter of our mutual entertainments, and the most usual subject of our
cogitations. For as an ancient yer while said very prudently, Chrysostom. Hom. (...)
de Lazaro.
The reading of the holy Scriptures is an excellent and an assured
Preservative, to keep us from falling into sin; and ignorance of the Scriptures
is an huge Precipice, a deep gulf of Perdition. In the design of our
perseverance, let us particularly make use of the two means which S. Paul here
furnishes us withal: The one, that the Gospel which we have heard, has been
preached in the whole world; the other, that it is the same which was committed
to our Apostle. It Is in the belief of this Gospel, that he would have us abide
firm. It Is to this faith, that he promises the peace of GOD, His Favor, and
His Eternity. GOD (says he) has reconciled you to Himself, that He might
present you holy, without spot, and unreproveable; if indeed you continue firm
in the faith, and are not moved away from the hope of the Gospel. From whence
it follows, that if we have this Gospel among us, we may certainly assure our
selves, that by retaining it, we shall obtain the peace, and the Salvation of
GOD. The only question therefore is, Whether the Doctrine which we have
embraced be truly this Gospel or no? If it be, I have no further search to
make. I am content to have found what is sufficient for me, that I may appear
before my GOD without confusion, and receive of Him life everlasting. But that
the Doctrine whereof we make profession, is the same Gospel that Paul preached;
the same that he and the other Apostles sowed in the world, and which the
world, overcome by the force of its truth, did in the end receive and adore:
This, I say, is so clear, that I do not think the Devil himself, as hardened in
impudence as he is, can deny it. For the GOD whom we serve; and the CHRIST,
whom we adore; and His Merit, in which we trust; and the Worship we give Him in
Spirit, and in truth; and the Heaven, we hope for; and the Sacraments we
celebrate, and all the other Articles of our Religion, do they not every where
appear, in the Books of Paul, and of the other Apostles? Are they not to be
seen in all the Monuments of these great men, as well in their Writings, as
also in the Churches which they planted through the earth? Let us therefore, my
Brethren, abide firm in this faith, since it most assuredly is the Gospel which
was heretofore preached in all the world, and was committed to S. Paul's
ministering. And if those of Rome do allege to us their Devotions and
Traditions; let us boldly tell them, that if those things were any part of the
Gospel, they would appear in what the Apostles preached; to whom JESUS CHRIST
gave the Ministry thereof. And in the mean time, there is not found any one of
them in the Sacred Volumes, which they have left us, to be the rule of our
faith. Neither the adoration of the Host, nor the veneration of Images, nor
the invocation of Saints departed; nor the other points for which they have
Excommunicated us. And herein their Head does evidently discover, how
Apostolical he is; to banish those from his Communion, whom S. Paul here
expressly declares, to be at peace with GOD, holy and unreprovable before Him.
For, to have this happiness, he does not oblige us to believe or practice this
pretended Gospel of Rome. He requires us, only abide firm in the belief of
his, the Gospel which he preached to the faithful, and left in his Epistles. In
them our Religion is to be seen, full and whole. But not one Article of that
which Rome would by all means constrain us to receive. But there is no need we
should make further stay upon this matter; the truth of that Doctrine which we
embrace being so clear, that no man who understands Christianity, and owns the
Divinity of it, can call it into question: And on the other hand, the absurdity
of the Doctrine we reject, is so palpable, and so rudely beats against the
foundations of Reason and Scripture, that it s very difficult for a man, who
has had any taste of the Gospel, ever to yield up his consent to the errors we
contest; except GOD have blinded him in punishment of his ingratitude. The
great combat which we have most cause to fear, is that of the passions of our
flesh. It Is these properly that enfeeble faith, that darken its light, that
hide the truth from its view, and paint up error. These are the true causes of
their change, who desert us; and of the offense of many, that are infirm among
us. Experience shows it us daily. And accordingly you see, Matthew. 13.21, 22.
our Savior has advertised us of it; having said in one of His Parables, that
it is either the fear of persecution, or the cares of this world, and the
deceitfulness of riches, that makes the seed of heaven unfruitful in the hearts
of men, and obstructs their perseverance. And S. Paul somwhere imformeth us, 2 Timothy 1.19.
that they that reject a good conscience, make shipwreck also in respect of
faith. When a man is once sold over to pleasure, or avarice, or ambition, it is
no wonder, if in the sequel, he disgust the truth, and fall into error. The
passage is easy from the one to the other. Besides, the slaves of sin, not
finding the contentation of their passions, in the profession of Truth, which
is for the most part under the cross; their interest carries them to seek their
satisfaction in the world: this gives an huge shake to their minds, and brings
them by degres to relish the worlds side and party; as it is natural to us, to
believe easily the things we desire. Here therefore it is, dear Brethren, that
we must put to our might, and fight in good earnest, if we would continue firm
in the faith. Give me a man, that embracing JESUS CHRIST, has cast off the
lusts of the flesh, and of the world, and I will be secure of his perseverance.
Take me away the colors, wherewith avarice, and ambition, and vanity, do
paint-over error, in the thoughts of the worldly-minded, and I will not fear
its seducing of any. Cleanse your Conscience, and your Faith will be out of
danger. The Devil, without doubt, made use of his best weapons against our
LORD; and you know, that having represented to Him, the hunger, and the
necessity he was in, he omitted not to spread before His eyes the pomp of the
Grandeurs, and riches of the world. It is a wile he still puts in practice; and
his Ministers do not forget this piece of his play: they fail not to tell such,
as they would destroy, that they will give them wonders. Faithful Brethren, let
us fence our selves seasonably against this tentation. Mortify we in us all
the lusts of Flesh and Earth, accustom our selves to a not-dreading the Cross,
and the sufferings of our LORD; suffer not the world to dazzle our eyes. Look we
upon it, as a deceitful show, unable to content its own adorers. To the false
goods, wherewith it feeds its bondservants, let us oppose the true ones,
which the Gospel promises. Let the sweet and noble hope of these, inflame our
souls with an ardent desire of heaven, and its immortality. Let it sweeten all
the bitterness that attends our profession, and make execrable to us, all that
tends to turn us away from so blessed a design. Courage, Christian; yet a
little patience, and you have overcome. Your faith, if you abide firm in it,
will open in your heart for the present, a living spring of such joy, as is a
thousand times sweeter than all the pleasures of Worldings: And it shall be
crowned one day, with that supereminent and immortal glory, which the Gospel
that you have believed, does promise to all those, which shall constantly
persevere in the Vocation of the LORD JESUS. To whom with the Father, and the
Holy Spirit, the true and only GOD, blessed for ever, be all honor, and praise
to ages of ages. Amen.

THE XIII. SERMON.
COL. I. Ver. XXIV. Verse. XXIV. Whereupon I now rejoice in my sufferings for
you, and to fill up the remainder of the afflictions of CHRIST, in my flesh,
for His body, which is the Church.


THE Gospel of the LORD JESUS has many admirable evidences of its divinity,
and among them, the sufferings of its Confessors, and Martyrs are, in my
opinion, not the least illustrious. For if you seriously consider them, you
will find, that there never was any doctrine in the world, that drew more
persecutions upon its followers; or that inspired them, with so much courage,
and resolution to undergo the same; or was, in effect, sealed with such a deal
of blood and patience. Other religions, as being sprung from the earth, are
welcome there; and the world that well knows its own blood, and its own
spirit, shows them kindness, and receives them gladly. The alliance also which
there is between them, being all of them fruits and productions of the flesh,
makes them mutually bear with one another. And if some jealousy at any time, do
raise in any of them, some aversion for the rest, this passion seldom carries
them so far, as to an open persecution. But as soon as Christianity appeared,
they all turned their hatred, and their violence against it, as against a
Religion, that was a stranger, and of a quite different original and extraction
from theirs. Who is able to report the furious excesses of the world against
this innocent discipline? and the horrid calamities, to which it condemned the
professors of it, banishing them out of all its countries, stripping them of
all its honors and possessions; burning them, and massacring them and
mercilesly employing its brute creatures, and its elements, against them? Yet
these cruelties did not astonish the faithful; They bore them generously, and
would rather lose all that was dear to them, even to their very blood and life
it self, than renounce JESUS CHRIST. Of so many false religions, as were up in
the wind among men heretofore, in the time of Paganism, name but one that was
consecrated in such a manner. Of all the sects of Philosophy, which Greece
yer-while brought forth, and the old sages so haughtily boasted of, show me
one, that gave its disciples the courage to suffer for it; or was watered with
their blood. Indeed I will not deny, but that some persons have been, and still
are found to suffer for false religions. But First, this happens not, save when
long use, and the superstition of many generations, have authorized the belief
of them; whereas the faithful suffered for Christianity, at the first springing
forth of it, before that the consent of people, or the authority of Princes had
strengthn'd it, or any other of such humane considerations made it plausible.
Then again, those sufferings for error are very rare, they be the sufferings of
some few persons only, one here, and another there, whom vanity or melancholy
may push on so far; Whereas Christians suffered by thousands, of all ages, of
each sex, of every rank and condition, so as their resolution can be attributed
to no other motive but their religion. Who can doubt, but Mahometism, and
Paganism would have been immediately extinct, if they had been exposed to the
like trials? Whereas Christianity was established by them: it flourished in the
flames; and the ruder shocks that persecution gave it, the deeper root it took.
And this Character is so essential, to this Divine discipline, that in the time
of our fathers, when GOD caused it to come forth, once again into public
light, it escaped not the same treatment that it anciently had; nor did it fail
to make proof of its truth by the same sufferings, confessions, and martyrdoms
which had accompanied its first birth. Hereto I further add, that the
sufferings of other religions, when any be, are with constraint and fear, or
mixed with pride, and obstinate ferocity, whereas, in those of the Gospel,
there shine forth humilty, and modesty; charity, and sweetness; celestial
consolation, and joy. Such, at the erecting of Christianity, were the
sufferings of the Apostles, and of their Disciples. For which cause, S. Paul
mentions his, here to the Colossians, in pursuance of the design he had to
confirm their faith. I now rejoice (says he to them) in my sufferings for you,
etc. -- To keep the faith of the Colossians, in its purity, and to secure it
from the leaven, which the seducers would mix with it, he represented to them
(if you remember) in the precedent Text, two strong arguments of the truth of
the Gospel. One taken from its extention, for that it had been preached through
all the world in a very little time; whereas the new doctrine, wherewith there
was endeavor to infect them, had been heard but here and there in some by
corners. The other drawn from the miracles of his own call: for that it was the
doctrine, the ministration whereof, our Savior had authentically and
magnificently committed unto him; Whereas He had given no person any order, to
preach those traditions, wherewith some would burden them. But because this
was a matter of great importance, he spends the rest of this chapter, in
grounding and clearing it, showing by diverse means, the truth of His Heavenly
call. And first, he confirms it in this verse, by the sufferings which he
cheerfully and willingly bore, to answer that call; secretly opposing this
condition of his, to the condition of the false teachers, who were exempted
from the cross, by the profession they made of observing Moses's Law. That I
(says he) am sent of GOD, and a true Minister of His, these great combats
which I sustein, and the afflictions which I continually suffer, do evidently
show you. For instead of fearing them, or being ashamed of them, I rejoice in
them; and it highly contents me to confirm my preaching, with this divine seal
of JESUS CHRIST's, even the cheerful bearing of His cross; because I am not
ignorant, how necessary this deportment is in His School, where no one lives
without suffering; and how profitable it is for His mystical body, that is to
say, the Church whom He has united with Himself, and of whom He has made me a
Minister. This is the sum of what the Apostle delivers to us here, in the
matter of his afflictions; and that we may the better understand it, we will
consider, First, the manner how he bore them, which he expresses in these
words. I now rejoice in my sufferings for you; and next in order, the reasons
of this his rejoicing, taken from the nature of those afflictions, which were
the rest of the sufferings of CHRIST, which I do fill up (says he) in my
flesh: and finally the object, or the use of them, in that he suffered them,
for the body of CHRIST, which is the Church. These are the three points, that
we will explain, the grace of GOD assisting in this action. The Apostles joy in
the nature of his sufferings; and the end or utility of them: we will establish
and make good the truth of his sentiments, and refute the attempts that error
makes, to force out some advantage from his words; the whole, with as much
perspicuity, and brevity, as we may.

Although it be true in general, that all those who will live godly in CHRIST
JESUS, do suffer persecution; yet this is particularly verified in the
Ministers of the Gospel; who not content with the single embracement of this
profession, do undertake to draw others to it, and guide them in it. This
charge exposes them, more than the rest of the faithful, to the hatred, and
violence of the world. S. Pauls's history does clearly evince it. For he had no
sooner received this sacred Ministry; but he saw the Jews, and the Heathen rise
against him, as by common agreement. His whole life from that moment was
nothing but a Series of afflictions. But the Spirit of Him, who had called him,
did fortify him in such a manner, that he sustained them all, not only
patiently, and constantly, but even cheerfully, and there was not one of them,
of which it might not be said, but that he rejoiced in suffering it.
Nevertheless it is evident, that in this place, he speaks of one of his
afflictions in particular, and not of them all in general. For his saying, I
now rejoice in my afflictions, does intimate that he means his present
sufferings, those he was in when he wrote this Epistle, and not others that
were past. Every one knows the estate he was then in; that he lay a prisoner at
Rome, bound in a chain for the Gospel. It is therefore of this persecution that
we must understand him. It is this prison, and this chain, and the
inconveniences, pain and ignominy that attended them in respect of the flesh,
which he signifies by his afflictions. But the question is, how he says, that
it is for the Colossians, he was afflicted? I rejoice (says he) in my
sufferings for you. It appears not in the history of this persecution of his,
which we have at large in the book of the Acts, that these faithful people had
contributed ought thereto; that they had been either the cause, or the occasion
of it. To this I answer, that if you exactly consider this sacred history, you
will easily find wherewith to resolve this difficulty. For it is evident, that
the hatred of the Jews his accusers and persecuters, who raised up this long
affliction upon him, was principally caused by that commerce, which this holy
man ordinarily had with the Greeks, and other Gentiles, he imparting the Gospel
to them, and receiving them into the communion of the people of GOD, without
obliging them to observe the Law of Moses. It was this that particularly
kindled their passion against S. Paul. They suffered S. James, and diverse
others of the Disciples, who exercised their Ministry among those of the
circumcision, as you see in the Acts. But as for S. Paul, who taught the
Gentiles, and freely communicated the mysteries of GOD to them, him they could
not bear; They cry out as soon as they see him, Acts 21.28, 29.
Men of Israel help. Behold the man, that teaches all men every where against
the people, and the law, and this place. And they add in particular, that he
had brought Greeks into the Temple, and polluted that holy place: imagining, he
had caused a Disciple of Ephesus, whose name was Trophimus, to enter in there;
because they had seen him in the City. Hereupon the Apostle was made prisoner,
by the Captain of the Citadel, and from thence sent to Cesarea, and two years
after to Rome. So you see, that the commerce he had with the Gentiles, and the
care he took of their conversion, according to the charge given him concerning
it from on high, was the true cause that brought all this tedious, and terrible
tempest upon him: Since therefore the Collossians were of the number of
Gentiles; considering them here under this relation, he had reason to say, that
it was for them he suffered; it being evident, that he incurred the trouble, he
was at that time under; for having opened, by his sacred Ministry, the heavenly
Jerusalem, to them, and others of their quality. And thus he explains himself
about it, in another place, where speaking of the same persecution that is in
question here, Ephesians 3.1.
I Paul, (says he) am the Prisoner of JESUS CHRIST, for the Gentiles. He
expressly names, the consideration, under which the Ephesians had a part in his
bonds, to wit, as they were Gentiles. The truth is, he was not imprisoned, on
the occasion of the Ephesians, or the Collossians in particular; but in
general, because of the service he did to the Gentiles, converting them, and
admitting them to the communion of the people of GOD. And let none object, that
he had never preached in person to the Colossians. Some doubt it. But suppose,
he had not; it suffices, that those, who had converted them, as Epaphras, and
others, had done it by his order, and after his example, and under his
authority, he being the person who had preaching to the uncircumcision
committed to him; and to whom the LORD from Heaven had given the charge to go
unto the Gentiles, Act. 26.17, 18.
for the opening of their eyes, and for converting them from darkness to light,
and from the power of Satan unto GOD, that they might receive the remission of
their sins, and inheritance among them, which are sanctified by Faith.
Hereafter we shall find him declaring, yet more plainly to those faithful
people, that they, and the rest of the Gentiles, were the occasion of his
sufferings; I would (says he to them) that ye knew, what great conflict I have
for you, and for them at Laodicea, and for as many as have not seen my face in
the Flesh. In all which the holy prudence of the Apostle does appear; who, to
win the hearts of these believers, and thereupon dispose them, to the better
reception of his instructions, besides the authority of his Office, which he
sets before them, does expressly intimate to them, the affection he bore them,
and the zeal he had for their salvation: both such, as to gain them unto GOD,
he stuck not, to be cast into so long, and so grievous a persecution, and far
from repenting it, he still rejoiced in it to that very hour: an evident sign,
that if it were to commence again; the consideration of that hard prison,
should not withold him at all, from exercising his ministry toward them, and
the other Gentiles, in the same manner he had done. It is thus, that S. Paul
took all the afflictions, wherein the Gospel, and the edification of men did
engage him. 2 Timothy 2.10.
I suffer all things (says he) for the elects sake, that they also may obtain
the salvation, which is in JESUS CHRIST. And to them that would have deverted
him, Acts 21.13.
from the journey he took to Jerusalem, What do ye (says he) weeping, and
afflicting my heart? For I am ready, not only to be bound, but also to dye at
Jerusalem, for the name of the LORD JESUS. He faithfully makes good, what he
had promised them. He generously undergoes his bonds. The tumult, and fury, of
an enraged people, did not daunt him. The conspiracy of his enemies, the
unrighteousness of his judges, the perils of the Sea, did not mollify him, at
all. The tediousness of a long imprisonment, did not change him at all. Behold
him, how he yet protests, that he rejoices in his afflictions. He is as
fresh, and as vigorous, as if he were but now entering upon them. Indeed it is
thus, that we ought to suffer for JESUS CHRIST. It is not enough, to afford it
patience; there must be joy in it. It is not enough, to go forth under the
Cross, without murmuring. There must be marching on with alacrity. He that
follows His Captain weeping is but a sorry soldier; The men of valor, do
deport themselves gladsomly, on such occasions. S. Paul goes yet further. Romans
5.3.
He would have us to glory in such kind of tribulations, and triumph, because
of them. So did the Apostles; who having been ignominiously whipped, by the
decree of the Council of the Jews, rejoiced (says the Holy History,) that they
were counted worthy, Acts 5.41.
to suffer shame for the name of JESUS. I confess such joy, in occurrences,
that would possess all other men with shame, and sadness, is strange; I confess
it is contrary to the sentiments of nature, and does exceed its strength. Yet I
affirm, that it is just; and for all that it is above the reach of our reason,
will be found a very rational joy.

That this may the better appear, let us now consider the two reasons of it,
which the Apostle alleges here, when he adds, And I do fill up the rest of
the afflictions of CHRIST, in my flesh, for His body, which is the Church. The
word (and,) which knitteth these words, with the foregoing, is put here, as in
many other places of Scripture, for one of those particles, which hey call
causal. I rejoice in my sufferings for you, and do fill up the rest of the
afflictions, etc. that is forasmuch as I fill up, or because I do fill up what
remains of the afflictions of CHRIST; as some of the best, and most learned
interpreters have well observed. The first of these two reasons, which induced
the Apostle, to receive the sufferings of the Gospel with joy, is taken (as you
see) from hence, even that by undergoing them, he did fill up the rest of the
afflictions of CHRIST, in his flesh. First, it is clear, that by the
afflictions of CHRIST, he does not mean the troubles, which the LORD JESUS
himself did suffer, in His own person, during the days of His flesh, whereof
His death on the Cross was the last, and the chief; the end and crowning of
them all. For neither S. Paul, nor any of the writers of the New Testament,
does ever use the term, affliction, to express those sufferings of our LORD.
They are always termed, either His passion, and sufferings, or His tentations;
as in the Epistle to the Hebrews. Hebr. 2.9. 1 Pet. 1.11.
JESUS was made a little lower than the Angels, through the passion of His
death; And in S. Peter; The Spirit declared the sufferings, that should
afterward come upon CHRIST; and so elsewhere. Secondly, the afflictions of
CHRIST, of which the Apostle speaks in this place, were not finished; there
remained still some part of them to be filled up; whereas the LORDS's personal
sufferings, were perfectly completed on the Cross; so as in this behalf, there
remained nothing more, for Him to suffer; according to what Himself testified,
when he cried, with a loud voice, before he gave up the ghost. It is finished;
and according to what the Apostle teaches, Rom 6.9.10. Heb. 9.28.
in diverse places; namely, that CHRIST dyed for sin once; that henceforth He
dies no more; but lives unto GOD; and that He was once offered, to take away
the sins of many. Those of Rome do confess it, and even complain, that they
should be charged, with having other thoughts in the matter; they acknowledge
it would be gross blasphemy, to say, that the sufferings of the LORD JESUS, by
which He expiated our sins on the Cross, do want any thing, that should be
supplied, either by S. Paul, or any other man. What then are these afflictions
of CHRIST which are spoken of here? Dear Brethren, they are those, that the
Apostle suffered, for the name of the LORD, and in His communion, and by reason
of the ministry, wherewith He had honored him. For it is the style of these
divine men, to give this title, to all that the faithful suffer, 2 Cor. 1.5.
for this holy, and glorious cause. As the sufferings of CHRIST abound in us,
(says the Apostle) so by CHRIST, does our consolation abound. Where you
clearly see, is signified, by the sufferings of CHRIST, not that, which the
LORD suffered in His own person, but that which the Apostle suffered for Him.
Phil. 3, 10.
And elsewhere again when he says, that he desired to be found in CHRIST, to
the end he might know the fellowship of his sufferings; that is, those
sufferings, by which all His faithful ones are consecrated, after His example.
The same, 2 Timothy 1.8. 2 Cor. 15.
he elsewhere calls, the afflictions of the Gospel: and in the same manner,
the dying of the LORD JESUS, which he says he bears about in his body; just
as he says here, that he fills up the afflictions of CHRIST, in his flesh.
And, in my judgment, it is the same, that he means, at the end of the
Epistle to the Galatians, where he glories of bearing in his body, the
brandings of the LORD JESUS, Gal. 6.17.
because afflictions are as it were, the mark, that JESUS CHRIST imprinteth in
the flesh of His servants, the seal and badge of His house. So in the Epistle
to the Hebrews, he terms, the low and disgraceful condition, the afflictions
and incommodities of the people of GOD, the reproach of CHRIST; Heb. 11.26.
saying, that Moses esteemed the reproach of CHRIST, greater riches, than the
treasures of Egypt.

If you now ask me the reason of this kind of speech, it is not difficult to be
found. For first, Since it is for the name of the LORD, for His cause, and in
his suit, that the faithful are afflicted; suffering (according to S. Peter's
advice) not as murderers, 1 Pet. 4.15.16.
or thieves, or evildoers, or busy in other men's matters, but as Christians:
all the wounds that they receive upon this account, are justly called the
sufferings of CHRIST. Since He is the cause, and the true occasion of them; it
is reason to attribute them to Him, and to say, that they are His. Secondly,
There is so strict an union, between the LORD, and all His true members, that
they with Him, make up but one body, as the Apostle will presently tell us. And
by virtue of this conjunction, we have part both in His glory, and, in some
sort, in His very Name; as the Apostle intimates, when he compares this
mystical body to a natural body, 1 Cor. 12.12.
and says, that As the body is one, and has many members, and all the members
of that one body being many, are one body: so likewise is CHRIST. Under the
Name of CHRIST there, S. Paul compriseth, not only the person of the LORD
JESUS, but with Him, the whole multitude of His faithful ones. And considering
them, as united together; He gives the Name CHRIST to this whole body, which is
composed of the LORD, as the head, and of the faithful, as members. Whereby it
appears, that all that the faithful do suffer, each for his share, does make up
part of the afflictions of CHRIST. As you know we call those hurts ours, which
we receive, in any one of our members, whether the hand or the foot. Paul is
the hand of CHRIST, as one of the members of His body, yea one of the most
excellent. Surely then, all that he suffers partaineth to CHRIST. It Is His
affliction, and His hurt. None of the wounds of His servant is alien to Him.
And you see, even among men; it is an offending a Prince, to offend His
Minister; it is an affronting the Husband, to injure the wife: to fall upon the
servant, is to make battery on the Master. Though the union of these ranks of
persons be nothing so strict, or so intimate, as that of JESUS CHRIST, and the
faithful; yet it suffices to denominate those outrages and injuries, the
Prince's, the Husbands, or the Masters injuries, which are done to the persons,
that appertain to them under that relation. Accordingly you see, in the course
of civil affairs, men interess themselves as much in such kind of causes, and
take as heinously, or more the outrages done to persons depending on them, and
dear to them, than those that are directly aimed at themselves. Thus in the
Heavenly State of the Church, JESUS CHRIST owneth, both the good, and the evil,
that is done to His faithful ones. He says of those that visit, that comfort,
and feed His poor members; that they visit, and comfort, and feed Himself. Of
those that refuse them these good offices, He complained that they have denied
them to Him. And Paul had learned this lesson from His own mouth. For when, in
the darkness of his ignorance, he, agitated with the fury of his zeal without
knowledge, persecuted the Disciples. JESUS had cried to him from Heaven: Saul,
Saul, why persecutest thou me? Acts 9.4.
It is me thou outragest, in the person of those faithful people, whom thou
purposest to bind, and imprison. Thou dealest them never a blow, but reaches
me. I miss not, by being in Heaven, to bear a part in all, that they suffer one
earth. The blood, thou drawest from them, is mine; and as their persons belong
to me, so all their afflictions, and torments are mine. The Apostle instructed
by this Divine oracle, boldly calls afflictions of CHRIST, all that which he
suffered, after he had the honor to be His.

But he does not barely say here, that he suffers the afflictions of CHRIST.
He says, he fills up the rest, or that which is behind, that, which was yet
wanting of them. To understand it aright, we must remember, what he teaches us
elsewhere, to wit, that whom GOD has foreknown, Romans 8.28.
He has also predestined to be conformed to the image of His Son; that He
might be the first born among many brethren; And that one of the principal
parts of this conformity, is their suffering here below, and their partaking of
the cross of CHRIST, according to the constant advertisement He gives us, in
Scripture; as, that if any one will follow Him, he do take up his Cross; that
such, as will live godly in Him, shall suffer persecution; and that it is by
many afflictions, GOD leads us into His Kingdom. Now as the wisdom, and
understanding of the LORD, is infinite, He has not only ordained this, in
general: but has defined, and decreed in His eternal counsel, both what the
whole body of the Church shall bear in gross, and what each of the faithful, of
whom this body is composed, shall suffer in particular; through what trials he
shall pass; where his exercises shall begin, and where they shall end. And as
His hand, Acts 4.28. 1 Pet. 1.20.
and His counsel had before determined all, that the LORD JESUS suffered, in
His own person; by reason whereof S. Peter calls Him, the Lamb, that was
pre-ordeined before the foundations of the world: So likewise has He resolved
upon, and formed, in the light of His eternal Providence, the whole lot of each
one of the faithful; all the parts, and passes of their combat. The case of the
head, and of the members is alike. There does not any thing betide them, by
mere chance. The procedure, and proportion of their whole laborious course, is
cut out, and fashioned before all ages. According to this holy, and veritable
doctrine, the Apostle doubted not, but that His task was ordained, in the
counsel of His GOD, and the number of his sufferings determined, and the
quality of them regulated. Having then already dispatched a good part of them,
he means here, that which remained for him yet to finish according to the
counsel of GOD. I accomplish (says he) in my present sufferings, the remainder
of the afflictions of CHRIST. I dispatch my task by little and little, and what
I now suffer, makes up a part of it. It is one draught of the cup, which the
LORD has ordained for me; a portion of the afflictions, which I am to pass
through, for His CHRIST's sake, and cause. It Is one of the conflicts, which I
must endure, for the consummating of my whole course. But it may not be
omitted, that the word here used, and which we have rendered, I do fill up, is
in the Original very emphatical; and signifies, not simply to fill up, or to
finish, but to fill up in ones turn, in consequence of, and in exchange with,
some other. I reckon, that there is represented by it, a secret opposition,
between what JESUS CHRIST had suffered, for the Apostle, and what the Apostle
at that time was suffering for JESUS CHRIST. The LORD (says he) has, in his
rank, completed all the sufferings, that were necessary for my redemption: I
now, in my turn, fill up all the afflictions, that are useful for His glory. He
did the work, which the Father had given Him to do on earth; and I after Him,
and after His example, do that, which He has charged me with. He has suffered
for me; I suffer for Him. He has purchased my salvation, by His cross: I
advance His Kingdom, by my combats. His blood has redeemed the Church; my
imprisonment, and my bonds do edify it. For you see, My Brethren, that the
conformity, which is between JESUS CHRIST, and each one of the faithful, does
require, that there be such a resemblance between His sufferings, and ours. And
this is that, which the Apostle intends, by the word here used. Hitherto we
must also referr, his saying particularly, that he fills up the remainder of
the afflictions of CHRIST, in his flesh. For as the LORD did suffer in this
infirm, and mortal nature, which He had put on; and, after He had put off the
infirmness of it, and rendered it immortal, and impassible, suffered no more:
in like manner, it is in this flesh, that all the afflictions shall be filled
up, which we are to suffer, by the order, and counsel of GOD. When we shall
have once quitted it, there will be no more conflicts, and sufferings for us to
undergo, then there were, for the LORD JESUS, after His death upon the cross.
It Is this same thing, the Apostle signifies, in the passages before alleged;
that he bears the dying of CHRIST, in His body; and His brandings in His
flesh. Whence appears, (to note it by the way) how absurd the belief of
Purgatory is; which makes the faithful to suffer, not in the flesh; but in the
Spirit; and extends their afflictions, and pains, beyon the days of their
flesh; in which nevertheless, the Apostle teaches us, that their sufferings
are completed. Thus you see, what the sense of his words is, and how much
reason he had, to rejoice in his sufferings: First, because they were the
afflictions of JESUS CHRIST, the Prince of life, and the author of our
salvation. Secondly, Because they were dispensed, by the order, and the will of
GOD. Thirdly, because they made up, the last part of the Apostles task; being
the going on, and the remainder of the conflicts, which he had to sustain. And
lastly, because they contained an illustrious evidence of his gratitude toward
the LORD; and rendered him conform to His holy image, in that, as JESUS had
suffered for his salvation, he also suffered, in his order, for the glory of
his gracious Master.

But he adds, yet another reason, that sweetened likewise the bitterness of
his sufferings to him, and made him to find joy amid the horror of them: It is,
that he suffered them, for the body of the LORD, which is His Church. He had
already said, that he suffered for the Colossians, as we have explained it; Now
he extends, the fruit of his afflictions, further, saying, that they are of
use, to the whole Church. And to show us, how much weight, this consideration
should have, to make his sufferings pleasant to him, he gives the Church the
highest, and the most glorious appellation, that can be attributed to any
creatures, calling it the body of CHRIST. For what more illustrious, and more
precious subject can we suffer for, than the body of the Son of GOD, the King
of ages, the Father of eternity? We have already treated of it at another time,
upon the eighteenth verse of this Chapter; and showed, how, and in what sense,
the Church is the body of CHRIST; neither will we repeat ought of it, for the
present. But his affirming, that he fills up these afflictions, for the Church,
is true, and appears so to be, in two respects. First, inasmuch as the Church
was the occasion, and indeed the cause of his sufferings. For it was the
service he did it, in preaching the Gospel, in instructing, and comforting it,
in founding it, and settling it in the faith, that had provoked the Jews against
him, and involved him in the afflictions, which did beset him. As if a Princes
servant, zealous for his Masters glory, and for the weal of his affairs, should
therethrough fall into some disaster; he might say it was for him, and his
Estate, that he shed his blood, and lay a prisoner in his enemies hands.
Secondly, S. Paul's afflictions were for the Church, because he suffered them,
for the edification, and consolation of the Church. This was the scope of his
patience, and the design of His constancy. It Is to the Church, that all the
fruit, of these fair, and illustrious examples of the Apostles virtue, did
redound. He himself explains it to be thus, elsewhere. If we be afflicted
(says he to the faithful) it is for your consolation, and salvation; which is
effected in enduring the same afflictions, which we also suffer; where you see,
that the fruit, which the faithful reaped from these afflictions, consisted in
this; that by the virtue of his example, they were confirmed in the Gospel;
were rejoiced, and comforted, and fortified for the like combats. And in the
Epistle to the Philippians, treating of the same bond, Phil. 1.12 13, 14.
that he speaks of in this place, I would, ye should know, (says he) that the
things which have betided me, have fallen out rather to the greater furtherance
of the Gospel. So that my bonds in CHRIST have been noted in all the Palace,
and in all other places. And many of the brethren in the LORD, waxing confident
by my bonds, are much more bold to speak the word without fear. Lo! how his
sufferings were for the Church, in that they encouraged the Preachers; and
enkindled, in the hearts of the faithful people, the zeal of the house of GOD,
and in those without, an inquisitiveness about the Gospel, for which he was a
prisoner. This great man's preaching had never sparkled, as it did; it had
never afforded the world, and the Church, so much edification, and consolation,
if it had not been accompanied with sufferings, sealed with his blood, and
confirmed by his wonderful patience amid the continual persecutions that were
raised against him. The conflicts of other servants of GOD, have the same
effect. Their blood is the seed of the Church. It Is from their sufferings, that
it springs up. It Is by them that it grows, and gathers strength. It Is the
patience of these Divine Warriors, that converted the world, that conquered
the nations unto JESUS CHRIST, and planted His cross, and His Gospel every
where, even in the most rebellious spirits. Surely, since the Church received
so much profit, from the Apostles afflictions, it is with good reason he affirms
here, that he fills up the remainder of them, for it. And in this sense we
must understand it, when he says elsewhere, 2 Timothy 1.10.
that he suffers all things for the elects sake.

This may suffice, for the proposal of the truth, which is perspicuous, and
simple, and obvious. But the Error of our adversaries compels us to lengthen
this discourse; Not that they deny the exposition, which we have produced; For
how could they do that, without renouncing the doctrine of the Gospel, and the
confession of Christians in all ages? But granting, that the Apostles
afflictions were for the Church, in the sense we have expounded it, they add,
that they were so further, in another sense; that is to say, in that by
undergoing them, he satisfied for the sins of other believers, and by this
means did contribute to the greatning, and enriching of the Churches treasury
of satisfactions; out of which the Bishop of Rome, to whom the custody of it is
committed, makes largess from time to time, as he judges meet, for the
expiating of the sins of penitents; and hence has risen the use of
indulgences, which is become so common in our days. But first, what kind of
proof is this? To show, that the Saints have satisfied Divine justice, for the
sins of other believers, they allege, that S. Paul writes, I fill up the rest
of the afflictions of CHRIST, for His Church. I answer, his meaning is, for
edifying, and comforting of the Church. They acknowledge, what I answer; and
only add, that the Apostles sufferings do serve also for the expiating the sins
of the Church, and to fill the exchequer of its pretended satisfactions. In
conscience, is this disputing? Is it not a pronouncing of dictates, after their
own fantasy? Is not this a presupposing of their opinion, and no proving it?
It is clear, that we read nothing in this text, either of these satisfactions,
or of that treasury, or of those indulgences, whereof they tell us. Certainly,
if they will draw these things from hence, it behooves them to show us, that
they are here; to discover them to us; to constrain us, by the force of their
proofs, to see it here. But so far are they from binding us to this, that they
not so much as endeavor to do it: and content themselves with telling us, that
though our exposition be good, and true, yet theirs also must be adjoined.
Since they urge no other reason of it, but their own dictate, we may reject it,
with the same facility, that they offer it. Nevertheless for your greater
edification, I will insist a little further, upon the illustration of this
Text. First, the Apostles words do no way oblige us, to understand him of their
satisfactions, it being evident, that it may be said of all useful things, that
they are for those, who have the use of them: as for example, that it is for
men the Sun shines in the heavens; that it is for them, the clouds pour down
the rain, and the earth yields its fruits; That it is for the Church, S. Paul
wrote his Epistles; that for the same he preached, and published the Gospel,
and a thousand other such things: 2 Cor. 12.15.
in which, never any man dreamt of any satisfaction. And when S. Paul
professes to the Corinthians, that he would most willingly spend, Justinian on
the place.
and be spent for them, does he mean for the satisfaction of their sins? No,
says a Jesuit; but he speaks, of his great pains, in preaching, and teaching;
which would not have failed of being very useful to the edification of the
Church, though of no value for the satisfaction of GOD; Here therefore in the
same manner, when the Apostle says his afflictions are for the Church. It
follows clearly that his sufferings were of use to the Church, (which I
willingly confess); but not, that they were satisfactions, for the sins of the
Church; which is precisely the thing, we deny, and which they should prove. But
if the words of this Text do not found their exposition; the authority of the
Fathers, of which they are wont to make so great a noise, does not establish it
any jot more: there being not known any one of them, that ever inferred their
doctrine from the Text, or that interprets it otherwise, than we have done.
Lastly, the thing it self does as little favor their design. And to demostrate
it to you, we must briefly touch at all the points of their pretended mystery.
It is composed of four propositions, all which they advance, upon their own
credit, without founding, so much as one of them on Scripture. For first, they
presuppose, that when GOD pardons us the sins, that are committed after
Baptism, He remitteth to us only the fault, and the eternal punishment: but not
the temporal punishment of our trespasses: this, they count, He obliges us to
expiate, either here, or in Purgatory. Secondly, they add, that diverse Saints,
as the Apostles, and the Martyrs, and others have done, and suffered much more,
than themselves needed, for the expiating of their own sins. And as they are
provident thrifty men, lest these superfluous satisfactions, (for so they call
them) be unprofitably lost, they hold, that they go into the Churches common
treasury; where being mixed with the superabundant passions of CHRIST, they are
conserved for the necessities of penetents. And finally, after all the rest,
they give the custody of this treasury, to the Bishop of Rome alone, who
dispenses it, as he judges expedient. Here Is a chain of immaginations, which
have no foundation, either in reason, or in Scripture, or any other where, but
in their own passion, and interest. For first, who taught them, to cut in
pieces thus the benefits of GOD? and to suppose, that He remits the guilt,
without the punishment; as if to remit a sin, were ought else, than not to
punish it? and that He, again, remits a part of the punishment, (to wit, the
eternal) and holds us bound, to satisfy for the other? How does this accord,
with that full, and entire grace, which He promises to repenting sinners; and
how with His declaring, that He will forget their sins; that He will do away
their iniquities; that He will remember them no more; and that there is no
condemnation to them that are in JESUS CHRIST? Would not it be a mocking of
men, if after all this, He should exact of them, the punishment of their
faults, to the utmost farthing? And as for the pretended satisfactions of the
Saints, whence have they drawn them? from what Prophets, from what Apostles,
seeing, both the one, and the others, do declare, that none of them were
justified, by their doings, or their sufferings? that they all had need of
grace, for the expiation of their sins? So far were they from having suffered
more, than was necessary to expiate them: and that all their sufferings are not
able, to counterpoise the glory, wherewith GOD will crown them? And if we be
indebted unto them, for any part of the expiation of our sins; what will become
of the Apostles assertion, that CHRST purged our sins by Himself? Heb. 1.3^.
and that he did consummate, or make perfect, them that believe, by that one
sole oblation, which He made on the Cross? If S. Paul who is in question, did
in suffering satisfy for us, how does he protest elsewhere, that He was not
crucified for us? Sure, according to our adversaries supposition, 1 Cor. 1.13.
he could not in truth deny it. For if his sufferings do serve, not only to the
edification of our lives, but also to the satisfying for our sins, as they
pretend; there remains no longer any sense, in which it may be said, that
CHRIST alone did suffer for us. These two propositions, that the Apostle did
suffer, and did not suffer for us, will be irreconcilable; whereas in our
doctrine, it is easy to accord them, by saying, he suffered for us, that is,
for our edification, and suffered not for us, that is, not to satisfy for our
sins; this kind of suffering appertaining to the LORD JESUS only. Beside, if
the afflictions, which the Apostle speaks of here, were satisfactory for the
Church, (as our adversaries will have it) S. Paul would not have suffered them
with joy: it being evident, that pains of this nature do necessarily seize
those, that suffer them, with an extreme horror and heaviness: because they are
accompanied, with the apprehension of the wrath of GOD against sin; as it
appears, both by the Cross of our LORD, which he bore constantly and patiently,
it is true; but without any moving of joy; and also by the confession of our
adversaries themselves, who represent to us the souls, that suffer for their
sins, in their imaginary Purgatory, all astonished with horror, and full of an
excessive sadness. In fine, how does this fixtion accord, with the perpetual
voice of the Church, that though the faithful dye for their brethren, Aug.
(...) tract. in Joa^. and l. q. ad Bonif. de pecc. mer. and remiss.
yet Martyrs did not shed one drop of their blood, for the remission of their
sins. And that none but CHRIST, has done this for us; and that He herein gave
us not, what to immitate, but what to thank Him for? that He alone took on Him
our punishment without our sin, to the end, that we by Him, without merit,
might obtain the grace, which is not due to us? This foundation being
overturned, their pretended treasury, and the dispensing of it, which they
forge, does fall to ground. I confess, the Church has a treasure, or rather a
living spring of graces, and of propitiation for its sins; but it is full, and
whole in JESUS CHRIST her eternal High priest; who was ordained of GOD, from
all time, to be a propitiation, through faith, in His blood: and to have
possession of the same, the sinner needs, but to present Him an heart full of
faith, and of repentance, according to the direction of S. John, 1 John 1.9.
If we confess our sins, He is faithful, and just to pardon them, and to
cleanse us from all iniquity. As for the patience, and the sufferings of
Saints, though they have not the virtue to satisfy for our sins, yet
notwithstanding they are not unprofitable to us. Wherefore the LORD would have
them put up, and kept, not in the pretended enchequer of the Pope, but in the
treasury of the Scriptures; out of which, every faithful person has the
liberty to fetch them, at all times, for his use, to the edifying of his life;
and for the gathering from such fair examples, that excellent fruit of piety,
which they do contain, he admiring, and imitating them the best he can. This is
that we ought to practice, upon the sufferings of the Apostle in particular,
which are represented to us in this Text; that we may in good earnest make our
profit of them, to the glory of GOD, and our own edification.

Learn we from them, first, not to be ashamed of affliction for the Gospel. S.
Paul shows us, that it is matter of joy; Mat. 5.11, 12.
I rejoice (says he) in my sufferings; and our LORD Himself commands us to
have this sentiment of it. Rejoice (says He) and be exceeding glad, when men
shall revile you, and pers^cute you: for great is your reward in Heaven. For so
persecuted they the Prophets, which were before you. CHRIST was treated thus
Himself; and His Apostles went to heaven, the same way. Blush not at the
bearing of their marks. If they be ignominious before men, they are glorious
before GOD: Fortify your selves in this resolution, particularly ye, to whom
GOD has committed the ministry of His word. If the world do thwart your
preaching; if it threaten you, if it come so far as to imprisonments, and to
banishing, and further yet, remember that S. Paul had no better usage; and that
it was out of a prison, that he wrote this excellent Epistle. As your cause is
the same; so let your courage be like his. Conclude, as he did, that these
bonds are an honor to you; that these sufferings, are the afflictions of
CHRIT. Let this sacred Name, and the communion, you have with Him, sweeten all
the bitterness of your troubles. But Faithful Brethren, think ye not to be
exempted from these trials, because you are not Ministers of the Gospel. You
also have part in them, each one according to his calling, and the measure of
the grace of GOD. He has no children, whom he consecrateth not by afflictions.
But if you suffer with JESUS CHRIST, you shall reign with Him, If you have part
now in his Cross, you shall have so one day in His glory. And to assure you of
it, He calls your sufferings, His afflictions. He protests, that you
receive never a blow, but He feels it. Doubt not, but he does take great
notice of the confflicts, which He vouchsafes to call His. Think also upon what
He has sustained for you, and you will confess, it is reasonable, that you
should suffer something for His Glory, who has undergone so much for your
salvatition. He has taken up for you, the whole curse of GOD: Will not you
bear the reproaches, and wrongs of men, for Him? He has born and expiated the
penalty of your sins on the cross. Will you have horror at the remainder of His
afflictions. He has accomplished, what was most difficult, that which none but
He could discharge, having drank for us, the dreadful cup of GOD's indignation
against our sins. Accomplish ye stoutly, the trials that remain for us. It Is He
Himself, that dispenses them to us. It Is not either the fancy of men, or the
rage of Devils. God has cut out our task for us. It Is from His hand we must
receive, all the afflictions, we shall suffer. But beside that we owe this
respect, and subjection, to GOD; let us learn of the Apostle, that we owe such
examples also to the Church. It is not for JESUS CHRIST alone, that we suffer.
It is for His body also. As our afflictions advance the glory of the Master; so
do they serve likewise, for the edification of the Family. Judge ye thereby,
Faithful Brethren, what our affection for the Church should be. The
consideration of it made up a good part of the Apostles joy. He accounted
himself happy, that by his sufferings, he could testify the love he bore, to
this sacred body of His Master. He blessed his Chain, how hard soever it was,
because it did the Church some service. Dear Brethren, let us imitate this
divine charity. Love we our LORD's Church above all things. Let us make it the
chief object of our delight. Consecrate we to its edification, all the actions,
and sufferings of our lives. Embrace we all its members, with brotherly
kindness; and take good heed, we despise no man, that has the honor to be
incorporate in so august, and so divine a society. The Apostles example shows
us, that we owe them even our blood, and our life. And we have heard him
besides at another time, Phil. 2.17.
professing to the Philippians, that if he might serve for an aspersion upon
the sacrifice, 1 John 3.16.
and service of their faith, he should joy in it. And S. John says expressly,
that as CHRIST has laid down His life for us, so we ought to lay down our
lives, for our brethren. If the LORD spare our infirmity, and call us not, to
so high trials; let us, at least, testify our charity toward the Church, by
all the offices, and services, whereof our condition, and the present occasion
is capable. We owe it our blood. Let us give it, at least, our tears, our
alms, our good examples. You that have had the heart, to plunge your selves,
in the vain pastimes of the world, while the Church was in mourning; that have
laughed, and sported, while she suffered, and groaned; repair this disorder.
Comfort her with your pious tears, whom you have sadded, by your vain
pleasures. Break with the world. Have no more commerce, but with the children
of GOD. Remember, you have the honor, to be the body of JESUS CHRIST. How is
it, that you have no horror, at defiling, in the ordures of sin, and vanity,
those members, which are consecrated to the Son of GOD, washed with His blood,
sanctified by His word, and baptized with His Spirit. The Church, beside this
purity of life, which its edification requires of you, at all times; does
particularly at the present, demand of you the succor of your alms, for the
refreshment of its poor members. Their number, and their necessity, increases
daily. Let your charity be augmented, after the same proportion. Let it relieve
the indigence of some, let it allay the passions of others; let it extinguish
enmities, and hatred, among us all. Let it seek not only to those, whom you
have wronged; but even to them, that have offended you, without cause; that
henceforth you may truly be, the body of the LORD, His Church, holy, and
unblamable, having no spot, nor wrinkle, nor any such thing: patient, and
generous in affliction; humble and modest in prosperity; crowned with good
works, and the fruits of righteousness, to the glory of our great Savior, the
edification of men, and your own salvation. Amen.

THE XIV. SERMON.
COL. I. Verse. XXV. XXVI. XXVII. Verse. XXV. Of which (Church) I have been made
a Minister, according to the dispensation of GOD, which has been given me
toward you, to fulfill the word of GOD.

XXVI. Even the secret, which had been hid, from all ages, and generations; but
has now been manifested, to His Saints.

XXVII. To whom GOD would give to know, what are the riches of the glory of
this secret, among the Gentiles, which is CHRIST in you, the hope of glory.


THE Church of our LORD JESUS CHRIST, is the fairest, and most glorious State,
that ever existed in the world; a State, formed in the counsel of GOD, before
the creation of the heavens; founded on the cross of His Son, in the fullness of
time; governed by the Father of eternity; enlivened by His Spirit; the most
prized, of His Jewels; the last end of His works, and the only scope of all His
marvels. It Is a State, not mortal, and corruptible, as those of the earth; but
firm and everlasting; situate above the Sun, and Moon; and see all other things
roll under its feet, in continual change, without being subject to their
vanity. It Is the only society, against which, neither the gates of hell, nor
the revolutions of time, shall at all prevail. It is the House of the living
GOD, the Temple of His holiness, the Pillar of His truth, the dewlling place of
His grace, and glory. Whence it comes, that one of the Prophets long ago,
contemplating it in spirit, cried out transported, and in ecstasy. Honorable
are the things, Psalm. 87.3.
that are spoken of thee, O City of GOD. But among its other glories, this in
my opinion, is none of the least, that GOD would employ the hands, the sweat,
and the blood of His Apostles, for the erecting of it. It is for the Church,
that He made, and formed these great men. It Is for the same, that He poured,
into their souls, all the riches of Heaven. And as they had received them, for
the Churches service; so they laid them out faithfully, and cheerfully in it;
yea, to such a degree, that they counted it a great honor, to suffer on its
occasion. They blessed the reproaches, that they received, for edifying of it.
We lately heard S. Paul, the most excellent of those divine men, protesting,
that he rejoiced in his sufferings, and afflictions for the Church; and now, in
the Text we have read, he goes on, and says that he is the Minister of the
Church. What, and how admirable must that happy Republique be, whose Minister,
and servitor S. Paul was, the greatest of men; one of the masterpieces of
Heaven, and the wonder of the earth? But beside his designing to justify, by
these words, the joy he had in suffering for the Church, as Minister of it; He
would also, found the liberty he took, to make remonstrances to the Colossians,
and authorize his doctrine against the errors, which Seducers were sowing among
them. For this cause, he enlarges on this matter, and magnifieth his Ministry.
First, he represents unto them, the foundation of it; namely the Call of GOD;
and the object of it, that is, those, toward he ought to exercise it; and the
end of it, in verse 25. in these words, I have been made a Minister of the
Church, according to the dispensation of GOD, which has been given me toward
you, to fulfill the word of GOD. After this, in the following verse, he
extolleth the subject, about which the labor of this ministry was to be, to
wit, the word of GOD; saying, that it is the mystery, which had been hid from
all ages and generations, but which has now (says he) been manifested to the
Saints. Lastly, he adds in the last verse, the efficacy of this Divine secret
toward the Gentiles; and declares in one, wherein it consists, namely, in
JESUS CHRIST our LORD; He is the whole matter, and substance of this great
mystery. GOD (says he) would give the Saints to know, what are the riches of
the glory of this mystery among the Gentiles, which is CHRIST in you the hope
of Glory. These are the three points, which we purpose to handle in this
action, if the LORD permit, the ministry of Paul, the mystery of the Gospel,
and the riches of its glory toward the Gentiles. The subject is great, the
time short, and our abilities small; May it please GOD, to supply our defects,
by the abundance of His Spirit; so powerfully strengthening, and multiplying,
the words of our mouth, in your hearts, that notwithstanding their scantiness,
and poverty, they may yet administer food for your souls; even as sometime, by
the virtue of His blessing, seven loaves, and a few little fishes, as you heard
not long ago, sufficed to satiate a great multitude.

As for the first of these three points; the Apostle speaking of the Church,
does say, Of which I have been made a Minister according to the dispensation of
GOD, which has been given me toward you, to fulfill the word of GOD. Upon
which, we have four things to consider. First, the quality of the Apostles
office, which he terms, the ministry of the Church. Secondly, the the title
to this office, founded on the dispensation GOD had given him. Thirdly, the
object of the execution of this office, which he expresses, by saying toward
you; that is, toward you Gentiles, as we shall show anon, and in the Fourth
place, the function, and the proximate end of this office, which he declares
to us, in those words, to fulfill the word of GOD. Observe then Brethren, first
of all, how this holy Apostle, to express the office, to which GOD had called
him, says, he had been made, not the Master, or the Prince, or the Judge, or
the Monarch, or the Highpriest, but the Minister of the Church. Whereby you
see, on the one hand, how very far, from the mind of this holy man, the
doctrine, and practice of those is, who qualify themselves, with those vain,
and haughty titles; which are not heard of in the Scriptures, among the names
of the Apostles, and Pastors there: and who are not ashamed to say, and to
write openly; that Bishops are Judges, Masters, and Princes of their flocks:
That he of Rome in particular, is the Monarch of the Church; its King, and its
Sovereign Lord on earth; whose feet it ought to kiss, the lowest homage a
vassal can do to his Master; that he has power to impose laws on the Church,
which shall bind the Conscience, so as it can have no faith, or salvation, out
of his obedience; that he has, though indirectly, even power, and dominion
over the temporalities of the Church; not so much as the Scepters, and Crowns
of the Sovereign powers of the earth excepted. Judge by this, if it be not a
mocking of the world, to strive that they may be taken for true heirs, and
successors of S. Paul, and S. Peter. S. Paul calls himself a Minister of the
Church; These men say, they are the Lords, and Monarchs of it. S. Paul
protests, that he has no dominion over our faith. These men pretend, that
they have an absolute empire; 2 Cor. 124.
such, as every man is bound under pain of damnation, to believe all that they
command, for this very reason, because they command it. S. 1 Pet. 5.1.2, 3.
Peter styles himself a Presbyter, (that is, an Elder) with the Presbyters, or
Elders. These men say, they are their Sovereigns, and Kings. S. Peter orders
the Pastors to feed the flock of CHRIST, not as having Lordship over his
heritages: And these men attribute to themselves a direct, and a supreme
dominion over them. In sine, JESUS CHRIST, both Paul's and Peter's Master,
says expressly to His Ministers; Mat. 20.25.
You know, that the Princes of the Nations are Masters over them, and exercise
authority upon them, but it shall not be so among you. And these men exercise,
both upon people, and Pastors; in sum, on the whole Church, a mastership, and a
dominion, much more absolute, more rough, and rigorous, than ever did any
Monarch upon his subjects; and such, as wants neither the pomp of dignity,
nor the splendour of riches; nor arms, nor guards, nor any other of the
ordinary, and visible marks, and badges of a worldly royalty. But you have to
observe here also, on the other hand; how false and unjust the derision is,
which our adversaries make, of the name of Minister; which Pastors among us do
assume; imputing in a manner, their modesty to them, as a crime; and almost
accusing them, that they are not arrogant. I know well, that the word here
rendered, Minister, is often used, in the language of Scripture, and the Church,
to signify the ministry of those; who have the care of the poor, and of the
stock of the Church, and we have retained it, in this sense, in our vulgar
tongues; in which, they that are put into such charges, are called (in French)
Diacres, (in English, Deacons) as you know; which is precisely the Greek word,
here used by the Apostle. But however, since S. Paul has not stuck to use this
name, Col. 1.23. 2 Cor. 3.6. and 6.4.
for the expressing of his office, calling himself here, as you see, a Minister
of the Church, and before, a Minister of the Gospel, and elsewhere yet, a
Minister of the new Testament, and again in another place, a Minister of GOD,
and Minister of CHRIST; it seems to me, that no one can blame us, for having
followed the example of his humility; us, who are so far beneath him; and that
the taxing of us, for calling our Pastors, Ministers, is evidently a reviling
this great Apostle, who has so often used this name, in this sense, yea, even
to signify the highest dignities that be in the Church; such as, without
contradiction, his Apostleship was. For it is evident, that he means this
here, when he says, he was made a Minister of the Church.

He adds, in the second place, According to the dispensation of GOD which has
been given me. Hereby he shows, first, that it was not man, but GOD, the
supreme Master, and Lord of the whole universe, who called and consecrated him,
to the Ministry of the Gospel. You all know the history of it, it being told us
at length, in the book of the Acts: it is full of so many wonders, that the
vocation of this holy man, ought to be counted very singular; many
circumstances meeting in it, which do not occur, in the call of any other
Apostle. JESUS CHRIST had called the rest, during the days of His flesh; He
called S. Paul, after His resurrection, and His sitting at the right hand of
the Father. He conversed with the rest on earth; To this person, He spoke from
Heaven. The others were invited by our Savior, and won, by little, and little.
Him He overcame, and subdued, at once, by an extraordinary exercising of His
Divine power; seizing him suddenly, by the miraculous force of His right hand.
If the rest, before their call, had no affection for the LORD, at least they
had no hatred, nor aversion for Him. Paul burned with a furious zeal, against
JESUS CHRIST, and all His, and made war upon Him, and had weapon in hand, when
he was plucked by celestial power, out of the bonds of iniquity; and in a
moment changed, from a persecutor, to a Minister of the Church. But beside the
Author of his call, he further discovers to us here, the nature of his
Ministry, by saying, that this dispensation of GOD was given him. I am not
ignorant, that the dispensation of GOD, may be taken, for the conduct, and wise
disposel of the Providence of GOD, who governs all things, and particularly
the things of the Church, by His eternal counsel. And if the Apostle had said
simply, that he had been made a Minister, according to, or by, the dispensation
of GOD, it might have been so understood; But he adds expressly, that this
dispensation of GOD, was given him; and this necessarily obliges us to
understand it, not of the LORD's conduct, which was not given him; but of the
divine office of a steward in His Church, to which S. Paul was called, and
which was committed to him; For that the quality, and condition of his
Apostleship was such, 1 Cor. 4.1.
he teaches us expressly elsewhere. Let every one (says he) account of us as
Ministers of CHRIST, and stewards of the mysteries of GOD. Whence it clearly
follows, since the Apostle was a steward, or a dispenser, that his Office was a
stewardship, or a dispensation, as he calls it here. And from thence it
appears again, how false the opinion of those is, who attribute a Lordly, and
absolute authority, and a dispotical power, to Ministers of the Church, over
the LORD's flocks. For the steward, or dispenser has power, not to do any
thing of his own head, and after his own phantasy; but only to dispense, what
the Master has given him; and precisely in such manner, as he has prescribed
him. If he license himself to do more, he exceeds the bounds of his
commission; and all, that he does, or says, beyond them, is null, and of no
force, nor does it oblige any one of the household, to obey it.

But the Apostle adjoyneth, in the third place, the object of his Ministry,
that is, who they are, toward whom he ought to exercise it. This dispensation
of GOD, has been given me toward you, says he. These Colossians, to whom he
wrote, being Gentiles by birth, and extraction, he considers them here, in
that quality, and his meaning is, that it was for them, and others like them,
that he had been called to this sacred ministry; that is to say, in a word, for
the Gentiles. It Is true; an Apostleship was an universal charge, which extended
generally to all men, of what nation, or condition soever, having the whole
earth for its praecinct; according to that clause of the commission, which the
LORD gave His Apostles, when He sent them; Go, and teach all nations. And that
the Ministry of S. Mat. 28.29.
Paul was of the same condition, does appear evidently, by his procedure, and
by his writings; For he often preached the Gospel to the Jews, as you may see
in diverse places of the book of the Acts; and he directed to them particularly,
that excellent Epistle to the Hebrews, which remains in the Church to this
day. But though the extent of His charge was such originally, and by right;
nevertheless, that He might exercise it with more commodiousness, and fruit,
GOD assigned him peculiarly to the Gentiles, and would have him labor,
particularly for them; as He gave him express notice, when He directed His call
from Heaven to him; Act. 26.17, 18.
I send thee (says he) to the Gentiles, to open their eyes, that they may be
turned from darkness to light. And afterward, in pursuit of this heavenly
order, Peter, and Paul by a voluntary Economy, parted mankind in two; Peter,
with the other Apostles, taking the circumcision to preach to, that is to say,
the Jews, and Paul the uncircumcision, that is the Gentiles, as himself reports
elsewhere. Which must be understood, of the ordinary exercise of their charges;
it being otherwise not prohibited, either that Peter should undertake preaching
to, and the converting of the Gentiles, Gal. 2.
or Paul the like for the Jews; if any opportunity inviting them to it, were at
any time presented them, in the course of their Ministry. Whereby you see, in
general, how necessary this appropriating of a determinate flock to each
Pastor, is; and how vain, and exorbitant, the pretention of Him is, who calls
himself, the universal Pastor, and Bishop of all Christendom. For if the
Apostles themselves, who had the power, did yet account the exercise of this
charge so difficult, that to acquit them of it, they voluntarily parted the
district of their commission between them; each of them taking a portion of it
only: how can we believe, that a man, who is infinitely inferior, in regard of
the gifts of these great Ministers of GOD, should be capable to govern alone,
the whole Church of CHRIST? But the Apostle alleges this, very pertinently,
to the Colossians, to keep them fast in the purity of the faith. For since he
had been sent of GOD, to illuminate, and teach, the Gentiles; it is evident,
that being Gentiles as they were, they owed him a particular respect, and were
to receive nothing into their belief, which was unconform to his instructions;
considering him, as the Minister of their faith, whom GOD had particularly set
over them. Whence it follows, that they neither could, nor ought to embrace
that novel doctrine, which certain seducers did offer them; seeing it was
neither preached, nor approved by S. Paul. And since we our selves are by
extraction Gentiles, this consideration, my Brethren, obliges us also, to the
same reverencing of this holy man. He is our Apostle, and the Minister, whom
GOD has given us, for an interpreter of His will, and a conductor of our souls
to salvation. Let us respect Him, among all the Ministers of CHRIST. Let us
hear him diligently. Let us peruse His divine instructions, night and day; let
us abide fixedly hanging on His sacred mouth, and not hear ought beside.
Whatever others may be, there was never any but he, that received from heaven,
the particular commission to instruct us.

Lastly, he shows us, what the work is, and the end, of this Office of his;
the dispensation of GOD has been given me, toward you, (says he) to fulfill
the word of GOD. Some there be, that understand by this word of GOD, whereof
the Apostle speaks, the ancient oracles, which foretold, the converting of
the Gentiles, to the knowledge of the true GOD, in the days of the Messiah; as
that, for instance, Isai. 42.6. and 49.6. Zech. 2.11. Mic. 4.1.
which we read in Isaiah that CHRIST shall be a light to the Nations; and in
Zechary, Many nations shall be joined to the LORD, in that day, and shall
become my people; and in Michah, Many nations shall go, and shall say, come and
let us go up to the mountain of the LORD, and unto the house of the GOD of
Jacob, and he will teach us his ways, and we will walk in His paths. And other
such, which are found, in great number, in the books of the Prophets. As if the
Apostle meant, that he was appointed the Minister of the Gentiles, for the
accomplishing of these predictions. Now sure, it cannot be denied, but the
thing in its self, is true; it being clear, that his preaching was one of the
most excellent means, which the LORD made use of, for the effecting of what he
had promised, in those oracles; namely, the conversion of the nations.
Nevertheless, the putting of this sense, upon the Apostles words, is in my
opinion, a doing them some violence. For first, the word of GOD, in his style,
does signify the Gospel; which is so called, by reason of its excellency:
being, without controversy, the most excellent of all the words of the LORD,
and these terms are always constantly so understood, when he coucheth them
simply and absolutely, as in this place he does; and I do not think, that so
much as one passage can be produced, wherein he takes them otherways. And
though this were not so; yet it is impossible, to understand them otherwise
here; where the Apostle, to explain, what this word of GOD is, for the
fullfilling whereof he was sent, immediately adds, the mystery, which had
been hidden from ages, and from generations; but has now been manifested to
His Saints; which is, as you see, an illustrious description of the Gospel. And
as for this phrase, of fullfilling the word of GOD, which seems chiefly to
have settled the Authors of this exposition, it sounding harsh to them, that it
should signify preaching of the Gospel; they should consider, that the Apostle
uses it elsewhere, in this very sense; Romans 15.19.
when he says, that from Jerusalem, and round about, even to Illyricum, he had
fullfilled the Gospel of CHRIST; where he uses the same term, which he places
here; and clearly calls that, the Gospel of CHRIST, which here he terms the
word of GOD. What does he mean then, by these words? Truly, to fulfill the
Gospel, is to preach it, with such efficacy, as that it has reception in the
hearts of men; it is, to justify the virtue of it, by the effect. And
therefore our French Bibles have judiciously rendered the word, in the place now
quoted, by, making to abound. The true, and natural perfection of the Gospel
is, that it is the power of GOD to salvation, to every one that believes, both
Greek and Jew. I acknowledge, it is so always in its self; but this its virtue
does not appear, nor display it self, until it be planted, by preaching, in the
hearts of men; and do take root, and fructify there. Till then its perfection
remains hid, and wrapped up in its self. It Is with it,, as with seed, which
shows not what it is; but when having been received into the bosom of the
earth, it produces an herb, or a plant: or as a sword in the sheath, which
does not discover its strength, and the goodness of its temper, but when it is
drawn, and set on work. Thus does the Apostle mean, when he says, that GOD
gave him the dispensation of the Gentiles, to fulfill, or accomplish his word.
That is, to spread, and, by his preaching, display the virtues, and perfections
of His Gospel; which then clearly appeared, when this heavenly word, which till
that time, had operated on the Jews alone in a manner, did also in short space
convert, a great multitude of Gentiles. And the Apostle elsewhere, uses a like
word, in almost the same manner, when he says, that the power of GOD is
completed in infirmity, that is to say, not that it acquireth, but that
therein it shows and displayeth its perfection. Such is the end of the
Apostles Ministry. He was called to it, to fulfill, or complete the word of
GOD; to set His Gospel on work; to preach it, for the converting of men, and
for the glory of its Author.

Whereby you see, first, wherein principally, the charge of true Ministers of
the LORD, does consist; not incommanding, or in appearing above their flocks;
much less in braving it before the world: but in publishing heavenly doctrine,
with an holy order; even to the giving of themselves no rest, till it be settled
in the souls of their hearers; till it reign there, and show its divine
perfections in the change of their conversations. And secondly, that the Gospel
is the whole subject of their preaching; so as they have not liberty, to mingle
with it, either their own inventions, or traditions of men, how fair, and
plausible soever they may seem: that they do keep themselves faithfully within
these bounds, remembering the end of their commission; that the dispensation of
GOD has been given them to fulfill the word, not of men, but of GOD. Consider
we now, that which the Apostle adds, concerning this word of GOD, (that is,
the Gospel) It is (says he) the mystery, which had been hid from ages, and
from generations, but has now been manifested to His Saints. All this serves,
to exalt the glory of the Gospel. He says first, that it is a mystery, that
is, a secret; and he gives it the same name often other-where; 1 Timothy 4.16.
because it is a dectrine, not exposed to the sense, and reason of men, but
secret, and hid in GOD: such a doctrine, as eye saw not, nor ear heard, neither
did it ascend into the heart of man; Read the books of the worlds sages. You
will see, that by the subtility of their spirits, they did discover, and as we
may say, read diverse verities in the creatures, which the Creator had graven on
them. But you shall not find those of the Gospel there at all. They were hid,
in the deep abyss of His eternal wisdom and counsel, where no created eye can
penetrate, or discern ought that is in it, until Himself produce it, and set
it in our sight. Whereby it does appear, how much they are mistaken, who
pretend, that Evangelical truth, may be found out, by the contemplation of
nature. I grant, that the Gospel does not contradict nature; yea, I affirm,
that it perfecteth, and crowns it: so as when it is once revealed to us, we
observe diverse things in nature, which have admirable correspondence with it,
and could not be fully cleared, without this new light. But it is the Son of
GOD alone, who brought it out of the bosom of the Father, and published it. By
the same consideration, you may also judge, with what reverence we ought to
receive the Gospel; since it is a mystery, the secret, not of an earthly King;
but of the Sovereign Monarch of Men, and Angels.

The Apostle says, in the second place, that this secret had been hid from all
ages and generations, that is, from the creation of the World, until the
revealing of our LORD, and Savior; none of the former times, none of the
generations of men, that lived in them, having had the happiness to know it.
There are many truths in the Law, that may be termed secrets, or mysteries: as
for instance, what it teaches, concerning the creation of the world, and the
manner of that Creation; concerning the judgment of GOD against sin, and the
calling of Israel had been public a long time, having been discovered, by the
Ministers of GOD, Became public long ago. Ephesians. 3.5.
to the sore-passed generations. The Gospel alone has this glorious advantage,
to have continued hidden, all that while, until the appearance of the Son of
God. S. Paul affirms it here; He repeats it, in the Epistle to the Ephesians,
Romans 16.25.
in almost the same terms. He had signified it before, in that, which he wrote
to the Romans: saying, that this mystery had been kept secret in old time. But
he adds in fine, that this great secret, has now been manifested; that is to
say, in the fullness of time, in the latter days, when the Son of GOD appeared.
By the Saints of GOD, he means, first, the Apostles, to whom the LORD JESUS
did discover the whole truth of His Gospel, by the light of His Spirit, in a
very peculiar, and extraordinary manner: and secondly, all the rest of the
faithful, whom he caused to see the same mysteries, by their Preaching,
accompanied with the effectual operation, and light of the same Spirit. Both
the one, and the other of them, are called Saints, because GOD had separated
them, by His call from the rest of men. By which you see, that there are none
but the Saints of GOD, who do truly know His mysteries; the revelation, which
is necessary for the knowing of them, most assuredly purifying, and sanctifying
the heart of man.

But I perceive, some difficulties arise here, in your minds, against this
doctrine of the Apostle; which must be resolved, for your satisfaction, before
we pass further on. First, You may ask me in general, how it is true, that this
mystery was hid from the foregoing ages, seeing the Gospel is eternal? And
then, how this accords, with so many Prophecies of the Old Testament, in
which it seems to be so clearly represented; and moreover, how with the LORD's
saying of Abraham, that he saw His day; and lastly, with the Scriptures express
informing us, that the ancient believers were all saved by faith, which seems
to have no place, without the knowledge of the Gospel? To this I answer, for
the first article, that it is true, the Gospel was foretold, and as the Apostle
speaks elsewhere, was promised, and figured, under the Old Testament; but it
was not manifested. It was at that time in being; but lay hid in the bosom of
the Father, and only wrapped up in the Oracles, by which He promised it, and in
the types, by which He figured it; so as it is nevertheless eternal; forasmuch
as in these latter times, it was, not made, and created of nothing; but only
brought out of the obscurities, and enveloppings, which until then it had
remained covered with. And as for the Prophecies, it is true, they are clear,
since the Sun of righteousness, arising in the horizon of the Church, has
there shed abroad His light: by the benefit thereof we easily read, what the
finger of GOD has written in them; But before this, while the darkness of the
night did cover all things, it was impossible for the best sight, to penetrate
thoroughly the true meaning of them. As when it is broad day, we read
distinctly, and without difficulty, the same writing, wherein we see nothing
but some strokes, and a few letters confusedly, during the dimness of the
night. Would you know, what difference there is between these two seasons? Turn
to that Chapter of Isaiah, Isa. 53.7.
in which we read, He was led as a sheep to the slaughter, and what follows.
There is not a child among us, but presently understands it of CHRIST, and
His dying for us, Act. 8.34.
in a profound humbleness, and charity. Yet the Ethiopian, who, without doubt,
was very forward in the School of the former people, does confess that he
understands nothing of it; and cannot tell, whether the Prophet does say this
of himself, or of some other. First, the accomplishment of the things, which is
the commentary upon prophecies, and the light of figures, has made the ancient
oracles and types clear to us; which by consequent, remained obscure, and
inexplicable, until that event. Secondly, the Law did further augment this
obscurity: being then spread over these mysteries, as a thick veil, through
which, how sharp-sighted soever men were, it was not possible for them to
pierce. Whereas now, the righteousness of GOD having been revealed to us
without the Law, (as the Apostle says) and this troublesome Veil having been
rent, and removed by JESUS CHRIST, we clearly behold the light of Moses's face,
which indeed was of old, but could not be seen, as long as it abode covered
with the Veil of the Law. And as for Abraham; he saw the day of the LORD, and
rejoiced in it: that is to say, he knew, and believed, that CHRIST should come,
and save the world, and exalt the people of GOD unto a super-eminent glory;
which was sufficient for his joy: but this implies not, that he distinctly
knew, either what the person of CHRIST would be, or in what manner He acquired
salvation for us, with all the circumstances of these things; which neither any
men, or so much as Angels knew, but by the manifestation of JESUS CHRIST, in
flesh, Ephesians. 3.10.
and by the consequents thereof; the Apostle expressly testifying, that it was
then, and not before, that the manifold wisdom of GOD was made know to the
Angels; whom, according to his ordinary style, he calls, principalities and
powers. The knowledge, which the rest of the faithful had of CHRIST, was like
that which Abraham had. They believed in sum, His coming, and their redemption,
and the restoration of all things by His means: and they desired Him, and
waited affectionately for Him, saluting His promises afar off. But they did not
distinctly comprehend the mystery, and in particular, as we at this day do.
Yet this hindered not, but that they were justified by the merit of His death,
and saved by His cross, and fed with his Manna; and made to drink of His
source; it being clear, that there is no other salvation in the world, but the
same which He did procure; nor do the diverse degrees of faith, by which the
redeemed draw from His fullness, vary ought at all, in the essence, and
substance of His grace: because GOD requires no other faith of His people, but
such as is proportioned to the measure of the revelation, He has given them;
the same being more or less clear, as the times were nearer to, or further
distant from, the glorious light of His Son. Thus the truth, which the Apostle
teaches us here, abides firm, and beyond all contradiction; namely, that the
mystery of GOD, that is to say, the Gospel, was hid from ages, and from all
generations; and was not manifested, but now to the Saints of GOD. To whom
(says he) GOD would give to know, what are the riches of the glory of this
secret, among the Gentiles, which is CHRIST in you, the hope of glory.

This is the third part of this Text, and does express the glory, and the sum
of this mystery. He sets the will of GOD, at the entrance, as a strong bar
against our curiosity, to stay it; and restrain it, from intruding into a
search of the causes, of this admirable dispensation of the mystery of the
Gospel. It busieth its self principally about two points, namely, the time, and
the persons to whom this manifestation has been made. For, as to the first, it
does demand, why GOD should suffer so many ages to flow forth, and so many
generations pass away, without discovering the secret of the Gospel to them;
having reserved the revelation of it to these latter ages only? Let us say with
the Apostle, that the truth is, He would so do; and be we contented with His
will, assuring our selves, that it is just, and reasonable, though we know not,
the motives of it. He has reserved the seasons of things, in His own dispose.
Besides, at what time soever He had done it, man would still have demanded, why
no sooner, or no later. Now he complains, that GOD delayed so long. If GOD had
discovered His mystery, at the beginning, he would complain of His having made
so much haste. He now objecteth, the interest of the first ages, that were
deprived of this blessed light. He would have objected the interest of these
last generations, that they were too far removed from this Sunshine, to make
their profit of it. Unbelief does never want pretenses. It finds somewhat to
reply, against all the LORD's procedures. And not desiring, that they should be
just, does easily forge apparences to it self, to believe they are not so. Let
us suffer Him to be wiser than our selves; and instead of arguing about the
order He has taken, receive it with respect, and make our profit of it. Let it
satisfy us, that by His grace, we find our selves, within the compass of that
blessed time, in which He has manifested His secret; and make we use, with
thankfulness of the advantage, He has pleased to give our age, above those
that have preceded. But if you ask me, why GOD communicated His Gospel, to the
Church no sooner; tell me also, why He gives not, to men, and other living
creatures, the perfection of their kind, at the instant of their nativity? why
lets He them lose so much time in the weaknesses of infancy, which might be
better employed in more noble actions, if they had their vigor, and maturity at
the beginning of their days? Tell me again, why He makes not the plants to
grow up, to blossom, and to bear fruit, in a moment? and why He forms
families, and States so slowly, among mankind? GOD does nothing suddenly; and
would have us understand the maturity of His counsels, by the gravity of His
motions. He has formed the Church, in the same method. He would, that she
should begin to pronounce, before she spoke distinctly; pass through childhood,
before coming to full age. He would, that she should learn her rudiments,
before she heard the highest lessons of His wisdom; And have, in one of her
times, Moses for her Schoolmaster; in the other, JESUS CHRIST for her Doctor,
as the Apostle shows us, in the Epistle to the Galatians. Since the Gospel is
the highest of Her lessons, C. 3, and 4.
it was justly reserved for her ripest age. But if you press me still, and ask
me, why GOD ordained such a difference between the ages of the Church: I will
answer you, as before, with S. Paul: that thus He would do. You cannot break
over this bound, without unsetling the whole nature, and bringing the justice,
of all His progresses into contestation; it being evident, that it was neither
more difficult for GOD, nor less apparently reasonable to give animals, and
vegetables, their strength and perfection, in the first moments of their life;
then to give the Church, the knowledge of His mysteries, in the first centuries
of her time. The other point, in this dispensation of GOD, which offends our
curiosity, respects the persons, to whom He has manifested His mystery, and
sanctified them by this Divine light. Why to these, has He done this, rather
than to those? Why to poor Galileans, rather than to the Scribes, and Priests
of Israel? The Apostle cutteth the knots of all these questions, with one only
word, saying, that He would make it known to them. It Is the reason, which the
LORD Himself alleged, for this diversity, when having given thanks to the
Father, for that He had hid these things from the wise, and prudent, and
revealed them unto babes, Mat. 11.26.
He adds, Even so, Father, for thus it has pleased thee. And our Apostle
treating elsewhere expressly of this matter, concludes, that GOD has mercy on
whom He will have mercy, Romans 9.18.
and whom He will He hardens. It Is at this Will, that we must stop, and not
go on, vainly seeking for reasons in the persons themselves, of the favor GOD
has showed them; it being clear, that we shall never find in them any which
may give us satisfaction. And again, hereto must we reduce all the diversities,
which may be observed in the dispensation of the Gospel: as, that GOD makes it
to abound, in one country, and among one people, while another is deprived of
it; that He makes it to shine upon one generation, after having denied it to
another; that He communicates it here more liberally, and there more sparingly.
All this depends merely on His good pleasure; nor can the things themselves
afford us any valuable reason of it.

But I return to the Apostle, who says, that by the revelation of His Gospel,
GOD has made known, what are the riches of the glory of this mystery among
the Gentiles. They that are versed in the reading of this holy man's writings,
do know that he often uses the word riches, Romans 11.33.
to set forth abundance. As when he cries out, Oh the depth of the riches,
both of the wisdom and the knowledge! and when he speaks elsewhere of the
riches of the grace of the LORD; Ephesians. 1.7. Romans 2.4.
and when he demands of the impenitent, if he despise the riches of the
goodness of GOD, of His patience and long-suffering; and so in a multitude of
other places. It Is in this sense, that we must here understand the expression
of riches of glory; that is to say, a great abundance of glory, or (which
amounts to as much) a very great and most abundant glory. Whereby you see the
zeal of this holy man for the praise of the Gospel. Inasmuch as he cannot
satisfy himself about this subject, but heapeth up the most magnifick terms,
he can think of, to represent the excellency of it. He calls it a mystery,
and a mystery of GOD; and a mystery hidden, during all the ages that rolled
on from the foundation of the world, and at length discovered from Heaven in
the last time, to the Saints of GOD. This is very much; and there is no other
doctrine, either humane, or indeed Divine, of which so much can be said. But it
is not enough for S. Paul. He adds, that it is a glorious mystery, yea
contents not himself with this. He ascribes to it, not glory simply, but
riches, and an abundance of glory. And it is not here alone, that he does so.
He speaks of it every other-where in the same manner; as when he says, that
unto him this grace was given, Ephesians. 3.7, 8.
to preach among the Gentiles, the unsearchable riches of CHRIST: and to make
all men see, what is the communication of the mystery, which from the
beginning had been hid in GOD; and elsewhere he calls it, the glorious
ministration of the Spirit; 2 Cor. 3.8.18.
and the mirror wherein the face of the LORD is openly beheld. And in truth,
he had good reason. For it is particularly in the Gospel, that GOD has made
all the beams of His glory to shine out. There He manifests and communicates
unto men, all the marvels of His Power, of His Wisdom, of His Justice, and of
His merciful goodness, in their greatest altitude, and in their richest
abundance, which are as the substance and essence of this glory. The Gospel is
His treasury, wherein He presents us His most glorious, and His Divinest
benefits; His grace, His peace, His Spirit, His Holiness, His consolation, His
life, and His immortality. But the Apostle does not speak here of the riches,
of the glory of the Gospel in general, and toward all. He adds particularly
among the Gentiles. Sure, there is no sort of men, whether Jews or Greeks, but
the Gospel shows forth riches of glory in them, if they receive it; Yet we
must acknowledge, that never-did its glory break forth, with so much splendour,
as when it was preached to the Gentiles. First, that exceeding great and
inexhaustible abundance of goodness and grace, which the Gospel goes filled up
with, did pour forth it self, and (if I may so speak) overflowed all bounds, in
saving the Gentiles, the most hopeless of all men; when it raised them from
this grave, or rather from that abyss of misery, wherein they had lain, not
four days, as Lazarus in his Sepulcher, but for four thousand years. For this
cause, the holy Apostle, comparing the grace of GOD in His Son, (...) 15.8.9.
showed to the Jew, with that showed to the Gentile, at His calling of each of
them, does name the former, Truth; for that it was promised; and the second,
simply, and altogether, Mercy. Then again, how very admirable was the virtue of
the Gospel, which effected that in a few days, that the Law had not been able
to do, in so many ages? The Ministers of the Law did compass Sea, and Land, and
after all found it very hard to make one proselyte, and with all their
diligence, for two thousand years, that they toiled, had not reduced so much as
one Nation to the Service of GOD, though they employed even sword, and strength
to that end, when they could. But the Gospel quite naked, and without other
weapons, then its Cross, brought unto GOD many a people converted from
Paganism. They were a sort of men, that worshipped stocks and stones: they lay
plunged in a brutish ignorance, and in the most infamous vices; there was a
mixture in them, of the stupidity of beasts, and the wickedness of Devils.
Certainly, to make so much as one of these a Christian; to bring him out of
this infernal pit, (...).
and place him in the Church; to make him of a slave of Satan, a child of GOD,
was (as an Ancient, writing on this passage rightly says) no less a miracle,
than if some one should suddenly change an unclean, and deformed dog, into a
man, and from the dunghill, whereon he lay, cause him to sit upon a royal
throne. It was truly therefore a great, and an ineffable richness, and
abundance of glory, for the Gospel, to transform so speedily, not a small
number, but hundreds, and thousands of Pagans, into so many believers. And in
this, the Apostle secretly strikes at the false Teachers, who would mix such a
noble, and glorious mystery, with their feeble traditions, as if it had not
strength, and virtue enough of it self to subsist, without the succor of their
inventions.

Finally, he intimates, in two words, the ground of all this richness of glory,
that the Gospel has; which is (says he) CHRIST in you; that is to say, that
CHRIST, whom they possessed, and who dwelt in them by faith. 1 Timothy 1.1.
And he adds, that He is the hope of glory; after the same manner, that
elsewhere he calls CHRIST our hope, that is, He of whom we hope for highest
glory, and in whom we do infallibly find all the blessedness, that we can,
either defire, or expect. It is not without design, that he advertiseth them,
that JESUS CHRIST is all the fullness of the mystery of the Gospel. He lays a
foundation hereby, for what he will more clearly tell them hereafter: namely,
that it is in vain, that the seducers would mingle, the Ceremonies of Moses,
and the service of Angels with it. All this great mystery begins, and ends in
JESUS CHRIST; since it is no other thing, 1 Timothy 4.16.
as himself defines it elsewhere, than GOD manifested in the flesh, justified
in the spirit, seen of Angels, preached to the Gentiles, believed on in the
world, and received up into Glory; that is, JESUS CHRIST our LORD, born, put to
death, raised again, glorified, and set forth in the Gospel for us. Such is the
mystery, whereof the holy Apostle has spoken to us.

Judge now, Beloved Brethren, what grace GOD has showed us, in communicating,
so rich, and so admirable a secret to us. Many Kings, and Prophets have desired
to see, and hear it; and not at all had the happiness. Heaven, and earth did
sigh four thousand years, after the blessing we possess: But in the end, only
the last ages did obtain it. The Jews saw the wonders of GOD but obscurely, and
through veils, and shadows. The Gentiles saw them not at all, being covered
with a disinal night, living without GOD, and without hope. This divine
mystery, appearing at once, in the end of times, as a great light, that shines
forth sudainly from Heaven, did dissipate the shadows of the one, and dispel
the darkness of the other, changing, by its virtue, the whole face of the
universe in a moment. It has particularly showed the riches of its glory among
us, having brought our Fathers out of the horrors of Paganism, which did once
cover this whole Land. Let us embrace therefore, with all the affections of our
souls, this great and inestimable favor of the LORD's. Let us keep it pure,
and uncorupted, without immixing in it, ought that is alien to it. It is not
only sufficient for our happiness. It is even rich, and abundant in glory.
They, that would stuff it out with Ceremonies, and services, whether of Moses's
teaching, or man's inventing, as false Teachers heretofore did, and our
adversaries at this day do; they, understand not aright the inexhaustible
opulency, wherewith it overslows. They obscure the resplendency of its heavenly
glory, by their additions; they hide it, and cover it again, with the veil,
which JESUS CHRIST has rent in sunder. Let us say to such, as propose them
unto us; We are contented with the mystery, which GOD has vouchsafed to
manifest unto His Saints. It sufficed for their bliss. It will well suffice for
ours. We do not desire, any other riches, than those which it abounds with;
or any other glory than that, which it shines withal. It is enough, that this
JESUS CHRIST, who fills it up, is in us, the hope of true glory. There is no
need to associate with Him, either Moses, or Angels, or Saints. But Faithful
Brethren, the securing of this mystery, from the errors of superstition, is not
all. For the conversing of it pure among us, and placing it in that glory,
which is due to it, there must be a putting far away the filth of vices, and of
carnal, and earthly passions. GOD has not lighted up this great Sun among you,
that ye should continue to live ill, and do the same works, in such a blessed
light, as are done in darkness. Far be it from Him. He has discovered to you,
the mysteries hidden in old time, that your holy life might be new. As your
knowledge is greater, than that of other ages; so let your holiness surpass
theirs. The dimness of their light does in some sort excuse their faults;
faults committed in the mistakes of childhood, and in the obscurity of shadows.
With what pretext can you palliate yours? you, to whom GOD has communicated
all His counsel; How will you defend, that ardent, and unruly passion, which
you have for the earth? you, whom by the Gospel, he has made to see, all the
beauties of Heaven; How will you justify the love, and the adherence you have,
one to the pleasures of the flesh, another to the heaps, and honors of the
world? you, to whom He has showed the riches, and the glory of eternity, in
His Son JESUS CHRIST? Sure, to sin, in such light, is not an infirmity; nor
simply a naughtiness. It is an impudence, and an execrable insolency. Take heed
then, Beloved Brethren, that this great grace, which GOD has showed you, do
not turn to your condemnation. If you desire, it should be saving to you,
purify your selves, and cleanse your selves from all filthiness and pollution.
For the mysteries of GOD are only for Saints. Renounce the world's behavior,
as well as its belief: Walk in the ways of Heaven, in an Honesty, and Purity,
worthy of the vocation wherewith GOD has honored you. Let His mystery show
forth the wonders of its glory, among you; potently changing your whole life,
into its brightness, and transforming you into the image of that JESUS CHRIST,
who has vouchsafed to dwell in you, and to take your hearts, for His temple:
that after you have wisely managed His talents here below, and happily
travailed in His work, He may crown you one day, in the Heavens, with that
sovereign, and eternal glory, which He has promised us, and we hope for, from
His grace. So be it.

THE XV. SERMON.
COL. I. Verse. XXVIII. XXIX. Verse. XXVIII. Whom we preach, admonishing every
man, and teaching every man in all wisdom, that we may render every man perfect
in CHRIST JESUS.

XXIX. Whereunto also I labor, combating according to His efficacy, which
works in me powerfully.


DEAR Brethren; There is a great difference between the Law, and the Gospel,
both in regard of their own nature, and in regard of the manner of their
dispensation. For, to omit other things, the Gospel is a mystery, that is, a
verity, so hid in GOD, as if He had not vouchsafed to discover it to men
Himself, by a supernatural revelation, no creature, either earthly, or
heavenly, had been ever able to bring it forth from the bottomless deeps of
GOD's wisdom; or to acquire any solid, and distinct knowledge of it, by the
contemplation of the things of the world. But the Law is a verity, suitable to
the sentiments of nature, and so open to the view of Angels, and men; that if
sin had not dulled, and corrupted the strength of our understanding, we should
have easily comprehended it, of our selves, without any extraordinary
manifestation from Heaven. Accordingly you see, how deplorate, and how blind
soever men be, yet they fail not to discern the things of the Law, and the
rectitude, and justice of the most of that, which it commands us. But if you
consider the dispensation of these two doctrines, you will find, that whereas
the Law was given by Moses to the Jewish nation only, the Gospel of our LORD
and Savior was preached to all people on earth indifferently, there having
been no part of mankind, to whom the benefit of this new light was not
presented by the Apostles, and their Scholars. S. Paul (if you remember)
informed us of it, in the foregoing text; where he affirmed, first, that the
Gospel is a mystery, sudden during all the ages and generations, which had
passed; but now manifested to the Saints of GOD; and secondly, that the LORD
has made known the glorious riches of this mystery among the Gentiles, that is
to say, among other people of the world, beside the Jews; This he further
confirms, in the Text now read unto you, by the extent of his preaching,
protesting, that he declares this Divine word to all men. For having intimated
before, the subject of this great mystery of the Gospel, and declared that it
consists wholly in CHRIST JESUS alone, who is the author, and the matter of
this celestial doctrine, he adds, whom we preach, admonishing every man, and
teaching every man in all wisdom, that we may render every man perfect in JESUS
CHRIST. And because his labors, and his sufferings, were one of the most
glorious marks of the truth, and the Divine authority of his Apostleship, he
makes mention of them also, in the following verse, Whereunto I also labor
(says he) combating according to His efficacy, which works powerfully in me.
For his design is to justify, what he had before told the Colossians; namely,
that he was a Minister of the Church, set up to fulfill the word of GOD among
the Gentiles: and this, to the end he might establish the Colossans in the
doctrine which he preached, and secure them from the seductions of false
Apostles, who endeavored to corrupt it, by immixing with it, the errors, which
they went to and fro a sowing in the world: and did pretend, that besides Faith
in JESUS CHRIST, there was a necessity of observing the ceremonies of the Law
of Moses, and of practicing diverse superstitions, as the worshipping of Angels,
which they recommended, and hugely exalted, as S. Paul will show us, in the
following chapter. It was for the setting up of his own Ministry, and
teachings, above these evil workers, that he urged his heavenly call before; It
is for this end again, that he exalted the Gospel, in so lofty a manner; and
it is for the same end, that he here sets forth the exercise of his Apostleship;
which consists in two things; one whereof is the preaching, which he
describes in verse 28. The other is the labor, and conflict, which accompanied
his preaching, declared in the verse following, the last of this chapter. These
are the two points, which we will treat of, by the will of GOD, in the present
action; the Preaching, and the combats of S. Paul; noting upon each of them,
what we shall judge apt for your edification, and consolation; which is the
only mark, that all the labor of this great Apostle tended to; and the true
end, both of our word, and your faith.

As for the Apostles Preaching, we shall have four things to consider, which he
says of it. First, the subject of it, to wit, JESUS CHRIST whom (says he) we
preach. Secondly, the manner of it, which he expresses in those words;
admonishing, and teaching every man. Thirdly, the object, to which this
preaching of his was directed, namely, every man; admonishing every man (says
he) and teaching every man; and in the fourth, and last place, the end, and
aim, to which it tended, to wit, the perfecting of those, to whom it was
directed; that (says he) we may render every man perfect in CHRIST JESUS. For
the first, when he says, that he preaches JESUS CHRIST, his meaning is not
simply, that he speaks of JESUS CHRIST to those, whom he instructed. There
never was an heretic, but made some mention of Him; and for the coloring of
his dreams, did mingle with them somewhat of the mystery of JESUS CHRIST; even
Mahomet himself, the desperatest of all impostours, that ever debauched men
from the Gospel, does nevertheless speak of Him with honor, and acknowledge in
gross, the truth of the call, and doctrine of JESUS. But the Apostle signi^ies,
that he declares JESUS CHRIST alone; preaches none but Him; that He is the
only subject of His preaching, and the filling up of his teachings; according
to the profession he expressly makes elsewhere, that he determined to know
nothing among them, 1 Cor. 2.2.
whom he taught, but JESUS CHRIST crucified. His Epistles, in which he has
left us a lively, and a true picture of his preaching, do sufficiently justify
his speech. For such as have read those divine writings see, that they are
filled, from the beginning to the end, with JESUS CHRIST alone. This adorable
name shines out every where in them; and there is no tract, or chapter, but it
is engraven on it. There are scarce two periods found together, in which it
does not appear. If he be to teach, he proposes no other secrets, but those of
the nature, or the offices, or the actions, or the passions, or the promises of
JESUS CHRIST. If he must combat error, he wields no other weapons in it, but
the Cross of JESUS CHRIST. If he aim to clear the obscurities either of nature,
or of the Law; JESUS CHRIST alone is the light he uses, to dissipate all kind
of shadows, and clouds. From Him he fetches consolation, for souls cast down,
either by the sense of their sins, or by the heaviness of affliction. In Him,
he finds all his motives, and arguments for our sanctification. JESUS CHRIST
alone, furnishes him, with all that is necessary to pacify our consciences, to
make glad our hearts, to raise our hopes, to confirm our faith, to inflame our
charity, to inkindle our zeal, to stiffen our constancy, to encourage our
patience, to purify our affections, to loosen us from the earth, and lift us
up to heaven. JESUS CHRIST is all his Logic, and all his Rhetoric. He is the
rise of his arguments, the magazin of his arms, the great motive of his
persuasions, the soul of all his discourses. In the determinations of this holy
Doctor, you no where meet with, either Pope; or Mass; or devotions to Saints,
and Angels; or Purgatory, or auricular confessions, or so much as one of those
pretended mysteries, that fill up the modern Theology. He was fully content
with JESUS CHRIST. He believed it enough, to preach Him, and that he needed no
more, either to discharge his own duty, or to advance our edification; and
truly he had reason. For what is there, I do not only say necessary, and
useful, but any way good, or great, and excellent, which is not in JESUS
CHRIST? Though other things, which are recommended in religion, were as true as
they are false; and as innocent, as they are pernicious; yet it is evident,
that in comparison of CHRIST JESUS, they are miserably poor, and childish. In
Him alone is found such true solidity, as is able to content the soul; in Him
alone is wisdom, righteousness, sanctification, and redemption; all the fullness
of the Godhead; all the treasures of wisdom, and knowledge, as S. Paul will
tell us hereafter. In this LORD alone, is grace, truth, and life. There is no
salvation in any other. Acts 4.12.
No other name has been given under Heaven unto men, whereby they must be
saved. And yet, alas! though this be a truth, so clear in it self, and so
authentically confirmed by the practice of our great Apostle; there are people,
that professing to believe it, do for all, seek that elsewhere, which is to be
found in JESUS CHRIST only: and having this living, and overflowing spring of
grace opened to all believers, by the loving kindness of the Father; yet go
digging in the poor Cisterns of the creatures, for the water of salvation. They
acknowledge, that the merits of JESUS CHRIST are infinite, His righteousness
absolutely perfect, His grace inexhaustible, His power supereminent: but they
are not content with it however; They adjoyn their satisfactions unto His; the
prayers of Angels, and Saints to His intercession; and do mingle the sufferings
of men, with the blood of the Son of GOD. But if the lusts of the world, or the
false blaze of error, or the corrupt inclinations of the flesh, do induce them
to approve, or to bear with so dangerous a mixture; let us, for our part, Dear
Brethren, whom GOD has delivered from such prepossessions, adore the fullness
of JESUS CHRIST. Let us content our selves with his richness, and never seek
any true good any otherwhere, than in Him. Bless we GOD, that from the Pulpits
erected among us, we hear no name sounded forth but His. Since S. Paul
preaches none but Him, it is greatest reason, that He alone should take up the
mouth of Preachers, and the faith of their hearers.

But the Apostle having declared the subject of His preaching, adds the
matter of it. We preach CHRIST, (says he) admonishing, and teaching in all
wisdom. These are the two parts of the office of a good Preacher, to wit,
admonition, and instruction. The first compriseth all the remonstrances, that
are made to sinners; whether to reprehend their faults, or to excite their
diligence, or to comfort their sorrows, or to advertise them of any other part
of their duty. The second, contains all the lessons of heavenly doctrine, the
exposition of each of the articles of the mystery of godliness. Admonition
reformeth manners; teaching informs faith. The one moves the will, and the
affections; the other instructs the understanding. The Apostle protests
elsewhere, Act. 20.21, 31.
that he carefully joined these two offices together; not contenting himself
with teaching, and testifying of faith in JESUS CHRIST; but moreover
incessantly admonishing every one with tears. And you see these two ways
meeting thoughout his Epistles; in which, he not only expounds the mysteries
of faith; but ever, and anon descends to the applying of those instructions,
to the carriage of those whom he instructs; reproving them, chiding them,
comforting them, encouraging them, as they had need. And as he practiced thus
himself; so he gave order, for the like procedure, to others, whom GOD had
called to the holy ministry. 2 Timothy 4.2. 1 Timothy 3.2. 2 Timothy 2.24. Tit. 1.9. 2 Timothy 3.16, 17.
Preach the word (says he to Timothy) be instant in season, and out of season;
reprove, rebuke, exhort with all sweetness of spirit, and doctrine. And
elsewhere he wills in general, that every Pastor be, not only apt to teach; but
also able, to admonish by sound doctrine, and to convince gainsayers. Indeed,
these two offices are necessary for the edifying of the faithful, which is the
end of the ministry. It is not enough to propose the secrets of the Gospel in
general unto them; general things do not much stir us. They must be touched in
particular; and the word of God which is the instrument of our profession, is
proper for these two operations, as S. Paul expressly notes, when he says,
that the Scripture is profitable, for doctrine, for reproof, for correction,
for instruction in righteoussness, that the man of GOD (that is, His servant,
or his minister) may be accomplished, and perfectly furnished unto every good
work. Such then, as the LORD has honored with this sacred ministry, should
labor both in the one, and the other of these two performances; and make
account, that he calls them, not simply to teach, but also to admonish. For
this here is not the pew of a Professor of Mathematiques, or Physic; who has
no other business, but to explain the secrets of those sciences, to those that
hear them. This Chair has been prepared in the Church, for the conducting of
men to salvation; not merely to make them understand: but to give them
everlasting life; to illuminate their minds; to form their lives unto holiness,
to pluck them out of the snares of Satan, and cause them to walk in the ways
of GOD. Faithful Brethren, since you know, that such is the nature of our
charges, you should not think it strange, or ill, that we execute them, in this
manner, among you. There are some, that have a tender ear. They willingly hear
information, and doctrine: but cannot bear remonstrances. Discourse, about the
mysteries of religion, is pleasing to them; but about their vices, and their
duty, burdensome. And this tenderness is a very bad sign; as showing, that
their morals are not found. As a Physician judges, that there is something
amiss, some sinew hurted, or some collection of unnatual humors, in those parts
of the body, which he cannot touch, without putting the Patient to pain. If you
would have our ministrations, to be entirely grateful to you, reform your
manners, that nothing may remain in your life, but what is healthy, and
vigorous. Remonstrances do importune those only, that have a diseased Soul. But
they should consider, that if they be troublesome to them, they are necessary
for them: and if the interest of our Office do oblige us, to make them; the
interest of their salvation, does much more oblige them to suffer the same. It
is a salt somewhat sharp, but wholesome; a potion, bitter, but conducing to
health. But the Apostles addition, that he teaches in all wisdom, must not be
forgotten. There is no need, I should advertise you, that he speaks of heavenly
wisdom; of that truth, which is necessary to be known, for the obtaining of
Salvation. It is evident therefore, when he says, he teaches in all this
wisdom, he signifies, that he declares all the mysteries of it, to such as he
instructs; that he hides no part of it from them, which it concerns them to
know, for their arriving at the inheritance of JESUS CHRIST. It is the very
thing, that he speaks elsewhere more clearly, and in express words; namely,
when he takes the Bishops, or Pastors, of the Church at Ephesus, to witness,
that he had kept back nothing from them, which was profitable for them; but had
taught it them, Act. 20.20, 21, 27.
and preached it publicly, and from house to house, tesstifying both to the
Jews, and to the Greeks, repentance toward GOD, and faith in JESUS CHRIST our
LORD; and a little after. I have not shunned (says he) to declare to you all
the counsel of GOD. Whence it appears, that the traditions, which are pretended
to have been, not publicly, and generally taught to all the faithful, but
delivered in secret to some only by the Apostles, are not at all necessary to
men's Salvation. He that has learned, what the Apostle taught all men, knows
enough, since he taught in all wisdom; except men will say, that he wants
some knowledge, who has learned all wisdom. But it has always been one of
the artifices of curiosity, to feign, that men of GOD did not publish all; and
that they committed a part of their instructions, only to the ears of some,
that were more perfect than the vulgar; to the end, that under this pretext, it
may make its own disquisitions, and inventions pass, for articles of divine
doctrine. I know well, that this is a mere imagination; as weak, as it is bold;
and such as has no other foundation, than the passion of those, that advance
it. But it is not my business, to make any further inquiry, into the vanity of
it. For what ever it be, since S. Paul has taught every man, in all wisdom, my
simplicity is henceforth in safety. The ignorance of your pretented secrets,
cannot be prejudicial to me, since all the wisdom of the Gospel, is comprised,
in the Apostles public, and common teachings. From the same consideration, you
may perceive also, how extravagant the dreaming of those is, who would make it
be believed, that the doctrine of the Church is polished, and perfected from
age to age, the succeding having added to the light of those, that went before;
and that we should not wonder, if the ancients either knew not, or even spoke
contrary, to some of the Articles of the Modern Divinity: forasmuch (say they)
as the Church, not having yet at that time declared them, the belief of them
was not necessary. By this account, the Faith will have been imperfect, in the
Apostles time. Yet S. Paul says here, that what he Preached to all men, was
all wisdom; and he will add immediately, that by it, he rendered every man
perfect in CHRIST JESUS. whatsoever may be said in the matter, it is clear,
that it is enough to know the things, that are sufficient to save us. If that,
which the Apostles Preached, did suffice for the salvation of the first
believers, we have nothing to do with that which men have added since. For we
seek but our salvation; and it is sottishness to imagine, that what was
sufficient to save believers in those days, is not sufficient to do it in
ours; as if GOD had changed his design; and the revelation of His Son, and the
Apostles Preaching were not the seal and the last perfection of all His
dispensations. The Articles which have been declared in the latter ages, did
make up a part of the wisdom Preached by the Apostles, or no. If they made up a
part of it, they were no less necessary for the first ages, than for the
latter. If they made up no part of it, they are now as little necessary as
ever. And it avails nothing, to allege the Church, to us. For what authority
soever may be ascribed to the company, which is so called, it has not enough,
to make that necessary, which in reality is not so; not enough, to shut up,
what GOD has opened; nor to contract, what He has dilated; or to bind, what
He has loosed. If GOD will save us, without belief of the Mass, or of
Purgatory; the Church would do well to will the contrary; would she not? GOD
will judge us, by His own will, and word; and not by the fantastical conceits,
or imaginations of men.

But I return to the Apostle, who shows us also, in this Text, (and it is
that, which we are to consider, in the third place) what the object of this his
Preaching is, when he says, that he admonishes every man, and teaches every
man. It Is very probable, that the false Teachers, who would seduce the
Colossians, for the coloring of that observation of the Law, which they
recommended, did allege, that the Apostles themselves left the Jews the use of
Circumcision, and the practice of legal abstinences; and that if S. Paul did
otherwise, it was but toward some only. I account, it is to this properly,
that we must referr and oppose, his saying here three times, that he
admonishes every man, that he teaches every man, and that he might render
every man perfect in CHRIST. He thus repeats this word to them, to show, that
his Preaching was the same, and uniform throughout: that he declared to all
men, but one sole JESUS CHRIST; and that he Preached Him indifferently both to
Jews and Gentiles, Greeks and Barbarians; GOD having given for them all, but
one and the same Gospel; as He has set up but one Sun, in the Universe, to
shine on all mankind. I declare (says he) the same CHRIST unto all, as Savior
and Redeemer of the world. There is no man, to whom I Preach any other thing.
Whereby he gives a secret blow to the doctrine of these Seducers, which was
particular, and not Preached, either by the holy Apostle, or by any of his
fellows. It may well be also, that he aimed to show here, in his way, the
extent of his charge, which enclosed all men on earth within its compass, there
being no one of them, to whom he had not authority to Preach the Gospel, and to
admonish and teach him. According to his saying elsewhere, that he is debtor,
Romans 1.14.
both to the Greeks, and to the Barbarians; both to the wise, and to the
unwise; for the seasonable establishing of the power, he will use anon, to
admonish the Colossians, and condemn the Seducers. For he shows thereby, that
there is no person, how knowing soever he may be otherwise, but is his
Scholar, for this Heavenly wisdom, and ought in this respect to be subject to
his instructions, and to learn of Him the mysteries of the same. As if he had
said, that GOD has raised him to the Doctoral Chair of the universe, and made
him His public, and universal Herald, who should be hearkened to, by all the
men of the world. Whence it follows, that these pretended Masters of the
Colossians, who would intrude to teach them, after their mode, did thwart the
institution of GOD; and that before they did put themselves, upon the
instructing of others, they should first have learned, of the Apostle, the true
mysteries of the wisdom of GOD. I acknowledge, there is not any one of the
Ministers of GOD, who has now this great extent of Authority, that the Apostle
here ascribes, and with truth, to himself. Nevertheless each of them ought to
do, in his district, what the Apostle did, in his; even admonish, and teach
every man, whoever he be, in all wisdom; have but one, and the same Gospel for
all; not pleasing doctrine, and, as is commonly said, a Velvet Gospel, for the
rich; and another quite different, for the poor; but treat them all without
respect of persons: not conceal ought from the one, which has been discovered
to the others; each one ought, to teach the small, as well as the great; to
admonish the great, as well as the small; to edify them all in common, without
despising the littleness of the one, without fearing the greatness of the other.

But let us now see, what the end, of this Preaching JESUS CHRIST, is. We
declare Him, says the Apostle, admonishing, and teaching every man in all
wisdom, that we may render every man perfect in JESUS CHRIST. This was the
Apostle's aim; this was the design of his labors, even to present, all those
that heard him, holy, and unreprovable, unto JESUS CHRIST; to put them into
such an estate, by his Preaching, as that they might appear, before the Throne
of Grace, without confusion. He expresses it elsewhere in other terms; namely,
when he says to the Corinthians, 2 Cor. 11.2.
in particular, that he had appropriated them, or knit them, or as it were
espoused them to one husband, that I might present you, (says he) as a chaste
Virgin unto CHRIST; where he uses precisely the same word, which he places
here, and which we (French) have translated, in the one of these places
(render) render, and (presenter) present, in the other. You know, there are two
sorts of perfection; one of a believer's minority; the other of his full age,
according as the Apostle distinguishes our times, in the first Epistle to the
Corinthians. 1 Cor. 13.11.
The one, that which we have here below, during the course of our Pilgrimage.
The other that, which we shall not have but in Heaven, our true Country. This
latter is a perfection every way complete; such, as comprehends all the
degrees of knowledge, holiness, and glory, which our nature is capable of. The
former is a perfection begun, having all the parts of sanctification, and
consolation, that are necessary, in our present frailty, but not yet brought up
to the top, and highest degrees. The one is simply, and absolutely called,
Perfection, the other is so named, but in some respect, and in comparison,
either of the estate, which we were, and other men not regenerate are still in,
or of the condition of our age. The Apostle means the first, Phil. 3.12, 15.
when he confesses, that he is not already perfect. He speaks of the second,
when he faith, Let us all that are perfect, be thus minded. The one, and the
other is the end of the Preaching of the Gospel. For the design of Paul, and of
all true Ministers of the LORD, is, to guide the faithful to eternal salvation;
that is, to the last and highest of these two kinds of perfection, by means of
the first. And so the nearer effect of their Preaching, and which immediately
follows it, is the believer's perfection on earth. The further and more remote
effect of it, which necessarily, and infallibly results from the first, is his
perfection in Heaven. Moreover, this first perfection, to which Preaching
immediately tends, consists of two parts chiefly, Knowledge, and
Sanctification; Faith, and Charity; And though there be many defects, both in
the one, and the other, if you compare them with the vision, and glory of
Heaven, yet the one, and the other are, even at present, perfect in some sort,
to wit, in as much, as the true believer wants not any of the knowledges, and
habitudes, that are necessary to salvation. And it is to this the Apostle
reduces it, when he restrains the perfection he speaks of, to JESUS CHRIST;
that we may render every man perfect in JESUS CHRIST, says he. It Is to His
abundance, that we owe our perfection; forasmuch as He gives us what we have
of it, by His Spirit; and supplyeth, what we want of it, by the riches of His
merit. The Apostle considers the Believer's perfection here, in its whole
extent, that is, in regard both of faith, and of holiness. I confess, he does
particularly intend the first of these. For it seems to me evident, that he
has an eye to the error of the Seducers, who added the observation of the
Mosaical Law, the worshipping of Angels, and such other Traditions, to the
instructions of the Gospel, as if the faith of Christians were imperfect
without them. S. Paul, to overthrow this pernicious dotage, does seasonably lay
firm, that the Preaching of the Gospel is enough to render every man perfect,
who receives it with says, that there is no need, either of Moses, or of
Angels; no need of the Ceremonies of the one, or of the services of the other;
that JESUS CHRIST, in whom we are, abundantly suffices, without the adjunction
of any other. But though this be the Apostles direct aim; yet in that
perfection, which he speaks of, together with entireness of faith, he does
comprise, pureness of manners, and of worship, which inseparably depends on it,
and without which that faith cannot possibly be perfect.

Such is the sense of these words of S. Paul; from which we may learn two
things, before we go further on. The first is the perfection, and sufficiency
of the doctrine Preached by the Apostles. For since the end to which it tended,
was to make the hearer of it perfect, it is evident, that it had in it all,
that was necessary to convey this perfection; there being no likelihood, that
GOD would have put a means, into the hands of His servants, which was not
sufficient to reach their end, such a fault being incompatible with His
infinite wisdom, and power. But it is evident, that the Apostles Preaching,
would not have been able, to make the faith of their hearers perfect, if they
had omitted, in Preaching, any one of those particulars, the believing whereof
is necessary to salvation: It must be concluded therefore, that they omitted
not any one of them. Whence it is clear, by the same argument, that all the
traditions, which men advance at this day, are unprofitable. For what service
can they do us, since we may be perfect, in JESUS CHRIST, without them? It
cannot be said, that they were a part of the things, which the Apostles
Preached. First, the very men, that defend them, dare not affirm it of the most
of them, it being notoriously known, that they rose up by little, and little,
very long after the Apostles times. Secondly, because S. Paul himself
describes to us the matter of his Preaching, We Preach CHRIST (says he)
confining it wholly, as you see, to the mystery of our Savior, with which
these Traditions have no more alliance, than those of the Seducers had, which
he will afterward refute, who sought to mingle diverse Ceremonies, and the
worshipping of Angels, with the Gospel of JESUS CHRIST. And lastly, because the
Apostle elsewhere gives to Scripture, the same sufficiency, which he here
ascribes to his Preaching, saying, 2 Timothy 3.16, 17.
that All Scripture is by the inspiration of GOD, and is profitable for
doctrine, etc. that the man of GOD may be perfect. But it is clear, that these
pretended traditions do appear no where at all, in Scripture. Sure then, it is
also manifest, that they are no way necessary, to make our faith perfect. But
by the same grounds, it is apparent again, how contrary to S. Paul, the
doctrine of Rome is. For whereas he says, that the design of his Preaching
was, to make every man perfect in JESUS CHRIST; Rome, on the contrary, allows
this perfection only to Clerks, in the first place, and next, unto Monks, not
reckoning, that the people, (whom by an odious name, which S Paul never gives,
but to Pagans, or the profane, they call Seculars, and men of the world, in
opposition to men of the Church) can, or should seek to arrive at persection.
And the presumption of Monks is grown so high, that there are no longer any,
but persons hooded, and clothed in their mode, that are called Religious men,
or Religious women; as if every man, who is a true Christian, were not also
truly religious; and again, they call their condition only, the state of
perfection; as if all the rest of the faithful, were but abortives, and
imperfect productions. And though this vanity be, so out of measure injurious,
to all other Christians; yet their Partisans do suffer it, and seem, for the
most part of them, well pleased with it; imagining, under this pretense, that
there are none, but Monks, obliged to be perfect; and that, as for themselves
who are in the world, it is not their part, to aspire so high; and in effect,
the greater number do so freely dispense with themselves, in the case, that
truly there is reason to call them Seculars indeed. But the holy Apostle here,
overthrows in two words, the arrogance of the one, and the security of the
other. As for the former, when he tells us, he Preaches the Gospel, that he
might render his hearers perfect, he clearly shows us, that, for our guidance
to perfection, we have no need of the Rules either of Francis, or Dominie, or
Bruno, or Loyola; or the other many pretended Regulars, who as it were outvying
one another, daily set forth some new discipline to the World. The LORD JESUS
has provided long ago for our perfection, giving us a most complete, and very
easy rule, to attain it; after which, it is an exorbitant rashness, to resolve
the establishing of another. Follow that rule, Christian, embrace that, and
proceed constantly in the way of holiness, which it has prescribed you; and be
confident, that so doing, you shall not fail of being perfect, though you wear
not Francis's Frock, and Hood; or Loyola's little Band. But the Apostle here,
no less condemns, the security of those, that are called Seculars, than the
vanity of such, as style themselves Religious. For he says expressly, and
universally, that his design is to render every man perfect in CHRIST JESUS. He
will have no other Disciples. He owneth none for his Scholars, but such as aim
at perfection; such as vow it, and labor after it daily. If you remain
Secular, and in state of imperfection, his Preaching has not wrought it is
effect in you; and as you have not part in that perfection, to which he would
form you in this life, no more shall you have part, in that, to which he
desires to conduct you, in the next life. There is but one sort of Christians,
even such, as having believed the Gospel, do mortify the deeds of the body,
and crucify their flesh, with it is affections, and who forgetting the things
which are behind, do advance some steps daily; toward the mark, and prize of
their calling; such as Paul, whose speech about it you are now hearing, has
prevailed to render, by the efficaciousness of his Preaching, perfect in CHRIST
JESUS. It Is a mistake, it is a folly, to fancy any others. These double, or
middling Christians, that would at once be, both Christians, and worldlings,
disciples of Heaven, and of Earth; have no more place in reality of nature,
than in the Scriptures of GOD. If you would have place, among the perfect ones
of the life to come, be betimes, among the perfect of this life. There Is no
ascending to the one of these perfections, but by the other; If you will be one
day in the number of full-grown men of JESUS CHRIST; be now in the number of
His Children. Walk in faith, and in love, during this Pilgrimage, if you
pretend to the vision, and glory, of the heavenly Country.

But it is now time, My Brethren, to say something to you of the Apostle's
labor, and combats; having spoken of his Preaching: Whereunto I also labor,
says he, combating according to His efficacy, which works powerfully in me.
Sure there is no Christian, but meets, in the way to Heaven, with many thorns;
which the flesh, the World, and the Devil, do sow there; for that they cannot
suffer, that any one should undertake so glorious a design, but they must cross
him, (...) utmost of their power. Yet among all the faithful, there are none,
that have more labors, and combats to undergo, than the Ministers of the
Gospel. This high Office, besides that it is first very painful in its self,
does next draw the hatred, and persecutions of the enemy, upon them, more than
others; and again, among all those whom GOD has honored with this divine
employment, it must be acknowledged, that the Apostles are the men, who had
most difficulties to surmount, and afflictions to wade through. All our pains,
to say true, are but Childrens play, in comparison of the combats, that these
great Warriers had to fight. For who does not know, that in every work of
importance, the beginning is ever much more difficult, than the progress, and
prosecution? The Apostles brake up the ground, wherein we labor; They opened,
and planed the race, in which we run; They with infinite pain, laid the
foundations of the house, which we build. The business at that time was, to
overthrow Paganism, to demolish Judaism; to fill up great deeps, and to make
plain mountains; whereas we enter upon a work already settled, and fixed. They
went through a Country, where was neither way, nor path, nor any thing,
favorable to them; whereas we go in the track, they have made. To all this we
must also add, the great extent of their charges, which enclosed the whole
universe, and obliged them to take care of all the Nations of the World:
whereas we labor each of us, in a small parcel of this great, and vast
heritage of the Son of GOD. What shall I say of the persecutions, which Satan
raised up, and brought upon them in all quarters, animating all the powers of
the world against them, and subtily engaging them in this war, some by a zeal
for the Religion of their Fathers, others by reasons of State; some by a
jealousy for reputation, others by their passion for pleasures, and vices? To
overcome so many difficulties, and to advance (as they did) a work, whose
success was, in appearance, as impossible, as if they had undertaken, to
displace the bounds of the world, and to change mountains, and seas, it was
evidently necessary, that these holy men should toil, in an extraordinary
manner, and strive with a quite other vigor. than any of all the rest of the
faithful ever had. But though they all applied themselves to such service, with
an indefatigable, and courageous earnestness, and with an admirable constancy
of mind: yet sure S. Paul did particularly signalize himself, among those
blessed Patriarks of the new people, and Israel of GOD; For as to labor, which
he mentions first, none of them all preached CHRIST, with more fervor; none of
them pressed men, to yield themselves to Him, with more vehemence; none began
with more allacrity; nor went on with more assiduity. There never was tongue
more active, nor pen more Divine, nor mind more vigilant. He alone traveled
well-nigh as many countries, as all the rest together. He visited all nations,
sowing the Gospel every where, watering it night, and day, by His speech, by
his tears, and by his cares with incredible pains. He had no sooner achieved
one conquest, but he enterprized another; and the end of one labor was to him,
but the beginning of another. Never did ambition, or avarice, though the most
restless of our passions, put men of the world, to half the pain, that the
design of bringing mankind, to the perfection, which the LORD JESUS promised,
caused unto him. And as the inclination, which the Sun has, to communicate his
comfortable beams to all creatures, keeps him in a perpetual motion, without
permitting him to have one moments rest; So S. Paul's charity, and the passion
he had, to shed abroad every way, the light, and life, and blessedness,
wherewith his Master had filled him, pressing him alike both day, and night,
made him take his course, without ceasing, and roll continually about mankind,
presenting his treasures, sometimes to one country, and sometimes to another,
passing all the days he lived, in this glorious unquietness. Neither did he
overlash at all, when he said somewhere, being compelled to it, 1 Cor. 15.10.
by the unequitableness of his Calumniators, that he had labored more
abundantly, than any of the rest. That part of his story, which S. Lake has
told us, in the Acts, does justify the truth of those words of his, and these
fourteen divine Epistles, which he has left us, and which do themselves make
up part of his admirable labors, do as clearly show us, how the case stood
indeed. His combats, were no less, than his ministerial labors. For by them,
he means the perils, and the sufferings, upon which, his discharging his
Apostleship, and the preaching of the Gospel, did cast him every hour, which he
frequently compares, to the combats that were at that time, solemnized in
Greece; because those, that entered into them, had diverse pains, and
inconveniences to suffer, as he shows at large, toward the end of the ninth
Chapter of the first Epistle to the Corinthians. He had more enemies to
sustain, 1 Cor. 9.25, 26, 27.
than any of the rest; Jews, and Pagans without; Seducers, and false brethren
within. It may make us tremble, but to read the persecutions, and the crosses
he received from the one, and the others. Himself has drawn up a little
Catalogue of them, wherein he represents to us, through what depths of
afflictions he had passed, and did still daily pass, being pursued out of
measure, both by his own countrymen, and also by the Gentiles. He was beaten,
imprisoned, scourged, stoned; He was in shipwracks, on the Sea; in dangers, and
deaths, upon the Land. He was brought to be, at the mercy of robbers in
deserts, beset round in cities, both with weapons of enemies, and the
ambushments of false friends. He was reduced to nakedness, to cold, to hunger,
and thirst; It Is this hard, and terrible chain of labors, and sufferings,
which he means here, when he says, Whereunto I also labor, combating. But
Oh the deep humility of this holy Soul! he immediately gives the glory of these
merveilous exploits, to the sole virtue, and assistance of the LORD JESUS. I
labor, and combat (says he) according to His efficacy, which works
powerfully in me. He exercises the like modesty elsewhere; when having said,
that he had labored abundantly more, than they all, he presently takes up
himself, and adds, yet not I, but the grace of GOD, which is with me. It is the
invincible force of this grace of the LORD JESUS, which he calls here, his
efficacy; and he says, it works powerfully in him, or with power, to
signify the admirable effects, which it produced in him; first, in that it
raised up in Him, the light of knowledge, the love of holiness, charity toward
the LORD's flock, such prudence, and wisdom, as were necessary for the
instruction, and government of souls. Secondly, in that it endued him with a
more than humane courage, with an immovable constancy and firmness, both that
he might not sink under the burden of such great, and continual labor; and
that he might patiently, and cheerfully bear the persecutions, and tentations,
which were still let loose upon him; the LORD making things tend to His glory,
and the advancement of his work, which seemed so contrary thereto, as He
promised him elsewhere, that His power should be made perfect in his infirmity.
Thirdly, in accompanying the Apostles preaching, with diverse miracles, which
ravished men, and authorized his words, Romans 15.18, 19
as he expressly testifies in another place. I will not dare to speak of any of
those things, which CHRIST has not wrought by me (says he) to make the
Gentiles obedient by word, and work, through mighty signs, and wonders. Lastly,
this Divine virtue of our Savior, did also magnificently appear, in the
success he gave to Paul's labor, opening the hearts of those, that heard him,
and causing his voice to enter into them, notwithstanding all the impediments
of nature; with such a miraculous blessing, that he made his Gospel to abound,
from Jerusalem, and round about, even to Illyricum, subduing nations, and
converting them gloriously to the service of His Master. It Is this that he
represents here to the Colossians, in these words, even that he labors, and
combateth according to the efficacy of CHRIST, which works powerfully in him.
And it excellently conduces to his design, which is to show the truth of the
Gospel he preached; which shined forth clearly in those many miracles, they
being as seals by which the LORD confirmed it.

I confess now, that this great example, does particularly reflect on such, as
GOD has called to the sacred Ministry of His house: and it shows them, on
one hand, how painful their office is; that it is a work, (as the Apostle faith
otherwhere) a work (I say) rather than a dignity; 1 Timothy 3.1. 2 Timothy 4.5.
a labor, and not a recreation. For the discharging of it worthily, they must
toil, and strive, watch in all things, endure afflictions, and do the work of
Evangelists. And it teaches them, on the other hand, that they must not
recoil, for those great difficulties; but trust in the grace of CHRIST, and
expect, from the sole efficaciousness of His assistance, that light, that
strength, that patience, and constancy which is requisite, for the finishing of
so laborious a course; since it is He alone, who renders us meet for these
things, strengthening us in weakness, comforting us in trouble, encouraging us
in difficulties, susteining us under assaults, and so conducting us, that
though we be nothing of our selves, 2 Cor. 3.5.
yet, in Him, we can do all things, who makes us able to be Ministers of the
new Testament. But though S. Paul's example do particularly respect Pastors; yet
it appertains also to all true Christians in general; since there is no one
of them, but is also, in some sort, the LORD's servant; has of Him, the
managing of some of His Talents; and is called to labor, and combat. Let us
consider then, all of us in common; and jointly make our improvement, both of
the preaching, and of the laboring of this great Apostle. He still at this
day, declares to us, the same CHRIST, whom he preached heretofore to all the
nations of the world. Though the Organs, that sound it to you, be incomparably
weaker, than his were, yet it is his word that you hear; the same word, and the
same CHRIST, that yer-while converted the universe. The same Paul, whose voice
had then so much efficacy, speaks yet to you daily. He addresseth to you the
same doctrine; He sets before you the same wisdom; He admonishes, and teaches
every man among you. Do not abuse so great a blessing; do not frustrate the
labor of this holy man, of it is true, and just effect. The end of His
preaching is, that you all may be perfect. This is the mark, to which he calls
you all in common. Say not to me, that he speaks, but to some only. I admonish,
(says he) and teach every man, that I may render every man perfect in JESUS
CHRIST. Object not the employments, which you have in the world, nor the cares,
to which your family, and your affairs do bind you up. If they be incompatible
with that perfection, which the Apostle requires of you, you must renounce
them. It Is an extreme folly, to excuse ones self from being happy. This ought
to be the first, and last of our cares; and if we cannot attain it, but by
quitting of honors, by losing of riches, by retrenching our delights, yea (as
the LORD says) by plucking out our own eyes, and cutting off of our feet, and
our hands; it is better to forego all this, than keep it, to be cast, at our
departure hence, into the torment of eternal fire. But these are vain, and mere
frivolous pretenses, to palliate our slackness. If we have truly received JESUS
CHRIST into our hearts, neither a wife, nor children, nor a family, nor an
estate, nor the honest, and lawful employments of the world, will hinder you
from being perfect. The fear of GOD, honest deportment, plain-dealing, and
justice; charity, and beneficence, and in a word, the fanctity, wherein our
perfection consists, is not incompatible with any of these things. For, I
beseech you, is it your business, or your calling, which obliges you, to
offend GOD, and injure men? to pollute your body with the filth of infamous
pleasures? to defraud; or to rob your neighbor? to drown your whole life, in
luxury, in debauches, and in slothfulness? No, no, Christian; excuse not your
selves, by such allegations. The affairs of your Family, and of your trade, are
altogether innocent of your faults. To say true, they rather invite you, to
honesty, and innocence; than solicit you to vice. It Is nothing but the rage
of your ungoverned passions, that causes this disorder. It is nothing, but
your ambition, your covetousness, your pride, your effeminateness, and
delicacy, that turns you away from Christian perfection. To tend to it, there
is no need, you should retire into a Desert, or a Cloister, nor that your
habits, or your food, should be different, from those of the people, among whom
you live; There needs for this, but retiring from vice, and sincere renouncing
the practice of it; plucking up the lusts of it, out of your heart, changing
your life, and not your dwelling, your carriage, and not your clothes. And this
is it, my Beloved Brethren, wherein we must labor, and combat. The design I
call you to is great, and painful, and no less difficult, than the conquest of
the world; the business of S. Paul's Apostleship. For there is nothing that is,
either more harsh to us, than to renounce our passions; or more difficult, than
for us to overcome our selves. It is much more easy to wear a Cowle, or an
hair-cloth, and blacken the body with blows, yea to kill ones self, than to put
off the desires of the flesh. Labor then earnestly, and assiduously; since you
have undertaken so difficult a task. Employ all your time in it: Let no day
pass, without putting it on; watching, and praying, mortifying all the members
of your old man, with a true penitence; reading, and meditating the word of
GOD, embracing His promises, exercising your selves, in the study, and
practice, of those good, and holy works, which he has recommended unto us. The
design is great, and you are weak. But the LORD JESUS, in whom you have
believed, is allmighty, and allmerciful. He has still the same force, which
heretofore converted the world by the hand of S. Paul. If you labor in his
work, with such zeal, as His Apostle did, He will also communicate His graces
unto you. He will display His virtue, upon you. He will work powerfully in you.
He will bruise Satan under your feet, and crucify your flesh, by the efficacy
of His own. He will vivifie your spirit by the light of His. He will make you
to triumph over your enemies. He will comfort you in the afflictions, which you
shall suffer for so good a cause. He will guide you in all your ways. And
after the labor, and the combat, will crown you, on high in the Heavens, with
such glory, and immortality, as all the pains of the present life, are no way
comparable to. So be it; and unto Him, as also to the Father, and to the Holy
Spirit, the only true GOD, blessed for ever, be honor, and glory, to ages of
ages. Amen.

The End of the First Part.
SERMONS OF Mr. John Daille, UPON THE EPISTLE OF THE APOSTLE St. PAUL TO THE
COLOSSIANS.

The Second Part, Containing an Exposition of the second Chapter, in sixteen
SERMONS.

LONDON, Printed for Thomas Parkhurst, and are to be sold at his Shop at the
Bible and three Crowns in Cheapside near Mercers Chapel, and at the Bible on
London Bridge. 1672.

TO MONSIEUR, Monsieur BIGOT, LORD of LAHONVILLE, Counselor of the KING in
His Counsels, Intendant, and Controller General of the Gabels of France.
SIR,
AMONG the advantages, which the Reformation of the Church, embraced by our
Fathers, in these latter ages, has afforded us, we must, without doubt,
ascribe the pre-eminence, to the free use we have of the word of CHRIST; which
He, of His abundant Grace, has recovered for us. This Divine Taper, lighted up
from Heaven, in the house of GOD, to shine unto His people, did remain hid a
long time, under a Bushel, (that I may express it, Mat. 5.15.
in the terms of the Gospel) the negligence, and fraud of men withholding it in
this shameful-state. It is now set anew, on its Candlestick, whence it
diffuseth every way, its enlivening, and saving light among us; and that in
such abundance, as we may truly say in this respect, the word of CHRIST
dwells richly in us. Col. 3.6.
It reigns alone, in our assemblies, where its voice, and not any other, is
continualy heard to resound; the Fables, and Legends of men being altogether
banished thence. It is read there in a familiar language, which every one
understands; whereas if it be read elsewhere, it is in a tongue, dead, and
barbarous, and unknown to the people. It is explained among us, with all
fidelity, sincerity, and diligence, whereas amid the darkness of former ages,
it was so unworthily treated by Preachers, that to consider their Sermons, one
would think, they had designed to make it openly ridiculous. I confess, those
persons, that abide in the erroneous opinions of their Ancestors, yet are
somewhat ashamed of this gross, and profane licentious practice of theirs; and
they have reformed it after a sort: Yet there remain, but too many defects
among them still, and this one in particular, that they explain, in public,
only some pieces, and (if it may be said) shreads of Scripture, sometimes taken
from one book, sometimes from another, never showing their hearers any complete
body. For it cannot be denied, but that this manner of handling the word of
GOD, does deprive the faithful of much edification; it being evident, that the
view, and the considering, of an entire book, gives us a great deal more of
knowledge in it, and admiration at it, than the view of any part of it, alone,
and taken off from the whole, can do. This fault is so much the less
pardonable, in our adversaries; for that, besides reason, it crosses also the
custom, and authority of those ancient Doctors of the first ages of
Christianity, whose true sons, and legitimate successors, these Gentlemen,
boast, they are. For it was frequent at that time, for Pastors to expound in
the Church, whole books of Scripture throughout, by Sermons continued on, upon
the chain of the holy Text, from the beginning of a volume to the very end:
that remainder, which we have, of the writings of those days, does clearly
evince so much. There are extant still, the Sermons of S. John Chrysostom, upon
Genesis, upon the Gospels of S. Matthew, and S. John, upon the Acts of the
Apostles, and upon all the fourteen Epistles of S. Paul; which were delivered
by this great man, part of them in the Church of Antioch, and part, in the
Church of Constantinople the greatest, and most populous Churches of all the
East. And among the Latins, we have the Tractates of S. Augustine, upon the
whole Book of Psalms, and upon the Gospel of S. John, and upon His first
Epistle, which were in like manner, made and delivered in the Assemblies of his
people. An evident sign, that about the beginning of the fifth Century, when
these two excellent, and famous personages did flourish, this custom was in
repute among Christians. Whether then, the thing be considered in its self, or
the suffrages of the Ancients be taken, it is manifest that our Fathers, and
our selves, had all the reasons in the world, to re-establish this sacred, and
just usage, in the Church.

Now Sir, this Book, which I address unto you, is a fruit of it. For having
undertaken, in conformity to this order, to expound, in our holy assemblies,
the Divine Epistle of the Apostle S. Paul to the Colossians, and being come to
the end of it, by the grace of our LORD, because the whole work, could not be
commodiously contracted into one volume only, I have divided it, into three
parts; of which this here, is the second. The Piety, which has long flourished
in your House, Sir, and the exquisite knowledge, that GOD has given you, of
His truth, do induce me to believe, that this Books which wholly treats of His
Divine mysteries, and nothing else, will not be unpleasing to you. It Is this
has given me the liberty, to put your name upon it: a Name, which diverse
excellent graces, wherewith GOD has adorned, both your Family, and your
Person, do render very dear, and very honorable, in our Church. I am sorry,
that this Present is no more worthy of it. But such as it is, I do not despair,
but it may obtain, from the dignity of its subject, and from the favor of your
goodness, that acceptance, which it cannot pretend to upon any merit of its
own. Please you then, to receive it, as a sincere testimony of the respect, I
bear your virtue, and of the grateful sense I have of the friendship, wherewith
you honor me: withal, as an inviolable pledge of the prayers, which I present
unto GOD for your prosperity, and of the fervent affection, I have, to be, as
long as I live.

Paris. Apri^ 1. 1648. SIR, Your most humble, and most obedient Servant, DAILLE.

The SIXTEENTH SERMON.
COL. CHAP. II. VER. I, II. Verse I. For I would that ye knew how great a
combat I have for you, and for them which are at Laodicea, and for all them
which have not seen my presence in the flesh.

II. To the end that their hearts might be comforted, they being joined
together in love, and in all riches of full certainty of understanding, unto
the knowledge of our GOD, and Father, and of CHRIST.


DEar Brethren, As Gardeners, and Husbandmen, do not content themselves, with
sowing good grain, in the ground that they manure; but also take care to pluck
up thence the bad herbs, which might choke, or incommodate the good: So in the
Spiritual husbandry of JESUS CHRIST, it is not enough that the Ministers of his
Gospel, do cast his Divine Word, the good and saving seed of our Regeneration
into the Souls of Men; They must also be at the pains to weed, and cleanse this
mystical Soil, the tilling whereof is committed to them; plucking up out of it,
error and false doctrine, those bad and pernicious weeds, which springing up of
themselves, or being privily sown there by an enemy's hand, are apt to mar all
this celestial tillage. Hence it is that the Apostle St. Paul, having in the
first Chapter of this Epistle to the Colossians, settled the truth with great
efficacy, as you have heard, comes now in this second Chapter, the beginning
whereof we have read, to reject, and refute the errors, which certain false
workers, ministers of Satan, endeavored to shuffle in; that this people as a
field, or a garden of God's, being rid of all naughty, and noxious grain, the
noble seed of the Gospel, which the Apostle had cast there, might take root,
and spring up, and grow at liberty, covering and crowning it all over with the
flowers and fruits of incorruption, (that is, sincere piety, and true sanctity)
no strange plant being mingled with it. These Seducers (as we have often
intimated) did teach, that besides faith in JESUS CHRIST, which they made
profession of, there was also a necessity of observing the Mosaical Law, and of
worshipping of Angels, and of practicing certain superstitious Disciplines, and
Mortifications, of their own invention. And to put off the whole the better,
they mingled with it some subtilties, and vain speculations of secular
Philosophy. This is the weed which the Apostle, the Church's holy Husbandman,
now roots up out of his LORD's field; fortifying the Colossians against the
craft of that sort of men; and divinely showing them, how full, and sufficient,
the doctrine of his Gospel was; how unprofitable, and even plainly dangerous,
the Seducers additions were. You shall hear it afterward, in the progress of
the Chapter. For, as to the two Verses, we have read, and the three, or four
following, they are as the entrance, or gate of this dispute; the Apostle in
them, preparing the hearts of the Colossians, to receive his instructions, by
the evidences he gives them, of his ardent affection for their Salvation; and
presently in the first Verse, he declares to them the pains he was in for
them, and for their neighbors: I would (says he) that ye knew, how great a
combat I have for you, etc. -- Then he adds, in the following Verse, the end,
or the cause of this combat of his: To the end (says he) that their hearts
might be comforted, etc. -- These two points now, we purpose to handle, in the
present action, by the assistance of the grace of CHRIST; S. Paul's care, and
combat for the Colossians and Laodiceans: then his design, or the end, for
which he underwent all this trouble for them.

In reference to the first of these two points, ye may remember, the Apostle
affirmed, in the end of the precedent Chapter, that to discharge the Ministry,
which GOD had committed to him, he did labor and combat, according to his
efficacy, that wrought powerfully in him. Now he descends from Generalities,
to a particular instance; and having spoken in gross of the labor he did
undergo for the edification of all, he tells the Colossians of the pain he was
in particularly for them; adding, For I would that ye knew, how great a combat
I have for you, and for those of Laodicea. It is not without cause (says he)
that I profess to strive, and labor, for the edification of the faithful. For,
not to alledg other proofs of it to you, GOD knows, and I desire you also
should know, that I sustain a great combat for you, and your neighbors.
Laodicea, which he speaks of, was the headcity of Phrygia, nigh to Colosse,
which was situate in the same Province. The Vicinity of these two Cities was
the cause of a particular commerce between those Churches, which GOD had formed
in them; whence it comes, that the Apostle afterward salutes the Laodiceans by
name, and orders the Colossians to impart this Epistle to them. S. John also,
in his Apocalypse, makes mention of the Church of Laodicea; and it is one of the
Seven Churches of Asia, to which the LORD JESUS commanded him to write in his
name. And by the Letter, which he wrote thereupon, registered in the said Book,
it does appear, that there was much looseness, and coldness, and many defects,
in this flock; whether such corruption had got footing there so early, as S
Paul's own time; or whether (as I judge more probable) it were slipped in
afterward, through carelessness of the faithful, and the craft of foes; However
it be, there is great likelihood, that Laodicea was troubled at this time with
the same evils that the Colossians were; and that these Seducers who
endeavored to infect the one, applied themselves also to the other. Therefore
the Apostle would have this Epistle, which is as a preservative against the
venom of these false teachers, to be communicated to those of Laodicea; an
evident sign, that since they had need of the same remedies, they were
threatened with the same maladies.

But to the Colossians, and the Laodiceans, whom he here expressly names, he
further adds indefinitely, all those which had not seen his presence in the
flesh. His name was so very famous among Christians, that there could hardly be
any one of that number, but had heard speak of him, knew him by reputation, and
consequently had seen him in heart, and in spirit. But he speaks of those only,
that had not seen him present in body; whether he by these words do understand
all the faithful in general, that had not at all enjoyed his presence, in what
coast or country soever they were, (for we know, that the care of this eminent
Apostle extended to them all:) Or whether he speak here of the faithful in
Phrygia, or in Asia only; which in my opinion, is more likely. For, there being
no possibility that S. Paul; and the other Apostles, should present themselves
every where; they often sent Evangelists, who were as their assistants and
coadjutors, hither and thither to diverse places to travel for the Conversion of
Souls. And so, though the Apostle had traversed the greatest part of Asia the
less, and honored with his presence and preaching, many of the principal
Cities in it, and in special, the Province of Phrygia, Act. 16.6. and 18.2, 3.
(as may be gathered from the Book of the Acts:) Yet it may not be doubted, but
that there remained still many Cities to which he had not been able to go in
person. Expositors both ancient and modern, for the most part do conclude from
these words of S. Paul, that he had not been yet in the City of Colosse, nor in
the City of Laodicea, when he wrote this Epistle; and they suppose that he had
converted those people, and founded Churches among them, by the Ministry of
Epaphras, without conveying himself in person thither. Nor can it be denied,
but that the words do give us some apparent ground so to conceive. For saying,
That he has a great conflict for the Colossians, and the Laodiceans, and for
all those that had not seen his presence in the flesh; he seems to enroll the
Colossians and the Laodiceans among those that had never seen him. Theodoret.
in his Preface to this Epist. and on the place it self.
Nevertheless there are Authors found among the Ancients, and they of as great
repute as any, for height of Learning, as well as for choiceness of Wit, and
solidity of Judgment, who are otherwise minded, and do hold that S. Paul had
been both at Colosse, and at Laodicea: accounting it improbable, that he should
have gone through Phrygia twice, as S. Luke expressly testifies, and not have
seen these two Cities, the principal ones of that Country. And for these words,
and all those which have not seen my presence in the flesh; they conceive them
added, not to rank the Colossians, and the Laodiceans, with such as had not
seen the Apostle; but quite contrary, to distinguish and separate them from
them; as if S. Paul had said, that he had a great combat, not only for them,
but even for those who never saw his presence in the flesh. But this disterence
being of no great importance at the bottom, and means necessary for an exact
decision of it, also failing: there is no need we should stay to solve it; but
may leave every one at liberty to take either way of the two; neither of them
endamaging the truth of faith, or holiness of life. And thus we have seen, who
they were for whom the Apostle sustained this great combat which he speaks of.

Consider we now, the combat it self, what it was. I doubt not, but he means
thereby, first and principally, that care and sollicitousness and
thoughtfulness, which the consideration of these Churches drew upon him. For
though their faith and constancy afforded him much contentment, and encouraged
his hope; yet when he cast his eyes upon the great tentations that surrounded
them, the hate and persecutions of the world; the seducements and artifices of
the false teachers; and reflected on the weakness of humane nature; he could
not but fear, left so many things, and those of so much force, should debauch
them from piety. Love is not without apprehension, no not in the greatest
safety; how much less in the midst of so many dangers? The Apostle assures us
elsewhere, that the affection he bore to the faithful, was so great, that he
sympathiz'd in all their miseries, and was as if he had suffered them himself.
The care which I have of all the Churches, Cor. 11.29.
(says he) keeps me besieged from day to day. Who is weakened, but I am weakened
also? who is offended, but I also burn? And in the same place he represents
unto us the pain he was in, for the Corinthians in particular, 2 Cor. 11.3.
I fear (says he) lest as the Serpent beguiled Eve through his subtilty, so by
any means your minds should be corrupted from the simplicity which is in
CHRIST. Just the same did he apprehend for the Colossians and Laodiceans, and
other Christians in Asia; even lest the cheats and crafts of Seducers should
disorder their faith, and make a like spoil among them, as they made in the
Church of the Galatians, as appears by the Epistle he wrote them upon this
occasion: Yet these just fears wherewith the thoughts of the Apostle were
encumbered, were not his whole combat. For under this word, he compriseth also,
all that he did to divert the danger, which he apprehended. First, he was
perpetually in prayer for the safety of these dear Churches; and as Moses, in
elder time upon the mountain, ceased not lifting up his hands to the Almighty,
for the Victory of his Israel, that was in fight the while with Amalek. So this
great Apostle from that high station, where JESUS CHRIST had set him in His
Church, did continually present his supplications, and sighs to Heaven, for the
good success of the Combats which his Master's troops were engaged in. 2 These.
1.12. Phil. 1.4. Colos. 1.9.
We pray always for you (says he). I still make request for you all, in all my
prayers. We cease not to pray for you, and to crave, that you may be filled
with the knowledge of the Will of CHRIST, in all wisdom, and spiritual
understanding. To Prayer he added Action; courageously attacquing Error on all
occasions; refuting Seducers, and discovering the vanity of their Doctrine, and
the malignity of their design; not only by word of mouth, but also by writing;
as we see by those divine Epistles of his, which remain with us; and in which
the evidences of his great earnestness against these false Apostles, do appear
here and there in many places. And as he laid on stoutly upon enemies; so did
he smartly take up the faithful; reproving them, admonishing, and encouraging
them to necessary firmness and constancy. He marched with so high a generosity,
that he spared not S. Peter himself; who having slipped through weakness and
complacency into actions which seemed to favor error, Paul boldly undertakes
him, and shows him his fault, with much liberty, as himself gives us an
account elsewhere. In short, Gal. 2.
he omitted none of the duties of a valiant and vigilant Captain, either
against the foe, or toward his friends and fellow soldiers, as is easy to be
seen by his writings. Yet his combat stayed not here. He often came to blows,
cheerfully suffering for this cause, all the persecutions which the rage of the
Jews, and the malice of Seducers did contrive, and form against him. And to say
the truth, the very chain he was laden with, and the prison he was in, when he
wrote this Epistle, did make up a part of this Combat of his; it being clear,
by the History of the Acts, that nothing had more inflamed the hatred of the
Jews against him, who cast him into this affliction, than the zeal he showed
every where against the corruptions of such people as would retain the
Ceremonies of the Jewish Law; and hence it is, that he told the Colossians
before, Col. 1.24.
he suffered for them; because in effect, and at the bottom, it was for
maintaining their liberty, and the liberty of other Gentiles converted to the
Gospel, and for the keeping of their faith pure from all corruptive leaven,
that he fell into this tedious sufferance. Such was Paul's combat for these
faithful people.

Dear Brethren, admire the zeal, and the charity of this sanctified soul. He
was in the Prisons of Nero; he stood, as we may say, upon the Scaffold, and had
his head on the block; being indicted for a criminal matter, which concerned
his life. And even in this estate, his heart is in pain for the Churches of
Colosse and Laodicea, and for those beside, that had never beheld him. Their
danger troubled him, more than his own. Neither prison nor death was able to
extinguish or diminish his affection; or to make him lay aside the least of his
cares; Having so great a Combat against his own person, upon his hands he
leaves it, and on so pressing an occasion, travelleth, and combateth for
others. Certainly, there cannot any thing be imagined, more elevated or more
ardent than this love. We may truly affirm of it, what is said in the Song of
Solomon, His love is strong as death, and his jealousy is hard as the grave;
it is burnings are burnings of fire, and a flame of GOD; Many waters could not
quench it, nor could floods drown it. But observe again, the prudence and apt
procedure of this holy man, in that he represents these things to these
faithful people for so good an end. For being to entertain them with important
matters, and to decry errors, which seduction did paint over with the deceitful
colors of Philosophy and Eloquence, that he might dispose their hearts to give
him due audience, and gain his remonstrances a necessary credit and authority;
he sets before them at the entrance the cares he had for their Salvation; the
combats he sustained for them; and all the effects of that sacred amity he had
toward them. As a Captain, who to keep firm his Soldiers in their duty,
represents to them his watchings, and his pains-taking, and his cares for their
preservation; and in sum all the marks of his affection to them; or rather as a
tender mother, who to withdraw her dear children from giving ear to debauches,
shows them her fears, her sollicitudes, and her alarms; the yearning of her
bowels, and all that she does, or suffers for them. Such is the Apostles holy
artifice in the present business; and it is grounded upon a maxim we all know;
namely, that we much more believe those that love us, and are affectionate for
our welfare, than those to whom we are indifferent. He declares to them his
pains, that they may take in good part his remonstrances; and discovers to
them his passion, that they may receive his counsels. His aim is not to draw
glory from it, or to enhanse his esteem among them; (such a childish vanity had
no place in the soul of this great man) but indeed to render his instructions
the more effectual to the Colossians thereby. And the Combats which he for the
same end tells them of, should serve in like manner for examples unto us. Let
Ministers of the Gospel learn by them, what love they owe their flocks; what
cares and combats their Office obliges them to. Let nothing in the world be
dearer or more precious to them than the Salvation of the Souls committed to
their charge; let them take part in their joys, and in their griefs; let them
feelingly resent their wounds, apprehend their dangers, labor incessantly for
their edification. To it let them consecrate the thoughts of their mind, and
the words of their mouth, and the work of their pen, and the actions of their
life; yea, their blood, and life it self, (if there be need) saying with clear
conscience, as the Apostle in another place does; 2 Cor. 12.15.
As for me I will willingly spend, and be spent for your souls, and be glad to
serve for an aspersion upon the sacrifice and service of your faith. Let this
care and these thoughts fill their hearts day and night; let them make account,
that there is neither affair nor occasion, nor peril, that dispenses with them
for the same; no not death it self in the very gates whereof they ought to mind
still their flock, and combat for them by their prayers and their devout
wishes. Such is the faithful, the love and the care we owe you. We confess that
without such watching and striving for your Salvation, we cannot avoid the
censure, and chastisements of the supreme Pastor. Judge, if it be not
reasonable, that you have affection and respect for those whom the love of your
Salvation engages to so many cares and labors; and if it be not just that you
receive their instructions with reverence, and hearken to the product of their
studies with attention; that you comply with the zeal they have for your
edification, and attribute much to their counsels, and suffer their liberty;
and impute to their affection the sharpness of their remonstrances when grief
and fear draw from them complaints and cries against your carriages; that you
consolate the pains they take for you, by your resentment of the same; and
above all by your progress in the studious pursuit of piety. For this is the
only fruit they crave of all their cares, and their combats; they would account
them most advantagiously recompensed if you do but profit by them; if they
perceive by the goodness of your manners, and the sanctity of your life, that
they have not labored in vain. But do not imagine, I pray, that their
solicitude does discharge you of all care. On the contrary, it shows you
with what earnestness and assiduity you should labor for your own Salvation.
For if they must heed your affairs with so much diligence, what zeal should you
put forth about them your selves? Their travel may awaken and hearten you, but
it cannot save you except you travel your selves. Their combating will win you
no Crown if you take not part in it after their example. Every one shall live
by his own faith, and no person be crowned for the zeal of his Pastor, or his
brother. If your Pastors watch, if they stand on their guard, if they labor
and combat, blessed be GOD they shall receive their pay. But their laboring
will not excuse your loytering, nor will their heedfulness justify you
neglects. Every man shall bear his own burden; they may give you the example
of their piety, they will not be able to communicate to you the recompenses of
it. Employ we then our selves, both the one and the others, Pastors and flocks
about our Salvation with fear and trembling. Let us all combat with Paul, if we
will be crowned with him. Imitate we his Charity, if we desire to partake in
his Glory. Let us extend our cares and our love as he did, not only to the
saithful whom we know, but even to those whom we never saw. For carnal amities,
I confess it is bodily sight and presence which enkindles and maintains them.
The eyes of the flesh are the authors and the preservers of them. But in those
of JESUS CHRIST, it is otherwise; It Is the Spirit that knits them. It is its
eye and its sight, that causes them both to begin, and to continue. For since
it is properly JESUS CHRIST and His Gospel, that Charity loves, it is evident,
that it ought to embrace all those which bear the marks of them, whether they
be absent or present. The distance of times and places does not hinder these
sacred commerces. The Apostle combateth even for those that had never seen him.
Let us also then love all true Christians, and spread our affections as far as
to those whom many Seas, and many Mountains sever from us. Let us combat for
them by prayer, and do them (how far off soever they be from us) all the
Offices whereof our Charity shall be capable; traveling with holy tenderness
for the salvation and edification of one another.

But having considered St. Paul's combat, let us now examine the end and design
of it. Whence comes it, holy Apostle, that thou take so much pains, and have
these Colossians and Laodiceans, and even those that never saw thee, so near
thy heart? Why does this carefulness follow thee to the very prison, and come
there to aggravate and invenom thy personal sufferings? Why labourest thou so
for them? To the end (says he) that their hearts may be comforted, they being
joined together in love, and in all riches of full certainty of understanding,
unto the knowledge of the secret of our GOD, and Father, and of CHRIST. Thus
does the Apostle answer our demand. I am in pain (says he) for their
consolation and their faith. I combat to preserve this treasure to them, and to
prevent the enemies snatching out of their hands so precious and so necessary a
possession. By saying, he combats for them, that they may keep these Graces, He
shows, That they were in danger to lose them if the enemies they had, that
is, the Seducers and false Apostles, did accomplish their design, and persuade
these faithful people to those errors, which they were setting forth. In effect
it is evident, that their doctrine of man's Justification by ceremonies and
observations, whether legal or humane, is incompatible with the truth of the
Gospel; does disturb the comfort of the faithful, break the bond of charity,
confounds and embroileth the mystery of JESUS CHRIST; bereaveth Him of His
glory, and of His plentifulness, representing Him as poor and scanty, and as
needing the succor, either of Moses, or of Philosophy, and the superstition of
men to give us Salvation. The Apostle names three things which he wishes unto
these Believers, and which he would keep for them by his cares and combats,
Consolation of heart; Conjunction in charity; and the riches of a full
certainty of understanding, or as he expresses the same thing in other terms,
knowledge of the secret of our GOD, and Father, and of CHRIST. The first of
these, to wit, Comfort of heart, is the happiness of the faithful upon earth.
For it is that calm and tranquillity which their souls enjoy amidst the
tempests of this life; when they sweetly repose themselves upon their Master's
word, and are assured to partake of His Salvation, notwithstanding the menaces
and persecutions of the enemy; and the defects and imperfections of their own
course. All heresy and error in Religion does necessarily disturb this
consolation; because it shakes the truth and certainty of the doctrine of the
Gospel upon which it is founded. But the error which the Apostle sets himself
to oppose, did particularly strike at this part of our Salvation, depriving
consciences of that peace, which faith in JESUS CHRIST does afford them; and
casting them into a miserable agitation, in that it makes their justification
to depend on, I know not what observances that are either vain and
unprofitable, or even impious and pernicious. It Is this that animates S. Paul
to combat it so vigorously every where: because the faithful could not receive
it, without losing their true consolation; that is, their only hearts-good. And
this should make us jealous for the purity of the Gospel to keep it free from
all admixture of error. Let us not hearken unto those who tell us, that if what
they have added to the Gospel do displease us, yet we cannot deny but they
retain JESUS CHRIST, and the foundations of our Salvation in Him. It is a most
evident delusion. I confess that JESUS CHRIST gives Salvation and Consolation;
but He does it to those that embrace Him, as He presents Himself to us on His
Cross, and in His Gospel naked, and without adulteration and composition. If
you will have either vice or superstition with Him, He will serve you for
nothing, save to augment your condemnation. As food, how good and wholesome
soever it be, will no less then kill you, if it be mingled with poison. We must
either receive JESUS CHRIST alone, or renounce His Salvation. There is no
possibility to link Him, either with the world, or with superstition. And this
verity, that our hearts cannot have true and solid comfort but in JESUS CHRIST
alone, is so evident, that error it self when it is pressed home is constrained
to acknowledge it. After sufficient dispute about the merit of its works, and
large boast of the worth of its satisfactions, and of the value of its
Pontifical indulgences, Bellarmin. of Justif. i. 5. c. 7.
and of the Intercession of its Saints, it confesses that by reason of the
uncertainty of our own righteousness, the safest course is, to put all our
confidence in the sole mercy of GOD. In other cases which concern our
divertisement only, I think a man may sometimes without blame choose the longest
and most hazardous way. In the case of our Salvation it is an excess of folly
without doubt not to take the safest. Since by your own confession, my
doctrine, or rather the doctrine of the Gospel is the safer, suffer me to hold
to it, and to pity your imprudence, who do amuse the world with that which your
self confess to have less of safety and more of hazard in it.

But I return to the Apostle, who having said, That he combateth for these
faithful people, that their hearts might be comforted; adds in the second
place, they being joined together in charity. Their Seducers troubled their
Union, and casting in a new doctrine among them as a matter of contention,
ruined their fraternal concord, as much as in them lay; drawing them into
diversity of minds, from whence arises contrariety of affections: It is
therefore also for the preventing of this disorder, and for the preserving of
union in charity among them, that the Apostle had so great a conflict. For as
the Sea abides peaceable and united during a calm, but rises all in waves
that violently dash on one another, when the wind begins to bluster. So false
teachers which are as the winds and gusts of hell, do no sooner fall upon a
Church but they disturb its peace, and put all the members of it in commotion;
parting them asunder, mutinying them, and making them miserably clash with each
other to their common ruin, and the joy of their enemy. But S. Paul teaches us
here that the mutual conjunction of the faithful in charity is necessary for
the consolation of their hearts; to the end (says he) that their hearts may be
comforted, they being joined together in love. Indeed what joy and what comfort
can a good soul have in the trouble of division? Considering withal, that JESUS
CHRIST, who is the only source of our joy, does not communicate Himself to any,
but such as have a true charity; who abide conjoined in his body by the Lands
of one and the same fame and love. In fine, the third benefit which the Apostle
desires to preserve among the Colossians and their Neighbors, is the
abounding of a full and an assured knowledge of the mystery of GOD, being joined
in charity, and in all riches of certainty of understanding in the knowledge of
our GOD, and Father, and of CHRIST. This order is well worth the noting. For
these three things which he has ranked together here, are of such a nature,
that the first depends upon the second, and the second upon the third:
Consolation upon union in charity, and union in charity upon knowledge. This
last is as the first degree, upon which charity is raised up; and charity as
the second which sustaineth the third, to wit, Consolation. Of these three
Jewels one cannot be had without the other. And as the consolation of the LORD
cannot be enjoyed without the sweetnesses of charity; so charity cannot be had
without the lights of knowledge. But the Apostle does not simply name that
knowledge which he desires in the faithful; He describes it in stately manner
as he is wont; and intimates, as he proceeds, the principal qualities it ought
to have, which he briefly compriseth in these words, all the riches of full
certainty of understanding, that is, to express this Hebrew phrase, in the
idiom of our own language, all abundance of understanding, with full assurance
and satisfaction. He would have therefore first that the knowledge of a
Christian be understanding; that is, that he do perceive and see in the
clearness of celestial light those verities which GOD has revealed to us; not
that we are bound to comprehend them all, and penetrate the nature of them to
the bottom; (for being the most of them Divine and Supernatural, this is
impossible for us) but that we ought to know what is revealed to us of them:
because otherwise we should be in danger every moment to be deluded, and to
take the vain traditions of men, for things taught of GOD. Whence appears how
far that hood-winkt faith wherewith our adversaries do content themselves, is
from the knowledge of a Believer. This faith if interrogated about Evangelical
truth, refers it self to the Church in it, being ignorant all the while of what
it believes, and consequently having no spark of understanding. Black is not
more contrary to white, nor darkness to light than this fantasm of faith (shall
I say) or of ignorance, to the knowledge which the Apostle here requires in us.
He would have the faithful to be intelligent; and these people understand
nothing at all; nay do boast of their ignorance, imagining that it is not
without merit. It is therefore the faith not of a Christian; away with such a
thought; nor of the Collier, as they call it; no, nor of a man endued with
reason: but the faith of a brute which has no understanding, as the Psalmist
sings. Secondly, the Apostle wills that we have not merely understanding, but
riches, yea all riches of understanding; that is, a great and perfect abundance
of knowledge; that we be rich in this kind of wealth, that we be ignorant of
none of the mysteries of Divine truth; that we know not the elements, or the
first maxims of it only, but all the inferences that are necessary to guide our
lives, and to guard us from the ambushes of Satan, amid which we go, Otherwise
how shall we discern the voice of the chief Shepherd from the voice of a
stranger; to fl^e from the one and follow the other; Whereby you see again, how
contrary to the doctrine of this holy man, the preaching and practice of those
of Rome is, who license their people to be ignorant; and do blame such, as not
contenting themselves with the first and plainest lessons of Christianity, do
study the bottom of this saving wisdom; outragiously decrying this laudable
affection, as if it were the way to heresy and hell. Finally S. Paul would
have this intelligentness of a Believer to be besides its abounding with an
entire certainty and assurance; making use of a word which he often puts to
signify a full and an assured persuasion, when we hold things which we believe
to be sure and indubitable. For though matters of faith be not laid open either
to the senses, or the reason of men; yet the truth of them is so evident, so
beautiful, and so well marked that as soon as the clouds of those passions and
prejudices which hide it from us are removed from before the eyes of our
understanding by the hand of the holy Spirit, ^t beams forth, and shines into
our hearts with exceeding brightness, and makes it self to be believed, and
embraced for what it is indeed. Thus must it be known with certainty, and not
with doubting, that we henceforth be no more children, Ephesians. 4.14.
wavering and carried to and fro with every wind of doctrine by the sleight of
men, and by their cunning craftiness, whereby they lie in wait to deceive, as
the Apostle speaks elsewhere. Whereby you see, how false the opinion of Rome is,
which makes the belief of Christianity to depend upon the authority and
testimony of her Prelates. I pass by the extreme weakness and vanity of this
pretended foundation, which has been verified by a thousand experiments.
Whatever it be in other respects, this is manifest, that since they fasten the
people's knowledge there, they must of necessity confess, that their faith ought
to change if any change do happen in the doctrine of their Prelates; whence it
follows that then it is not certain, nor assured, nor such a knowledge as the
Apostle requires in us; whose property is such, that though Paul himself or
Angels from heaven should come and preach the contrary it would abide not
withstanding, even under such a supposal, still firm and unmoved; and rather
anathematize Apostles and Angels from heaven, than let go that Divine verity
which it has believed and known; so strong is the sense it has of its
excellency.

But the Apostle having thus described the nature of true faith, or a
Christian's understanding, does lastly confine it within the bounds of its true
subject, when he adds, the knowledge of the Secret of our God and Father, and of
Christ. This restriction is necessary; because seducers do boast of their
traditions too, as if they were a piece of wisdom, worthy of our faith; and it
may not be doubted, but that the false teachers against whom the Apostle
intends to dispute did deal in such manner. To arm us against their vanity he
declares expressly that the understanding he requires of us is a knowledge not
of what Philosophers do talk in their Schools about the nature of the world;
nor of what Seducers do bring forth, from their vain imaginations, but only of
the Gospel of our LORD JESUS CHRIST; without which there is nothing but error
and folly. He calls it a Secret or a Mystery, because it was a verity hidden
with GOD, and incomprehensible to our minds, as we have said otherwhere. He
says, that it is the Secret of GOD our Father, both because He is the Author
of it, who has revealed it to us of His Grace; and because He has manifested
Himself therein, discovering to us in the Gospel all that we need to know of
His nature and will for attaining to Salvation. He adds in the end, and of
CHRIST, for the same reasons; it being evident that it is the LORD JESUS who
brought this holy doctrine from the bosom of the Father, and set it in our
view, by the Ministry of His Servants; and that also it is He, who is the
principal Subject of it, as our only Mediator, without whose conduct and merit
it is impossible to have any part in true happiness. Its of this mystery of
CHRIST JESUS, that the Apostle desired the Colossians might have a full, firm,
and distinct knowledge for to abide knit together by charity, and by this means
enjoy a true and solid consolation. This is the treasure which he is afraid
least they should lose. It Is to preserve it to them that he undergo^th so much
pain and so many combats.

Dear Brethren, his desire teaches us our duty. Since we aspire to the same
happiness that the Colossians before us have done, since we serve the same
Master, and live under the same Discipline, let us labor to get and keep for
ever the same good things which the Apostle wishes them. GOD of His great
mercy offers them liberally to us, and the fault will be ours if we do not
partake of them. ^ for the Knowledge of his Mystery, He presents us the
treasury of it, in His ho^ Scriptures. This source of light is not shut up, and
inaccessible unto you, as it to a great part of the world, and even to many
that call themselves Christians but opened and made obvious. Draw out of it the
wisdom of heaven, reading studying and searching those Divine books, night and
day. We do not envy you this sweet and happy communication, as the Pastors of
our adver saries dea with their flocks; We could wish, as yerwhile Moses did,
that all GOD's people were Prophets. It Is a science, that admits all ages,
all sexes, and all conditions of men; the Author of this holy doctrine having
so tempered it as it is accommodated to the capacity of every sort of persons.
There are in it deeps to exercise and humble the greatest Spirits; there are
facilities to instruct and content the least. It is an abyss where Elephants
may swim, and a shallow where Lambs may wade. But as all are capable of this
science, so there is no person but it is necessary for. It Is the key of the
Kingdom of heaven, the spring of piety, the root of sanctity, the seed of true
life. Study it carefully. Hearken to the teaching of it here, meditate on it at
home with deep intentiveness; beseeching GOD with prayers and tears to open
your hearts and write His doctrine in them. Content not your selves with having
learned some points of it. Take no rest till you know all its wonders; till you
have attained not simply understanding, but all riches of understanding as the
Apostle here speaks. Urge not to me that vain and cold excuse, which is in
the mouths of many, that you are not Ministers, and therefore need not be so
knowing. These Colossians were Ministers no more than you; and yet you see,
what the Apostle does desire for them; and afterward he will enjoin, that the
word of CHRIST do dwell plenteously in them in all wisdom. Why? are you less
exposed to temptations for your not being Ministers? are the Devil, and the
World less ardent, or less obstinate in setting upon you? We are all engaged in
the same war, and have all need of the same arms. Is it Captains only and
Officers that ought to be armed? Is it not necessary for private Soldiers? The
knowledge of the Mysteries of the Gospel is the armor of all Christians; and the
Scripture is the public Magazine, whence both one and the others should fetch
it. But that it may do you service at your need, this knowledge must be also
deeply radicated in your hearts; you must have it with a full assurance (as the
Apostle says). It should not slightly float in your head, to be plucked away
by an enemy, on the first occasion; It must be engraven on your heart with a
pen of iron, and the point of a diamond; that is, you should be so firmly
persuaded of it, as nothing may be able to efface it and enfeeble your belief
of it. I know well every one boasts to be so. But there is a great difference
between words and things themselves. Show it me by your lives, and I will
credit it. If you be fully persuaded of the truth of the Gospel, How is it,
that you have not the charity which it so necessarily commands us? How do you
hate men whom it commands you to love; and love the vices which it enjoyneth
you to hate? Let us lay by words, and possess in deed, that full certainty of
understanding which the Apostle wishes us. This is the true way for us to
abide all joined together in charity; to conflict with, and overcome our
enemies; to edify and preserve our friends; to attract those that are without;
to retain those that are within; to enjoy much consolation in all the trials of
this world, and to obtain in the end the Salvation, and the glory of the other,
through the grace of our LORD and Savior JESUS CHRIST. To whom with the
Father, and the Holy Spirit, the true and only GOD, be all honor, praise, and
glory to ages of ages. Amen.

The SEVENTEENTH SERMON.
COL. CHAP. II. VER. III. Verse. III. In whom are hid all the treasures of
wisdom and Knowledge.


IGnorance of the natures and qualities of the LORD JESUS, is the source of all
the errors and heresies which have exercised the Christian Church from its
beginning down to this day. 1 Cor. 2.9.
And as S. Paul said of the rulers of the Jews, that if they had known the true
wisdom, they would never have crucified the LORD of Glory: So may we say of the
authors of all the false and pernicious Doctrines which men have lusted to
introduce into Religion; that if they had duly known JESUS CHRIST, they would
not have ever troubled the Church. I pass by the scourges of the first ages,
the impiety of the Arrians and the Dokites; the extravagancy of the Nestorians
and the Eutychians, together with the numberless branches of the one and the
others; they all evidently sprung from ignorance of the true being of our LORD
JESUS CHRIST, and strike directly at Him, ruining either His natures, by
attributing to Him, the one a created and imperfect Divinity; the others an
imaginary and phantastique Humanity; or His Person, some of them dividing,
others confounding the natures which are united in it. From the same original
its clear, have come those abuses and disorders which had the vogue in the
following ages, and which raising themselves by little and little, from weak
and obscure beginnings have at last got a superiority and suffocated the
genuine simplicity and verity of the Gospel. Hence proceeded that invocation of
Saints, which is at this day practiced throughout all the Roman Communion.
Hence has issued that second sacrifice which they call of the Altar, and
wherein the heart of Religion is made to consist. If men had rightly known the
excellency of our LORD's mediation, and the effectual extent of His Cross, they
would never have addressed them to any other Intercessor, never have had
recourse to any other oblation. From the said ignorance also as from a common
spring of error, have flowed in among people, satisfactions and merits of
condignity, and congruity, and indulgences, and the rules and odly various
Disciplines of Monks, and in sum all Superstitions. If people had well known
what an one JESUS CHRIST is, they would have been assuredly content with His
Satisfaction, and with his infinite merit, and with that eternal indulgence
which He has purchased for all that believe, and with the perfection of His
Gospel. Hence again has come the setting up of another Head in the militant
Church, to be there as the Vicar and coadjutor of JESUS CHRIST. If this JESUS
whom the Father has given over all things for an Head to the Church, if the
fullness of His power, and of His wisdom, and His infinite love had been well
known, never had this second Monarchy been erected in His Kingdom. In fine, we
may say to these, and to all others, that err in Religion, Joh. 4.10.
as sometime our LORD Himself said to the Samaritan, If you knew the gift of
GOD, and who this JESUS is, that speaks to you in His Scriptures you would
seek all your Salvation in Him alone, and demand of none besides. Him, any of
the things that are necessary for the refreshment and consolation of your
Souls. Judge, faithful Brethren, how much it concerns us to know Him well, and
to have Him still before our eyes; Since this knowledge suffices to secure us
from error. Accordingly you see with what care the Apostle S. Paul represents
Him to us, and with what affection he lays out before us all the marvels of
this great and divine Subject. He described Him before to the Col^ssians in a
sublime manner, and to fasten their hearts to Him alone, showed them that in
Him is found all fullness. But he contents not himself with this. He now
informs them further in the Text which you have heard, that in Him are hid all
the treasures of wisdom and knowledge. In these few words there is a great deal
of sense and truth* Therefore we will employ this whole exercise in the
explaining of them to you if GOD permit; noting, in order all that shall seem
to us necessary, both for the understanding of the Text, and for the
instruction and edification of your Souls.

I know well that the relative word, whom, is in the Original indifferently,
whom or which; and may be referred either to JESUS CHRIST, or to the Mystery of
GOD, whereof he spoke just before; if referred to the latter, it is as if he
had said, that in this Mystery are hidden all the treasures of wisdom; and I
deny not but the words so construed do make a veritable sense; it being certain
that our LORD's Gospel here called, His mystery, is an inexhaustible treasury
of all saving wisdom and knowledge. But it is not needful to come to this; and
in my mind its more pertinent and more fluent to refer this word to the Name of
CHRIST, which immediately preceded, and to account the Apostle's meaning is,
that in JESUS CHRIST are hid these treasures which he does intend. Yet at the
bottom as you shall see, the sense is the same, which way soever of the two,
you understand it. And for a right conceiving of it, we must first refute the
exposition which some do give of this Text, and then assert the true meaning.
There are some that take these words as if Paul would say, that JESUS CHRIST
knows all things, and has so rich and so abundant a knowledge, that He is
ignorant of nothing. It Is a mistaking of the Apostle's intention in this place.
But that which they add is yet worse. For from this ill interpretation they
infer a false and a dangerous doctrine; concluding, from our Savior's having
all the treasures of Knowledge, that the infinite wisdom of His Divinity, was
really transfused into His humane nature; and by consequent all the other
properties also of the Divine nature; as its omnipotency, its infiniteness, and
its presence in all places; since there is the same reason for all these
attributes of GOD, and they are so in separable that none can have one of them,
without possessing of the rest. See, I pray you, how fruitful error is, and how
truly it was said by one of the ancient Sages of the world, That one falsity
and absurdity being supposed, many others do necessarily follow upon it! For
that which has led, or to say better which has drawn these authors into this
long series of errors, is nothing but a false opinion, which they have about
the Sacrament of the Eucharist. They incommodiously and unreasonably suppose
that the flesh of JESUS CHRIST is really present in the bread: And this
absurdity has engaged them by little and little in those others that are so
much worse. For not being able to relish that Transubstantion, which those of
Rome make use of to uphold this real presence of our LORD's body, and
deservedly rejecting it, as full of absurdities and contradictions; yet bent to
retain their own bad presupposition, they have had recourse for the maintaining
of it to another, well nigh as great an error, namely, that of Ubiquity, and do
affirm that the body of JESUS CHRIST is every where present, and consequently
in the Eucharistical signs; and to defend a thing so strange and so contrary
to sense, to reason, and to Scripture, they have advanced this conceit, that
the flesh of CHRIST through its Personal union with the Divinity, has really
received all the properties thereof; that is, that the Son assuming it unto
Himself has rendered it omnipotent, immense and infinite; a thing which has
induced them to corrupt diverse passages of the Word of GOD, that they might
form out of them some prop for their error. It is not the place here to make a
thorough refutation of their doctrine, nor to lament at large such persons
their deserting of the truth in this particular, who are illuminated with the
beams thereof in others. Would to GOD we might bury a fault which has caused
so much scandal in Christendom in eternal oblivion! I will only touch at the
concernment of the Text in hand, and their abuse of it, for the favoring of
their opinion. I say then, that in this ratiocination of theirs. they commit
two notable faults; the one, that they do not take the Apostle's meaning
aright; and the other that they conclude wrong. And to begin at the latter of
these, they conclude wrong; for from the being of an infinite science and
knowledge in JESUS CHRIST it does not follow that the Soul of His humane nature
understands, and knows all the things that God knows; as from the being
of an eternal Divinity in JESUS CHRIST, it no way follows that His flesh is
an eternal Divinity; or from His having created the World, that his Flesh
created it; like as (if at least we may compare Humane things with Divine) from
a man's having in him an immortal intellect, it follows not at all that his
body is intelligent, or immortal. For as in Man there are two Substances, the
Soul and the Body; which, though united in the same subject do nevertheless
conserve each of them their Properties apart; the Soul its spiritualness and
invisibility; the Body likewise its visibility and palpableness; the one a
capacity to understand and will, the other not; after the same manner, there
are two natures in JESUS CHRIST, which though personally united, yet are not
mingled or confused one with the other. But retain each of them their essential
and original qualities; in such sort that the Divine nature abides eternal,
infinite, omnipotent and omniscient; and the humane created in time; bounded in
place, and endowed with a limited strength, power, and science. Now as when we
say of man in general, that there is understanding and sense in him; that he
has a visible or invisible essence; that he is mortal or immortal: each of
these attributions ought to be understood, in reference to that part of his
nature, to which it agrees, and not be confusedly applied to them both; So, if
the Apostle had said (as I grant, he truly might) that there is in JESUS CHRIST
an infinite power or knowledge, it should be referred to His Divinity, and not
to His Humanity. For JESUS CHRIST being very GOD blessed for ever with the
Father, who doubts but that in this regard, He is omnipotent and omniscient?
But thence it follows not that He is so in regard of His humane nature too. And
for any to deduce it from that attribution is as impertinent reasoning, as if,
because there is in JESUS CHRIST a flesh conceived and born of the Blessed
Virgin, and which was infirm and crucified; you would infer, that therefore
His Divinity was also born of the Holy Virgin, and that it too was fastened to
the Cross. But though it should be granted them, that all the treasures of
wisdom and knowledge are hid in the humane soul of JESUS CHRIST, yet still they
would conclude wrong, to infer thence as they do, that the knowledge of His Soul
is infinite, and the same with that of GOD. We confess that this blessed Soul
having had the honor to be personally united with the Eternal Son of GOD, has
also thereupon been adorned with all the shining light of knowledge, and wisdom,
whereof its nature is capable; so as it may be said in this respect that all
the treasures of them are hidden in it; and that the knowledge which it has of
things does much surpass the knowledge of Men and Angels, both for its extent,
and also for its clearness and firmness. Yet the nature of the subject wherein
it properly resideth, being finite, it self is also necessarily finite; whereas
the knowledge of the Father, and of His eternal Word, is infinite, even as the
nature of the one, and the other is infinite. And it is to no purpose to reply,
that by this account, the humane nature of JESUS CHRIST will have no advantage
above the Saints; of whom it may be said in this sense, that all the treasures
of wisdom are hidden in them, since GOD, who dwells in them has an infinite
knowledge and wisdom. For this consequence is evidently false. First, by reason
of the extreme difference which is found between the graces communicated to the
Saints, and the gifts of light and knowledge that are insused into the Soul of
our Savior. Secondly, by reason of the infinite difference that is between
their persons; for though GOD do dwell in the Saints by His grace; yet no one
of the Saints is GOD; whereas the Eternal Word so dwells in the humanity of
JESUS CHRIST, that the same one who is man is also truly GOD; these two natures
being so strictly united, that they are but one only, and the same person: by
means whereof, it may be rightly said, that if the Word of the Father be
almighty and eternal, as indeed it is, omnipotency and eternity, and
infiniteness are in JESUS CHRIST; (for He is truly the Word of the Father) but
it cannot be inferred, that S. Peter (for example) or S. Paul had in them an
infinite power or wisdom, because GOD dwelled in them; for that GOD dwelt not
personally in them, (that is, so as each of them was GOD) but only by the grace
of His Spirit.

Finally, I add in the second place, that all this dispute is beside the
Apostle's scope, whose meaning they have misapprehended. For his intention here
is not to speak of what JESUS CHRIST knows, What would this conduce to the
end he has proposed to Himself, namely, the confirming of us in the Gospel,
and the fortifying of us against those traditions, and speculations, which
false teachers would add to it, that we might reject them, and content our
selves with this JESUS CHRIST, whom the Father presents to us in His word?
Who sees not that the Knowledge which our LORD has of things that He knows in
Himself, is altogether extraneous to this purpose? For the thing in question
is, what we must know to serve GOD aright, and be saved in the sequel. But
JESUS CHRIST reveals not unto us in the Gospel all that He knows either as
GOD, or as man. And so from His knowing all things, it follows not that it is
enough for us to embrace His Gospel. For (will the false Teachers say) though
He know all for His own part, yet He has not discovered in the Gospel which
His Apostles do preach unto us, all that is necessary for us to believe, or to
practice. What then (you will say) is the true sense of these words? Dear
Brethren, it is not hard to discern if you afford ever so little attention to
the thing. The Apostle considers the LORD JESUS here, not simply and
absolutely; but so as He is set forth and revealed to us in His Gospel; as far
as He is the subject of the Apostle's preaching, and the object of our faith.
It Is in this respect he says, that all the treasures of wisdom and knowledge
are hid in Him; thereby signifying, that this CHRIST, who is present to us in
the Gospel, is an object so rich, and so divine, as He contains all the
matter of wisdom in Him; that all the verities, whereof it is composed are
found fully and abundantly in Him; so as for the having of true wisdom, there
is no need of studying any thing but CHRIST alone; we need but know Him, and
shall be ignorant of nothing. As if I should say, that the treasures of wisdom,
or natural science, are hid in the world; my meaning would be, not that the
world knows the things and verities which appertain unto this science, but
that it does contain them; that it is a theater whereon they are exposed to our
view; and an object by the contemplation whereof we may acquire and learn them.
And as if I should say, that Man is the treasury of all the knowledge of living
Creatures; I should understand thereby, not what man knows of them, but what
he exhibiteth of it, being as an exact model and pattern, of all that the nature
of living Creatures comprehends; so as by careful studying and meditating him,
all that may be known of them may be drawn forth. In this very manner, the
Apostle saying, that in Christ are hid all the treasures of wisdom and
knowledge; does show us what is the knowledge, not that CHRIST has in Himself,
but which He can give to us; not what He knows, but what He makes us to
know; He being as it were an abyss of wonders, wherein are found all the riches
of that heavenly truth, in the knowledge whereof true wisdom consists. From
whence the inference he aims to make upon it does clearly flow, namely, that we
ought to shut our ear against any other doctrine, how plausible, and probable
soever it be. For since JESUS CHRIST is the Magazin, and the treasury of all
wisdom, in whom is found all that we ought to know, not only for necessity, but
even unto plenty; who sees not but that it is an extreme folly for men to turn
themselves another way, or trouble their heads about the study of any other
object? And so this wisdom, and this knowledge, of which the Apostle speaks, is
not that cognizance which the LORD has of the things He knows, either as
GOD, or as Man; but it is that knowledge of Divine things which we have need of,
for our attaining to Salvation, and in the having whereof, the true perfection
of our nature does consist. And when he says, that the treasures of this
wisdom are hid in Him, his meaning is not, that these Divine things are known
unto our LORD; (such a conception would be frigid and impertinent,) but that
they are all displayed, and set forth in Him; that they dwell in Him, that they
are found there; that they are enclosed, and to be seen in Him, through the
veil of the infirmity of His Cross, which in a manner hides and overspreads
them. This is, in my opinion, the true and genuine sense of the Apostle's
expression.

Let us now examine each of the terms of it, which are all of them wondrous
elegant and rich; and afterward consider the truth of them. First, he calls
this wisdom and knowledge which is in JESUS CHRIST, Treasures, to intimate, both
the Excellency, and the Abundance of them; the word Treasure, importing both
the one and the other. For, as you know we properly call such a collection, a
treasure, as is of things not worthless, and of no value; as dust or chass; but
precious and exquisite; as gold and silver, and precious stones, and jewels.
But besides worth, this term signifies abundance also. For you will not say,
that that man has a treasure, who has but two or three pieces of gold, or
silver, or a diamond, or four or five Emeralds. To have a treasure, is to have
a great and a considerable mass of rare and precious things. And hereby the
Verities which JESUS CHRIST exhibits, and affords us the knowledge of, are
distinguished from those which are found otherwhere. Perhaps a good number of
knowledges will be found otherwhere, but they are unprofitable, and of no
value. They do not make a treasure. This worthy title appertains only to
things rare and precious. But the Verities which JESUS CHRIST teaches those
that study Him, are so many pearls of inestimable price; they are divine
jewels, such as neither the barbarous Sea coasts, nor the Mines of the new
World do yield; such as neither the Heavens nor the Earth, nor any of the
storehouses of Nature can furnish us with. But abundance also is in the matter
before us, as well as worth. I deny not, but that some of these precious
Verities are hid in the world, and in man himself; and that by attention and
meditation, they may be thence drawn out; as appears by what the Pagans had
learned, who read no other book. I grant moreover, that the ancient Tabernacle
of M^ses afforded a yet greater store; But what is all this, in comparison of
that abundance of them, which JESUS CHRIST presents us? Certainly there is
none but He (to say true) in whom this Divine treasure is found. And for the
fuller discovery of the unmeasurable abundance of His inexhaustible riches to
us, the Apostle contents not himself with calling it a treasure. He says
treasures in the plural, so great and vast is the opulency of this Divine
subject. Yea, he says not simply treasures, but all the treasures; to show us,
that there is nothing fair, or exquisite, or precious, but is found in Him.

Now S Paul subjoineth in the progress of His speech what those treasures be,
which are in CHRIST. The treasures (says he) of wisdom and knowledge. Away ye
covetous, who never hear speak of treasures, but do fancy those of the world;
which (to say the truth) are but piles of dung, heaps of clods of earth, a
little otherwise formed and colored than other parts of this vile and low
element be. The jew^^ which the treasury of JESUS CHRIST is full of, is of an
infinitely more precious nature than the metals you adore; It is (says the
Apostle) wisdom and knowledge. The term, wisdom, is honorable among men; and
though they are ignorant of the thing, nevertheless they respect the name of
it; confessing that it properly agrees only to such knowledges as are at once
both sublime and useful, divine and salutiferous. Surely, to stick in this
definition which themselves give of it, it is clear, that not one of all the
Sciences that they have learned in the world by the strength of their own
spirit, does deserve to be called wisdom. For either they are low, and of
things of small elevation, as the skill of their trades, which have no
employment but on the earth; or at least they are vain, and unprofitable, as
that which they tell us of the Heavens, and their motions; of nature, and its
mutations; of numbers and figures, and the measuring of bodies. For what
service does that science do them, whereof they vaunt, with so much insolence?
Are they any whit the happier for it, or ought the more assured by it?
Themselves do vilify it, when they are in a good mood, and confess, that all
of it yields those that excel most in it, but a very slender profit. Will you
call an useless industry, Sapience; and count him a wise man that busieth
himself to no purpose? On the contrary, is it not the character of a fool, to
amuse himself in things of naught, and toil about that which affords him no
benefit, as children that run after their shadow, and course butter-flies? What
is the wisdom then which is truly worthy of so glorious a name? Dear Brethren,
it is evidently the knowledge of Verities necessary to our Salvation; those
Verities that can make us happy, and conserve peace and consolation in our
Souls, and conduct us through the accidents of this life to the possession of
that supreme felicity which all men naturally desire. It Is this kind of
knowledge that the Apostle means here. Its this which by way of excellence, he
calls wisdom; as alone deserving the name, while all other kinds of knowledge
do lie far beneath it. As for Science, which he does adjoin, I think we need
not strive to sever it from Sapience; as if they must necessarily be two
different things. I know well, there are they that subtly distinguish them;
some affirming, that Sapience is the knowledge of GOD, and of things divine.
Science, the knowledge of Man, and of things humane. Others resolving, that
Sapience signifies the knowledge of things to be believed, and Science of things
to be done. But not to dissemble I much doubt, whether the Apostle ever thought
upon these petty subtilities: For the word Science in the Original generally
signifies all knowledge, and there is no reason to restrain it to the knowledge
of things either humane or moral. I judge it therefore more accordant with the
simplicity of these Divine Authors, to take the words, Sapience and Science, in
well nigh the same sense; and to say, that the latter was added, only to
enlarge and enrich one and the same conception; as if the Apostle had said,
that there is neither Sapience nor Science, nor any true and Saving knowledge,
but it is in our Lord JESUS CHRIST.

In fine, it must be observed, that he says, These treasures are hid in
CHRIST. This is a very apt prosecution of his metaphor. For treasures are not
exposed to every one's view. They are locked up in some close cabinet; and many
times those that have them, hide them in remote places, or lay them under
ground to keep off the eyes and hands of men from them. Forasmuch as this is
usually done, the Apostle has very gracefully used this word in the matter
before him; and the more gracefully, for that something semblable may be
observed in the dispensation of JESUS CHRIST. Not that GOD has any such design
as avaricious men have; or that He, fearing lest people should see and seize
His treasure, has directly hid it from them, to prevent their sharing it. Far
be it from us to entertain a thought so injurious to the goodness and
liberality of this Sovereign LORD, who sent not His Son into the world, but to
save the world; and delights in nothing more than in seeing us search into His
treasuries, and enrich our selves with His good things. Who likewise has
clearly and magnificently laid forth in His CHRIST all His heavenly wealth; by
reason whereof that Son of His is called the Sun of Righteousness; that is, the
most visible, and most remarkable object in the Universe. He has sent His
Servants every way to discover Him unto Mankind; and from the tops of the
highest places to call all men to a participation of this treasure of light.
Now both His brightness, and their voice has spread abroad so gloriously, that
it may be justly said, Light has been in the world, Joh. 1.10.
but the world perceived it not. Wherefore our Apostle says elsewhere, That if
his Gospel be yet hid, it is hid to them that are lost, 2 Cor. 4.3, 4.
and whose understandings the GOD of this world has blinded, (to wit, the
unbelieving) that the light of the Gospel of the glory of CHRIST might not
shine into them. Where you see he attributes all the fault of worldlings not
discerning the excellency of this treasure to their own blindness, caused by
the darknings and malice of Satan; and not to the obscurity, or hiddenness of
the treasure it self; which he gives a quite contrary name to, calling it
light, yea, a glorious light, that is to say, great and sparkling. Why then
says he, that the treasures of wisdom are hid in Him? whereas it seems, he
should say on the contrary, that they are manifested in Him? that they shine
out, and appear clearly in Him? I answer, that the one and the other may be
said, in diverse respects. For if you consider the thing in its self, the
treasures of wisdom are manifested to us in JESUS CHRIST; and there is no
purifyed Soul, but sees them in Him, and acknowledges them immediately, when
it views Him, as the Gospel represents Him. But if you have respect to the eyes
and perceptions of men, as they naturally are, even obscured and corrupted by
Sin; I confess, it is hard for them to discern in JESUS CHRIST the riches of
wisdom and knowledge which the Father has put in Him; and that this proceeds in
part from that veil of meanness and infirmity, wherewith He is as it were
covered all over. And this makes S. Paul say elsewhere, that CHRIST crucified,
whom He preached, was to the Jews a stumbling block, and to the Greeks
foolishness; though to the faithful who were called, He was the Power and the
Wisdom of GOD. Therefore it being necessary for our Salvation, that He should
be born, and live poorly on earth, and there suffer in the end the death of the
Cross which surpassed all others for cruelty and ignominy; the Father who sent
Him in this form, clothed with this sad and shameful mantle, that assrighteth
men has, both manifested and hidden His treasures in Him. He has manifested
them in Him: since it is in Him, and by Him, that He exhibiteth to us
whatsoever we ought to know for the attainment of Salvation: He has hidden
them in Hun; since He has covered this treasure with such a veil, as by its
poor and contemptible look, discourageth men, and makes them say, as Isaiah
prophesied, He has no form nor comeliness in Him, and when we see Him there is
no beauty that we should desire Him. But they which have their eyes purified by
light from on high, do discern under this appearing simplicity and humility,
all celestial riches in their stateliest and most glorious form. This is the
Apostle's meaning here, when he says, that these treasures are hid in CHRIST.
He advertiseth us, that we must not stop at that infirmity and emptiness which
appears at first sight in Him; and disgusteth vain, and earthly spirits; but
look within, and contemplate the great wonders which GOD has there manifested
for our complete instruction and consolation.

Hitherto we have examined the words of this Text. It remains, that we now
consider the truth in it. We shall do it but summarily. For the prosecution of
this rich subject in its whole extent, is above the ability of Man, or Angel,
to be worthily performed; so great is the height and depth of it. But we will
briefly touch its chief heads. Man's true wisdom in his present state is to know
His misery, with the means to escape; it and his felicity, with the way that he
must take to attain it. As for our misery, nature indeed has given us some
perception of it, there being scarce a man in the world who sees not some
depravation and irregularity in himself; and whose conscience does not reproach
him with his faults and threaten the judgment of a supreme justice. The Law
has taught us much more of it, representing GOD unto us as armed with
inexorable severity against sinners, and fulminating his curse upon them. But
beside that these knowledges are weak, and are easily smothered in security,
there is this sorrow with them, that having showed us our misery, they do not
inform us of the remedy; so as if they be necessary to draw us out of that
folly, wherein the most are plunged, (who confidently sleep amid the tempest,
and presume they are well, while they have a mortal impostume in their brain,
or in their bowels) yet it cannot be said, that they suffice to make us wise;
seeing that for the just possession of this title, a man must know not only his
malady, but also the means to cure it. And yet though we knew it too,
nevertheless this would not be sufficient; because, besides deliverance from
evil, we desire also the fruition of good, yea the chief Good. But neither the
light of nature, nor even the light of the Law does reveal to us, what this
supreme felicity is, which without distinct knowing it, we do desire; so far
are they from showing us the way to it. But in JESUS CHRIST as proposed to us
in the Gospel, these Verities that are necessary to render us wise, are found
clearly and fully all of them. For as to our misery, He declares it exactly to
us, not by some surd and inarticulate sounds, as nature does; nor by
circuitions and essaies, as the Law did; but by the fullest and most moving way
of information that ever was in the world; even crying aloud to us from that
Cross, to which our sins had nailed Him. Behold ye sons of men how horrid your
crimes are, since that it was necessary for the washing them away, that I
should come down from the Heavens, and shed forth my blood. Behold, how great
and irreparable your fall was, since there was none in heaven or earth, that
could raise you up again but my self. As much as the life of the Son of GOD is
more precious than the life of all mankind; so much clearer is the proof which
his death gives us of the horror of sin, than that which we might take from
the death of all that ever sinned; though we should we see them stricken down
together, and punished by the avenging justice of GOD. But if this great
Savior do make us so feelingly perceive the horridness of our misery, his end
is only to make us the more ardently desire and embrace the remedy, which he
offers us, fully prepared from that same Cross to which he He was fastened for
us. I grant that the forbearance, and kindness of GOD, in his conduct of men,
though sinful, might give them some sparkle of hope; and his promises under the
old Covenant had highly confirmed it betimes. But the Sword of his Justice
dreadfully flaming in the hand of the Law, perplexed them not a little, and it
was very difficult for them to accord His inflexible righteousness, with the
mercy that was necessary for them. JESUS CHRIST has removed all these
difficulties, and exhibiteth unto us, in his Cross, the solution of all our
doubts. Fear nothing, sinner, I (says he) have contented the Justice of God,
and satisfied his Law. Boldly trust his promises, and approach his Throne with
full assurance. This blood, which has opened to you the entrance thither, is
not the blood of a beast, nor an earthly ransom; it is the blood of GOD, a
ransom of infinite value, more than sufficient to take away your sins, how
infinite soever the demerit of them be. But you will say, This is not yet
enough for my consolation. CHRIST, I confess, sufficiently assures me of the
pardon of my sins. What assurance does he give me against so many enemies, the
world, the evil Angels, flesh and blood, in midst of whom my way does lie? But,
Christian, does not the same Cross, which has merited your pardon, give you
also clear and undoubted evidence of your safety, during the whole course of
your life? For since you understand by it, that GOD has delivered up his only
Son to death for you, how can you fear, that he will withold any of the cares
of his Providence from you? Yet this is not all. CHRIST JESUS, who shows us
these excellent and sacred verities, in his death, as it were engraven in great
Letters on his Cross, holds up others before our eyes, of no less importance,
in his Resurrection. Believers, neither the pardon of your sin, nor the
assistance of GOD during your life, would be sufficient for you; for as much as
after all, death will swallow you up, as well as unbelievers. See then further
in your JESUS, the truth that is necessary to complete your consolation. By
committing his spirit, at the point of death, into the Father's hands, he
teaches you, that GOD will receive your soul when you depart out of the world:
And by rising again the third day after, he assures you, that your bodies
shall one day be raised out of the dust: And ascending into Heaven, he assures
you, that you shall be transported thither both soul and body, to live and
reign there with him in eternal glory. As for the way, which you must take, to
arrive at this high happiness, his whole life, and his death, have clearly
marked it out to you; and he still shows it you from that lofty Throne whereon
he is set. Tread in my steps (says he) if you will be exalted to my glory.
Follow the example of my innocence, and of my charity, if you desire to have
part in the Crown of my Kingdom. I have born injuries with calmness and
patience; I have constantly obeyed my Father even unto my death on the Cross,
and you see the honor wherewith he has crowned me: Imitate my obedience, and
you shall receive my recompense.

This is the lesson which the LORD JESUS gives us; showing us incomparably
more clearly than either the frame or government of the World, or the Mosaical
dispensation ever did, both the Justice of GOD, that we may dread him, and the
Power and Wisdom of God, that we may reverence him and his mercy, that we may
love and serve him with all the strength of our souls; serve him, I say, not
with the sacrifices of old Judaism, nor with the feeble and childish devotions
of Superstition; but with a pure and holy heart, with works worthy of him, with
an ardent zeal, a sincere charity, a constant integrity and honesty, a profound
patience and humility, an immovable hope and confidence: These are the Verities
which do constitute true Wisdom; all of them, as you see, high and sublime, but
in like degree useful and salutiferous. Here is not question of the nature of
Elements, of Animals, of Plants, or of Meteors; nor of the motions of the Sun,
or of the Moon, or of the other Planets; but of the Being, and the Counsels,
and the Conduct of that Great and Most High God, who made and formed all those
things, and in comparison of whom, Heaven and Earth are but a Mite of dust.
Question is not of numbers and figures, which can neither diminish your
mseries, nor make your souls happy; but of your peace with GOD, of your
consolation in this life, and of your glory and immortality in the next. It Is
this which JESUS CHRIST teaches us, that Divine crucified Person, who dyed and
rose again for us. Its this he shows us, represented in high and splendid
colors through all the pieces of his Mystery. However Nature and the Law might
discover the brims and first lineaments of this Celestial Wisdom, it is he alone
who has exhibited to us the whole body, and showed us the entire frame and
structure of it. Conclude we then, that it is verily in him that all the
treasures of wisdom and knowledge are hidden, as the Apostle says.

Embrace we this Conclusion with firm belief; and upon it, bless we GOD, first,
for that he has vouchsafed to give his CHRIST unto Mankind; and particularly,
for that he has communicated him unto us, mercifully presenting him to us both
in his Word and in his Sacraments. Next, pray him to open our eyes more and
more, that we may discern these rich and precious treasures of wisdom and
knowledge which he has hid in him. Let not the vileness of his Cross, nor the
veil of his Infirmity, nor the simplicity of his Gospel, and these Sacraments
wherein he is offered to us, offend us. This very thing, if we consider it as
we ought, makes up one principal part of the wonder; and that we may rightly
know and value this treasure, let us cleanse our minds from the clay and mire
of the earth; let us purify our understandings, and rid them of the sentiments
and opinions of the world, which being fastened to its own dung, does prize
nothing but the luster of its false honors, and the vanity of its perishing
riches, and the delight of its unseemly pleasures. Let us once set free our
souls from these fordid and servile passions; and acknowledge, as is clear, and
visible, and justified by experience, that it is an extreme error and folly to
seek one's happiness in such wretched things. Lift we up our eyes unto Wisdom,
and desire the possession, and embrace the study of it. It is the jewel and
ornament of our nature; its whole dignity stands in it. Without it, man is
little or nothing different from beasts, nay in some sort in worse case than
they; as sinking beneath himself, and falling into utmost misery. But give we
good heed, lest we take a shadow for substance, and a phantasm for true wisdom.
Be not deceived. This wisdom is only in CHRIST JESUS; All that pretended wisdom
which has the acclamations and applauses of people whether in the Courts, or
in the Schools of the world, is but masked folly, a disguised extravagance, and
a painted error, which passes by the principal and necessary part, and amuseth
its self about that which is of no profit, nor any way provides for its own
welfare; which is the true end of wisdom. Seek it therefore in JESUS CHRIST
alone. It is in him that you shall find the true substance of it. And as those
that have any treasure are wont to visit it often, and have their hearts always
in the place where it is: so think you, night and day, upon this Divine
Savior, in whom are hid the treasures of wisdom and knowledge: Consider him,
pry into him, and diligently sound him. He is an Abyss of good things. Have
your hand ever there, and draw thence by faith, study, and meditation, all that
is necessary for you. Let your whole life be taken up in the continual handling
of these Divine Jewels, in admiring the beauty, and using the brightness of
them. Let it be all the passion of your souls, the matter of your joys, and the
consolation of your troubles. If you have not those false good things which the
world so much glories in, remember that you have the treasures of Heaven, the
portion of Angels, the wisdom and knowledge of happiness. Take heed that none
bereave you of so rich a possession. Shut your ear against the prattle and
plausible discoursings of Seducers. Conserve this treasure courageously against
their attempts: nor be content to have it only; communicate it to your
neighbors: lay forth the wonders of it before their eyes, adorning all the
parts of your life with it. Let the innocence, and sanctity, and sweetness, and
humility of the LORD JESUS shine out in it. Let these be your Pearls, and your
Jewels, and your Ornaments before men, which may constrain them to acknowledge
that JESUS CHRIST dwells in the midst of you, and to say, Of a truth this
Nation is a wise and understanding people. Above all, instruct your Children in
this knowledge. Leave them this wisdom for an inheritance. Such a portion is
enough to make them happy; whereas without this they cannot possibly be other
than fools and wretches, though you should leave them all the wealth of the
East and West.

Finally, since the Apostle assures us, that all the treasures of wisdom are
in JESUS CHRIST, let us content our selves with him alone, and centemn the
vanity of those who under any pretense whatsoever, would make pass for wisdom
doctrines that are foreign, and without the sphere of CHRIST. Let us not so
much as give them the hearing. It Is warrant enough for us to reject them, that
they make up no part of the treasure of JESUS CHRIST. I stand not to enquire,
whether they be true or false, helpful or hurtful. It suffices me, that
whatever they be otherways, they are not in CHRIST. Nothing is to be received
in Religion, but what comes out of this treasury. GOD, who has given it us in
his abundant mercy, and who calls us to partake also of it the LORD's day
next, grant us to conserve it pure and entire, to possess it with joy and
respect in this world, and reap the full fruit of it in that which is to come.
So be it.

THE EIGHTEENTH SERMON.
COL. CHAP. II. VER. IV, V. Ver. IV. But this I say, that none may deceive you
by words of persuasion.

V. For though I am absent in body, yet in spirit I am with you, rejoicing, and
seeing your order, and the firmness of your faith, which you have in CHRIST.


AS men do not naturally love and desire, but things which have an appearance
of good; so they believe none but those that have a semblance of truth; and
they lay down love of the one, and belief of the others, as soon as they
certainly discover that the former are evil, and the latter untrue. Whence it
comes, that being prepossessed, upon some general and confused knowledge, with
conceit that the enjoyment or belief of a thing would be profitable and
advantageous to them, they wish it prove good and true; evidently presupposing,
that otherwise their very nature could not permit them to love it, or believe
it. This is to be seen in children themselves, who are the sincerest and most
natural map of the motions of our nature. For when their Nurses tell them any
thing, they ask if it be true; and if the tale please them, they are troubled
when they perceive it is but a tale; and would have it true, that they might
believe it. So deeply imprinted in the mind of all reasonable Creatures is this
sacred and inviolable principle of their nature, that nothing is to be believed
but what is true. This advantage which truth naturally has over falsehood, does
enforce its very enemies to counterfeit its mark, and wear its livery, they
being sensible that their errors and falsehoods can have no passage among men,
except they go under the appearance of some truth. Even as Coiners, that they
may put off their Copper and Lead, do give it the color and resemblance of
Gold and Silver, and counterfeit the image and stamp of a lawful Prince; or as
they that would travel through an enemy's Country, do privily accommodate
themselves with the enemy's badges: so Seducers, well knowing that the
understanding of man is the proper and lawful Kingdom of truth, where nothing
passes but under the avouching and marks of the same, do fard and disguise the
fictions which they would put off, and give them, as finely as they can, the
countenance and color of truth, that by the means of this false resemblance
they may pass current among men, who would reject them immediately if they saw
them in their own natural likeness. There has ever been a great number of
these cheats in the world; a multitude of persons being every where found, who
pricked forward by ambition, or some other particular interest, do strive to
bring their fancies and dreams into reputation. But as Christian Religion
compriseth the best and most important Verities in the world; so there never
was any profession that Error and Imposture have more labored to corrupt, both
by decrying some of its true doctrines on one hand, and by intermingling of
falsehoods on the other. And as all the artifice of such unhappy wits tends
only to confound truth, and lies; so ought we to employ the utmost of our
industry, that we may effectually sever them, and so discern them, as we never
take the one for the other. This discerning, dear Brethren, is one of the most
important duties of our life. It is loss, I confess, to take Copper for Gold,
and bad money for good; and it is moreover ignorance, ever shameful, sometimes
not a little hurtful, to receive an error for truth in Philosophy, and in civil
life. But yet the loss and shame that accrues from all this kind of cheats,
reaches no further than the present time; whereas the consequents of those
impostures which we suffer in Religion, do extend even to eternity. For this
cause the holy Apostle often warns the faithful, Romans 16.17. 1 These. 5.21.
Ephesians. 4.14. Heb. 5.14.
to whom he writes, to beware of them, and to try all things with a great deal
of care, that they may not be inveigled by seducers, nor take up their
traditions for truths; willing every sound and thorough Christian, to have his
senses exercised and habituated to discern between good and evil. You may have
observed in the Text we have read, that this is the happiness which he wishes,
and would procure to the Colossians, keeping them from being drawn in by the
fair speeches of those seducers that courted them. He had before represented to
them at large the abundance and excellency of the benefits of their LORD and
Savior; and he protested again in the verse immediately foregoing, as you
heard, if you remember, in our last Exercise upon this subject, that in JESUS
CHRIST are hid all the treasures of wisdom and knowledge. Now he shows them
the design upon which he so instantly repeateth what he seemed to have
sufficiently treated of in the precedent Texts. Now this I say, says he, that
none may deceive you with words of persuasion. And to give evidence that he did
not put himself to this trouble vainly, or rashly, he adds in the following
verse the knowledge that he had of their estate, it being as really before his
eyes as if he were upon the place. For (says he) though I am absent in body,
yet in spirit I am with you, rejoicing, and seeing your order, and the firmness
of your faith which you have in CHRIST.

Thus we shall have two points to handle, for the giving you a full and entire
understanding of this Text.

First, The Apostle's care of these Christians that they might not be seduced.
And

Secondly, The cognizance he took of their present state, though he was in body
far distant from them.

We will consider them both, if GOD permit, as briefly as we can, pointing at
what we judge useful for your edification and consolation, both in the one and
the other.

The first of these two points the Apostle expresses in these words, But this
I say, that none may deceive you by words of persuasion. Upon which words we
shall have two things to examine; The danger the Colossians were in; and, the
usefulness of that which the Apostle says, to preserve them from incurring it.
The danger was great, and the evil, which it threatened, grievous and mortal,
even the being deceived and seduced by the persuasive words which false
Teachers used in this wretched design. There never was any servants of CHRIST,
but such a tentation did beset them; Satan no sooner seeing the truth of the
Gospel any where appear, but he immediately raises up Impostors to corrupt it,
and turn away those that embrace it, from the purity and simplicity thereof.
But especially at the beginning of Christianity, when it was first preached and
sounded by the holy Apostles, then there arose a multitude of seducers, who did
their utmost to deprave and mar this divine seed of the salvation of men; and
the Devil made like attempts in our Fathers days, when perceiving the Gospel to
be revived, that he might presently obstruct this holy work, he speedily
brought into the field a world of spirits, some audacious and extravagant,
others subtle and selfish, which endeavored to scandalize, or to seduce the
simple: those, by the prodigies of their fond imaginations: these, by the
plausible appearances of their false accommodations. But they which troubled
the Church in the Apostle's time, did address themselves, among others, to the
Colossians in particular, as appears both by what he intimates briefly here;
and more clearly yet, by what he adds in the series of this Chapter. He does
not name them; but his saying, that none deceive you, is a sufficient evidence
that there were some crastsmen of this quality about them, who took pains to
ensnare them. It is therefore th^^^ same he aims at, and against the force of
their seducements does he arm the Colossians. He shows here both the end to
which they tended, (even the deceiving of the faithful) and the means they used
about it, (namely, words of persuasion). The term he pitcheth upon to express
the first of these, does not signify simply to deceive, but to deceive by
false and captious ratiocination. For these bad men knowing well that the
spirits of men are not brought to embrace nor avoid any thing, without some
reason; it being the natural order and disposition of all our actions and
motions, that the understanding do still precede the will; they begin the
effecting of our ruin there; and, to entangle our minds in their errors, they
propose us reasons, false indeed, but appearing otherwise; such as have the
color and countenance, but not the essential form and substance of a good and
solid discourse. This the word (Paralogism) here used by the Apostle, does
properly signify. It Is a sophism, a false and spurious arguing, which by its
vain appearance and fallacious blaze, leads men into error; as those fatuous
fires, which rising sometimes in the dark of night, do trail those that follow
them into precipices. Satan the Father of all Sophisters, took this course
first; having miserably seduced our first Parents by the illusion of a false
discourse, the vanity whereof experience clearly demonstrated: for that he
might corrupt their will, he attaqued their understandings in the first place;
and beguiled them, that he might destroy them; persuading, that the forbidden
fruit would make them like GOD. Those whom he has set on work since that time,
have all followed this method, there having never risen Heretic, either under
the Old or the New Testament, but has painted over his impostures with some
deceivable reasons. Only this difference may be observed among such men, that
some do the thing maliciously, and against their own conscience; others,
through ignorance. The former sort are true children of the Devil, and the most
execrable of all men, as combating that truth which they are conscious of; and
defending error by reasons, whose vanity they well understand; neverthelss they
forbear not to labor in this unhappy desing, either for the acquiring of glory
to themselves, or for creating trouble to Teachers of truth, whom they have
conceived an hatred of. Those of the other sort who do it through ignorance,
have less guilt and wickedness, I confess, but are no less dangerous. For
believing in good earnest the errors which they do advance, they strive to
persuade others to them with so much the more passion and fervency, as
imagining that they serve them, when they indeed destroy them; and that they
edify, when in truth they ruin them. Romans 10.2.
Such were those Jews of whom S. Paul bears witness, that they had a zeal of
God, but without knowledge. They believed themselves the error which they
recommended; and were in those snares, wherewith they sought to entangle
others. And in this rank we must place the most of those of the Roman
Communion, who take so much pains to draw us into their mistakes; not only
those of the people, but also many of their Monks, and of their Doctors, who
labor to deceive others, because they have been themselves deceived; having
run into that erroneous persuasion into which they would induce us; and
confirmed themselves from time to time in it by those sophisms and false
reasonings which they offer us, and which they have either learnt of their
instructors, or invented of themselves. We must equally take heed of both these
sorts of workers. For how different soever the motive of their acting be, the
effect of it is ever the same, even seduction and perdition. And as poison
forbears not to kill the man that takes it, though it have been ignorantly
given him by a person that know it not to be poison, who perchance took of it
himself, thinking it a remedy; so error, from whatever hand it come, has still
a bad effect; and the opinion they have of it, who present it to us, does not
change the venom of it, nor impede its corrupting of our souls, and
extinguishing Divine life in us, if we do receive it.

But the Apostle in this place points out the means also, which false
Teachers use for the setting up of their errors. That none (says he) may
deceive you, by words of persuasions. These he calls elsewhere in the same case
sweet and flattering words, Romans 16.18.
saying in his Epistle to the Romans, that Schismatics and such as make
divisions contrary to the doctrine we have learned, do seduce the hearts of the
simple by sweet and flattering words. 1 Cor. 2.4.
And this he names again elsewhere, the enticing words of man's wisdom. Under
these terms he comprehends all the advantages, and attractives of discourse;
all that it has in it, which is apt to touch and win hearts; as either
probable reasons, wherewith it is furnished, or beauty of terms and expressions,
or artificial disposition, and graceful pronunciation. There is none but knows
how potent these charms of eloquence are. They sometimes dazzel the best eyes,
and do deceive the firmest minds. It Is a kind of Magic and Enchantment which
makes things appear quite otherwise than they are, and gives them colors and
qualities that are not their own; which makes Honey pass for Wormwood, and
Wormwood for Honey; black for white, and white for black. There is no cause so
good, but this kind of illusion overthrows; nor so bad, but it establishes.
There is no affection which it does not allay; nor b^l^^f which it does not
shake; nor resolution, which it does not break. It has often (...) the
innocent to be condemned, and the nocent absolved with applause. It Is by its
sleights that truth, how invincible soever it be, has sometimes seemed to be
vanquished. It Is to its dexterity and its stratagems that error and falsehood do
we the greatest part of their lying-triumphs. For feeling themselves in reality
weak, they have recourse ordinarily to this kind of Sorcery; that they may
carry by its illusions what they could never win by true and legitimate
strength. It Is it that maintains Sophisters, and Wranglers, and Mountebanks,
and Seducers. With the sophistry and prattle which it lends them, they have
the hardiness to show themselves, and to oppose the clearest truths, and
recommend the grossest errors. But among all the busy people that use it,
there are none that employ it more perniciously, than Heretics and corrupters
of Religion. This false Rhetoric is the principal instrument they seduce
withal. Accordingly it is evident, that they have always taken it up, and
scarce ever attempted upon Truth, but with this sort of weapons. And it must be
confessed, that they help themselves by them with wonderful dexterity. Never
was cause, in matter of Religion, more sordid, or shameful, or seeble, than
that of the Pagans; yet they that pleaded it against the ancient Christians,
knew so well how to fard it with the colors of their false reasons, and the
gloss of their brave words, that they made it pass for plausible among the
multitude, and rendered Christianity ridiculous to them, how holy and lightsome
soever its truth was. Those Heretics which arose from among Christians, had no
less ability and artificialness to recommend their impostures, borrowing for
this purpose, from the Philosophers and Orators of the world, the subtilties of
their Logic, and all the colors of their Rhetoric. There are still left us
some pieces of the one and the other, in the Books of Antiquity; as the
Discourses of one Celsus in Origin; of one Caecilius in Minutius; of Porphyrius
and Symmachus, for Paganism; diverse writings of Tertullian, for Montanism; of
Fanstus, for the Manichees; and of Julian, for the Pelagians, in S. Augustine.
It Is wonderful with what dexterity and with what grace and eloquence they do
manage such bad and infamous subjects; nor can I read them, without lamenting
the unhappiness of so many excellent and highlyapprovable things, to be
miserably profaned in the service of error; as one cannot choose but groan to
see Marble, and Gold, and Azure, and precious Stones, employed in adorning the
Temple of an Idol. And I note it expressly to you, my Brethren, that you may not
think it strange if those of Rome at this day do speciously defend a very bad
Cause; nor be much moved at the ostentation they make of it, who are not
ashamed to boast of the eloquence and subtilty of their Teachers, as if this
were one of the marks of truth. I freely consent to the praises they give them,
and do acknowledge, that words of persuasion (as the Apostle here calls them) do
abound on their side: but I dare affirm notwithstanding, and am assured, that
every intelligent and unpassionate person will accord with me herein, That, how
subtle and eloquent soever their Masters be, and how much pains soever they
have taken for the better plastring over, and coloring, and burnishing of
their Doctrine, in conclusion their works are not more neat, nor more polite,
nor more specious and fair-seeming, than the works of those Pagans and
Heretics whom I but now named; yea, to speak without passion, I believe they
are far inferior to them. Let them forbear therefore to urge unto us for a mark
of truth, an advantage which is common to them with Pagans and Heretics; an
advantage which the most infamous Causes do employ, which the worst do
ordinarily seek after more earnestly than the best; so much more cunning being
used in their defense, by how much less strength they have in themselves. Not
that I would decry eloquence and acuteness, or render them suspect with you, as
if they never were in other service than of error; I willingly acknowledge, they
are excellent graces of GOD, and that he gives them to men properly for the
defense of Truth, and sure they have not always had the hard hap to contend for
Falsehood. They have often done good service to the Gospel, and employed their
might for its glory, both heretofore against the Pagans and the old Heretics;
and in our times against those of Rome, as appears by the writings both of the
Fathers, and of our own Doctors; a good number of them being found, who even in
this respect come no whit behind their adversaries; besides their having the
principal advantage, that is, the truth on their side. This Paul himself, who
here condemns words of persuasion when they recommend error, does not reject
them when they are laboring for truth. And though he was not much versed in
the art of profane eloquence; whence it comes, that he says of himself, that
for speech he was as one of the Vulgar; yet his discourses want no strength nor
grace; that rich heavenly knowledge which abounded in his heart, giving its
tincture to the words of his mouth; and that great personage indeed felt how it
was, who hearing him speak, was pressed with the force of his discourse, and
said aloud, Thou almost perswadest me to be a Christian. All my aim is, Acts
26.28.
that since error oftentimes abuses eloquence and acuteness, against the
truth, as evil men do other gifts of God to evil ends; we should not judge of
the main of any cause by this advantage, nor hastily embrace that party that
defends it self with the best and most perswafive words, nor reject that which
has least of these ornaments in view. As Innocence is not always the best
clothed, so Truth frequently is not the most decked. And though of it self it
be always more probable, more likely, and more easily maintainable than
falsehood, Arist. Rhetor. l. 1. c. 6.
as one of the ancient Sages well observed; yet sometimes it comes to pass
through the sleight of seducers, by the false light they set it in, and the
colors they shadow it with, that it looks worse in the eyes of the ignorant
than a lie does. Take we heed then of their surprising us, and so well fortify
our minds against their illusions, that they may never make us reject the
truth, how foul and ugly soever they paint it out; nor receive a delusion, how
specious and plausible soever they do render it. Remember, that that Babylon,
the Mother of Error, who is pourtrayed before us in the Apocalypse, Rev. 17.4.
does present its abominations unto men in a golden Cup; that is, she gives her
poisons in a pleasing Vessel, and shuts up and hides the horridness of her
impostures under very fair and specious words; it is this that those seducers
yerwhile did, who solicited the Colossians; their errors were attended with
persuasive words for the beguiling of them. This is the danger from which S.
Paul would here preserve them.

Let us now consider the means he puts into their hands for their safe guarding
themselves from it. This I say unto you (says he) that no one may deceive you
with enticing words. Since he thus speaks, it is evident, that what he says is
able, if we improve it as we ought, to keep us from falling into the
misleadings of seducement, and to frustrate all the charms of its good and
persuasive words. What then is it that he says? and what at last is that so
holy and so efficacious a speech, which can dissipate the illusions and
enchantments of error? Dear Brethren, you heard it in the exposition of the
precedent Text, where this holy man told us, that all the treasures of wisdom
and knowledge are hid in JESUS CHRIST; It Is that he understands here. This is
that Celestial Oracle to which he attributes this great virtue. This is the
remedy which he gives us against all the poisons, and all the charms of
seduction. None of the weapons or of the wiles of error can bear up before this
sacred word. It alone is sufficient, if we use it as we ought, to confound and
annihilate all the pretended wonders of the eloquence and subtilty of false
Teachers, as heretofore the Rod of Moses swallowed up all the Rods of the
Egyptian Magicians. For whosoever shall hold fast this principle in his heart,
that all true wisdom and knowledge is in JESUS CHRIST, he will receive nothing
out of CHRIST. Being content with this treasure, he will despise all other
things, how specious and plausible soever they may be. Seduction will do well
to display its arts, and to gild and paint over its inventions with the fair
colors either of ratiocination, or of eloquence. It will get no ground upon
such a one, since after all, the thing it does so carefully polish, is not in
JESUS CHRIST, out of whom he will know nothing. He will not so much as hear the
babbling of error, so far will he be from being affected with it. He will shut
his car against its fine words; so far is he from being seduced by them. Or if
he please to cast his eye upon the works of its subtilty and its eloquence, he
will look upon them as Spiders webs, or as juggling, and Gypsies feats, which
amuse us, and beguile our senses, but make no impression on our hearts. We well
know they do deceive us, though we cannot tell how. So the faithful man will
hold that for a deceit, and an illusion, that leads him out of JESUS CHRIST,
though otherways he do not see wherein the sophism of the error does consist,
nor is able clearly to unty the knots thereof. This, dear Brethren, is the sure
and infallible means to exclude, and to expel all error from among us.
Seducement wins nothing, but upon those that betray this gate, and yield it,
that there may something be of good and saving importance out of JESUS CHRIST,
and his Scriptures. When once it has this ground given, it never wants paint
and pretenses to color its delusions, and render even those plausible and
likely, which are otherways grossest and most extravagant. Thus those
Traditions and Ceremonies which have still the vogue among our Adversaries,
were by little and little obtruded upon Christians. The invocation of Angels,
and of Saints departed; the Sacrifice of the Altar, and the veneration of
Relics and of Images; the visible Head, and the Hierarchy, and the
infallibility of the Church; Satisfactions, and the merit of works; Prayers and
Services in a language not understood; the adoration of the Host; Communion in
one kind only; Purgatory, Suffrages for the dead, and many other such like
things. A thousand, and a thousand colors are found to paint them out, and
recommend either the belief or the practice of them to poor people. There are
huge Books made about them, full of wit and eloquence, that drive the matter so
far, as to make these things pass for the principal and most useful part of
Christian devotion. But this short Saying of S. Paul's is enough to ruin all
their labors, and to secure us from all their snares; In JESUS CHRIST are hid
all the treasures of wisdom and knowledge. It suffices me to have Him, since
having Him, I have all appertains to true wisdom. How well disputed, and how
eloquently soever pleaded all your traditions be, I am not concerned in them,
seeing I have the treasure of all Science in CHRIST JESUS. And it is not here
alone that the Apostle gives us this lesson for the freeing our selves from
the intanglements and snares of error: Elsewhere instructing the Hebrews, and
exhorting them that they would not be carried to and fro with diverse and
strange doctrines; he lays before them, at the entrance, this divine principle,
That JESUS CHRIST is the same, both yesterday, and to day, and for ever.

But it is now time to come to the second part of our Text, in which the Apostle
declares to the Colossians the cognizance he took of the state of their Church.
For (says he) though I be absent in body, yet in spirit I am with you,
rejoicing and seeing your order, and the firmness of your faith which you have
in CHRIST. This is the reason why he advertiseth them to take heed of the wiles
of seducers, and why he so carefully puts into their hands the means to
preserve themselves. For some might have thought it strange, that being so far
from them, and in all likelihood ignorant of the state wherein they were, he
should yet give them such an advertisement. He preventeth this surmise, and
answers, that though at Rome he were, nevertheless he minded what was a doing
at Coloss; the affection which he bor^ them, obliging him to interess himself
in all their concernments. Wonder not (says he) that I bespeak you in this
manner, and send you, from so far off, preservatives against seduction: For
though so many Seas and Hills do sever my body from you, yet my spirit is with
you, taking part in all that does betide you, rejoicing in the prosperous
estate of your piety; but likewise fearing the attempts of those enemies which
I see round about you ready to sow the tares of Schism and Error, upon any the
least overture they find for it. Some referr his saying, that he wasi n spirit
with the Colossians, to an extraordinary and miraculous operation of the Holy
Ghost, who replenishing his soul with light, made him thereby see things that
passed at the greatest distance, as clearly as if he had been present; after
the same manner that GOD had afore-time showed Elisha what his servant Gehazi
did with Naaman; a passage, which accordingly the Prophet expresses almost in
the same manner. 2 Kings 5.26.
Went not my heart with thee (says he to Gehazi) when the man turned again
from his Chariot to meet thee? I confess surely, that GOD could easily have
made known to Paul at Rome, in the Prisons of Nero, where he was, all that
passed in the Church of Coloss, with as much, yea more clearness, than if he
had been present there; and have revealed also to him the whole state of other
Churches further distant from Italy; as he made Ezekiel while living in
captivity at Babylon, to see the most secret actions of the Jews, in the City,
and the Temple of Jerusalem. But because it is dangerous to argue from what GOD
can do, to what he does; and under color of some slight probabilities, to
resolve upon things which his word does not at all affirm: Moreover, since we
must not multiply Miracles without necessity; I account it best and safest,
without having receourse to this extraordinary kind of presence, to interpret
these words of the Apostle simply, as others do, of a presence in respect of
care and affection. For nothing is more common in all Languages, than to say,
that our mind is in such places, and with such persons, as we think upon, and
have affection to. Whence comes the vulgar saying, that the soul is where it
loves, because there it ordinarily keeps its desires, its love, and its
cogitations. And it is thus also that we must take what the Apostle says to
the Corinthians, 1 Cor. 5.^.
that though absent in body, he was present with them in spirit; He means
simply, that his bonds did not detain his spirit, or shut it up in the Prisons
of Rome; nor hinder him from minding them every hour, and having his affections
and thoughts continually among them; figuring to himself the estate which they
were in, in as lively a manner as if he had had them before his bodily eyes;
and drawing from this lively conception the same movings of joy, contentment,
and fear, as the sight of them would have wrought within him. So as there need
be no wonder, if having them so deeply engraven on his heart, and still present
to the eyes of his mind, he become pained for them, and at such distance
prescribe them necessary precautions and preservatives against the pleasant,
but pernicious poisons of error. And observe, I beseech you, this holy man's
prudent and apt procedure. For, to justify that care which he took of them, he
does not urge the danger they were in, their weakness, or the bad inclinations
which some of them had: This discourse would have been offensive, as showing a
distrust of their piety; but on the contrary, he here tells them of the
prosperity of their spiritual estate, the beauty of their order, and the
constancy of their faith. Rejoicing (says he) and seeing your order, and the
firmness of your faith. Do not imagine (says he) that I have an ill opinion of
your piety, because I do so earnestly advise you to stand fast: I am very well
satisfied concerning it; and do find you in so good a posture, that I have much
consolation at it; this matter being so pleasing to me, that it fills my heart
with joy, notwithstanding the sad estate that I am in. But from the same root,
whence springs my joy, my ardent desire to see you go on from good to better,
does also arise; and with it the solicitude and care I take to exhort it;
because it would be an extreme regret and displeasure, to see Error waste or
wound so fair and flourishing a Church, ever so little. See how by praising
them he does oblige them to regard his advertisements; and by the very
consideration of their having so well begun, does more and more engage them to
holy persevering to the end. Thus he also treated the Philippians, My beloved
brethren (said he to them) and much desired, Phil. 4.1.
my joy, and my crown; so stand fast in the LORD, my dearly beloved. You
perceive of your selves, without my indication, that when he says, rejoicing
and seeing your order; the meaning is, rejoicing to see, or for that I see your
order. For in Scripture Language, and even in our vulgar speech, the particle
[and] is often used in this sense, and signifies, because that, or, forasmuch
as. He praises and extolleth two things in these faithful persons, wherein the
happiness and the perfection of a Church does consist; to wit, Order, and a
firm and constant Faith. By the order of these Colossians, he means the good
disposition of all the parts of their Church, the vigilance of the Pastors, the
submission and obedience of the Flock, their joint-regard of Discipline; each
keeping themselves within the bounds of their vocation, and both together
living in concord and good intelligence, honestly, and without scandal. For,
that order comprehends also purity, and sanctity of behavior, the Apostle
evidently shows in another place; where, 2 Thessalonians. 3.6.
to signify those that lead a scandalous life, he says, that they walk
disorderly. He praises also the firmness of their faith in JESUS CHRIST;
signifying thereby, both that full persuasion they had of the truth and
divinity of his Gospel, and their constancy to hold it fast, notwithstanding
the assaults and tentations of the Enemy. It Is this Faith, dear Brethren, and
this Order of the Colossians, that was the matter of the Apostle's joy, and the
occasion both of the desire he had to see them persevere still in so good a
course, and of the advice he gave them, not to suffer themselves to be beguiled
by the persuasive words of seducers; as likewise, of the adding that
preservative, of meditating incessantly upon the treasures of wisdom, which are
in JESUS, for the saving themselves from this mortal danger.

It Is now our concernment to make a good improvement of so excellent a lesson.
We are as much environed, or more than the Colossians sometimes were, with
people that endeavor to deceive us with words of persuasion, that daily make
all kind of attempts upon our faith, and do not forget the sophisms of
subtilty, or the charms of eloquence, presenting error to us farded with diverse
specious colors. For the securing of our minds from their illusions, let us
tell them, as the Apostle teaches us, That all the Treasures of wisdom are hid
in that JESUS CHRIST whom we have embraced; that He suffices to make us wise
to salvation; and that we need to know none but Him to obtain happiness. If
with fair and artificial words they represent to us the necessity of an
expiatory Sacrifice, for the recommending that of their own Altars; or the
utility of Satisfactions, to make us receive theirs; or the horror of fin,
which has no entrance into the Kingdom of GOD, to persuade us upon their
Purgatory; or the need we have of an Intercessor, to oblige us to have recourse
to the mediation of Angels, and of departed Saints; or of an Head, to set up
their Pope: Let us answer them, That we have all this most fully in JESUS
CHRIST; that His Cross is our Sacrifice; His Sufferings our Satisfactions; His
Blood our Purgation. That while we possess Him, we shall need neither an
Intercessor to open the Throne of the Grace of GOD to us, and render both our
persons and our prayers acceptable to Him; nor an Head to govern and conserve
us. Let us account all that would turn us aside from Him, or place any part of
its Treasure elsewhere than in Him, to be a seduction and an illusion. And, as
good Physicians do not only preserve from poisons, but also draw profit from
them, by making them Remedies; so let us not content our selves to keep the
venom of Seducements from hurting us; let us manage them in such sort, as that
they may serve us. Let the ardency they have for Error, inflame our zeal for
the Truth: Let their pains-taking and industry, sharpen our diligence and care.
Let us employ that acuteness and eloquence, to the defense of the Gospel, which
they profane in the service of an Imposture. Let us have no less affection for
the Cause of GOD, than they have for the matters of flesh and blood. And
instead of the extravagancy of some who love ignorance and rudeness, because
Error does abuse Knowledge and Eloquence; let us on the contrary, thence take
occasion to labor in adorning and embellishing of Truth, that even in this
respect Falsehood may have no advantage above it. But if the examples of enemies
should be of use to us, much more ought the examples of Brethren be so, which
wholly and solely tend to our edification. Let us make our profit of that of
the Colossians, whose faith and order the Apostle praises, that we might
imitate it. Let us put our Church into such an estate, as may give joy to the
LORD, to His Angels, and to His Ministers. I may not deny, but that your says
and order may be, in some degree, praised without flattery, since by the Grace
of CHRIST, my Brethren, you persevere in His fear, and assiduously rank your
selves under His Ensigns, no tentation having been able hitherto to make you
desert these holy Assemblies. But you are not ignorant, that together with this
well-doing, there are many miscarriages among us; that there pass diverse things
in our Congregations smally comporting with the dignity of the House of GOD;
and that the hardness of some does stiffen it self against Discipline, the only
Bond of Order; and if our Faith be constant against Error, it is too too
yiedling unto Vice. Dear Brethren, I had rather leave the examination of it to
your own Consciences, than here publish our sin and shame, and will content my
self with telling you, 1 Cor. 6.10.
that the Apostle banisheth out of Heaven the vicious, as well as the
idolatrous. GOD, who has granted us to persevere in the profession of His
Truth, be pleased powerfully to amend, by the virtue of His Gospel, the defects
which His gentleness has hitherto born with, in us; and sanctify us so
efficaciously, that after we have glorified Him on Earth by the good order of
our conversation, and the fruirs of a firm and unmoved Faith, we may one day
receive, in the Heavens, from His merciful hand, the Reward and Crown of
blissful immortality, in His Son JESUS CHRIST, who in the Unity of the Father,
and of the Holy Ghost, lives and reigns the only GOD, blessed for ever. Amen.

THE NINETEENTH SERMON.
COL. CHAP. II. VER. VI, VII. VI. Therefore as you have received the Lord JESUS
CHRIST, so walk in Him.

VII. Being rooted and built up in Him, and established in the Faith, as you
have been taught, abounding therein with thanksgiving.


FOrasmuch as man naturally loves novelty and variety, it comes to pass, that
he disgusteth the best and most wholesome things, when he is held any long time
to the usage of them. What food was there ever in the world, better, more
savoury, more nourishing, and more miraculous, than that Manna wherewith GOD
fed the Israelites in the Wilderness, pouring it down daily from Heaven upon
them, by the Ministry of his Angels; whence it is called, the Bread of Heaven,
and the Bread of the Mighty; that is, of the Angels: Nevertheless this wretched
people were soon discontented at it, disdaining that precious gift of GOD,
Numb. 11.6.
and sottishly regretting the fruits and fish of Egypt. Our soul (said they) is
dried up, there is nothing here; our eyes see naught but Manna. Dear Brethren,
this History is a fit emblem of what has betided men in reference to JESUS
CHRIST and His Gospel; the true Bread of Heaven sent down from GOD into the
Wilderness of this World, for the eternal nutriment of Mankind; of which that
ancient Manna, as you know, was the figure, according to what Himself teaches
us in the sixth of S. John. For our nature is no less delicate, nor has an
appetite less extravagant in respect of the Doctrines that are necessary to
seed our Souls, than it has in respect of the Meat that is ordained for the
refection of our Bodies. The truth of the LORD JESUS is embraced at the first
with hungring, and heat, every one admiring the wonderfulness of this heavenly
food, which wholly exceeds the productions of the earth. But because, though
it be throughout holy, and salutiferous, yet it is simple and uniform; the
vanity of man in desiring change and variety, makes him disgust it immediately,
and betake himself to seek out novelties for the seasoning and rendering of it
more grateful. The Apostles had scarce sown this sacred doctrine in the Church,
as in the Camp of Israel, but evil workers presently rose up, who to remedy
men's disdain, and accommodate this Celestial verity to their palate, would
needs add to it diverse inventions and novelties of their own forgging. And S.
Paul foretold, that more such would arise, as bad or worse than the first. 2 Timothy 4.3, 4.
Having (says he) itching ears, they shall assemble to themselves Teachers
according to their own desires, and shall turn away their ears from the truth,
and turn unto fables. O prophecy too true! How punctually have thou been
fulfilled! This foolish itch of the ear has caused a thousand and a thousand
fantasies and novelties to be by little and little entertained among
Christians, which have so born down, and as it were overwhelmed the Gospel,
that it is hardly to be discerned any longer; as you may see in the Doctrine of
Rome, which is but an heap of Traditions, Errors, and Superstitions, partly
copied out from Judaism, and some from Paganism it self, partly issuing from
the private speculations of some particular persons. In our Fathers days, the
Gospel having been brought out of the dark caverns of ignorance, into the light
of men, it was received in like manner with ardor and admiration. But that
disgusting of the best and most wholesome things, which is fatal to us, overtook
it quickly, and did stir up, as also it full does, diverse spirits, who for
remedy, do strive to sophisticate this pure Doctrine, and dress up its
simplicity with their own inventions, to make it please the world, To cure us
of this fastidiousness, the Apostle at this time addresseth to us the
exhortation you have heard; the same which he sometime made to the Colessians
for the same end; forbidding them novelties and strange doctrines, and
enjoining them to stand fast in JESUS CHRIST, who had been preached to them,
without admitting or desiring any thing beyond His Gospel. Therefore (says he)
as you have received the LORD JESUS CHRIST, so walk in Him, etc.

Upon these words, for the giving you a full and entire exposition of them, we
have two things to consider;

First, The Apostle's enjoining the Colossians to keep and fasten to the LORD
JESUS; this is the sense and intention of the first verse.

Secondly, The manner how he would have them fasten to the LORD; namely, by the
confirmation and abounding of their faith in his Gospel with thanksgiving.
These two particulars we purpose to treat of in this Exercise, by the
assistance of CHRIST, for your edification and consolation.

And for the first; You may remember, that in the precedent Text the Apostle
praised the faithful people of Coloss, and rejoiced at the good order he saw in
their Church, and at the firmness of their faith in JESUS CHRIST. But because
it is not sufficient to begin well, except we do continue; in as much as
salvation is promised only to those that shall persevere unto the end; with
good reason, and very pertinently, does he now add, to the praise he gave them,
an exhortation to continue, and to abide firm in that good and happy state
wherein they were; and this so much the rather, for that there were about them
certain busy and unquiet spirits, who with their inventions and subtilties
endeavored to vitiate the sincerity of their belief, as you have already
heard, and shall again more particularly hear in the sequel of this Chapter.
Therefore (says he to them) as you have received the LORD JESUS CHRIST, so
walk in Him. JESUS CHRIST is the Subject, in which he would have them to abide.
For He is the way, the truth, and the life; neither is there salvation in any
other. But because these false Teachers, for the better putting off their vain
traditions, were wont to color them with our Savior's Name; knowing well,
that every faithful person would soon hiss at them, if they spoke openly of our
quitting JESUS CHRIST, or our distancing our selves from him. The Apostle
anticipates this danger, and expressly shows the Colossians, how he intends they
should abide firm in JESUS CHRIST, saying, As you have received the LORD JESUS,
so walk in Him. And to this also, that which he adds in the following Verse,
has relation; As you you have been taught. By this he clearly signifies, that
the doctrine which had been delivered them, either by himself, (if it be true
that he preached the Gospel to them, and founded their Church, as some think)
or by Epaphras, as most are of opinion. He signifies, I say, that this Doctrine
which had been preached to them, and believed by them, was so holy, and divine,
and sufficient to salvation, that it was their duty constantly to adhere
thereto, and to admit nothing beyond what they had heard, under any pretext
whatsoever. Here is the way, Isa. 30.21.
walk in it, whether ye turn to the right hand, or to the left, as Isaiah
sometime said: But by these words, the Apostle not only marketh out to them,
and stateth that Doctrine which they ought to hold; he obliges them also
thereto, by their own interest: For since they had received it, they could not
again part from it, without condemning themselves either of imprudence, or of
levity. For he that quits the Faith he once embraced, does thereby evidently
show, either imprudence, in having sometime taken a false or imperfect Doctrine
for good; or levity, in quitting and altering now, a Doctrine good and
sufficient when he received it. If your belief be good, why do you change it?
If it be otherwise, why did you entertain it? It follows of necessity, either
that there was error and precipitation in the one, or that there is weakness
and sickleness in the other. So you see, that the interest of their own
reputation did oblige these Christians to that constancy which the Apostle
enjoins them. Besides, though it be an heinous sin, not to receive the LORD
JESUS when He presents Himself to us by His Gospel; yet it is much more
enormous to cast Him out after reception given Him: as it is by far a greater
outrage, to thrust forth a man from your House when you have admitted him, than
to have shut your doors against him at the first. The one is a simple offense;
the other is an affront. In like manner, it is a much more injurious treatment
to desert CHRIST JESUS after having followed him, than never to have given ear
to, or followed him at all. And observe here, I pray, the efficacy of sound
doctrine; it is such, as that in receiving it, we receive JESUS CHRIST himself.
For, this Highest LORD comes in to all such as embrace his Gospel. And we may
apply to this purpose what he said to his Apostles on a like occasion; Whosoever
receives them, receives him; whosoever gives credit to their preaching, shall
have their Master to be with him: He shall entertain not Men or Angels, but the
King of Men and Angels, the Eternal Son of God, the Prince of Life, and Father
of Eternity. He that receives the Doctrine of an Aristotle, or a Plato, or of a
Father, or a Pope; and in short, of any man whatever, does not thereupon
receive the Author of the Doctrine himself; because no man has either the
power or the means to communicate himself to those that credit his
instructions. But JESUS CHRIST, being GOD blessed for ever, of a Nature, a
Wisdom, and a Power infinite, he accompanies his own Gospel, and communicates
himself to those that receive it; he dwells in their hearts by faith; he
there sheds abroad the light and influence of his Spirit; he brings thither
with him Peace, and Life, and Joy.

Now to close up this part, Take heed you do not stretch S. Paul's words beyond
his intention; as if his meaning were, that generally every one should hold to
that which he has been taught, and never part with what he has once received,
whatever the things be which he has believed, and whoever the persons were
that delivered them. GOD forbid that an imagination so sottish and pernicious,
and so very far from the Apostle's mind, should ever enter into your heart. By
this account, those that have been in an error, should do well not to come out
of it; and it should not be lawful for such as have taken poison instead of a
remedy, to cast it away. Neither should point of honor and generosity be urged
in this case; perseverance in an error, once known, is not constancy, but
obstinateness. It Is a part of true generosity to confess one's fault, and
forsake it; and it is clearly a seebleness of spirit not to let go what is
false, or naught, upon the pretense that you had the ill hap to close sometime
with it. I confess it had been better to have rejected it at first; but settling
in it after conviction, is a doubling of your fault and infelicity. And as for
Honor, it is a pitiful extravagancy to place it in things contrary to duty and
virtue. If Error be honorable, I shall yield, that he that confirms himself in
it, is a man of Honor. But since quite contrary, all confess, as is most
evidently true, that Error is a shameful thing, and blameworthy; who sees not,
but that true Honor obliges us to quit it, and not stiffen our selves in it?
and that, pretending of Honor for persevering in error, or in vice, is to go
about (as the Gospel says) to gather figs from a thorn, Luke 6.44.
and grapes from a thistle? It is as if a man would attempt to white himself
with Ink, and cleanse himself with Mud. In a word, it is a seeking of Honor in
Shame, and of Glory in Ignominy. But I pass by those, who by such speeches
clearly discover, either that they have not well pondered what they say, or
(which would be yet worse) that they hold Truth and Error, Piety and
Impiousness, Virtue and Vice, to be indifferent things; since, after their
reckoning, Pagans and Heretics are blamable, when they forsake these latter,
to follow the former; which cannot be affirmed, without maintaining at the
least, that both the one and the other are indifferent; in as much as common
sense dictateth to all men, that it is a prudent action, worthy of praise, and
not of blame, to quit the worse for the better, and leave a bad way that one
may take a good one. I come to those of Rome, who also abuse the Apostle's
exhorting the faithful, here, and elsewhere, to abide in that which they have
received, and which has been taught them, without giving ear to novelties.
This (say they) is that you have done, you that walk no longer in the way you
were taught amongst us; that have deserted and abjured the Mass, and the
Service of our Saints, and the veneration of our Images, and the belief of our
Purgatory; and many other such things, which your Ancestors received; and all
which, or the greatest part of them, have been constantly and openly preached
among us, from age to age, and from father to son, for a thousand years and
more, as your selves cannot deny. Dear Brethren, To this I answer, That this
exhortation of the holy Apostle's, is so far from favoring their Cause, that
quite contrary it overthrows it, and sets up ours. For, as we have said, He
does not positively determine, that every one adhere to the Doctrine he has
received of his Teachers. GOD forbid; since by that means, he should have
obliged the Pagan to remain eternally in his Idolatry left him by his
Ancestors; and the Heretic, in the error his Masters have infused into him;
and the Musulman in the Faith of his Mahomet; and the Jew in the tradition of
his Fathers. He should, on the contrary exhort the Gentiles to come out of the
ways wherein GOD had let themselves and their Ancestors walk for the time past.
He who presses the Galatians to forsake the by path whither their Doctors had
misled them, that they might recover the race they once ran; He, who would have
Timothy, and all true Ministers, 2 Timothy 2.25, 26.
labor to draw men out of the snares of the Devil, whatever hand it was that
entangled them in the same: He speaks here to faithful people, who had
received, and kept pure and sincere till then, the Gospel of JESUS CHRIST,
without any mixture of error or superstition. It Is to these he recommends the
standing fast in what they had learned. And if our Adversaries resemble them, I
confess they have reason to stick in the Doctrine of their Fathers, and we have
done ill to recede from it. He speaks not in general of all kind of Doctrine;
but particularly, and by name, of that which the Colossians then believed; to
which he expressly gives these two Characters for the distinguishing of it from
all other Doctrines. First, That it wholly referred to JESUS CHRIST. Secondly,
That it had been delivered them, either by himself, or at least by some one of
his faithful Disciples. So as you have received JESUS CHRIST, walk in Him, even
as you have been taught. If such the Doctrine of Rome be, if it neither publish
nor exhibit ought but JESUS CHRIST the Lord; if it were delivered by S. Paul,
if it came from his hand, if it be derived from his spring, I will unfeignedly
confess, that we are faulty in having quitted it. But since, on the contrary,
it is evident, and as clear as the light of the Sun, that what we have quitted
and abjured, is, not that LORD JESUS CHRIST whom Paul and his fellow laborers
and Scholars preached; but a Leaven which is contrary to him, and which has
been superadded by men; nor was taught by the first Ministers of the truth: Who
sees not, that we have in this not disobeyed, but obeyed the Apostle's
exhortation? that we have done what he commands, and not what he forbids? For
in what place of S. Paul's or the other Apostle's preaching, can they ever show
us, that Mass, and that Purgatory, and that worshipping of Saints, and in one
word, any of those other Articles which they retain, and we have relinquished?
Every one sees how all these things do vary from the Lord JESUS CHRIST, and
make void his Cross, and his Kingdom, causing men to seek the expiation and
purging away of their sins, other-where than in His Sacrifice; and attributing
to Creatures the honor of Invocation, and of presiding over the whole Church,
which belongs to Him alone. But that other mark which S. Paul gives of the
Doctrine, which ought to be held fast, does less yet accord with them; namely,
its having been received from the Apostles: it being manifest, that not one
word of them is found in those holy men's writings, which are the public and
authentic records of what they preached; and that those traditions of Rome
grew up in after-ages, some at one time, some at another; issuing, by little
and little, out of the forges of men, according as error gathered strength; as
they know that read the Volumes of Antiquity without prejudice and
prepossession. Let our adversaries therefore leave these odious accusations.
They must either show, that those Doctrines of theirs which we have
relinquished, are Apostolical; or confess, that we had reason to relinquish
them: This very command of S. Paul's, which they are not ashamed to object to
us, necessarily obliging us to adhere to that LORD JESUS CHRIST alone, whom he
preached, and whom the Colossians believed on, according to his preaching. And
it may not be insisted on, that the Doctrine, we contest with them, has been
their belief for a thousand years, or more. Time is no prescription against any
truth, and least of all against the truth of CHRIST and his Apostles. That
which he has pronounced, continues in force for ever. If any one preach ought
as Gospel to you, Gal. 1.8, 9.
besides what we have preached, were it my self, were it an Angel from Heaven,
let him be an anathema. I enquire not of what date your opinions are. It is
sufficient for me to anathematize them that were not preached as Gospel by the
Apostle. Time cannot have conferred on them the advantage of being true, which
they had not at their rise. What is not now veritable or Apostolical, will
never be so. You are not the only men, among whom Error has grown old: that
gross one of Idolatry lived among the Pagans well nigh Two thousand years; and
their Rome hereto alleged Symmachus.
her hoary hairs, as well as yours does at this day; and said, as now again
Rome does, that it is an Undertaking ill-timed, to correct old age; and that to
charge it with error, is to affront those years. It Is a thousand years and
more, since Mahomet's perfidy has been up, yet is never a whit the better for
that. You your selves observe Errors in the same antiquity, whose authority you
cry up so loud; and you cannot deny, but that those which you condemn in the
communions, of the Grecians, of the Armenians, of the Jacobites, and of the
Cophties, are very old. It Is an extremely bad defense, when men are convict of
error, to say, that they have been a long time of that opinion. How ancient
soever your Doctrine is, it is young in comparison of S. Paul's, since it was
born after his days. Neither its pretended antiquity, nor any other
consideration, can secure it from his fulmination. Since he would have us keep
to that which he preached, without receiving ought beside; how stale and moldy
soever with age your traditions can be, they all ought to perish under pain of
an anathema, seeing they are without the compass of S. Paul's preaching. We are
at this day in the same case the Colossians yer while were. They stood bound by
this exhortation, to reject the worshipping of Angels, the distinction of
meats, justification by the Law, all that any way tended to add to that LORD
JESUS CHRIST, whom they had received from the hand of Paul, and who had been
taught them by him. Let us then also freely reject the same things; keep we
constantly to that JESUS CHRIST, whom we have received of him; who did fill up
all his Sermons, and does still fill up all his Epistles. Content we our selves
with that primitive and truly ancient Doctrine; and boldly despise all the
novelties that the world has presumed to add thereto in aftertimes. Let us
walk, as the Apostle gives us order, in this LORD JESUS. Let Him be our only
way, the rule of our faith, and of our manners.

You know, the Scripture ordinarily uses this term, to signify the ordering
and conduct of our life. It compares the various Disciplines and Persuasions
which men follow, unto Ways which lead, some to one end, some to another. For
it speaks of the way of sinners, and of the way of the righteous; meaning
thereby the apprehensions and maxims by which they lead their lives. Therefore
it says, walk, to signify living, or leading, and ordering the life. As
therefore our Lord and Savior says, that He is the Way; so his Apostle
enjoineth us to walk in Him; that is, to lead our lives, both in regard of
knowledge and persuasions of mind, and also in respect of affections and
actions, according to his holy Gospel, without any forsaking it, to take
another course; judging all that varies from it, to be folly, how plausible
soever it may appear otherways. And as a prudent and advised traveller, never
leaves his road, but puts on in it constantly, till he come to his journey's
end, how smiling soever the Meadows look, how green and fresh soever the shades
be, how fair and large soever the ways are that lie in view. In like manner are
we ordered to keep continually to the Doctrine of our Lord and Savior, and not
relinquish it; or assume any other, of what nature, or color, or appearance
soever it be; still resolving in our selves, that whatsoever is without the
dimensions of this model of Truth, cannot but be dangeorus; and apt, if we
follow it, to lead us to perdition. I pass by the observation which some make,
namely, That the Apostle commanding us to walk in CHRIST, does intimate, we
should advance still, and make progress therein. For though this conception be
for substance veritable, it being the duty of each true believer to go forward,
and not pass a day without improvement (...) piety; yet it seems to me, to be
without the reach of the Apostle's words, (...) scope of which is simply to
oblige us unto perseverance in the Gospel of JESUS CHRIST. Beside, what he
adds in the following verse, does sufficiently (...) commend this duty to us;
where he shows us, after what manner we are to (...) in JESUS CHRIST, Being
rooted (says he) and built up in him, and (...) the faith, as you have been
taught, and abounding therein with thanksgiving.

In these words he prescribes us three things; Firmness of faith, the
abounding of the same, and giving of thanks. He expresses the first, two ways;
First, in metaphorical terms, being rooted and built up in JESUS CHRIST: And
next, properly, and without figure, being established, or confirmed in faith.
For this confirmation in faith, is no other thing, than the self-same that he
intends by the words, rooted, and built up in JESUS CHRIST. The first of
these two Metaphors is taken from Trees, which stand firm, and easily resist
the violence of winds, when they have put forth good and deep roots into the
earth; which serve them for so many stays and bands to hold them fast; whereas
the Plants, which have but little or no root, are easily plucked up; the least
gust, yea, the hand of a Child is enough to overthrow them. The faithful are
often in Scripture compared unto trees. You all know the Parable of the
Fig Tree in the Gospel, Psa. 92.13, 14
and that of the Palm Tree in the Psalms. The just shall flourish as the
Palm Tree, and grow as the Cedar in Lebanon. And there is no one in the Church,
but is acquainted with that dainty Tree, planted by the rivers of waters, which
brings its fruit in its season, and the leaves whereof does not wither; Psalm.
1.3.
which the Psalmist gives us a picture of, at the beginning of his Book, for an
image of a true believer. Whence it comes, that the Ministers, who labor in
the culture of these Mystical Plants, are likened to Gardeners, and
Vine-dressers, and Husbandmen; such an one was he, in that Evangelical Parable,
Luke 13.8.
who prayed the Owner to supersede the sentence pronounced upon one of his
fig trees. And S. Paul also expresses his own, and Apollos his laboring for
the edification of the faithful, in terms taken from the same subject, saying,
that he planted, and Apollos watered. 1 Cor. 3.6, ^
In consequence of these figurative expressions, which are familiar in
Scripture, you see, that it is with much gracefulness, and a great deal of
reason, that the Apostle here, to recommend firmness of faith in JESUS CHRIST,
does say, they should be rooted in Him. He says the same again elsewhere, when
he prays GOD to strengthen the Ephesians by his spirit, Ephesians. 3.18.
that (says he) being rooted and founded in love, they might be able to
comprehend, with all Saints, what is the breadth, and length, the height, and
depth, and to know the love of Christ. For since the faithful man is compared
to a tree, it is congruous to attribute to him both the production (that is,
fruits), and the parts of a tree, whereof the principal is the root. We say
then, that a tree is well rooted, when its root is spread abroad, and thrust
far into the ground, where it is planted and fastened to it so many ways, that
it stands upright and firm, nor can be plucked up without extreme difficulty.
Who then is the believer rooted in CHRIST? Even the man whose whose soul
embraces the LORD JESUS; all whose thoughts and affections are stretched
forth, and fastened to this Divine crucified Savior; who has neither love, nor
desire, nor affiance, but for Him. It is he, who having rightly understood the
excellency and the fullness of this rich Subject, seeks all his felicity in it;
and withdrawing the desires, the cares and affections of his heart from earth,
(which are, as it were, the strings and roots of our nature, by which it is
fastened to its objects) does thrust them forth toward JESUS CHRIST, does unite
with, and bind them about Him, and rests on him alone, and draws the
nutriment of his life from none other; ^s you know, trees by their root do
receive all that juice, which makes them ^^ve, shoot forth, and fructify. Not
to alledg any other example, such a one was our Paul; so fastened was he unto,
and so incorporated with his LORD, that he lived in Him alone; this divine
ground wherein he was planted, affording him all the joy, all the contentment,
and all the life he had. There is no need to fear, that those who adhere to
JESUS CHRIST in such a manner, who are so really and deeply rooted in Him, can
ever be plucked up by any effort, how violent soever it be. The winds do in
vain shake them; tempests do beat upon them to no purpose; persecutions will
not be able to make them bend; nor fraud, nor eloquence, nor the subtilty of
Sophisters, remove them. Novelties and Curiosities do not tempt them; because
that sweet sap which they continually draw from their CHRIST, as from a rich
soil, does content them, and purges them of that foolish and childish itching
humor, which opens the ears of the weak and unstable, to such things. But if
you be not thus rooted in CHRIST, it will be no great difficulty to pluck you
from the station you are in. If it be not this heavenly efficacy of our LORD,
but either birth, or breeding, or the discourse or authority of men, or the
name of liberty, or any other such like cause, which keeps you in the
profession of Christianity, I am much afraid you will not long abide in it. If
your heart be in the world, if it still spread its affections, as its roots,
into perishing things; if it still admire the pleasures of the flesh, and the
fumes of ambition, and the vanity of riches, your perseverance is, in truth,
very dubious. The tree that has no root, has no hold. The first gust that
falls upon it, bears it down. And would to God experience had less justified
this truth in our eyes. But this is the very cause of all their change who have
deserted us. If you examine their lives, you will find, they were not well
rooted in CHRIST JESUS. Wonder not that they were overthrown. But let us make
our profit of their unhappiness; obeying the Apostle. And that we may abide
firm for ever in the communion of this Divine LORD of ours, out of which there
is nothing but misery and perdition; let us be rooted in him with a lively and
profound faith and love. Let us love and relish him only, and inseparably
fasten all the powers of our souls to him alone, as dead, and risen again for
us; drawing all our righteousness from his Cross, and all our hope and our
glory from his Heavenly state, and his immortality.

I come to the other Metaphor here used by the Apostle to set forth the
confirming of our faith in JESUS CHRIST; being rooted, says he, and built up
in JESUS CHRIST. The former was taken from Trees; and this now is drawn from
Buildings. It is no less famous in Scripture, than the other; for the faithful
are there oftentimes compared to Houses, and particularly to Temples; and the
Church, that is, the Society consisting of them collectively, is represented to
us under the same image. Whence it comes, that the labors of the Servants of
the Lord for this end, are also called edifyings; a word so common in this
sense, that there is no need we should stay to explain it. And for as much as
in material Edifices, it is the Foundation that sustaineth all the Building;
thence it comes that the Scripture gives that name to our LORD and Savior, as
to him upon whom this spiritual Structure does entirely depend. Other
foundation (says the Apostle) can no man lay, 1 Cor. 3.11.
than that which is laid, even JESUS CHRIST. And this the Prophets foretold, in
saying of him, that God would set in Sion a chief Cornerstone, Isa. 28.16.
Psalm. 118.22.
elect and precious. And, that the stone which the builders rejected, should be
made head of the corner. The Apostle therefore, desiring to fortify his dear
Colossians against the danger of falling, prosecuting this figure so common in
Scripture, commands them to be built up in JESUS CHRIST. And the same
expression he makes use of elsewhere; as when he says, that we are built upon
the foundation of the Prophets and Apostles, Ephesians. 2.20, 21.
JESUS CHRIST himself being the chief Cornerstone; it whom (says he) all the
building proportioned and fitly set together, rises up unto an holy Temple in
the Lord. What is it then to be built up in JESUS CHRIST? Dear Brethren, we say
an House is builded on a Rock, when a Rock is the Foundation that bears and
sustains it wholly. A soul is builded in JESUS CHRIST, when it wholly relieth
upon Him; so as its Faith, its Hope, its Love, and the other parts of its
mystical structure, are all set upon Him, and immediately fastened to Him; it
believes the Gospel, because it is the word of CHRIST; is assured of the
remission of sins, because they were expiated by CHRIST; it expects the Kingdom
of Heaven, because he purchased it; loves neighbors, because they are his
workmanship; meekly bears affliction, because it is a part of his Cross: in
sum, lays and setleth upon him alone the designs, the thoughts, the
enjoyments, and the expectations, wherein consists both its present life, and
that which is to come. One so built up in JESUS CHRIST, is right that wise man,
commended by our Savior's own mouth, Mat. 7.24, 2^
who builds his House on a Rock, so as no violence is able to effect its
fall. For indeed, what can overthrow a soul seated on this Rock of Ages, which
is so firm, and unmovable for ever? Where is the tentation, or the
persecution, that can beat it down? What is built upon this Foundation, is not
subject to natural accidents. It Is a celestial and an eternal Edisice. But the
misery of men, and the true cause of their weakness and ruin, is, that they
build elsewhere, either wholly, or for the greatest part. The World is the
ground whereon they set, and raise up the designs of their lives; and this
ground being naught but weak and floating Sand, the first force that assaults
them, brings them down, and their fall (says our Savior) is great.

Lastly, The Apostle expresses in proper terms, what he had represented under
these two Metaphors; adding, and established in faith. For it is properly by
faith that we are rooted in JESUS CHRIST; and it is by it also that we are
founded and built up in him; all these phrases signifying only the spiritual
union and conjunction which we have with the LORD, the sole tie whereof faith
is. Let us labor therefore continually to confirm our faith, if we would
resist the enemy. Let us meditate the truth of the Gospel, study all its
mysteries, taste the excellency of it. Let us carefully hear and read that word
wherein GOD has revealed it to us. By it faith has its being, as the Apostle
tells us; Romans 10.17.
Faith comes of hearing, and bearing of the word of God. Whence you may judge,
how contrary to the Apostle's injunction, the command of the Church of Rome is,
who will not grant, that the faithful should read Scripture. How shall they be
confirmed in faith, if they have no commerce with this sacred word, the only
parent and nurse of faith? How again can they, without it, acquit themselves in
that which the Apostle commands, in the second place, even that we abound in
faith? It is not enough that we be established in it, that we have of it for
necessity; he would have us furnished even unto plenty; possessed of a great
and rich measure of it: have this sacred light to go on, still increasing, and
augmenting, as he says elsewhere, from faith to faith. Some are of the mind,
that this word must be reserred, not singly to the thing, but also to the
sentiment that we have of it. As if the Apostle's meaning were, when he speaks
of abounding in faith, that we should account our selves to have abundantly, in
the faith of JESUS CHRIST alone, all the saving-knowledg we can desire, without
needing the addition of ought any other way. This exposition is elegant and
ingenious, and very pertinent to the Apostle's design. But because it is
followed by few, and the former is more simple, I will not insist upon it.

In fine, the Apostle adds, in the third and last place, giving of thanks;
abounding in faith, says he, with thanksgiving. His scope is, that we do
tenderly resent the excellency and plenty of the benefits which are
communicated to us by the Gospel; and do remember the spring whence they flow,
to wit, the sole Grace of GOD; who, taking us out of the darkness of error and
ignorance wherein we were plunged, has made us enter into the Kingdom of
Light, by the power of his Word and Spirit; that we may continually render him
our grateful acknowledgments of it. Besides that this duty is most reasonable
of it self, it is also necessary to ensure the faith of the Gospel unto us: For
as on the one hand GOD augmenteth his gifts to the thankful; so he takes them
away from the unthankful, withdrawing his light from their souls, and giving
them up to themselves; as you know he threatens ungrateful Churches to take
his Candlestick from them. And the Apostle informs us elsewhere, that to them
who received not the love of the truth, he sends the efficacy of error, so as
they believe a lie; which is the most dreadful punishment, wherewith he
avengeth himself on the iniquity of men. Dear Brethren, that we fall not into
so dismal a judgment, let us possess this treasure of knowledge which GOD has
given us in his Son, with all the gratitude we can; humbly blessing him, for
that he has vouchsafed to impart a thing so precious, and of such
saving-importance unto us; to us, I say, who were so unworthy of it. Let it be
all our love, and all our glory. Let others boast of their might, and their
skill; of their riches, and their greatness. As for us, glory we only in the
knowledge of GOD, and of his holy Gospel, the sole supreme happiness of man. Let
us be jealous of this holy Doctrine, keeping it pure, and sincere, and
carefully taking heed of the Leaven of Superstition and Error. Let us be
content with our LORD JESUS CHRIST the Prince of Life, and with that fullness of
grace we have received, and the holy Apostles preached. Mix nothing foreign
with it. To add to it, is to accuse it of imperfection and insufficiency.
Instead of losing time in the inventions of Error, and in the laborious, but
childish exercises of Superstition. Let us employ all hours in good and holy
works; walking in JESUS CHRIST; rooting, and building up our selves more and
more in him; establishing our selves, and abounding in faith; and testifying,
and proving the truth of it, by a pure piousness toward GOD, and an ardent
love toward our Neighbor; by the fervency of our Prayers, the liberality of
our Alms, the humility of our Deportments, the modesty of our Persons, the
honesty, justness, and integrity of all our Words and Actions, to the glory of
the LORD JESUS, whom we serve, and own for our Master; to the edification of
men, and our own salvation. Amen.

THE TWENTIETH SERMON.
COL. CHAP. II. VER. VIII. Ver. VIII. Beware lest any man make prey of you
through Philosophy, and vain deceit, after the tradition of men, after the
rudiments of the world, and not after CHRIST.


OUR LORD JESUS CHRIST, comparing the society of his faithful ones, in the
tenth Chapter of S. John, to a Flock of Sheep, does advertise us, that there
are Thieves, who coast about this mystical Fold; and do come only to steal, to
kill, and to destroy; as also, that there are Wolves which take away and
scatter the Sheep. You are not ignorant, dear Brethren, that under the names of
these spiritual Thieves and Wolves, he does represent unto us evil Spirits, and
the false Teachers whom they set on work; who both together earnestly promote
the same design, though by diverse means, namely, the debauching and alienating
of the faithful from the Communion of JESUS CHRIST, their only Pastor; getting
them, and appropriating them to themselves, as the Thief, who takes what is
another's, and makes it his own. Whence ensues their death and destruction. For
as the Wolf kills the Sheep he has seized, so these Ministers of Satan do
bereave of life those whom they pull away from the Flock of Christ, out of
whose communion there is nothing but death and perdition. But these wretched
workers do employ (as I said) many different means to compass their cruel and
bloody design. Some they take away by downright force, making them leave the
bosom of the Church, by the violence of persecutions; or drawing them into the
world, by the pleasures of the flesh; and do bring them, even to a renouncing
of the very Name of JESUS CHRIST the Prince of Life. Against others, they make
use of fraud, training them forth, and distancing them by little and little
from JESUS CHRIST, under fair and plausible pretenses; so as in the end, they
have nothing of his left them but a name; and a vain unprofitable profession,
remaining indeed under the power, and in the possession of his Enemy. It Is
against these mystical Thieves, and Robbers, that the Apostle does awaken the
Colossians, in the Text we have read, exhorting them to take heed of 'em.
Before, he prayed them, to establish, to build up, to root themselves more and
more in the Communion of the LORD JESUS, acknowledging with humble gratitude
the excellency of his gift m^de them. (...) ensure this Treasure to them, he
advises them to watch against the (...) ambushes of their Enemies; who sought
to surprise them, and pluck, by (...) tifice of their subtilities, and fair
discourses, JESUS CHRIST out of their hearts, and render themselves Masters of
them, and of their life. Beware (says he) lest any man make prey of you, etc.

For it is the duty of a good Pastor, such a one as the Apostle was, not only
to seed the mystical Sheep, which the chief Shepherd has committed to his
care, by giving them the pure and wholesome doctrine of the Gospel, the only
pasture of souls; but also to preserve them, with all his power, from the paws
of Wolves, and the hands of Robbers; advertising them of the danger, and
dexterously delivering them out of it, by the saving-tone of his voice. But as
your Pastors are obliged to this care, so you see, dear Brethren, that it is
your duty to watch for your own safety; to open your eyes and senses, that ye
may discern a stranger from a domestic, a thief from the shepherd, the hand of
a robber from that of a friend. Beware, says the Apostle to you. He would not
have the faithful be silly sheep, that let themselves be led away by the first
commer, and indifferently embrace all that is offered them. His will is, that
we have our senses exercised and habituated in discerning between truth and
falsehood; able to prove all things, that we may hold fast what is good, and not
suffer our selves to be surprised, either by the dignity of a Robe, or the
blaze of Wit, or some appearances of Deportment; seeing, that Angels of Satan
do sometimes clothe themselves with light. The prudence of the Beraeans is
praised by the Holy Ghost, Acts 17.11.
who examined S. Paul's preaching, comparing what he had spoken to them, with
the Scriptures, that they might assuredly know the state of the matter. The
salvation of our souls is too precious for us to trust any other than GOD in
it. Whence appears, how dangerous that security of implicit faith, as they call
it, is; which, without any scruple, receives all that its Teachers deliver; and
is so far from examining it, that it vouchsafes not so much as to understand
it; believing it true, without knowing it; provided only that the mouth which
publishes it, has been opened by the Pope's hand. If the question were only
of a title, those of whom the Apostle advises the Colossians here to take
heed, were Teachers; and he contesteth not with them about their dignity, in
any part of this Epistle: He deals with them only about their Doctrine.
Accordingly the case is concerning Doctrine, whether we ought to believe it, or
no; and whatever may be the hand that delivers it to us, if it be false, it
will not fail to destroy us; as poison does not forbear to kill, though he that
prescribed it, has taken his degrees with all the formalities requisite. S.
Paul too elsewhere, with one word overthrows all the prepossessions that might
be for any Preachers, upon any ever so eminent quality of their persons, when
he proclaims twice together, If we our selves, Gal. 1.8.
or an Angel from heaven, do preach another Gospel to you, beside what we have
preached, let him be an Anathema. Be you all that you will, you cannot be more
than S. Paul, or an Angel of Heaven. Since their Doctrine ought to be examined
by the Gospel, for its having reception, or being accursed, as it should be
found conform, or contrary thereto, it will be no wrong done you, if yours be
put to the same trial.

But consider, I pray, with what emphasis the Apostle recommendeth to us the
importance of this duty. Beware (says he) lest any man make prey of you. He
could not, more to the life, or with greater elegancy, express the danger of
such as stand not on their guard, than by this word, which signifies properly
to carry away the booty that a man has taken. It is not without cause (says
he) that I give you order to use all your abilities, and to defend your selves
against Error with utmost vigilance. For no small matter depends upon it. It is
as much as your souls, your selves, and the noblest part of your being, your
understandings, your affections, your heart comes to. The Wolves, and the
Thieves, against whom men watch with so much care, do aim only at their Sheep,
or their Purse. Those, against whom I animate you, aim at your Persons. An
Enemy, against whom Cities and States do set guards, does threaten only their
Goods, or their Lives at most. He against whom I require your watching, seeks
your souls, and the share they have in eternity. You are the Workmanship, and
the Jewel of the LORD of Glory. You will be a prey to Satan and his Ministers,
if you fall into their snares. They will not be content with having taken you;
they will bring you into bondage; and the redeemed of JESUS CHRIST, whose
liberty he has bought at the price of his Divine Blood, will become slaves of
men, and which is worse, of Devils. Good GOD! how piercing was the eye of that
Heavenly Spirit, which guided the Pen of this Apostle! How clearly did it see
the nature and the qualities of all the things whereof he speaks! Observe how
Error ^iumpheth over those whom it infecteth: See the Trophies it sets up of
their spoils; the F^tters wherewith it loadeth those whom it seduceth; the yoke
which it puts upon their neeks, and the captivity into which it brings them;
and you with confess, that the e^lects of its false and damnable conquests,
could not p^ssibly be more truly and more naturally represented to us, than by
saying, as S. Paul does here, that it makes a prey of Christians, or carries
them away as booty. For Error is ever insolent; and whereas Preachers of the
Truth do serve those whom they teach, and style themselves their Ministers, as
this Apostle heretofore did; the Teachers of Falsehood usurp dominion over those
whom they have corrupted, and vaunt, that they are their Judges, their Masters,
and their Lords. S Paul noted it long since of the seducers of the Corinthians,
who, as he says, 2 Cor. 11.20.
enslaved them, devoured them, and exalted themselves over them, and smote them
on the face; that is, did put all kind of indignities upon them. And the false
Teachers among the Galatians, Gal. 6.13.
he says, did glory in the flesh of their miserable discriples. They are blind
that do not at this day observe the self-same thing in the carriage of those
men that reign over all the multitude whom they have deceived; and rear up
lofty Trophies of every poor soul that they have made prey of. Dear Brethren,
if you love the liberty which the LORD JESUS has purchased for you; if you
abhor the servitude of men; if you desire the fruit of the one, which is
immortality; and detest perdition, the inevitable sequel of the other; in the
name of GOD, take heed that no man make prey of you. The Doctrine of truth is
enclosed within the LORD's sheepfold. Abide there, if you would be in safety.
Stray you thence but ever so little, and you will fall into the hands of Wolves
and Robbers. Hearken not unto their babble. Be not taken with their
countenance. Let any thing among them that may promise fair, be suspected of
you, since their seeking only is, to withdraw you from the simplicity of the
Gospel.

Now the Apostle points at three things here, which he advises us to take heed
of in particular; namely, The vain deceit of Philosophy: The traditions of men:
and, The rudiments of the world: Because these were the three sources from
which those false Apostles, that then attempted the Colossians, drew all the
heads of their Doctrine, and the means which they used to color it, and give
it that vain luster which was needful for the beguiling of the simple and
unlearned. For, Col. 2.23.
as we shall see more particularly in the sequel of this Chapter, they enjoined
the worshipping of Angels; a matter they had taken, in all likelihood, out of
the Sinks of the Platonic Philosophers, who storied diverse things of these
higher spirits, and of their interposition, and mediation between GOD and us,
for the purifying of us, and the rendering us capable of supreme happiness; as
we see even at this day, in those remains which we have of their Writings.
Again, Col. 2.23.
they introduced diverse voluntary devotions, which did not spare the flesh, and
seemed full of humility; but were indeed only traditions of men, without any
foundation in the word of GOD. Finally, it is also evident, that they pressed
the observation of days, and the distinction of meats, according to the
ordinances of the Mosaical Law, which are likewise styled Elements of the
World. Now though these three points do particularly respect the false Teachers
at Coloss, yet they are common well-nigh to all such as ever set themselves to
alter and sophisticate the Gospel; the most part of their impostures having
issued from one of these three springs. We will consider them therefore briefly
and distinctly, by the will of God; and after them, the character or mark which
S. Paul gives them, to wit, that these things are not after CHRIST.

Among these things, of which we are to beware, he gives the first place to
Philosophy. It Is name is very honorable; Philosophy, if you weigh the word,
signifying the love and pursuit of wisdom. But the corruptness of those men
that gave their Profession this name among the Grecians, did disgrace so worthy
a term, and made it to be the name of a Tool of Error and Imposture, rather
than of an Instrument of Science and Truth. For the common sort of those that
styled themselves Philosophers, amused themselves altogether in vain
Speculations, in a trade of subtilty and syllogizing, and in endless disputes,
that yielded men no true profit. They thought they had attained the End of
their profession, when they had got a faculty to speak of all matters, with
some color and probability, so as to dazzle the eyes of the ignorant, and win
the admiration of the half-witted. This vanity rendered them odious, first among
the Pagans themselves; where they went, among the people, for extravagant
persons, and were in little better esteem among the greater part of the better
sort. And for as much as of all Professions scarce any did more fiercely oppose
the Gospel of our Savior; thence it came to pass, that the first Christians
also conceived a very ill opinion of them; which increased, when it did appear
that Heretics did ordinanarily fetch from these men's Forges, the Arms they
used to offend the Faith of the Church, and to defend their own Inventions.
Tertullian.
This induced one of the most ancient Christian Writers, to call them the
Patriarchs of Heretics; and to say, that all Heresies are maintained by their
rules, and animated with their spirit, and do lodge in their thickets and
bushments, as in their strong hold. He calls them Animals of glory: and all
Christian Antiquity treats them very coursly, as we understand by what is left
us of the Books or that time; wherein the commerce of Philosophy is accounted
so dangerous, that it has been charged upon some as a great crime to have but
looked into Aristotle's Books, and learned his Logic. On the other side, we
meet with Fathers also, who have high esteem of Philosophy; and it cannot be
denied, but that even they that blame it, do make use of it, and many times
with good success, and much to purpose. It Is not my design to break up this
question, or to produce here all that may be said, either for Philosophy, or
against it. The holy Apostle does not oblige me to it; as who blames here, not
the substance thereof, but the ill use of it which false Teachers made,
employing it either to the inventing, or the defending of their errors: this he
evidently shows, by that having ordered us to take heed that none make prey
of us by Philosophy, he adds immediately, and by vain deceit; by these words
limiting, what he had generally uttered; and giving us to understand, that he
rejected not the use of Philosophy, but when it was made to serve Error and
Imposture. We must therefore here, as in all other subjects, carefully
distinguish the abuse from the thing it self, and the substance from what is
accessory to it, and the truth from that error which is superadded thereto by
the wickedness or weakness of men. For there is not a thing in the world so
good, and so laudable in its own nature, but our Vices do foul it, in handling
the same. Intemperance has defamed Wine, Meats, and Spices: Luxury, Gold,
Silver, Precious Stones, Silk, and Perfumes; all of them Creatures of GOD, very
good, and very excellent. Cruelty, Murder, and Parricide, have defiled Iron, a
most necessary instrument of our life; and Fire, which we cannot be without,
has often served the rage and the injustice of Tyrants. What is there more
admirable than Beauty, among the ornaments of the body? and then Eloquence,
among the ornaments of the mind? Yet they frequently become, through the
corruption of men, means of debauchery and seduction. Not so much as the
Scriptures themselves, the most salutiferous effect of the goodness of GOD, but
are sometimes profaned by error and vice; ignorance and levity wresting them to
men's own ruin, and wretchedly turning that to destruction which was not given
but for our salvation. It is not meant, that upon this pretense we should cast
off a due using of any of the works of God, who, being infinitely wise, has
made nothing but is useful. By this account it would not be lawful to make use
of any thing, since there is nothing which viciousness and ignorance does not
abuse. I say the same of Philosophy. If its Authors among the Pagans, if
Heretics among Christians, have made it serve the interest of error, it
follows not, that it must be totally rejected; nor should we do as the man,
that rooted up his Vines, because having taken too much of the fruit of them,
he was overcharged with it; or as he, who would have his Rose-bushes burned,
because he had been sometimes pricked in gathering their Flowers. All that may
be thence concluded, is, that this plant must be discreetly handled; the fruit
enjoyed, but with moderation; the flowers gathered, but with heed taken of the
thorns. This is all the Apostle forbids us in it, even deceit, and not
instruction; that in it which is vain, and not what is found to be solid; Error
and Sophistry, not Science and Ratiocination. Philosophy it self does wash its
hands of its Disciples faults. It disavows their Errors, and renounceth all
that they have brought forth, without its direction, by ill arguing, how great
soever otherways their reputation be. It is so far from defending them, that it
self affords us weapons wherewith to combat them, and offers us its lights to
discover the weakness of their false discourses. For it has observed and
taught the rules of legitimate Reasoning, with such admirable skill, that there
is no falsehood to be met with, but it gives us a conviction of. So as if error
be in the discourses of men of this profession (as without doubt there is no
small measure) it is certain, that in this unhappy production they have swerved
from their own rule; it being impossible that a falsehood should ever be duly
and rightly concluded from truth Whence it follows, that no error or doctrine
contrary to truth, is, to speak properly, Philosophy, it is an abuse of it. It
may well be an imagination, and an extravagance of the Phil sopher; not a part,
or a true fruit of Philosophy. And when the Apostle says here, that Heretics
make a prey of men by Philosophy; that is (as he adds) by a vain deception:
he takes the word Philosophy, as the vulgar does, for the accustomed and
ordinary discourses of Philosophers, and not for true Philosophy, and that
which is properly so called. As long as the Philosopher carefully keeps within
the bounds of his faculty, and transgresses them not, he instructs, and does
not deceive. The bounds of Philosophy, which it has set it self, are, the
things that may be known by the light of natural reason. While it keeps this
road, it travels securely; and, I confess, what it teaches in this kind, may
do good service to the Gospel; so far would it be from clashing with it. For
who sees not, that its discoveries of the nature of Plants, of living
Creatures, of Metals and Meteors, of the transmutation of Elements, the motions
of the Heavens, of Times and Seasons, of the concatenation of inferior Causes
with the superior, and the Conclusion it raises from this Contemplation, That
there is above the Universe an Invisible, Eternal, most Wise, and Almighty GOD,
upon whom it all depends; who sees not, I say, that this is laudable, and
excellent, and nothing in effect but a report of the handiwork of GOD, and a
demonstrating of his Divinity? If the Philosopher had staid him there, and
deduced nothing thence but this clear consequence, That the same Supreme
Being, whose sootsteps and whose glory he had perceived in his works, ought to
be supreamly adored, served, sought, and loved; never had the Apostle ordered
us to be afraid of Philosophy; for he himself makes use of such discourse, Acts
14. and 17.
when he speaks to the Gentiles, as you may see in his Oration to the
Lycaonians, and the Athenians, in the Acts; and he does elsewhere evidently
confirm it, when he says, That GOD has made manifest unto men, what may be
known of Him; Romans 1.19, 20
and that His eternal Power and Godhead, invisible in themselves, are yet
visibly seen by the creation of the world, they being considered in His works.
But the misery is, that the Philosophers, being carried away with that vanity
and curiosity, which was natural to them, broke those bounds, and would needs
define things which are beyond that compass; and about which Reason, in the
state we now are, sees not one jot. And here it is, they necessarily fell into
error and extravagancies; as persons born blind would do, should they intrude
to discourse to us of colors. Such are the Fancies of Plato and his Scholars,
concerning the estate of the souls of men departed from their bodies,
concerning the purifications he devised to convey us near the Supreme Good:
concerning the interposition of Demons (is he calls them) that is Angels (as
the Scripture terms them), to present our supplications to GOD; and concerning
the service which he ordained to be done them, in consequence of this good
office; and a thousand other such like things. Such also was the mistake of
Aristotle, when not content to understand the present establishment of the
World, he would know what it was in the beginning, wherein he had no light at
all; concluding, because in the state things now are, of nothing nothing is
made, that therefore it was never otherwise; and thereupon affirming for a
certainty, that the World is eternal. As if we must needs judge of the first
beginning of a thing, by those Laws under which it lives after its settlement;
and should limit the power of a free Agent, to the measure of the effect
wrought; that is, as if, because GOD, in this frame of the World, does make now
nothing without Matter, therefore it followed, that absolutely he could make
nothing another way; which is as impertinent a reasoning, as if you should
infer, that because a Painter has wrought his pieces with three or four
colors only, it were impossible for him to draw, or represent any thing any
otherways. In this particular Philosophy has offended by excess, undertaking
more than it could compass. It often erreth likewise by defect, when it rejects
the revelation of GOD, as resolved to admit nothing that is above its own sense
and reason; as if a man that had never seen any other than the shining of our
Fires, and our Candles, should contest, there was no other light in the world.
Pride has made the greatest part of the old Philosophers to fall into this
impiety. It seemed to them an abasing of their glory, to acknowledge there was
another School more knowing than theirs; and that it was an injury to tell
them, GOD had discovered secrets to others, which he had hid from them. It was
this vanity that spurred them on so violently against the Gospel of our LORD
and Savior at the beginning. If Philosophy do modestly keep its rank; if it be
content with its bounds, and not thrust away nor injure divine Revelation; if
it acknowledge it as its Mistress, and be subject to it, as Agar yerwhile was to
Sarah, welcome be it; it may be received, and may abide with us. But if it
usurp, if it will needs be Mistress, and command in a Family, where it has only
the quality of a Bondwoman, let it depart, and be treated according to Sarah
her speech to Abraham; Drive out the bondwoman and her son. GOD has
vouchsafed to reveal unto us by his Prophets, and in the last times by his own
Son, all the Articles of Religion. Philosophy ought to adore them with us. It
has nothing to enjoin us in the matter. From the mouth of GOD, not from the
mouth of Philosophy, do we receive Religion. As often therefore as Teachers of
Error shall use the authority or artifice of the Philosophers, to render their
inventions plausible or probable in our eyes, let us boldly despise all their
subtilty. Let not the names of Aristotle and Plato make us afraid; let not
their petty subtilties dazzle our sight. We may hear them, when question is
only of men, and of nature. When GOD and his service is concerned, we ought to
give ear to none but GOD, and the Son of his love, about whom he has
proclaimed from Heaven to us, This is my beloved Son, hear him. It Is this the
Apostle does intend, when he says here, Let no man make a prey of you by
Philosophy. But, provided the Doctrine of our Lord and Savior do remain sound
and entire, without diminution, without augmentation or mixture, we are not
prohibited the service of Philosophy; but may employ its Physics, and its
Ethics, to confirm and illustrate, as far as they can, the truths of the
Gospel; its Logic, to defend them against the Sophisms and Sleights of
gainsayers; and, in sum, to adorn and embellish them, we may use ought of
worth that Philosophy does afford; as the Israelites heretofore adorned the
Sanctuary of GOD, with the Gold, and Silver, and Jewels of Egypt. Whence you
may see, how in the disputes of Religion which we have with those of Rome, they
for their part do evidently abuse Philosophy; whereas we duly employ it, they
abuse it: For, not to say, that they make Aristotle reign in their
Divinity-School, regarding his Edicts, and cherishing much jealousy of his
reputation, as if he were a Pillar of Religion; they found Articles of their
Faith upon the authority of the Sages of the world; as when they prove their
Purgatory by the testimony of Plato; and the veneration of Images by the custom
of Nations; and Free Will, by Philosophy: and diverse other things of like
nature; which being not to be found in the Scriptures of GOD, they go seek them
in the Writings of men. As for us, it is evident, we have no positive Article
in our Faith, but what is in the Gospel. Only when our Adversaries urge their
Transubstantiation upon us; having showed, that GOD has no where revealed it
to us in his word, but even clearly contradicted it, we call in Philosophy its
self to our succor, to evidence the absurdity thereof: We produce its
testimony in a case which clearly is of its cognizance; namely, the nature of
an human body, the place it takes up, the quantity to which it is extended, the
quality of substantial mutations; of which kind they pretend this is, Whether a
body made and formed Sixteen hundred years ago, may still be every day
substantially produced.

But it is high time to come to the two other Sources of the deceits of false
Teachers. The second is the Tradition of men, as the Apostle calls it. Take
heed (says he) that none do make prey of you by Philosophy and vain deceit,
after the traditions of men. The Scripture commonly gives the name of
Traditions to those instructions which we receive from some other. And it
frequently uses the word deliver (whence, in the Latin Tongue, that of
Tradition is derived) for to instruct or teach. I received of the LORD (says
the Apostle) that which I delivered unto you; that is, taught. It therefore
calls those Doctrines Traditions of men, which have men only for their authors,
which come from men, and not from GOD. I confess, that errors derived from that
Philosophy, whereof he spoke even now, may also bear the same name, since they
slowed from the spirit of man, and had no other source than his imagination;
yet the Apostle distinguishes the one from the others, for two reasons, as I
conceive. First, Forasmuch as these had some color of abstruse wisdom, being
sprung from speculations, in show, sublime and excellent; though, in reality,
vain and frivolous; whereas the Doctrines which he here calls Traditions, had
no foundation at all, but the authority of those that set them up, and the
usage of those that practiced them; they being otherways far from all
Philosophical reasons, not only true and solid, but also probable. Secondly,
Because they had had some successive continuance among the people of GOD,
having been delivered by the Pharisees, and other Zealots of Judaism, from
father to son, in a series of no small length; whereas that which he calls the
deceit of Philosophy, was not delivered in that manner, but lately invented by
these new Teachers, and taken from the dreams of some Philosophers. Whence it
does appear, that no productions or institutions of an human spirit, are
receivable in Evangelical Religion; neither those that are supported by some
pretended reasons; nor those that are founded upon use and antiquity. They are
all of them nothing but folly and vanity in the sight of GOD, with what color
soever they be painted over. And though men boast of their utility, they are
extremely hurtful, as pestring Consciences, and busying them about things which
GOD has not ordained; and turning them aside from his pure service, to matters
of naught. Accordingly you see, that our LORD JESUS CHRIST rejects, and roughly
thrusts away all the traditions of the Pharisees, how much esteemed soever they
were for their antiquity, and pretended use; reproaching them, that by holding
fast those Traditions of men, they did let loose the Commandments of GOD, and
applying to them those words of the LORD in Isaiah, Mark 7.8. Isa. 29.13.
In vain do they honor me, teaching Doctrines, which are the commandments of
men. As indeed its an unsufferable presumption, that man should attempt to
prescribe the form of GOD's service; especially after the declaration, which
himself has vouchsafed to make of his holy will; nor is there one among men,
that would endure his servant should treat him in that manner; and instead of
obeying his Orders, and causing others to dispatch them, fall a Philosophising
in his house, and giving his Family a new rule to observe, as if he were wiser
than his Master: I know well, the authors of these Traditions, and those that
follow them, are not without fine reasons to palliate their temerity. But it is
evident, that they do the very same, for substance; neither is it to be
doubted, but a servant that should be culpable of such a vanity, would alledg
likewise his motive and designs, to any that would give him audience. But
common sense dictateth to the meanest capacities, that such undertaking-spirits
merit not so much as to be heard; especially where GOD is concerned; in
comparison of whom, they, with all their sufficiency; are but poor worms of the
earth. Hold we firm therefore this foundation of the Apostle, That the
Traditions of men ought to have no place in Religion. It concerns me not to
inform my self of their age, whether they be the traditions of men ancient or
modern. It suffices that I know they are Traditions of men. Having the
Apostle's advertisement, we should not be moved with any reason, or splendour,
or antiquity they may come clothed with. If you would have me receive them,
show me, that they are Prescriptions of GOD, Institutions of his CHRIST,
Doctrines of his Scriptures. Without this, how specious soever you make them
appear to me, I shall ever believe, it is but to make prey of me; and your
diligence shall have no effect, but the making me suspect them so much the more.

In fine, the Apostle adds a third Source, whence the Seducers drew both
their Doctrine, and the means to color it; namely, that which he calls the
Elements of the world. I pass by the opinion of those, who refer these words to
the Elements of Nature, Water, Air, Earth, and Fire; as if the Apostle here did
tax these false Teachers, of reducing the service of them which was then in
full vogue among the Heathen; these wretched Idolaters having yerst deified all
the parts of the Universe. There is not a word in S. Paul's Writings, either
here, or elsewhere, that leads us to such a conceit; and it is not very
likely, that the persons he here aims at, should authorize so brutal a kind of
Idolatry; persons, who covered themselves with the Name of JESUS CHRIST, and
made profession, at least in show, of retaining his Gospel. It is clear, that
the Apostle in other places, does mean, by the Elements of the world, not these
primigenial, and more simple substances, out of which all natural generations
are framed; but the ceremonies and carnal services of the Mosaic Law, under
which the ancient people lived, until the revelation of the Messiah. When we
were children (says he; Gal. 4.3, 9.
and you know he calls all that time the Childhood of the Church, wherein it
was under the Pedagogie of Moses) we were in bondage under the elements of the
world; and a little after, in contempt, he styles them, poor and weak
elements, whereto the Galatians would embondage themselves. Now it is evident,
the error of the Galatians was, that they would still be subject to the
Ceremonial Law. Here, beneath the Text, he uses the same word in the same
sense: If you be dead with CHRIST (says he) unto the elements of the world,
why are you burdened with Ordinances? There is then no doubt, but that in this
place he does, in like manner, signify still the same thing, by these words,
that is to say, the observations and devotions of the Ceremonial Law. And in
effect, we shall see hereafter, that these seducers whom he combateth in this
Chapter, would hold fast that Law, either in whole or in part, subjecting the
faithful to circumcision, and diverse regulations about meats and days. S. Paul
calls them, Elements, or (as our Bibles have rendered it in some places) the
rudiments of the world; because they were the first and the lowest lessons the
Church had, during the time of its Childhood; they were as its Alphabet. For
the word [ Elements] is often so taken; namely, for the first lessons, wherein
they are taught to know their Letters; which are also called Elements, because
in speech words are made up of them, even as natural bodies are formed of those
first and more simple substances, which we properly call Elements. And he calls
the Jewish Church, the World; because its estate, and its worship, was gross,
and terrene, and in some sort worldly, in comparison of that of the new Isreal,
whom the LORD formed to worship GOD in spirit and in truth. Whence it comes,
that he calls all the knowledge of the Jewish Rabbis, 1 Cor. 2.6, 8.
the wisdom of this generation; and those Rabbis themselves, the Princes of
this generation; that is, of this world. Thus, how hoary-headed and venerable
soever the age of these rudiments of the world was, the Apostle would not that
the faithful should susser themselves to be taken, under that pretense, by
those seducers that advanced the observation of them. Behold, what were those
three colors wherewith these men be-painted their Doctrine; The vain
speculations of Philosophy; The antiquity of Tradition; and, The authority of
the Mosaical Ceremonies!

To which the Apostle adds, and not after CHRIST. By these very few words, as
with one blow, he beats down all the speciousness of these strange Doctrines:
Let men trick them up (says he) as much as they will; let them color them
with the subtilities of Philosophy; let the practice of them be authorized by
Tradition; let them be recommended under the name of Moses, and by the respect
we owe to the rudiments of the former world; all this hinders not, but that we
ought to despise them, not only as unprofitable, but even as dangerous, since
they are not after CHRIST. He says, they are not after CHRIST; First, Because
the LORD JESUS has told us nothing of them in his Gospel; whence it appears,
that we have good ground to reject from our belief all that is not found in the
Scriptures of the New Testament. Secondly, Because the Doctrine of JESUS CHRIST
is wholly spiritual and celestial; whereas those traditions and legal
observations were gross and carnal. And lastly, Because, besides their having
no correspondency with the nature of the Gospel, they do turn men aside from
the LORD JESUS, causing them to seek some part of their salvation otherwhere
than in Him; in whom it is so entirely seated, as not the least drop of it is
to be had in any other. And what show soever such as follow these Traditions do
make, of being resolved to retain JESUS CHRIST, experience lets us see, that
they do but very slightly stick to him; busying themselves wholly in the
performance of their own devotions, and placing the greatest part of their
confidence in the same; which comes from hence, even that these are more
grateful to them, both for their novelty, and for their being voluntary, and
indeed of less difficulty; it being much easier to the flesh, to acquit it self
of some external and corporeal observances, than to embrace JESUS CHRIST with a
lively faith, dying to the world, and living unto him alone.

Thus you see what we had to say to you upon this advertisement of the
Apostle's. It is addressed to you also, dear Brethren, since you have
adversaries, who solicit your belief in the same manner as those men did at
first combat the faith of the Colossians. They propose unto you the same
errors, and paint and gild them over after the same method, with the vain
colors of Philosophy, with the plausible name of Tradition, with the authority
of Moses. They are either Doctrines drawn forth from the speculations of
Philosophers, as the invocation of Angels, and of Saints departed; the
veneration of Images, the estate of souls in Purgatory and such like; or humane
Traditions, as prayer for the dead, Quadragesimal observances, the Hierarchy,
the Primacy of the Bishop of Rome, Monkery, Single-life, and others, all
crected by men, without any foundation in the word of GOD. Or lastly, they are
Elements of the world, ceremonial observances, sometime instituted by Moses,
but abolished by JESUS CHRIST, as the distinction of Meats, Festivals,
Unctions, Consecrations, Sacrifice, Fixation unto certain places; and of all
that we reject in our Doctrine, there is not a particular but referrs to one of
these three heads. Remember therefore, when they set upon you, that the Apostle
still to this day calls aloud from Heaven to you, Take heed that none do make
booty of you by Philosophy, and vain deception, after the tradition of men,
after the rudiments of the world, and not after CHRIST. Under these fair
appearances there is hidden a pernicious design. Men would take you away from
JESUS CHRIST, and make you a prey to, and the Vassals of men. Oppose to all
their Artifices this one saying of the Apostle's, That whatever the things
which are enjoined you, may be, they are not after CHRIST; they are not found
in that Testament, wherein he has declared his whole will; they have no
conformity with the nature of his Gospel, and do turn away the minds of men
from that Sovereign LORD, in whom alone is our wisdom, and our righteousness,
our sanctification and redemption. But, Faithful Brethren, as the Apostle's
lesson should defend you from error, so should it preserve you from vice. Let
that JESUS, whom he so assiduously preaches to you, sill up your manners as
well as your faith. Love none but him, as you believe in none but him: Renounce
the customs and vices of the world, as well as its Religion. Let the leaven of
Philosophy have no more place in your actions, than in your belief. Receive the
manners of men into your communion, no more, than the traditions of men. If you
be above the rudiments of the world, be also above its infancy, and its low and
childish passions and affections; they were sometimes pardonable in that
childhood, but are inexcusable in persons whom JESUS CHRIST has advanced unto
perfect men, and such as by his illumination he has brought un^^fulness and
maturity of age. Let your souls henceforth have thoughts and a^^ctions noble
and heavenly, and worthy of those high instructions which JESUS CHRIST has
given you. Let your whole life be referred to him, passing by the world, and
its elements; this present generation, and its lusts and idols, with which the
LORD JESUS does not participate in any thing. He has crucified all those
things for us, and displayed before our eyes a new world, brought forth out of
the bosom of Eternity; a world incorruptible, and radiant with such glory, as
can neither be sullied, or made to fade. It Is hither, Faithful Brethren, that
you should elevate your desires. This same is true Christian Discipline, to dye
with JESUS to this old world, having no more sentiment or passion for its
perishing-benefits; and to live again with the same JESUS in that new world
whereinto he is entered for us; to breathe after nothing but its glory; to think
of nothing but its purity; to rejoice in nothing but in its peace, and in the
hope of its eternal pleasures. To forgo for ever that which is passed; and to
tend with all our might toward the mark and price of our supernal calling;
justifying the verity of our Religion by the sanctity of our conversation; so
as there appear no more among us, either ambition, or hatred, or avarice, or
any of those loathsome defilements that do disfigure the whole life of
worldlings. The LORD JESUS, who has given us this excellent Divine Doctrine,
who has founded it by his death, and set it up by his resurrection; who also
has in these latter times purged it afresh both of the vanities of Philosophy,
and of the traditions of men, and of the elements of the world, please to
confirm us in it for ever by his good Spirit, and to make it so efficacious for
the sanctification of our life, that after we have finished this earthly
pilgrimage, we may receive one day, at our going forth of this vale of tears,
from his merciful hand, the Crown of immortality, which he has promised and
prepared for all true observers of his Discipline. Amen.

The Twenty-first SERMON.
COL. CHAP. II. VER. IX. Ver. IX. For in Him dwells all the fullness of the
Godhead bodily.


AS the Christian Religion does consist in Principles and Practices incompably
more sublime and salutiferous, than any that the world ever learned in the
Schools of Nature and the Law; so was it delivered and instituted by an Author
infinitely more excellent than any of those were, who ever erected other
Disciplines among men. I will not insist upon the Authors of those various
Religions which bore sway heretofore in the time of Paganism; who, though they
were in esteem among Nations, and raised to an high reputation of wisdom and
virtue; yet had the taint of an extreme ignorance and vanity; as their own
Institutions sufficiently discover to any one that will take the pains to
examine them in the light of Reason. It would be injurious to the LORD JESUS,
the Founder and Prince of Christianity, to compare him with such people. But
even Moses himself, the great Teacher of the Hebrews; and the Prophets, who
commented on, explained, and confirmed his Law, are all insinitely beneath the
dignity of this new Lawgiver. They were, I grant, Ministers of GOD, the Mouth
and Organs of his Majesty, the Interpreters of his Will, and Heralds of his
Truth; being endued (as was suitable to so high Offices) with an excellent
sanctity, a rare and extraordinary Wisdom, and an heavenly Power, which
evidenced it self in them by miraculous effects. But after all, they were men,
and never pretended to be ranked above that feeble nature, which was common
unto them and us; nor did receive any of those Honors which belong to the
Divine; whereas the LORD JESUS is so Man, as he is likewise GOD blessed for
ever; and was so far from refusing Divine Honors, that he has expressly
required them at our hands; and enjoined us to adore him with the Father, and
to acknowledge him his Eternal Son. This same difference the Apostle observes
between the LORD JESUS, and those other Ministers which GOD made use of in the
former Ages. God (says he) having at sundry times, and in diverse manners, in
time past spoken unto the fathers by the Prophets, has in these last days
spoken to us by his Son. Ebr. 1.1.
Moses, and the rest, were Prophets of GOD; JESUS is his Son. The others were
his Ministers, JESUS is his Heir. The others were faithful as Servants; Ebr.
3.5, 6.
JESUS as Son is over the whole House. In the others, there did shine forth
some marks of the commerce they had with GOD, that Sovereign Majesty imprinting
on their faces, as upon Moses's in particular, some sparklings of his glory.
But JESUS is His very Light, the resplendency of his glory, and the character
of his Person. Dear Brethren, it does highly concern us to know rightly this
great dignity of our LORD and Savior; not only for the rendering to his Person
the worship we owe him, and of which we may not fail without offending the
Father, as himself has told us, John 5.23.
He that honors not the Son, honors not the Father who has sent him; but
also for our embracing with so much the more zeal, the Religion he has
delivered us, without ever admitting the persuasion that either men on earth,
or even Angels from Heaven can add any thing to the light, the goodness, and
the perfection of the discipline of so great and so perfect an Author. For this
cause does S. Paul here hold forth to the Colossians the Divinity of our LORD
JESUS CHRIST. In the precedent Verses he exhorted them to constant perseverance
in the belief of his Gospel, confirming themselves in it more and more, and
taking heed they gave no car to Philosophy, and the vain traditions of
seducers, who endeavored to corrupt sound doctrine, by the mixing of diverse
inventions, which they would add to it, as if it were not perfect enough of it
self, to guide us to salvation. The Apostle, to bereave Error of this pretext,
and show the faithful, not only the sufficiency, but even abounding of the
Gospel, represents unto them the sovereign perfection and divinity of its
Author. For in him (says he) dwells all the fullness of the Godhead bodily.
Since you have JESUS CHRIST (says he), there is no need of recourse to others.
In Him, as in a living and inexhaustible spring, is all good necessary to your
happiness; a divine Authority to found your Faith; an infinite Wisdom to direct
you in all truth; an incomprehensible Goodness and Power to give you grace and
glory; a quickening Spirit to sanctify and comfort you. All other things
compared to Him, are but poverty, and weakness. See how the Apostle fortifies
the faithful in the doctrine of the LORD, and in few words overthrows all that
the presumption of flesh and blood may dare to set up, beside, or against his
perfect truth.

For a right understanding of his words, we must consider them exactly. For
though the number of them be small, their weight is great; they are rich, and
magnifick in sense; and do contain, within their narrow compass, one of the
noblest and fullest descriptions of JESUS CHRIST, that is found in Scripture.
Let us see then, first, what all this fullness of the Godhead is, whereof the
Apostle speaks. And then, in the second place, how it dwells in JESUS CHRIST,
to wit, bodily. The LORD please to conduct us by the light of his own Spirit,
in so high a Meditation, that of his fullness we may receive grace for grace;
and draw from it what may fill our souls with that life and salvation which
overfloweth in him, and can be no where found at all but in him.

As for the subject it self whereof S. Paul speaks, and in which he says,
that all the fullness of the Godhead dwells, none can doubt but that it is our
LORD JESUS CHRIST. For having said, at the end of the verse immediately
foregoing, that the traditions of men, and rudiments of the world, are not
after CHRIST; he now adds, For in him dwells all the fullness of the
Godhead. Whence it is clear, that the LORD JESUS CHRIST, whom he had even then
named, is the Person of whom he speaks, and to whom he attributes all this
fullness. As little could any man be to seek, who this JESUS was, of whom the
Apostle speaks. All knew him, at least confusedly, and in gross; and did
conceive him a man born of Mary in Judea, who having lived some years among the
Jews, had been at length crucified by the sentence of Pontius Pilate; and who,
being risen from the grave to a new life, had sent forth his Apostles to preach
his Gospel; and afterward afcended up into Heaven. And though all did not
believe that he was risen again, and glorisi'd; yet all well knew, that this
was said of him: so that both the one and the other hearing JESUS CHRIST named,
did presently conceive in their mind the Idea of this Person, born and dying in
Judea, at such times, and at such places, with some retinue of Disciples during
his life, and after his death. This then is the subject of which S. Paul
speaks, even JESUS CHRIST considered under this form of a man, in which he
manifested himself to the world, and in which he was conceived and figured in
the minds of those that heard him named. In this man, whose appearance was like
that of other men, who was born and bred on earth, sustained during his life
with our common food, subject to our infirmities, who passed through the
differences of our ages, suffered our griefs, felt our inconveniences, and
experimented the rigor of death, yea the cruellest that was; in this man, I
say, whose body was nailed to a Cross, and deprived of its soul, and buried in
a Sepulcher; in this man, under so mean and contemptible a form, dwells
(faith the Apostle) all the fullness of the Godhead.

It is ordinary in the Hebrew Language, to signify, by the fullness of any
thing, that which the thing contains; as, by the fullness of the earth, Men,
and other living creatures, Psalm. 24.
which do fill it; and by the fullness of the Sea, the Isles which the Sea
contains. After this manner of expression, the qualities and perfections of
any one nature may be called its fullness, because they are the things that fill
it, and with them it is as it were furnished and adorned, as the movables and
ornaments of a room or an house, are the fullness of it. Therefore, as if I
should say, that in Adam, as he was at first created, was found all the fullness
of Manhood, every one would easily perceive, that my intention were to say, the
perfections of human nature, the faculties, and properties, and beauties, which
it is full of, and without which it cannot sustain the dignity of that name,
were all in Adam ^an immortal soul, a vigorous understanding, a free will, a
body of excellent (...), acute senses, and in sum, all the other faculties that
have any place among the perfections of the nature of man: So here, when we
hear the Apostle saying, that the fullness of the Godhead is in JESUS CHRIST;
let us account, that by this clause he means those perfections and qualities
which fill up the Divine nature; in which this great and sovereign Being does
consist; and which Theologues commonly call, the Attributes of GOD. You know
what the word Godhead does signify, even the Nature and Essence of GOD. The
fullness of the Godhead then is that rich and incomprehensible abundance of
perfections, whereof the supreme and adorable Nature is full; as His Life, His
Power, His Wisdom, his Justice, His Goodness, His Immensity, His Eternity, His
Holiness, and all the other Properties, which it has in an ineffable manner;
and which our understandings, according to their mean capacity, do conceive in
it; as the form of the Deity, that is necessary for its having that Name; a
nature that wants it, being incapable of being called GOD, otherwise than
falsely and improperly. I grant, some resemblances, or rather some touches and
lineaments of these Perfections of the Godhead do appear in the noblest of the
Creatures; as in the Angels, for instance, who are immortal, and endowed with
an admirable sanctity, virtue, and power. But the fullness of them is not in any
Creature at all; neither can it be found, that ever the Scripture spoke in this
manner of Angels, and said, that the fullness of the Godhead was in them.
Besides, these blessed Spirits, and other Creatures, how excellent soever you
can imagine them to be, do participate of these divine perfections, but in a
very little measure. Whereas the LORD JESUS has them wholly. And to make this
evident to us, the Apostle thought it not enough to say, that the fullness of
the Godhead is in Him; but has expressly declared, that ALL this fullness
dwells in Him; that we might be assured, there is not at all any Perfection,
or Excellency, or Accomplishment in the Divine Nature, but is found in Him.
Thus, in these two or three words, he has comprised all that the Scripture
teaches us in diverse places, of the richness of the Perfections of our LORD
and Savior. For instance, it tells us, That he is full of grace and truth;
that he is the Wisdom and the Power of the Father; that he has the words of
life; that he is the Way, the Truth, and the Life; that in him are hid the
treasures of wisdom and knowledge; that he has that might and strength which
sustaineth all things now, and which created them at first; that he is the
Everlasting Father, and has immortality and incorruption; has an infinite
understanding, whereby he sounds the reins, and discerns all the thoughts
of the hearts of men; that he has a super-eminent Glory, to which all
Creatures ought to do homage, yea the Angels themselves, who indeed adore Him;
the Empire, and dominion over all the world; the right and authority to judge
all men, and a multitude of such things as these. Verily S. Paul has comprised
it all in one word, saying here, that all the fullness of the Godhead is in
JESUS CHRIST; it being evident, that if he wanted any of these Names, Rights,
and Attributes, He could not have all the fullness of the Godhead, which is
ascribed here unto Him.

But let us now see in what manner he possesses these things: the Apostle
expresses it very briefly, saying, that all this fullness of the Godhead
dwells in him bodily. First, the term dwells is illustrious signifying,
that all this copious abundance of perfections, does not reside in JESUS CHRIST
for some time only, appearing a little while, and then withdrawing again; so
making some transient stay in Him a few moments, and no more; but that it
abides in Him constantly, and for ever; for so the word [dwell] in
Scripture-use does import. The Word, and the glory of GOD, appeared in Moses,
and the Prophets, when being moved by the power of his Spirit, they uttered and
acted Divine things; but it dwelt not in them. It only rested on them some
hours space, for the LORD's recommending those Servants of His, and for the
settling their authority by these marks of his Providence, and of his
communicating with them. Whereas the whole fullness of the Godhead was, and is,
and ever shall be in CHRIST JESUS. Therefore the Apostle speaks expressly in
the present tense, and says, dwells in Him, not that it had dwelt in him;
that no one might imagine it did at any time retreat. But how great and
admirable soever the signification of the word [dwelleth] is, the Scripture yet
does frequently make use of it, to express the continual sollicitudes that the
Divine Providence has of the faithful; as when it is said in so many places,
that GOD dwells in the midst of his people; and when the LORD himself says,
in reference to his Ark, whereon he sometime manifested himself to his ancient
people, I will dwell in the midst of the children of Israel, Exodus 29.45.
and will be their GOD. And when again, speaking of Sion, he says, It is my
rest for ever, there will I dwell, because I have taken pleasure therein. The
Apostle therefore, to distinguish and sever the dwelling of the Godhead in
JESUS CHRIST, from the now-mentioned, and all other kind of its dwelling
otherwhere, adds, that the fullness thereof dwells in Him bodily. He
opposes BODY to a shadow, or an image; as when he says afterward, of the
Ceremonies of the Law, that they were shadows of things to come; but the Body
is in CHRIST. The BODY, that is, the Truth and thing it self. The shadow is but
a slight and imperfect representation of it. I think therefore that it is in
this sense the Apostle says here, that the fullness of the Godhead dwells
bodily in CHRIST; that is to say, really and truly; in substance, and not in
shadow; in truth, and not in figure. The Godhead dwelt, in time past, in the
Ark of the Covenant, but in shadow only. For it was not this Supreme Majesty
its self, that was present there; but a Symbol only, and some token of its
glory; whereas it is the Body it self (if I may so speak) of the Divinity, and
not its shadow only, that resides in JESUS CHRIST; all the perfections thereof
being in Him really, and in their whole truth. And hereby is excellently
expressed to us, that admirable and inessable union of the Divinity, with the
flesh of our Savior, which the Church ordinarily calls Personal; so close an
union, that this Flesh, and the Word which assumed it, do make but one and the
same Person; the Human nature of JESUS CHRIST subsisting only in the Person of
the Son. For if it were otherwise, it could not be said, that the fullness of
the Godhead dwells bodily in CHRIST. He would not have the Body of it, any
more than the Creatures have, to whom it communicates its self. He would have
but some lineaments and shadow of it, not the very thing: For example, GOD
dwelt heretofore in his Ark, inasmuch as he manifested his presence in it. But
because the things which he set and made to be seen there, were not very
Nature, or the self-same Perfections wherewith it is filled; but some simple
effects of his Power, whereby the Images of some of his Perfections were in
some sort delineated; it is evident, that it cannot be truly said, that the
fullness of his Godhead dwelt there bodily. Thus also ma^^sted he himself to
Moses in the Burning-bush; and afterward to the Apostles in Cloventongues as
of fire; and before that, the Holy Ghost appeared in the form of a Dove. But
besides that these manifestations being but transient, it cannot, upon them, be
affirmed, that GOD dwelt in the Bush, or in the places where those other
Symbols appeared; besides this, I say, it is evident, that the flame at the
bush was not at all the Divine Nature, or any one of its Perfections; and that
neither the Dove, nor the fiery Tongues, were, any more, the proper essence of
the Holy Ghost, or any one of his real and divine perfections; all these things
being but forms created of GOD, and consequently Productions and Works of his,
wherein he represented to his Servants, as in a Pourtrait, or a rough-draught,
some slight resemblance of what he is indeed. Whence it follows, that though it
might be said (which yet may not) of the places where these things appeared,
That the fullness of the Godhead dwelt in them; nevertheless it would be false
to say, that it dwelt in them bodily; it being clear, that the things by reason
whereof it should be said to have dwelt there, were not the Body, and the truth
of his Nature, but its shadow and symbol only. I say the same of Prophets, and
of Saints, and of Angels themselves, to whom GOD most intimately communicates
himself. For the things, by reason whereof the Scripture says, that he
dwells in them, are that holiness, that joy, and that knowledge, which he
works and preserves in them, in a great measure. Now every one sees, that
neither the knowledge, nor the piety, nor the charity, nor the joy, nor the
constant and uninterrupted felicity of the Saints, are the very nature of GOD,
or the Body its self (if I may so speak) of his immense and incomprehensible
Perfections, in which the fullness of his Godhead does consist: these things are
only effects and works of GOD, engravings and impressions of his hand, marks of
his operation; so as how high soever their excellency be, and how exact soever
the Image of GOD in these Saints is; yet it cannot be said, that the fullness of
the Godhead dwells in them bodily; since it is clear, by the things now
spoken, that it dwells in them by shadows only; by the illustrious and
glorious traces which his operation has left in them, and not in substance. It
remains then we conclude, since the Apostle here expressly asserteth, that all
the fullness of the Godhead dwells bodily in CHRIST; that the Divinity is in
him after a quite other manner than either in the Symbols, by which it is
represented; or the Creatures, on which it sheds forth its grace and glory;
that it so dwells in JESUS CHRIST, as he has in him, not some d^^^eations and
models, by which it is figured forth; not those qualities and dispositions
alone, which it works by the presence of its grace, in the most holy of its
Creatures; but its very self: that he has the body and verity of it, that is,
(as the Church expresses this mystery in one word) That the Godhead is
personally united with his Flesh; it being not otherwise possible, that the
fullness of the Godhead should dwell in him bodily.

Now that such is this divine union of the Eternal Word with the Flesh of JESUS
CHRIST, does appear, First, from that neither the Apostle, nor any other of the
Sacred Writers, ever said of Saints or Angels, what we here read of our Lord;
namely, That all the fullness of the Godhead dwells in him bodily; an evident
sign, that this is a glory which appertains to none but him alone. Secondly,
From that the qualities, the actions, and the attributes of the Divinity are
communicated to the Man that was born of the blessed Virgin; and reciprocally,
the sufferings, the qualities, and the actions of the Flesh, that was born of
Mary, are attributed to the Eternal Son of GOD; as when the Scripture says,
That GOD has redeemed the Church with his own blood; that the Lord of Glory
was crucified; that JESUS CHRIST is before Abraham was; that he founded the
Earth at the beginning, and the Heavens are the work of his hands: and other
like expressions. Dear Brethren, such is the sense of these divine words of the
Apostle. Admire ye the force and the richness of the Scripture, which has in
so few words blasted and beaten down all the inventions and dogmatizings of
Error against the Truth, both of the two Natures of our LORD and Savior, and
of the union of them in His Person.

First, These words do overthrow the impiety of those who bereave JESUS CHRIST
of his Divinity, and reduce Him to the degree and condition, either of a mere
Man; or of a Person raised indeed above man, yet made notwithstanding, and
created at the beginning, as well as other Celestial and Terrestrial Creatures.
How can such blasphemy subsist before this Sacred Oracle, which proclaims not
simply the Divinity, but that the Godhead; and not this simply neither, but
that the fullness of the Godhead; yea, to omit nothing, that all the fullness of
the Godhead dwells in him bodily? If He be but a Man, and no more, no part of
this fullness of the Godhead dwells in Him; neither its Power, nor its Wisdom;
neither its Goodness, nor its Justice; neither its Glory, nor its Eternity. For
none of these Divine qualities do dwell in one who is but a man. We must
avouch, that he has in him verily, those Perfections that fill up the Godhead,
(that is, the Divine Nature) or deny, that all the fullness of the Godhead
dwells in him. But if you grant me (as deny it you cannot, without giving the
Apostle the lie) that all the fullness of the Godhead dwells in him, you must
of necessity confess also, that he is GOD; no one (if he be not GOD) being
capable of receiving, holding, and having in himself the fullness of GOD. For
this fullness being infinite, there is none but GOD that can contain it, since
there is not any but he alone who is infinite. Now it dwells all in our LORD
JESUS CHRIST. It must therefore of necessity be confessed, That He is GOD of a
Nature infinite.

Whereby the frigid and frivolous evasions of those impious men are refuted,
who taking away from JESUS CHRIST the reality and true glory of Divinity, do
leave him the name of it, and make a titular GOD of him; a GOD (as they speak)
created and raised up a while since; who has but the title of GOD, not the
nature; the office, not the essence. Who can sufficiently detest the
audaciousness of these Wretches, that by this impiety of theirs do overthrow
all the groundwork of the Scripture, which has insinuated nothing more
clearly, or more expressly, than the one-ness of the true GOD? Who is too so
jealous of his glory, as that he forbids us, upon pain of death, to give his
Name, or his Worship, or his Attributes, unto any Creature, of what quality
soever? If JESUS CHRIST be not the true Eternal GOD, Creator of the Heavens,
and the Earth, how will you, miserable men, avoid this condemnation, you that
give him the name, and the adoration of the true GOD? But S. Paul lays all
their subtilty in the dust, by saying formally here, that all the fullness of
the Godhead dwells in him bodily. The fullness of the Godhead is not an empty
name, or a titular dignity. It is that which fills it; it is that gloriousness,
it is that light, it is that nature, that truth, and that perfection, wherewith
the Godhead is full. It Is this therefore that dwells in JESUS CHRIST; the
substance of a true and real Divinity; not an hollow, and a vain shadow; it is
the thing, and not the title of Deity.

But as the Apostle does, by these words, convince the impiousness of such as
bereave our LORD and Savior of the glory of his Divinity; so does he likewise
confound the extravagancy of others, who deprive him of his human nature,
foolishly affirming, that he had but a false appearance in that kind. For here
are two subjects clearly represented to us; one, that dwells (to wit, the
fullness of the Godhead); another, in which this fullness dwells, to wit JESUS
CHRIST; the one is, the Temple; the other is, the GOD that resideth in the
same: the one, our Saviors Human nature; the other, the Eternal Son of the
Father. Two real and veritable subjects, by the wonderful uniting whereof this
sacred and adorable Sanctuary of GOD is made up and composed. To take away the
truth, either of his Godhead, with the former; or of his Flesh, with the
latter; is to destroy the Fabric. Again, these words of the Apostle do, in
like manner, overthrow the error of those who have corrupted the union of these
two natures in JESUS CHRIST; on one hand by dividing them, as did the
Nestorians; on the other, by confounding them, as did the Eutycheans. For if we
sever JESUS CHRIST into two Persons, the fullness of the Godhead will not dwell
bodily in his Flesh. This Man will have but gifts of the Divinity, which are as
it were some draughts and lineaments of it; He will not have the Truth, and the
very Body of it. Neither may it be replied, That the Temple in which GOD
resideth, is a substance different from his Person. For the Body is the
residence of the Soul; yet Soul and Body have but one and the same subsistence,
and do constitute but one and the same Person. So as the dwelling of the Son in
his Human nature, as in his Temple, does not hinder, but that this Human nature
of his does subsist with him in one and the same Person. Yet though we may not
divide these two Natures of our LORD, it does not follow that we must mix and
confound them; as they do, who define the union of them, by the Human nature
its being made equal with the Divine; and will have it to be become infinite,
and immense, and endowed really in its self with all the properties of the
Divine nature. The Apostle says indeed, that the fullness of the Godhead dwells
in CHRIST; but he says not, that his Flesh was really changed into the
Godhead. The body, by being personally united to the soul, does not thereby
become soul. It conserveth its own nature, and has only this advantage, by
that strict conjunction, which knits it with the soul, that they subsist
together, and make up but one and the same person. Just so, the Flesh of our
LORD, by the Word's dwelling in it, becomes one self-same Person with it, being
truly the body, and the soul, and in one word, the nature of the Son of GOD;
yet it still keeps its original being, and essential properties. The LORD is a
true Divinity, dwelling in a true Flesh, and true Flesh dwelt in by a true
Divinity. There is a Divinity, and an Humanity, truly distinct the one of them
from the other, and each of them retaining its own being, and proper
qualifications; but there is one only, and the same Person, who takes His Name
sometimes from the one, and sometimes from the other, and sometimes jointly
from them both. For we call Him the Son of Mary, and the Seed of David, by
reason of His Flesh: The Everlasting GOD, and the Word of the Father, and the
Lord of Glory, by reason of His Divinity; Immanuel, (that is to say, GOD with
us) and GOD manifested in Flesh, by reason of these two natures together. I
confess, it is a mystery that surpasses our comprehension; and a wonder, that
has no parallel. But neither must we measure the verities of Religion by the
Ell of our understandings; especially when question is of GOD; whose Nature,
Reason it self does confess to be infinite and incomprehensible. It suffices,
that the word of the LORD informs us, it is so. And though our reason cannot
discern the manner how; yet, it being once illuminated by Divine revelation, it
acknowledges a kind of necessity of it. For presupposing what the Scripture
does discover, and reason approve, of the desert of sin, and of the infinite
punishment that is due to it; as also, of the inflexible constancy of Divine
Justice, which cannot let sin pass unpunished; it evidently follows, that man
could not have been reconciled to GOD, unless his Justice were satisfied; nor
his Justice have been satisfied, without a Sacrifice of infinite worth and
merit: So as it being the office of CHRIST to reconcile men unto GOD, it is
clear, that for the effecting of this great design, he must offer to the Father
a Sacrifice of infinite value, and consequently be GOD; since nothing can
proceed from a finite subject but what is also finite; and none is infinite,
but GOD alone. It was necessary therefore, that all the fullness of the Godhead
should dwell bodily in our Mediator. Not to speak of other emoluments which
this admirable union of our Nature with the Divine, in the Person of JESUS
CHRIST, does afford us; as, the assurance it gives us of the infinite love of
GOD, and of our salvation: the title it procures us to the merits of our
Savior, whom it has made our Brother, and consequently our selves capable of
being his coheirs: the consolation it sheds into our hearts, of his, whom we
serve, having an infinite power and wisdom, to defend us in our combats, to
strengthen us in our weaknesses, to preserve us against all the assaults of
Hell, and the World, and redeem us from death, the last of our enemies; it
being evident, that if we had but a mere man for a Savior, how holy and
excellent soever he might be, there would remain unto us still very great and
just causes of diffidence and fear.

Therefore blessed for ever be the Father of our LORD; blessed be his love, and
that great mercy which induced him to send us so excellent and admirable a
Mediator, as has all the fullness of the Godhead dwelling in him bodily. Let us
receive him with faith, and adore him with devotion, and serve him with zeal.
Neither let his flesh be an offense to us. It is very flesh (I grant); but the
flesh of an Eternal GOD; who under this Pavilion of his visible abasement of
himself, which the world otherwhile so insolently despised, has lodged all the
glory of Heaven, and all the fullness of the Divinity. Nor let his Majesty, and
this fullness of the Godhead, which dwells in him, affright us. He Is a great
God (I confess); but a GOD manifested in flesh, dwelling in our nature;
descending, and humbled even to our degree, and partaking of our flesh and our
blood, that he might bring us to himself. Let us embrace with reverence that
most sacred Religion which he has brought us from Heaven. And indeed, i^ the
World has followed and held fast, and still in diverse places does, with so
much earnestness, follow and hold Religions invented and erected by vain men,
who were full of ignorance and error; what respect do we not owe to this same
one, that has been given us by the hand and mouth of a person in whom dwells
all the fullness of the Godhead? Moses was but GOD's Servant, and you see what
respect the ancient people bore him, and with what severity all disobediences
and rebellions against his Ordinances were punished; and how that poor Nation
does still at this day in vain adore the Sepulcher and Relics of the Law,
which dyed, and was abrogated long ago. What penalties then must we expect, if
we despise the Doctrine of the Son, who is eternally blessed with the Father?
Heb. 2.3,
This great salvation (as the Apostle elsewhere calls it) which began to be
declared, first by the LORD? All other Disciplines are perished, or will in
time perish. Even that of Moses's did wax old, and in the end was abolished.
But the Institutions of CHRIST shall remain for ever all-holy, and all-perfect,
immutable, and unalterable; nor do they need any reformation, or addition, or
amplification. After the LORD, we do not at all look for any other new Teacher
to come into the world. Moses promised another Prophet after his death, to the
people of GOD. JESUS CHRIST, the Prophet so promised, may have no Successor. He
does not promise us any; but only threatens us with diverse seducers that would
usurp His Name, and counterfeit his Voice, and put on sheeps clothing, to
debauch his Disciples. Whereupon we ought to take all those for suspicious,
that pretend to add any thing whatever to his sacred doctrine. Besides, our
LORD and Savior's own quality does oblige us to content our selves with him,
and give no ear to any other. For in him (says the Apostle) dwells all the
fullness of the Godhead bodily. Seeing he has fullness, the man can want nothing
that possesses him; according to what S. John says, He that has the Son,
has life; that is, eternal salvation, which is all that we desire. This short
sentence of the Apostle's is enough to secure us against the artifices of all
seducers: if they set before us the delicacies and subtilities of Philosophy,
coloring their fond imaginations with a vain semblance of wisdom, let us arm
our selves with this consideration, That we have in CHRIST JESUS all the true
wisdom that is, since in him dwells all the fullness of the Godhead. If any
man offer us ancient traditions, let us remember that the Authors of them were
but men; who, how great and holy soever they may be, are all liable to error:
whereas the Gospel, which we do embrace, is his doctrine, in whom all the
fullness of the Godhead dwells bodily, and by consequence, pure and divine
verity. As for those Ancients, and those Bishops and Pontiffs, whose names and
authority you our Adversaries do urge me with, I know not who they were; or, to
say better, I know well that they were men subject to failing; so as neither
you nor I can have any firm and certain assurance, that their assertions are
true. But for this JESUS, with whose Gospel I content me, we all know that he
was the Son of GOD, in whom wisdom and truth do dwell bodily, with all the
fullness of the Deity. Moses himself must be silent, when the LORD JESUS does
appear, as the Stars do withdraw their light, when the Sun shows abroad his.
The one's Law is no longer considerable, when the other's Gospel is risen.

In fine, this sentence of the Apostle's does suffice to overturn, not only all
the traditions of men in gross, and in general; but even each of them singly,
and in particular. For example, we are pressed to serve and invocate Angels,
and Saints departed. I will not, for the present, alledg, that GOD, whose voice
is the rule of my Faith, has given no command about it. I will not say, that
Religious worship does not belong to any Creature. I will not enquire, whether
Saints do hea^ from Heaven, where they are, the prayers that are directed to
them on the earth^ nor whether, being finite and created, as they are, they do
behold the motions of our hearts: I will only demand of our Adversaries, Why
they would have us serve and invocate Saints? To the end (say they) that we may
gain their favor and their intercession with the Father. But, poor men, have
we not, in JESUS CHRIST all the grace and favor that we need? And though there
were nothing else in the matter, would it not be great imprudence for us to
have recourse to others, since we have him near us, in whom dwells all the
fullness of the Deity? They extol unto us their merits, and their satisfactions,
and the indulgences of their Popes. I enter not upon a strict examination of
these things; nor do I make enquiry for the present, whether they be merits,
and satisfactions, and indulgences, in reality or no. Though they were what
those men pretend they be, yet it is clear, that they are useless to us; since
we find in this JESUS CHRIST, who suffices us, all the fullness of the Godhead,
dwelling in him even bodily. If you have need of mercy, of grace, of
consolation, of righteousness, of merit, of assistance, of life; none of these
good things are wanting in him, in whom dwells all the fullness of the Deity.
And I am well assured, you shall find no degree of them any other where, either
in Heaven or Earth. But though some drop of them might be elsewhere met with;
yet it is certain, (and your selves will not deny it) that they are not to be
had either in Saints, or in Angels; either so undoubtedly, or so abundantly, as
in JESUS CHRIST. Why then, while I have so rich a treasure in my hands, would
you have me go a begging other-where? It is sufficient for me to be saved.
Since the fullness of things necessary for my salvation, dwells in JESUS
CHRIST, I will content my self with having recourse to him alone; with sixing
my trust, and my love on him; and with addressing my services and supplications
unto him: nor will I be so unadvised, as to lose, or at least hazard my time,
and my devotions, in directing them to others, which I am sure I may
successfully apply unto him.

Dear Brethren, Let us hold to this LORD alone. Let us not divide our piety
between him and any other. Let him alone have our whole hearts, and all our
desires, since he alone has all that fullness which is necessary to make us
happy. He is the true Fountain of living water; let us not draw any other
where. We have no need of Cisterns: This Divine Rock, that follows the Camp
of his own Israel, has wherewithal to satisfy all his people plentifully. He
wants nothing, who has fullness. Only let us bring him souls hungring after
his benefits, and thirsting for his righteousness; hearts panting after the
pleasures of his Sanctuary; and braying after him, as the Heart after the brooks
of water. Let us serve him constantly, and keep faithfully the holy discipline
he has given us, in a continual exercise of piety and charity. This is all
that he demands of us, for the love he has born us, for the favors he has
done us, and for the glory which he promises us. Let us not deny him, I
beseech you, so just a thing. Let us do what he requires us, and he will
liberally give what we ask of him. He will, through his great goodness,
communicate this Divine fullness to us which dwells in himself; that being
justified by his merit, cleared by his light, upheld by his power, enriched by
his treasures, quickened by his spirit, and fed with his abundance; we may one
day have part in his Crowns, and in his Glory, after the petty conflicts and
slight trials of this life, to be made eternally happy in him. Amen.

The Twenty-second SERMON.
COL. CHAP. II. VER. X, XI. Ver. X. And ye are made complete in Him, who is the
head of all principality and power.

XI. In whom also you are circumcised, with a circumcision made without hand,
by the putting off of the body of the sins of the flesh, to wit, by the
circumcision of CHRIST.


DEar Brethren, With excellent reason said our LORD and Savior, when he would
magnify the love of GOD toward Mankind; that he so loved the world, as he
gave his only Son, John 3.16.
that whosoever believes in him should not perish, but have eternal life. For
this donation of his CHRIST which he has made us, is without contradiction the
greatest and most admirable evidence of his love, that he could give us. I
confess, that this great Frame which he freely bestowed on us at the first
Creation; this World, roof'd with those stately Heavens that environ us,
enlightened by those brave Luminaries that roll about incessantly over us; and
filled with an infinite variety of good things, was a choice sign of a
wonderful bounty and love; and that the Psalmist had reason to cry out, as
ravished with the consideration of it, What is mortal man, Psalm. 8.5, 6, 7.
that thou have remembrance of him; and the son of man, that thou visitest him?
For thou have made him little less than the Angels; and have crowned him with
glory and honor. Thou have made him ruler over the works of thy hands.Thou
have set all things under his feet. Yet it must be acknowledged, that all this
liberality of GOD's to usward, which considered in its self is so great, and
so ravishing, is a small matter in comparison of the ineffable and
incomprehensible love which he has showed, in giving us his CHRIST; whether
you compare the gifts themselves, one with the other; or do consider the fruit
which they both yield. For the first; Whereas the World is a kind of Magazine
of the riches of Nature; JESUS CHRIST is the Treasury of all the Perfections of
the Godhead. In the one, GOD has set forth, and put together, only the works
of his hand; which are effects, and as it were shadows of his greatness: in the
other, he has poured out all the abundance of his own nature; and as the
Apostle told us in the precedent Verse, In CHRIST dwells all the fullness of
the Deity bodily: whereas in the world dwells only the fullness of the
Creature. As much then as the Operator is greater than his Work, and the
Creator than the Creature; so much more excellent and admirable is the gift
that GOD has made us of his Son, in the economy of grace, than that of the
World, in the administration of Nature. The difference of the fruit that we
gather from the one and the other of these gifts of GOD, is suitable to this
disproportion which we see between the things themselves. For first, the
enjoying of the world could but continue life to man, who before had it; it
could not restore it to any that had lost it: whereas JESUS CHRIST gives life
to the dead, and perpetuates it to the living. Again, that life which the due
usage of the world could sustain, was terrene, carnal, and obnoxious to
perishing; whereas the life we have from JESUS CHRIST, is celestial, spiritual,
and immutable.

The holy Apostle, having represented in few words the infinite greatness of
CHRIST in himself, as having all the fullness of the Godhead dwelling in him
bodily; comes now to discover that admirable abundance of fruit which we draw
from him; the whole, as we have often told you, with an aim to confure the
ingratitude and vanity of certain seducers, who not content with that
inexhaustible source of blessings, which GOD has opened for us in his Son,
would needs conjoin with it Philosophical inventions, and legal ceremonies. The
Apostle prosecuteth this intention, down to the fifteenth Verse; and beginning
it at the Text which you have heard, he tells the faithful Colossians, at
first, that they are made complete in JESUS CHRIST, who is the head of all
principality and power. Afterward, entering upon a particular deduction of this
compleatness which we have in CHRIST, he adds, in the following verse, That we
are circumcised in him with a circumcision made without hand, by the putting
off of the body of the sins of the flesh, to wit, by the circumcision of
CHRIST. Then in the sequel, (...) forth other graces and benefits, which we
derive from the fullness of our LORD. But we, for the present, will content our
selves with the two verses we have (...). And for the giving of you a full
understanding of them, to your edification and consolation, we will peruse the
two points that offer themselves in them, the favorable assistance of GOD
interposing.

First, in general, The compleatness which the Apostle says we have in JESUS
CHRIST.

Secondly, in particular, The circumcision made without hand, which he adds,
we have in Him.

The perfections and riches of any thing, are no advantage unto us, if they be
not communicated. A Spring, how fair and fresh soever, does us no service, if
it be sealed up; and a Garden-plot walled in, rather paineth, than pleases our
desires; neither does an inaccessible Treasure lessen our need. The Tree of
life, and the other wonders of the Paradise of Eden, did indeed enrich that
delicious place; but afforded our first Parents no refreshing, when entrance
into them was prohibited. For this cause the Apostle counts it not enough to
have told us, that all the fullness of the Deity dwells bodily in JESUS
CHRIST. Perhaps the false Teachers themselves contested not this abundance,
with him; but confessing, that he had all in himself; did only deny, that he
would communicate it entirely to us, as having it only for the perfecting of
his own Person, and not for the happiness of ours. To banish this false conceit
out of our hearts, the Apostle adds, that we are made complete in him; that
is to say, His fullness is communicative; the Father has poured forth into him
those good things and graces which fill him, that each of us might draw out as
much as we need. He is the true Tree of Life, laden with fruit, that we might
gather; set open before our eyes, and to our hands; not shut up (as the other
was after the fall) in a place inaccessible. He has received, to give unto us.
He is rich, to enrich us. He is full, to replenish us. His abundance is our
bliss; and his treasures the relief of our necessity. The Father gave him unto
the world; and in him, life and immortality. Neither suppose ye, that he will
impart some of his benefits only: As he has an all-fulness of them in himself;
so he communicates them all to us. He leaves no part of our nature empty. He
fills up all with his graces. We derive from him all that is necessary to
complete us. This is that which the Apostle signifies by these words; and they
may be taken two ways: Either as importing, that we are filled; or (as our
Bibles have it rendered) that we are made complete in JESUS CHRIST; but both
amount to one and the same sense, the difference being only in the manner of
signification, and not in the thing signified. For the one and the other does
mean, that we receive of JESUS CHRIST our Lord, all things requisite to the
perfection and happiness of our persons, the same residing most abundantly in
him, to wit, the grace of GOD, and righteousness, wisdom, consolation, and
sanctification. If you read, that we have been filled in JESUS CHRIST; it will
be a similitude taken from empty vessels, which are filled with substances,
that were extrinsique to them. For our Nature being of its self empty, and
destitute of the glory of GOD, and of its necessary perfections; our LORD JESUS
CHRIST fills it from his own abundance, and furnishes it with all perfective
Graces. He clothes it with his righteousness, that it may appear with freedom
before the Throne of the Father. He illuminates it by his Spirit unto
saving-knowledg. He comfort it with his peace, and decketh it with sanctity
and love, and in his treasury on high, keeps for it that blessed life and
immortality, wherewith he will enrich it at the day of Resurrection. This sense
(as you see) has a very clear coherence with the Apostle's saying of our LORD,
that in Him dwells all the fullness of the Godhead bodily: and is exactly
parallel to that of S. John in his Gospel, John 1.16.
that we have all received of his fullness, and grace for grace. As in Nature,
the Sun has not only in its self a fullness of that resplendent light, which
renders it so beautiful and so admirable; but diffuseth it abroad also from its
self, and replenisheth with it all the Luminous bodies which circulate about
it, as the Moon, and the other Planets, and this Earth whereon we dwell; all
which have no other brightness but what this great Starr does shed upon them.
So in Grace, (if we may take leave, to compare the mysteries thereof with
natural things) JESUS CHRIST, the true Sun of righteousness, has not only in
himself all the fullness of the Deity, dwelling there bodily. He also
communicates his fullness to all the souls of men that look on him, and do move
and live in his communion. He fills them with his abundance, and clotheth
them with his light, changing them into his Image; and of dim and dark lumps,
as they were originally in themselves, making them so many Stars, and
lightsome bodies.

Now if you take the Apostle's word here, in another manner, as importing, that
we have been made complete in JESUS CHRIST; the sense will still be very
pertinent. For besides, that we being naked of all perfections meet for our
nature, the saying, that we have been made complete in CHRIST, will excellently
well express his Grace, as signifying, that it is he who has filled up our
breaches, and repaired in us what the other Adam had ruined, by giving us all
that we wanted: Besides this, I say, this term will also very aptly answer to
that title which the Apostle gave, a little before, to the Ceremonies of
Moses's Law; where he called them the rudiments of the world; that is, the
beginnings, the first and plainest Lessons of Piety; Heb. 7.19. Gal. 4.
such as consequently were unable to bring to perfection, as he says expressly
in another place; by reason whereof he styles the time of the Law, the infancy
of the Church; that is, the age of its imperfection. Opposing therefore JESUS
CHRIST unto the Law in this respect, he now says, that we are complete in Him,
and that for good reason; in as much as He has the body, whereas the Law had
but the shadow; He has fullness, whereas the Law had but some small parcel of
the requisites of our salvation. For the same cause, he elsewhere calls the
Ceremonies of it weak, and poor, or beggarly elements. Gal. 4, 9.
As for the Law (says he) it did but begin with us, and only draw some slight
and dark lineament upon us, of that true form which GOD did purpose to imprint;
whereas JESUS CHRIST has finished us. In Him it is we have that perfection,
that entire body, that truth and fullness, whereof the Law had but the
beginning, the shadow, and figure.

Hereby now this holy man deals those seducers, whom he has undertaken, an
handsome blow, discovering the foolishness of their design, who would still
oblige persons to the Ceremonies of the Law, that were made complete in JESUS
CHRIST; an attempt no less ridiculous, than if one should put a man to his ABC
again, who had received the last tincture of highest erudition in the
University; pretending, that he could not be thoroughly intelligent, and
accomplished, except he still daily studied the rudiments and plainest lessons
of Children. But that which follows in the Apostle's words, namely, that JESUS
CHRIST is the Head of all principality and power; is adjoined to prevent
another error of those men's, who (as we shall hereafter hear) did teach the
worshipping and serving of Angels; pretending it necessary we should address
our selves to them, as to Spirits capable of interceding with GOD for us, and
of obtaining by their interposal with that Supreamest Majesty, those graces and
perfections which we need. S. Paul does show, in these few words, the vanity of
this false doctrine. For since the LORD JESUS is the Head of Angels, who sees
not but that we have most abundantly in Him, whatsoever these people could
expect from them? and that possessing JESUS CHRIST, as we do by faith in His
Gospel, we have no need to run to Angels, who depend upon Him, and have naught
but what is found much more richly in their Head? As if a man that does possess
a Prince's Son, would yet needs make use of the favor and interpositions of
his servants with him. Members have neither motion, nor sensation, nor life,
but the same is much more abundantly in their Head. Subjects and Servants
possess nothing, but the Prince can far better, and far more easily communicate
it to us, than any one of them. Since JESUS CHRIST is the Head and Prince of
Angels, it is clear, that having Him, we want nothing of all that which the
Angels can give us. From the same ground appears further, the impiety of the
error of these Seducers. For since the Angels are subject unto JESUS CHRIST, it
is evident by the light of Scripture, that no one can give them that religious
worship which these people attribute to them, without becoming guilty of
idolatry; the greatest and sensiblest outrage that man can do to his Creator.
For no Christian can be ignorant, but that GOD throughout his whole word does
forbid us to serve any creature, how high and excellent soever it be; religious
worship being an homage which belongs to the Divine Nature, and cannot be
performed, without sacriledg, to any other. As for other things, I presume you
all know that they are the Angels whom the Apostle means, by these
principalities and powers of which he speaks, as we formerly explained it, Col.
1.16.
upon the precedent Chapter. He says, that JESUS CHRIST is their Head, that
is, their Lord. And this quality belongs to Him, not only as He is the
Eternal Son of the Father, of the same essence and power with Him; who having
created them at the beginning, and continuing to preserve them by His Goodness
and Might, is by all kind of right their true Master, and natural Lord; but
also as He is the CHRIST and Mediator. For since He, in this relation, and
under this quality, has been constituted the Lord of all things, both
superior, Phil. 2.10.
inferior, and intermediate; having, in consequence of His humiliation,
received such a Name, as is above every name, and unto which every knee boweth,
both of those that are in Heaven, and that are on Earth, and that are under the
Earth; it is evident, that in this sense He has dominion and empire over
Angels, 1 Pet. 3.22.
as well as others. And thus also S. Peter expressly teaches us, saying, that
Angels, and Authorities, and Powers, have been made subject to Him: For this
cause, these Spirits are often called, the Angels of CHRIST, as in S. Matthew,
Matt. 13.41. and 24.31. Rev. 1.1. and 22.16.
The Son of Man shall send his Angels: and in the Apocalypse, where S. John
says, that JESUS CHRIST sent him by his Angel, the things that were revealed
to him; and in the same Book, I JESUS (says the LORD) have sent mine Angel.
Only we must observe, that the L. JESUS is not called Head of the Angels in the
same manner and sense as He is styled Head of His Church. The former Title
signifies only the Empire and Lordship which he has over the Angels. The
second signifies further the union He has with His faithful ones, who were
saved and redeemed by the merit of His Death, and are animated and quickened by
the Spirit of His Resurrection. For He does indeed command the Angels, as their
true and legitimate Master; but He has not assumed them, nor washed them from
their sins; these holy and blessed Natures having never committed any: Nor has
He, by His merit, obtained for them, that life and bliss which they enjoy;
these all being benefits pertaining unto none but men. Accordingly you shall
not find, that the Angels are called His Body, or His Members. This quality is
peculiar to the faithful, consonantly to what the Apostle elsewhere says, to
wit, Ephesians. 5.23.
that CHRIST is the Savior of His Body; and every one knows, that He is not
the Savior of Angels; since they, having not fallen from their original purity
and felicity, have had no need of being saved.

But come we now to the second point of our Text, which the Apostle lays
before us in these words: In whom also (says he) you are circumcised, etc. He
begins here to discover in particular, and by as retail, what he but now
spoke of in general; namely, our having been made complete in JESUS CHRIST;
specifying, one by one, the perfections which those false Teachers sought for
otherwhere than in JESUS CHRIST; and showing, that they are to be sound
plentifully in him, so as there is no need to have recourse to any besides him,
or to add any thing to his Gospel, for the acquiring of them. Among all those
things that these Seducers sought to shuffle into Religion, there was none they
pressed more than Circumcision, which (as you know) was one of the Sacraments
of the old Covenant, wherein, by cutting off the foreskin, was figured and
exhibited to the Israelites, the purifying of their nature by the abolishing of
their, sins and excision of their vices, as also, their entrance into the
communion of GOD. In effect, this Ceremony was of infinite importance. For it
was the seal of all the old Covenant; the person, who received it, being by
means of it consecrated and initiated to the Discipline of Moses, and solemnly
obliged to observe the same, as the Apostle remonstrates to the Galatians. Gal.
5.3.
I protest (says he) to every man who is circumcised, that he is bound to
fulfill the whole Law. For this cause he begins with it in this place, well
knowing of what consequence this error was, which annihilated the Cross of
CHRIST, and overthrew the whole mystery of his Grace. Let none object (says
he) against this compleatness which you have in JESUS CHRIST, that having not
been circumcised, you want the first and the principal (...) sanctification.
This part of your perfection is not wanting any more than (...) and if you
carefully consider what JESUS CHRIST has given you throu^^ his Gospel, you
will find, that though Moses's knife has not touched you, yet (...) miss not
of having a Circumcision, through the goodness of our LORD; yea, such a one, as
is not only equally excellent with the other, but even much more perfect.
Whence you see, to how little purpose these men endeavor to make you subject
to this ancient incision of the Law; it being altogether superfluous to such as
have passed through the hands of JESUS CHRIST. The Apostle sets this
consideration before the Philippians, in a dispute of his against the same
seducers. We (says he) are the Circumcision, who worship GOD in the spirit,
Phil. 3.3.
and glory in CHRIST JESUS, and have no confidence in the flesh. But here he
explaineth, in what follows, this admirable circumcision which we have received
in JESUS CHRIST; and says, first, that it is not made with hands: next, he
adds in what it consists; to wit, in putting off the body of sins: and
lastly, he terms it, the Circumcision of CHRIST. He says then first, that
this circumcision which we have in our LORD and Savior, is not made with hand,
whereby he affirms, that it is not formally and precisely that circumcision
which Moses gave the Jews, the hand of man effecting that in their flesh. This
here, is made by the operation, not of a man, but of GOD; with the knife, not
of Moses, but of CHRIST; that is, by that word of his, accompanied by his
Spirit, Heb. 4.12.
which is sharper than any two-edged sword. In which respect alone, it has a
great advantage above the circumcision of the Jews; it being evident, that the
works of GOD are more excellent beyond compare, than the works of men. And as
the Apostle, telling us in another place, that the building which we look for,
2 Cor. 5.1.
after the dissolution of this earthly tabernacle, is not made with hand, does
by that very reason demonstrate the excellency of it, even that it is a work
not of human art, or nature; but of the wisdom and power of GOD: In like manner
he here discovers the worth and value of our circumcision in JESUS CHRIST, by
saying that it is not made with hand.

But the thing it self does no less demonstrate the same, than the quality of
that operation by which we receive it. For this circumcision made without hand,
which we have in JESUS CHRIST, is (as the Apostle here defines it) the putting
off of the body of the sins of the flesh. You know what he and the other holy
Writers do understand by the flesh; to wit, this not only infirm and mortal,
but moreover defiled and corrupted nature, which we all bring into the world;
comprehending not only the body and the senses, but also the soul, and it
tainted and infected with the ordures of sin, and in some sort transformed into
flesh by the carnal qualities and habitudes wherewith it is invested; its
understanding being wholly dull and sensual, its will earthly and brutish, and
its affections rebellious against the Law of Heaven, and all of them set on the
flesh. This nature of man thus framed, is that which S. Paul both here, and
frequently elsewhere, calls flesh. The sins of this flesh are the habits of
those diverse vices that cover it, and invelop it on all hands; not those only
that properly relate to the body, and the satiating of its irregular appetites,
such as are they that refer either to gluttony and drunkenness, or to luxury;
but also all others whatsoever, which cross the Law of GOD, and overthrow that
order of righteousness and holiness which he appointed for all the faculties,
and motions, and sentiments of our nature; Gal. 5.19, 20.
as we are taught by the Apostle in many places, and particularly in the
Epistle to the Galatians, where he places, among the works of the flesh, not
only adultery, and fornication, and drunkenness; but also idolatry, and
heresy, and enmity, and clamours, and envyings, and wrath, and murders, and
such like. The mass of all these vices is that which he here calls the body
of the sins of the flesh; Romans 6.6.
and he uses this manner of speaking again elsewhere, as when he says, that
the body of sin is destroyed, our old man having been crucified with the LORD.
And it must be confessed, that this figure is marvellously elegant, and proper
for this matter. For even as the body comprehends in its self several
members, which have each of them their particular function and exercise; in
like manner this mass of corruption which we bear about in our nature, is
composed of many different Vices, which have each of them their peculiar motion
and operation. Ambition tends one way, Avarice and Intemperance another. Envy
defiles us in one manner, Cruelty in another, and each of these pests has its
own sentiment and ends. Their motions are sometimes even contrary, and do
thwart one another, as unclean spirits that are not at an agreement. However,
at the bottom, all these evils come from one and the same source, and live in
one and the same mass; as all the members do make up but one and the same body.
Hence it is, that the Apostle sometimes, considering sins under this notion,
calls them our members, or the members of our flesh; Col. 3.5.
as when he commands us to mortify our members, which are upon the earth, to
wit, fornication, uncleanness, inordinate affection, and other like Vices.
Moreover, as this body, in which we live, does cover us all about; so that mass
of Vices, wherewith our nature is infected, does encompass and on wrap us on
all sides; there being no part or faculty in us, but is as it were invested and
besieged with it. Such is the corruption that we derive from the first Adam;
and by reason thereof, the Apostle sometimes also calls it, the old man: He
says therefore, that the circumcision which we have in JESUS CHRIST, is the
putting off of this body of the sins of the flesh; when the faithful person, by
the virtue of the Word and Spirit of the LORD JESUS, does cut off all the vices
of the flesh, which are the members thereof, and strips himself of this old
habit of sin and death, wherewith the first Adam clothed us. This is that which
in the same sense he elsewhere calls a putting off the old man as to former
conversation, Ephesians. 4.22. Col. 3.8. Gal. 5.24.
which is corrupted by deceitful lusts. And in this present Epistle, a putting
off of anger, malignity, and evil speaking, and other such sins; and again in
another place, a crucifying of the flesh, with its affections and lusts. All
this amounts to the same sense, and signifies the mortifying of the flesh, and
the cutting off of its Vices, that there may be an abstaining from all the sins
which they are wont to produce in the lives of men of the world. The Apostle
adds, in the end, that this is the circumcision of CHRIST. First, because our
LORD and Savior has expressly instituted it in his Gospel, commanding us to be
born again, to deny our selves, to change our deportments, to put on a
simplicity and humility, like that of little children; and to break all the
ties we have with the flesh and the world, if we will follow him, and have part
in his Kingdom. This is the first and most important instruction in his
Discipline. Secondly, It is the circumcision of CHRIST, because it is he alone
who is the Author of it, and does effect it in us; neither is there ought, but
his Gospel alone, that can unclothe man of this body of the sins of the flesh.
For it is not possible, but that a soul on whom the Doctrine of JESUS CHRIST
has been imprinted, by the power of the Holy Ghost, should renounce the world
and the flesh. Philosophy was so far from curing this malady, that it did not
so much as know it ex^ctly. The Law discovered it indeed, and made man to feel
the tyrannous strength of this rebellious body of the flesh, wherewith he is
naturally clothed and surrounded. But it was unable to subdue and mortify it,
as the Apostle teaches us at large in the seventh Chapter of the Epistle to
the Romans. There is none but JESUS CHRIST, who by the efficacy of his heavenly
truths, and the divine examples of his holiness, thrust down into our hearts by
the hand of his Spirit, can circumcise us in this manner, unfolding and
dis-investing us by little and little of these wretched bonds, and weakening and
extinguishing the life of the flesh in us. Compare now this Circumcision of our
Savior's, with that of Moses, and you will, without difficulty, perceive, that
it infinitely surpasses it in dignity and excellency. That of Moses wounded
the body; this of CHRIST enliveneth the soul. The one pared away a little skin,
the other mortifies the whole body of the flesh. The one was, in its self, but
a typical ceremony; the other is a mystical verity. The one marked the flesh;
the other makes better, and ennobleth the heart. Without the one a man could
have no part in the communion of the carnal Jews; and by the other we enter
into the alliance of the spiritual Jews, whole praise is of GOD and not of men.
Whereby you may judge how extravagant the conceit of those seducers was, whom
the Apostle does in this place oppose; who notwithstanding that excellent and
divine circumcision which Christians have received in their Savior's School,
would yet bring them under that of Moses, which was poor and weak, and so many
ways defective, as if Christians could not, upon a far better ground than the
Jews, glory, that they truly are GOD's circumcised. Now for a right
comprehending of the force of the Apostle's reasoning, it must be remembered,
that circumcision, as well as the other ceremonies of the Mosaic Law, was a
figure, which represented the abscission of the vices and lusts of the flesh,
as the Prophets themselves do clearly enough show, when they promise the
ancient people, that GOD will circumcise their heart, and the heart of their
seed, Deuteronomy. 30.6, Jer. 4.4.
that they may love him, and live; and command them to circumcise themselves
unto the LORD, and to take away the foreskin of their hearts; an evident sign,
that this external action did refer to the internal mortification, and
sanctification of the soul. Since then the figure is unprofitable, when the
truth is attained; and models do serve only till the things themselves be
formed and perfected; the use of them, when this is done, being no longer
necessary: you plain^y see, that from the Apostle's saying here, that in JESUS
CHRIST we have this putting off, or cutting off of the sins of the flesh (that
is, the truth, whereof circumcision was the figure and model); it evidently
follows, that it is no longer necessary for us, and that a wilful retaining of
it still, is an accusing of JESUS CHRIST of having not fulfilled in his
Discipline the thing represented by this ancient type. I^'s true, that even in
the time of the Old Testament the faithful had some part of the sanctification
signified by their circumcision; but what they had was weak, and in small
measure; because the true causes on which it depends, being all comprised in
the Mysteries of the New Testament, were then but foretold and promised, not
fully and clearly revealed, as now by their accomplishment they have been; by
means whereof it was meet, that during all that time they should be exercised
in the observing of these typical rites, and held in, and kept under the
Pedagogie of Moses, until the fullness of time, according to the Apostle's
Doctrine in the Epistle to the Galatians. Now that JESUS CHRIST has openly
exhibited the very body of truth, and fully brought to light all the causes and
motives of true sanctification, these exercises of the Church's infancy are no
longer seasonable; and they that still stick to them, are no less ridiculous
than he that would still keep up the centries of a vault, or the models of a
building, even after the Fabric is finished, and brought to its perfection; or
retain under a School-master's Ferule, and in the restraints of childhood, a
man grown up, and come to ripeness of years.

This is that we had to say for the exposition of this Text. It remains for a
conclusion, that we extract those instructions and consolations, which if we
meditate on it attentively, it will afford us.

First, Since the Apostle assures us, that we are complete in CHRIST, you see
how vain those men's pretensions are, who set forth certain rules of perfection,
as they call them, beyond the Gospel. Let us content our selves with our LORD's
fullness, and seek our perfection in him alone. And instead of amusing our
selves about the inventions of men, embrace and practice CHRIST's Discipline,
advancing daily toward the utmost degree of perfectness. For we may not
flatter our selves with an imagination, that a man may nevertheless appertain
to him, though he lead an wholly vicious and corrupt life. S. Paul here
protests plainly to us, that all such as are in him, are made complete.
Whence it necessarily follows, that such as are not complete, are without his
communion, and by consequence should not promise themselves any share in his
salvation; it being prepared for those only that are in him. If this Doctrine
do trouble us, let us impute it to our vices and our looseness; and taking once
this truth to heart, with all our might endeavor after that perfection which
is in JESUS CHRIST; accounting, that without it we cannot possess either his
grace in this world, or his glory in the world to come. I well know, that to
speak absolutely, no one is perfect; and that if we compare our condition on
earth, with that in heaven, all our perfections are but weaknesses. Yet it is
true, that JESUS CHRIST does, even in this life, in some sense, complete his
faithful ones; and this perfection, which he gives them, is not a vain name or
an imagination. It Is a thing, and a most real truth; it is a piety and charity,
sincere, and free, and without hypocrisy; which, though it sometimes fail,
does notwithstanding produce true fruits, and works quite different from those
of Worldlings and Hypocrites, according to what our LORD said, even that if
your righteousness do not exceed the righteousness of the Scribes and
Pharisees, you shall in no wise enter into the kingdom of heaven. Object not,
that you are yet on earth, and that perfection is not to be found but in
heaven; and that to live as an Angel, one should be without a body. It is not
the perfection of Heaven that we demand of you. The LORD will not reject you
for having not had in this life the transcendent brightness of the next. But
though a child be not obliged to conduct his life with as much prudence and
reason as a man of years; it does not follow, that he has license to live
without rule, and in the debanches and disorders of slaves. Every Age has its
bounds, and its measures, and its perfection. Our childhood here below must not
be without discipline, under the pretense, that it is not come to full growth.
Christians, I complain not, that there are defects in your knowledge, and
practice, which have no place in Heaven; but that there are in you vices which
ought to have no place on earth. I blame you, not for that there is a great
difference between you and Angels; but that there is none between you and
worldly men. I require, not what is above the strength of your age, but what is
worthy of your profession, and does not at all exceed your light. I beseech you
only to labor as much for JESUS CHRIST, as the children of this generation do
for the interests of their lusts. This does not exceed the capacity of our
nature, since you see what the servants of sin do: and its necessarily your
duty; except you imagine, that we owe less to JESUS CHRIST, than Worldlings do
to their foolish and vain passions.

The first piece of that compleatness which we have in him, is this Divine
Circumcision, which is not made with hand, but by the efficacy of his Spirit.
Without it, we can have neither place in the communion of his people, nor right
to his Inheritance. It Is a Circumcision, of which we may truly say, that every
soul that shall not have received it, shall be cut off from his people. The
Apostle shows us wherein it consists, to wit, in putting off the body of the
sins of the flesh. JESUS CHRIST has put the sword in our hand, that is
necessary to cut away this wretched flesh, namely, his sacred word, wherein he
discovers the horridness of sin, and infernal venom of vices, and the vanity
and iniquity of all the lusts of the flesh. He has showed us the perdition
which they that serve it fall into; and has put it to death on his Cross, and
buried it in his Sepulcher. He has spread before our eyes the wonders of GOD's
love, and the eternity of the Kingdom appointed for faithful servants. He has
given us rules and examples of this part of our sanctification, in his Gospel,
and in his life; and offers us the lights and consolations of his Spirit, to
lead us in this work. Grasp we then this Divine Knife of his Gospel. Thrust it
hardily in to our hearts, and cut out thence all the impurity of the vices that
are there. Let us rid our selves of them, and cast them behind us. Exterminate
all the productions of the flesh, as execrable things. Leave not one of them in
our selves. Having subdued Avarice, combat Ambition. Pluck out Luxury and all
its passions from our inward parts. Root up Hatred, and Wrath, and Cruelty, and
spare the life of none of these Monsters. Let us not rest, until we have
cleansed our hearts of all this cursed brood. For it is not enough to have cut
off some of them. One sole Enemy abiding in our bosom, is able to destroy us.
The body of the sins of the flesh must be put off, says the Apostle, and not
one or two of its sins only. I confess, the labor is hard; but it is
necessary, and that at all times (for it is the task of our whole life); in
especial manner at present, now that the death of our LORD and Savior, and his
resurrection, and his holy Supper, do call us to extraordinary efforts of piety
and sanctity. And if the labor be great, the felicity and the glory that
follows it, is infinite. Let us employ our selves in it, well-beloved Brethren,
with ardency and generosity, put off the body of all our sins; that having
truly crucified our old man with the LORD JESUS, we may also rise again with
Him, to be enlivened by his Celestial food, and have part for ever, after the
short trials of this life, in His blessed immortality. Amen.

The Twenty-third SERMON.
COL. CHAP. II. VER. XII. XII. Being buried with Him through baptism, in which
also you are raised again together, through the faith of the efficacy of GOD,
who has raised Him from the dead.


DEar Brethren, It is very true, that the solemnity of this great day, which
has been consecrated by all Christians to the resurrection of the LORD JESUS,
and sanctified by the Mysteries of his Table, at which we have communicated,
does require more than ordinary devotion and meditations of us: Yet I have not
needed to seek a subject for the present exercise, any other where than in the
series of the ordinary Texts which I do, in this place, expound to you; the
words I have read, which immediately succeed those you heard last LORD's Day,
excellently suiting each of those duties to which this day is particularly
dedicated: For they treat of our LORD's resurrection, and of the fruits that
redound to us thereby; as also of Baptism, wherein they are communicated to us,
and which was wont, for this reason, to be solemnly administered heretofore in
the ancient Church, on the night before Easter; and of that faith, by which we
become possessed of this Divine Resurgent. Lastly, They speak of the interest
we have in his burial, that sequel of his precious death, the blessed
commemoration whereof we have celebrated this morning. Subjects these, which
are, as is plain to all, eminently meet for the devotion of this day. This then
shall be, by the will of GOD, the matter of this action. Faithful Souls, afford
it a vigorous and a deep attention, elevating your thoughts to JESUS CHRIST,
the Prince of our salvation, and Author of our immortality, whiles we shall
endeavor to represent to you what his Apostle here teaches us about our
communion in his burial and resurrection.

You may remember, that to confound the impiety of certain Seducers, who would
oblige Christians to Mosaical Circumcision, this holy man alleged, in the
precedent Text, that we have in JESUS CHRIST that substance and truth whereof
the Judaical Circumcision was but the shadow and model; having in him put off
the body of the sins of the flesh; so as having received, through the grace of
JESUS, this mystical and divine circumcision, the other carnal and typical one
is altogether useless to us, and cannot be desired or practiced by Christians,
without wronging their Savior. He still prosecutes that same intention; and to
show how rich that sanctifying-grace is, which we have in JESUS CHRIST, he
adds, that besides our being circumcised by the virtue of his word, and
divested of the body of the sins of the flesh; we have moreover been buried
with him through Baptism; and further, that we are therein risen again with
him, through the faith of the efficiency of GOD, who raised him from the dead:

For a right understanding of these words, we are to consider, First, The
communion we have both in the burial and resurrection of our LORD JESUS CHRIST.
And secondly, The twofold means by which this communion is given us, to wit,
Baptism, and the Faith of the efficiency of GOD, who has raised our LORD from
the dead. The Apostle expresses the first point in these words, Being buried
with him, in which also you are risen again together. As for our burial with
the LORD, you know, that having suffered on the Cross that dolorous and
accursed death which we had merited; his sacred body, loosned from that
mournful tree, and wrapped up in a sheet, was by Joseph of Arimathea laid in a
new Sepulcher, where it remained three days without motion, without
respiration, and without life, in this sad state, (the last of our infirmities)
until the beginning of the third day, when he gloriously rose again. The
transcendent wisdom of the Father, which ordered all the parts of this great
work, proceeded thus here very fitly, to justify the truth of his Son's death,
by his stay in the grave. For if he had resumed his life immediately after he
laid it down, and descended from the Cross alive again, I confess such a
Miracle might have astonished and transported the minds of the Spectators, and
demonstrated, that this Divine crucified Person was more than man. But on the
other hand, it would have rendered his death suspicious, and without doubt made
men imagine, that it had been but a feigned and false appearance, and no real
separation of his soul from his body; which opinion would evidently have shaken
and overthrown our salvation, it being entirely founded on the death of the
LORD JESUS. Whereas therefore it so highly concerns us to believe the same, GOD
has in such sort assured and certifi'd the truth, that we have not any show of
reason to call it in question. For this cause, it was his will, that the LORD
JESUS, having commended his spirit into his hands, should be laid in the
Sepulcher, and continue there three days; there remaining, after this, no more
cause to doubt, but that he was truly dead, since he was so long a time in the
state of the dead. Moreover our consolation required, that he should enter into
our Sepulchers, to take away for us the horror of them, and to assure us by His
example, that they have not force enough to detain our bodies for ever, or to
hinder them from rising one day again. It Is for these reasons, and other such,
that JESUS CHRIST would go down into this, death's last entrenchment. The
Apostle says then, that true believers have been buried with him.

How so (you will say), seeing that they, being living persons, were never laid
in the grave; and surely not in our LORD's, that was situate on Mount Calvary,
nigh to Jerusalem, places very far distant from our abode?

Dear Brethren, there is no man so gross, but does plainly see, that these
words are not to be taken according to the letter, but figuratively; and that
they signify not a natural but a mystical Sepulcher. And in such a sense it
may be said two manner of ways; That we have been buried in CHRIST, or with
CHRIST. First, in regard of our justification, that is, the remission of our
sins. And secondly, in regard of our sanctification, and the mortifying of the
old man. For as concerning the first, it is evident that JESUS CHRIST was not
buried, as neither was he crucified and put to death, but for us only. Burial
is nothing else but a consequent of death. It Is the sad and dismal state to
which it reduces men ever since they became guilty; that is to say, it makes
up a part of the punishment of sin. As indeed it is a hideous thing, and full of
horror, to see so noble and excellent a Creature, in whom the Image of GOD did
shine forth, and who had been formed for immortal glory, to be brought down to
the grave, under the power of Worms and putrefaction. JESUS CHRIST therefore
having undergone this ignominious Infirmity for us, and for our Salvation, that
he might leave none of our penalties unsatisfied for, it is evident that when he
was buried, we were buried in him, and with him; since it was properly for us,
that he did descend into the Sepulcher. He bore us upon the Cross. He bore us
in the grave. We all were in him, forasmuch as he, in all this work, acted but
for us. We did and suffered these things, since we are the cause that he did
and suffered them. We were buried in him, forasmuch as His being buried has
discharged this part of our punishment, and so changed the nature of our
graves, that instead of being prisons, and places of execution, they are now so
many beds and dormitories, wherein our bodies do repose until the resurrection.
Thus his burial has freed ours from the curse, which is naturally upon it; and
this benefit makes up a part of that justification which he has merited for
us, it comprehending an exemption from all the penalties that are due to our
sins.

But it is not in this sense that the Apostle says we have been buried with
JESUS CHRIST. For he speaks here of the first part of our sanctification, which
is nothing else but the mortifying of the body of sin, or old man in us, and
its burial, that is, the bringing it to naught. It Is therefore properly in this
respect S. Paul says, that we have been buried with JESUS CHRIST, even in as
much as by the virtue of his death and burial, our old man has been destroyed,
and suffered a death and burial semblable and analogical to JESUS CHRIST's. For
as his flesh, after it was deprived of life, was laid in a grave; in like
manner the old man of true believers, having been stain, is interred and
brought to naught. And as the LORD JESUS left in the Sepulcher his Funeral
linen clothes, together with all the infirmity and mortality he had, and came
forth vested with a nature and a life fully refined from all that weakness of
the first Adam which appeared in him during the days of his flesh; even so the
faithful do put off for ever that body of sin wherewith their first Parent had
enwrapped them, and leave it in their mystical Sepulcher, to be resumed no
more; but that they may henceforth lead a life free, and exempt from all its
filthiness and turpitude. Lastly, As the burial of our Savior was properly but
a progression and continuation of his death; so likewise that of our old man is
but a prosecuting of his destruction; it is the estate this puts him in, and
under it he abides for ever, without rising any more. S. Paul does else where
clearly show us, that it is thus we must understand his words; as when he
says, in the sixth to the Romans, that we are buried with CHRIST by baptism
into his death, Romans 6.4, 5.
that as he was raised from the dead by the glory of the Father; so we should
likewise walk in newness of life: and immediately after he says, that we have
been made one self-same plant with him, by the conformity of his death and
resurrection. To which must be also added, that it is in him, and with him, we
have been buried in this sort; for that in his death and burial the principles
and causes of ours were contained. His death has destroyed our old man, and
his burial has interred him; it being evident, that if our LORD had not
suffered both the one and the other for our salvation, sin would still live and
reign in us. For it is the love of GOD, and his peace, and the hope of glory,
the true effect of our Savior's death and burial, that gives the deaths-wound
to our old man, and that does abolish and bury his whole life.

See then how we are buried with him; not that, to speak properly, our bodies
do really enter into the grave, in Joseph of Arimathea's garden, where his
abode three days (away with so childish a conceit): but for that the virtue of
his death and holy Sepulcher does derive into us an image and a copy of his
burial, destroying and burying our old man by his efficacy, and bringing on him
a mystical death and burial conform to his own real and mystical one. This now,
which the Apostle adds, that we are also risen again, together with him; must
also be understood after the same manner. As our death and burial with him is
mystical and spiritual, so is likewise our resurrection; these words signifying
no other thing, but that he, by the virtue of his resurrection, does work and
produce one in us, which has resemblance and analogy with his own. And this
resurrection of the faithful, in consequence, and by the efficacy of JESUS
CHRIST's, is their being renewed unto an holy, spiritual, and Evangelical life.
For even as the LORD, having put off on the Cross, and left in the grave, that
earthy, infirm, and natural life which he had led here below, during the days
of his flesh; did put on a new one, that was glorious, spiritual, and immortal,
rising from the grave a man heavenly, and living to eternity by the sole
strength of a quickening spirit; so likewise all his true members having quitted
their old man, as destroyed and abolished by the virtue of his death, do put on
the new, which is formed in righteousness and holiness; and instead of that
vile and wretched life which they led aforetime in the turpitude and fifth of
sin, they take up another wholly new one, which is quickened by the Spirit from
on high, upheld by his power, and shines all over with the glorious lights of
his sanctity, charity, and purity. But besides this conform ^y between the new
nature, which we receive in JESUS CHRIST, and that same which he put on at his
coming forth of the grave: we are said to rise again with him, because it is
the virtue of his resurrection that produces all this change in us. His
resurrection is the cause of ours; without it we should lie dead still, and in
bondage to sin. This will appear, if you afford ever so little attention to
consider it. For that which forms the new man in us, and gives us the courage
to renounce the world, that we may live pure and holy, is, as every one knows,
the persuasion of the love of GOD, and of the remission of our sins, and the
hope of blissful and glorious immortality. Now it is the resurrection of JESUS
CHRIST, that gives us all this assurance, putting in our hand a firm proof of
the satisfaction of Divine Justice, from the deliverance of our Surety; and of
our immortality, from his having taken possession of the same for himself and
us; so as our souls, being certifi'd of the transcendent goodness of GOD, and
of their own happiness, do ardently embrace his Discipline, and the
endeavoring of a new life. Besides, that faith which purifies our (...), and
by which, as we shall hear anon, we are risen again in JESUS CHRIST, could not
take place in us, if he were not risen from the dead; Romans 1.4, 1 Pet. 1.3.
since it is by that he was declared the Son of GOD with power, according to the
spirit of holiness. Therefore S Peter says, it is by the resurrection of JESUS
CHRIST from the dead, that GOD has begotten us again unto a lively hope. And
S. Paul, for this very reason, 1 Cor. 15.17.
protests, that if CHRIST were not risen, our faith would be vain, and we
should be still in our sins. It must then be concluded, that in rising again,
he raised up us also by the same means; forasmuch as by rising, he gave being
and clearness to the principles and causes of our mystical resurrection.
Opening his own tomb, he by that means opened ours. He broke in pieces the
doors and bar^s of our Sepulchers, by quitting his own; and raising himself
from the dust, he drew us up out of the earth, and brought us forth from the
abode of death; that glorious life also wherewith he then vested himself, has
inspired into us all the spiritual life, motions, and sentiments, that we have.
O holy and blessed Communion! O divine and incorruptible fruits of the
Sepulcher of JESUS CHRIST! The death of the first man did kill us; and the
death of the second makes us alive. The one's Sepulcher is our prison, the
other our liberty. In the former do appear horror and malediction, the signs of
our guilt, and of the just wrath of GOD; but from the latter, peace and life do
bud out, glory and immortality shoot forth. The grave of Adam did extinguish,
and shut up for ever in a state of exinanition all the beauty, strength, and
life of our nature. The Sepulcher of JESUS CHRIST has destroyed nothing but
our sin; it has shut up, and kept in only our old man, that is, the
loathsomness and misery of our lives; and instead of this abominable body of
sin and death, whereof it has divested us, has, as it were, teemed with, and
brought forth a celestial and immortal nature, which it puts on us, together
with our Savior. And thus you see what are the fruits of our communion with
JESUS CHRIST, namely, the destruction of our old man, and the creation of the
new, signified by the Apostle in these words, we are buried, and risen again
with him.

Let us now consider the two fold means, here intimated by the Apostle, by
which GOD does make us partakers of them. The first is Baptism, being buried
(says he) with CHRIST by baptism, wherein also you are raised again together
with him: For so do I take these words; rendering, wherein, not, in whom, and
referring this term, not to JESUS CHRIST, but to Baptism; as it it had been
said, In which Baptism you are also raised again together with the LORD; this
construction being more natural, and more convenient than the other; as they
that understand the original Language, wherein the Apostle wrose, with easily
perceive, if they take the p^ns to consider this Text there; though it the
bottom it make no difference which of these two ways be taken, the whole
amounting to the same sense, whether you say, that we are risen again in
Baptism, or in JESUS CHRIST.

In truth, all the means which GOD makes use of in Religion, have no other
tendency but to communicate JESUS CHRIST to us, as dead, buried, and risen
again for us, to the destruction of our old man, and the vivification of the
new. Nor do they ever fail to produce these two effects, in any of those that
receive them as they ought. Therefore the holy Apostles frequently ascribe them
to the word of the Gospel, which is the first and principal means that GOD
makes use of to save us; Romans 1.15. Heb. 4.12.
by reason whereof it is called, his power to salvation. As for the destroying
of the old man, the Epistle to the Hebrews attributes to the Word, the virtue
that operateth and effects it in us, saying, that it is quick and powerful, 2
Cor. 10.4, 5
sharper than any two-edged sword, piercing even to the dividing asunder of
soul and spirit, and of the joints and marrow: and S. Paul elsewhere calls
it, a weapon mighty, to the pulling down of strong holds, to the overthrowing
of imaginations, and every height, that exalts it self against the knowledge
of GOD, and for the bringing of every thought into captivity to the obedience
of CHRIST. And as to the life of the new man, 1 Pet. 1.23, 25
you know S. Peter teaches us, that the Gospel which is preached us, is the
seed of this life; telling us, that it is thereby we are born again. That holy
Supper, of which we have participated this morning, has also the same effects.
For since it communicates to us the body of JESUS CHRIST dead and buried, and
risen again for us, we need not doubt but i^ gives us also the virtue which it
has, and is insuparably adherent to it, for the putting to death the old Adam,
and making the new to live in us, by its be-dewing our Consciences with his
blood, and feeding our souls with his flesh.

But although these two effects be common to all the means which GOD has
instituted, and (...) use of in Religion; yet the Apostle speaks here but of
Baptism, (...) Because (...) the first seal we receive of our Savior, and the
proper Sacrament of our rege^eration, which contains the initials and
beginning of our spiritual (...) in the House of God; whence it comes, that
treating of the same subject elsewhere, Romans 6.3, 4.
he makes mention of Baptism in like manner. Know you not (says he) that we
all, who have been baptized into JESUS CHRIST, have been baptized into his
death? Therefore we are buried with him by Baptism. Secoudly, He so does, that
he might, with so much the more clearness, confute the erro^ he here combareth;
even by opposing, to that circumcision which the seducers did press, that
Baptism which we have received in JESUS CHRIST; whereby has been fully
communicated to us all that these people pretended to draw from the use of
circumcision. Their folly was therefore so much the more insupportable, for
that they would not only retain a shadow, whereof JESUS CHRIST has given us
the true body; but also withstood one of the old Sacraments of Moses its giving
place, to one of those which JESUS instituted. If question be of the substance,
and very effect of circumcision, we have that truth and fullness in JESUS
CHRIST, whereof it had but some part shadowed out by its figure. If the matter
be the Sacrament it self, the LORD has given us one highly excelling, to wit,
Baptism. So as which way soever it be taken, there is no reason at all that any
man should desire still to retain circumcision. But to proceed; it is not here
only that the Apostle attributes so great an effect unto Baptism. He speaks
thus of it constantly; as for example, when he says, that CHRIST sanctifies
the Church, Ephesians. 5.26. Gal. 3.7.
cleansing it with the washing of water by the word; and elsewhere, that we all
who were baptized, have put on CHRIST; and in another place again, 1 Cor. 12.13.
that we have all been baptized into one spirit, to be one body. For the
Sacraments of CHRIST are not vain and hollow pictures, wherein the benefits of
his death and resurrection are nakedly portrayed as in a piece of Art, that
feeds us barely with an unprofitable view of what it represents. They are
effectual means, which He accompanies with his virtue, and fills with his
grace, effectively accomplishing those things in us by his heavenly power,
which are set before us in the Sacrament, when we receive it as we ought. He
inwardly nourishes, by the virtue of his flesh and blood, the soul of him that
duly takes his Bread and his Cup. He washes and regenerateth that man within,
who is rightly consecrated by Baptism. And if the infirmity of age do hinder,
that the effect does not at the instant appear in Infants baptized; yet his
virtue does not fail to accompany his institution, and conserve its self in
them, and bring forth its fruits upon them, in their season, when their nature
is capable of the operations of understanding and will. Heretofore in the
primitive Church, this double effect of Baptism was more clearly represented in
the external action of the Sacrament, than it is at this day. For the greater
part of those that were baptized, being persons of age, who came over to
Christianity from Judaism or Paganism, they were unclothed, and then plunged
into the water, whence they immediately came forth, and so were baptized in the
Name of the Father, and of the Son, and of the Holy Ghost; whereby they
testified, that they did put off the body of sin, the habit of the first Adam,
and buried it in the saving-waters of JESUS CHRIST, as in its mystical grave,
and came forth thence risen up to a new life; for a symbol whereof they took up
a white habit, and wore it an whole week. Now though the water wherewith we
baptize, does not carry so express a figure of this mystical Sepul cher and
Resurrection, as that of the Ancients did, since this ceremony cannot be
practiced toward Infants without very great inconvenience, and even danger of
their lives, in so tender an age, and especially in such cold Countries as
ours; nevertheless, the virtue of holy Baptism is still the same; that JESUS,
whom in it we did put on, communicating to us, by the virtue of his Spirit, the
mystical image of his Burial and Resurrection; that is, as we have showed, the
annihilation of the old man, and creation of the new. If we meet with any
baptized persons, as there are but too many such, in whom the old man is so far
from being buried, that he lives and reigns with absolute power, and the new
man has neither life nor action at all; it may not be imputed unto JESUS
CHRIST, who always accompanies his Sacraments with his saving virtue; but unto
the persons own unbelief, who does wretchedly repel the operationof the grace
of CHRIST, and deprive it of all the effect which it would have assur^dly
produced in them, if their unworthiness had not frustrated its efficacy toward
them. For I acknowledge, that neither Baptism, nor the Word, do work in any, but
such as receive them with faith. And in this, as in all other things, the
admirable wisdom of our LORD does appear. For the subject being Man, a
reasonable Creature, he deals with him in a way proper and suitable to his
nature. The means he uses for his salvation, do not operate in him, as drugs
and simples, by a Physical action, and such as takes its effect, whatever
otherwise be the mind of the man that takes them. But the operation of the Word
and Sacraments does depend upon the preparation of their hearts to whom they
are administered. They work, when they are received with faith; they produce
nothing, when they are received with unbelief. And thus it is meet, that the
understanding, which is the Guide and Ruler of all our moral actions, be first
persuaded of the truth of GOD, and then our wills and affections take
impression, and be changed by the efficacy of his power.

This very thing the Apostle here does show us with much clearness, by adding,
besides Baptism, that we are buried and raised again with CHRIST by faith; an
evident token, that the Sacrament does mortify sin in us, and raise us up unto
sanctity, according to the faith it meets with in us. It left the heart of
Simon Magus in the bonds of iniquity, and in the gall of bitterness; because it
found in it no faith at all, but a naughtiness hardened in unbelief, and full of
Hypocrisy. But as for Lydia, and all those that have a true faith, it does
assuredly mortify sin in them, and makes the new man live in them unto
righteousness and holiness. For it is not possible, but that the person who is
firmly persuaded of the truth of the Gospel, should renounce sin, the venom and
horror whereof this Divine Doctrine does so clearly discover; and on the
contrary, embrace that holiness, whose beauty and blessedness it does so
magnificently set before us; man naturally flying from what he believes mortal,
and pernicio^s to him; and ad^ering with like necessity to what he judges
healthful and advantageous. But the Apostle, who does every where exalt the
grace of GOD, and cast down the (...) of man, lest any one should imagine, that
this ^^^th, upon which (...) does depend, were a production of our own will;
does by the way advertise us, that it is a gift of our LORD's, when he names
it the faith of the efficacy, or of the operation of GOD; that is to say, which
the efficacy of his hand produces in us. Whereby their error is refuted, who
hold, that GOD, for the producing of faith in us, does merely set before us,
either outwardly by his Word, or inwardly by his Spirit, the object of truth,
leaving it to the liberty of our will, to believe it, or reject it. By this
account, faith should not be the faith of the efficacy of GOD; since that,
according to this supposition, he should exert none at all upon us. But the
Apostle styles it, the faith of the efficacy, or operation of GOD. We must
conclude therefore, that for the giving of us faith, he operateth in us,
powerfully forming our hearts, and opening them by the might of his Spirit,
that they may receive his truth; yea, that he does imprint and engrave it on
them himself by a most efficacious action. The term Energy (for such is the
Original, and it is that which we have rendered efficacy), deserves great
consideration; properly signifying, in the style of the Book of GOD, a powerful
operation, which surely accomplisheth its design, and infallibly produces its
intention; such as is the action by which GOD created the World; an evident
sign, that the operation by which he produces faith in us, is so strong, as
that it bears down all contradiction; so as none of those upon whom he
vouchsafes to put it forth, can resist it, or hinder their understanding from
believing.

The Apostle adds, that GOD has raised JESUS CHRIST from the dead, either to
determine the object of our faith, which is principally JESUS raised from the
dead by the glory of the Father; or (which I think to be more pertinent) to
compare our mystical Resurrection with JESUS CHRIST's. For seeing it is GOD,
who by his efficacious action gives us that faith by which we rise again in
CHRIST; and seeing it is He again who has raised our LORD from the dead; it is
evident, that both the one and the other of these two works, has the self-same
principle, to wit, the Almighty Power of GOD. Christians, judge with what Power
He works in his faithful ones, since that he exerteth the same virtue to give
them faith, by which he raised his own Son from the dead, as the Apostle
informs us yet more clearly in another place, Ephesians. 1.10, 20.
where he prays, that we may know what is the exceeding greatness of his
power to usward who believe, according to the working of his mighty power,
which he showed in CHRIST, when he raised him from the dead. Neither let his
saying, that the Father raised him, disquiet you, as if this did cross the
Scripture's asserting elsewhere, that the LORD JESUS himself raised up the
Temple of his Body when the Jews had overthrown it. Joh. 2.19.
It is true, that he raised up himself; but since his Power is the Power of the
Father, as being one only, and the same GOD with him; it is evident, it may be
truly said, that the Father raised him up; the working of one of these two
Persons being the working of the other, as our Savior declares in S. John,
Joh. 5.19.
that whatsoever the Father does, the Son does in like manner also. Whence it
comes, that the Scripture attributes the Creation of the world indifferently to
the one and to the other.

Dear Brethren, This is that which the holy Apostle, the great Minister of GOD,
does tell us in this Text. Oh how happy should we be, if we had these Divine
Instructions written in the bottom of our hearts, and engraven in Capital
Letters upon all the parts of our lives! If our actions did justify, as our
words profess, That we are buried and risen again with JESUS CHRIST by Baptism,
and by the faith of the operation of GOD, who raised him from the dead! But
alas! it must be confessed to our shame, there appears in the lives of most of
us, no print of the burial, and least of all of the resurrection of JESUS. The
flesh lives, and exercises as horrible tyranny in them, as it does in the
lives of the men of the world. It has all its sentiments, and all its motions
at liberty. The new man, that breathes nothing but Heaven, and loves nothing
but Holiness, has no place in them; it is so far from reigning there, that
it is banished thence, and acts no more than a dead body fast shut up in the
grave. Yet if nothing depended on the matter, save our shame, impudency would
bear it out. But the worst is, our salvation, and our eternal damnation does
depend upon it: for JESUS CHRIST saves none but his Members, such as are made
conform to him, and have been buried and raised again with him. Awake we
therefore from this mortal Lethargy, which has benumbed our senses to this
day. Labor we day and night in prayer, with sighs and tears, and not cease,
until we feel the old man dye, and the new live in our hearts. As for the
former, both Nature and Experience do sufficiently show us the extravagancy of
its desires, and the vanity of all its motions. For, I beseech you, what profit
does the flesh receiv^ from all the trouble that either its self takes, or that
it gives to others? What benefit has it from the turmoiling of its avarice, or
the burning of its ambition, or the shamefulness of its pleasures, or the
sweetness of its revenges? It torments its self, it toils its self, it
embraces wind and smoke, and then perishes, oftentimes shortning its own
duration by the violence of its agitations. It has but a little body (which
daily weakens) to lodge, and se^d, and clothe for some years; yet it travels,
and disquiets its self as much, as if it had a million to maintain for the
space of many ages. Was there ever a greater folly? Certainly, should a man of
composed mind behold our busy employments in the earth, with the motives and
designs of so many motions and troubles as we consume our selves in, I make
little question but he would take well-nigh all men for frantic or foolish,
and cry out, not simply with the Wise man, Vanity of vanities, all is vanity;
but yet louder, and in a tone more tragical, O madness! O frenzy! All the
World is but a company of sens^ess men!

But the seeing of the vanity of the flesh is not sufficient for the conceiving
of a due horror at it. Christian, enter into the Sepulcher of your Savior, and
you shall perceive there, that besides vanity, the life of the old man is all
full of venom and wretchedness. This sacred Body, which you see lying in that
Tomb in so pitiful an estate, was pierced with nails, potion'd with gall,
crowned with thorns, covered with the reproach of men, and the curse of GOD,
separated from its Soul, and brought down to the dust, to divert from you the
punishments justly prepared for the disorders of your flesh. Think what Hells
it deserved, since it was necessary that the LORD of Glory should suffer such
strange usage to redeem it from them. Having once discerned, by such sensible
evidences, the vanity and malignity of the old man, and the perdition into
which he leads his Vassals, how can you have the heart to let him live within
you? Beloved Brethren, crucify him, and out him of the world. He is unworthy
to live. Pierce him through with the thorns and nails of your JESUS. Give him
his gall to drink. Put him to death with him, and bury him in his Sepulcher, to
come forth no more. Let his Avarice, and Ambitions, and all his Concupiscences,
remain eternally extinct in the dust of that salvifique grave, that there
appear no more henceforth any track of him in your whole course. And instead of
that infernal vigorousness wherewith he inspired heretofore, and disturbed your
whole life, put on that new man, whom JESUS has on this day made to come forth
out of his Sepulcher. Drink in his Spirit, fill your veins with his Blood, and
your arteries with his fire. Receive his Sentiments, and deck your selves with
his Lights. Lead henceforth a life worthy of his Resurrection, and of his
Baptism, and of that immortal Food which you have taken at his Table. Let your
actions aim at nothing but Heaven. It Is there your Treasure is. Christian, what
do you yet seek on Earth? Your LORD is no longer here. This day saw him come up
thence, to go fit down on high at the right hand of GOD, and carry up your
hearts with him, giving them all his motions, that where he is, ye may be also.
And if his will do oblige you, to tarry yet a while on earth, spend the whole
time in the same manner that he spent his forty days after his resurrection in
a continual meditation of heavenly things, in the company of Apostles, in the
entertainment of Saints, in the exercise of an ardent charity, in the
preparatives of your ascension to his ^ingdom, wholly managing this short space
to his glory, and to the instruction and edification of men. This is that we
owe, dear Bretthren, to the Burial and Resurrection of our LORD. There is no
need to run to Palestine, nor to go up Mount Calvary, for to enter into his
S^pulcher. You are entered into it, and buried with him, if you, by the faith of
his Gospel do mortify and destroy sin, according to the intention of your
Baptism. Nor is it a whit more necessary for the having of part in his
resurrection, to go and kiss the last print of his seet upon Mount Olivet. You
are risen again with him, if affected with the glory he brought out of his
Tomb, and persuaded of the truth of the discoveries he made of blessed
immortality, you live according to the form of his Gospel, in purity and
sanctification.

GOD, who raises the dead by his glorious power, please to reveal the same
might upon our hearts, and form so lively a faith in them, as may be the true
workmanship of his hand, and the faith of his efficacy, that we may thereby be
buried, and raised up with CHRIST; and after these firstfruits of his holiness,
be one day transformed into a perfect resemblance of his glory, for the eternal
possessing of that great and blessed Heavenly Kingdom with Him, which he has
purchased for us by the merit of his death, and ensured to us by the virtue of
his resurrection. So be it.

The Twenty-fourth SERMON.
COL. CHAP. II. VER. XIII. Ver. XIII. And when ye were dead in offenses, and in
the uncircumcision of your flesh, He quickened you together with Him, having
freely forgiven you all your offenses.


DEar Brethren, The Philosophers do, with good reason, commonly say, That
contraries illustrate one another: For nothing makes us better understand the
excellence of liberty, than consideration of the mis^r^es of bondage; and
nothing does more discover the nature and advantages of Virtue, than the
deformity and wretchedness of its opposit^ Vices. The beauty and usefulness of
light, is perceived by the hideousness of black obscurity; and the sweetness of
health, by the incommodities of sickness. For this cause, the Ministers of God,
to teach us the true worth of his benefits, do frequently represent to us the
misery of that estate out of which he delivered us. Thus you ^ee, the Prophets
of the Old Testament did continually put the Israelites in mind of their once
sad and pitiful estate in Egypt, under the tyranny of Phara^h. They would have
them keep it in their eye, that so they might duly relish the red^mption of
GOD, and the sweetness of that liberty he had given them. Under the New
Testament the Apostles are no less intentive to represent, at every turn, the
extreme hideousness of our original condition, for to make us acknowledge, so
much the more, the grace that GOD has showed us in his Son, by translating us
out of the Kingdom of darkness, into his mavelous light. Thus S. Paul does in
the Text we have read; wherein, that the Colossians might be brought to a
fuller comprehension of the inestimable excellency of the benefit they had
received from GOD in JESUS CHRIST, when they were raised again with him in
Baptism, by the faith of his efficacy, as he expressed in the foregoing Verse:
He now lays before them the misery they were before engult'd in. When ye were
dead in offenses (says he), and in the uncircumcision of your flesh, etc.

Now this discourse does also hit the mark he principally aimed at in the whole
dispute; which is, as you have often heard, to refute the pernicious error of
those who accounted the observing of circumcision, and other Ceremonies of
Moses, necessary for Christians. Sure all the profit they could pretend to by
them, was either the remission of our sins, or the sanctification of our lives.
But the Apostle does here show us, in few words, that we have both the one and
the other of these two graces in JESUS CHRIST; The first, Since GOD has freely
forgiven us all our offenses in Him: The second, Since of being dead, as we
were in our selves, He has made us alive with him; whereby it is evident, that
the Ceremonies of the Law are henceforth wholly useless to us. There is no need
of the knife of Moses any longer. GOD, by the sole Gospel of his CHRIST, dying
and risen again for us, the true Sword of Heaven, infinitely sharper than any
of the Metals of Nature, has cut off all the corruption of our flesh. He has
done much more yet. By the alone virtue of the same CHRIST, he has rescued us
from death, and animated, and made us alive. And as for the sins whereof we
were guilty, he has pardoned us them all. His pure grace in JESUS CHRIST has
effectually fulfilled whatsoever Moses's Law did promise or figure. You have
had experience of it (says the Apostle to the faithful at Coloss), you have
seen and felt the efficacy of JESUS CHRIST in your selves. Remember what you
were, when you believed on him; and consider what you are, since you passed
through his hands. Ye were dead, and ye are alive; ye were covered with crimes,
and are fully absolved of them. Do not so assront your Deliverer, as to think,
that having wrought so great Miracles by his own power alone, he does need the
Elements of the Law to finish his work in you; and that he cannot complete,
without Moses, what he so magnificently began and advanced without him. This,
my Brethren, is the Apostle's express design, in these words.

We, who through the grace of GOD, are not troubled with the error of these
false Teachers, which dyed, and was buried long ago; will consider this Text
more generally, and view the whole extent it has, for our edification and
consolation, without insisting precisely upon that particular use for which it
was first written to the Colossians; and that nothing in it may escape us, we
will examine, if GOD permit, the two heads which are proposed in it, distinctly
one after another.

The first is, The estate we were in before the vocation of GOD in his Son; Ye
were d^ad (says the Apostle) in offenses, and in the uncircumcision of your
flesh.

The second is, The grace that GOD has showed us in JESUS CHRIST; He has
quickened you (says he) together with Him, having freely forgiven you all your
offenses.

Here is, in sum, the map of our whole Redemption. The first part represents
unto us our misery by Nature. And the second, our happiness under Grace. That
is, the archrevement of the first and of the second Adam; the death into which
the one had sunk us; and the life unto which the other has raised us.

There Is none so ignorant, but knows what life and death are. As life is the
sweetest and dearest of all our good things; so death is the greatest and the
last of all our evils. Accordingly you see, now prudent-Nature has given
Animals such an Instinct, as to use all the strength and skill they have, to
preserve themselves alive, and prevent their dying. Other evils take from us,
each of them, but some part of our comforts. Death bereaves us of them all.
Bondage deprives us of Liberty; Banishment, of our Country; Sickness afflicts
our Bodies; Shame or Infamy our Souls; Pain troubles our Senses; Poverty
incommodateth our life. But there is no calamity so great, as not to leave us
the use or enjoyment of some good, or at least of our selves. Death
extinguishing our life, and by this means sapping and overthrowing the very
foundation of our enjoyments, does at the same time despoil us of all other
good things altogether. Wherefore the holy Apostle, and the other sacred
Writers, that they might represent the hideousness and misery of the condition
of men, that are without the grace of GOD, do not call it simply a Bondage, a
Banishment, a Sickness, a Disgrace, a Blindness, a Poverty, a Calamity, a
Nakedness: They term it a Death; to signify, that it is the utmost of all the
evils that can betide our nature; that it is a privation, not of some good
things only, but generally of all: so as nothing remains either in the spirit,
or in the senses, or in the body of these miserable creatures, that deserves to
be called good. It Is the term Isaiah makes use of, to express the estate of
people, while they had no part in the Covenant of GOD: Light has shined (says
he) upon them that dwell in the region of the shadow of death. Isa. 9.1.
And the LORD JESUS puts us all in the same condition, before he has called
us; Joh. 5.25.
The hour comes (says he) and already is, that the dead shall hear the voice
of the Son of GOD, and they that hear it shall live. And without doubt it is to
these kind of dead that he willed one of his Disciples to leave the care of
burying their dead. Matt. 8.22. 1 Timothy 5.6.
And you know what the Apostle says of that Widow who passes her time in the
pleasures of sin, That she is dead while she lives. And our Savior tells that
person who led a wicked life, under a false reputation of piety, Rev. 3.^.
Thou have a name to live, but art dead. S. Paul, following the style of the
Holy Ghost, does call them dead, who abiding in the ignorance that is natural
to all men, do neither know GOD, nor his will: Ye were dead (says he to the
Ephesians, Ephesians. 2.1, ^
speaking of the time they spent in the darkness of Paganism) ye were dead in
trespasses and sins. And a little after, putting himself in the same number,
though he was otherwise a Jew, When we (says he) were dead in our trespasses,
GOD quickened us together with CHRIST; which are precisely the same terms that
he here applies to the Colossians, whose original condition was in effect the
same with that of the Ephesians they being both the one, and the other of them,
by birth Pagans.

I well know, that the men of the world, and generally they that have no part
in the grace of GOD, do live, and are sensible, and go to and fro; they do
desire, and fear, and hope, and exercise, in sum, all the actions in which life
is ordinarily made to consist. Yea, I confess, that to measure things by
appearances, and the outside only, there are none that seem to live but they,
filling the world with the noise of their actions and motions, while the
faithful for the most part groan in some corner, or pass their days obscurely
in the silence of retirement, without appearing, or making themselves seen; so
as it may be said of them, in this respect, as the Apostle somewhere does in
another, 1 Cor. 1.28.
that GOD has chosen things that are not, to bring to naught things that are;
the flesh no more accounting the faithful to be any thing, than if they neither
lived, nor existed at all; and considering none but men of the world, when
things that live, and indeed are, do come to be reckoned up. But S. Paul
himself clearly shows us, that he speaks not here of the privation of this kind
of life, in as much as he says not simply, that we were dead, but that we were
dead in offenses, and in the uncircumcision of our flesh. We must know
therefore, that there are two kinds of life; the one carnal and natural, which
consists in the exercise of natural actions and faculties, such as are common
to us, partly with sensitive creatures, as drinking, eating, sleeping, and the
like; partly with evil spirits, as sinning, offending GOD, and our Neighbor.
The other sort of life is spiritual and divine, having for its principle the
Image of GOD, and his Grace; and for its actions, the exercising of piety
toward GOD, and charity toward our neighbor. Such a life as Adam's would
have been, if he had persever'd in the innocence wherein he was created; and
such as is the life of the holy Angels now in Heaven. To these two kinds of
life do answer two kinds of death; the one natural, which is the separation of
the soul from the body, and an abolition of the actions, and motions, and
sensations, which the union of these two parts of our being does produce in
us. The other spiritual, which is nothing else but a privation of the Image of
GOD, and of those good and holy faculties, and habitudes, and actions,
wherewith it is accompanied. It Is this second kind of death the Apostle intends
here, when he says, that we were dead in offenses, and in the uncircumcision
of our flesh. For the Holy Ghost, the true Judge and Estimator of things, does
count all those for dead, which have not the life of GOD, how full of life
soever they be, in respect of earth and flesh. And truly for just cause. For if
we consider the thing in the light of true reason, we shall find, that what men
call life in them, is unworthy of that name; it being, to speak properly, mere
death. For living, is right acting, and exercising of faculties suitable to
one's nature, with such satisfaction and pleasure as he is capable of: So as
the true life of man (for of him we speak) is nothing else but a continual
exercise of good, and holy, and just actions, suitable to his true nature, and
worthy of that immortal soul which was given him at the beginning, with such
high contentment as must needs accompany the same. Now it is evident, that
those that are in the flesh, do do nothing like this. Instead of those
excellent and noble actions for which they were created, they do none but base
and bad ones. Instead of meditating on GOD their Creator, and on heavenly and
divine things, they dream on nothing but the flesh and the earth, unworthily
weltring in these bogs with all the sense and understanding they have. Instead
of loving GOD above all, of adoring and serving him with all the strength of
their soul, their whole will is set on creatures and vanity. And their
Appetites, instead of being subject to right reason, do drag it into corruption
and unrighteousness. Sure this universal disorder in actions and motions, is
not, to say true, the life of a man; it is a depravation, and an overthrow of
it, which deserves the name of Death, rather than of Life. As when a Clock is
marred, and all its motions put awry and confused, there is no longer the going
of a Clock; though it still have the parts, it no longer does the office; it
has only the name of a Clock, not the truth. So is it with Man; he has still
the broken remainders, and ruins of his primitive nature; but the pieces being
confused, and the wheels crushed together, and all motions disorderly, he has
no longer the true life thereof, he has but a false and deceivable image of
it. Again, acting in this horrible confusion, it cannot be, that he should have
that pure and calm contentment, without which his life is not life. He must of
necessity be always in doubt, in distrust, in fear, and disquietness; and at
last fall under those just executions which this disorder does deserve; that
is, into that eternal death which is the wages of sin. And though he does not
yet suffer this final infelicity, while he is on earth; nevertheless, because
it is infallibly his portion, and will eftsoons assuredly betide him, we are to
count him even at present a dead man; and look on him, as on a Malefactor, that
is on the point of being condemned and executed. For though he in the mean time
does live and breathe, yet we stick not to say, that such a one is a lost man,
because his punishment is certain. Thus you see it is very justly, that the
Apostle reckons all those to be dead, who are without the grace of GOD,
forasmuch as they do none of the actions of true life; and eternal death is
unavoidable to them, while they are in this estate.

But the Apostle's words do signify somewhat more yet. For to be dead, is not
simply to be without exercising the actions of life; it is an having lost the
principles of life, and a being incapable of doing the actions thereof. You
call him a dead man, not who is simply without action, and does not exercise
sensation or motion (for they that are asleep, or in a swoon, are verily in
that condition, yet are not dead); but him, who cannot any longer act, nor
feel, nor move; and with action, has lost the faculty or power of it. Sure
then, since the Apostle says, that carnal men are dead; he means, not only
that they are without the operations, and motions, and sentiments of true life;
but that moreover they lie destitute of the faculty and power to act them.
Himself teaches it us expressly elsewhere. For as to their understanding, which
is the foremost and the ruling guide of all actions properly humane, he says
not simply, that it does not comprehend the things of GOD; but moreover, that
it cannot discern them. The natural man (says he) comprehends not the things
of the Spirit of GOD, 1 Cor. 2.14.
for they are foolishness unto him; neither can he understand them, forasmuch
as they are spiritually discerned. And as for the Affections, which are another
principle of human actions, he affirms likewise somewhere, that the affection
of the flesh is enmity against GOD; Romans 8.7. John 5.44.
that it is not subject to the law of GOD, nor indeed can be. Our Savior also
says of such as are in this miserable estate, that they cannot believe; and
one of his Prophets had said long before, Jer. 6.10. and 13.23.
that the ear of that people was uncircumcised; and that they could not
understand; and in general, that they could no more do any good, than the
Ethiopian change his skin, or the Leopard his spots.

But the Apostle here does further show us the quality and the cause of this
death under which we lay before the LORD did call us; Ye were dead (says he)
in offenses (that is, Ephesians. 2.1.
in your sins, as he expressly adds in the Epistle to the Ephesians) and in the
uncircumcision of your flesh. I acknowledge, this word is sometimes taken in the
Scripture for the external condition of the Gentiles; and circumcision, on the
contrary, for the state of the Jews; whence it comes, that these two terms are
used to signify, one of them the Gentiles, and the other the Jews; as when the
Apostle says elsewhere, that the preaching of the Gospel to the uncircumcision
was committed unto him; and the circumcision unto Peter; that is, he received
the charge of publishing the Gospel to the Gentiles, and S. Peter to the Jews.
I confess also, that these Colessians to whom he writes, were by birth
Gentiles; so as it may be said of them, that they were dead in that miserable
heathenish estate they were sometime in. Yet I do not think that this is
intended by the Apostle in this place. For in that case, it would have been
sufficient to say simply, when ye were dead in uncircumcision, i. e. in
Paganism; and there would have been no need to add, as he does, in the
uncircumcision of your flesh. Besides, it is evident, it seems, that he makes
here a secret opposition between that uncircumcision whereof he speaks, and
that circumcision which the Colossians had received from the hand of JESUS
CHRIST, whereof he spoke immediately before, saying, that in JESUS CHRIST they
had been circumcised with a circumcision not made with hand, by putting off the
body of the sins of the flesh. Therefore as by circumcision in that passage, a
spiritual and mystical cutting off was signified; so in the Text, the Apostle
takes the word uncircumcision mystically, and not literally; for the internal
corruption of our nature, and (as he expressed it before) for the body of the
sins of the flesh; not simply, for the external condition and mark of Paganism.
Ye were dead in the uncircumcision of your flesh; that is, in the corruption of
your flesh; precisely in the same sense that Moses meant, when he commanded the
Israelites to circumcise the foreskin of their heart, that is, to cut off the
vices and corruption of their hearts. This mystical uncircumcision of the
flesh, is nothing else but the depravedness of our nature; the vices, and
perverse habitudes and qualities which have seized on all its faculties; the
blindness, error, and folly of the understanding; the disorder of the will, and
its adherence unto vanity, and false good things; the rebelliousness of the
appetites, and lusts (...) ^^inted with gall, and bitterest poison. This is
properly the princip (...) wherewith we all were struck before the vocation of
GOD. This is the cursed (...) from which it springs up in us. In the stirrings
and motions of this hateful source, which boils incessantly in us, and casts up
filth continually, does this spiritual death consist. And I confess, in this
respect, there is a difference between the condition of the dead, commonly so
called; and the condition of these spiritually dead, whom the Apostle speaks
of. For the former, as they do no good, so neither do they any evil. Their
faculties are equally disabled to the one, and the other. Whereas these
spiritually dead men, have lost sense and motion, only in reference to that
which is good. They have both quick enough, but it is only in reference to
evil. They understand, they love, they desire, but altogether oppositely to
good; their thoughts and affections being full of error, extravagancy, and
malignity. As for true good, they neither comprehend it, nor discern it, nor
love it any more than (...) they had neither understanding, nor will at all.
Whence it follows, that whereas the deadness, the insensibility, and
unmovableness of other dead, is an innocent misery, deserving our pity, and not
our hate; these men's, on the contrary, is an evil infinitely culpable, and does
merit, not compassion, but abhorrence and execration, from every reasonable
creature. For that they neither do, nor can love GOD, does not proceed from
their being destitute of natural faculties of understanding and loving, but
from a strong and obstinate rebelliousness of those faculties; and from that
invincible passion which carries them to evil; John 5.44.
as our Savior shows us, when he says unto the Jews, How can you believe,
seeing that you seek honor one of another, and seek not the honor which comes
of GOD alone? An evident sign, that these wretched people's impotency to
believe, did come from nothing but their impiety, their stiff and inflexible
aversion from the glory of GOD, and that ardent and invincible affection they
had for vanity, and their own glory.

See then, beloved Brethren, what the condition of all men is, before the LORD
does effectually call them unto the grace of his Son. Where now are they, that
pretend they have the power of a free determination, and a will equally capable
of good and evil? that do hereupon contest, they can either convert them
themselves unto GOD (as said the Pelagians of old); or at least prepare
themselves for conversion, and dispose themselves for grace; as the greater
part of the Doctors of Rome, and with them some others also, do maintain at
this day? The Apostle blasteth all this pride in one word, when he says, that
we were dead in our sins, and in the uncircumcision of our flesh. If a dead man
be able to make himself alive, or to prepare himself for the reception of life,
by any actions that come from him, I will yield, that the error of these men is
not incompatible with the Doctrine of S. Paul. But since common sense assures
us, that the dead are deprived not of the actions alone, but also of the power
of life; and that there is nothing but a supernatural action of GOD, that is
able to restore them to the society of the living, so as they can contribute
nothing thereto themselves; we must needs either charge a falsh^od upon the
Apostle, who says, that before Grace, we are dead in our sins; or confess, in
consequence of his Doctrine, that men neither have, nor can have of themselves,
any action or disposition unto spiritual life; and that the power of the hand
of GOD, working supernaturally in them by his grace, is the only strength that
raises them up out of this miserable state If their will be free, it is free
to evil only; which it embraces and follows most freely (I confess), that
is, most voluntarily, and without any constraint, taking all its delight
therein. If their understanding do act, it is for error, which it does
conceive, and most obstinately embrace. But as for the life of GOD, they have
not liberty, or light for it any more, John 6.44. and 8.36.
than if they had neither will nor understanding at all; according to that
which our Savior has taught us, saying, No man can come to me, except the
Father, who has sent me, draw him: and again, If the Son make you free, you
shall be free indeed. Without this, a man can have neither life nor liberty.

The Apostle clearly shows it, when having represented the death, wherein we
were, he adds, in the second part of our Text, that God has quickened us
together with CHRIST, having freely pardoned us all our offenses. For there is
no doubt, but we must refer this action unto GOD, of whom he just before was
saying, that He raised JESUS CHRIST from the dead. It is therefore the same
GOD, who raised up the chief Shepherd from the dead, that does also make alive
his faithful flock, bringing them our of that spiritual and eternal death into
which we are naturally sunk; and putting them into a celestial and immortal
life. As there is none but He, that could inspire and quicken that dust of
which He formed us at first; so there is again none but He, that can expel out
of our flesh that death which has seized on it, and restore that life which
sin has extinguished in us. Both the one and the other vivification is the
work of His hand alone. Yet to say, as truth is, it is needful for Him to put
forth more might in the second of them, than He did in the first. For if that
handful of earth of which He created Adam, had no disposition at all to that
form and life which He put in it; yet at least it had no repugnancy thereto;
whereas besides that He now finds in us no disposition to an heavenly life,
He meets with (over and above) resistance and contrariety; a spirit of
rebellion a^^mating the whole mass of our flesh, which He must necessarily cast
out, that celestial life may be infused. Now as that Death, in which we lay,
does comprehend two things; namely first, the corruption of a nature destitute
of all just and rational apprehensions and motions; and secondly, the guilt of
sin, and an oblig^tion to eternal punishment: In like manner that life to which
GOD calls us by his grace, does consist in two particulars; first, a
restoration of His Image in us, by the infusion of principles and faculties of
true life; and secondly, the remission of our sins. The Apostle here does
briefly speak of them both; of the first, in saying, that GOD has quickened us
together with CHRIST: of the second, in adding, that he has freely pardoned us
all our sins.

For the first, GOD has quickened us, in that, delivering us from the death we
were under, he has put into us, by the grace of his Spirit, the principles of
an heavenly life, and formed in our breasts new hearts, hearts illuminated with
a new light, to wit, the good knowledge of his Truth, and of the mysteries of
his will. Then in the second place, by the virtue of this Divine flame, he
enkindleth in our souls the love of his most excellent Majesty, charity toward
our neighbor, u^^ection for just and honest things, zeal for his glory,
abhorrence and hatred of sin, and in a word, sanctification, and all the
virtues which it comprehends, that are the sproutings and productions of this
second, celestial, and happy life, which in his great mercy he conferreth on
us. From this new nature, as from a blessed root, do issue good and holy
actions, prayer, worshipping of GOD, frequent meditation, and reading of his
word, ecstasies of love to him, travels for his glory, sufferings for his Name
sake, relieving, instructing, assisting of our Neighbor, and such others that
are as it were the flowers and fruits; in the production whereof, that life,
which GOD has given us in his Son, does properly consist. It Is the same thing
that the Apostle elsewhere compriseth in few words, saying, Ephesians. 2.10. and 4.24.
that we are the workmanship of GOD, being created in JESUS CHRIST unto good
works, which GOD has prepared, that we should walk in them. And again in
another place, that our new man (that is, the second nature, which he forms
in us, when he quickneth us by his grace) is created after GOD in true
righteousness and holiness. The holy Spirit being rich and magnificent in its
expressions, does explain this admirable and blessed operation of the grace of
GOD in us, by diverse terms, taken from different resemblances, but all
amounting to the same sense. For to set it forth, it says not only, as here,
that GOD has quickened us; but also, Ephesians. 2.10. 1 Pet. 1.3. Ezekiel. 36.26. Jer.
31.33. Romans 11 23. Col. 1.13. 1 Cor 3.6. Acts 16.4. Phil. 2.13.
that He has created us; and in another place, that He has begotten us again;
the same is meant when it says, that GOD takes out of us our hearts of stone,
and gives us hearts of flesh, in which he writes his laws: that He renews us,
and forms us into new creatures, or new men; that He graffeth us by his power
into the true olive: that He translateth us out of the kingdom of darkness,
into his mavelous light: that it is He who gives increase, the Ministers of
the Word being nothing: that He opens our hearts, and works in us
effectually both to will and to do of his good pleasure: and other like phrases
which are found here and there in the Scriptures.

But the Apostle adds here, that GOD has thus quickened us together with
CHRIST; showing us, by these words, the cause and the manner of our
vivisication; namely, that it was effected in JESUS CHRIST, and with Him, and
by Him. For as that death which we heretofore bore in our selves, does come
from Adam, the stock and original of our carnal being, who by destroying
himself, destroyed us also with him; and corrupting his own nature, corrupted
ours likewise; so as it is in him and from him that we inherit this misery: in
like manner, on the contrary, that life which we have now received from GOD,
does come from JESUS CHRIST, the stock and root of the new nature; who raising
up himself unto life, raised us up also, according to what the Apostle says
elsewhere, viz. that as all dye in Adam, so likewise in JESUS CHRIST are all
made alive. But this assertion of his here, that GOD has quickened us together
with CHRIST, 1 Cor. 15.22.
does particularly refer to his resurrection; as if GOD, in restoring him to
that glorious life, which he received at his issuing out of the Sepulcher, had
at the same time given us also part therein. And he speaks in this manner, for
two reasons principally. The first is, because it was then, that JESUS CHRIST
brought to light that blessed life whereof we have been made partakers; and
from him, as from its source, has it been derived unto us; so as that same
time was the day of our new birth as well as his. For if he had not been made
alive, no more should we have ever been. Not but that the Father all had the
might and power that was necessary to give us life again. But his Justice could
not have suffered him to give life to any of the sons of men, if their Surety
and Mediator had abode under death. The second reason is, That he being our
Head, and we his Members; he our Pattern, and we Copies, drawn (if I may so
say) from his Original; when GOD raised him, he re-enliven'd us also by the
same means; since by this action he obliged himself to vivifie us likewise; it
being evident, that without this, we should not have that conformity with our
Head, to which he predestined us. Not to mention, for the present, the
efficacy this Resurrection has, to form in us faith, and hope, and love of
glorious immortality, which are the principles of that new life that GOD does
put into us by his Spirit; as we intimated in the exposition of the precedent
Verse.

There remains now the other part of this blessed life which GOD gives us in
his Son, namely, the remission of our sins. S. Paul sets it before us here,
when he says, that GOD has freely pardoned us all our sins. For the Spirit of
Sanctification, which is as the soul of that new life he creates in our
hearts, does indeed turn away our affections from vice, and obstruct our
committing of unjust, ungodly, and impure actions, wherein we wallowed before.
Yet this respects only the present and the future; and if there were no more,
the guilt of sins committed in time past, during our spiritual deadness, would
nevertheless remain in its strength; it being clear, that though the act of sin
be past, the faultiness wherewith it commaculates him who commits it, goes
not off so soon. It subsists still, both in the conscience of the sinner, if he
have any; and in the registers of the Justice of the Supreme Judge of the World,
binding over the sinner unto punishment. Whence it follows, that supposing a
man be perfectly cured of vicious habits and inclinations, yet would he
nevertheless be faulty, by reason of his fore-passed sins; and consequently
liable, upon this account, unto the curse; with which, and the terrors that
precede it, true life is so incompatible, that it is not imaginable a man in
such a state could ever resolve to serve GOD freely and sincerely. Therefore
GOD, that he may thoroughly quicken us, does not only deliver us from the
tyranny of vice, and of the flesh, by that Princely Spirit which he pours
into our inward parts; but moreover pardons us all the sins whereof we are
guilty; and it seems in very deed, if we do accurately observe the moments of
his action in us, that it is there he does begin, first remitting our former
offenses, to the end that the sense of this goodness of His, may cause us to
love him, and incline us to obey him, and conform our selves with all our might
unto his holy will.

The Apostle attributes unto this remission, two remarkable qualities. One,
that GOD forgiveth us all our offenses; that is, does not impute to us any of
our sins, either in whole, or in part; but treats us, as if we had committed
none at all. Another is, that he does it freely, and of mere grace (for so does
the word [giving] used here in the Original, properly signify; as our
Translation has well expressed, by rendering, He has freely forgiven us). The
Scripture tells us not of any other kind of pardon. For as to that which our
Adversaries do assert, to wit, whereby the fault is remitted, but the
punishment exacted either in whole, or in part; or is bought out with the
payment of our own satisfactions, or the satisfactions of others; it is a
figment of their own Schools, of which the Holy Ghost says nothing any where;
but represents unto us all that remission which GOD gives the faithful, either
at the beginning, or in the progress of their regeneration, as an entire
pardon, and purely gratuitous. As for that satisfaction, by which our LORD and
Savior obtained it for us, it is so far from any way diminishing, that it does
infinitely exalt the bounty of GOD toward us, since that he so loved us, as
that he might pardon our faults with the consent of his Justice, he would have
his only Son to shed his precious blood for the contenting thereof. This is
that we had to deliver upon this Text of the Apostle's.

Dear Brethren, Let us hold fast what it has taught us of the condition that
all men are naturally in, before GOD calls them to his grace. Let not their
outward appearance deceive you, nor the pleasures of their flesh, nor the
splendour of their pretended virtues, either civil or moral. All this is but a
false image of life, covering a carcass that is stinking, and abominable before
GOD. Make account that they are dead; and that if they walk, it is not a true
principle of life, but sin the poison of life, which does animate them, and set
them on working. The issue will one day clear it to us all; when the just
judgment of GOD, having stripped them of that fallacious disguise which now
hides the hideousness of their nature, shall show it before Heaven and Earth,
and make us plainly see, that they were but Sepulchers, whited without, and
full of filth and infection within; and cast them, thereupon, into that
wretched and eternal death, which is prepared for them with the Devil and his
Angels. Bless we GOD, who has delivered us from this perdition by his great
mercy; and hate we sin, and the corruption of the flesh, which had involved us
in it. Look we on them as pests and poisons that destroy our life; and reckon
we, that we have lived no more time than what has been exempted from our
serving of them. You deceive your self, Worldling, who count the days of your
unclean pleasures, or your vain honors, the best part of your life. To say
plainly, it was the time of your being dead, and not of your being alive. After
so many years, as you have tumbled up and down the earth, you have not yet
lived a moment. You have all along been in a state of death. And they that
write upon your Tombs, that you lived so many years, and died such a day, do
grossly err. You did not live, when you offended GOD and your Neighbor; or lost
your time in the filth of your infamous delights. And on the day that you shall
quit the earth, you will not cease to live (for to say true, you never lived);
but from one kind of death, you will pass into another; from the death of sin,
to a death of torment. Christians, if you love life, and hate horror at death,
renounce sin, and mortify your flesh. You cannot live, except it dye. Put in
exercise that noble life which the LORD has given you in his Son. Act
according to the Principles which he has put into you by his Spirit; and lay
forth continually in good and holy works, the Graces wherewith he has vested
you. Faithfully love and serve him. Let your minds meditate on nothing beside
him, your hearts desire none but him, your tongues speak only of him. Let the
contemplation of the wonders of his love, and the hopes of his glory, be the
whole food of your souls. Respect those men in whom you see his Image shine.
Affect them, and serve them for his sake, looking upon their lives, their
estates, their honor, their bodies, and souls, as sacred and inviolable
things. Endeavor to enrich them by communicating of your prosperities unto
them. Offend no man. Do good to all. Let your charity and your innocence be
conspicuous in the sight of GOD and Man. Faithful Brethren, This is that life,
truly worthy to be called life, which GOD does reward for the present with a
joy and contentment of Conscience, that is a thousand times more sweet and
savoury, than any of the vain delights of the world; and which he will crown
one day with that glorious Immortality he has promised. It Is for this that he
has vouchsafed to forgive us freely all our offenses, all those so many
horrible Crimes which had merited Hellfire; and is still ready to pardon all
the sins we have committed since. This so great and admirable loving kindness
of his tends only to withdraw us from sin, and oblige us to love and revere
so good a GOD. It Is for the self-same end that he has raised up his Son from
the dead, and enlivened us with him, giving us faith, hope, and charity, the
principles of a new life, even that henceforth renouncing sin, and the flesh,
and turning our hearts toward Heaven, where our treasure and our glory is, we
might live soberly, righteously, and godly in the present world, looking for
the blessed hope and appearing of the glory of our great GOD, and Savior JESUS
CHRIST. Amen.

The Twenty-fifth SERMON.
COL. CHAP. II. VER. XIV. Ver. xiv. Having effaced the obligation that was
against us, which lay in ordinances, and was contrary to us, and which he has
entirely abolished, having fastened it upon the cross.


DEar Brethren, That remission of sins which GOD gives to all those who
believe in his Gospel, is in truth, of it self, a great and inestimable grace.
For who sees not, but that it was an effect of a transcendent goodness in GOD,
to be willing to pardon such persons as had mortally offended him; and consent
to their happiness, who had obliged him, by their feloniousness and
ingratitude, to make them eternally miserable? But the manner in which he has
pardoned us, and the price that our grace has cost him, does infinitely
heighten the wonder of this benefit of his. For he has not forgiven us our
sins, by a single act of his will, as a Creditor remitteth a Debt to his
Debtor; because such a man having absolute power to dispose of his Estate, in
favor of whom he pleases, it is sufficient, for his doing of such a kindness,
that he will do it. With GOD it was not so, in the present affair. His Justice,
and the majesty of his Laws, were concerned in the favor he would show us, and
formed an opposition against it, withholding and staying the motion of his
Clemency toward us; so as his own sanctity permitting him not to despise the
voice of Reason, and the rights of Justice, for any one's sake whosoever, the
will he had to pardon us, was not sufficient alone, to bring it to effect. And
here it was, that his love to us did show it self admirable, and truly divine.
For seeing that sin could not be forgiven us, without satisfying that Justice
which we had violated; and on the other hand, that this inexorable Justice
could not be satisfied, but by the Cross of his only Son; this good and
merciful LORD did so affect our bliss, that to take away the legal impediments
which Justice laid in against it, he resolved to deliver up his Son to that
cruel and shameful death; as our Savior himself has declared in the Gospel,
John 3.16.
saying, that God so loved the world, as he gave his only begotten Son, that
whosoever believes in him should not perish, but have eternal life. Here then
properly is the highest pitch of this wonder, which does justly ravish men and
Angels; that the pardon of our sins, which GOD has given us, was bought at the
price of the death of his only beloved Son. And in truth, our consciences could
not have been assured of his grace without the same; Nature having planted in
our hearts so quick a sense of the right that GOD has against sins, as we
could not put an entire confidence in his mercy, until we might know, that his
Justice was contented and dis-interessed. Therefore the holy Apostle, having
represented to the faithful at Coloss, in the precedent Verse, the great favor
that GOD had showed them, in the free forgiving of their offenses, does now
adjoin the foundation of this remission, and the means by which it had been
obtained. He has forgiven you; having effaced (says he) the obligation which
was against us, that lay in ordinances, and was contrary to us, and which he
has entirely abolished, having fastened it to the cross. By this consideration
he gives them to see the greatness of this benefit of GOD; and does assure
their consciences against all the doubts that the rigor of the Law might raise
in them; and particularly, against the contendings of those false Teachers who
would make them believe, that the grace of JESUS CHRIST was not sufficient for
their salvation, except they did moreover submit to observe the ceremonies of
Moses. This shall be, by the will of GOD, the subject of this Exercise, and for
the giving you a full understanding of this Text, we will consider two things
in it.

First, What this obligation is, whereof he speaks, that lay in Ordinances, and
was contrary to us. And

Secondly, How GOD did efface it, abolish it, and fasten it to the Cross of His
Son.

It Is a similitude very ordinary in Scripture, to liken Sin unto a Debt; whence
comes that phrase, which is so common in the language of GOD, and of the
Church, of the remitting or acquitting of sin, for the pardoning of it. Our
Savior used it, in the prayer he gave us, where the petition for the pardon of
our sins, is conceived in these words in the Gospel of S. Matthew, Acquit us
our debts, Mat. 6.12. Luke 11.4.
as we also acquit them to our debtors; that is to say (as S. Luke has
interpreted it), Forgive us our sins, as we forgive them that owe us, or that
have offended us. This form of speech was so ordinary among the Chaldees and
Syrians, that they put the word Debtor for Sinner, or a guilty person, as
appears by the ancient Chaldee-Paraphrase upon the Psalms, which says, Psalm.
1.1.
Blessed is the man that stands not in the way of debtors, instead of saying,
sinners; as the Hebrew Text of the first Psalm does import. And our LORD used
the same word in this sense, when upon speech of certain Galileans, whose blood
Pilate had cruelly mingled with their sacrifices, he says, Think you that they
were more debtors than other Galileans? that is, more culpable, Luke 13.4.
as the French has it. Thus also must we take it in that tradition of the
Scribes and Pharisees, reported by S. Matthew; He that has sworn by the gift
which is upon the altar, he owes, or is a debtor; that is, he sins, or is
culpable. The reason of this Metaphor is founded upon the resemblance of the
things themselves, debt and sin having some conformity. For as the one obliges
the debtor unto payment, the other obliges the sinner unto punishment. And as
a debt does give the Creditor a certain power over his Debtor; in like manner
does sin give unto GOD, or unto the Magistrate, over the offender. For he has
a just power to punish the sinner, as a Creditor has to make his Debtor pay;
though otherways, as we said not long since, there be some difference between
the powers of the one, and the other: public Justice being concerned in the
punishing of an offender; whereas in a debtor's making payment, it is not so;
whence it comes, that debts may remain unpaid, if the private person, to whom
they are due, be pleased to remit them: whereas Justice does not leave a sin
unpunished, though the offended party does quit his interest to the offender.
And this difference is seen in human affairs; where you know, that for the
exempting of a Criminal from punishment, it is not enough he do content his
Adversary, except the Prince, who is Guardian of the Law, and the Conservator
of public Justice, do give him an abolition of his crime. But setting aside
this difference, there is in other respects such an analogy between a debt, and
sin, as the name of the one is justly applied to signify the other. This
similitude is the cause that S. Paul here gives the name of an [Obligation] to
the Law, or Testament of Moses.

The word he makes use of in the Original, does signify generally any
acknowledgment written, or at least signed with our hand, by which we confess
our selves to owe a man such or such a sum; and oblige our selves to pay him it
at such time, and in such manner, as we have agreed upon. Such are those which
be commonly called Bills and Schedules. But because of all Contracts of this
kind, an Obligation that passes before Notaries with certain solemn forms, is
the most juridical, the French Bible has made use of the name thereof in
particular. An obligation then in Civil matters, is a Creditor's Title, and an
evidence of the power he has upon his Debtor, to convince him of his debt, and
compel him to make payment, if he do refuse. It Is an authentic testimony of
his owing such a sum, which condemns him to pay, and makes his body and goods
liable in this behalf unto his Creditor. Whence it appears, that this
Obligation whereof the Apostle speaks in the Text, is the instrument of our
condemnation, and an authentic declaration and demonstration of our sin, which
gives valid testimony that we are guilty, and subjecteth us by this means to
the avenging Justice of GOD, giving him a clear and undisputable right to
prosecute and punish us. All agree, that the word Obligation must be so taken
in this passage of the Apostle. But when question is of founding the bottom,
and of determining what properly and precisely the thing is, to which this
quality agrees, and whereunto S. Paul's meaning was to give it, there is found
some difference among Expositors; some conceiving it one particular, and others
another. I will not stay to report their several opinions, it being no way
necessary for your edification. I will content my self with representing to you
that sense which I account the truest, and which has likewise been followed by
diverse eminent servants of GOD. I say then, that this Obligation, whereof the
Apostle speaks, is no other thing than the old Law, given in time past to the
Israelites by the Ministry of Moses, and of them accepted at Mount Sinai. This
appears, first, from S. Paul's saying, that this obligation lay in ordinances.
For every one knows, that this does properly belong to the Law of Moses, which
consisted in a great many moral, ceremonial, and political Ordinances. The
Jews, who are very exact and scrupulous in such matters, reckon them up to Six
hundred; R. Moses ben Majm.
and their learned Authors divide them into fourteen Classes or ranks. The
whole body of these Ordinances is precisely the Law of Moses; so as it is
evident, it is this Law the Apostle means; since he says, that what he means,
lay in ordinances. He thus explains it himself, in a passage that has great
alliance with the Text in hand; where speaking of the re-uniting of the
Gentiles with the Jews into one only people, done by our LORD JESUS CHRIST; he
says, that he abolished the enmity in his flesh, to wit, (says he) the law of
commandments, which lay in ordinances; where it is evident, that he signifies
the Law of Moses, both by those express words, the law of commandments; and
also by the nature of the thing it self; it being certain, that this enmity of
the Jews and Gentiles (that is, the thing which separated them before our
Savior's dispensation) was naught else but the Mosaical Law, which the one of
them had, and the other had not. The same appears again clearly, from that
conclusion which the Apostle inferrs from this Doctrine, in the sixteenth, and
the following Verses of this Chapter. For from his position here, namely, That
the obligation which is in ordinances has been effaced; he concludes, that
none ought to condemn us in eating, or in drinking, or in distinguishing of a
Festival, or of a new Moon, or of Sabbaths; and again, that it is impertinent
for any to burden us with ordinances, such as are, Eat not, Col. 2.21.
taste not, touch not. Now every one sees, that these ordinances do make up a
part of the Law of Moses. Certainly then, it is that Law he does mean here,
because otherwise it would not follow, from the abolishing of our obligation,
that we are no longer subject to such things.

But the truth of this interpretation will be fully perceived by an exposition
of the Apostle's own words themselves, there being no other subject but the
Mosaical Law, to which all the circumstances and qualities he here attributes
to it, do properly agree. First, He terms it, an obligation against us.
Secondly, He says, that it lay in ordinances. In the third place, he adds,
that it was contrary to us. And finally, in the fourth and last place, he
says, that it has been effaced, abolished, and fastened to the cross; things
these, which cannot, all of them together, be verified of any other subject.
First, The Law of Moses was an obligation against such as lived under its
dispensation; that is (as we have explained it), an evidence and ^^^alible
argument of their sin, and of the just power that GOD had to condem them unto
punishment. For the Law of Moses proclaiming aloud, that all such as failed to
observe any one of its ordinances, are accursed; it is manifest, that they all
who accepted it for the terms of their Covenant with GOD, did by the same pass
condemnatory sentence on themselves, and submit to the curse; both the
conscience of each one in particular, and the common experience of all in
general; showing, that there was not a man who punctually observed all things
written in the Law. And as he that passes an obligation to his Creditor, does
condemn himself to make payment; and if he fail therein, does make his goods,
and sometimes his very person, liable unto him; in like manner, they that
received the Law, and signed it (if I may so say) after they had heard and
understood it; these, I say, condemned themselves unto the curse of GOD, and
did put their persons, and all their goods, into the hands of Divine Justice;
since it is clear, that none of them did ever fully satisfy all the clauses
which that Contract does contain. Therefore as a Bond given by a Debtor to his
Creditor in acknowledgment of what he ows him, is an obligation, which makes it
clearly appear, that he is responsible to him, and deprives him of all excuse,
and leaves him no defense to the contrary: So the Law of Moses is an authentic
obligation, which demonstrates, and invincibly proves, that the sinner is
guilty, and liable to the avenging Justice of GOD, without having any
considerable means left him to defend himself from that punishment; which it
ordains for all such as violate its commands. As for the ceremonies, I grant,
they promised, in appearance, some satisfying of the Justice of GOD, and some
expiation of sin, inasmuch as they prefigured the mysteries of CHRIST who was
to come. But at the bottom, and in themselves, they contained no such thing in
effect. On the contrary, they were so many obligations upon a sinner, openly
testifying, that he stood obnoxious to the Justice of GOD. For the aspersions,
and purifications that were made by washing, or pouring water upon men, did
evidently show, that such as received them, were defiled and unclean. And
Circumcision was a public confession of the impurity of our nature, which did
declare that it needed to be cut or retrenched. And they that offered Beasts to
be slain for sacrifices, did by that very act acknowledge they had deserved
death. Those that observed the Fasts, and other mortifications of the Law, did
protest they were unworthy to use the Creatures of GOD. And thus it was in the
rest of their Ceremonies. All their devotions of this nature were either images
of the punishment they deserved, or an avouchment of their guiltiness, and so
many proofs and convictions of their sin. For to imagine, that these carnal
Ceremonies did truly expiate their offenses, was not possible for them to do;
both by reason of the absurdity and extravagancy of the thing it self; and also
for that GOD had a thousand times advertised them of the contrary, by the mouth
of his Prophets.

So you see, in my opinion, clearly, how all the Law of Moses was no other than
an obligation against us, an instrument of our condemnation, an evidence of our
sin, and a justification of our punishment. Wherefore the Apostle elsewhere
calls it, in the same sense, and for the same reason, the ministration of
death, 2 Cor. 3.7, 9.
and of condemnation; because, in effect, it did properly serve only to form,
and prosecute, and finish the sinners arraignment; as affording full
demonstration both of his guilt, and of the penalty due to him; giving in
evidence concerning his crimes, and making known the Justice of GOD in judging
and punishing him. And hereto must be referred what he elsewhere notifies,
namely, Romans 3 7. Gd. 3 1^. Romans 7.^.
that by the law was given the knowledge of sin; and that it was added because
of transgression; and again, that without the law he had not known sin.

As for what the Apostle adds here in the second place, That this obligation
of which he speaks, does lie in Ordinances, we have touched at it already, and
referred it to that large multitude of Commandments wherein it consists. For
I do not see, that any thing does oblige us to restrain this clause to the
Ordin^^^^s of the Ceremonial Law, as some do. It comprehends generally all
that the Law Ordains, of what kind or rank soever it be. And it seems to me,
that the Apostle's scope and aim does so require: For he urges, GOD's having
^bolish'd that obligation which consisted in Ordinances, to prove, that he has
freely p^^doned our offenses, which he had been saying. Why? and how (...)?
Because (says he^, or inasmuch as he has cancelled, by the cross of his Son,
the obligation that was against us, Verily it seems, that this reason will be
beside the purpose, if the obligation that was made void, were not that of the
whole Law; as the offenses which have been forgiven us, in consequence of the
abolishing of this obligation, are generally all sins committed against any
part of the Law whichsoever, and not only transgr^ssions of the Ceremonial
Ordinances. And whereas the Apostle, in the following Verses, does argue from
this Doctrine against the Ceremonies only; who knows not, that it is ordinary
to reason from the whole, unto one of the parts? As when elsewhere, in the
Epistle to the Galatians, having laid it down in general, that the Law of M^ses
cannot at all justify us; he thence infers against the seducers, that by
c^nsequence, neither circumcision nor the other ceremonies can have this
virtue: just as in this place having settled this principle, that the Mosaic
Law was abolished by the Cross of our Savior; he afterward does with reason
thence conclude, that we are no longer obliged to its ancient Ceremoni^s.

But the Apostle says, in the third place, that this obligation whereof he
speaks was contrary to us. This, as you see, does also suit well with the Law.
Of it self I confess, it is good, and holy, and prontable, and salutiferous
unto man, as that that would lead him unto ^e: But it is become contrary to us,
through cause of sin, whereof we are all guilty. For it serves to convict us of
it; as an Obligation, which being produced in judgment, stops the mouth of an
unfaithful Debtor. It is as it were our Adversary, that impleadeth us, and lays
open our crimes, and brings upon us that condemnation to which we have
submitted, in accepting and signing it. And as for its Ceremonies, besides that
they witnessed the sin of those who practiced them, as we have said; they were
also contrary to us in another kind; even as putting a new yoke upon us, which
through their vast multitude and diversity was heavy and unsupportable. Yet it
must be observed, that this seems not to be proper^y the thing which the
Apostle intends here; the word he makes use of in the Original, (...).
signifying, that this obligation was not simply contrary to us, but contrary
in some sort. I think then, that by this word he prevents an Objection that
might be made him. For though the Law, might some one say, be an obligation
against us; yet is it nevertheless useful, since it shows us our sin and
misery; and by that means, forces us to have recourse to the mercy of GOD,
that we may seek our salvation in his Grace alone; which was in effect the true
end for which GOD gave it to the Israelites. The Apostle granting this as a
truth does affirm, That this obligation was notwithstanding, in some fort,
contrary to us. For first, It telling us only of obeying, or being punished,
and thundering out on all hands that dreadful voice, Cursed is every one that
continu^th not in all things written in the law, to do them; did darken the
clearness of the grace of GOD, and perplex poor sinners, filling them with
affrightments, and hind^ing them from full discerning of the clemency and mercy
of the LORD. Then^^g in it aggravated their pains by its ceremonies; the true
scope of which, it was at that time very difficult to comprehend aright. And
lastly, It shut the gate of the House of GOD against the Gentiles, of whose
number the Colossians were; it being as an enterclose, that separated them from
his people, and consequently cloigned them from his grace and p^rdon, which he
gives not to any but such as are in his Covenant. If therefore it were not
absolutely contrary to us, yet it cannot however be denied, but that it was so
in some sort.

In fine, the Apostle says, that this obligation which was against us, has
been effaced, and entirely abolished, and fastened to the Cross; which also
agrees very p^^per'y to the Law of Moses, of which S. Paul teaches constantly
ev ry where, that it was disannulled and abrogated by the death of the LORD
JESUS, to make room for the Gospel, according to the Oracles of the Prophets,
that GOD would make a new Covenant with his people. Here is then the second
head of our intended matter, upon which we are to consider, how GOD has
abolished this obligation which was against us, by the Cross of his Son. He
tells us two things concerning it; the one, That this obligation is made void:
the other, That it is by the Cross of CHRIST it was made so. He expresses the
former of these with great elegancy, as his manner is; using three most
significant terms, all of them taken from the nature of civil promises and
obligations, in pursuance of the similitude he began with. First, he says,
that this obligation has been effaced. For so it is ordinary with men to do;
when they have a debt paid them up, they efface the name of their debtor, that
was upon their Books, and the sum which he owed them. The Apostle says, that
GOD has done the same in reference to us; that he has effaced this obligation
of our mystical debt, which was written in his Law, and signed in our
particular Consciences. And this term has the greater elegancy in this place,
because there did intervene, for our acquitting, some such thing as men are
wont to do. For they strike out their debtors promises with some liquor, as
Ink, or the like; which they draw over the lines of their writings. So was our
obligation made null by the effusion of a liquor, to wit, the blood of JESUS
CHRIST, which was poured forth, as may be said, from the Cross, upon that
dismal Book of the Law, for the effacing all the clauses of our condemnation in
it. For as to the writing of men, Ink is enough to blot it out. But there was
nothing, save the Blood of the Son of GOD, that was able to efface this doleful
writing of the Law, wherein the sentence of our death was contained. Now it
seems, that this should be sufficient to assure a debtor, even the telling him
that his obligation is effaced. Yet the Apostle contents not himself; he
adds, that ours has been taken out of the way, or abolished. Thus you know,
among men, they that are exact and punctual, do not only efface their debtors
writings, they tear them, and reduce them to pieces, that no sign of their debt
may remain. GOD has done so toward us. He has not only effaced the
obligation he had against us; He would not have so much as the rasures of it to
appear. He has disannulled it, and abolished it, and rent it with the nails of
his Son's Cross. He has (says the Apostle) fastened it to the Cross. It is not
possible to say any thing that should be better or more elegant. Those same
nails, and those same thorns that pierced the body of our LORD upon that fatal
Tree, whereon he dyed for us, did by the same means tear and cut in pieces the
obligation which was against us, that evidence of our debt, and instrument of
our death; that is to say, in sum, the Cross of JESUS CHRIST has disarmed the
Law, and divested it of that killing-force which it had against us naturally,
and reduced it to such an estate, that we being under the covert of his Cross,
it can no more harm us, than if all the Letters of it were estaced, and its
Papers rent in sunder. This divine crucified Person has, by dying himself,
made the Law dye: and that which does sometime fall out in the combats of men,
has been the event here; both the Combatants, even CHRIST and the Law,
remained dead upon the place. The Law slew our LORD; who went unto this combat
for us, to the end he might take and bear the terrible blows, the thundrings
and lightnings of our principal enemy. But he has also bereaved the Law of
life, and left it in the same estate it had reduced him to; though indeed with
huge disserence in the issue. For our LORD raised up himself from that death
which he received and suffered for us, rising again the third day gloriously
alive; whereas the Law shall never resume the life, or the strength, which he
has deprived it of. It shall remain for ever in that death he has given it.
This is that the Apostle teaches us very clearly elsewhere, when he says,
that JESUS CHRIST having been made a curse for us, has redeemed us from the
curse of the law. Gal. 3.13.
His wounds have been our cure, his death our life, and his curse our bliss.
The blood which issued out of his sacred body, did blot out the sentence of our
condemnation; and the blows, which pierced him, did break in pieces the
instrument of our ruin.

Now this great and admirable effect which S. Paul attributes to the Cross of
CHRIST, does furnish us with a clear proof of his Satisfaction. For if his
death were nothing but an example of patience and humility, to what purpose
says this holy Apostle, that the obligation which was against us, was
abolished, and fastened to his cross? Who sees not, but that by this account
the Cross of our LORD would have done the Law no harm at all? That his Blood
would have been so far from making void our obligation, as it would not have
made so much as the least rasure in it? What does his death contribute to my
deliverance from that curse under which this fatal writing puts me, if he dyed
only to give me a noble pattern of constancy, and not to discharge my debts?
The Saints have verily suffered for our example; and their deaths are patterns
of our patience. Yet it cannot be found, that the Prophets or Apostles ever
said of them, by reason of it, that the obligation which was against us, has
been made void by their death; or that the evils which they suffered, have
redeemed us from the curse of the Law. And besides the blasphemousness of it,
it would render a man evidently ridiculous, to give such language of them, or
to say of them as the Scriptures speak of the LORD alone, that they have born
our sicknesses, and carried our dolours, and been pierced for our
transgressions, and bruised for our iniquities; and that the chastisement of
our peace was upon them, and by their stripes we are healed. Conclude we
therefore, that he verily dyed in our stead; and did satisfy, on his Cross,
the Justice of the Father for us. For this being presupposed, as the Scripture
teaches, there is no longer any difficulty; and it is clear, that his Cross
did strike out and abolish the obligation that was kept in the Cabinet of GOD
against us, and which alone had the right and power to destroy us. As when a
Surety pays the sum, which the man he has given security for, does owe; he
voids the Obligation that had been made to the Creditor about it (and by virtue
whereof he was to be put in prison), of all the force it had to endamage him.
He effaceth it, cancels it, and makes it null. He renders useless all the
preparatives of Justice against his friend. He puts the Adversary, and all his
Advocates, to silence. He stops the mouth of the Judge, that was even open to
decree against him. He stays the Serj^ants, and secures his liberty from their
outrages. This is just the thing our LORD and Savior has done for us. But
what, say I, he has done thus for us? He has done for us infinitely more than
all that this comes to. Death and the Curse were due to us, as the wages of our
sins. The sentence of it was written in ^he obligation of the Law, which we our
selves had signed, and wherein we had submitted to this penalty. The Judge was
ready, and Execution could not be avoided. The LORD JESUS, moved with
compassion, and sent by the goodness of the Father, puts himself in our room,
as Surety and Mediator for us. He pays what we did owe. He suffers on the Cross
the punishment we deserved. His Cross therefore has struck out that
redoubtable obligation which was against us. He has abolished and made it of
no effect. He has broken all the forces it was going to raise against us. He
has pacified our Judge, coufounded our Accusers, staid the Officers and
Ministers of Justice, and saved our persons from the fetters and torments which
were prepared for us. But hence again appears how vain the error of those is,
who pretend that GOD does but half-pardon our sins; that having remitted unto
us the fault, he does exact of us part of the punishment, and make us suffer
it, either in this life here, or after death, in a certain partition of Hell,
which they call Purgatory. How could they more rudely clash with the Apostle's
Doctrine? He says, that GOD has effaced, cancelled, and abolished the
obligation which was against us. These men affirm, that he still makes us pay
some part of our debt. Sure then our obligation is not yet torn. It Is a thing
unheard of in the course of Justice, to bring an Action against that Debtor
whose Obligation you have effaced. If it be torn, if it be made void, and of no
effect, you have no longer any right to draw him before the Judge, much less to
get him condemned to pay. If GOD, who does nothing but according to Justice,
should make us pay any part of the penalties of our sins, which he has
forgiven us; the Obligation, by virtue whereof he condemns us, is still in
its full force. But the Apostle protests, that it has been effaced, and
remains blotted, and nailed to the Cross of CHRIST for ever. The Obligation
which was against us, imported all the punishments both temporal and eternal,
that we were obnoxious unto. It is voided, and nulled. We therefore do no
longer owe any of them. Fear not, Christian; you have to do with a faithful
Creditor. Having remitted to you your debt, yea, cancelled the evidence of it,
and torn the Obligation; he has no intent at all, after all this, to demand
any part of it of you. I confess, that the payment JESUS CHRIST has made, is
of no use to such as remain in unbelief; and though he has, in point of right,
nulled the Obligation which was against us; yet their ingratitude and
infidelity is a cause that they have no benefit from this kindness of his: Even
as the unthankfulness and obdurateness of that servant, of whom we are told in
that Parable in the Gospel, did deprive him of the favor his Master had showed
him, in forgiving the ten Talents he owed. For GOD has affixed this reasonable
condition to the Covenant of Grace, which he has made with Mankind, that the
payment of our Debts made by our Surety, should not be allowed to any, but
those that believe; so as they that obstinately abide in incredulity, have no
share in that impunity, or in those other benefits which this great Mediator
has obtained for us. But as to the man that believes, and by a true faith
applies applies to himself the death, and blood, and merit of the LORD JESUS,
there is no more any condemnation for him, Romans 8.1.
as the Apostle elsewhere says; nor, by consequence, any punishment: the
obligation, by virtue whereof alone he could be condemned at the Tribunal of
GOD, having been effaced, abolished, and fastened to the Cross of his Savior.

Thus you see, Beloved Brethren, what that grace of GOD is which the Apostle
has here made known, and by what means we may get part in it. Sinners, you
that groan under the heavy load of your crimes; that feel your misery, and
perceive the cords of that damnation in which the Law does entangle you, come
unto the Cross of CHRIST, and you shall find rest to your souls. Your
consciences accuse you, and compel you to subscribe your own condemnation,
acknowledging the justness thereof. But how just soever it be, the Cross of
JESUS freeth you from it; forasmuch as it has fully fatish'd for you, Beware
of the error both of the ancient and the modern Pharisees, who pretend ability
to pay what they owe, and even more than they owe; and to justify themselves
by their works, that is by the Law. The Law is the instrument of our
condemnation, and the ministration of our death: and a man, that would be
justified by the Law, commits no less an extravagance, than he, that to prove
he owes nothing, should produce in Judgment the Bills and Bonds he has given
his Creditors. Confess you your debts. Divest your selves of all presuming upon
your own righteousness. Declare, that of your selves you are bound over to
eternal malediction; that you have deserved it: and do present your selves
naked before GOD, who justifies the ungodly. He will clothe you with the
righteousness of his Son. And you, Faithful Brethren, who are already entered
into this blessed Covenant, Live ye in peace, and quietly wait for the fruit of
your faith, according to the promises of GOD. Let not the thundrings and
lightnings of the Law make you afraid. Let not that death, with which it so
severely menaceth the sons of men, terrify you at all. Let not World or
Devils, the Executioners of its Justice, astonish you. JESUS CHRIST has
brought to naught all their strength, by effacing the obligation that was
against us. Satan, thou cruel enemy of our repose, object not to us our sins.
We confess, they are greater, and yet more grievous than thou can express.
Lay not before us that clause of our old Covenant, which puts all that have
sinned under the curse. We confess, we have merited this curse. But know,
Satan, if we have deserved death, JESUS CHRIST has suffered it for us; and if
we have committed sins worthy of thine Hell, the Blood of the Son of GOD has
blotted them out. His Cross has made void that old piece upon which thou
make such a clamor; that rough obligation, with which thou incessantly
threatnest us. How have thou the insolency to accuse those whom GOD justifies?
and to condemn those for whom the Son of GOD dyed and rose again? It Is thus,
Dear Brethren, that we must repel the tentations of the enemy, and maugre his
assaults, possess in peace the loving kindness of GOD, adoring his bounty, and
ardently employing our selves to his glory. For this is the scope and the end
of his grace. He has acquitted us of all our debts, and made void the
obligation which was upon them; that we being ravished with a Goodness so
divine, might love him with all our strength, and all our soul, according to
that veritable Maxim, acknowledged by Simon in the Gospel, He to whom much is
forgiven, Luke 7.43. Luke 1. 74, 75
ougth to love much. He has delivered us, by his Son, out of the hand of our
enemies, that we might serve him without fear, in holiness and righteousness
before him all the days of our life. And indeed, how can we have the heart,
either not to love at all, or to love but coldly, a GOD who is so good to us?
who seeing us overwhelmed in debt, has freely forgiven us all? has made void
the obligation; and for the razing out, and making void the same, spent the
blood of his only begotten Son; and for the rending it in pieces, suffered his
Divine Body to be all rent with strokes. After a goodness so ravishing, must
not that man be worse than a Devil who loves not this Father, who has given us
his Son; and this Son, who has by his death obtained our salvation? Oh how
much reason had the Apostle to count him execrable, who loves not this great
Savior! 1 Cor. 16.22.
If any man (says he) love not the LORD JESUS CHRIST, let him be anathema
maranatha. GOD forbid there should be any so wretched and odious a person in
the midst of us. Yet if any be, sure he believes not of our Savior, what he
makes profession to believe. For it is not possible to believe him, without
loving him.

Let us love him then, and faithfully serve him, setting his Name and Honor
above all the Interests of the World, and our Flesh. Let us obey his holy
Discipline, and conform all that life unto his will, which we hold not but by
his grace. Let us imitate that Divine Pattern he has left us, diligently
walking in humility, and patience, and charity, whereof he has given us so
great and so admirable examples. Let us have compassions and tendernesses for
our Brethren, that may resemble those which he has had for us. He has
pardoned us all our sins, and quitted to us all our debts. He has shed his
blood, to blot out the obligation that was against us. He dyed on a Cross, that
he might thereunto nail up, and for ever abolish all the instruments of our
condemnation. Having experienced so great a goodness toward our selves, how
can we dare to have so little toward others? to be obdurate to them, and
implacable, when they have offended us? cruel and inexorable, when they owe us
any thing? He has forgiven us Talents, and we exact of them even Farthings. He
has pardoned us a thousand and a thousand crimes. We retain against them the
slightest offenses. What shall we answer, when he one day shall say to us,
Behold I have forgiven thee all this great debt at thy request; should not
thou also have had pity on thy fellow servants, as I had pity on thee? Without
doubt, my Brethren, we should. It is a duty too just, and too reasonable for us
to fail in. If yet our flesh oppose, let us pray the LORD, to subdue it to his
will by the power of his Spirit; granting us to do what he commands; that after
we have had part here below, in his Grace, and in his Sanctification, we may
one day participate, on high, of his Eternal Glory. So be it.

The Twenty-sixth SERMON.
COL. CHAP. II. VER. XV. Ver. xv. Having spoiled principalities and powers,
which he publicly made a show of, triumphing over them on that Cross.


DEar Brethren, The Cross of our LORD CHRIST, which, at the first preaching of
the Gospel, was a scandal to the Jews, and the scorn of Gentiles, is in truth
the greatest mystery of the Wisdom of GOD, and matter of highest admiration to
Angels and men. In it, the Supreme Majesty has mixed together, with
incomprehensible art, and reconciled most contrary and most incompatible
things, death and life, ignominy and glory, condemnation and absolution, defeat
and victory. The Devil having put it in the heart of Judas, to betray JESUS;
and pushed on the Princes of the Jews to take him, and deliver him to Pilate,
who condemned him, and caused him to dye a cruel death upon a Cross; this
mortal Enemy of our salvation seemed to have got the day, inasmuch as by his
artifices he had brought the Prince of Life to so shameful an execution. But it
succeeded quite otherwise. The blow he gave our LORD, struck himself; and our
Savior, by suffering of death, overthrew for ever all the power of the Devil;
as Sampson, the Hero of Israel, who when he dyed, pulled down, and involved in
the same ruins some thousands of his enemies. This Cross, on which JESUS hung,
was, to say truth, the instrument of his glory, rather than of his ignominy;
and the trophee of his victory, rather than the gibbet of his execution. He
suffered death on it, I grant; but a death that lasted no longer than three
days, and got him immortality; whereas he there defeated and ruined the Devil,
and all our Enemies, without recovery. It Is this the Apostle represents to us
in the Text, where in connection with that he had said before, namely, that the
LORD effaced the obligation which is contrary to us, and abolished it, and
fastened it to the cross; he now adds, Having spoiled principalities and powers,
which he publicly made a show of, triumphing over them on the cross. Good GOD!
what a change is this! He tells us of the death of CHRIST, the most painful,
the most shameful, and most execrable punishment in the world, as of a triumph;
and does not stick to compare that fatal Tree whereon he suffered it, to a
triumphal Chariot. He puts in chains those that put him to death; and causes
them to go, not for authors, or spectators of his sufferings; but for part of
the pomp of his victory. This is the sight, my Brethren, to which the Apostle
inviteth us; the triumph, not of a Caesar, or some other of the World's great
Captains, but of the Son of GOD, the Father of Eternity. In it you shall see
this King of Glory riding in a Chariot bathed all over with his divine
victorious blood; Isa. 63.1.3.
and as the Prophet Isaiah yerwhile represented him, with Princes and people
under foot, and he marching over them with his garments died red. In it you
shall see, not Soldiers and Commanders in chains, but Demons, the Princes of
this world, bound and fettered fast for ever. You shall see, not Arrows broken,
and Cuirasses battered, and Arms cut in pieces; but Sin abolished, and Death
destroyed. You shall see the spoils, not of an Army, or a Country; but of the
Lords of the world, and of the Governors of the darkness of this Age. Lastly,
You shall behold in it, not the image of some petty Fortress taken by assault,
or composition; or of some River forced, or some Province subdued; but Hell
finally beaten, Heaven gained, and an Eternal World brought under the power of
our victorious LORD. Let us apply our selves to the fruition of this
magnificent spectacle, and afford it all the sense and attention that we have.
To this end consider we, First, What these Principalities and Powers are, which
JESUS CHRIST has spoiled: And then see, in the second place, how he made a
show of them, and triumphed over them on the Cross. These are the two Heads we
will treat upon, if the LORD please, in this action.

The Apostle ordinarily makes use of the words Principalities, Powers,
Dominions, Thrones, Col. 1.16. Romans 8.37. Ephesians. 1.21.
and Virtues, to signify the Angels; as for instance, in the first Chapter of
this Epistle, in the eighth of the Epistle to the Romans, and in the first of
that he wrote to the Ephesians. He gives those spiritual beeings these names,
both because of the strength and power they are endowed with, which mightily
surpasses the virtue of material and elementary things; and also by reason of
the diverse orders into which GOD has distinguished them, according to the
difference of their ministrations; placing some of the Angels, as it were,
Chiefs, in a superiority to others. And though the sin of Devils has corrupted
the perfections of their nature; yet it does appear, by diverse places of
Scripture, that it has not quite destroyed this Order among them; Satan being
set forth to us as the Head of this black band; and as having other evil Angels
under him; so as they may, in this respect, be still re^med Principalities and
Powers. Nevertheless there is another reason which the Apostle had his eye
principally upon, in giving them these names, as he himself intimates in the
sixth Chapter to the Ephesians. We wrestle not (says he) against flesh and
blood, Ephesians. 6.12.
but against principalities, against powers, against the rulers of the darkness
of this world, against spiritual wickedness in high places. Here you plainly
see, he calls them Principalities and Powers, by reason of that Imperiality
they exercise in this world, under its present state of subjection unto sin and
vanity. Not that such a superiority does of right belong unto them; for having
rebelled against their Creator, they have lost all true and lawful dignity. But
the sin of man having ^uslav'd him to those evil spirits, has withal made
these elements subject to them, whereof he was the true and natural Lord. And
GOD has permitted it so to be, for the executing of his justice against sin.
For since that man shook off the yoke of GOD, having wretchedly preferred the
pernicious counsel of his Ene^y, before the just commandment of his Master, it
is but reason he should be subject to him, to whom he did betray his own
liberty. Such then is the order, or rather the confusion of the world, since
the fall; to wit, that the Devil exercises an insupportable ^yranny in it,
governing it at his pleasure, as if he were Lord of it. For, First, He works
upon all the ungodly, with wonderful force, swaying their souls unto brutal
passions, setting on fire their lusts, and by that thick smoke which he raises
from their hearts, blinding their minds, and depriving them of all the light
that is necessary for distinguishing of truth and falsehood, Ephesians 2.2.
of good and evil, as the Apostle does elsewhere inform us, saying, that this
unclean spirit does work effectually in the children of disobedience; and in
another place, 2 Timothy 2.26.
he tells us, that he has the wicked in his snares, and makes them do his
will. Not that he compels them to evil by co-active force, and how much
soever they dislike it; but their nature being corrupted as it is, he never
tempts them without effect, their souls voluntarily surrendering themselves to
his pernicious persuasions. Moreover he disposes of material things, turning
and changing them at his pleasure, raising tempests in the air, seditions and
wars among men; putting in commotion all that murtherous violence that makes
havoc of mankind; and presiding over all the instruments of the creatures
damage and death. Heb. 2.14.
By reason whereof the Apostle in the Epistle to the Hebrews, calls Satan,
Him who has the power of death. And although he executes none of his bad
purposes, without the permission of GOD, as the Scripture clearly shows us in
the History of Job, where you see, he touches neither the goods, nor the
children, nor the person of that holy man, until leave had of this Supreme
Majesty; nevertheless, because he works commonly in the world, the greater
part whereof is depraved, and rebellious against GOD, he seems Master of it,
and himself does glory in it; as when he said to our Savior, in temptation,
after he had showed him all the Kingdoms of the Earth, Luke 4.6.
All the power and glory of these things will I give thee; for to me it is
delivered, and I give it to whom I will. And indeed for these reasons does our
Savior style the Devil, John 12.31. and 14.30. 2 Cor. 4.4.
the Prince of this world; as when he says, Now the Prince of this world shall
be cast out; and so elsewhere: and S. Paul calls him in the same sense, the GOD
of this world. Represent unto your selves the world as it was under the
darkness of its old Heathenism, when GOD left all Nations to walk in their own
ways. In it, the Devil absolutely domineered. All those poor multitudes held he
under his tyranny. He had put out the eyes of their minds, and in this
blindness made them commit all kind of vileness and abominations. He inspired
into them hatred of the true GOD, and of his Service; and so effectually
beguiled them by his fallacious illusions, that he caused them to adore himself
under the forms of diverse Idols. These same spirits are they that the Apostle
intends here by those Principalities and Powers he speaks of. For though the
Scripture does particularly mark out one of them, whom it calls Satan, as the
Head of this abominable Monarchy; yet it rangeth under him a vast multitude of
Spirits, who all traveling upon the same design, and setting on work in it all
the might and industry they have, do bear a part in his accursed Empire. And
there is great probability too, that they are divided into certain bands, each
of which are drawn up under their particular Chiefs, and do all of them depend
upon Satan as their General. For which reason it is that the Apostle calls them
in the plural number, Principalities and Powers. These are the Enemies whom the
LORD JESUS has overcome, and utterly defeated on the Cross, as himself
reported the evening before his passion, saying, that the Prince of this world
was then judged; that is, was about to be condemned. And S. Paul elsewhere
says, Heb. 2.1^*
that JESUS has by his death destroyed him that had the power of death, to
wit, the Devil.

Let us now see how our Savior has spoiled these Principalities and Powers,
and publicly made a show of them, triumphing over them on the Cross. First, It
is evident, that all this language of the Apostle's is figurative, and taken
from what great Captains, that had been victorious over their Enemies, were
heretofore wont to do. For after they had spoiled them, not only Arms, Habits,
Jewels, and Baggage, but also of their Estates and all their Glory; they led
them away prisoners, and made a show of them to their Contrymen on the day
of their triumph. This name the Romans gave to the pomps of that entry which
their Captains and Generals of a Victorious Army made into their City. For when
any of them had won a Battle, taken Towns, conquered Countries, or done any
great and notable exploit of war, one of the principal and most prized Honors
that were decreed him for a reward of his valor, was a Triumph^; which was
acted with incredible pomp and ceremony. The Conqueror was mounted on a stately
Chariot, magnificently clothed and crowned. His whole Army marched before and
after him in Military order, every Troop under its Ensigns and Colors. The
heads and principal of the Enemies followed his Chariot, bound, and in chains.
There was carried along all the Gold and Silver, and other Treasures, he had
won from the Enemy. The Towns he had taken, the Rivers he had passed, the
Provinces he had subdued, the Battles he had given, were represented in
Picture, and exposed to the view of the people, who with great festivity and
rejoicing accompanied in throng, or beheld him from the windows of their
houses, and filled the air with their acclamations and applauses. He entered
Rome in this ^quipage, and passing through the fairest Streets of the City,
ascended the Capitol, the chief of their Temples, where he betook himself to
offer sacrifice, after he had thus displayed the fruits of his Victories before
the eyes of all the world, and received all kind of benedictions and praises
from his fellow Citizens. This is properly that which was called a Triumph. The
Apostle therefore fetching his terms from this custom, which was well known at
that time, and familiar to every one, does apply them to our LORD and Savior,
because of that resemblance we find between the pomp of his mystical victory,
and this Triumph of S^cular Rulers and Captains. He tells us, that he has
spoiled these hostile Principalities and Powers. He says, that he has
publicly made a show of them. In fine, he affirms, that he has triumphed on
the Cross; expressions, all of them manifestly taken, as you see, from that
glorious pomp of the Roman Triumphs which we have now described; and which, for
substance, do signify no other thing, but that JESUS dying on the Cross, has
fully vanquished and defeated the Devil, with all his power, in the view of
Heaven and Earth.

In prosecution hereof, we are to refute the false expositions which some do
give of this passage; Themas. Loranus. Cajetan.
and after that, render you an account of the true. Some of the famousest
Interpreters of the Church of Rome, do understand it of the deliverance of the
Fathers, whom our Savior (as those men say) took out of that Limbus in which
their spirits were, and led them to Heaven with them. He spoiled principalities
and powers, that is, the Devils, from whom he took away what they kept in Hell;
forasmuch (say they) as he caused Adam, Noah, Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob, with
the rest of the faithful who deceased under the Old Testament, to come forth
from their Limbus, which is one of the partitions of the infern^l Region. Then
(they say) he led them, carrying them up to Heaven, and giving them entrance
into Jerusalem on high, whence they had been until then excluded. And he made
them triumph in himself (for so the same Authors do read the Apostle's words),
that is, He made them to participate of his triumph, in that they had the
honor to accompany and enter into Heaven with him. But scarce can a thing be
uttered more false, more forced, and more impertinent, than this whole
interpretation. First, That which it supposes of the abode of the spirits of
the old believers in a subterraneous and infernal Limbus, is uncertain and
fabulous, being sounded only upon the tradition of men, and not on any
authority of the word of GOD. As for that which they commonly alledg to prove
it, namely, Genesis 37.35.
Jacob's saying, that he would go down into Hell unto his Son Joseph; they that
are versed in Scripture do well know, the word Inferi, or Hell, in that place
in particular, and almost every other where in the Book of GOD, does signify
the Grave. Whence it comes, that the same Patriarch says elsewhere unto his
sons, that if any evil befell Benjamin, they would make his white hairs descend
with sorrow ad inferos, to Hell, as diverse read it; where it is clear, that by
the same word he means the Grave, into which the dead go down with their hairs;
and not Limbus, into which only souls descended, who have no hair sure. And as
to what they produce of the pretended soul of Samuel, called up from Hell by
the Sorceress her charms; where is the Christian that does not burn to see such
power granted the Ministers of Devils over the Spirits of Prophets? God forbid
we should credit so gross an absurdity. That which the Enchantress saw came
from Hell, I confess; but that which she saw, was not in truth the soul of
Samuel, which was at rest with GOD, in Ahraham's bosom. It was nothing but a
vain shadow, and a phantasm of that Prophet, called by his name, because of its
resembling him, as the greatest part of the ancient Fathers did affirm, and as
some of the most famous Authors, Leo Allatius in Euctath. Anti^ch. Psalm. 68.19.
even of the Roman Communion, do at this day hold. They again do abuse what the
Psalmist sings of the Messiah, Thou art gone up on high; thou have taken or
led a multitude of captives (as its rendered). These captives they will have to
be the spirits of the Fathers. But it is manifest to all that have the least
knowledge in the holy Tongue, that the phrase there used by the Prophet, does
signify to take, or to make prisoners, not to free them; and to lead, not into
liberty, but into captivity: So as if this passage be meant of the Fathers, we
must say, not that the LORD brought them out prison (as is supposed), but that
he put them in; a thing that would be infinitely absurd and ridiculous The
spirits in prison, 1 Pet. 3 20.
of whom S. Peter speaks, cannot, upon any better ground, be taken for the
souls of the faithful det^ined in Limbus, since those spirits were sometimes
rebellious, or disobedient in the time of Noah, and perished in their sin;
which cannot be said of the Patriarchs, and the Faithful. In fine, the
Apostle's saying, that the way into the holy places was not manifested while
the first Tabernacle was standing; signifies indeed, that the High Priest of
the Church, our LORD JESUS CHRIST, did not carry, not introduce our nature into
Heaven, in soul and body; nor discover and make manifest the way to our Mansion
of Immortality, until the veil of the first Tabernacle was rent; which is very
true. But thence it follows not, that the spirits of the faithful, consecrated
before our Savior's coming, did not feel the fruit of his death; and much
less, that they were detained in Hell. But besides that this Tradition has no
foundation in the Scripture, it does plainly cross the same. For our LORD
promised the good Thief, Luke 23.43.
that the very day he was crucified, he should be with him in Paradise; where
yet, according to our Adversaries supposition, he should not have entered till
the forty-third day after. And the Parable of that bad rich man does plainly
show us, that at that time, as the souls of impenitent sinners were cast into
the torments of Hellfire; so the spirits of the faithful were carried up into
the repose and felicity of Paradise. For that bosom of Abraham wherein Lazarus
rested, Luke 16.22, 25, 26.
was not a pit without water, as the pretended Limbus is counted to have been;
but a place of refreshment and consolation; not situate in the vicinity of
Hell, but severed from it by a great gulf set between them. And in truth, since
the faithful did even then drink of the Mystical Rock as well as we; were
sprinkled with his blood, did partake of his sufferings; why would any one
imagine, that our Savior's Sacrifice had less virtue to introduce them into
Heaven after their death, than it had to justify, and sanctify, and comfort
them, in the days of their life. As they bore a part with us in the same faith,
and conflicts on the earth; so had they share of our repose and joy in Heaven;
neither is there any reason for our being admitted, if you will needs have them
excluded. Accordingly certain it is, that those elder Christian Writers, who
did bar the souls of the faithful that deceased under the Old Testament, out
of Heaven; did as well deny reception there to the souls of Christians; not
assenting that either the one or the other were admitted till after the
resurrection: so as our Adversaries, rejecting (as they have reason to do) the
one half of this error; and confessing, that Christian souls, sufficiently
purged, are received into Heaven: it is nothing but pure obstinacy in them to
retain the other half thereof; and pretend, that the condition of the faithful,
departed under the Old Testament, was otherwise than under the New. Be it then
concluded, that all this pretended deliverance of souls brought out of Limbus,
is but the fiction of an human spirit, not only beside, but even against
Scripture and Reason.

But I add, in the second place, that though it were as certain, as it is
dubious; and as true, as it is false; yet it would not be possible to refer
this passage of the Apostles unto it. First, The spirits of the faithful
departed this life, are not at all in the power of Satan, but in the hands of
GOD, to whom they recommend them at their death; so as though JESUS CHRIST had
brought them out of Limbus, yet it could not be said that he had therein
spoiled the Devils, since that to spoil them, is to take from them what they
were possessed of; and its clear, that though the souls of the faithful had
been in this imaginary Limbus, yet they would have been there out of the
Devil's possession. Secondly, The word here used, which the French has
translated mener en montre, that is, lead about for a show, is always taken in
an ill sense, for a shameful and ignominious show, such as that of Malefactors
is, when they are led through the City, and publicly executed, that the sight
of their shame and punishment may keep men in their duty. Now if our LORD had
delivered the souls of the faithful out of such a Limbus, it could not be said,
that he had made a show of them in this sense; it being evident, that in this
case they would have accompanied his Triumph by way of honor; and that it
would not have been any ignominy, but a glory for them, to have followed his
victorious Chariot. Moreover, the Apostle's words are so placed in the
Original, that the spoiling, and making a show of, and triumphing over, which
he speaks of, do necessarily respect the same persons, that is, those whom he
spoiled, are the same he made show of, and triumphed over. Now he spoiled not
the spirits of the Fathers, he on the contrary did enrich them; sure then it is
not them he made a show of: neither can the action, which the verb imports,
be referred to them, without depraving the Apostle's whole Context. This is all
spoken of one and the same subject, to wit, those Powers and Principalities,
that is, the Devils, as we have demonstrated, and as all do accord. They are
the Devils whom JESUS spoiled. It is the same that he publicly made a show of,
and it is they again whom he triumphed over.

As for the Latin Interpreter his saying, Zanchy.
the LORD triumphed of them in himself; I acknowledge, that diverse Greek Copies
do read the Text in that manner; and some of our Writers have so expounded it;
conceiving, that our Savior, upon his crucifixion, did bring the Devils, whom
he had overcome, out of their Hells, and show them to the Angels and the
Spirits made perfect, bound and chained up, as a glorious token of the victory
he had gotten over them, and they add, that this triumph did continue too,
until his ascension into Heaven. But the Scripture telling us nothing of this
matter, I think it dangerous to affirm the same; it being better, and more
safe, to keep to that which GOD has revealed in his word, than to take liberty
to follow our own imaginations, how plausible soever they appear. And the
reason which seems to have moved those men to advance this conjecture, is
exceeding slender. For they have been induced to do it, only by conceiving it
absurd to say, that JESUS CHRIST triumphed over his Enemies on the Cross;
seeing that, to speak properly, he overcame them on the Cross, but it seems he
triumphed only at his resurrection and ascension. But first, though there were,
in this, some inconvenience, yet nothing would enforce us to assert what they
propose. It would be sufficient, for the avoiding thereof, to say, that our
Savior triumphed of his enemies in himself, or by himself; that is, according
to the ordinary style of Scripture, by his own strength and virtue, he being
raised from the dead, and gloriously lifted up to Heaven, by the potency of his
own arm. But I say, in the second place, that there is no absurdity at all in
attributing these things to the very death of our LORD; understanding them, as
we ought, spiritually and mystically. And without doubt, it is much more fluent
and clear, to refer the last words of this verse to the Cross of our Savior,
of which the Apostle had spoken immediately before (he fastened the obligation
to the Cross; having spoiled Principalities and Powers, over whom he triumphed
on it, that is, on the Cross); than to take it of our LORD himself, and say,
that he triumphed over his enemies in himself, which is frigid, and harsh, and
obscure. Say we then, with the greater part of the Modern, and with the more
knowing and illustrious of the ancient Expositors, that it is on the Cross our
Savior spoiled Principalities and Powers; and that it was there also he
publicly made a show of them, and triumphed of them. I confess, if we look
upon him as suffering on that execrable tree, amid the scoffs and sarcasms of
the Jews, in the lowest degree of his exinanition, Flesh will find in him
nothing less than victories and triumphs. But you know likewise, that this
mystery must not be judged of by the senses of the flesh. It Is faith alone
that is able to discover and contemplate the wonders that are in it. Now if you
open the eyes of Faith, you will easily perceive, that JESUS has spoiled all
hostile powers, on the Cross; and that it is with this weapon properly that he
surmounted those strong and potent Tyrants, and took from them all the
instruments of their violence, and made a prey of all their riches. For to say
true, that harsh and cruel dominion which the Devil exercises in the world, is
not founded upon any thing but sin. If this pest had not infected us, all the
forces of Hell, though they were a thousand times greater than they are, could
not have hurted us. It Is upon our sin that this fierce Tyrant has built all
his power, and it is upon our ruins that he has raised his grandeur. For first,
if we were not culpable by reason of the sins we have committed, the Justice of
GOD would never have suffered this Executioner of his Judgments to trouble and
prosecute us as he has done. It would not permit him so much as to open his
mouth against us to accuse us. But sin having provoked the wrath of GOD, and
his Law prohibiting access unto his Throne, and pronouncing a curse upon us:
it is evident, that the same delivered up our persons to the evil Angels, and
gave them power to execute its judgment on us. Again, beside these evils, which
are termed penal, and which could not terminate at last, but in an eternal
death; the Devil did annoy men in another kind, even by pushing them on to vice
by his temptations, and making them commit a multitude of sins, some by means
of avarice, and others by the furies of ambition; casting some into the
excesses of luxury, others into the disorders of drunkenness and glutny. But it
is sin also that gives him this power upon men, to wit, that Concupiscence
which reigns in them, and which the Scripture calls the old man, because it
is the inheritance, and succession, and image of the first Adam. It Is by this,
as by an handle, that the Devil seizes on them, and trains them into such sins
as he pleases: Were it not for this, he would have no hold upon them; and each
of them, if he were exempted from it, might say, as our LORD did, The Prince of
this world comes, but has nothing in me. Now JESUS CHRIST has abolished by
his Cross, both the guilt and the vices of men; the guilt, in that he bore the
punishment thereof, and satisfied Divine Justice for them, and extinguished all
the flamings of the Law, and opened the Throne of Grace to every impenitent
sinner. Their vices, in that he crucified and destroyed our old man on the
Cross, and mortified all its lusts, and discovered its impostures. Sure then
its by his Cross that he divested the Devils of the dominion they exercised
over mankind, having sapped and demolished all the foundations thereof, by his
admirable sufferings.

As for that which the Apostle adds, in the second place, viz. that he
publicly made a show of those hostile powers, this does excellently well agree
with his Cross. For this show signifies nothing else but an extreme confusion
and ignominy, as we have already intimated; and who is there, but knows, that
the evil Angels never received a greater than that was, wherewith the Cross of
our LORD and Savior did cover them? They thought to have overcome him, and
found themselves overcome; instead of ruining his Dominion, as they imagined,
they saw their own utterly overthrown. And this was publicly done, in the view
of Heaven and Earth; our Savior having been crucified in the greatest City of
the Orient, by broad day, and at the solemnity of the most sacred Festival the
Jews had. The Angels looked on it from on high, and never beheld any thing with
more attention and astonishment. Jews and Gentiles were spectators of it; and
Nature it self, however mute and insensible, sufficiently showed, that it took
part in it, shutting (if we may so say) its eye, through the horror it had to
see its Creator suffer. But fear not, poor Creatures: The shame and confusion
will wholly remain to our Enemies. Our Sun will soon come out of this Eclipse;
and his suffering is the salvation, not the ruin or damage of the Universe. In
fine, the Apostle's further assertion in the last place, that our LORD
triumphed over these hostile powers on the Cross, is easily verified also. For,
Origin.
as an Ancient said, There were two crucified persons on that Cross; the one
JESUS CHRIST, who was nailed to it visibly, voluntarily, and for a short time
only; the other, the Devil, invisibly fastened to the same Cross, and to his
great regret, and for ever; in as much as this Cross of our Savior has
destroyed his life, and power, having given him that deadly blow, whereof he
will never recover. Faith sees upon the Cross, above, the Son of GOD
combating, and conquering for us; and it sees, beneath, all the bad Angels, put
in chains, vanquished, and in vain raging, under his feet. Yet do I ingenuously
confess, that to speak properly, the resurrection and ascension of our LORD,
have more analogy with a triumph, than his death, which does rather resemble a
conflict. But it is a very common manner of speech, to attribute the name of an
effect, to the cause which produced it. It Is, in my opinion, principally in
this sense that our Savior triumphed of his enemies on the Cross; because the
death he there suffered, was the true and only cause of his triumphs. 'Twas the
Tree of this Cross that bore the Palms and Laurels he has been crowned with.
It Is there that all the causes and originals of all his glory are found. It is
this Cross that opened his Sepulcher, and brought him out from thence, and
raised him up in Immortality. It Is it also that a little after opened Heaven to
him, and seated him on the right hand of the Most High It Is it that loosed the
tongues of his Apostles, and changed the world in a short time; that defeated
Paganism, that is, the greatest part of Satan's Empire; that threw down Idols,
and drew all people to the service of that Divine crucified Person whom it
bore. It is the same likewise that will pluck us one day out of the hands of
death, and lift us up into the Sanctuary of Eternity. Lastly, It Is it has
founded that glorious Throne whereon JESUS shall sit, and both the one and the
other, his Subjects and his Enemies, see him truly triumphing; the one with
eternal joy, the other with a confusion that shall never end. Since the Cross
of our LORD and Savior is the cause of so many triumphs, who sees not, that it
is not only with truth, but also a great deal of elegance, that the Apostle
here says, he triumphed on it over his Enemies.

Let us, Dear Brethren, adore the mystery of it; and look upon it,
notwithstanding the sad appearances of its infirmity, as the only cause of the
glory of our Head, and of the liberty of his people. If the Jew do stumble at,
and the Greek deride it, it is an effect of their ignorance and infidelity. For
our part, who know its virtue, let us say with the Apostle, GOD forbid that we
should glory, save in the Cross of our LORD JESUS CHRIST. Gal. 6.14.
It has taken us out of the mortal bonds of the Devils, and put us into the
liberty of the sons of GOD. It has spoiled our old Tyrants, and broken their
Iron yoke, and overthrown those infernal principalities and powers. Let us not
fear them. After the blow they have received from the Cross of CHRIST, they are
but back-broken Serpents, that do but hiss and crawl along the dust. I grant,
they yet stir, and wind about us, and do not cease to threaten us. But they can
no longer hurt us, if we keep fast to the Cross of our Savior, by which the
world is crucified unto us, and we unto the world. They are our Enemies, they
are no more our Masters. We are to wrestle with them; we are under their yoke
no longer. And if GOD do sometimes permit them to strike us, in our goods, or
in our bodies, and what we have on earth; yet he preserves our persons, and
does not suffer them to take from us any thing that his Son has purchased in
Heaven for us. And he so governs these Combats, that they ever turn unto our
glory, and their confusion, as that of Job's yer while did. GOD permits them to
attaque us, that we may overcome them; or to say better, that the Cross of
JESUS may stand up once more victorious in each of us, and bruise Satan under
our feet, Romans 16.26.
as it has already bruised him under his. Let us, with good courage, follow
the victory of our Head, and stoutly march on in his steps. Let us pursue the
vanquished Enemy, and not quit him till we, in this holy war, do bear away the
Laurel, and the honor of a Triumph. Take heed he rally not his dissipated
Forces, and do us some affront. For henceforth there is nothing but our
wretchlesness that can give him the advantage. Our Victory is as sure as may
be, if we have so much courage as not to destroy our selves. For what can he do
to us, if we watch, if we pray, if we keep upon our guard, and under the Ensign
of the Cross of our LORD? Will he accuse us? GOD does justify us, and his Son
does defend and intercede for us. Will he batter us with the curse of the Law?
The Cross of CHRIST has annulled that. Will he stir up against us the hate and
persecutions of the world? In these things we are more than conquerors through
him that loved us; and that can so turn and change them in favor of us, as
they shall all work together for our good. Will he take hold of us, on the
other side, by the baits of sin, and pleasures and benefits of the present
world? Our Savior's Cross has extinguished and mortified the desire of them
in our hearts; showing us that all this beauteous figure of the World is but a
vanity, that passes away, and ends in eternal misery. Will he menace us with
death? He may; but the Cross of JESUS has disarmed it of all its stings; and
so altered its whole nature, that whereas it was, of it self, the wages of sin,
and an effect of our Judge's wrath, and the beginning of Hell; it is now a
token to us of the grace of GOD, the end of our Combats, and the entry of our
Paradise. Let us therefore, my beloved Brethren, live in repose, and take
fruition, with humble thankfulness, of the good things which the LORD JESUS
has obtained for us, by the merit of his Cross; serving, and religiously
adoring him; consecrating all our life to his glory, as he gave his for our
salvation; and assuring our selves amid all the storms of this generation; that
neither death, nor life, nor angels, nor principalities, nor powers, nor things
present, nor things to come; nor height, nor depth, nor any other creature,
shall be ever able to separate us from the love of GOD, which he has showed us
in JESUS CHRIST our LORD. So be it.

The Twenty-seventh SERMON.
COL. CHAP. II. VER. XVI, XVII. Ver. xvi. Let no man condemn you in meat, or in
drink, or in the distinction of a festival day, or of a new moon, or of
sabbaths.

Ver. xvij. Which things are shadows of those that were to come; but the body
of them is in CHRIST.


DEar Brethren, Our LORD JESUS CHRIST does excellently show us the difference
of that Evangelical service which he has instituted in his Church, from the
Legal service which had place in Israel under the Old Testament; when speaking
of it to the Samaritan, he says, Woman, John 4.21, 23
believe me, the hour comes, that neither in this mountain, nor at Jerusalem,
shall ye worship the Father; But the true worshippers shall worship the Father
in spirit and in truth. Under the Law, the service of GOD was affixed to
certain places, as the Temple at Jerusalem, and the Land of Canaan; to certain
times, as Sabbaths, New Moons, and those great Feasts of the Passover,
Pentecost, and Tabernacles; to certain corporeal things, as Beasts, and other
Kinds, which were offered upon a material Altar, with diverse ceremonies; and to
certain sorts of Meat; it being not permitted at that time to eat of any other.
But now the LORD JESUS has abrogated this adhering to places, to times, and to
the elements of this world, as a low and childish exercise; and appointed for
his people a service altogether spiritual and divine, proportioned to that
admirable light of knowledge which he has shed into the hearts of the faithful;
a service that wholly consists in love to GOD, charity and beneficence
toward our Neighbor, and in honesty and purity in respect of our selves. This
is the true service of the Deity; worthy of man that presents it, and of GOD
that receives it; since man is a reasonable Creature, and GOD a Spirit
infinitely good and holy; according to what our Savior adds, that the Father
seeks such to worship him; and that being a Spirit, they that worship him,
must worship him in spirit and in truth. But though this kind of service be so
just and so rational in its self; and though the LORD JESUS have so clearly
instituted it by his Divine Authority; yet, on the other part, the inclination
of our nature is so violent toward gross and earthly things, that even among
those who make profession of acknowledging JESUS CHRIST for the Son of GOD, a
multitude is found that cannot let go these bodily exercises, in which a part
of Divine Service did heretofore consist. The Apostle testifies in diverse
places, that there were such in his time; 1 Timothy 4.3.
and he advertiseth us in others, that there would also be such in after-ages;
and the event has precisely answered his prediction: an evident sign, it was
the Spirit of Truth, that is, the Spirit of GOD, which illuminated his
understanding, and caused him to see in those days, things hidden in a time to
come, so far beyond the reach of the natural sight of men. It Is against these
people that he labors, in this Chapter, for to defend from their abusing
them, not only the Colossians, to whom he writes, but also the faithful of all
Ages. He laid firm and unmovable foundations of the truth, in his foregoing
discourse; and the same, as his manner is, with great strength, and glorious
evidence; showing us, that we have all those advantages plentifully in JESUS
CHRIST, upon pretense of which, error would introduce its inventions and carnal
observations; that in him we have all fullness necessary to complete us; that
his Resurrection and his Spirit do divest us of all the vices of the flesh; and
that his Cross does give us full remission of our sins; since it has both made
void the obligation concerning all the punishments we owed to Divine Justice;
and triumphed of all those powers that were capable of accusing or tormenting
us. Whence it clearly follows, that it is a vanity for any to go about to
oblige us unto legal and material observations, seeing that we most perfectly
have, in the death and resurrection of our LORD, all that sanctification and
justification, for the advancing of which it is pretended that these things do
serve. This is, Dear Brethren, the direct conclusion that the Apostle does now
deduce from that excellent and divine Doctrine which he established before.
Therefore, says he, let no man condemn you in meat, or in drink, or in the
distinction of a festival day, or of a new moon, or of sabbaths. Which things
are shadows of those that were to come, but the body of them is in CHRIST. He
first forbids them to suffer themselves to be put in subjection to these legal
things; and next, he brings them a reason for it, taken from their nature, for
that these things were but shadows; of which JESUS CHRIST has exhibited to us,
and given the true body. These shall be, by the will of GOD, the two points we
will handle in this Exercise; observing, in the one and the other of them, what
we shall judge conducible to your edification.

Those Seducers, whom the Apostle opposes in this place, had drawn the
devotions which they would add to the Gospel, partly from the Mosaical Law,
partly from Heathen Philosophy, and partly out of their own imagination; whence
it comes, that in one of the precedent Verses he advised the Colossians to
beware that no one made a prey of them by philosophy and vain deceit, Col. 2.8.
after the tradition of men, and the rudiments of the world. They had borrowed
from Moses, circumcision, and the distinction of meats and days. They had begged
from the Schools of Philosophy, the worshipping of Angels, and the vain
discourses wherewith they colored over this abuse; and they had invented of
themselves certain austerities and pretended mortifications, of which they made
great account in Religion. See, I beseech you, what an heap of strange things
the Spirit of Superstition did, even at that time, thrust into Christianity;
that you be not amazed, if men, in so many ages as have rouled down since those
days, pursuing the same design unheeded, according to the passion of their
flesh, have by little and little quite filled up Religion with the like
services and observations; and, as it were foul'd and dirted that pure and
clear Fountain of our Savior's Discipline, with the dregs and sediment of
their inventions. For if flesh had the impudence to promote such abuses, during
the lives, and under the eyes of the Apostles; how much more would it have the
boldness to enterprise, and facility to execute it, during the night of so many
ages, which were not only destitute of the light of those great Tapers, but
also overspread with the darkness of grossest ignorance. But let us see how S.
Paul condemns the Traditions of those of his age, to the end we may preserve
our selves from those of our own, by the example and authority of his Doctrine.
He spoke before of circumcision, to which they would have had Christians still
submit themselves. He now takes to task their other abuses; and first, the
distinction they made of days, and of meats; and next, in the verses following,
their Doctrine touching Angels, and the worship they gave them; and last of
all, their Disciplines and Mortifications, from the 20th Verse to the end of
the chapter. We will see, by the grace of GOD, the two other parts of His
dispute, each of them in its place. As for the former, the Apostle taxes here
two sorts of destinctions, or observations, which these men made in religion;
the one of meats, the other of days. And as to the latter, he notes
particularly, and by name, some of the days, which they observed, to wit,
Festivals, new Moons, and Sabbaths. But about the other, he expresses himself
in general only, saying simply, Let no man condemn you in meat, or in drink,
without declaring particularly the kind of meat, or drink, which they
prohibited, or permitted; so as, the Apostle not telling it us, and we having
no light in it neither any other way, it is not easy for us to know precisely,
what the meats were, the distinction whereof these people did set up. For
first, the Law of Moses, whence they had taken some part of their discipline,
did forbid a great number of meats, and contained several very scrupulous
regulations about eating, as you may see in the eleventh chapter of Leviticus,
and in other places: Among the beasts of the field, it permitted the Jews to
take none for meat, but such as chew the cud, and divide the hoof: and among
fishes, none but such as have fins, and scales: and by this rule, it banished
from their tables, Hares, Rabbets, Leverets, The Hog, the Lamprey, the
Tortoise, and many other kinds: that I may not speak of several sorts of birds,
which were interdicted them. It was an abomination for them, so much as to
touch any of these things. And for drink, though there was no general rule
given, yet they had diverse particular observations which do referr unto it; as
for instance, N^m. 19.15.
they were not to drink any liquor drawn out of a vessel that had no close
cover; and the more devout, absteined from wine, and strong drink, either for
ever or for some time only, according to the law of the Nazarites. And that
they might not fall unwittingly, into the transgressing of some of these rules,
they did never eat with Pagans, or of any meat, they had dressed, for fear,
there might have been some lard in it, or some other mixture of things
prohibited them: or that their meat, and drink had been offered to idols, as
with the Pagans was ordinary; a thing they greatly had in abomination. For this
cause, Daniel, and his fellows, Dan. 1.8.
would not taste of the meat, or of the wine of the King of Babylon's table:
desiring rather to eat nothing but pulse, and drink nothing but water, then put
themselves upon the danger of being defiled. And hereto we must referr, that
eating herbs, which the Apostle reports of those weak ones, Romans 14.2.
who still retained the Mosaical distinction of meats. The meaning is, that
living among Pagans, and fearing lest the victuals they sold in their shambles,
and shops were defiled one way or other, they forbore them, and restrained
themselves to herbs, in which they feared no such thing. The Judaical rules
about eating and drinking being such, it is hard to say, whether the Seducers
retained them all in general, or observed only part of them. Great probability
there is, that they adhered to them in some sort, either in whole, or in part.
Yet drawing a part of their observations (as they did) from the sinks of
secular Philosophy, it might well be, that beside what they had taken out of
Judaism to this purpose, they did mingle with it some observances of the
Philosophers also, who likewise had their abstinences, as we understand by the
books of the ancients. And that of the Pythagoreans is sufficiently known who
fed on herbs, and fruits only, forbidding the use of all animated things. It is
very likely, that those false Apostles, upon whom S. Paul has his eye here,
had some such discipline, considering that which he adds afterward, of the
nature, and ends of their abstinences. And this is that, which we may say,
concerning their laws about the matter of eating and drinking.

As for the days, which they observed; all those, that the Apostle names in
the Text, were taken out of Judaism. For that the new Moons, by which the
Hebrews began all the months of their year, (as the most part of the people of
the East do to this day) that they, I say, were solemnly observed among the
Jews, does appear, both by diverse places in Moses; where he ordeineth, Number.
10.10. and 28.11. Psalm. 81.4.
that a Trumpet be sounded at the beginning of the month, and that certain
peculiar sacrifices be offered unto GOD: and also by that Psalm, where the
Prophet commands, to sound the trumpet, on the new Moon, upon the solemn
feast day, and again by Isaiah, where GOD, rejecting the vain services, which
hypocrites presented Him, without any true, (...) 13 14.
faith, or devotion, does say. As for the new Moons, and the Sabbaths, and the
opening of your convocations, I can no longer bear the trouble of them, nor of
your solemn assemblies. My soul hates your new Moons, and your solemn feasts.
They are grievous to me. I am weary to bear them. As concerning the Sabbath,
that is, the seventh day of every week, which we call Saturday, no body is
ignorant, with what devotion it was observed, and kept holy, by the Jews;
according to the ordinance of GOD, repeated in diverse places of Moses, and even
registered among the ten articles of the Decalogue. Again, by the festivals,
which S. Paul mentions, he means those high days, which, besides the
Sabbaths, and new Moons, that went on in the ordinary succession of weeks, and
months, were solemnized at certain seasons of the year; as the Passover, on
the fourteenth day of the first month, remarkable for the immolation of the
Lamb, and for the unleavened bread, N^m 24.
and lasted seven days; Pentecost, which was kept fifty days after the
Passover; and the feast of Tabernacles, which was celebrated the fifteenth day
of the seventh month, and lasted seven days, which the people spent under
Tents, and Booths. So, you see, the Apostle does here point at all the three
kinds of Jewish feasts; those of the year, which he calls simply, festivals:
to wit, the Passover. Pentecost, and the Tabernacles: those of months, which
were the new Moons; and in fine, those of the weeks, which were the Sabbaths.

Now whereas, the French has translated it, in the distinction of a festival
day, it is word for word in the original, in part of a festival day which some
take to signify, in respect of festivals, or upon the account of festivals: in
the same sense, that S. 1 Pet. 4.16.
Peter seems to use the word, when he says, If any man suffer, as a Christian,
let him not be ashamed, but let him glorify GOD in this part, or in this
behalf, that is, in this respect, and as to this matter. And thus the Apostle
in this place would say, let no man condemn you in regard of festivals; or for
festivals; that is, in the matter of the observation of certain days. But the
word here used, being the root of that other, which in Greek signifies to
distinguish, to sever, to divide; as in French, partir, and partager, do come
from the word part, or party; that Interpreter has not succeeded ill, in
rendering it, the distinction. For they, that keep holy certain days, and make
them festival, do distinguish them from others, and set them apart to observe,
and celebrate them quite otherwise, then they do other days. For substance,
the Apostles intention is clear; namely, that he forbids every man, whoever he
be, to condemn Christians, in respect of the use of certain meats, and the
observing of certain days. Let no man condemn you, says he, in eating, or in
drinking, or in distinguishing of a festival day, or of a new Moon, or of
Sabbaths. It is properly in the Original, Let no man judge you; and this word
does aptly suite the Apostle's sense. For these Seducers would make their
ordinances, about the distinction of meats, and days, to pass for necessary
laws: which they meant to impose on the faithful, and by the same, judge them;
praising, and approving such as absteined from the meat, they forbad them, and
observed the days they had marked out to them; and condemning as guilty of a
sin, those, that failed to do the one, or the other. And the Apostle, a little
after the Text, mocking at their pretended laws, will show us the form of them.
Why (says he) are ye charged with Ordinances, to wit, Eat not, taste not,
touch not. And this is that, which should be heedfully marked: For as
concerning those, who, through a certain feebleness of mind, did at that time
still scruple the violating of these Mosaical distinctions, but however without
condemning such as practiced otherwise, or obliging them to such observations,
as necessary things; those the Apostle would have to be supported with
patience, and sweetness, and he sharply, reproves such as gave them any offense.
But though he has this condescendency for the infirm; yet he is altogether
rigid, and inexorable against these pretended teachers: who acting the
Legislators, would put Christians under their yoke; and not content with that
supportance, which would have been given to their infirmity, did pretend to
make others subject to it, and fiercely condemned those, that observed not
their traditions. It Is to them, what he says here, is addressed; Let no man
condemn you; let no man judge you. And if notwithstanding his prohibition,
these men have the presumption to proceed, and condemn Christians for such
things; it is evident, that in this case, he would have us despise all their
judgments, their fulminations, and their anathema's; holding them themselves
worthy of condemnation, since they dare to make laws in the house of GOD;
according to the instruction he gives the Galatians, about the same. Gal. 1.9.
If any one evangelize to you beyond what you have received let him be an
execration. It Is thus that the Apostle guardeth, and fortifyeth the liberty of
Christians, in reference to meats, and days, against the attempts of all such
as would intrude to make laws in the Church about such things, being
indifferent in their own nature.

But because these false teachers covered themselves with the authority of
Moses; to the end that this pretext might not dazzle the eyes of the simple, he
prevents it; and granting, that such distinctions had place yer-while in
Judaism, by the ordinance of GOD; he shows, by the quality of their nature,
that the usage of them is ceased now under Christianity. This is the
signification of those words, which he adds for the second part of the Text.
The which things (says he) are shadows of those that were to come; but the
body of them is in CHRIST. It is evident, he means the distinction of meats,
the feasts, the new Moons, and the Sabbaths, of which he had been speaking, and
in general, all other like things: and he says that they are shadows of
things, which were to come; not to signify, that they still subsist of right,
(on the contrary, he affirms, that they have no more place) but simply to
declare unto us, what their nature is, and for what end they were, both
instituted of GOD, and practiced, during their time, by His people. He says
then, that they are shadows of things to come, of which the body is in CHRIST.
A shadow is the representation of a body, but an obscure one, and gross, and
imperfect, and such as shows us merely some of its lineaments, and not the
lively color, and true form of its members. Whence it comes that this word is
taken, in the Greek language, in which the Apostle wrote, for that which we
call, a rough draught; which is a dark, and gross painting, done only with
lines, and not with the luster, and diversity of colors; opposed to that,
which they call, painting to the life. And S. Paul himself does elsewhere make
this opposition, when he says, that the law had a shadow of good things to
come, Heb. 10.1.
and not (says he) the lively image of the things: and again, in another
place, he styles the law, the pattern, Heb. 8.5.
and the shadow of heavenly things. But here, as you see, he takes the word,
shadow, properly, and not figuratively for a rough draught; opposing it to the
body its self, which it represents, and not to another kind of more express,
and more lively image. What then is this body, of which the legal observations
were shadows? It is (says the Apostle) things to come; a body, which is of
CHRIST, or in CHRIST. The things, he means, were already come, and
accomplished, for the most part, at the time he wrote; forasmuch as CHRIST, in
whom they are, having been manifested, has fullfilled all the mysteries of
salvation. But the Apostle considering them as in the time, when the shadows
were afoot under the Law calls them things to come; because at that time they
were indeed not come, CHRIST who was to exhibit them, being not then revealed.
At that time, they were future; now they are present. These things (my
Brethren) are the Offices, and the Benefits of our LORD JESUS, and all the
parts of that heavenly discipline, which He has brought into the world. The
Apostle therefore saying, that legal observances were shadows of them; does
mean, first, that they figured them, and referred to them; and secondly, that
that representation of them, which they afforded, was dusky, and obscure, and
gross: that it was not a clear, distinct, and lively pourtrait of them: but
only as it were a tricking, a naked, and simple delineation: such as a shadow
is in respect of the body, which projects it. This was one of the principal
offices of the Mosaical law; even to figure out the CHRIST, that was to come.
For GOD, having purposed, in His infinite wisdom, for just, and great reasons,
not to send CHRIST into the world, until the last ages, and (as the Scripture
speaks) the fullness of time, did judge it meet, to give in the mean time, the
figure, model, or design of this great masterpiece of work, in the law of
Moses. First, for the entertaining of His people, during this time of their
minority, in those low, and puerile exercises, which suited with the weakness
of their age, until the revealing of CHRIST; as the Apostle excellently
teaches us, Gal. 3.4.
in his Epistle to the Galatians. Secondly, He proceeded in this manner, for
the justification of His Gospel, when it should be once come. For the shadows,
and delineations of it, which we see in the law, do clearly show us, that it is
the workmanship, and designement of GOD; and the admirable resemblance, between
these ancient figures, long since drawn by His own hand in the Tabernacle of
Moses; and the bodies of the things, that have been revealed in JESUS CHRIST,
does irrefragably prove, that He who heretofore took the care to make those
draughts, is Author of the verities they represented; and that the body does
descend from the same Heaven, that at first, did make the shadows of it to be
seen. I pass by, for this time, the Lamb, and the Sacrifices, and the
aspersions, and expiations, and all the Levitical Priesthood; a true
delineation, of our grand Victime offered for the salvation of the world, and
of that eternal righteousness, which His blood has procured for us, and other
like things, which cannot but with extreme difficulty be maintained, nor
accorded with the ways of the ordinary wisdom of GOD, save by acknowledging,
and receiving as veritable, what the Apostle does here teach us, and is evident
enough of it self, namely, that all this was heretofore ordained, for the
prefiguring of CHRIST.

I will only speak a few words, of the distinction of meats, and days. The
Apostle opens the mystery of it elsewhere. For as to observance of meats:
giving us order in the Epistle to the Corinthians, 1 Cor. 5.8.
to keep the feast of our Passoever, not with the old leaven of naughtines, and
wickedness, but with the unleavened bread of sincerity, and truth; does he not
clearly show us, that abstinence, from leavened bread, observed by the first
people, was a Picture of the Innocence, and sanctity of the second? and that by
consequence, it is to the same we must referr the distinction of other legal
meats? the beasts, which were forbidden them, representing by the characters of
their natural qualities, those moral imperfections, that is, those vices, and
corrupt affections, from which our lives ought to be exempted? As for example,
abstinence from Swines flesh, which was an abomination to them, did signify,
that the people of the Messiah should have no commerce with those
uncleanness, and ordures of deportment, wherein men of the world, notably
represented by the genius of this animal, do wallow. And when the same Apostle
tells us, that we should keep our feast, in truth, and sincerity; and in
another place, Hebr. 4 9.
that there remains unto us a Sabbath, or a rest; does he not show us again,
that the old feasts of Israel were shadows of ours? even of that feast, which
the Messiah has procured, and appointed for the faithful, and which does
consist in two things; the one, that they do abstain from the works of sin,
and of the flesh, the common works of men; and the other, that they do
celebrate a rest in GOD, with eternal joy? Now that the body of these shadows
is in JESUS CHRIST, is evident. For innocence, sanctity, abstinence from sin,
joy, and immortality do well in Him fully. There it is, and no other where,
that the truth, the example, and pattern, the doctrine, and all the cause of
them, are to be found; together with an almighty Spirit of light, which alone
is capable of producing these divine things in every one of us. Whereby you
see, it is so far from being consequent, upon these distinctions having been
heretofore ordained of GOD, that we ought now to observe them still; that on
the contrary, it is to be concluded, we may insist no longer on them. For since
they were appointed, in the quality of shadows, until CHRIST should be
revealed; who sees not, but that now when CHRIST has been fully manifested, it
would be mere folly in us to adhere unto them still? even as, if seeing, and
having in hand the very body of a thing, we should busy our selves in following
after, and embracing the shadow of it?

Precisely such, was the extravagancy of these false Teachers, who are here
noted by S. Saul; and such also is the error of all those, who upon the like
pretenses, intermedle with the imposing of laws upon Christians, concerning
usage of, or abstinence from, such things, as are in their nature indifferent.
And it is in this matter for one that our adversaries of Rome, are infinitely to
blame: who notwithstanding the reason of the things themselves, and the so
clear doctrine of this great Apostle, both in this place, and in many other,
have made, and constituted, a no less number of laws, about the distinction of
days, and meats, then were among the Jews themselves. They have marked more
then half of the days of the year, some with black, and others with white. I
call, marked with black, those, which they have devoted to the sadness of
fasts, and abstinences, as all the Fridayes, and Saturdayes of the year, the
Ember weeks, the Rogation-dayes, the Advent, the Eves, and Lent. I mean, by
marked with white, those which they consecrate to joy, as that great throng of
Holy Days, which they disperse through all the four seasons. JESUS CHRIST,
the Father of eternity, has made His Disciples free from the laws of time,
raising them up above the Heavens, which do make, and measure it. But these
men, put them in subjection to days, and months; and reduce them under the
yoke of the Jews, and make their piety depend upon the Almanac. If they do not
exactly observe all the days of the year; if they fast not one day: if they
eat not on another; if on one they don't do penance, if they make not mirth on
another; though upon the former, they should have cause to rejoice in GOD; and
upon the latter to afflict themselves for their sins, or their sufferings; they
commit a mortal sin, though they did it without contempt, or scandal. Was there
ever a discipline less reasonable? or more contrary to the doctrine of S. Paul?
who would not have Christians condemned, for the distinction of a Festival-day,
of a new Moon, or of the Sabbaths: who reprehends the Galatians for their
observing-dayes, and months, and times, and years; Gal. 4.11. Romans 14 6.
and counts it for a weakness in faith, to esteem one day above another?

Neither may it be replied here, that we also do discriminate, Sundays, and
Easter, and Christmas, and Pentecoste. We observe them for orders sake, not for
Religion: for the Polity of the Church, and not upon scruples of devotion. For
what a confusion would there be, if we had no days appointed, for the
assembling of the faithful? It Is for our mutual edification, and not for the
worth, and value of the days themselves, that we observe them; and (as an
Ancient said) not, that the day, on which we do assemble, is more holy, or more
glorious, S. Hie^ome. l. 2. Comment. in Ep. ad Gal. To. 9. p 314.
then another; but because, what day soever we assemble, it is a consolation to
us to behold our selves all jointly employed in holy exercises. For the main,
to us all days are equal; as uniform parts of the same time, which flow on by
the order of one, and the same LORD, all of them; and are all employable to His
glory: but the necessity, and infirmity of this poor life, does constrain us of
force to divide, and part them out for diverse uses. If it be thus, O
adversaries, that you discriminate-dayes; I shall confess, I have done wrong,
to accuse you, of crossing the doctrine of S. Paul. But who knows not, that it
is a devotion for days; and not the profit of men, that makes you observe
them? You believe you do GOD service in this very thing, that you feast one
day; and fast another. You give it to the dignity of the day, and not to the
necessity of order, or to your edification; neither do you esteem days alike.
Those which you observe, you set up very high above others, not only by reason
of the Church's command; but because they have the honor to represent, and
signify some mysterious thing. Accordingly you hold, that, besides the use,
which Festivals may be of for your instruction, and your having time for works
of piety: your very solemnizing of them is a Religious act, such as makes up a
part of Divine service, and is (as you say) meritorious in the sight of GOD:
which is exactly the opinion, and the practice of those, whom the Apostle, in
this place, does oppose. For they condemned Christians, not for absence from
the assembly of the Church on the day appointed for it, or for having profaned
such hours in the world, as were destined unto the service of GOD, or for
having scandalized their neighbor by this kind of fault; but only, and
precisely (as you do) for not having celebrated a Festival-day.

What shall I say, of the other point, to wit, the use of, and abstinence from
meats? The Apostle says, Let no man judge you in eating. In conscience, dare
you affirm, that you judge none of the faithful in this behalf? What mean then
those so rigorous laws of yours against them, that eat any flesh? those laws of
yours, that deprive Christians of this liberty, for more then one third of the
year? and condemn that man, who during all this time shall taste one bit of
Bief, or Mutton, to as heavy penalties, as if he had committed a deadly sin?
You are come so far, as you look not upon those, who violate these fine laws,
as sinners: You abhor them, as pro^ne persons, and Atheists and count them not
for Christians. Is not this a grave, and holy discipline, and well worthy of S.
Paul, and JESUS CHRIST; to make the service of GOD consist in meat; whereof
neither abstinence, Matthew. 15. 1 Cor 8 8. Romans 14.17.
nor use, (as reason shows every one, and as our Savior, and His Apostle do
teach) does pollute, or sanctify? does bring loss, or gain? it being a thing
purely indifferent in it is self: good, or evil, only as it hurts, or helps the
interests of temperance, and charity? But we shall have shortly a fitter
occasion to speak unto you of this subject more at large.

For the present, Beloved Brethren, make your profit, I beseech you, of S.
Paul's instruction. Use the liberty, which the LORD JESUS has obtained for you,
as His Apostle does declare. It is not reasonable, that men should take from
you, what GOD has given you, and bought with the precious blood of His Son.
Only see, Gal. 5.13.
that you take not this liberty for an occasion, to live after the flesh. Lay
by shadows, since you are no longer children. But embrace the body, which is in
JESUS CHRIST. His Kingdom is neither meat, nor drink; and no one will He
condemn for having eaten any of the things, which he has created for the
faithful to use with thanksgiving. If He otherwhile prohibited some of them, it
was to deli^^ate, and figure out by this fleshly abstinence, that which is
mystical, and spiritual, whereunto He has shaped you by His cross. Your
abstinence, Christian, is, to renounce the meat that perishes; to loath the
passions, and productions of vice, whereon the world does feed. It nourishes
it is self with the works of sin. Avarice, and ambitions, and injustice, and
luxury, and the ordures of wantoness, and the infamous sweets of revenge, are
the aliments it runs after, and cannot live without. This is, O ye faithful,
that flesh, the usage whereof is forbidden you. This is the Lent, which JESUS
CHRIST, and His Apostles, have in truth enjoined; a Lent to be observed, not
forty days only, but all the year long: even that we abhor what is evil;
that we eschew vice, as poison; that our lives be pure, and innocent, and clean
from all the filthiness of the flesh. This is in truth that abstinence, that
makes a Christian, and without which no man can have place among the members of
CHRIST. Gal. 5.24. and 6.14.
For they that are His, have crucified the flesh, with the affections, and
lusts therefore. The world is crucified to them. It Is provisions, it is
pleasures, it is allurements are had in execration of them. Whoever he be, that
fasteth this Lent exactly, he shall have part in the resurrection of CHRIST
JESUS. Not a man shall attain thereto otherwise. Prosecute it in good earnest,
Christian Souls, and powerfully mortify in your selves, all the lusts of this
accursed flesh, which perishes it is self, and will make all those perish too,
that desire it is delights, and cannot wean themselves from it is deadly
dainties. See what JESUS CHRIST has done, and suffered for the destroying of
it. See the excellency of that other divine food, on which He would have you
live. Your true food is to fulfill the will of His Father. This is the food of
the Prince of glory, and of all His Angels; food, that is holy and immortal;
which will leave in your Souls a divine relish, and contentment, much better
then all the feasts on earth; and after the consolations, wherewith it will
solidly strengthen your consciences in this life; eternally repast you in the
Heavens, with the delights of blissful immortality.

Brethren, this is the body, whereof the abstinence of the Jews was the shadow,
and delineation only. As for their festivals, they were also figures, verily,
not of those in Rome (which, to say true, are mere shadows, and weak
repesentations themselves, no less then these of the Jews; only they are
instituted by men; whereas the Jewish were ordained of GOD) they were, I say,
figures of the resting and spiritual contentment of the faithful. Origin.
against Cells. s. l. 8. p. 404.
Our festival (as one of the ancients heretofore answered a Pagan, that
reproached Christians for their having none) our festival is, to do our duty;
to worship GOD, and offer Him the unbloudy sacrifices of our holy
supplications; to rest from our own works, and entirely sequester our selves to
the work of GOD; to exterminate from among us, that really servile, and
mechanic labor of vicious actions, and spend our lives in the truly noble,
and divine exercise of Sanctification. Our Passover is, to eat the flesh of
the Lamb, to make use of His blood, to pass out of Egypt unto Canaan, out of
the world unto GOD, and from Earth to Heaven; leaving the things that are
behind, and advancing daily toward the mark, and prize of our calling. Our
Pentecost is, to converse with CHRIST in heavenly places, to think, and
medirate on Him, and to receive from His hand the Divine fire of His Spirit,
that we may speak of His wonderful works. Our feast of Tabernacles is, to live,
as strangers, in the world, without cleaving to it, still aspiring unto
Jerusalem which is above, the Mother, and the City of the faithful. Our new
Moons are the praise we continually sound forth unto GOD, not with
Silver-trumpets, but with heart, and understanding. In fine, Our Sabbath is, to
do, not our own will, but the will of GOD, repressing, and restraining the
motions and sentiments of our nature, that place may be left for CHRIST to work
in us, so as it may not be we that live; but CHRIST, who lives in us.

This is, Christians, that true body, which was represented heretofore, by the
Jewish shadows. These are your festivals, your solemnities, and your devotions.
Keep them holy, and celebrate them religiously. It is the great Prince of your
salvation, who has instituted, and consecrated them. He recommends them to
you, every where in His Gospel; and has indissolvably obliged you to them by
that death of His, the remembrance of which we are to celebrate next LORD's
day. If you acquit your selves worthily herein, be assured that after such stay
for a time as you make here below, He will raise you up to Heaven, there to
celebrate with Him, and His Angels that last mystical feast of the great day,
which rising at the point of our Resurrection, shall not go down for ever; but
shine eternally, and render us happy in the fruition of that life, and immortal
glory, which was prepared for us, before the foundation of the world. So be it.

THE XXVIII. SERMON.
COL. II. Ver. XVIII. Verse. XVIII. Let no man master it over you at his
pleasure, by an humility of spirit, and the service of Angels, intruding into
things, which he has not seen, being rashly puffed up with the sense of his
flesh.


DEar Brethren; It Is a thing, infinitely strange, and which shows the extreme
corruption of our nature, more sensibly, than any other, that men should have
so vehement, and invincible a passion for the serving of creatures. GOD the
Sovereign LORD, both of them, and of the Universe, did manifest Himself clearly
to them, causing the illustrious, and glorious marks of His goodness, and
wisdom, and infinite power, to shine forth every where, above, and beneath,
upon them, and about them; yea bringing the same home even to their hearts; and
giving them a feeling of Him, by the innumerable benefits, which He pours out
continually upon all the parts of their lives; In short, He showed Himself, and
drew near, and presented Himself in so lively a manner to their understandings,
Senses.
and perceptions, that they could not, (if I may presume to say it,) be
ignorant of Him, though they would. Besides all this, He vouchsafed to reveal
Himself to them, at the beginning, in a particular way; speaking familiarly to
Adam, and Noah, and others of the primitive Patriarchs, who were the sources of
the first, and second world. Nevertheless you know, that notwithstanding all
these lights, the rage of that passion men had for Idolatry, was so violent,
that it made them forget all these holy, and admirable discoveries of the
Deity; and induced them, instead of their great, and abundantly good, and
omnipotent Creator, blessed for ^ver, to serve the creature; and their frenzy
rose to such an height, that besides the Luminaries of Heaven, and the
invisible Powers, that do govern them; as also besides Kings, and Sages, and
persons, whom worth, or authority had raised above others, they were not
ashamed to adore yet other things, of the lowest in nature; as Beasts, and
Plants, and Elements; and to complete their extravagancy, they added to all the
rest, Images, and Figures, things absolute insensible, and unprofitable;
Changing (as the Apostles does reproach them) the glory of the uncorruptible
GOD, Romans 1.22.
into the resemblance, of corruptible man, and of birds, and four-footed
Beasts, and creeping things.

This Brutish error having overwhelmed all mankind, the LORD was so gracious,
that He drew Abraham out of it, as a brand out of an universal Conflagration;
and afterward, manifesting Himself more clearly unto his posterity, by the
ministry of Moses, and giving them His Law, He raised up amid this people a
public testimony of His truth, against the general misdemeanour of the world,
fulminating a thousand, and a thousand maledictions, against all such as served
Creatures. But the love of Idolatry was so strong, as it broke this bar of
Heaven, and violated this Divine declaration; which proved to be so far from
reducing the Nations to their duty, as it could not keep the very Israelites in
theirs, but they, as we learn by their History, often gave up themselves to the
serving of Creatures. At last, after so many significations of His mind, GOD
sent His only begotten, the Sun of Righteousness, and truth, into the world,
who opened to us the manner and the reasons and causes of the worshipping of
GOD, and did fully discover, that which, both the Gentiles were ignorant of, by
reason of their stupidity, and the Jews did but imperfectly know, in their
minority. Now who would think, that so shameful and gross an error, as the
serving of creatures is, should have the shamelesness to show its self, in so
noble, and so glorious a light. Yet you know, this wretched passion found the
means to content its self; bringing in, under diverse vain, but plausible
pretenses, the worshipping of Angels, and men, by little, and little, among
Christians. But however, it is not so strange a thing, that a corruption should
get such ground in the latter ages, when it was favored by an universal
ignorance, and by a decay of truth, and by the depravedness of men: such a
thing does frequently come to pass in their disciplines, and constitutions;
commonly, as they go on, they grow worse. That, which surpasses all admiration
is, that in the time, and under the eyes of the holy Apostles of our LORD and
Savior, there should be men found of so impudent a spirit, as to promote so
vile an error, in the profession of Christianity. We should scarce be able to
believe it, if S. Paul did not give us that testimony of it, which we even now
read to you. And GOD permitted it, as well to exercise, and prove the Church,
which then was, as to confirm ours; this occasion having here drawn from the
Apostle's pen, a clear, and magnifick condemnation of this abuse. He has
rejected already in the precedent context, those observances, which the false
Teachers, he opposes, had taken from the Mosaical Law; now he refu^es those,
which they had borrowed from the Philosophers of the World. For as we shall
show anon, that serving of Angels, which these men would have introduced among
Christians, was a fruit, and an invention of Heathen Philosophy. S. Paul
strikes down this vain impiety in few words. Let no man, says he, master it
ever you at his pleasu^^, by an humility of spirit, and the service of Angels,
intruding into things, which be has not seen, being rashly puffed up with the
sense of his flesh.

Dear Brethren: Here is a notable sentence pronounced, which overthrows, in
express words, all the worship, that the superstition of men, whether ancient,
or modern does attribute unto creatures; it being clear, that there is not any
one of them, whom we may lawfully serve in Religion, since the Apostle
forbids us to serve the Angels themselves, who are without difficulty, of
all creatures the most excellent. You know the interest we have in this cause;
those of Rome anathmatizing us in it, under color, that content to adore and
serve GOD our Creator, and Redeemer only, we refuse to render unto Angels and
Saints departed that Religious Worship, and those Divine honors, which they
decree, and deferr daily to them, to the great prejudice of the glory of GOD
and the irreparable offense of men: Let us therefore exactly consider this
Oracle of the holy Apostles; and that we may leave nothing in it behind us, we
must see first, what the Doctrine of those Seducers is, which he condemns.
(He expresses it in these words, Let (...) man master it over you, by an
humility of spirit, and the service of Angels:) and then we are to examine, in
the second place, the marks he gives these false Teachers which are contained
in the following words; intruding into things he has not seen, being rashly
puffed up with the sense of his flesh: and not holding the head. But we will
satisfy our selves, for this time, with the former of these parts, remitting
the second to another opportunity, by reason of the cavils, and inventions our
adversaries make use of to corrupt this passage, which we must refute as
briefly, as we can.

The word, that S. Paul uses at the entrance, and which we have translated,
Master it, is difficult, and seldom found in the Authors of the Greek Tongue.
S. Hierom, one of the learned of the ancients, says, Ep. ad Alg. 9, 10.
it was peculiar to the Country of Cilicia; whereof S. Paul was, as being born
at Tarsus, the Capital City of that Provi^ice. However it be, the derivation of
the word is clear, and does sufficiently discover, what is well-nigh its
signification. For such, as understand the Greek, do know, that this term comes
from another, which signifies the reward, that was given to those who won the
victory in those games, or combats for prize, at which certain Judges, and
Moderators did at that time preside, who had the superintendance of the whole
action, regulating and bounding the race, assigning the ground, and receiving
the Champions into it, judging of their courses, and combats, proclaiming that
man victorious to whom they yielded the advantage, and solemnly putting a Crown
upon his head. Whence it comes that themselves were called by a name, that
signi^ies Givers of the reward; and the term, which signifies what they did on
such occasions, is generally used to express, governing, regulating, ruling,
and having the superintendance of a matter. It is expressly from this term, that
that which the Apostle uses here, is formed; saving that it seems to signify
governing, and ordering, not simply, but to the prejudice, and damage of the
concerned. Therefore some have thought, that S. Paul, comparing here the
Faithful unto Racers, or Combatants, as he very often does elsewhere, does
exhort them, not to let the prize, or reward of the Victory, to be taken from
them by the artifice of Seducers, who made it their business, to turn them out
of the true, and lawful lists of their race, which are no other, than
believing, and obeying the doctrine of the Gospel; and make them enter into
another carriere, to wit, that of their own inventions, and services; in the
same sense, that he elsewhere said to the Galatians, who were abused by a like
imposture: Gal. 5.7.
Ye did run well, who did turn you aside, that you should not obey the truth?
If this exposition were adapted as well as to the Apostles phrase, as it is to
his sense, it would be excellent: showing us, that I may say it by the way, how
this serving of Angels here forbidden us, is an error of no small importance,
since it makes those, who turn aside unto, or employ themselves in it, to lose
the prize of their Heavenly calling.

The Latin Interpreter, Canonized by those of Rome, having respect to the
effect of such false doctrine, which is a driving of the faithful out of the
right way, does Translate it simply. Let no man seduce you. There is no need to
report the thoughts of all others. But I do affirm, that there can be hardly
found an expression more proper, more commodious, and according better with
either the term or the scope of the Apostle, then that of the French Bible, Let
no man master it over you; which does naturally express the magisterial
authority, that these Seducers assumed to themselves, enjoining, and commanding
their fancies to the faithful, as if they had been installed Superintendants of
their Religion, and their lives; and willing them to understand, that without
practicing what they prescribed, it was not possible to obtain the prize of
their high calling. Wherein the Apostle gives them a blow, and renders them
ridiculous, as men who having, in truth, no lawful authority, would yet make it
be believed, that they had; and did speak, and command with as much confidence,
as if it belonged to them to distribute the Crown of Heaven at the last day; or
that they had it already in their hands to impart it, to whom it should seem
them good. But that which S. Paul adds, does discover their folly much more;
let no man (says he) master it over you, at his pleasure, or at his will;
which may be referred, either to their office, or to their Doctrine, or, as I
think, to them both. To their Office; meaning, that they are voluntary
Superintendents, and that their own will alone, not the voice of GOD, or men,
did elevate them to this pretended Mastership; well night as the Roman Orator
calls a certain man a Voluntary Senator, who did thrust himself into the rank
of the Senators, but had no right to be there, having been elected only by
himself. But this respects also their Dectrine, and signifies that the serving
of Angels, which they commanded, was founded merely on their own good-pleasure,
and not upon any precept of GOD; that their will alone, was the reason, and
ground of it, not the will of the LORD; that it was nothing but an imagination
of their own head, and a fruit either of their melancholy, or their malice.
Whence we may observe, by the way, That those, that teach in the Church, ought
to set forth nothing, but what is founded on the word of GOD. Isa. 8.20.
To the Law and to the Testimony; but if they speak not according to this word;
of a truth there shall be no morning for them. This rule is enough to cashier
all the doctrines of Rome which we contest with her. For if you examine their
serving of Saints, and Angels, their Sacrifice of the Mass, their Papal
Monarchy, and other like opinions, you shall find, that they have no foundation
but their will; and when they are pressed, they go so far themselves, and
boldly assert, that they are judges of all things; judges of the faith of men,
and of the Scriptures of GOD: and that a Declaration of their Popes ought to
suffice for the reason of any thing; into which also their whole religion, and
belief is finally resolved. So as if ever there were a generation, of whom it
might be said, that they mastered it over the faithful, at their pleasure,
without doubt it is they; who do call themselves their Judges, their Lords, and
their Monarchs; who make their will pass with them, for the supreme law of the
Church; who put off to them an end less multitude of traditions and services,
upon the sole credit of their good-pleasure: and undertake to distribute to
them the rewards of their piety, after their death, merely according to their
phantasy, exalting some to be Saints, others to be Beatisied; ordaining for
some the service of Hyperdulia, for others of sim^^^ Dulia; (as they call it):
commissioning some to be over one Country, or City, or over one sort of
Diseases, or Affairs, and others over another. (As Kings dis^ibute according to
their good pleasure, the Honors, Charges, and Dignities of their State) while
they cannot produce, for one particular of all this, any command, or foundation
from the Word of GOD But come we to our Apostle, who declares in that which
follows, what the Discipline was, that these voluntary Masters of the
Faithful, did pretend to impose upon them. Let no man (says he) master it over
you, by an humility of spirit, and the service of Angels.

In these words, he shows us, what it is, to which they would oblige
Christians, namely, the service of Angels; and what the pretext was, upon which
they promoted this new service, to wit, an humility of Spirit; As for the
former of these; the word used in the original, does signify, not in general
all kind of service, but particularly that of Religion; whence it is, that the
Latin Interpreter does render it, the religion of Angels. This religious
service comprehends in it those pieces of worship, and those ceremonies,
which are peformed to the Deity, and the actions by which homage is done it in
that quality, as adoration, invocation, thanksgiving, trust, and such others.
These men's meaning therefore was, that besides that supreme service, which
Christians do render unto GOD the Father, Son, and Holy Spirit, they should
serve Angels also, as their Mediators, and Intercessors with GOD, and that
under this quality, they should address prayers, and thansgivings, and other
duties of religion to them. This was their error. The pretext they took up, to
authorize this service, was, an humility of spirit; alleging, that we are too
poor a thing, to present our selves directly unto GOD, and address us, by our
selves, to so sublime a Majesty; as also, that JESUS CHRIST being the Son of
GOD, and GOD with Him, blessed for ever, it would be presumption in us to
pretend the presenting our selves immediately to Him: whereupon they concluded,
that we must have recourse to Angels, who are middle natures between GOD, and
us, to the end that they receiving our prayers, may present them to our common
Sovereign, and intervening with Him on our behalf, obtain access for us to His,
otherwise inaccessible, Throne. Such was the false, and fair-seeming discourse,
wherewith these people painted over their Tradition.

Whereupon you may observe; first, in general, that the alleging of some
specious, and seeming reasons, is not sufficient for the authorizing a worship,
or an observance in religion. All that is proposed to us in this kind, must be
founded on the word of GOD, who alone has the wisdom, and the authority that
is necessary, for the setting up of things religious. For if we once license
the mind of man, to rely upon its own imaginations, there is no error, nor
extravagancy, but it will put some color upon. Sure the discourse of these
Seducers does not want show; and men have found so much of that in it, as both
Heathens, and the Heretics, which have troubled Christianity, and in sine
those of Rome, have all of them made use of it, to color their Superstitions.
Yet you see, the Apostle, without sticking at all this vain luster, without
vouchsafing so much as to examine it, does reject, and absolutely condemn that
service, for which it was taken up: only because such service was not ordained
of GOD, but founded solely only on the will of men. Let this example make us
wise, to abhor, and refuse without delay, whatsoever men would introduce into
religion, without the order, and the word of GOD. Let us not stay at all upon
those gaudy reasons, wherewith they endeavor to paint over their inventions.
Let us not so much as hearken to them. It is sufficient warrant for our
rejecting of their services, that they are not ordained in the word of GOD.
From hence alone it follows, that they assuredly are vain, and unprofitable;
neither is there any pretext, how specious soever it be, that can or ought to
authorize in religion, a thing that GOD has not appointed.

Again, you see here in particular, that that Humility of Spirit, wherewith our
adversaries do at this day color over, the services they perform to Angels,
and Saints, is but an old paint, which ancient heretics did use to bad
purposes, and the Apostle long ago expressly rejects; so as it is not only a
vanity; but a very impudence for them to serve themselves of a thing so
decried. Let them cease alleging unto us, that we are too poor to present our
selves directly unto GOD; Let them forbear to lay before us the Courts of
earthly Kings: where men make use of the mediation of Officers, before they
speak to the Princes themselves; to infer thereupon, that we must betake us to
the the intercession of Saints, and Angels in like manner, that they may lead
us unto GOD, and present Him our persons, and requests. S. Paul has blasted
all this artifice; and they should be ashamed to use a pretext, which the first
heretics took up, for the covering of their errors; and this great Apostle
has manifestly taken from them. In very deed, all this pretended humility of
spirit, wherewith the one, and the others mask themselves, is but a cover of
real presumption, which disdaining to be subject to the commands of GOD, would
serve Him after its own fantasy, and not as He has appointed. Isai. 7.11, 12.
It Is the humility of Ahaz, who haughtily refused the grace, that the goodness
of the LORD offered Him, upon pretense, that He would not tempt Him. GOD, in
His great mercy, gives us His Son JESUS to be our Mediator; He humbles
Himself, and is made man, that He might be more accessible unto us. Joh. 14.1,
6. Ephesians. 3.12.
He proclaims in a thousand places, that He is the way, the truth, and the
life; and that no man comes to the Father, but by Him, that it is He, by whom
we have boldness, Mat. 11.28.
and access with confidence, by faith in Him. He calls us unto Himself. Come
unto me, says He, and I will give you rest. And His Ministers do, not only
permit us to go to Him; Heb. 4.16.
they command, and press us to do so. Let us go (say they) with boldness to the
throne of Grace, that we may obtain grace, and mercy to help in time of need.
Instead of obeying these holy and divine calls of GOD, and His Ministers, you
say, No, I will not do it. I am not so presumptuous, as to go either to GOD or
to His Son. I must beg the intercession of Angels, and Saints, to present me
before that supreme light. In conscience, is not this an exalting of your self
above GOD? Is it not a presuming, that you know better than He what belongs to
your duty, and His service? Is it not an hiding, under the fine words of a
feigned humility, plain rebellion, and disobedience to His Holy Majesty? which
is in effect the highest pride, a creature can be guilty of; since it is, at
the bottom, a pretending, that you are wiser than He; and that the way, He
prescribes you, is neither so good, nor so reasonable, as that which you have
chosen. But let us forbear any further arguing. For where the Apostle speaks,
there is no need, that we should discourse. His authority relyes not on the
succor of our reasons. Here (you see) it is express against our adversaries
corrupt usage. He formerly condemns the thing they do. For they approve, and
daily practice this service of Angels, which S. Paul forbids us: and ground it
upon that same humility of spirit, the pretexture whereof He has voided, and
destroyed; becoming doubly culpable, both for rebuilding (if I may so say) this
Jericho of superstistition, which he has domolished, and for employing in it
the very stones which he has blasted from Heaven. What can error say against
so clear a determination? By what charms can it turn away this flash of
lightning from falling on its head? Dear Brethren, it is too much in love with
its own inventions, to give glory to GOD; and will rather renounce His word,
than quit its superstitious imaginations. In the present matter, seeing its
self pressed, it has recourse to subtilty; and though it both maintain, and
practice the worshipping of Angels, and cannot deny but (...) the Apostle
condemns those, who teach, and practice it; yet it pretends with an (...) ^ible
boldness, that it is not it, the Apostle does condemn. It has turned its (...)
ways, to effect this illusion; all which, to say the truth, have more
hardi(...) in them. And, to begin at this one; the famousest of its last
Advocates, (...) ^ink, ill satisfied in his conscience with the subtilty of his
fellows, has bethought himself of a new gloss, unheard of till now in all the
Schools of Christianity, both ancient, and modern; born of his own conceit
alone, a very fruitful breeder of such productions, and begotten by mere
despair of his bad cause. Du Perron, in His Repl. to K. James. p. 909.
This man then affirms, that S. Paul does mean, by the service or religion of
Angels, not (as all the Fathers, and all the Modern have believed) the
worshipping of Angels, but, as he all alone will have it, the Law of Moses.
First, the novelty of this gloss, and the very consideration, that for the
space of near sixteen hundred years, not so much as one single man has been
found, that was aware of it, does sufficiently show, that it is the heat of
disputation, and not the truth of the thing, which suggested it to the author
of it, and the maxims of his Church, he does evidently renounce too; which
wills, that Scripture be not interpreted, but by the Fathers; whereas he,
laying by their exposition, brings in one here, that is not only undiscernable
in any one of them; but also directly contrary to the most, Chryso^^.
Th^odoret. O^^um^^. T^^^philact.
and most renowned of their number; who do understand these words of the
Apostle, of the worship done to Angels, by those Seducers, whom S. Paul does in
this place oppose. But I say moreover, that it is for good reason, that no man
ever thought upon it: since in very deed it is not maintainable; nor can be at
all accorded, either with the Apostles words, or with his scope and design.

Not with his words; for they must be interpreted according to the style of the
Authors of that tongue, wherein he writes. Now there are but two or three
places in Scripture, where the word used by the Apostle does occur so
construed, as it is in this place. One is in S. James, Jam. 1.26.
If any man among you (says he) seems to be religious, and bridles not his
tongue, but deceives his own soul, that man's religion, or service is in vain.
Another is in the book of the Acts, where S. Paul says, that from the
beginning, he lived a Pharis^e, Act. 26.5
after the accuratest sect (says he) of our religion. The word is found again
so construed, in the book of Wisdom, held for Canonical by our adversaries, and
which though it be not such indeed, yet is writ in Greek, with the same
language and the same style, that the Books of the New Testament are. This
author then makes use of the word in the same manner. Wisd. 4.27.
The abominable service, says he, or religion of idols, is the beginning, the
cause, and the end of all evil. In all these places, the religion, or the
service of any one, does signify, either the service he does to some other, as
in the two former passages; or the service that is done to him by others; as in
the latter of them. Here therefore, except you think, the Apostle swerved from
the style, wherein he wrote; the service, or religion of Angels, must, of
necessity, signify one of those two things, either the service, which the
Angels do perform to GOD; or the service, which men perform to them. The first
of these two senses, cannot take place, by the confession, of our adversaries
themselves, and of every sober person. They must then necessarily admit the
second, and confess with us, and with all the Ancients, that by the service of
Angels, S. Paul intends, not the Jewish religion, or the Law of Moses, but the
religious service, which these Seducers rendered to Angels, under pretext of
humility.

Moreover, in what Prophet, in what Apostle, in what rational Author, either
Ancient, or even Modern, have these men ever found this novel, and extravagant
manner of speaking, the service of Angels, that is to say, the Jewish religion?
Verily it is called the Law of GOD, because GOD instituted it: the Law of
Moses, because Moses was the Mediator, and Minister of it; the religion, or
service of the Jews, because that people made profession of it; the elements,
or rudiments of the world, because it contained but the Alphabet, and the
first, and lowest lessons of piety, and was affixed, for the most part, to the
corporeal things of this world. But that it was ever called the religion, or
service of Angels, we read not. And as for that, which those people do allege,
out of ^^^ Epistle to the Galatians, namely Gal. 3.19. Heb. 2.2.
that the Law was ordained by Angels in the hand of a Mediator, and its being
called, in the Epistle to the Hebrews, the word spoken by Angels, this, I say,
does not justify their pretention at all. For in these two places, the Apostle
does declare, only the service which the Angels did to GOD, when He gave the
Decalogue upon Sinai; where these heavenly Ministers accompanied Him, and
ordered all the Pomp of that admirable manifestation of His; forming the
lightnings, and the thunders wherewith the Mountain did resound; elevating in
the air the smoke, and darkness, which covered it, shaking its foundations, and
making all of it to tremble, and distinguishing the thunders, into those
articulate words, which the mouth of GOD it self pronounced. So far did the
operation of Angels extend, and no further. For, as to the rest, it was GOD
that spoke in His own Person, I am (said He at the beginning, the LORD thy GOD;
and that gave, and uttered all the other precepts, which the Israelites heard;
so as the Law, or the religion, which He then established, might well be termed
the religion, or the service of GOD. But it would be an evident injuring of His
Majesty, to call it the religion, or the service of Angels; since it was given
neither in their persons, nor by their mediation Besides, though it were
otherwise in this particular; yet it is clear; that this title would be proper
to the Decalogue only, and not reach that part of the Law which is called
Ceremonial, in the establishing whereof the Angels did not intervene at all,
GOD having delivered it immediately to Moses, and Moses, to the Israelites; and
yet it would be this precisely, that S. Paul should understand here, if His
purpose were to speak of the Mosaical Law, as our adversaries believe. Since
then this name The religion of Angels, can no way belong unto it, it must of
necessity be asserted, that it is not the Law of Moses, that the Apostle means
in these words.

But his design, and the thread of his discourse, is no less opposite to this
gloss, than his words. For first, having already refuted, what the Seducers
took from the Law of Moses, in the verse immediately foregoing, in these words,
Let no man condemn you in meat, or in drink, or in the distinction of feasts,
or of new Moons, or of Sabbaths, which are shadows of things to come, whereof
the body is in CHRIST; having I say, so magnificently deposited this, for what
cause, or to what purpose should he go repeating the same again? How should the
Apostle be capable of such vain babbling? Let us say then, that the error, he
rejects here, is diverse from that, which he condemed just before. That which he
condemned before, is the observation of the Jewish law, or religion: certainly
then this is not the thing meant in this place. Besides, that which he adds,
can no way refer unto it. Let no man (says he) master it over you, by humility
of spirit, and the service of Angels, intruding into things he has not seen.
Where the Apostle evidently shows, that the service of Angels enjoined by the
Seducers, was founded upon hidden things, and such as they could have no
knowledge of, either by their own reason, or by Scripture: whereas the Jewish
Ceremonies are so clearly, and so distinctly explained in the books of Moses,
that there is not a man, but may see them there. Lastly, the Apostle shows us,
at the beginning of this discourse, that these Seducers had drawn some of their
observances from Philosophy: which will not find place, if by the service of
Angels, you understand the Jewish religion, which, as all know, was delivered
by Moses, and not by the Philosophers. (...). p. 910.
For whereas our adversaries understand the discourses of the Jews, by the vain
deceit of Philosophy, this is absurd and rediculous in the highest degree; it
being evident, that the Jewish Doctors are sometimes called, Sages, 1 Cor. 1.20.
and their science, wisdom; as when S. Paul says Where is the wise? GOD has
made foolish the wisdom of the world. But never are they called Philosophers,
or their Doctrine Philosophy; These names being every where constantly
referred, to the learned men of Greece, and of the Heathen, and unto their
Doctrine.

Be it then concluded in fine, that the Apostle means here, by the religion, or
service of Angels, not the religion delivered to the Jews by Moses; but the
worship, and invocation, and service, which these Seducers would have men
address unto Angels, under pretext of humility; they having drawn this abuse
out of the Greek Philosophers, in whose Books it is still found to this day;
Plato, one of the chief of them, writing expressly, that service must be done to
the Demons; (so called they the Angels) as holding a middle place between the
GODS, and men; and serving us for Interpreters, to the Divine Nature; and all
his School has ^ver thus hold, and practiced, as does appear by the works of
the latest of his disciples. And this abuse was common among all the heathen.
They founded it too, just as the Seducers here taxed by the Apostle did, and as
our Adversaries do, upon pretended humility of Spirit, A^b os. p. 1807. c. 4.5.
as we understand, by an ancient commentary upon the Epistle to the Romans,
published under the name of S. Ambrose. The Author speaking of the Heathen of
his time, says, They are wont to make a miserable excause, saying, that by
means of them (that is, of the petty Deities, they served) they might go to
GOD; as men come to a Prince, by means of His Counselors of State, and His
Masters of Requests. But, says he a little after, men go to a King by means of
His Officers, because after all a King is a man, that knows not whom he may
trust with His estate: whereas GOD is ignorant of nothing, and knows the
disposition, and actions, and capacity of all men: so as to obtain His favor,
we want not the suffrages of an Interposer; there needs, but a devout soul.
Such a one He will surely hear, wheresoever he speaks to Him.

It Is from the sinks of this Philosophy of the World, that the Seducers, here
opposed by the Apostle, had drawn their pretended humility, and their serving
of Angels.

And our Adversaries well perceiving, that for the main it cannot be denied,
but such was the doctrine here condemned by the Apostle, do advance another
fancy of theirs; telling us, that in his time, there was a certain Sect, which
some call the Judaique Sect, and others otherwise, consisting of people, who
neither served GOD, nor JESUS CHRIST, but Angels, under the quality of Chiefs,
and supreme Patrons, and Protectors of their Religion: that it is at these S.
Paul aims here, and not at them, who, its true, do serve Angels, but do also
serve GOD the Father, and His Son JESUS CHRIST. First, all this Sect is an
Idol, which never had subsistence other-where, than in their fond conceit;
neither could it indeed be any other where. For if they were Jews, who can
believe, that they served not GOD, whose service the whole Judaical Law, and
Religion did expressly command throughout, in the beginning, in the middle, and
at the end? Again, if they were Christians, how served they not JESUS CHRIST?
And if they were either Jews, or Christians, how did they own no other chief of
their Relgiion, then the Angels? All this is nothing, but a mere fiction of our
Adversaries, who endeavor to put a Changling upon us, and do set up this
chymera, that it may take the blow which the Apostle deals them. It is not
lawful for us to forge Sects at our pleasure. There must be proof of them
produced from good, and creditable witnesses, if we would be believed about
them. But so far are they, from having any warrant, of this fine story, in
Antiquity; that on the contrary, the ancient Interpreters of the Apostle, such
as Theodoret, Photius, and Theophylact, do overthrow it, affirming, that those,
whom S. Paul aims at, alleged, that GOD is great and incomprehensible, and
that it is a thing unworthy of the Majesty of the Son, to conduct so mean
Creatures unto Him, as men are: whereupon they added, that application must be
made to Angels, for our having access by their means, and for the gaining of
the favor, and good will of GOD. How did not they serve GOD, since it was for
access to Him, and for the becoming gracious with Him, that they employed the
Angels interceding? and how did they not adore JESUS CHRIST, seeing they
accounted themselves unworthy to go immediately to Him? In fine, how did they
own the Angels, for the supreme Heads of their Religion, seeing they made use
of their intervention, only for to come to GOD thereby? (...).
This very thing was the motive of their erring practice. And of the forenamed
Ancients adds expressly, that the service they did to Angels was, Praying to
them; as also this abuse reigned a long time in Phrygia, and Pisidia; and that
^ven in his days there were Oratories found, Dedicated to S. Michael. A
relation, (...).
which has so stung one of the great Cardinals of Rome, that all in Choler
against this Author, (who lived almost twelve hundred years ago, and was
besides one of the greatest and most knowing spirits of Antiquities) He says,
with his leave he has had ill luck in this particular. Whence you may see the
respect that these Gentlemen do bear the ancient Fathers, whom they have
perpetually in their mouth, When they favor them, they are Oracles. If they
speak otherwise, their antiquity does not s^ve them from being treated as
ignorant, and unlearned. Now whereas they allege, the Apostle's saying of
those he speaks of, that they held not the head, (that is CHRIST JESUS) I grant
it: But I affirm, that this does not interr, they made profession of
acknowledging Him not: as from his saying, that they were puffed up with the
sense of their flesh, and did intrude into things they had not seen, it follows
not, that they did acknowledge, either the one, or the other of these things.
So far were they from it, that they made profession of humility, and it was
under this very pretext, that they would serve Angels; and boast, without
doubt, they did, of knowing well the things, that they divulged. But the
Apostle speaks here of that, which follows truly, and ligitimatly from their
doctrine, and not of what they avowed. For doubtless, they made profession of
JESUS CHRIST, and of His Gospel, and S. Paul, does clearly presuppose it,
through his whole discourse. But by the addition of their errors, they denied
in effect, what they confessed with the mouth; and by this serving of Angels,
took away from CHRIST the quality of being Head of the Church, which in word,
they gave Him. It Is this, the Apostle here charge them withal; and thereby
foundeth evidently this maxim, That whosoever takes the Angels, or any other
such whom you will, for His Mediators, and Intercessors with GOD, he does in
effect renounce the Mediation of JESUS CHRIST, and takes from Him the glory He
has to be the Head of the Church. This dignity no more admitting an associate,
then that of His Regality; and being such, as cannot be possessed, by any one
alone.

But why do I stand considering, what the opinions of these false Teachers in
other respects were? Let them have believed whatever else you please: sure it
is, they worshipped Angels; and that S. Paul accuses them of it, and
reprehends them for it; and will not have the faithful follow them in this
particular. He does not say, that they were Sorcerers, or Atheists; that they
did not serve, or not invocate GOD, and His Son JESUS CHRIST. He says, they
served Angels, and takes them up for it extreme sharply. You do the same. Judge
then, whether the Apostle's Thunder does not fall on you. But you will say, I
do adore GOD, and JESUS CHRIST. In Conscience, do you not mock the world, in
defending your self after that manner? As if you were accused of not
acknowledging the Divinity of the Father, or of the Son, and not of Worshipping
Angels? But it is always the custom of these Masters, to substitute one, or
other of the Ancients in their place, when they are taken with transgressing
the Ordinances of GOD, and His Apostles. The LORD forbids the bowing down ones
self before Images. They avow they do it; but for all that, do pretend, that
the Law Thundereth against the Heathen of former times, and not against them.
S. Paul condemns, with heinous words, such as enjoin abstinence from meats.
They confess, it is their practice: but do add, that it is, the old Encratites,
and Montanists, and Manichees, whom the Apostle means, and not they. In like
manner here, being accused of worshipping Angels, they franckly confess it, yea
boast of Worshipping them, and Excommunicate us, for that we do it not with
them. And whereas S. Paul protests so clearly, that we must not serve them,
they pay us off with this brave excuse, that it is not of them he speaks, but
of I know not what old race of Jewish Heretics; as if it were not manifest,
that he speaks in general of all those, who at any time, and in any place
whatever, do take upon them to serve Angels: forbidding us, under an heavy
penalty, to let them master it over us, upon any pretext.

As for us, Dear Brethren, who do know, that the Laws of GOD are universal, and
eternal; and that no Age, nor Climat can dispense with men for them, or exempt
the Violaters of them, from that righteous curse, they threaten; let us
faithfully obey this holy, and sacred order which the Apostle has given.
Hearken we not to the vain glosses, and frivolous distinctions, by which humane
subtilty endeavors to elude it, and color over its own abuses. Observe we
sincerely, what this great Minister of JESUS CHRIST enjoyneth us. He forbids
us to Worship Angels in point of Religion. There is no reason, that either the
eloquence, or the subtilty, either the splendour, or the power of men, much less
their pleasure, and usurped domineering, should have more efficacy upon us,
than this Heavenly Authothority. And praised be GOD, for that He has given us
the courage to obey His Apostle in this particular, and to put away the
Worshipping of Angels, and men from among us, notwithstanding the strong
contradiction of flesh, and blood. Let us abide firm in this resolution. Let us
adore none, but GOD; since there is none adorable, but He. It Is just, that He
alone should be served among us; since it is He alone, who has created, and
redeemed us.

But, Beloved, remember, I beseech you, that rightly to render Him His due
glory, it is not sufficient, to have renounced the error of those ancient
Phrygians, whom the Apostle here opposes, and of our Adversaries of Rome, to
wit, the adoration of Angels, and men departed; There must also be banishing of
all strange service, all Idolizing of any thing whatever. For if GOD cannot
suffer those, who serve Angels, and deceased Saints, that is, the most
excellent natures that be, and such as have the image of the Deity most clearly
resplendent in them; how much less will He endure those, that adore Gold, and
Silver, the excrements of the earth? or their own belly, the shamefullest, and
most infamous of all idols? or the flesh, which is but a vain, and perishing
figure; or the grandeurs of the world, which are but exhalations? And we, that
have renounced the first fort of these false services, how can we be excusable,
if we retain, and exercise the second? Now would to GOD we were as free from
the one, as we are from the other. But it must be confessed to our shame; these
latter kind of Idols have still a great many Devoto's, and Servitors among us.
That avarice, which S. Paul calls an Idolatry is but too much exercised among
us: the flesh, and vanity are here publicly served. Wretched men, where is
your judgment? You do not serve the Angels of Heaven, and you serve the
metals of the earth! You do not adore Spirits made perfect, and you do adore
profane flesh! Neither the light of the Sun, nor the brightness of the Moon,
has been able to seduce your hearts; and you have suffered your selves to be
seduced by the glittering of Gold, and Silver, the false Sol, and Luna of the
Chemists! You have put your hope in Gold, and said unto fine Gold, Thou art my
confidence, You that have disdained to put your confidence in Saints. The
belly, (with shame, and horror do I utter it) the belly is your GOD; yours,
who have made this glorious promise, to have none but the Eternal only for your
GOD? How can you hope, that the LORD should suffer you, to give Him such
Monsters for companions? He, who is so jealous of His glory, that He cannot
suffer the Angels themselves to be associated with Him? Dear Brethren, I pray,
let us deceive our selves no longer. Let us once for all put clean away all
these false services, and exterminating every Idol from among us, adore and
serve none but GOD alone. Let Him have the entire possession of our whole
hearts; let Him reign, and exercise an absolve dominion in them, governing all
the sentiments, and motions of them, at His will; that after having constantly
adored Him in Spirit, and in truth, we may one day receive from His holy
faithful hand, the Crown of Glory, and Eternity, which He has purchased for us
by the merit of His only Son our LORD JESUS CHRIST; To whom, with Him, and the
Holy Spirit, the true, and only GOD blessed for ever, be honor, and praise
unto Ages of Ages: Amen.

THE XXIX. SERMON.
COL. II. Verse. XVIII. XIX. Verse. XVIII. Let no man Master it over you, at his
pleasure, by humility of Spirit, and the service of Angels, intruding into
things, he has not seen, being rashly puffed up with the sense of his flesh.

XIX. And not holding the head, from which the whole body, being furnished, and
fitly knit together by joints, and bands, increases with the increase of GOD.


DEAR Brethren: The same pride, that destroyed the first man at the beginning,
is the cause of the ruin of such of his posterity, as do perish. For if you
heed it well, you will see, that that is the thing, which makes them despise,
or mis-embrace the CHRIST of GOD, in whom alone stands our salvation. It was
pride, that kept the Jews from embracing this singular gift of Heaven; because
(says S. John) they loved the praise of men; even as our LORD reproached them,
saying. How can you believe, seeing you seek honor one of another? And S. Paul
expressly informs us, that the proud fancy they had, to establish their own
righteousness, was the cause, they submitted not to the righteousness of GOD.
It was likewise pride, that blinded the minds of the Gentiles, so as they saw
not the wonderful things of the Gospel of JESUS CHRIST. The haughty opinion
they had of their own vain wisdom, induced them to disdain the wisdom of GOD;
and to account the Cross of His Son foolishness, though it be an inexhaustible
treasury of sapience. Again, in fine it is pride, that has seminated, among
Christians themselves, all the heresies, that have grown up into any request,
since the Churches nativity to this hour. Ignorance animated with presumption
has brought them all forth, and bred them up. For if the unhappy workers that
divulged them, had kept to the doctrine of GOD, and not lashed out beyond what
He has revealed in His word: if the vain fierceness of their Spirit, had not
emboldned them, to enterprise things above the reach of men; they would never
have thought upon corrupting Religion, with their falsly-subtil inventions. It
would have remained pure throughout, and sincere to this day; and such, as the
Ministers of our LORD, and Savior delivered it at first to their Disciples, by
word, and writing. But their pride mis-leading them, did induce them, to
attempt things above their capacity, and adore, and spread abroad their
presumptuous imaginations, as true secrets of GOD.

The Apostle informs us, in this Text, that this was the origin, in
particular, of those errors, and false services, which certain Seducers went
about to introduce, at that time among Christians. We heard, in the last
exercise upon this subject, what their error was: namely, that under color of
a false humility of Spirit, they taught the service, or Religious worship of
Angels. We are now to consider, by the assistance of GOD, that which the
shortness of time hindered us from explicating then; to wit the marks of these
false Teachers, and the pernicious consequence of their error. For though the
Apostles intimation of the thing it self be sufficient; His authority in the
Church being such, as it is not lawful for any man, whoever he be, to teach, or
believe any thing in Christian Religion, contrary to the sentiment of this
great servant of GOD: Yet not content with injoyning the Colossians, that they
should not let themselves be mastered over by these pretended Doctors, who
would cause them to serve Angels; for the adding of more weight to his
exhortation, he discovers to them those Seducers their true motives, and the
cause of their error, and remonstrates also the dismal issue, in which it did
engage them. For, as you have heard, he notes first their audaciousness, and
ignorance, when he says that, they intrude into things they have not seen.
Next, he shows the source of them, to wit, their foolish presumption, when he
adds, that they are rashly puffed up with the sense of their flesh: And lastly,
he represents us the pernicious consequence of their doctrine; the fruit, and
success wherein all their striving did terminate; which was, that in effect, by
their glorious services, they debauched, and disunited men from JESUS CHRIST
the true, and only Head of believers, and so deprived them of that life, that
light, and salvation, which this Divine Head influxeth into the members of His
mystical body. For this is, in substance, the sense of the latter part of the
Text, in which the Apostle says, that these people did not hold the head, from
which the whole body being furnished, and fitly knit together by joints, and
bands increases with the increase of GOD. In these three heads, the whole
meaning of this Text seems to me to consist. Wherefore, if it please GOD, we
will examine them distinctly one after another: and, in the Apostles order,
treat first of these Seducers boldness: secondly of their presumption, and
lastly of the consequence of their doctrine, which tends to the disuniting of
men from JESUS CHRIST, the Head of the whole body of the Church.

As for the first point; this temerity, to intrude into things one has not
seen, is ordinary enough, with all sorts of men, ever since the venom of pride
impoisoned their hearts, and in special, with all heretics; But it is
remarkable particularly in those, that teach the service of Angels; it being
manifest, that those blessed Spirits, whose worship they erect, are of a nature
much superior to us, the order, and operations whereof are open to no sense of
ours. But when the Apostle says, they have not seen the things into which they
intrude, his meaning is not simply, that the eyes either of their body or of
their natural reason, never received the Species of these objects; nor
apprehended, or conceived the consequences, and conduct of their being; but
moreover, that they neither had, nor could have by the word, or revelation of
GOD, any certainty of the things they affirmed. For though the greater part of
the matters of Religion be above our senses; yet when GOD has discovered them
to us, and as it were, rendered them visible in His word, it becomes easy for
us to know them by this means; and the Scripture too does call the knowledge,
that we have of them this way, a sight of them. Ezekiel. 13.3.
Thus Ezekiel means, when he reprocheth the false Prophets, with following
their own hearts, when they had seen nothing; that is, they predicted, and
assured things for true, which the foolish imagination of their own Spirit
suggested to them, though in truth, GOD had showed them no such matter, in the
light of His revelation. It is just so, that those Seducers did, whom the
Apostle taxes in this place. They dogmatized, and affirmed it, as a clear
case, that Angels were to be served, and invocated: and to persuade men of it,
they delivered many things, concerning their nature, and their intervention
between GOD and us. Yet the truth is, that of all this, they neither had, nor
could have any certainty, as being things, which they had never seen either in
the School of nature, or the revelation of GOD.

All our knowledge, and assurance necessarily comes from one of these three
sources, namely, either from sense, and such is the knowledge we have of the
things we see, hear, smell, touch and taste; or from reason; and so does humane
science, which is acquired, or formed, by discourse, and natural reasoning; or
lastly, from the revelation of GOD, who discovers to us, by the light of His
word, diverse objects, and diverse verities, which neither our sense, nor our
reason, could perceive in nature. Now though reason does cause men, by the
consideration of things that are, or are done in the world, to discern some
principles, and verities of Religion; yet the whole of this is so small a
matter, and withal so confused, and imperfect, by reason of the corruption of
our understandings, that the Word of GOD ought to be held, for the sole assured
foundation of Religion; according to that which the Apostle signifies to us
elsewhere, Romans 10.17.1
even that faith comes by hearing, and hearing from the word of GOD. When
therefore he says here, that the Seducers do intrude into things they have not
seen, he does, it is true, respect in general all those Sources of our
knowledge, and absolutely deny, that these men had, by them, any of the things
they dogmatized: but he does particularly referr to the third, that is, the
revelation of GOD. And his meaning is, that the LORD had not showed them, nor
made them see, by His Word, any of the things they preached, and would set up
in the Religion of Christians. And though indeed they neither had, nor could
have any certain knowledge of them; nevertheless they discoursed of them
blindfold; and did divulge their fantasies, the visions of their brain, and
dreams of their own Spirit, for indubitable, necessary, and wholesome truths.

A carriage, which the Apostle does excellently well set forth, by that word of
his, which we have translated, intruding; a word, that properly signifies
entering into, setting foot on, and marching forth in some quarter, as in ground
we have title to. Whereby he notes out the vanity of these false Teachers, who
did not merely busy themselves in a research of things above their capacity,
(which is in it self a vain, and ridiculous labor) but also dared to speak of
them, and make peremptory decisions about them: so, going above ground, and
walking, as may be said in the vacuum of their own imaginations: mounting their
thoughts unto a Region far above them; like that poor Phrenetick, of whom the
Poets speak, who having presumed to enter upon a strange Element, and fly
there, soon found his rashness punished with his ruin. The Prophet makes use
of a like phrase, when to represent his modesty, Psalm. 131.1.
he says, that he has not walked in great things, and too high for him.

Dear Brethren, we have no need, to ascend so far back as the Apostle's time,
for examples of this vanity. Our Adversaries of the Communion of Rome, do
afford us a sufficient store: who, as they retain the error of those, whom the
Apostle here taxes, serving Angels, as they did: so do inherit their temerity,
intruding into things, they have not seen. They do magisterially pronounce,
that men must serve, and invoke Angels, and Saints departed. They boldly define
the Religious Worship, that is to be given, and divide it us into its kinds;
naming one of them Dulia, and the other, Hyperdulia; all with as much
confidence, as if they spoke of things most obvious to sense. I urge not, for
the present, that Scripture does blast this whole error, every where
intimating, that we ought to serve no one in Religion, but GOD alone, and with
loud voice anathematizing the Worship of any creature. I pretermit, what it
says particularly, against the Adoration, and Worshipping of Angels; as also,
that S. Paul does expressly prohibit it in the Text. I keep singly to the rule,
he here gives me; that no belief be afforded those, who intrude into things,
they have not seen; and do demand of these hardy Doctors, in what Region, in
what part of Divine Revelation, have they seen these Services, these Dulia's,
and these Hyperdulia's, of which they so positively speak? Where is it, that
the Holy Ghost has showed them these brave Doctrines? To what Prophet has He
revealed them? To what Apostle has He signified them? Of what Evangelist have
themselves learnt them? Sure they must here be hushed, of necessity. They have
not seen one of these pretended mysteries, in the Book of GOD. They cannot show
us any track of them any where, except it be in the fancies of Plato, and of
the Heathen Philosophers, the Disciples of Demons, and not of GOD; men taught
in the School of error, and not in that of truth. They proceed further yet,
and make us discourses about the Orders of Angels, and distribute to them their
business, and cut them out their Ministrations; they rank the Saints, and give
to them, each his Charge, and employment. And if you ask them, how these
Spirits, being in Heaven, do hear our Prayers and requests; and by what means
they see the secret motions of our hearts; They answer, some of them, that the
mirror of the Trinity, upon which they incessantly have their eyes, does
present them, all the Idea's of them; others, that GOD reveals them to them,
some other way. But whence do they know this? It is neither sense, nor natural
reason, that has showed it them. If therefore they have seen it any where, it
must be in the Revelation of GOD. Yet it is clear, and they cannot deny it,
that neither this pretended mirror, nor any one of their other conjectures, do
appear there at all. Cajetan. in 22. q. 88. a. ^.
And one of their most famed Authors sufficiently declares it; We do not know,
(says he) by any certain reason, whether the Saints do perceive our Prayers,
or no; although we do piously believe it; as if it were piety, and not pitiful
credulity, to believe things of which we have no assurance. But let him make
what account of it, he pleases. This is evident, that since he confesses, they
have no assurance of these things, it must of necessity be confessed also, that
it is extremely ill done of them, to intrude into them; except he will reject
the Authority of the Apostle, in his condemning those here most expressly, who
intrude into things, they have not seen.

This vanity does further show it self, in the things they give out, concerning
the state of Souls, in their fabulous Purgatory, the situation, the structure,
and partitions whereof they represent; together with the fire, and torments of
the Spirits, that are there imprisoned, with such a deal of confidence, as if
they were just now come from thence, after many years stay in the place.
Nevertheless, the truth is, that neither they nor their Ancestors ever saw one
jot of it, either in the Scriptures of GOD, or in the nature of things; there
being not a word any where, of any one of these imaginations. That which they
say, of their Transubstantiation, with its conditions, and circumstances, and
of the manner how the body of CHRIST is present in every crumb of their Host,
and in every drop of their Chalice. Their positions likewise, concerning their
pretended Sacrifice of the Mass, and concerning the relative, or Analogical
adoration of Images, and concerning the Characters, which some of their
Sacraments do imprint upon the souls of men; and in one word, all the points of
doctrine, that we contest with them, are of the same nature; All of them are
things, they have not seen; they intrude into them; walk in them, and strout
vainly; commanding the belief or practice of them, under pain of damnation, how
doubtful, and uncertain soever they be, and furiously anathematizing all those,
who make the least doubt to receive them.

As for us, Dear Brethren, who, through the grace of GOD, have learned to
prefer His voice before the imaginations of men, and to fear the thundrings of
Heaven, more than the fulminations of Rome, let us leave them in this vain
humor; or to say better, pray to GOD, to bring them out of it, and give them
to distinguish their own dreams, from His declarations. And for our further
acquitting of our selves, let us religiously keep to the Apostles direction.
Intrude we never into things, we have not seen. Neither be so simple, as to
follow those that do, or to suffer our selves to be mastered over, by them. Let
us rest in the things which GOD has clearly revealed to us in His word; which
He has so set before our eyes, in that Divine Treasury of His truth, as very
children may there behold them. This portion is sufficient for us; if we
cultivate it well, we shall find in it abundantly, wherewith to inform our
understandings, wherewith to calm our Consciences, and sanctify our hearts,
and perfect all the faculties of our souls. Let no man presume above that which
is written. 1 Cor. 4.6. Romans 12.3.
Take heed of being wise above what is meet: but be wise to sobriety. Let the
word of GOD be the rule of our science, and His Book the bound of all our
curiosity. All knowledge is had, without knowing any thing beyond it. This
consideration alone is enough to preserve us from all the errors of Rome; For
since the intruding into things, we have not seen, is a temerity condemned here
by the Apostle; and in matter of Religion, we can have seen none but such as
GOD has revealed in His Word; it evidently follows, that we are obliged not
only to forbear believing, but also to proceed to the rejecting of all the
Doctrines, about which we are in contest with Rome, no one of which appears
in the Word of GOD. And it is manifestly sin, to reduce them into act, or
practice, since according to the Apostle, Romans 1^.23.
Whatsoever is not of faith is sin: it being certain, that there cannot be any
true faith of things, which are not found in the Word of GOD, seeing the same
Apostle shows us, that that hearing which produces Faith in us, is of the
Word of GOD, as we have intimated before.

But I come to the other point, where S. Paul taxes the arrogance and
presumption of the false Teachers. It Is this properly that leads, or to say
better, (...) them, into that Vtopia of things they never saw. They are (says
the Apostle r^shly puffed up with the sense, or understanding of their flesh.
By this understanding or (...) of their flesh, he means all the vivacity,
ability, and acuteness, that nature has endowed us with: what ever degree of
vigor, and light, reason does of its self attain unto. For, under the word,
Flesh, Scripture comprehends the whole nature of man; that is to say, not his
body only, to which this name does properly belong, but also his soul, yea even
his understanding, his will, and his reason which is the excellence^ part
thereof: forasmuch as sin, since it infected our nature, has in such a manner
condensated, and corrupted, and altered, all the faculties of our soul, that it
has turned them, after a sort, into flesh, and blood, not that it has, to
speak prop^ly, destroyed the substance of them, (which, as you know, is still
spiritual, and immortal) but by reason of its deading the vigor, and embasing,
and depr^ving the dispositions of them, having ^^f^ned us to the earth, and to
our selves, and filled (...) afflictions, and wills, with so perverse, and so
violent a love of the flesh, that all (...) light of our understandings, is
obscured, and blackned by the Con^agion of this poison; and their conceptions
are totally tainted with it, all our discourses, and reasonings, in this
mis^rable estate, being nothing but flesh and blood, until the Spirit of GOD
does come and reform us, and o^ carnal, and natural as our understandings were,
make them spiritual, by the infusion of its holy light into them. Thus it is
that our LORD, (...). 16.17. 1 Cor. ^.
and Savior said to Peter. It is not flesh, and blood, that has revealed this
secret in thee, but my Father, which is in Heaven. And S. Paul protests, that
the natural man cannot comprehend the things which are of GOD. It Is therefore
properly this reason, or (...) of the natural man, that is of a man not
illumin^t^d from on high which the Apostle here calls the sense, or
understanding of the flesh.

But the good opinion, which those Seducers have of it, he terms a passing up
with much elegancy. For, to say true, it is but wind they are ^lown up with,
filled they are not. Now not satisfied to have thus discovered their vanity, he
further adds, that they are puffed up rashly, that is to say, in vain, and
without (...). For indeed, whatever the pretended acuteness of our mind may be,
it is at the bottom so small a matter; it is a faculty so feeble, so limited,
and of so narrow an ex^^^^, that if it give us any vanity, it is without cause.
They that best know themselves, and do possess this part in an higher degree,
well perceive it; and fran^ly confess, that all the light of our understanding
is but a vapor; it is Science ignorance, and its ability, presumption. For who
is there, but does daily find, by making trial, that the point of this so much
esteemed understanding, turns at the least difficulties? that its sight is
dazzled at the meanest lights? and that its reason is confounded in the plain^st
meditations? And when we consider, not barely what each single person of us
knows, but all the Science that all mankind has acquired, during so many ages,
as its greatest, and most accomplished wits have been busied about it; we find,
that its so little in comparison of what we are ignorant of, that a drop of
water has more proportion to the whole Ocean. It Is therefore without doubt a
vanity extremely foolish, to make oftentation of it, and to presume much of a
man's self, for so small an advantage. But it is a much worse extravancy yet,
to take this understanding of the flesh for our guide in matters of Religion,
which are all of them divine, and celestial; while it is incapable of
conducting us in the very things of Nature, and of the earth, as experience
lets us daily see; so as we must conclude, that all those, who laying by the
Word of GOD, would instruct us in Religion by the light of their own
understandings, are all of them taken with as high degree of senslesness, as
ever was: and that beside vanity, there is frenzy in what they do, and some
such bruitishness, as those mad people showed, who yet while would raise the
Fabri^^ of their Tower up to Heaven. This is just the malady of all the
Heretics, and S^ducers that ever rose up in the world. Accordingly you see,
that the Apostle, in the Epistle to the Galatians, does enroll Heresy among
the works of the Flesh: because it is a production of its understanding, which
incitated, and heated by the presumptuousness thereof, does bring forth this
wretched brood. And it is remarkable, that these same Seducers, whose puffing
up, and pride the Apostle here discovers, did notwithstanding make profession
of humility of spirit, as he himself does testify; to show us, that we should
not rely upon apparencies; and that oftentimes under the habit, and looks, and
outward actions of humbleness, there are hidden, hearts puffed up with vanity,
and swollen with pride. And such is at the bottom the Genius of all those, that
would have their inventions to be valid in Religion. Their very having the
audaciousness to exceed the institutions of GOD, does evidence an insufferable
arrogance; forasmuch as instead of being content with His Orders, and
submitting to them with an humble, and teachable spirit, they undertake to cut
out new ways to Heaven. I leave now to each one the care of applying this
observation to those new rules, which the spirit of superstition has
multiplied, for diverse Ages, almost to an infinity. They all set the Cross over
their Gates; the services they perform to Angels, and men; the habits they
shape for their zealous; their countenances, and their very looks, and eyes
ever fixed on the ground, do promise a profound humility. But GOD knows what
the reality is. And remitting the dijudication of it unto Him. I only advertise
you, that you should not suffer such fair outsides, to abuse you; remembering,
how the Apostle has here taught us, that a profession of humility of spirit,
does sometimes cover, a foul rashly puffed up with the sense of its flesh: as
also, that not seldom, this very humility, and pretended mortification, is the
matter, which feeds its pride, and maintains its flatulency.

But it is time, to come to the third point; which contains the worst, and
most pernicious effect of this serving of Angels, here condemned by the
Apostle; namely, that they that promote it, or stick in, and practice is, do
not hold the head, from which the wh^le body, being furnished, and fitly knit
together, by joints and bands, increases with increase of GOD. You know, this
head he speaks of, is our LORD JESUS CHRIST, Eternal and true GOD made man, who
dyed, and r^se again for the salvation of the world: and that the body of this
head, is the Church; the whole multitude of the faithful. This comp^rison is so
frequent in Scripture, and the reasons, upon which it is founded, are so clear,
and so known, that there is no need I should stand upon deducing them. We have
to observe, only, the operation of this divine head upon the body, and the
benefits it communicates thereto, both which the Apostle touches at. He says
first, that this Head furnishes the body of His Church. Then in the second
place, that ^^^tly knits the same together, by joints, and bands. And lastly,
that by this means, He makes it to increase with an increase of GOD. All this
is taken from the resemblance of natural bodies, whence this comparison is
drawn. For you see, that in nature, the head does first, distribute to all the
parts of the body, such strength as is necessary for the exercising of their
motions, and sensations; it being as it were the common Source, whence the
animal spirits as they are called, the principles of motion, and sensation; are
by the nerves, as by so many Channels, shed forth into all the parts of the
whole frame, as well higher, as lower, the farthest off, as well as the
nearest; and when this influence, and communication of the head happens to
cease, you see the members, which are deprived of it, to be presently
paralytick and insensible. Then further, the head does the body this office,
that it binds, and keeps decently fastened to each other, by means of the same
nerves, all the parts whereof it is made up, both the harder ones, as the
Bones, and Cartilages; and likewise the softer, as the Muscles, and other
substances. Finally, the Head, by means of this continual influence, does give
its body the ability to grow, and extend its self, and rise up by little, and
little, to the measure of its due magnitude. The Apostle therefore makes use of
this natural image, for the representing unto us of those spiritual benefits,
which we receive from the communion of the LORD JESUS, our mystical Head, and
says, First, that He furnishes His body, that is, gives it abundantly,
spiritual sense, and motion; and in a word, all graces necessary for the
exercise of an Heavenly life, diffusing them into all His mystical members,
that is, into all the faithful, by means of his not animal, as that of nature
is, but Divine, and Eternal Spirit. This Spirit, which He distributes to all,
and every of His members, does replenish our eyes, and senses, with that light,
and vigor, which is requisite, for the seeing, feeling, and tasting of Divine
things: It sheds abroad peace, and joy into our hearts, and curing our benumbed
limbs, and opening our hands which vice had locked up, does give us the
operations, and motions of the life of GOD, and in fine, forms in us all the
conceptions, and virtues of the new man.

But he says in the second place, continuing this excellent Metaphor, that
this Divine Head does fitly knit together His body by joints and bands;
expressing by these words, that spiritual Union, which binds, and joyneth the
faithful, all of them to their Head, and each of them to the other. For as
every member of the body has its particular temperature, and qualities, very
different from the rest, one being hard, another soft; one cold, another hot;
one dry, another moist; and yet being linked by those secret, and unperceptible
bands, which descending from the head, do fasten them all together, do make up
but one only, and the same body: so is it with the Church: The faithful, of
whom it is composed, are upon the account, both of nature, and of grace
infinitely different, one from another. In nature: for some are of one Nation,
of one Age, of one Sex, of one condition; and others of another; one rich,
another poor; one learned, another ignorant; one noble, another of low
extraction. In grace likewise; for who can utter all the differences of their
gifts in this respect? But JESUS CHRIST, their mystical Head, notwithstanding
this diversity, reduces them all into one, and the same body: as S. Paul says
elsewhere, We being many are one body in CHRIST: He sets us together, and
uniteth us aptly, one with another, by these mystical joints and bands of which
the Apostle here speaks: that is, the gifts and graces of His Spirit; and first
of all, Charity, the univeral bond of all the faithful, which ties them
inseparably together, by the sentiments of a sincere, and ardent love, and by
all the motions, offices, services, and assistances, which depend upon it. It Is
this Spirit of Charity, that mixeth all their souls into one; that renders them
sensible of each others weal, and woe; that inspires into them the same Prayers,
and wishes, and so governs their actions, that though different, they yet all
aim at the same mark, the glory of their Head, and the common edification of
His members. Among these joints, and ligaments of the LORD's body, I also
place, the diverse graces, wherewith He does invest them, giving to this man one
Talent, and to that man another, different; to one, zeal; to another,
knowledge; to one utterance, to another judgment. To the same too must be
referred, the diverse offices, which He has instituted in His Church, Pastors,
Teachers, Elders, and Deacons; this various distribution approximating them to
one another; the need, they have, of their Brethren, and the succor they may
afford them, admirably knitting, and keeping up the commerce of their common
Charity, Ephesians. 4.12.
as S. Paul expressly notes in the Epistle to the Ephesians; where speaking of
the diverse Ministries, which the LORD JESUS formed, and erected among His
people, he says, that He made them for the coaptation, or setting together of
the Saints, for the edification of His body.

In fine, he adds here, a third benefit of CHRIST's, which is as the sequel,
and fruit of the two former; that His body thus furnished, and compacted by its
Head, does increase with an increase of GOD, that is, with a Divine, and
spiritual increase, arising from the efficacy of GOD, and tending to His glory;
in as much as the Church, thus united to its Head, and filled with the
influences of His grace, is established, is strengthened, and completed by
little, and little, in faith, in hope, in charity, in light, and in sanctity,
until it attain, unto the measure of its perfect stature, in CHRIST. Such is
the Communion of the Church with its Head JESUS CHRIST, here described by the
Apostle.

And hence it appears, how grievous the error of those is, who serve Angels
there, being not any thing in these words, but does evince it. First then the
Apostle says, they hold not the head. It Is true, they do not make profession of
letting it go. For they affirm themselves Christians, and do own JESUS CHRIST,
for the Prince, and Author of their Religion. But at the bottom, and in effect,
they break the union, which they should have with Him, in quality of Head;
since they address themselves to Angels, as their Mediators, and Intercessors
with GOD. For it is a giving them the office of Head, which pertains to one
alone; it being clear, that this mediation, which is the Source of our life, is
the office of our Head. Again their impudence does plainly appear, in that
JESUS CHRIST our Head, does furnish His body with all necessary graces. For to
what end should we go seek in Angels, or Saints, what we have abundantly in
JESUS CHRIST? Is there any grace, any light, any blessing, which we may not
have from Him? Nay, (says the Apostle) it is he that furnishes the whole
body. He is the fullness of grace, an inexhaustible abyss of good. Sure then,
it is extreme vanity, to address our selves to any other; and to seek the waters
of life, and of salvation, in petty by-streams, rather than in that so full, so
fresh, and so abundant an only Source, which the Father has given us, in this
Divine Head. Though the serving of Angels, and Saints were permitted, (which
yet it is not) however, it is evident, it would be unprofitable, since we most
assuredly have, in JESUS CHRIST alone, all the succor, and assistance, we can
possibly pretend to, from those creatures.

But that which the Apostle adds, in the second place, to wit, that this Divine
Head does compact, and knit together His whole body, does further potently
oppose this error, which divides the Church and brings a very manifest odd
variety into its Services; for that it multiplyeth the objects of its devotion,
causing some to serve one Angel, or one Saint, and others another: some have a
devotion for one, and call themselves after him, and others adhere to another;
as you plainly see by the example of those of Rome, who are divided, into
diverse bands, and fraternities, according to the Angels, the Male, and Female
Saints, to whom they engage their devotion: not to say, how each of them has a
particular service, for his Angel guardian, differing from the service of all
others by reason of its object; forasmuch as according to them, every one has
his particular Angel, different from those of others. Whereas the true body of
CHRIST is all knit together in a perfect union, having but one only head JESUS
CHRIST, and one only religious service, one and the same faith, and one and the
same Worship.

Lastly, the Apostle yet again strikes, at the Authors of this error, when he
says, that the body of the Church, being united, guided, and governed by its
Head JESUS CHRIST, increases with an increase of GOD. For these people are
wont to vaunt of perfecting, and increasing the Religion of Christians, by the
addition of such services, as they invent. But S. Paul informs us, that this is
not the increase, that the Church receives; which must be an increase of GOD;
an augmentation, and advancement in things, which He has commanded, an
instituted; whereas these people do grow only in the traditions of men, and
inventions of the flesh, which add nothing to the true, and legitimate
magnitude of the body: it becomes by them, more blown up, not fuller; more
deformed, not greater. They are like warts, and wolfes, and empostumes, which
disfigure, and incommodate the body; but are far from enriching, or perfecting
it.

Dear Brethren, let us lay by, all these strange doctrines. Let us hold fast to
this Holy, and blessed Head, JESUS, the Son of GOD, who has vouchsafed to take
us for His body. Let us enjoy, with awfullest respect, the great honor, He
has therein done us. Be not we, so ungrateful, or so unadvised, as to give
that glory to any other, which belongs to Him alone. Let vain men submit to
other heads; let them profane this Divine quality of Head of the Church,
attributing it, either to Angels, or (which is yet worse) to a mortal man. For
our parts, O LORD JESUS, we neither have, nor ever will have, other head than
Thee. As it is Thou alone, that have redeemed us, formed, and associated us in
the Communion of thy body: So never will we address our Devotions, our
Religion, our Services, and invocations to any, but to Thee. It Is on Thee
alone, that we will live, and of thy springs alone, that we will draw. Likewise
with Thee are the words of Eternal life. To what Saint besides should we go?
Without Thee, we can do nothing, and in Thee alone we can do all things.
Beloved Brethren, this is the Vow, which I now present to the LORD JESUS, in
the behalf of us all, and I assure my self there is not one of you, but
heartily says Amen thereto. It remains, that we do faithfully acquit our
selves of this great vow, rendering up our selves to be guided, and governed by
the LORD JESUS CHRIST, since He is our Head; having no motion, nor sentiment,
but what descends from Him; and receiving into our Nerves, and Arteries His
Celestial, and divine Spirit; sincerely renouncing the spirit of the Flesh,
and of the Earth, which animates the world. Remember, that you are the body of
CHRIST, and live in such a pureness, as may be worthy of so great a name. Above
all, let us have those Sacred bonds between us, which do fitly knit all the
members of our LORD together: that is to say, the sentiments of a vigorus
Charity, communicating readily, and cheerfully to one another, the graces,
which our common Head has furnished us with, for our mutual edification; the
rich, their alms, to those that are poor; the knowing, their instructions, to
the ignorant; the strong, their succor to the weak; those that are in
prosperity, their Consolations, to the afflicted; increasing all of us
continually with an increase of GOD, in Faith, and Sanctification, and
advancing daily some paces toward the mark, and prize of our supernal Calling.
This is the Discipline of the LORD JESUS. This is that, He has commanded us,
His Apostles Preached, and left in their Writings, to us; not the serving of
Angels, and other such inventions of superstition, of which those holy men say
not one Word, except it be to refute, and condemn them. Rest we in their
Doctrine, and we shall have part in their bliss, through the grace of JESUS
CHRIST, their Head, and ours. To whom with the Father, and the Holy Spirit, the
only true GOD, blessed for ever, be honor, praise, and glory to Ages of Ages.
Amen.

THE XXX. SERMON.
COL. II. Verse. XX. XXI. XXII. Verse. XX. If then ye be dead with CHRIST, as to
the rudiments, of the world, why does any one burden you with ordinances, as
if ye lived in the world?

XXI. To wit, eat not, taste not, touch not.

XXII. Which all are things, that perish in the using, being instituted after
the commandments and doctrines of men.


DEar Brethren; Seeing the Apostle plainly shows, in diverse places, that the
use of meats is a thing indifferent, and that if we eat, 1 Cor. 8.8.
we have not thereby the more; nor the less, if we eat not; and even injoyneth
us somewhere to accommodate our selves to the infirmity of our brethren, Romans
14.21.
declaring, that it is good, neither to eat flesh, nor to drink wine, nor to do
any thing, whereby our brother stumbleth, or is offended, or made weak; it may
seem strange to some, that in this Epistle, and in the first to Timothy, and
elsewhere, he does so earnestly insist upon this point, and employ so many
words, and reasons against those, who did prohibit certain sorts of meats to
Christians. But if you thoroughly consider this holy man his whole procedure,
and the motives of his taking such order, you will find it full, in all the
parts thereof, of reason, and profound discretion. For first, there is a great
difference, between such, as he bears with, and those whom he rejects. The one
were infirm, and the other insolent. The former through want of knowledge,
could hardly count those things permitted, which the School of Moses, whence
they were but newly come forth, had prohibited. The latter, did in their
headiness, enterprise the bringing of Christians under the yoke again. The
error of those, reached no further, than their own persons. These would
dogmatize, and give the Church new Laws. Wherefore the Apostle is sweet toward
the one, and severe against the others, according to the difference of their
faults. And as to the thing it self, though it be no more a crime, to abstain
from, than it is to eat, any of the meats, which GOD has created for our use;
yet to make this abstinence pass, for a matter of necessity, is a penicious
attempt. First, it is an overthrowing, or a diminishing of our liberty, which
having been purchased, by the blood of CHRIST, ought to be very precious to us;
for since He would buy it us, at so high a price, it is not just, that the
fancy, or the tyrannical humor of men, should bereave us of a thing, that
cost him so dear. Moreover such injunctions do make, that to be thought
necessary, which is indifferent; and that, to pass for a part of the service of
GOD; which is not so; An opinion, which has dangerous consequences. For men,
once possessed, with this imagination, do, in such exercises, loose, a good
part of their time, which should be wholly spent in the study, and practice of
the true commandments of our LORD JESUS. But, which is yet worse, they easily
imagine, that they get, a license to commit things prohited without danger, by
such abstaining from things permitted, and the privilege of being dispensed
with for obedience to GOD, by that they render unto men; a conceit, which as
you see, does undermine the foundations of that true, and real sanctification,
without which no man shall see GOD.

The Apostle well-knowing therefore, the venom of these doctrines, and seeing,
on the other hand, the strong inclination, that men have to them; being
likewise not ignorant, (as experience has but too much verified,) that there
would be always people sound, to set them on foot among Christians; did
account it necessary, for the securing of our faith, to give us, in diverse
places of His divine Epistles, strong Preservatives against the Contagion of
this pernicious error. You have heard already heretofore, how he said
concerning it, Let no man condemn you in cating, or in drinking, irrecoverably
overbearing, by those few words, the temerity of all those, who for such
things, bring the faithful to the Bar; and condemn them to the fire of Hell,
for having but tasted of meats, which they prohibit. He now resumes the same
discourse, and having, in the two precedent verses, refuted the serving of
Angels, which the Seducers did set up in religion, he comes to their other
Ordinances, which concerned certain abstinences, and devotions, that they
imposed on Christians, as salutiferous, and of necessary use for humbling the
spirit, and mortifying the flesh; and first he refutes them by three excellent
reasons, which he urges against them, next, he rejects the vain, and specious
pretexts, under color of of which they were recommended. The first of those
three reasons, which he advances, against these pretended devotions, is taken
from the liberty, which JESUS CHRIST has purchased for us, by His death,
freeing us from all carnal, and ceremonial services. If therefore ye be dead
with CHRIST, (says he) why does any one burden you with ordinances, as if you
lived in the world, to wit, Eat not, Taste not, Touch not. The second is drawn
from the nature of those things themselves from which an abstaining was
ordered; they all are things (says the Apostle) that perish in the using. And
the third, from the rise of such ordinances, instituted, not by the authority
of GOD, but after the commandments, and doctrines of men. These are the three
points, we purpose to treat of in this action, by the assistance of GOD;
beseeching Him to grant, that we may meditate them, to our common Edification,
and Consolation.

The Apostles last words were, concerning the communion of the Church, with
JESUS CHRIST its head, who furnishes His whole body, and fitly knitteth it
together by joints, and bands, causing it to increase, with an increase of GOD.
Hereupon, he takes occasion, to set before us again, that enfranchisement from
the yoke of Ceremonies which we have by this holy, and mystical communion with
our LORD. That is his meaning in these words, we are dead with CHRIST, as to
the rudiments of the world. For (as we have showed before) the Apostle does
usually call the Ceremonial ordinances of Moses's Law, the elements, or
rudiments of the world: because they were the first, and lowest lessons of
GOD's people, standing all of them in material, and worldly things, and in the
usage of, or in an abstinence from, either elements, or plants, and animals,
and other fruits, and productions of the world. But he seems in this place, to
signify, by these words, generally all services of this nature, whether those
that Moses sometime instituted, for the exercise of the childhood, and minority
of Israel; or those that other men erected afterward: of which sort, were the
devotions, and ceremonies, which the Elders of the Jews, and the Pharisees
added to the Law, and made to pass for traditions of antiquity, as we
understand by the Gospel, where our Savior notes them, and very sharply
reproves them, in diverse places. Such again were the disciplines, and
devotions of those Seducers, whom the Apostle here opposes; and all other like
them, which though set up by diverse authors, and at different times, yet
jointly consist in one and the same kind of terrene, and material things, and
tend to one, and the same end, to wit, the purifying, and sanctifying of men,
and the rendering the Deity propitious, and favorable to them, by such
exercises. This whole sort of service, is carnal, tied up to certain corporeal
things, and actions, in which it consists, as is meat, and drink, in
watchings, and clothing; in men's washing, and discipling themselves, going in
procession, or on pilgrimage, repeating certain words, and forms of prayer, it
also depends upon times, having its years, its months, its days, its
festivals, and its very hours all regulated. This was the very form of the
carnal, or ceremonial service of the Jews, which was directly opposite to that
other kind of service; that JESUS CHRIST gave us in His Gospel; which without
being bound up to these childish scruples of times, of places, and of things,
does wholly consist in a pure, and genuine worshipping of GOD, in loving and
fearing Him, and tenderly affecting our neighbor, in honesty, and justice, and
in a true, and lively sanctity. Accordingly you know, that whereas the former
service is termed carnal, the latter is styled spiritual. The one is a serving
in shadow, the other in truth; the one in flesh, the other in spirit. It Is
then, in my opinion, all that first sort of carnal services, from what Source
soever they flow, either the institution of Moses, or the invention of any
other man, that the Apostle does here call the rudiments of the world;
declaring that we have been freed from it, by our LORD JESUS CHRIST; remaining
no longer subject to all this childish, and infantile pedagogy; nor bound up to
hours, or times, or elements, or other parts of the world; but being raised
above all these things, so as we may make use of them with full liberty,
according to the interests of Piety, and charity; and not be any more
imbondaged to them, or depend upon them.

But because JESUS CHRIST has procured us this great benefit by His death, and
does put us in possession of it, by the communion we have with Him in respect
thereof; thence it comes, that S. Paul sets forth this grace, of His freeing us
from subjection to the rudiments of the world, in terms that referr thereto,
saying, not singly, that we are delivered from such kind of services, by JESUS
CHRIST but that we are dead with Him, as to the rudiments of the world. An
expression, exceeding graceful, and elegant. It signifies, first, that we are
no longer subject to these rudiments of the world. For the dead are out of all
servitude. The Laws demand nothing of them any more. Neither their Lords, nor
their masters, have any power, to require ought of them, any longer. Death
breaks all the bonds, that tied them to any subjection whatever. The Apostle
says therefore, we are dead to the rudiments of the world, to signify that we
are freed from them; that we are no more subject to them; as he tells us
elsewhere, to the same sense, that we are dead to the Law; and again in another
place, Romans 7.^. Gal. 2.^9. Romans 6.^.
I am (says he) dead to the Law, that I might live to GOD. And thus too it is,
that we must take his affirming elsewhere, that we are dead to sin, that is to
say, delivered from its tyranny. And because death puts an end to, and
abolisheth the power, and authority of the master, as well as the servitude,
and subjection of the vassal, thence it comes, S. Paul says indifferently,
that sin, and the commandment of the old Law, are dead to us, and that we are
dead to them, signifying by the one, and the other, that we are Subjects of
theirs no more.

But S. Paul saying here, that we are dead with CHRIST, as to the rudiments of
the world, does show us, in the second place, both the cause of our liberty
(JESUS CHRIST) and the means, by which He acquired it for us, to wit, His
death. We are dead to all ceremonial services; for that our LORD has disolved,
and abolished them, in dying for us. For His death has satisfied all the
reasons, upon which these rudiments of the world were, for a time, appointed.
It has procured that righteousness, which they represented, and exhibited that
salvation, which they promised, and brought in the substance, whereof they were
but shadows. It has opened the house of GOD unto the Gentiles, whom they
barred from it; and put an end to the Old Testament, to which they pertained;
and founded the new, an eternal, and immutable one, which they prefigured.
Wherefore the Veil of the Temple was rent, from the top to the bottom, at the
time that JESUS suffered death; for a token, that the ancient worship, whereof
this Veil was a symbol, became thenceforth abrogated, and annulled.

In fine, these words of the Apostle do discover to us further, an apt
resemblance, that is found to be, between the LORD's death on the Cross, and
our freedom from the yoke of Ceremonies. For as JESUS in dying did divest
Himself of the former life, He led here below, during the days of His flesh, in
infirmity, and in subjection to the elements of Moses, to take up a new one by
His resurrection; which was to be free, divine, and celestial; so we
conformly, by virtue of the communion, we have with Him, and particularly in
His death, do lay down that former manner of life, that consists in the
childish exercises of some carnal abstinences, and devotions, to live
henceforth in the liberty of children of GOD, serving Him, no more in shadow,
and in figure, but in spirit, and in truth, with a conscience pure, and an
heart, not bound up to the places, things, and times of the old world, but
continually elevated to that new, incorruptible, and eternal one, above the
heavens, where JESUS CHRIST, the author, and prince of our religion, and
salvation, is. Such is this Evangelical verity, here laid down by S. Paul, at
the beginning of the Text; that we are dead with CHRIST, as to the rudiments of
the world.

Whereby, to mention it by the way, you may see, how much out in their
reckoning they are, who place the perfection of the faithful, in the practicing
of these carnal disciplines, and devotions, accounting those for perfect, who
do use them, S. Paul, on the contrary, terms them here, the rudiments of the
world: so as the subjecting of Christians to such disciplines, is so far from
being a perfect^^^ (...) completing them; (as these men pretend;) that it is
clean contrary, a put^ing them back to their ABC. and a reducing them, from the
highest Classis of the School of GOD, down to the lowest, there to become
children again, and lead a childish life, with the disciples of Moses, in an
apprentiship to his rudiments, and under the Ferule of his pedagogie.

The Apostle, from this principle thus asserted, concludes against the false
teachers, that all their ordinances, touching abstinence from certain meats,
were vain, unjust, and tyrannical. If therefore (says he) ye be dead with
CHRIST, as to the rudiments of the world, why are ye burdened with ordinances,
as if ye lived in the world? Afterward, he reports, and expressly specifies
some of those ordinances, which men would impose upon the faithful, namely, Eat
not, Touch not, Taste not. The force, and the coherence of his argumentation is
evident. It Is an injustice, (says he) and a tyranny, still to burden those
with worldly ordinances, who are dead to the world. You are dead to its
rudiments, by the benefit of CHRIST, who has, by His death, abolished all this
kind of carnal disciplines, and services; and nailed up, and torn, upon His
Cross, the obligation to them. By His grace, you live no longer in the world,
in the School of Figures, and terrene Ceremonies. You live henceforth in
Heaven, in the light, and liberty of the Spirit. For S. Paul does sometimes
apply the word, world, to the state of GOD's people, within their land of
Canaan heretofore, in the school of their Moses, and the performance of a
terrene, and carnal service. And therefore it is, that he elsewhere terms the
Levitical Sanctuary, Heb. 9.1.
a worldly Sanctuary. The faithful then being without this Mosaique world, it
is clear, that no man justly can impose upon them, in matter of religion, any
laws or ordinances of this nature; and that such, as attempt it, do outrage Him
that freed them, and oppress the liberty of His people; and that every one may
justly, reject their yoke, and oppose their tyranny.

Neither may it be alleged, that the ordinances promoted are none of Moses's;
but others quite different. For what ones soever they be, a yoke they are, and
every yoke, of what matter, and form soever, deprives us of our liberty.
Besides, very probable it is, that the Apostle, does, as we have expounded it,
by the rudiments of the world, intend, not particularly the Mosaical service
alone, but generally all such service, as is bodily, and of the same nature,
that that of Moses was. And in fine, though you should take it simply for the
Mosaique laws, yet would S. Paul's argument be good, and conclusive from the
greater to the less; as who should say; If you be set free from the yoke of
Moses, which was framed, and put upon the necks of the ancient people, by the
express appointment of GOD; how much more from one of men? If CHRIST has
delivered you from such ordinances, as it cannot be denied, but GOD was author
of; how intolerable is the headiness of those men, who burden you with their
laws? Indeed, who can believe, that GOD should have freed us, from commands of
His own, to put us under those of others? and that His Son should have
delivered us from a yoke of GOD's, to load us with one of mortal men's? and that
He should have exempted us from the rod of Moses, to yield us up unto the
scourges of these new Rehoboams?

As to these ordinances, which the Apostle here produces, doubtless they were
the Seducers; and not his own, as the Author of the Comment on S. Paul that
goes under the name of S. Ambrose, some one of the Ancients against all
semblance of truth, and reason, did imagine. S. Paul's saying before, Let no man
condemn you in meat, or in drink, does sufficiently show, that they were the
magisterial ordinances of these pretended Legislators; who did very severely
command their people, not only to forbear the eating, but even the tasting, and
touching of such meats, as they prohibited. The first of those three words,
that the Apostle uses, does in the Greek language properly signify, to touch;
and the Latin Interpreter, as also many others, have taken it in that sense
here, translating, Touch not, taste not, handle not. And our adversaries of Rome
do understand it, of the prohibitions in the Mosaique Law, of touching, or
handling, a dead body for instance, or such other things, as the Jews might not
touch without being counted unclean. In like manner, they referr, what is said
of tasting, to the prohibition of eating Swines-flesh, and the Hare, and other
meats, the use whereof was not permitted in the Law; as if the false Teachers,
at whom the Apostle aims, would have introduced among Christians, no other
ordinances then those of the Mosaique Law.

But this whole exposition is incommodious, and crosses the Apostle's meaning.
If he had had that thought, it would have sufficed to say once Touch not,
without superadding a third word, of the same signification, to wit, touching,
or handling. Not to urge, that this cannot accord with that which follows,
where he says, that these things were set up after the commandments, and
doctrines of men; it being evident, that the prohibitions in the Mosaique Law,
were made by the authority, not of men, but of GOD; so as if the Seducers had
pressed no other thing, it had been harsh, that I may not say false, to accuse
them, of making ordinances after the doctrines of men; and they would without
doubt have answered, that they were founded upon the commandment of GOD. In
fine, the Apostle's saying, that the things, an abstinence from which the
Seducers ordered, were all such, as did perish in the using, does subvert this
exposition, and evidently show, that the things forbidden by those false
Teachers, were only meat and drink; and not dead bodies, or other substances,
the touching whereof was prohibited by the Law. For since, the things he speaks
of, are consumed, are destroyed, and do all perish by the using and on the
other hand, it is most evident, that the things, which the Jews were forbid to
touch, are not at all of that nature, (that is, such as perish in the using) it
must of necessity be concluded, that it is not of them S. Paul speaks: but of
those only, that serve for the food of man, which are all consumed by the use
that is made of them, in eating, or drinking the same. And in the end we must
come back to the interpretation that our Bibles do exhibit, which have very
rightly rendered this passage in these words, Eat not, taste not, touch not. For
though the first of these three words does frequently, and commonly signify to
touch, yet such, as understand the Greek, do know, that it is sometimes taken
for, to eat. As our Expositors have produced instances of, from good, and
irrefragable Authors.

Now in these three words thus ranked, as they are, the Apostle represents unto
us by the way, both the order of the scrupulous devotions of superstition, and
the progress of the tyranny of these Legislators. At first, they forbid the
eating of certain meats, that is, the using them at your ordinary meals. If
they win this ground, they proceed further, and will debarr you even from
tasting them. At last they possess you with scruple to touch them, as if the
mere contact of such things were apt to pollute you. There is no end in the
scruples of superstition, nor any measure in it is devotions, and observances.
It heaps them up daily one upon another, and is never satiated with this vain
food. It never says, it is enough; it is always saying, give, give, like the
wiseman's horse-leach in the Proverbs. Prove. 30.15.
If it regulate your eating to day, to morrow it will give you laws for your
clothing, and afterward for each of the parts of your life; not leaving so
much as your looks, or your breathing, free. It Is a Labyrinth, wherein poor
consciences go on intricating them selves, without any issue; and a snare,
which does first take them, than bind them fast, and in the end strangle them.

But let us now consider, the two other reasons which the Apostle makes use of,
to show the vanity of the pretended ordinances of superstition about the matter
of meats, and eating, and drinking. The second than is taken, as we have
already intimated, from the nature of those things, which abstinence from, was
commanded. They are all (says he) things, that perish in the using. That is,
such as are consumed, in doing us service; the very eating, and drinking,
whereby they are taken, does destroy them; and they are of so feeble, and
infirm a substance, that they cannot be of use unto us, without being
corrupted; and to nourish us, they must first perish; an evident sign, that
all the benefit, we receive from them, does respect, but this wretched mortal
life; it being neither possible, nor imaginable, that what perishes, and is
consumed in us, should have any force, or virtue for the life of our soul,
which is immortal, and incorruptible. So you see, the Apostle does here
presuppose this maxim; that neither Religion, nor the service of GOD, does
properly, and immediately consist, either in the usage of, or an abstinence
from, any of those things, which serve to the maintaining of our common life
and are consumed in serving thereto: Romans 14.17.
as he says elsewhere expressly, that the Kingdom of GOD is neither meat, nor
drink, but righteousness, peace, and joy in the Holy Ghost. He makes use of the
same reason again in another place. 1 Cor. 6.13.
Meats (says he) are for the belly, and the belly for meats. But GOD shall
destroy both it, and them. His Master, and ours had used it before upon the
same argument to the same purpose, against the vain scruples of the Pharisees,
the Patriarchs of all this kind of disciplines. It Is not that, Mat 15.11.17.
(says he) which enters in at the mouth, that defiles a man. Because (as He
adds immediately after) all that which enters in at the mouth, goes down into
the belly, and is cast out into the draught; that is to say, it perishes, and
is consumed in the using. 1 Cor. 8.8.
Whence it comes, that the Apostle pronounces again elsewhere, in consequence
of the same doctrine, that meat (that is, any certain sort of meat) does not
render us the more acceptable unto GOD, 2 Timothy 3.4.
and that there is neither gain in eating it nor loss in eating it not; because
(as he says elsewhere yet) they are all created of GOD, to be used by the
faithful with thanksgiving so as nothing is to be rejected, being taken with
giving of thanks.

Sure, were it not for the extreme blindness of men, there would be no need for
us to repeat, and confirm so easy a lesson, with such diligence, and in so
many places; the sole light of reason, and the nature of things it self,
teaching it us so clearly. For who is there, but sees this truth, if he heed it
ever so little? and discovers of himself, that one is not the better, or the
more holy for eating Herbs, or Fish? nor the worse, or more vicious, for living
on other things? All this se^ves, but to sustein the seeble nature of this poor
body, and terminates there, without penetrating to the soul, whose essence is
wholly spiritual. It Is the conceptions of the understanding, and the
disposition of the heart, and the habitudes that referr to them, and the
actions that proceed from them, which make men good, or bad, and their morals
laudable, or blamable; so as it is a gross, and a deplorable error, though I
grant, it has ever been, and still is, very common, to make a part of pi^ty,
and sanctity consist in eating of or absteining from some sorts of meats.

But the Apostle contents not himself with citing the conclusions of reason,
and the nature of the things themselves, against the vain, and pernicious
ordinances of these Seducers. For the overthrowing them without recovery, and
the taking away all pretext of defending them, he further makes use, in the
last place, of a strong, and invincible argument, drawn from their being
established after the commandments, and doctrines of men. Thus it was, that GOD
did sometime strike the vain services of Israel; (...)
Their fear of me (said He) is an humane commandment, taught by men. And the
LORD JESUS overturns all the authority of the Jewish traditions, Mat. 15.9.
with the same shot, reproching them, that it was in vain they honored GOD,
teaching doctrines, which were but commandments of men. And it should seem,
it is hence, that S. Paul took both the conception, and the expression he uses
in this place. This reasoning, my Brethren, is extremely considerable. The
Apostle rejects the ordinances of the Seducers, because they are commandments
and doctrines of men. There Is no man but sees, that this discourse has no
consequence, unless upon presupposal, that nothing ought to be received in
Religion, under the quality of necessary belief, or service, except it be,
either taught, or commanded of GOD, and not of men only. It Is the doctrine of
the Apostle S. Paul in this place; the doctrine of the Prophet Isaiah, in that
other, which we alleged even now; it is the doctrine of JESUS, the Master of
Apostles, and Prophets, in His dispute against the Pharisees. O holy, and
precious verity, from how many errors would thou deliver the world, if
according to the authority of our LORD, and those two grand Ministers of His,
men would examine all things by thee as their rule! and consider when some
article in Religion is preached to us, not whether it be specious, and have
some appearance of reason; or whether it has been yerwhile held by the Sages
of the time past; or be for the present believed by the greater part of
Princes, and people; but whether it be indeed taught of GOD, in His word; or
merely set forth by men.

Dear Brethren; by this short, and simple method, you may easily settle your
thoughts, about all the differences, that rend Christendom at this day. Take
the Book of GOD; and admit nothing into your belief, but what you shall find,
either asserted, or commanded therein; refusing whatsoever the word of the LORD
has not authorized. Sure I am, that the Sacrifice of the Mass, and Purgatory,
and Transubstantiation, and the Monarchy of the Pope, and the Invocation of
Saints, and in a word, all that divides us from Rome, will remain, among those
commandments, and doctrines of men, which S. Paul here casts away from our
faith; and that nothing will be found, among the commandments, and doctrines of
GOD, but those Services, and beliefs, which are received, and confessed, by our
Churches. In the Name of GOD, make trial of it, if so be, you have not yet done
it; and you will see, that if our Adversaries have the doctrines of men for
them, we have the doctrines of GOD, of His Prophets, and Apostles for us. I
pass by other doctrines of Rome, for the present. Only, how can they defend
their ordinances, for the eating of no flesh, during more then a third part of
the year? commanding the faithful, to live all that time, upon nothing but
Herbs, and Fish, under pain of damnation? pressing this ridiculous Law, with so
much rigor that they do not hold such for Christians, as do transgress it? and
punish them, not with Spiritual pains only, but even with temporal, unto death
it self, in the Countries, where the Inquisition reigns? Is not this, the
doing with high hand, what the Apostle here forbids? Let no man condemn you,
in eating, or drinking? and why are ye burdened with ordinances, to wit, Eat
not, taste not?

Whereas they say, that the Apostle speaks, only of the Mosaical Prohibitions
of touching the dead, and tasting the flesh of the Hog, and Hare; this we have
already refuted. He speaks in general of all ordinances, that forbid the
tasting of any sort of meat, upon a Religious account. And it is no way
credible that he should grant the Pope, or any other man whoever, what he
denies Moses; or respect their Laws, more then his. Besides, all the
circumstances, and reasons, which he notes, or urges against the Laws of the
false teachers, are evidently of force against those of our adversaries. Those
teachers ordained, that these should be no eating, nor tasting of certain
meats. These men do the same. They recommended their abstinences, upon pretense
that they did humble the body, and not spare it. This is exactly the thing,
that our Adversaries affirm of theirs The Apostle alleges against them, that
they stitched up again the Veil of Moses, which had been rent in twain by JESUS
CHRIST; and reduced that carnal, and worldly worship into the Church, which had
been abrogated, and abolished by the Cross of our LORD. Is it not a Service of
the same kind, that those of Rome do set up? a Service, which consists in
things purely external, and corporeal, to wit, eating, and meats? S. Paul
adds, that the things, from which the Seducers required Christians to
abstein, were all such, as perished in the using. Those, about which our
Adversaries make Laws, are they not consumed in the very same manner? the
flesh, which they forbid? the Fish, and Herbs, which they command? In fine, S.
Paul rejects the Ordinances of the Seducers, because they were Doctrines, and
Commandments of men. Those of Rome, to which the same quality does adhere,
ought not then to be any more tolerated, than they. For how hardly soever the
men be, they durst not say, that GOD appointed them. They only say, that they
are conform to Scripture. But how so, while they so rudely clash with the
Apostle's Doctrine in this place.

As to their allegation, Dan. 1.8.
that the Hebrew Children would not eat of the meats of the King of Babylon's
Table; the Scripture tells us, they did it for fear of being defiled: to wit,
because the most part of the meats of Pagans, was offered to Idols. Beside they
doubted, there might be some one of those things, which were forbidden by the
Law of Moses, under which they lived; causes, as every one knows, that take
place no longer, and are in effect very far off from the reasons of the
abstinences of Rome. Dan. 10.2.
They produce also Daniel's three weeks, during which neither Flesh, nor Wine,
entered into his mouth. They should add, what the Scripture expressly reports,
that he did eat no pleasant bread, nor anoint himself, all that while; because
(as he says himself) he was mourning. Whence it follows indeed, that such as
are in mourning, and affliction of spirit, may if they see good, banish all the
pleasures of their manner of living even to those that are innocent, permitted,
and ordinary, as Daniel did at that time, out of his own judgment, and not
upon any public commandment. But it cannot be thence concluded, that either
there was then, or that there ought to be a Law for perpetuity in the Christian
Church, which forbids the use of meats for certain times of the year, which is
precisely the thing that our Adversaries pretend. 1 Timothy 5.23.
I pass by Timothy's abstinence, who drank no Wine. For there is little
probability, that it was through a Religious scruple, he abstained. Beside, He
was a particular person, and did the thing at his own arbitriment, not by the
order of any public Law. And yet too S. Paul recommends to him, the doing
otherwise; and in fine, the question is now of Meats, not of Wine, which those
of Rome do prohibit to none, at all. I also pretermit the Fasts of the
Israelites on diverse occasions; as were those of Anna, of David, of Esther, of
John Baptist, and his Disciples; these have no Communion with the abstinences
in hand. We do not refuse Fasts, (far be it from us) We do not simply, and
absolutely forbid even abstinence. (For it is equally in a Christians liberty,
to eat, or not to eat, any sort of meat whatever; neither the one, nor the
other is a sin, provided it be done in Faith, and Charity.) All, that the
Apostle condemns, and we with him, and after him, is the Tyranny, that
prohibits, what GOD permits; and will needs make that necessary, which He has
left free; as also, the Superstition, that places the true service of GOD, in
things purely indifferent. It remains then, we conclude, that this Law of our
Adversaries is a Doctrine, and a Commandment of men, since it has no
foundation in the Word of GOD.

But which is more, it is evidently adverse thereto. For the Apostle, writing to
the faithful at Corinth, that lived in the midst of an Heathen people, in whose
Markets, and at whose Tables, all sorts of meats were indifferently sold, and
served up, he gives them this rule; 1 Cor. 10.25, 27.
Eat of all that is sold in the Shambles, making no question for Conscience
sake. And if one of them that believe not does invite you, and ye be disposed
to go, eat of all that is set before you, making no question for Conscience
sake. How does this accord with the Roman Laws, that make scruple of so many
sorts of meat for Conscience sake? ^ Tim. 4.1, 2.
But this holy man has proceeded much further yet. He has not only refuted
this error; He has predicted it, and given us timely Advertisement of it,
ranking Abstinence from meats, expressly among the Articles of the false
Doctrine of those Seducers, whose coming he prophesied of; describing them by
dreadful marks, that he might possess us with a just horror at them. Neither
may it be answered, that he speaks of such, as hold the nature of meats to be
impure, and polluted in it self. He attributes no such thing to those, whom he
condemns; and says simply, that they would command to abstain from meats: If
our Adversaries do not so command; we do wrong to apply this Text unto them.
But since they eminently command the thing, and so mightily esteem the command,
that they deny him the name of a Christian, who does violate it; it is clear,
that of them also the Apostle speaks. He alleges, it is true, that every
creature of GOD is good, and was created to be used by the faithful, with
thanksgiving. He alleges this, I say, to refute this error; as we also make
use of it to refute that of Rome. But he does not at all impute to them, whom
he opposes, that they did formerly deny this verity; and hereafter we shall
hear, that those whom he does in this place refute, did ordain their
abstinences, for the humbling of the spirit, and the mortifying of the flesh
(altogether after the same manner, as our adversaries at this day do,) and not
out of any opinion they had, that the meats they prohibited, were unclean, or
polluted in their nature. Accordingly we read, that the ancient Christians who
lived about the end of the second Century, and the beginning of the third, did
not forbear condemning the Montanists laws of abstinence, and to apply to them
that passage of the first Epistle to Timothy, which we quoted even now; though
those Heretics protested, as they of Rome do at this day, that it was not
intended against them, who believed, with Catholics, both the Divinity of the
Creator and the goodness, and purity of the creatures, but against the
Marcionites, and the Encratites, who denied the one, or the other, or both of
them together; as we learn, by a certain book of Tertullians, in which he
expressly pleads the cause of Montanus against the Orthodox, whom, in
derision, Tertul. lib. de Jujuniis. c. 15.
he calls Psychiques.

Thus having refuted the error of those of the Roman Communion, I should now
come to answer their revilings. For upon the pretext, of our disapproving the
tyrannical law of their abstinences, they accuse us of being Epicureans, and
our Religion, altogether a Religion of flesh, and blood, and favoring
gourmandise, and drunkenness; as if it were neither possible, to commit excess
with fish, nor to exercise sobriety with any other food. It is not now adays
only, that this error, being unable to defend it self with reason, has had
recourse to railing. The Jews, at the beginning, seeing our Savior live
simply, without the pomp of their fasts, and abstinences, called Him a glutton,
and a wine-bibber; Mat. 11.19.
the Montanists afterward cried out, upon the Catholics of those days, as
they of Rome do upon us at present; that the belly was their god; Tertullian*
ibid.
and the Buttery their Altar, and a Kitchen their Temple, and a Cook their
Priest, and the steam of meats, their Holy-Spirit, and sauces their gifts of
Grace. Let it not shame us, to be treated, as the Son of GOD was, with His
first and best disciples. I might here say many things, of our morals, and the
morals of our adversaries, and perhaps it would be found, that our Carnavel is
no less sober, than their Lent; and their abstinence many times as intemperate,
as our pretended dissoluteness. But it is better, to refute their slanders, by
the honesty of our lives, than with the acrimony of our words.

Show then, dearly beloved Brethren, by your sobriety, purity, and temperance,
that it is not the love of the flesh, as calumny gives out, but respect to
truth, which makes you embrace the party you do. Defend your liberty in such
manner, as that you take it not for an occasion to live after the flesh. Gal.
5.13.
It Is this flesh, that JESUS CHRIST has forbidden us. That of animals does not
defile such, as eat of it soberly, and with thanksgiving: But this flesh
renders all those truly unclean, that suffer themselves to be tempted with its
pleasures. Abstain you from all its lusts. Have in abhorrence, all its sweets.
1 Pet. 2.11.
Eat not at any time of its fruits; and count it a grievous crime, to taste of
its dainties. It is of this flesh, that we may, without rigor, lay the
injunction upon you; Touch it not, and taste not of it. Let the acts of
injustice, and the pollutions, and the vanities, to which it carries men of
the world, be an abomination to you: and your meat, as the LORD JESUS's was,
Joh. 4.34.
to do the will of GOD, and finish His work. In particular, keep your selves
from the excesses of the season, that is at hand. Abhor the disorders of the
world even more, than you pity its superstition: and partake far less, in its
debauches, than in its abstinences. Prepare your selves also, for that divine
repast, unto which we are about to invite you, by all kind of good works of
piety, and charity: and above all remember, that the doctrine of the LORD JESUS
is, we renounce ungodliness, and the lusts of the flesh, to live soberly,
justly, and religiously; and that His true discipline consists but in two
points; the one, that we abstain, not from what is in its nature indifferent;
but from what He has forbidden us, as contrary to piety toward Him, or
charity toward our neighbor, or honesty in respect of our selves; the other,
that we patiently, and cheerfully suffer, the pains, and mortifications, not
which a voluntary superstition assigns us, but which His holy, and paternal
hand dispenses unto us. This, dear Brethren, is our Advent, this our Lent, and
the true law of our abstinences. The LORD JESUS, who has given it us,
vouchsafe us His grace, that we may duly fulfill it, to His glory, the
edification of our neighbors, and our own salvation. Amen.

THE XXXI. SERMON.
COL. II. Verse. XXIII. Verse. XXIII. Which have yet some show of wisdom, in
voluntary devotion, and humility of spirit, and in that do they not at all
spare the body, and have not any regard to the satisfying of the flesh.


DEar Brethren; It is a truth, acknowledged by the Sages, both of the Church,
and of the world, that Man puts not forth his affections, but to things, that
seem to him to be good; whether they be such in effect, or through error of
mind, he judge them such, when in reallity, they are not. Examine the motions
of your own souls, and the designs, and desires of your neighbors, as far as
you can penetrate them. You will find without doubt, and discover without
difficulty, that neither your selves, nor they, do love, or pursue any thing,
but what you account to be good, that is, tending to your benefit, and capable,
^^ther of yielding you some pleasure, or affording you some profit, or
acquiring y^^ some honor. Hence it is, that the Philosophers defined good, by
this its ref^^^ to our affections, and by the virtue it has to move, and
attract our desires, (...) Good is that which all desire. And hence it comes,
that Impostors, who (...) trade of seducing men, have always taken a great
deal of care, to give their (...) vain institutions, some show of goodness;
being not ignorant, that witho^ (...), they should not be able, to gain any
man's affections, and much less, to have any train of followers in the world.
This is to be seen, particularly in religion; into w^^^n never was heresy, nor
superstition introduced, but under the favor of this in posture; though
spirits of different capacities having meddled in the matter, there ha^^ been
accordingly, a great difference between their cosenages. For as those that
would make a false stone pass for a Diamond, or an Emerald, or a Ruby, do
endeavor, as far as cunning is able to counterfeit the truth, to give it the
color, the shape, the luster, the sparkling, and other qualities thereof, that
by such a feigned resemblance, they may deceive simple, and unexperienced
persons: So they, that have set themselves upon the corrupting of Religion, to
the end they might make the opinions, and services they promoted, be received
for sound doctrines, and disciplines, have above all things taken a great deal
of pains, to guild over their merchandise, and to color it with some fair, and
specious pretexts, fit to dazzle the eyes of men, and hide the defects of their
doctrine, and give it the show of what in substance it is not.

It is this, that the Apostle S. Paul does observe here in the documents, and
commandments of those Seducers, whom he undertook in this Chapter. For having
solidly, and admirably refuted that superstitious discipline, which they had
set a foot, and which consisted in a religious worshipping of Angels, and in a
scrupulous abstinence from certain meats, and in the observation of certain
festival days; for a conclusion, he discovers in this last verse, the false
colors, wherewith they did in vain dawb it over. He acknowledges, that it
had, its true, some show of wisdom; but denies, that this was sufficient to
cover its defects, or to oblige the faithful to receive it. Their Ordinances
(said he before) are commandments, and doctrines of men: Which yet (he now adds)
have some show of wisdom in voluntary devotion, and humility of spirit, and in
that they do not at all spare the body, and have no regard to the satisfying of
the flesh. It is evident, that he speaks of those humane doctrines, which he
had been mentioning, in the verse immediately foregoing; and he says, first,
that they have a show of wisdom: Next, he represents particularly three things,
which give them this false show, voluntary service, humility of spirit, and
rough treatment of the body, which they did not at all spare. These are, as it
were, the three colors, which being mingled together by the artifice of the
Seducers, composed that paint, which rendered their doctrine plausible, and gave
it this false show of wisdom, that beguiled the eyes of the simple. In
compliance with this distinction, we shall treat of three points in this
action, voluntary service, humility of spirit, and little care for the body,
and then consider, how error, and superstition have always made, and still to
this day make use of them, to gloss their inventions. GOD grant us to beware
duly of them, and please for this end, so to guide and assist us, by His
Spirit, in discoursing of them, as we may all bear away some Edification and
Consolation.

The name of wisdom is great, and honorable in the opinion of all people in
the world. For whereas other Sciences have respect but to natural, or humane;
the relation of wisdom is to Divine things. And whereas other knowledges, are
for the most part, unprofitable to him, who possesses them, that of wisdom, is
salutiferous: it signifying the skill of conducting ones way aright for the
attainment of happiness, by the light of some choice, and excellent verities.
Whence it follows, that this title of wisdom does not properly belong, but to
the knowledge of GOD, which, He has given us, by His Son, in the Gospel, the
only light, that is capable of conducting us to supreme felicity. Accordingly
you know, it is the name, that S. Paul does ordinarily give it; as when he
wills, that the word of GOD dwell richly in us in all wisdom; and when he
says elsewhere, that he speaks wisdom among them that are perfect, calling the
same a little after, the wisdom of GOD in a mystery, the hidden wisdom; and so
often elsewhere. Now though the doctrine of those, who corrupt the Gospel, as
these Seducers did, who S. Paul opposes in this Chapter, be nothing less in
reality, than wisdom, yet so it is, that its authors gave it the name, and
would have it pass in the belief of men, for a rare, and a beneficial
knowledge, more worthy of heaven, than earth, and capable in fine of rendering
those that follow it, perfect, and happy. The Apostle acknowledges, that the
doctrine of the Seducers of his time, had this show of wisdom; but by his very
granting them the show, h^ denies them the truth of it; and his meaning is,
that that doctrine of theirs had nothing but a false, and a deceitful color of
wisdom, not the substance, and reality of the thing.

Voluntary service is the first particular, that gave these doctrines of the
Seducers such a show. They have, says the Apostle, some show of wisdom in
voluntary service, that is, by reason, or because of the voluntary service,
they taught, and set a foot: the observances, and institutions, which these men
enjoyed, as abstinence from certain meats, the worshipping of Angels, and the
like being nothing else, but voluntary services. A service may be called
voluntary, two manner of ways. First, when he that performs it unto GOD, does
it with affection, and a good will; without torment, and constraint. The love,
he bears this great and sovereign LORD, sweetly bringing his soul under His
yoke, and disposing him to account, whatsoever He has commanded, to be good,
and delectable. In this sense, that free, and sincere obedience, which true
believers render unto GOD, according to the Gospel, may be styled voluntary;
because it proceeds, not from a spirit of bondage, as theirs does; who do
serve, only because they are afraid; but from a spirit of Love, and of
Adoption, crying in their hearts, Abba Father. Wherefore the Prophet terms
the new people, who render this frank and filial service unto GOD, Psalm. 110.3.
under the Gospel of the Messiah, a voluntary or willing people. Thy people
(says he, speaking to Him) shall be a voluntary people, or a people of frank
willingness, in the day, that thou shall assemble thine army, in holy pomp. It
is not in this sense, that the Apostle understands, the voluntary service; he
speaks of in this place. For first, though the terms voluntary service, which
are taken up in the French, to express what S. Paul has set down, may be so
understood; yet true it is, the Greek word he used in the Original text, is
never so taken, as the intelligent do know. Again this kind of Voluntary
service does consist in things, which GOD has expressly commanded: but the
Service here meant by the Apostle, not so.

We are to know then, that the Voluntary service, he speaks of is worship,
which GOD did not, by His word, oblige men unto; nor ever commanded them; but
they present it Him, merely of their own will, subjecting themselves, and
others to it, because it so pleases them, without any necessity imposed, on
GOD'S part, who demanded no such thing of them. It is Voluntary, not in regard
of the manner, after which it is performed; (for in this sense, as we have
said, the Service of true Children of GOD, may be also termed Voluntary;) but
in regard of it is institution; the principle, that sets it up, and presses the
performance of it, being not the Law, or the authority of GOD, but singly the
will of men, who of their forwardness, undertake to do things, to the honor of
GOD, and for His Service, which He for His part, never gave order for. Whence
it comes, that the word is, in the language of the Greeks, ordinarily taken in
an ill sense, as importing Superstition; because it is the property of this
vice, to invent diverse Services of it is self, and pretend, to pay off the Deity
with them.

But the Apostle, pointing here, at the thing, that gave the Seducers doctrine,
the show, and luster, which it had, it cannot be doubted, but he means their
Service its being Voluntary, and not its being superstitious, though indeed it
were so too. For Superstition being generally decried, and known to be a vice,
it is clear, that in that quality, it is not a thing capable of recommending any
ones doctrine; nor were there ever found Seducers so gross, as to profess, that
their worship was superstitions: much less to vant of it, and pretend to render
it recommendable thereby. But Voluntary service does charm men, and please
their carnal sense. And false Teachers for the most part, do not forbear to
glory in it, and allege it for a mark of the sublime wisdom of their
doctrine. There are of it two sorts; the one gross, and shameless to the
highest degree, which would make that pass for Service of GOD, which He not
only has not commanded, but even expressly prohibited; as when the Idolaters in
the wilderness, counted the festival they kept before their Golden Calf, and
the honors they gave it, things which GOD had expressly interdicted, for
worship performed to the LORD their GOD. Such also in effect was that Religious
Serving of Angels, which the Apostle taxed before; though it may not be doubted,
but the Seducers who introduced it, did endeavor, by diverse subtilities, to
elude those passages of Scripture, in which we are forbidden to do Religious
Service unto any creature whatsoever. The other sort of Voluntary service, has
a little more shamefacedness, and modesty, then the former; when a man
ordeineth, and if we may so say, erecteth into the title of a Divine service,
the observing of certain things, which verily GOD has not commanded, but which
neither has He forbidden, as abstinence from certain meats, and the
observation of certain days; things, which, it seems, GOD has neither
commanded nor forbidden. It is properly to this rank, we must assign that
Voluntary service, which the Apostle intends in the Text. For even they, who
institute such Services of the first sort do not yet own them to be so; but
pretended, that GOD has not forbidden, what they command, glossing those
passages, in which He forbids it, and so artificially changing the true, and
genuine sense of them, as they make it believed, that the objects of their
Service are not comprehended in it.

Now that this gives their Inventions a show of wisdom, as the Apostle here
says, and a luster, fair, and plausible in the eyes of carnal men, is very
clear. For first, it seems magnifique, and Heroical, to be uncontented with
what GOD has commanded us, for His Service; and to have the resolution to
exceed it. That which He has commanded, being evidently due, and of
indubitable equity; it seems a small matter, to do but this; because it is
simply nothing else, then the discharging of what a man ows; which does seem to
be a virtue not so exceedingly recommendable; For whoever heard Panegyriques
made in ones praise, because he duly paid his debts? Accordingly you see, that
presumptuous young man, who is mentioned in the Gospel, made no great account
of all this. For when our Savior, told him simply, what GOD commands us in His
Law, he answers disdainfully, Matt. 19.20.
that he had kept all those things from his youth; as if he had said, that was
his ordinary, his daily practice, and that he expected a quite other thing,
from so great a Teacher. But when a man does, what he is not bound to do, he is
admired; as we much more esteem him, who gives what he does not owe, then him
who simply makes puctual payment of what he does owe. Besides, it seems an act
of a great and extraordinary love to GOD, to subject that very thing to Him,
which He has left free to us. The fear of the Cudgel of times makes a Slave do
all, that his Master has commanded him; but it seems, that nothing, but love,
can oblige him to do more. Again, this very hardiness, of daring to set up some
certain sort of actions, in the Service of GOD, has a kind of, I know not
what, grandeur in it because common sense dictating to us, that to ordein
Service for Him, is properly the act of a Divine authority, we presently take
them for Divine men, who enterprise such a thing. It may also be, then that
character of an humane Spirit, which appears in these Voluntary services, makes
them to be the more esteemed by men; every one naturally loving his own
productions, and favoring his own works.

Be it for these reasons, or for others, once certain it is, that Voluntary
services, are ordinarily esteemed, and admired by men. And you see it clearly,
by experience of what is done, in the communion of Rome. For though considering
things thoroughly, no man can doubt, but Innocence, Charity, and Justice, are
much more excellent, then those Voluntary observances, which are practiced
among them; yet it is evident, that much more account is made of these, then of
the others. For the one they call simply, good works. But the others exceed it.
They are works of supererogation. There was need to forge this new word, our
common languages having none losty enough, to express the extraordinary
altitude of their merit. Hence it comes, that Monks, if you believe them, are
Angels, and Demigods. They are looked upon, as so many Heavenly Jewels; so
many Stars, and Luminaries; as the only Ornaments of the Earth, and of their
Church. But they set at this rate, none of those, who without Frock, and
without little band, and without particular rule, do lead an honest, and
irreprehensible life in a secular habit. The reason of this difference is that
the former do exercise themselves in such Voluntary services, as Francis, and
Dominick, and Bruno, and Loiola, have prescribed, them; whereas the latter do
addict themselves to that which GOD has commanded them: though indeed no man
can deny, but that to oblige men, right the oppressed, succor the needy,
assist the Widow, and the Fatherless (the things that GOD has commanded) be
incomparably better, and more excellent, then to put on a Capouche, or go with
bare feet, and shaven crown, or scourge ones self twice or thrice a week, which
are things that men ordein. In like manner you see, that in that communion,
none are commonly canonized, (which is the highest point of honor they do to
piety) but such as have regularly fasted, and Disciplined themselves, and lived
in coelibat, and (as they say) done Miracles; things all, which GOD has not at
all commanded in His Word. As for those, who content themselves with the
Religion, and virtues which GOD has ordained, nor do affect Voluntary
services; they must not pretend to be ranked among the Saints of Rome. But I
think, there is yet another secret reason, which has as much, or more
efficacy, then all the rest, in making Voluntary services to be so well
received by men; namely, that great aversion, which they naturally have for
those things, that are commanded of GOD: from obligation whereunto, they hope
to redeem themselves, either in whole, or in part at least, by means of humane
Services. For what countenance soever they make, of finding the obedience of
GOD's commandments very easy; yet in reality there is nothing to which they
submit, so unwillingly, and with greater pain; so as all the austerity of
Voluntary service is pleasant, in comparison of it. Being then p^ssess'd with
this false prejudice, that by absteining from what GOD permits, or by
submitting to what He does not command, they shall in reason oblige Him, to
dispense with for what He does command, upon hope of this exchange, they gladly
take up Voluntary service, which also, you know, they do indeed hold to be
satisfactions, that is, a kind of ransom, at the price whereof they are
delivered from the punishment they did incurr, for not having served GOD, as He
commands. Thus you see, Dear Brethren, that Voluntary service gives a luster,
and a vain show of wisdom, to humane doctrines, and traditions.

The second head of things, that contributes to this effect, and that renders
the same hugely recommendable, is humility of Spirit; the Apostle has already
noted heretofore, the affectation, and show of this pretended humility, in one
of the doctrines of these Seducers particularly, to wit, their teaching the
Service of Angels: which they did with pretense, that the putting of the
faithful in subjection to those blessed Spirits, was to humble them. Here he
speaks of it more generally. For besides, that all the outside of false
Teachers is commonly painted over with the colors of a great, and deep
humility, their discourse, and all their procedure being full of submissions,
and of an high profession of renouncing the advantages of vain glory; besides
this, I say, their institutions, and Disciplines themselves, do also promise
humility, and seem to be so many exercises of it. And this is the thing, in my
opinion, which the Apostle does particularly consider, in this place. Look
back, I pray, on the Disciplines of those Seducers, whom he opposes; I mean,
on those abstinencies from certain meats, and the observations of certain
days; does it not seem, that this was an exercising of men unto humility,
since it was a bounding of their liberty, and a degrading them from the power
they had; to dispose of these things at their pleasure? Adding withal, that in
general, whoever subjecteth man to a law of his, does humble, and abase him,
putting a new yoke upon his neck, whatever the thing, that he commands, in
other respects be. The same mark of humility does appear, in the greatest part
of the Voluntary devotions, that are in vogue, whether it be among Pagans, or
among Turks, or among Christians themselves. For they all in a manner, do
reduce, the habit, and feeding of their Devoto's to a low, and an abject form,
and such as is of small esteem among men; and oblige them to things, that seem
to vilify, and in some sort disgrace our nature. Homer. Idad. II. v. 235.
For the most part, they give them nastiness, and filth for trimming; as the
ancientest of the Heathen Poets says expressly of certain very devout Priests,
called Selli, or Sellians: that they always had foul feet, and slept on the
bare ground. They cast down their countenances, and make them of a sad look;
Mat. 6.16.
as our Savior says expressly of the Hypocrites of His time, that they
disfigured their faces. And as for habits, who can recount all the diversities
of them? It may suffice to observe in general, that both for the matter, and
also for the form, and fashion, these Zealots have always in a manner chosen
those, which are not only course, and of small account, but such as have also
somewhat unusual, and ridiculous in them. Their food does wear the same livery;
and you know, there is at this day an infinite number, who to descend unto the
lowest degree of meanness, do bind themselves by an express vow to mendicity,
or beggary; though GOD by express order forbad it his people; Deuteronomy. 19.^.
these men desiring rather to violate His command, then deprive themselves of
so rare an humility. It Is sufficient for their design, that this strickes the
eye, For there being nothing more natural unto man, than the desire of honor,
and the passion of braving, and appearing, and of showing every way, both in
person, and in clothing, and in diet, the marks of some eminency, and
advantage above others: one can hardly look, without admiration, upon people,
who seem to renounce all this; especially, when they are persons, born, and
bred in such conditions, as afforded them the means of possessing all these
advantages at their desire. This without doubt Creates a great prejudice for
their Doctrine, and makes it to be favorably received; it seeming not
possible, either that persons, who so voluntarily divest themselves, of what
others most earnestly seek after, should not be moved by a good Spirit; or that
Doctrines, which tend to humble our haughty, and proud nature, should be other,
than holy, and salutiferous.

The remains the last of those three colors, that enter the composition of the
paint of humane Doctrines, which is, in a manner, the deepest, and gives them
the greatest gloss; namely, that (as the Apostle says) they do not at all
spare the body, and have not any regard to the satisfying of the flesh. It is
clear, and confessed on all hands, that he speaks of the Austerity, and Rigor,
which these Seducers made show of, as well in their lives, as in their
Doctrine, beating down their bodies, and giving them hard usage, without having
any great care to content their desires. All are at accord, that this in gross,
the Apostle's scope, and sense; as indeed his words do necessarily, and clearly
signify. But when it comes to the ranking of them, and the construing of each
of them in particular, there does some difficulty appear, which has caused
diversity of thoughts among Expositors. The difficulty does precisely respect
the latter clause alone, and have not any regard to the satiating of the flesh,
instead whereof, it is in the Original, rendering word for word, not in any
honor for the satiating of the flesh. Some good, and eminent servants of GOD,
do sever the word honor, from the rest, interpreting the Apostle, thus, they
do not at all spare the body, in that which is for the satisfying of the flesh.
The honor of the body, in the Apostle's language, is its purity and honesty,
as he plainly teaches elsewhere, 2 These. 4.4.
saying, The will of GOD, even our sanctification is, that each one should know
how to possess his Vessel in Holiness, and Honor. And to this honor he
opposes, in another place, Romans 1.26.
all the ordures, and impurities of Luxury, which he calls passions of
dishonor, or infamous affections, as the French Bible has translated it.
Therefore it is, Heb. 13.4.
that he styles Marriage, which was instituted of GOD, for the conservation of
this honor of our bodies, honorable among all. The Apostle then, according to
the sentiment of these Interpreters, does oppose this honor to the Seducers
pretended mortifications. For to preserve this honor, it is true, we ought not
to spare our bodies, but religiously abstain from all, that is contrary to the
same, denying our flesh all the pleasures of impurity. It Is for this end alone,
that an ill usage of our bodies is permitted us: whereas these Seducers their
abstinences were of another nature. For the rigor they used toward their
bodies, was to abstain, not from pleasures incompatible with Sobriety,
Temperance, and Chastity; but from certain sorts of meat, the use of which no
way defiles the body, nor violates, in any manner, the holiness it ought to be
kept in. This exposition, you see, is good, and godly, and suiteth well enough
with the Apostle's terms.

Our French Bible has followed another, no less pertinent, as taking the Greek
word, that properly signifies Honor, or Respect, for Having regard, they do
not at all spare the body, and have not any respect, or any regard, for
satisfying of the flesh. For a man regards, what he does honor, whence it
comes that to honor, is often put, in Scripture, for the having a care of; as
when S. Paul would command Timothy to have a care of Widows, 1 Timothy 5.4.
he says to him; Honor the Widows, that are Widows indeed: and so frequently
elsewhere. In like manner therefore, he says in this place, that these
Teachers did not at all spare the body, and took no care of it; not valuing at
all the things, that are requisite, for the feeding, and satisfaction of the
flesh. I think, we may hold to this Exposition, as the simplest, and easiest;
and indeed it is the commonest, and most followed. These false Teachers then
made, this their contempt of the body, and the small care they took to nourish
it, according to its appetites, to be sounded out aloud; referring thereunto
those abstinences from some kind of meats, which they enjoined; proclaiming
that this was to mortify their flesh, and keep it in an wholesome discipline.
What could be said more plausible? For as nothing is more unworthy the high
designs of piety, than a sticking to the things of the Carcass, and the
Kitchen; so it seems, that there is not any thing more worthy of the things of
Heaven; then contempt of this base, and wretched nature. And the more
passionate ordinary men are for their flesh, even to the making it their GOD,
so much the more do they admire those, who beat it down, instead of adoring it,
as themselves do. Accordingly evident it is, that most Seducers have abused
this color, to paint over their inventions, and impostures. We read, how the
old Idol-priests did cut all their faces with Lancets, 1 King. 18.28.
and other Pagans rend their Children, and Pages with stripes, before the Altar
of their feigned Deity: nor can one think without horror, upon the Cruelties,
and Barbarities, which the most part of their Priests, and Votaries did, and do
yet to this day, exercise on their own persons, in places where Paganism bear
sway. Their Abstinences also were extreme; and there were Sects, yea whole
Nations, that scrupled to eat of any thing, that had had sense. The Fastings,
and Austerities of the Encratites, the Montanists, and Eustathians, ancient
Heretics of the Christian Profession, are famous in the Writings of Antiquity.
Not so much as the Mahumetans, the most sensual, and most carnal of all
Infidels, but do make semblance of not sparing their bodies. I pass by the
prodigious, and incredible austerities of their Votaries, of whom, some go
almost stark naked, and so little spare their flesh, that they wound, and gash
it, both with Incisions, and inustions; others neither eat, nor drink, but very
seldom. Even all Mahometans in general do most devoutly observe every Year a
kind of Lent, which they call Ra^edan, Fasting daily an whole month from
Morning until night, without taking any thing at all, until the Stars
appear. Every one knows also, how scrupulously they all abstain from Wine, one
of the pleasingst, and most prized refreshments of the body.

But for these people, who are without any knowledge of the Apostle's
Authority, Beloved Brethren, it is no wonder, they should suffer themselves to
be seduced by such vain shows. Our amazement, and grief is on the occasion of
our Adversaries of the Roman Communion, that this false luster, so loudly
decryed here by an Apostle, whom they profess to acknowledge, and reverence,
should yet be sufficient to recommend unto them Doctrines purely humane, and
cause them to receive them for Divine. For I may truly say, that all their
errors, or wanting very few, have been introduced, by favor of three false
colors, which the Apostle does here so roughly reject: to wit, voluntary
service, humility, and mortifying of the body. And they are not ashamed to
recommend them still by these very things, alleging, for the defense of their
doctrines, such shows, as Pagans, Heretics, and Infidels have heretofore
painted over their impieties, and superstitions withal, and the Apostle
expressly remarked, and condemned the abuse of. It Is by this, that they defend,
the worshipping of Images, and the Invocation of Saints, and the exorbitant
submission they live in unto the Prelates, and particularly to the Bishop of
Rome, and the celebration of so many Festivals, and a multitude of other
abuses. Not being able to found them on the Scriptures of GOD, they plead to
us, that they are voluntary services, which are performed with a good intention
and do tend to humble the Spirit. Their Fastings and Abstinences, their
Watchings, and Pilgrimages, their Whippings, and Disciplines, and all the odd
exercises of their Monks, are not in the least commanded of GOD. But what
skills it? The more voluntary they are, (say they) the more meritorious; and
then on the other hand, they mortify the body, which they spare not at all,
having no regard to the satisfying of its desires. There Is nothing, but they
might make pass for good and godly, with this specious pigment. I might justly
plead against these vain pretexts; that GOD's will ought to be the rule of
ours, and that it is dangerous to trust our intentions in matter of Religion;
seeing it often comes to pass, that GOD has that in abomination, which does
most please our thoughts: as also that it is a proud, and an extravagant
humility, to give men a power over our Consciences, which it is the prerogative
of GOD alone to have; and that if the not sparing of the body, do serve for the
mortifying of it, it follows not, that we must place divine service therein. I
might allege these, and many other things, and found them by the Scripture, to
demonstrate the vanity of their pretexts. But for this time, I content me with
the Apostle's example, and authority. He acknowledges, that the Doctrines of
those Seducers, whom he does oppose, had these three very colors; and that the
same gave them a show of wisdom. And yet for all this, he does not forbear to
reject them, making so little account of that show of theirs, that he
vouchsafes not to spend one word upon the refutation of it. How specious soever
their Doctrines be, it is enough for his condemning them, that they were
instituted, and taught by men, and not by the LORD; clearly presupposing by
this procedure of his, that all Christians should hold it for an undoubted
maxim, that Religious service must be measured by the will of GOD, and not by
ours; by His order, and not our fancy; and that the foundation of our
humility is, the respect we owe him, not to submit our Consciences to any
besides Him. Let then the Traditions of Rome, in other regards, be of what
quality you please; let them have all the colors of wisdom; let them be
voluntary, and humble, and meet to mortify the flesh. You will do much by
setting all this pompous show in view. You will gain much, by laying it forth
before mine eyes, and declaiming to me of the advantages of those things. I
cannot receive them, except you show me, that it is GOD has instituted them,
and not the will of man. The Apostle has taught me, to make so little account
of these kind of reasons, as that I should not vouchsafe so much, as to amuse
my self to consider them. After having heard you, it suffices me to tell you,
as he says here to the Seducers of his time, that if your Doctrines have this
show of wisdom, which you attribute to them, they are in conclusion, but humane
things, since GOD has not at all commanded them in His word.

Yet upon thorough examination, it will be found, My Brethren, that the most of
their inventions do want, not the reality alone, but the color, and the very
show of wisdom. For, I beseech you, what shadow of wisdom is there, in this
Lent for instance, which they began the other day, after the ordinary Preface
of their Carneval? What reason, or common sense is there, that can affirm, if
it be free, that it is wisdom, after license taken for all kind of debauches,
and fooleries, to imagine an handful of ashes will efface it all? That it is
wisdom to believe, the eating of Fish is fasting? That it is wisdom to think,
the eating Herbs, or Salmon, or Green-fish, is a sanctifying ones self? and
that to taste but a bit of Bief, or Mutton, during these forty days, is to
defile ones soul with a sin mortal, and meriting eternal fire? as if the whole
nature of things were changed in a moment, and the living Creatures of the
earth, from being good, and wholesome, as they were but four days ago, became
contagious, and deadly? Is it wisdom, to tie up Christianity to an observance,
which has so little reason in it, and to say, as they do, that such, as eat
any flesh, within this time are not Christians? There is no understanding how
ordinary soever, but may easily judge, that all this has no show of wisdom in
it, to say no worse. And it is to no purpose, to tell us, that it is not the
nature of the things themselves, but the commandment of their Church, that
makes them be of this opinion. For if these things be not true in themselves,
their Church does ill to authorize them, and besides that it contravenes the
rules of wisdom, evidently violates those of charity also, as straitning the
way to Heaven, and augmenting the difficulty of entering there, and damning men
for things, which without its commandment, would be free, and indifferent.

Let us lay aside then, I beseech you, my Brethren, all these humane
Commandments, which are so far from being just, and necessary, that they have
not, for the most part, so much as that vain show of wisdom, which the Apostle
granted, the Doctrines of the Seducers of his time, had. Hold we to the Sacred,
and saving institututions of our LORD JESUS; which all are just, all
reasonable, all full of deep, Mat. 16.11.
and truly Divine wisdom. Let us believe, as he has taught us, that it is not
what enters in at the mouth, that does defile a man, but what comes out of the
heart: and that the Kingdom of GOD, Romans 14.17.
is not meat or drink; but righteousness, peace, and joy of the Holy Ghost.
Serve we Him, according to His own rule, and not according to the imaginations
of men. Let our will be bound up to His; let it count it self happy in
following the same, and not presume to guide it self. Let it learn of Him, what
it owes Him,; not be so arrogant, as to define it after its own fancy. The
task, He has given us, is great enough, for our employing all the time, and
strength we have, without diverting ought of the same any other way. It Is in
this, that true humility consists, even in submitting absolutely to JESUS
CHRIST; in refusing no particular of what He would have; in attempting nothing
beyond His orders. He it is clear, would have us to love GOD with all our
heart, and our Neighbor as our selves: and that denying ungodliness, and
worldly lusts, we should live soberly, righteously, and godly in the present
world, looking for His glorious appearance. This Beloved Brethren, is the rule
of the Israel of GOD, that was delivered by JESUS CHRIST; Preached by His
Apostles, confirmed by their Miracles, and by the Conversion of the World.
Peace, and Mercy be to all that shall follow it. Amen.

The End of the Second Part.
SERMONS OF MR. JOHN DAILLE, ON THE EPISTLE OF THE Apostle ST. Paul TO THE
COLOSSIANS.

THE THIRD PART.

CONTAINING An Exposition of the two last Chapters, in Eighteen SERMONS.

LONDON; Printed for Tho. Parkhurst, 1671.

The Author's Epistle Dedicatory TO MONSIEUR Monsieur de Rambovillet, LORD OF
LANCEY, and of PLESSIS-FRANC.
SIR,
THese Sermons will not be new to You; there having past so little time, since
you heard them at Charenton, no doubt but you will know them at first sight.
The support they then found in our holy Assembly, emboldens them now to present
themselves in public. Perhaps it had been better, to rest contented with that
favor, which our people showed them, and not publish them once more in this
other form. For beside, that the eye is much more delicate than the ear, and
the defects of a discourse are far more easily observed on paper, where they
abide, than in the air, where they do but pass; there is further a great
difference between an Auditor, whom devotion does oblige to hear you, and a
Reader, who does owe you nothing. The one would think, he should sin against
Piety, if he denied you his attention. The other does you a favor, in heeding
you, and may examine you, without a crime. The one's judgment is half made for
you; whereas the other's is at its full liberty. These reasons would have
withheld me, from hazarding the edition of these small Books, if the matter
had wholly depended upon my opinion. But the desires of my friends, and the
entreaties of the Bookseller interposing in it, their violence has forced my
modesty. Yet I should have had vigor, and firmness enough, to defend my self
against it, if the question had been simply of my self, and my reputation. For
the present age being so polite, and so illuminated, as the most eloquent
tongues, and the best fashioned penns can hardly content it; I well know, that
to please it, there is need of graces, and perfections, which I do not possess.
But neither is that, the thing I seek: since of my weakness, and the Calling
wherewith GOD has honored me, having competently secured me from such a
passion. That which made me yield, to the too favorable will of my Friends, is
the interest of Christian souls, which they laid before me, and the service,
they believed, this Book might do them. The success will inform us, whether
they had reason to promise themselves so much from it. For my part, the thing
being as yet uncertain, I held my self obliged, to give place unto their
judgment, and to prefer the profit, which they imagine the faithful may receive
from my poor labors, before any other consideration. And if it be temerity, to
hope the same; at least it is not a crime, but a laudable affection to desire
it. Of one thing, Sir, I am wellnigh assured; that you will not dislike the
gift, I make you, of this third, and last part of my work. For to say nothing
of that sweetness of spirit, and that obliging nature, which every one observes
in you; and not to consider diverse testimonies, which I have received, of your
good will toward me in particular, I am confirmed in this opinion, by your
piety, well known in our Church, both by the excellent fruits of your charity,
in the ordinary course of your life, and by the services, you have sometime
done our whole flock, in the Office of an Elder, while you executed it among
us, with much edification, and praise. Persuading my self therefore, Sir, may
it please you, that you will receive this small present, with your usual
goodness, and facility; there remains not else, but that I pray GOD to conserve
you, with your worthy, and well-born Family in health, and prosperity, daily
augmenting on you His most precious blessings, both spiritual, and temporal. I
beseech you, to continue me the honor of your good graces, and to do me the
favor to believe, that I passionately am,

SIR, Your most Humble, and most obedient Servitour, DAILLE.
From Paris. Apr. the 1. 1648.
SERMONS ON THE THIRD AND FOURTH CHAPTERS OF THE Epistle of the Apostle St.
Paul TO THE COLOSSIANS.
SERMON XXXII.
CHAP. III. Verses I. II. Verse I. If then ye be risen again with CHRIST, seek
the things which are above, where CHRIST sits at the right hand of GOD.

II. Mind the things, which are above; not those, which are on the earth.


DEar Brethren; If the study and practice of true holiness, which consists in
the love of God, and our Neighbor, had filled, as it ought, the hearts and
lives of Christians, they would never have amused themselves in those minute
devotions, and carnal ceremonies, wherewith superstition has always fed, and
does still to this day feed the World. This second sort of services was not
invented and introduced in Religion, but to be a supply in defect of the other:
For man well knowing, that the Majesty and Beneficence of GOD obliges us to
serve Him; and the charms and tentations of the earth turning away his heart
from the legitimate service we owe Him, which is that of a true and real
sanctity; that he may not appear empty in the presence of this sovereign Deity,
he presents it instead of that which it requires of us, with certain
corporeal, childish, and spurious devotions, which, for that they are of our
own invention, are naturally pleasing to us. Accordingly, they are commonly
called satisfactions; because they are performed to content GOD, and pay Him
for the omission of what was due to Him: An evident sign, that if men had
fulfilled their duty, there would have been no need of their busying themselves
in these other exercises. Hence there proceeded, at the beginning, those
abstinences from certain meats, and those distinctions of days, and that
worshipping of Angels, which some seducers would have set up among Christians,
in the very days of the Apostles. From the same source also issued afterward,
the stations, the xerofagies, and other disciplines of the Montanists, and of
diverse heretics, that sometime disturbed the ancient Church. In fine, from
this very original have sprung the observances, and voluntary services of Rome;
those Orders and Rules of so many Monks, as do now a-daies fill the World;
quadragesimal rites, fasts and vigils, auricular confession, pilgrimages,
whippings, feastivals, jubilees, chappelets, and fraternities, with a multitude
of such other devotions, which have overwhelmed Christian Religion. We may
confidently say, there would never have been recourse to such things, if
mortification of the old man, if true piety toward GOD, and true charity
toward their neighbor, had exercised, and continually taken up the
affections, and whole life of Christians. So likewise you see their greatest
Zealots confess, that their rules and disciplines have no place in Heaven,
where holiness is perfected; and never had less on earth, than among Christians
of the first age, that is, the best, and most holy; all these humane devotions
being evidently sprung from a relaxing of the piety of Christians, and the
corruption of their manners.

Therefore the Apostle St. Paul, having refuted in the precedent Chapter, as
you have heard, the pretended services, and mortifications of the false
Teachers of his time; that the faithful, to whom he writes, might utterly be
disgusted at, and turned away from the same; does now lay before them the just
offices, and legitimate exercises of Christian piety; the body of holiness,
instead of shadows; the solid doctrine of the LORD JESUS, instead of the vain,
and childish lessons of superstition; the true mortifying of the flesh, instead
of the seducers unprofitable macerations; and an abstinence from sin, and the
lusts thereof, instead of abstinence from certain meats; in fine, Heaven,
instead of the earth: As a prudent gardener, who after he has plucked up the
bad, or unprofitable herbs of his garden, and well cleans'd the ground, casts
in good seeds, that are worthy to take up the earth, and capable of yielding
fruits useful for the food of men. Withal, the Apostle, by this means, prevents
an objection, that superstition usually makes. For being not able to maintain
its petty services, as holy, and necessary in themselves, it has been wont to
allege, that whatever they be otherways, it is yet better for Christians to
employ themselves in them, than to abide idle. The Apostle takes from it this
vain color, showing the faithful, that they have another task, which is much
more worthy, and much more noble, to wit, the study and practice of true
sanctity: so that superstition is guilty not only of a superfluous diligence,
but of a pernicious temerity, in diverting Christians from their legitimate and
necessary work, by those voluntary exercises, wherewith it pretends to charge
them. Let us then, Dearly beloved Brethren, keep off from the vain institutions
of superstition, whether ancient, or modern; and keep to the discipline of St.
Paul. Let us meditate, let us study, and practice what he enjoyneth us; and
assure our selves, that in following, and observing his rule exactly, we shall
have neither time, nor will, nor need to busy our selves after the rules of
men. He employes all the remainder of this Epistle in these Divine documents;
and in the beginning of this Chapter, after he has raised our hearts to
Heaven, he represents unto us, the general duties of sanctification; that are
necessary for all Christians: thence passing unto particulars, he instructs
married persons, children, fathers, servants and masters, in what they owe to
one another, as you shall hear, if GOD please, in the sequel of these actions.
For the present, to explain the exhortation, which he has placed at the head
of this excellent tract, and the words whereof we have read to you, we will
consider, by the grace and assistance of the Holy Ghost, first the precept, it
contains, that we do seek the things which are above; and then in the second
place, the two reasons upon which he foundeth it; one taken from our being
risen again with CHRIST; and the other from J. CHRIST His sitting on high, at
the right hand of GOD; and we shall observe upon each particular, as briefly as
we may, the instructions and lessons they afford us, either for our
edification, and consolation in general, or particularly for our preparation to
that holy, and mystical repast, unto which the LORD JESUS invites us against
the next LORD'S Day.

The ancient Greeks e're-while ascribed to that Philosopher of theirs whom they
most esteemed, the glory of having brought down wisdom from Heaven to the
earth; because he was the first that fixed the minds of his Scholars on the
considering of their own nature, and what we owe, either to our selves, or to
other men; whereas the Sages, that lived before him, busied themselves in
nothing but the contemplating of Heaven, and its motions, and the natural
things that depend upon the same. But the LORD JESUS, the true Prince of Wisdom
and Verity, instructs us quite otherwise than that man did, who verily was but
a blind leader of the blind. For all the Philosophy of JESUS CHRIST is, to
loosen us from the earth, and lift us up to Heaven, and so fix our minds and
affections there, as we may dwell even for the present, and converse, and have
our souls incessantly there, how far distant so-ever our bodies be from that
happy habitation. It is very true, as that poor Pagan judged, that the
contemplating of the Sun, and the Planets, and the other Stars, and the
searching out of their motions, and the admiring of their beauty, their light,
their greatness, and other qualities (which was all the employment of the
Heathens first Philosophy) does not much conduce to the perfection of our
manners, and the felicity of our lives. But neither is it upon that, that JESUS
CHRIST does fix us. He has discovered to us other things, on high within that
nobler part of the World, which are infinitely more excellent, and more
necessary; and such, as if that Pagan had seen them, he would have made no
difficulty to confess, that true wisdom consists, not in staying ones self
here below on the earth, but in ascending up to Heaven, for the viewing, the
loving, and admiring of them continually.

For first, He has revealed to us there, an holy, and a glorious City, seated
above nature, and all its elements; a City, not mutable, and subject to perish,
as inferior things; but founded, permanent, and eternal; the sanctuary of
life, and immortality; which GOD has builded, and in which He has displayed
all the wonders of His power, and wisdom; the dwelling, place, which He has
prepared for such among men, as embracing His promises by Faith, shall live
here below in His fear, and obey His commandments; and where He has aleady
gathered in, and consecrated in His rest, the spirits of such of the faithful,
as He has fetched out of the present World. CHRIST has made us see, that it
is there those blessed ones do dwell, with the armies of holy Angels; and that
it is thither He went Himself, when He had finished the work of our redemption
upon earth. It Is in this mystical Paradise, that the true Tree of Life does
grow. It Is there, that the rivers of pleasure do run. There shines the true
Sun, that never sets. There are kept those divine flowers, that can neither be
fouled, nor fade, with which the piety, and patience of Saints shall be one day
crowned. It Is there, that GOD manifests himself to His servants, and shows
them the mervails of His countenance unveiled: and feeds them, and fills them
with joy, and transforms them, by this vision, into so many living images of
His eternal, and blessed nature. It Is there, is true glory, and true pleasure;
an honor, a felicity, and a magnificence, the idea whereof never entered,
either into our senses, or into the very thoughts of our heart: in comparison
whereof, all the pomp of the Earth, and the glory of this Heaven, in which we
see the Sun and the Stars go their rounds, is but a shadow, and a vapor.
Again, as the creatures there possess true glory, so do they exercise true
sanctity: All of it, that is seen here below, is but a little sparkle of the
perfection of those blessed inhabitants of that celestial City. The love they
bear to their LORD, is there perfect, as well as the knowledge they have of
Him. Charity toward our neighbor, concord, union, truth, do there reign
absolute. Their souls have neither affections, nor desires, but which are
conform unto the will of GOD. The light of his face governs all their
motions, and shedding abroad its self continually upon them, maintains them in
an eternal holiness, peace and blessedness. The LORD JESUS has discovered to
us all these wonders above the Heavens, having brought life and immortality to
light by the Gospel. But further, He has certified us to, that these are
things which concern us, and pertain to us? and opened, by His cross, and
resurrection, the way that will most assuredly bring us to them. If we have the
courage to follow Him, of what condition or quality so-ever we may be, He will
congregate us to this holy company of His servants; receiving our souls into
His bosom, upon their departure from this earth, and raising up our poor
bodies themselves one day, revested with His immortality and His glory.

These be, Dear Brethren, the things which are above, that the Apostle wills
we do seek; in the same sense that our Savior commands us in the Gospel,
Matthew. 6.33.
to seek the Kingdom of GOD, and His righteousness; signifying by that term,
First, that we propose Heaven and Eternity to our selves, for the utmost end of
our whole life, and place our supreme happiness in this rich possession; that
we make it our grand, and only design. And secondly, that we employ, in this
noble persuit, all the might we have, seriously using all the means that the
Word of GOD prescribes us, faith, invocation, piety, sanctity; and flee as a
mortal pest, every thing that keeps us off, or turns us aside from this mark.
For, Prove. 21.25.
as to the slothful, who does nothing all day but desire, and sets not his hand
to the work, he has no part in those heavenly things. His desire kills him,
says the wise man; as one that feeds on nothing but wind; there must be
knocking; there must be seeking; there must be working out our salvation with
fear and trembling. This treasure is not for cold and languid wills, that
evaporate altogether in vain wishings. It shall be that man's prize, who shall
take it with an ardent, and a generous courage; and impulsed with a violent
affection, spare neither pain, nor watching, nor labor to obtain it.

That which the Apostle commands us in the following verse, namely, to mind
the things which are above, does amount to well-neer the same sense. For the
word he uses, comprehends the two actions of our souls toward objects we
love; the one, a considering them, and thinking on them; the other; a desiring,
and embracing them in our affections. So you see, he obliges us, first, to
list up our hearts to Heaven, where the LORD JESUS is, and to have that blessed
Kingdom continually before our eyes, which GOD has there prepared for us,
together with all those great eternal good things wherein it consists. He
requires, that this thought do fill our souls day and night; that it be the
thought that has superiority in them, that governs all the motions of them;
the thought that regulateth our resolutions, and decideth all our doubts. That
in all things which shall present themselves, we ever reflect hereon, to see
how they refer unto it, and whether they be compatible with it. Such was the
practice of the Father of the faithful. He looked (says the Apostle) for a
City that has foundation. And Moses, the grand legislator of the Jews, He had
regard (says the same Apostle) unto the recompense; that is, as he explains
himself in the Text, They minded the things which are above. And this thought
(as you see) is also necessarily conjoynt with affection; with an ardent desire
of possessing such amiable and excellent things, and with a steadfast hope of
enjoying them at length.

This is then, my Brethren, the first of those two duties which the Apostle
requires of us, to wit, that we seek the things which are above. Now unto it
he annexeth a prohibition, which follows necessarily from it, namely, that we
seek not the things which are upon the earth; Heaven and earth being so
opposite, as it is is not possible, but they who seek the things of the one,
must renounce the things of the other. The things of the earth are, as you
know, the goods of the World, riches, gold, silver, honors, pleasures, and the
like; all that which earthly men, the children of this generation do esteem,
and passionately love. He does not mean we should have no care at all about the
necessaries of the present life; for the good things that refer thereto, being
gifts of GOD, which we cannot be without, one may both acquire, and serve
himself of them with thanksgiving, yet not cleave unto them, and use them, yet
not abuse them. And the Apostle you know, other-where commands us to have care
of our families, and to do every one his own business, and to labor with our
hands, that we may carry our selves honestly toward them that are without, and
that we may have lack of nothing. But he forbids us to seek the things of the
earth, in the same sense that he commanded us to seek those of Heaven: that is,
to place our chief good in them, and to desire them with choicest affection,
and prefer them before any other consideration. It Is thus that those men sought
the things of the earth, Phil. 3.12. Luke 14.
of whom the Apostle says elsewhere, that the belly was their God, and they
gloried in their shame; and those in the Gospel-parable, who preferred the care
of their fields, and of their oxen, and the love of their wives, before the
call of Heaven. Such a one, in the Old Testament, was that Esan, who chose a
little pottage of lentils, rather than his primogeniture. Such, in the New,
were those sordid Gadarens, who would have the Son of GOD be gone, because He
had made them lose their swine; and those that love their fathers, or mothers,
or brethren, or other alliances, or their worldly possessions more than the
LORD JESUS; or that prefer the praise of men before the praise of GOD. Such a
one also was that besotted rich man, who thought himself happy enough, because
he had goods laid up for many years, and dreamt of nothing but enjoying them.

Now, though the bare dignity of heavenly things, and the mere meanness and
unprofitableness of earthly things, should be sufficient to recommend the
former, and to disgust us at the latter; yet the Apostle, for the swaying of us
to duties so just as these, sets before us two excellent reasons, the first
whereof is drawn from our resurrection with our Savior. He had touched it
already, in the twelfth verse of the precedent Chapter; and it is from thence he
resumes it, and reminds us of it here, saying, If then ye be risen again with
CHRIST; that is to say, since you are risen again with the LORD, as I have
said, and showed a-fore. For the particle, if, is used here, as often
elsewhere by way of illation, and concluding, not in way of doubting; and
imports as much, as if the Apostle had said, since that, or seeing that. For
the rest, you plainly see, that the Resurrection he speaks of, is not that of
our bodies, which shall not be till the last day; but another mystical, and
spiritual one, already accomplished in us, by the virtue of our LORD'S
resurrection, and the efficacy of His Spirit. Ephesians. 2.5.6.
He spoke of it a-fore, at the place we noted; and in the Epistle to the
Ephesians, where he says, that GOD has quickened us together with CHRIST, and
raised us up together, and made us sit together in heavenly places in Him. He
explains us the mystery of it elsewhere, in these words. Romans 6.
We are (says he) buried with Him by Baptism into His death, that as CHRIST
is raised from the dead, by the glory of the Father, so we in like manner
should walk in newness of life. Every resurrection presupposes a death
preceding. For to rise again, is nothing else, but for one to be restored to
life, who before was dead. Now the estate that men are in, under the dominion
of sin, the Scripture calls Death, because therein they have no sense nor
motion, in respect of piety and sanctity; no more than the dead that rest in
the grave, have any for the actions of this life. Ephesians. 2.1.
Ye were dead in your sins and offenses (says the Apostle to the Ephesians,
speaking of the time of their ignorance.) Whence is that which our Savior
says in the Gospel; Let the dead bury their dead: and which St. Paul says, 1 Timothy 5.6.
the widow that lives in pleasure, is dead while she lives. When therefore by
the efficacy of the vocation of the Spirit, and Gospel of the LORD, a man comes
to pass out of this miserable condition into the estate of grace; receiving the
light of Faith into his understanding, and Charity and Sanctification into his
heart; the Scripture, to express this wonderful change, says, that he is risen
again. This is precisely the resurrection that St. Paul intends in this place.

He says, that we are risen again with CHRIST; First, because this blessed
change that is brought to pass in us by His grace, is like that change which
betided Him, when from the grave, where He had lain for the space of three
days, He was raised unto life by virtue from on high. For as He then received
the faculties of moving, and sensation, of which He was deprived in the
Sepulcher: so we, in our regeneration, do receive a spirit, and a principle of
life, which we had not before. Again, as the LORD was restored unto life by the
glory of the Father, as the Apostle speaks, that is by virtue of the exceeding
great and glorious power of GOD; in like manner are we renewed, and put into
the state of grace, by the efficacy of the might of GOD, and not by the arm of
man, or the operation of flesh and blood. In fine, as the LORD, upon His rising
again, did recover, not simply that life which He laid down in His dying, but
another much more excellent and glorious, a spiritual, a celestial and an
immortal life: in like manner we resume in our regeneration, not the life of
the first Adam before sin, from which we were fallen, and which how excellent
so-ever, was nevertheless animal, and mortal, that is, capable of being lost,
as appeared by the issue: but another much more exquisite and perfect, a life
eternal, immutable, and like that the blessed Angels live. Thus you see, the
Resurrection of the LORD CHRIST is the idea and pattern of ours. But I add in
the second place, that we are said to be risen again with CHRIST, because it is
in Him, and from Him, that we have this grace; it being evident, that Faith,
which is the first faculty of the new life, does ingraff and incorporate us
into JESUS CHRIST, and as the vine-branch does not live, but in its stock; so
man cannot live that divine life, but in his Savior.

In fine, we are risen again with CHRIST, because His resurrection is the cause
of ours; in such sort, as if He had not risen from the dead, we should have
remained lying in the darkness of our spiritual death. CHRIST coming forth out
of His grave, has opened, and enlightened ours, and has administered out of
His own store, all things necessary to deliver us out of the miserable estate
wherein we were, and to put us in possession of the life of Heaven. His
resurrection has founded our Faith, showing us clearly that He is the Son of
GOD, and that His Gospel is true. His resurrection has assured our souls,
giving us full proof, that His death did fully satisfy and content the judge
of the World. It has strengthened our hopes, making us to see by example of
our Head, that death, the dreadfullest of our enemies, cannot impede our
happiness. Hereupon it has kindled love of GOD, and desire of so great glory
in our hearts; and finally, produced in them the principles, the habitudes, and
dispositions of the new life, which are necessary for our attaining unto
blissful immortality. Since therefore JESUS CHRIST in rising again, did thereby
raise up our life, which had been ingulfed in hell, and the curse, and brought
to light the causes of Faith, Hope, and Charity, the principal faculties of
that new life we now have; it is evident that we are risen again in Him, and
with Him. From whence, that which the Apostle infers upon it, does no less
clearly follow, to wit, that we ought to mind henceforth the things which are
on high, and seek them with all our affection. For the life unto which we are
raised up with our LORD, is heavenly, and not earthly; divine, and not natural;
eternal, and not corruptible. Since therefore every creature employeth all the
sense and affection it has, about things suitable to its life; who sees not,
that the faithful are obliged, by the honor they have to be risen again with
the LORD, neither to breath after, nor embrace other things, but those that are
on high, in which their new life does properly consist? And such is the example
He has given us. For being risen, he abode but a very little time here below,
only so long as the work of our salvation did require; and forthwith ascended
into Heaven, to draw up our thoughts and affections thither, until our bodies
also follow one day, being raised up thither, as His was, unto highest glory.

And this is the second consideration that the Apostle here lays before us, to
persuade us unto so just a duty. Seek the things which are above, where CHRIST
(says he) sits at the right hand of GOD. For it (as our LORD sometime said)
where our treasure is there be our hearts also; where should our souls be but
in Heaven, since it is in that blessed dwelling place that their treasure does
reside? JESUS, their good, their life, and their joy, in whom is hidden all our
felicity? In time past, under the Mosaical Law, the faithful always turned
their eyes and thoughts toward the Temple at Jerusalem, because it was the
abiding place of the pledges of GOD's covenant with them, and of the most
precious symbols of His presence and glory. Judge what our affection and
earnestness should be for Heaven, which contains the true Ark of GOD, where
all the fullness of His Godhead dwells, not in shadow, and figure, but really,
and bodily? But there is more yet; JESUS CHRIST is our Head, and we His
members. How can we conserve this honor, but in keeping close to Him, and
following Him faithfully, without ever separating from Him, or withdrawing from
that Sanctuary where He dwells? And indeed, He expressly assures us in the
Gospel, that He wills we should be where He is; and that where the dead body
is, there also the Eagles gather together; so as if we be truly of the number
of His Eagles, it is not possible but we should take our flight to Heaven,
since this divine body of our LORD and Savior is there.

And hereby you see, dear Brethren, to note it by the way, how distant the
doctrine of St. Paul is from that of Rome. For whereas the Apostle elevateth
our hearts from earth to Heaven, Rome brings them down, as far as in her lies,
from Heaven to the earth, fastening the hearts of her zealots, on her material
altars and ciboires, which, she pretends, the LORD is enclosed in; against the
suffrage of the whole Church, who has ever constantly applied these words of
the Apostle, particularly to the Sacrament of the Eucharist, exhorting the
faithful, when they celebrate it, to have their hearts above. Sure, if JESUS
CHRIST be here below, as Rome would have it, the Apostle does ill, to command
us to mind the things which are above: and worse again, in urging for a reason
of it, that it is above that JESUS CHRIST resideth. If for that the LORD is in
Heaven, we ought, according to the Apostles instruction, not to seek any thing
on earth; how much less, I beseech you, ought we to seek the LORD Himself
there? I do not advertise you, that this is to be understood of the presence of
the humane nature of JESUS CHRIST; For you know, that He is every where, as to
the essence, and providence of His Divinity; And as to the grace of His Spirit,
and the efficacy and virtue of His will and institutions, we readily confess,
that the same is not confined to the Heavens; and does extend, and show its
self wheresoever He pleases, according to the promise He has made us, to be
in the midst of us, when we are assembled in His Name.

But the Apostle does not barely say, that JESUS is in Heaven. He adds, that He
sits at the right hand of GOD. Diverse Doctors have belabored themselves
much in the explicating of these words; and at length, there are some that have
strangely disguised them; as if they signified, that our LORD's humane nature
had been invested with all the properties of the Divinity, which would be no
other thing, but that it was transformed into a Divine nature; a conceit which
all true Christians have horror for, confessing that the two natures do
remain, each of them in its integrity, having been united in JESUS CHRIST, but
not blended together, nor confused; The Apostle, if we please to hear him, will
tell us in two words what it is to sit at the right hand of GOD. For in the
15th. Chapter of the first Epist. to the Corinthians, speaking of the estate,
to which JESUS CHRIST has been exalted in the Heavens, and in which he shall
abide constantly unto the end; instead of its being said by the Prophet, from
whom the expression was taken, in Psalm. 110. that the LORD should fit at the
right hand of the Father; he says simply, that He shall reign till He has put
all His enemies under His feet; an evident sign, that this sitting at the right
hand of the Father, is nothing else, but that supreme dominion which has been
given Him over all things, and which He does, and shall exercise unto the end
of all ages; inasmuch as GOD has made Him LORD, Acts 2.36.
and CHRIST, as St. Peter speaks. And this consideration does again mightily
strengthen the holy Apostle's exhortation. For since Heaven is the throne, on
which the Prince of the Universe does sit, and from which He dispenses, and
governs all things at His will; there is great reason we should turn our eyes
thither-ward, and have this Royal Court of our Sovereign in mind night and day,
to comfort our selves under the trouble, that either the iniquity of men and
devils, or the intemperateness of other creatures, does give us, and to form
our manners, and all the parts of our life, after the will, and by the example
of so great, and so holy a Monarch.

Behold the Lesson, Beloved Brethren, which the Apostle gives us at this time,
that we seek not low, but high things; not those of the earth, but the things
of Heaven; since we are risen up with JESUS CHRIST, who is sat down on high, in
Heaven, at the right hand of GOD. What would there be in all the World more
happy than we, if we took up a good and a firm resolution to obey Him, and
practice the thing He enjoyneth us? These fears, and these desires, and so many
other vain passions which trouble our whole life, would have no more place in
us. We, elevated far above that, which men unprofitably covet, or possess, or
apprehend, should, with Angels, enjoy a Divine contentment. From that glorious
Heaven, where we should be, we should despise the vanities and variations of
the earth, and see its seasons pass on, and its elements roll about, and its
idols perish, and its pleasures fleet away, without any perturbation, being
secure, that none of its storms can ever reach that high and inaccessible
region where our hearts and lives would be. We should look upon death without
terror, knowing that it could not take any of those things from us, which we
possess on high. We should suffer all the accidents of this life without
emotion; because they can change no part of the things we have in Heaven. The
charms also, and illusions of the World, would touch us as little, as its
menaces, and raging; because the fruition of a greater good would render us
insensible for lesser ones; as the presence of the Sun puts out the shining of
the stars. Being content with Heaven, and its eternity, we should covet nothing
more; and satisfied with so rich a portion, not envy any of the creatures, the
perfections, and happiness they have. Our whole life would be a perpetual
feastival, whereon, free from the travail and turmoil of worldlings,
contemplating in spirit the glory of the Palace of our LORD, meditating His
promises, breathing after His benefits, and enjoying them for the present by
faith, and Hope, we should, in repose, wait for the blessed day of our glorious
triumph.

But alas! how far are we from such a felicity! This wretched and perishing
earth is the sole object of our minds. Our souls are no less fastened to it than
our bodies. It swalloweth up all our thoughts; it possesses our affections; it
takes up our cares, and our labors; and has the use of all our time. We have
no desires, and love, but for the false goods, which it shows us; nor fear
and horror, but for the evils wherewith it threatens us. As for Heaven, and
the things it comprehends, we are so far from seeking them, that we not so
much as think of them, except it be dreamingly, or in manner of a
divertisement, when we are told of them in this place; looking on the stately
representations which JESUS CHRIST has drawn us of them, as an empty picture;
fair indeed, and pleasing, but good for naught, saving to feed our eyes with a
short and bootless pleasure; not attracting, nor engaging our desires. This is
the cause why our whole life is miserable; full of griefs and fears, of
weaknesses, of regrets and infelicities. The least strokes overturn us; the
least losses, and slightest afflictions bear us down; because not being fastened
to Heaven, the only firm and sure place of the World, we fluctuate, exposed to
the mercy of all that comes against us. And as children cannot be appeased when
their puppets are taken from them, because they have set all their affection on
them: so are we seized, and do take on, when we come to lose some of these
toys of the earth. There is no way to comfort us, because we have fastened our
hearts to them. And to say truth, our condition is worse than other men's; they
at least are subject but to the evils that either the infirmity of nature, or
(as they call it) the inconstancy of fortune, do bring with them; whereas
besides these, the bad Christian, who is not a Christian, but in name, is
moreover exposed to the persecution of the World; so as, to say plainly, there
is nothing more foolish nor more wretched than he, who has part in the
temporal sufferings and hardships of true believers, and none at all in their
consolation or blessedness; inasmuch as his profession exposes Him to the
hatred of the World, and his vice excludes him from the Kingdom of GOD.

Awake then ye that are worldly, and come once out of so dangerous an error.
Let not the trumpet of Heaven, the voice of our great Apostle, have founded now
in your ears in vain. Do not add this contempt to your other crimes. He has
advertised you of your duty. He has declared the reasons that oblige you to
it. Take heed, lest if you shut your ears against JESUS CHRIST, who speaks by
His mouth, you perish in the end with this earth, and the things you seek on
it. How do you not perceive that you shall never find there the happiness you
seek? Why has not the experience of so many millions of persons, who daily
spend themselves in this vain labor; taught you, that the things of the earth
are all of them but vanities, and illusions, transient figures, which promise
pleasure, honor, and contentment, but afford none? which do not cure the
maladies of the body, nor of the soul? which infinitely toil out those that
seek them, and never fill the hearts of those that possess them? multiplying
their desires, and their fears, inflaming and envenoming their passions,
instead of extinguishing them? which are subject to infinite mutations? which
men and elements may bereave you of every moment? and which, considering the
short and uncertain duration of the life we lead here below, you can enjoy but
a very little time, supposing that nothing does deprive you of them before
death? At that time, Matt. 16.26.
What will it profit a man to have gained the whole world, and lose his own
soul? It is sure, a blindness incredible, to one that saw it not; I do not say,
that a Christian, who has hopes of the world to come; but that even any
reasonable man should adhere with so ardent, and obstinate a passion, unto such
wretched and fruitless things. We perceive it, and confess it, and make the
bravest discourses in the World upon it; and after all, that false luster which
we behold in these things, has such a faculty to bewitch our senses, that not
a person, but lets himself be caught thereby. But the worst is, that besides
error and vanity, there is in it a tendency to eternal damnation. For men may
not slatter themselves. None can serve two Masters; nor look on Heaven and
earth both together. He that seeks the one, must of necessity renounce the
other; it being no more possible to seek, than it is to find at once, the things
beneath, and those which are above.

Faithful Brethren, choose you, and take the better part, and leaving worldly
men, to labor in vain after the things of the earth, and to seek in it what
they shall never find; turn you your hearts and eyes toward Heaven, as the
Apostle calls you to do. There, Christian, is the felicity you desire. There
dwells rest, and joy, and immortality, and the perfection of both soul and
body. These are the only things that are truly worthy of your prayers, and your
pains. Seek them, and mind them night and day. Give your selves no rest till
you have found them, and do feel the first fruits and beginnings of them in
your hearts. Let these thoughts sweeten your sufferings, and consolate your
losses. It Is in vain, that you threaten me, ye people of the World. You cannot
deprive me of what I possess, nor hinder me from finding what I seek; since
upon the things of Heaven, you have no power. Whatever you bereave me of, the
best part of my treasure, and the only part that deserves that appellation,
will still remain entire to me. Let the same thought arm us against all
tentations. Thou, Tempter, promisest me the things of the earth; but I seek
those of Heaven, which thou can not dispose of. Though I should lose all I
have here below, even to this flesh its self, yet shall I find it again with a
thousand-fold increase in Heaven. Let this thought again keep us continually
busied in the good and worthy actions of piety, charity, and honesty. Let our
manners resemble those of the inhabitants of that divine City, which we seek.
Let the light of their knowledge, the ardency of their love, the purity of
their affections, shine forth now betimes in our lives. It Is that, to which
that new nature, JESUS CHRIST has given us, in raising us again with Himself,
does oblige us. These thoughts, and works of Heaven, are necessary productions
of the principles and faculties of that life unto which we have been raised up.
You can neither be Christians, without having part in the resurrection of our
LORD; nor have part in His resurrection, except you walk with Him, and wear
that lightsome robe of sanctity, wherewith He vesteth all the associates of His
resurrection. He Himself calls us hereto from that lofty Throne, whereon He
sits at the right hand of GOD; Faithful soul, (says He to each of us) look
unto me, and I will give thee light. Fear not; for I govern the Heavens, and
the earth. Only fix thine eyes, thy thoughts, and thine heart on me; and I will
guide thee by my counsel, and receive thee one day into my glory. Dear
Brethren, this He does promise us, and of this He will give us earnest next
Lord's Day, at His holy table. Let us do what He demands of us, or to say
better, let us pray Him to do it in us, and He will assuredly do what He
promises us. Unto Him, unto the Father, and unto the Holy Spirit, the true and
only GOD, blessed for ever, be honor, praise, and glory, to ages of ages. Amen.

THE THIRTY THIRD SERMON ON COLOSSIANS,
CHAP. III. VER. III, IV. Verse III. For ye are dead, and your life is hid with
CHRIST in GOD.

IV. When CHRIST, who is your life, shall appear, then shall ye also appear
with Him in glory.


DEAR Brethren; The LORD JESUS being, not only the author, and the cause, but
also the pattern, and exemplar of that great Salvation, which GOD of His
infinite mercy offers to mankind, in the Gospel; it is not possible that we
should have part in it, or assuredly enter into this rich possession, without
having in us a resemblance of the same sovereign LORD, and being as so many
copies of this Divine Original, where all His features and lineaments may
appear, though in a form and measure much less perfect and eminent than His.
Romans 8.28.
Of this the Apostle expressly informs us in his Epistle to the Romans,
saying, that those whom GOD did foreknow, that is, love, and discriminate from
the rest of men, according to His good pleasure, to communicate really faith
and eternal salvation unto them. He did also predestinate to be conformed to
the image of His Son. Heb. 2.12, 13.
For this cause He does us the honor to call us, sometimes His children, and
sometimes His brethren; by reason of the resemblance we have with Him; the
nature, the condition, the quality, and, as it is commonly termed, the fortune
of children following the fathers, and of brethren, being like their elder
brothers. Whence the Apostle concludes, in the Epistle to the Hebrews, that He
who sanctifyeth, that is, the LORD JESUS, Heb. 8.11.
and they who are sanctified, that is, the faithful are all of one, that is, of
one and the same mass, of one and the same form and nature. And to make it
plain to us, the Scripture compares Him, sometimes to a Vine-stock, Jo. 15.
Romans 11.
otherwhile to an Olive Tree, of each of which we are branches, all of them
things, between which there is by nature a strict communion; the one and the
others having the same constitution and qualities. And thence again it is, that
Saint Paul calls Him our first fruits, when speaking of our death, and the
resurrection which is to succeed it, he says, that CHRIST was made the first
fruits of them that sl^ep: 1 Cor. 15.20
the first fruits, as you know, being of the same condition and nature with the
rest of those things, out of the mass whereof they are taken.

Now although this consormity of the faithful with the LORD JESUS be of a large
extent, yet it does principally appear in two heads, wherein the Scripture does
particularly consider it; to wit, in His Death, and in His Resurrection; the
happy remembrance whereof, we have celebrated this morning. For the death of
JESUS CHRIST has produced a death like it, in all true believers; reducing
them, by its efficacy and virtue, unto a state conform to His, when He was
stretched out on the Cross, and lay in the Sepulcher. In like manner His
Resurrection transmitteth into them, a life like that, which He resumed, when
having overcome death, He issued out of His grave. His Death is not only the
cause, but also the pattern of ours; and likewise His Life is, both the
principle and exemplar of ours. It Is of this death, and this life, Dearly
beloved Brethren, the effect, and the image of the Death and Resurrection of
the LORD, that we make account to entertain you in this action. For after our
having celebrated the memory of the death and resurrection of this Great
Savior, and participated of the one, and the other, by the virtue of His
Spirit, and our Faith; what can we more pertinently meditate, than the precious
fruit which each of them produces in us? and the images of the one, and the
other of these mysteries, which this Divine dead, and again risen per^^^ does
draw, and form in us? inasmuch as He changes us after a sort into Himself, by
an impression of His omnipotent virtue; so as if we have truly received Him, we
are become dead, and risen again with Him? St. Paui teaches us this excellent
and saving truth, in the series of our ordinary Texts, by these words which we
have read for the subject of this exercise. In those that preceded, which we
expounded eight days since; this great Apostle drew us from the earth, that he
might elevate us to Heaven, where JESUS sits at the right hand of the
Father; Seek, says he, the things which are above; and not the things which
are on the earth. But because he knew how difficult such a transportation would
be for persons who are still so many ways fastened to the earth, to work so
high a design thoroughly into us, besides the reasons already represented,
which were taken from our resurrection with the LORD, and from His presence and
glorious sovereignty in the places he would elevate us to; he further proposes
two more for that end, in this passage. The one taken from our death. For
(says he) ye are dead; and the other from that new life which we have
received; a life hidden, it is true, for the present, in GOD: but such as will
be plainly and plenarily discovered one day, at the manifestation of the LORD
JESUS. Your life (says he) is hid with CHRIST in GOD. When CHRIST, etc. These
are the two principal points we will treat of in this action, the grace of our
LORD assisting; and Him we invocate, praying, that this word of His may be
effectually in us, His power to salvation, thoroughly changing us into the
similitude, both of His salutary death, and of His glorious life; that being
dead unto our selves, we may not live henceforth, but in Him, unto His honor,
and the edification of our Brethren.

Be not asrighted, Christians, at the Apostle's telling you in the entrance,
that ye are dead. This death which he attributes unto you, is gain, and not
loss; a donative from GOD's grace, and not an effect of His wrath, or an
execution of His justice. I grant, that every death is the privation of some
life that was possessed. But since there are miserable and execrable lives; it
must be confessed, that every death is not a calamity. For to be rid of a thing
that harms us, is not a calamity, but a comfort. It Is an advantage, and not a
damage, to be deprived of a poison, and divested of an habit of malediction.
The death, of which the Apostle speaks, is not the destroying of that happy
life which the Creator gave us at the beginning, to be led within Paradise in a
continual execise of the original justice, and rectitude of our nature, and in
the sweet and innocent fruition of the goods of the first world. It Is the first
Adam, and not the second, that outed us of this life; and as we did receive it
in his person, so we have lost it by his crime, being heirs of his misery, as
well as of his sin. The life, which is extinguished in us by the death here
intended of the Apostle is that corrupted and sin-infected life which we have
received from our first parents by carnal generation: a life contrary to the
will of GOD, and meriting His wrath, and obnoxious to His curse: the operation
of an empoysoned nature, and the acting of a blind understanding, a perverse
will, and an irregular affection, the continual flux of an abominable pest,
which in the course of nature could not otherwise determine, than in an eternal
death. It Is that, which Scripture calls the life of the old man, that is, of
this altogether depraved, and corrupted nature which we derive from Adam; and
which, through error in its false wisdom, placing its felicity in the enjoyment
of earthly things, adhereth to them with inordinate desire, and does not act or
labor, but to acquire the same, pursuing them with such a violent ardour, that
there is not any thing so holy, so just, and so honest, but it violates the
same, to attain its end. This is the life that the LORD JESUS destroys in all
His true members, and in regard of which, His holy Apostle says, and means
here, that we are dead. The death, whereof he speaks, is nothing else but the
privation of this pernicious and accursed life; the abolition of its
principles, and the destroying of the habitudes on which it does depend. We are
dead, because entering into the communion of JESUS CHRIST, we have put off this
first life, which was natural, carnal, and terrene; and consisted in a perverse
and vicious re-search and fruition of the perishing things of this old world,
that goes to perdition. And this is it he teaches us again in so many other
places, as when he says, 2 Cor. 5.14, 15, 16. Rom; 6.
that Old things are passed away; that CHRIST having died for all, all are also
dead, that they may not live henceforth unto themselves: and again, We are dead
with CHRIST, buried with Him by baptism into His death; made one and the same
plant with Him, by the likeness of His death: that Our old man was crucified
with Him, that the body of sin might be destroyed; and elsewhere, that they
that are CHRIST's, Gal. 5.24.
have crucified the flesh, with the affections and lusts; and it is the same
thing that he called before, the circumcision of CHRIST, Col. 2.11.
and the putting off the body of the flesh: the same again that he represents
other-where in His own person, when he says, that he is crucified with CHRIST;
Gal. 2.19, 20. and 6.14.
and that it is no more himself that lives, but CHRIST, who lives in him; and
that the world is crucified unto him, and he unto the World. And it is the same
too, that St. Peter understands, 1 Pet. 4.1, 2.
when he says, that we have suffered with CHRIST in the flesh, that we should
live the rest of our time in the flesh, no more after the lusts of men.

Behold me that penitent woman, whose history you have in the Gospel; Before
she had seen the LORD, she was an harlot, that lived in nothing but filth, and
had neither action nor thought, but for the lusts of the flesh. But after she
had heard the word of JESUS, and felt the efficacy of His Spirit, she soon lost
all that former life of hers. She has now no longer that wanton and wicked
heart; those unchaste looks; those impure desires. Psalm. 45.6. Acts 9.1.
In vain seek you in her that debauched person, that lived in infamy before.
That person is no more there, but is dead. The sharpened arrows of the King of
glory have penetrated her heart, and slain her. Behold me our Paul before his
conversion. He was a furious wild boar, inflamed unto threatenings and
slaughter; breathing out nothing but blood, and butcheries: a murderer
animated by pride, and cruelty. Spoke JESUS to him, on the way to Damascus? His
word, like a two-edged sword, pierced this fierce and unruly persecutor. He
struck him dead, or to say better, destroyed, and consumed him all, in a
moment. Seek not Saul in him any longer, that so fierce, and cruel man; He Is no
more there. He is dead, and so thoroughly dead, that you shall not find in him
any print of what he was before. Again, take me a view of those Pagans of
Colosse, of Ephesus, of Athens, and of other places, who were converted by his
ministry. Before they were idolaters, breaking out into all kind of vices;
their life was nothing but a continual practice of superstition, and impiety,
of avarice, and ambition, of envy, cruelty, and injustice. Now, when they have
passed through the victorious hand of the LORD JESUS, you see no more any such
thing in them. He has extinguished in them all the life of this kind, that
they had. Those idolaters, and ungodly wretches; those epicures, and robbers,
which lived in their persons heretofore, are all dead. They are new men of
another quality, in whom, none of that they were before, remains any longer.
In sine, there is not one of the truly faithful, and living members of JESUS
CHRIST, but has undergone this death; the flesh has been slain in him, and
the old man pierced, nailed, and crucified upon the cross of the Son of GOD. I
acknowledge, that so long as they are on earth, they still resent the efforts
and attempts of this old man, and that combat of the flesh lusting against the
spirit, Gal. 5.17.
which the Apostle elsewhere speaks of.

Yet I affirm, that this hinders not, but that true believers may be said even
for the present, to be dead in regard of the flesh, and the flesh dead in them.
First, because sentence of it is given in the judgment of GOD, who has in His
eternal counsel determined to extinguish, and abolish, in all the members of
His Son, that first life which they inherited from old Adam. Secondly, because
the execution of this decree of GOD is begun, and advanced in them for the
present. The mortal blow thereof the flesh receives in this life, from the hand
of JESUS CHRIST, and cannot possibly recover it again. Then in the third place,
because this execution already begun in them, will not be long a finishing;
natural death, which, considering the few days we spend here below, is not far
from either of them, devesting first their souls of all terrene and carnal
relics; and then the resurrection being finally to refine their bodies also
at the last day; when earthly life shall be entirely, and quite and clean
dissolved and destroyed. It Is for these three reasons, that the Apostle says
here and elsewhere, that the faithful are dead, in regard of the life of sin,
and of the flesh; not that they have not in them yet some remainders of them:
but for that this death is ordained by the decree of GOD, and already begun in
them, and will soon be infallibly finished. Even as we reckon among the dead, a
malefactor whom a supreme Court, and a sick person, whom a prudent and able
Physician, have condemned to dye; neither do we stick to say, that he is gone,
he is dead, because his death is inevitable, and all the life that remains for
him, is no long^r any thing. So when a man has been mortally wounded, we
immediately rank him with the dead; because his vitals are struck, and all the
movings and perceivings he yet has, are but his last gaspings, and the last
combat his life makes before it does end. It Is in the same manner with true
believers. The flesh in them is wounded to death, and if it does yet stir, if
it struggle, if it give them any blow, this at most is a small matter in
comparison of that life, it other-while exercised in them. At that time it
reigned in them. Now, if it do fight, yet it rules no longer. It finds a spirit
in them which resists it, which makes head against it; and in this,
unto-it-fatal, conflict, it loses by little and little, all the blood and life
it has yet left it. Wherefore the LORD JESUS, whose death, as we have said, is
both the cause, and the pattern of ours, did not dye in an instant, but a
lingering death, having continued five or six hours in an agony, before He gave
up the ghost. It is thus, that the old man dies in the faithful. He is already
pierced with the nails of our Savior, and fastened to His cross, and in a dying
estate, and without hope of recovery. Nevertheless he strugleth still, and will
be awhile in this estate, losing blood, and strength, and motion, and life,
not all at once, but by little and little.

This same is the condition of true believers: Whence appears the pernicious
error of those men, who having the old man, not bound, not pierced, not wounded
to death in them, but living, and reigning at full liberty, and with his whole
vigor, do yet imagine, that they pertain to JESUS CHRIST, and are of the
number of His true members. It Is a mortal mistake. JESUS owneth none for His,
but such as are dead with Him: whose flesh is either already laid down, and
destroyed in the grave, as theirs, who live in Heaven; or at least nailed to
His cross, as theirs, who yet combat on earth. I confess, the presumption of
those who vaunt they sin no more, and feel no longer in themselves any motion,
or contradiction of the flesh, is extremely vain. But your error, worldling,
is no whit less, who having sin reigning, and the flesh living in you, do not
forbear to persuade your self, that you are a true Christian. If the flesh does
still breath in a true Christian, if it has still some motion, and some
feeling in him; yet it has dominion in him no longer. It lives in him no
longer; it languisheth in him, and is so weak, as it plainly appears to be at
the pangs of death. Put it into this estate, if you will be truly Christian.
Fasten it to the cross of JESUS. Pierce it through with His nails, and with His
thorns. Make it drink of His vinegar. Take from it its pleasures; draw out its
blood, and strength. Again, since this is our condition; since we, by the
beneficence of our Savior, are dead, in such sort, as we even now explained;
you clearly see, Christian, that what the Apostle concludes upon it, does
evidently, and necessarily follow from it, to wit, that we should not seek any
more the things which are on earth. For since we have, in JESUS CHRIST, put off
that carnal and vicious life, for the maintaining, and welfare whereof, earthly
things are subordinate; who is there but comprehends, that it would be an
insufferable extravagancy for us, to amuse our selves still about them? It
would be an error as ridiculous, as if one went an hunting after game, or a
buying precious stones, and stuffs for a person either already dead, or at
least in the agony of death. Such a person has no more need of those things,
they being good only to feed, or fashion that li^e, which he no longer has.
It Is just so that you, Christian do, who labor so ardently in the seeking
after, and acquiring of riches, honors, and other goods of the present World.
All this is the equipage of a life, that you no longer have. The flesh, for
whose delight, and adornment, those goods do serve, is dead, or at least
death-struck in you. It is crucified with the LORD; and a crucified one has
nothing to do with meat, nor jewels, nor other things of the earth. Luke 12.20.
Thou fool, (said our Savior to the rich worldling in the Gospel-parable) this
very night shall thy soul be required of thee, and then whose shall those
things be which thou have laid up? As if he had said, that being once dead, he
could no more enjoy them. Christian, how is it you do not consider, not only
your dying e're long, but that you are (to say truth) dead already? that there
is no carnal life for you any longer? so as to conclude thereupon, that you
have therefore no need of all this earthly pelf, which with such a deal of
pain, you scrape together? I confess, that while we are on earth, we cannot
altogether be without it. But neither can you deny, that for a living
Christianly here, we need but a little of it, and for a little time; because we
have little left us of that life, for which it is necessary. Let us
proportionably have little affection and adherence to it. Let us use it; but
for necessity, and not for delight. Let us look upon the world with the eyes of
pilgrims, taking but so much of it as is requisite for our passing on. Set we
before us the example of the life of our LORD led on earth, during the days of
His flesh, (for indeed it is the pattern of that life we live here below after
our regeneration.) He sought not either the glory, or the pleasures, or the
riches of the World. He adhered not to any one of those things; but used what
was necessary for His food and raiment, with great sobriety, and frugality; not
tasting the fruition of it, and so little fearing to be deprived of the fame,
that instead of the glory of the world, He voluntarily suffered extreme
ignominy; poverty, and nakedness, instead of riches; torments, and the cross,
instead of pleasure. And so you see, my Brethren, how the consideration of our
being dead in CHRIST JESUS, should turn us aside from the affecting, and the
seeking of earthly things.

But the life we also have in Him, should no less set us at distance from the
same; and this is that the Apostle sets before us in the second place; You are
dead, and your life (says he) is hid with JESUS CHRIST in GOD. When CHRIST,
who is your life, shall appear, then shall you also appear with Him in glory.
It seems that the first words do tend, to prevent an objection, which might be
made to the Apostle, upon his saying, that we are dead. For how does this
consist with that, which he asserted before, namely, that we are risen again
with CHRIST? If we be risen, we live; and if we live, it is not true that we
are dead. But this difficulty is easily resolved. For first, the life, unto
which we are dead, is the life of sin, and of the flesh, as we have explicated
it; whereas the life unto which we be risen in JESUS CHRIST, is the life of
CHRIST, and of His Spirit. The one is the life of the old Adam, and the other
of the new. Now it is not incompatible, that one and the same person be
deprived of the former, and possessed of the latter. Nay, on the contrary, it
is not possible, that such as live in the former manner, should also live in
the latter; and as in nature, the generation of one thing does naturally
presuppose the corruption of another; so likewise in grace, the life of the
second Adam does of necessity infer the death of the first; so that, from our
being risen again with CHRIST, it is so far from following, we are not dead to
the flesh, that quite on the contrary, it thence necessarily follows, we are
dead to the flesh; it not being possible to affirm the former, without
supposing the latter; nor to place the life of CHRIST in us otherwise, than by
the death of Adam in us. An inevitable necessity requires, the one do dye, that
the other may live in us.

As for that life, which we acquire by our resurrection with JESUS CHRIST, the
Apostle grants, that it pertains to us, and that in this behalf it may be
said of us, that we live, as he does say frequently both of other believers in
general, and of himself in particular. Yet notwithstanding he shows us again,
that this life of CHRIST is not manifested, and completed in us; that it is
yet for the present, hidden in GOD with JESUS CHRIST; so as in this respect it
might be said of us, while we are on the earth, that we live not; and that we
have not yet the life unto which CHRIST has raised us; after the same manner,
Romans 8.22, 23.
as he spares not to say elsewhere, that our being saved, is in hope, and we
yet wait for the adoption; as if we had not hitherto received the salvation and
adoption of GOD. For the right understanding of this mystery, we must consider
briefly what the Apostle here says of it; and first, what that life is, which
he calls ours. Secondly, how it is hid in GOD, with JESUS CHRIST; and then
lastly, what shall be that manifestation of this life, which he promises us at
the appearing of CHRIST.

The life of the faithful is that same, which JESUS CHRIST does give them,
instead of the life He takes from them, when He receives them into His
communion. This which he takes away, was impure, and vicious; the other was
pure, and holy. This was natural, and earthly; the other is spiritual, and
heavenly. The principle of the former was a carnal mind, and an irregular
concupiscence; the principle of the latter is a divine says, and a just and
reasonable love. The one consisted in a vicious fruition of the flesh, and of
the earth; the other is a sweet, and a legitimate possessing of the Spirit, and
of Heaven. And as the former was mortal, and perishing, no less than the flesh,
and the earth, from which it drew its nutriment: so the other is incorruptible,
and eternal, according to the nature of the Spirit that quickens it, and of
Heaven, that maintains it. The fruits of the former were sin, and shame, and
damnation. The fruits of the latter are righteousness, honor, joy, and
immortality. That first life therefore, to say true, was a death rather than a
life, being such, as after a short and feverish agitation could not terminate
but in eternal sufferings. And this other, on the contrary, is alone truly
worthy of the name of life, which name also the Scripture does oft-times
purely, and absolutely give it; ^ Joh. 5.
as when it says, that He that has the Son, has life; and He that has not
the Son, has not life; and that He that believes in the Son, is passed from
death to life.

But then, you will say, since we do believe, how is it that the Apostle says,
our life is hid with CHRIST in GOD, as if it were not in our selves? Dear
Brethren, I answer; it is very certain, that the LORD JESUS does even at
present, give all His true members, the seminals and principles of this blessed
life; the which He casts into their hearts by His Gospel; and that He
preserves, augmenteth, and fortifyeth them there gradually by the virtue of
His Spirit, and by the usage of His Word, His Sacraments, and his Disciplines;
unto the making them bring forth the excellent fruits of charity, and sanctity.
By reason of these beginnings, and of the sure title, they bring them to the
plenitude and perfection of that life, they are said in Scripture to live, and
to have eternal life at present: even as we attribute to a plant the name and
life of the kind which it is of, when it has once taken root, and thrust forth
some bud, and verdure, though it has not yet its whole extent, and perfection.
Yet it must be acknowledged too, that the complete form of this life, which
consists in perfect sanctity, robbed with glorious immortality, resembling that,
which JESUS CHRIST our elder brother, brought up out of His s^pulchre, at His
rising again, and carried into Heaven with Him forty days after, will not be
communicated to us, but in the world to come. For here below, as you know, both
our knowledge is imperfect, and our sanctity infirm, as the Apostle says
elsewhere, declaring, that now we see but in a as glass darkly; 1 Cor. 13.1^
Phil. 3.12.
and that we have not yet apprehended, nor are already perfect. By reason
whereof he compares our condition here below, to childhood, during which, there
is imperfection in our thoughts, words, and judgments. Whereas in that other
blessed world, 1 Cor. 13.11.
we shall see face to face, and know as we have been known, and all that is in
part being done away, we shall be at the highest pitch of perfection, and in
the full vigor of a truly mature age. Withal, this body, which makes up a part
of our being, is yet subject to the laws of natural life, nor can it be
sustained but by the use of terrene, and corruptible elements, and by the low,
and vile functions of eating, and drinking, and sleeping. Whereas that divine
life, which we have in JESUS CHRIST, is freed from all these infirmities,
requiring a celestial, and in some sort, spiritual body; which is conserved by
the sole virtue of the quickening spirit, without needing the commerce of any
earthy, and perishing things. Whence it does appear, that to speak properly,
and exactly, we shall not have this blessed life, till after the last
resurrection. We now have but title to it, and the first buddings, the
rudiments, and initials of it; which is the thing the Apostle excellently
signifies, when speaking of Himself, and of all the faithful, he says, that we
have the first fruits of the Spirit; Romans 8.22.
that is, as it were the first lineaments of this divine and spiritual nature,
whereof the LORD has made us partakers, to use St. Peter's words. 2 Pet. 1.4.


Wherefore St. Paul here does at once very truly, and very admirably well say,
that our life (that is, the life we have by JESUS CHRIST) is, for the present,
hid with CHRIST in GOD: because the Father does yet keep it in His hand,
reserving the full displaying of it in us unto the time He has foreordained
in His counsel. Until then it does not appear; but abides hidden in GOD, as a
sure and certain effect, in its true and immutable cause. The world sees it not
in us, and the first fruits of it we already have, are to it so unknown, that
far from believing, we have any life more excellent than its own, it accounts
us on the contrary, the miserablest, and despicablest creatures of the earth,
and does think our life to be foolishness, and mere frenzy, and judges that
the end thereof will be without honor, as the Author of the Book of Wisdom
well says. And in truth, Wisd. 5 3
GOD does most frequently put this heavenly treasure in earthen vessels, and
chooses for this blessed life persons weak, and contemptible, and such as are
of no consideration among the men of the World; as St. Paul expressly observes;
neither is there in them, 1 Cor. 1.26, 27. Isa. 53.2.
any more than was sometime in their head, either form, or comelyness, or any
thing that should induce those that see them, to desire them. Whereto may be
added the afflictions that do extremely disfigure them, and darken that little
luster which they have. Aimd these meannesses and infirmities, it is hard to
discern any one ray of that glory they are destinated to. Themselves, in their
great tentations, enter into doubt of it. And when the spirit that quickens
them, does for their consolation discover the perfections and wonders of their
future life most clearly, and with the greatest evidence; so it is, that
notwithstanding this, that which they see, and taste of it, is so small a
matter, in comparison of what they shall have in the end, that it might well be
said, their life is hidden in reference to themselves. And thus St. 1 John 3.2.
John informs us. Beloved, (says he) we are now children of GOD, but it does
not yet appear what we shall be.

But we may not forget what the Apostle here adds, to wit, that our life is hid
in GOD with CHRIST; whereby he signifies two things; first, that CHRIST is yet
at present in some sort, and in some sense hidden; to wit, in regard of the
glory of His person. For though His Salvation, and His dominion have been
discovered by His Gospel, unto every creature, both Jews and Gentiles; yet
having withdrawn His up-risen, and glorified humane nature up to Heaven, into
the Sanctuary, and He from thence governing His kingdom, by the secret motions
of His spirit; His person remains hidden from the eyes of the World; this
great veil of the Heavens, which on all sides environeth the Sanctuary, into
which He is entered, hindering us from seeing His glory, how sparkling and
radiant soever it be. Secondly, the Apostle signifies by these words, that our
life is properly, and directly in CHRIST; that he is the source, and the cause
of it; and that two manner of ways; the one in that He merited it for us by
His sufferings; the other, in that He produced, and formed it in us by His
Spirit; by reason whereof He is called, the Author, and the Prince of life; and
St. John says, Joh. 1.4.
that life is in Him. Then again, our life is in CHRIST, as in its original
pattern, wherein at present does exist the true and perfect form of that
sanctity, glory, perfection, and immortality, in which the life we shall be
invested with, consists. Wherefore He is termed our elder brother, our
principle, or beginning, and our first fruits, as we have said at the entrance
of this discourse. From whence there redoundeth unto us a great, and a firm
consolation, against all the tempests of the present World; when we consider,
that how sad and frightful soever at times our undoing is, yet we live in GOD,
and in His CHRIST. CHRIST is the sacred, and inviolable stock that bears us,
in which the sap of our life is perfectly safe, above the rigors of winter, and
ardors of summer, and all other perils that menace us. GOD is faithful, and
CHRIST is living, and it is not possible, that either the one should deny
Himself, or the other dye. Since then the Father is the depositary, and the Son
the stock of our life, let us make sure account, that though we feel it but
feebly, and faintly in our selves, yet we have it, and possess it, and shall
eternally have it, so as nothing shall be ever able to extinguish it. Let this
sweet hope sustain us, and cause us to wait patiently for the term of that
full, and entire manifestation, which the Apostle in the sequel promises us,
When CHRIST your life shall appear, then (says he) you also shall appear in
glory.

His calling CHRIST our life, is a brave expression, full of force and
emphasis: suitable to that, we read in Jeremy, where speaking of the LORD's
anointed, Lam. 4.20.
he calls him the breath of our nostrils; to signify, that it is upon him
our whole life depends, and that (if we may so say) it is by his sacred mouth
we draw our breath. Thus the Apostle's saying here, that CHRIST is our life,
does not simply signify, that He is the cause and author of our life; but that
it fully and wholly depends upon Him; that without Him, and separate from
Him, we have not a drop, nor spark of life; and that it is in Him alone, we
have all the being, all the moving, and all the feeling, that respects the life
of Heaven. In very deed it is He that has merited it for us, by His death. It
is He that has brought it to light, by His Gospel. It Is He has showed us a
most accomplished pattern of it in His person, at His issuing out of His
sepulcher. It Is He that has given us the first fruits of it by His word, and
Spirit; and conserveth, and increases them in us, by His benediction. It is He
that keeps the fullness of it for us, in His treasury on high, as being the true
Father of eternity; And lastly, it is He, that taking this glorious life out of
His heavenly cabinet one day, will put it on us with His own hand. Besides, we
do possess neither the beginnings, nor the perfection of it, but in Him, and by
the benefit of our communion with Him; in that we are members, and branches of
His, which cannot live but united with their head, and incorporated in their
vine.

The Apostle therefore says, that when this sovereign, and only author of our
life shall appear, then we also shall appear in glory. He has appeared once
already; but in the flesh, as the Apostle says; GOD was manifested in the
flesh. He shall appear again a second time; but in glory. It Is this second
appearing he does mean, when the LORD JESUS descending from the Heavens, with
the host of His Angels, and seating Himself on a judicial Throne, shall openly
show to all the creatures of the World, His Glory, and Godhead, which the
Heavens that contain his flesh on high, and the weaknesses that cover His
mystical body here below, do now hide from the earth, as we lately said. Then
(says the Apostle) shall you also appear with Him in Glory. At the coming of
this sweet, and happy season, you, as plants in the spring, shall receive your
life; which from that sacred stock, wherein it is now conserved, shall be
diffused into you, and into all the other branches of this vine of GOD, and
crown you at an instant with its eternal verdure. The glory whereof he speaks,
does signify the light, the perfections, the wonders, and the pomp of blissful
life; perfect knowledge of GOD, love, and sanctity, and joy; the immortality of
our bodies, their beauty, their brightness, their strength, and impassibility;
and in fine, all the pieces of that infinite good, the grandeur, and excellency
whereof, we shall never distinctly comprehend, until the time that we possess
it. We shall then appear in this glory, first because, beside the first fruits
of it, which we have, JESUS CHRIST shall give us the fullness of it, which we
have not; this undoubtedly, the greatest, and most illustrious part of His
glory, which now remains hidden in Him, being then to be shed abroad upon us.
Secondly, because the World, which now despises, and treads us under foot,
shall then see us in this glorious estate. And as CHRIST, our head, shall be
seen with astonishment by those that sometime pierced Him; so they, that now
outrage His members, shall then see them in their glory, and be constrained to
change their opinion, and to acknowledge those for children of GOD, and Saints
of His, whom in the present World they do deride, and make by-words of, Wisd.
^.3.
as says the Book of Wisdom.

Thus you see, Beloved Brethren, what kind of life it is, which JESUS CHRIST
does promise, and communicate unto His faithful ones; to wit, the fruit of our
faith, and of that divine food which we have taken this morning; the life of
Angels; the crown of Saints; a super-eminent and eternal felicity in
conjunction with a super-eminent and immortal glory; It Is the rich treasury,
the living and inexhaustible spring of our consolation and sanctification.
Judge, I beseech you, what manner of persons they should be, that have so high,
and so divine an hope; and if it be not reasonable, we should withdraw our
thoughts and our affections from the earth, to elevate them unto Heaven, since
it is there our life is, and thence that we expect our chief happiness.
Christian, are you not ashamed to long for earth, you that have title for
Heaven? to labor for the meat that perishes, you that are destinated to a
life which perishes not? to run after shadows, you that, in JESUS CHRIST, have
the substance of true, and solid happiness? How much more generous and constant
are the children of this generation in their vanity? Those of them that are of
noble extraction, and especially they that are brought up in hope of a Crown,
would not for any thing have a mechanic trade, or foul themselves in sordid
actions; and even nations there are, among whom they totally refrain from
commerce with other men, and account themselves defiled, and profaned, by
having but touched a plebeian. And you, that are the issue of Heaven, a child
of the most High, a brother of His Angels, and an Heir of His kingdom; you,
that are bred up with divine manna, in the hope of an heavenly life, and an
immortal crown; how have you the heart to grope in the mud, and heap up dung?
to intermix with the miserablest bondmen of the earth, and the profanest
workers of iniquity? A King's son heretofore refused to contend in the public
games, because he saw no Kings do it. Christian, remember the dignity of your
name: separate your self from the exercises and divertisements of the people of
the world. Leave them the earth, out of which they come, and unto which they
shall return. Enter not into so ignoble and fordid a race, in which you see
none run but children of the earth, the race of Mammon, and the brood of
vipers, and serpents. Purify your hearts, and your bodies; let it never betide
you to defile them with base and terrene either thoughts or actions. Say not,
what shall we eat? what shall we drink? wherewithal shall we be clothed? These
are the thoughts and cares of bondmen. These are the discourses of Pagans.
This is all they seek. You, that are Christians, and whose life is hid in JESUS
CHRIST, seek His kingdom, and His righteousness. Let this be your ambition, and
all the passion of your souls. Let this divine life, and the glory wherewith it
will one day crown you, in the fight of Heaven and earth, be night and day the
object of your thoughts. Take it away even at the present, with an holy
impatiency. Begin betimes to live, as you shall live eternally. Let the
contemplating of GOD, let the love of His beauties, let the meditating of His
mysteries, let the considering of, and a conversing with His CHRIST, be your
employment, and your refreshment in the present World. Sanctify this earth,
during the time you tarry on it, and change it, as much as may be, into Heaven,
adorning it with an Angelick life and conversation. This is the way to make
sure your crown. For it will not be given in Heaven, but to those that have
desired and sought it in the time of their abode on earth. None shall reap
eternal life, but they that have sowed to the Spirit. No man shall have
fruition above, but he that has hoped here below; and no man hops here
below, but he that cleanses himself from the filth of vices. He that has this
hope in JESUS CHRIST purifieth himself, says St. John. Represent incessantly
unto your selves, this glorious coming of the Son of GOD. Consider, that He
will not long delay. Yet as little a while as may be, and he that should come,
will come. Consider that He will come on the sudden, as lightning, which in an
instant shines out from the clouds, and as the thief, that comes at the point
of time he was least looked for. How much will our confusion be, if He should
surprise us, in the disorder of our worldly affections, and occupations? But
GOD forbid that this should betide us. He has waited sufficiently for us. Let
us employ that little time which is left us, with so much the more care, the
less we have had for that which is past. Let us watch, let us pray, let us be
doing. Let us work out our salvation with fear and trembling. Let us lead lives
worthy of the name of Christians, which we bear; worthy of the Master whom we
serve, and of the food He has given us, and of the love He has born us, and
of the glory He keeps for us, cleansing our selves from all filthiness of flesh
and spirit, and waiting with an holy joy, and settled patience, for the
revelation of this great GOD, and Savior, to His Glory, and our Salvation.
Amen.

THE THIRTY FOURTH SERMON ON COLOSSIANS.
CHAP. III. VER. V. Verse V. Mortify therefore your members which are upon the
earth, fornication, unclearness, inordinate appetite, evil concupiscence, and
covetousness which is idolatry.


DEAR Brethren; In all the designs of our lives, the End is the principle that
moves us to act, and the rule of our actions. The fair aspect it gives us, is
the thing that inslameth our hearts, and kindles in them the desire of
possessing it; which thereupon awakeneth the powers of our souls, and causes
each of them to employ what ability and industry they have, in the pursuit; the
understanding, its light to find out, and make a due choice of means, fit to
conduct us in it; the will, and affections, and other faculties of our nature,
which depend upon them, their motions to get these means, and set them on work.
All this is done, as you know, and experiment it daily, only to attain that
End, we have proposed to our selves. The ends which men aim at, are infinitely
different, and oftentimes even contrary to one another; and consequently their
courses very different also; as if some went East, and others West; or some
took their way Southward, and others their march Northward. Yet notwithstanding
such diversity of intentions, and prosecutions, they are all incited, and led
on in the self-same manner; there being not one of them, but the desire of some
end he loves, has seized, and swayed unto action, and at length induced to
take the course he steers, according to the passion he has for the attainment
of it, and the judgment his understanding makes of means proper to bring him
to it. The end therefore being the first spring that sets us a going, the
principle of our motions, and as it were, the North of our course, the guide
and measure of our actions; You see, My Brethren, that it infinitely concerns
us to take it right, and having once taken it, to have it continually before
our eyes, for the referring, and addressing of all our travails to the same.
Wherefore our LORD condemns those, as unadvised, and injudicious persons, who
enterprise a design without having first duly considered it; without having
sat down, and taken their counters in hand, and exactly calculated all the
cost; that is, without having maturely, and composedly examined what the thing
is which they desire, and what abilities they have to compass it; as that
ridiculous builder, who laid the foundation of a Tower, and was then
constrained to give over, not having wherewithal to finish it. For this reason
also the Masters of Moral Philosophy, that they might rightly form their
scholars to it, have been wont to set before their eyes the felicity of man,
that is, his End, for the enkindling a love and desire of it in their hearts,
and then they propose to them the means that are to be used to attain it.

Such is the method that the holy Apostle has followed in this part of his
divine discourse which we are explicating to you. He showed us at the entrance,
Heaven, and JESUS CHRIST, who reigns there, sitting at the right hand of His
Father; together with that life, and immortality, and glory, which He keeps
for, and promises to His faithful ones. This is the end we should tend unto.
Seek (said He) the things which are in Heaven; and I persuade my self, there is
not a man so stupid, and savage, but an object so good, and so desirable, does
make impression upon, and possess with love of it, and a secret passion to
obtain it. Now, though the splendour of so noble, and so sublime an happiness,
should as soon as it appears, put out all that fallacious appearance of the
things of the earth, wherein the children of this world do vainly seek their
good, and which they foolishly take for the end of their lives; yet the
Apostle, to preserve us from this error, and fully inform us of our true end,
has further expressly advised us, not to place it in things here below. Mind
not the things (says he) which are upon the earth. Having therefore each of
you settled this divine end of your lives in his heart, according to the
Apostles doctrine, look at it continually. Let it be night and day before your
eyes. This thought alone, is capable to direct all your steps; to govern all
your actions; to purify your souls; to render you invincible against all your
enemies; to conserve the peace, and the joy of GOD in you, and maintain His
consolations in you, amid the greatest storms. Yet this does not satisfy our
Apostle. He, not content with having marked out our aim to us, and showed in
general what we ought to decline, does particularize us the means we are to
use, for arriving one day at that blessed Heaven, whither he had elevated our
hearts. He discovers to us, and tells us, one by one, the shelves, and
dangerous passages of our course, and finally, goes over the most part of our
duties in the conduct of this grand design. He begins with vices of the flesh,
and of the earth; the two pernicious pests of all, and most contrary to the
design, which, by the grace of GOD, we are entered on. The Apostle therefore
commands us, to make mortal war upon them, and to fight, to weaken, to kill,
and to destroy without pity, all that we shall perceive in our selves, to bear
any affection or inclination to them. Mortify therefore (says he) your
members which are upon the earth, etc. The LORD please to bless now the voice
of His Apostle, and sink these words, which Himself sometime inspired, so deep
into our fouls, that they may be at this time, effectual to our sanctification,
eradicating those accursed passions out of our hearts, which cannot live, nor
fructify there, without dishonouring the Gospel, and depriving us of that
heavenly life, to which we aspire. The speech, as you see, contains two parts;
the first of which commands us in general, to mortify our members which are
upon the earth. The other represents unto us in particular, some of these
members of our old man, which we are to mortify; to wit, fornication,
uncleanness, inordinate appetite, evil concupiscence, and covetousness, which
(says he) is idolatry. These are the two heads, which, the grace of GOD
assisting, we will consider in this action: first, the Apostle's general
exhortation; and then in the second place, the vices, which he does by name,
and expressly give us order to mortify.

As to the general exhortation, it is conceived in these words, Mortify
therefore your members which are on the earth; and to comprehend it aright, we
must consider the meaning of it, and the coherence. An understanding of the
meaning of it, does depend upon that clause, your members which are upon the
earth. For there is no one but sees, that this term, members, cannot signify
here, as it ordinarily does, the parts of which our body is com^osed, the
hands, the arms, the feet, and the like; and as St. Paul uses it (...) where,
when he says, Apply not your members to be instruments of iniquity unto sin.
Romans 6.13.
If he had had this intention here, there would have been no need to add, as he
does, that these members are upon the earth, every one plainly seeing it.
Besides, what he says in the sequel, does necessarily exclude this sense. For
he puts uncleanness, and covetousness in the rank of those members which he
orders us to mortify; things, that are not parts of our bodies, whereof
neither the being, nor name, does any way suit with them: but indeed, vices of
our souls, in which they properly reside, and whence they spread forth
themselves over our whole nature; defiling, and dishonouring it diverse ways.
This addition leaves us no doubt at all, but that these vices, and others like
them, together with all filthy and shameful habitudes, from whence bad actions
proceed, (which he elsewhere calls, the deeds of the body, and works of the
flesh) are directly, and precisely those members, the mortifying whereof he
commands us.

But (you will say) how, and why does he call them our members, seeing they are
not the parts of our nature, which are all good, and created of GOD, but rather
the maladies, the leprosies, and the pests of our nature; supervening from
without, by the venomous breath of the old Serpent, and his contagious
commerce? things that deprave, and blast, eat out, and consume our being, so
far are they from accomodating it, or adorning it, or affording it either the
benefit or the beauty, which the body does derive from that diversity of
members, wherewith it is so admirably furnished? I answer, that this is very
true; and that vices being the poison and ruin of our true being, they cannot
be properly called members of it; it being evident, that a disease is nothing
less than one of the members of the body, which it afflicts. Yet this for all
that hinders not, but the Apostle might, upon some other account, use this
similitude, and compare the vices of humane nature, in the state it now is,
unto the diverse members that constitute our body. And for the right
understanding of it, you may please to remember, that it is a form of speaking
very common in all languages, to compare those things unto a body, which are
made up of an accumulation, or collection of many parts, indeed different, but
nevertheless knit together in some order, and having some sequel and dependence
of some upon the rest among them; whence it comes that we say, the body of an
Estate, of an Army, of a Town, of a Family. An whole, wherein is no distinction
of parts, is called a mass: one, in which some distinction is to be be
observed, is termed a body. Thence it comes, that the Apostle compares that
heap of vices, and ill inclinations, which existing now in all men from their
birth, goes on growing, and gathering strength with age, he compares it, I say,
to, and gives it the name of a body; as you may remember you heard him speak in
the precedent chapter; where he says, that by our regeneration in JESUS
CHRIST, we have put off the body of the sins of the flesh. This same body of
our vices, is also often compared to an entire person, and called as you know,
the old man, or the old Adam. For first, it is not one vice alone; it is a vast
multitude of them; a mass of horrors; an hydra of evils; a mixture of many
poisons; an heap of an infinity of ordures; a complication of many maladies,
that do all at once make spoil of one and the same creature, and leave nothing
sound nor whole in it, from the sole of the foot to the crown of the head, (to
speak with the Prophets) but cover it all over with wounds, and bruises, with
putrified and inveterate sores. Then again, these maladies, though all
pernicious and mortal, are yet different among themselves; there is infidelity,
superstition, distrust, hatred, or contempt both of GOD and our neighbor, love
of the flesh, and the earth, pride, cruelty, sloth, luxury, intemperance,
avarice, and a thousand such others. For who can so much as name them all? And
though the confusion, that always necessarily follows error and vice, be, to
say true, very great among them; nevertheless, there is some kind of order and
sequacity to be observed in them. For whereas it is knowledge that should move,
and guide our nature; here it is ignorance that governs this troop
^^monsters. Blindness is their guide, and error their director. And whereas, in
the due constitution of man, the will follows the light of the understanding:
here the will follows its darkness, and embraces those phantasms, which the
frenzy of its leader takes for real, and solid things. And as in the diseases
of the body, what disorder soever there be, a certain order and regularity is
nevertheless to be seen in their beginnings, their progress, and increases,
nothing coming to pass in them without cause: so is it in the sicknesses of the
soul; they have their accesses, their inflammations, their returns, and their
periods: that though there be nothing but a perpetual disorder, which
displaceth every thing, and overturns all: yet all has its certain causes.
It Is therefore with a great deal of reason, and elegance, that the Apostle
compares this strange convention of so many evils, which are so diverse, and do
all work with some sequel and dependence unto a body; and each of those vices,
of which it is composed, as covetousness, fornication, and the like, unto the
members of a body.

He calls them, our members; because that old man, which is made up of them,
is wholly ours, and does invest all the principles of our life, from their
root, and invelope them, and mingle so deeply with them, that it all, in a
sort, is nothing but corruption, and malady; this venom infecting all the
actions, and all the motions of our nature, its understanding, its affections,
and passions, together with the thoughts, words, and actions which flow from
them; so that as our animal and natural life consists in the exercising of
our members, and in their actions; in like manner, our moral life is all of it
nothing, but a continual exercising of these vices, and of the sins they
produce; as is to be clearly seen, if you consider the lives of profane and
unregenerate persons; For they are naught else, but a continual exercise of
vices, of ambition, of vanity, of covetousness, of luxury and sensuality, as
they are addicted more or less to the one, or the other of these sins; the
perpetual running of a foul and muddy stream, which a corrupted spring does
daily thrust forth, that you cannot observe so much as one of its swellings or
rollings exempt from its filthiness. And this may suffice for comprehending the
reason why the Apostle calls these parts of the old man our members. For as to
that consideration which some do propose in this matter, namely, that the
members of our bodies having been created of GOD, they are not ours, but in
regard of use, and not in regard of their original; whereas the members of the
old man are ours, all manner of ways, having been made and formed in us, by
our own fault and naughtiness, and not by the hand of GOD, who created man
upright, and pure; man distorting, and depraving himself: this conceit, I say,
seems to me more subtle than solid. For though the matter of it be very true,
yet it is so wide from the Apostles design in this place, that there is little
likelihood he thought upon it, when he called the vices here of our corrupt
nature, our members. Without doubt he so does, only because it is in the
exercising and acting of these vices, that the carnal life of men does consist.

For the rest, if you remember what we said upon the precedent Text, of the
death of the old man in us, you will not think it strange, that the Apostle,
after having said that we are dead, does not yet forbear to exhort us to
mortify the members of this same life, which we have put off in JESUS CHRIST.
For our being dead in this respect, does not import, that the life of the flesh
is entirely, and absolutely extinct in us; (this will not be effected, until
we shall quit it, at our leaving of the earth, and put on celestial, and
spiritual bodies at the day of the resurrection;) but the Scripture does thus
speak, first, because JESUS CHRIST has, by His death, His resurrection, and
His ascension into Heaven, destroyed, and abolished all the causes that gave
nutriment and sustenance to the life of the old man; and secondly, because the
old man (...) received his deaths wound in each of us by the faith, that
ingrafted, and incorporated us into JESUS CHRIST; so as if we persevere, it is
not possible that he should recover. But this death of His, as we said, does
not arrive all at once. It Is executed by little and little; and the exercise of
a believer, during his stay here below, is to busy himself incessantly about
it, daily to weaken and wound that flesh of his, which is already nailed to the
cross of his LORD; to entinguish by little and little all the life it has
remaining; that is, to mortify his members, as the Apostle here speaks. In
this sense, you see, these two conceptions are so far from having ought that is
contrary, or incompatible in them; that quite otherwise, the one does evidently
and necessarily follow from the other. For since we are dead in JESUS CHRIST;
since the arrest of the death of our old man is past; since JESUS CHRIST has
done on His part, all that was necessary to execute it; since this flesh
condemned, is already fastened to His cross; it is evident, that it ought to
live no longer; and that by consequent, each of us should incessantly bestirr
our selves, to put it to death, by mortifying its members, beating down, and
weakening their vigor; driving deep into them our Savior's nails, and thorns,
until they be effectually reduced unto that state of death, unto which they
were condemned, having no more either motion, or sentiment, or force, or life
at all in us. Lo, My Brethren, the thing the Apostle means by these words,
mortify your members. To say it in a word, he would have us weaken, and
extinguish the vices of our old man, and put them in such a state of death, as
has no more strength, nor vigor, nor stirring.

But as this holy man's whole language is full of profound wisdom, I am of
opinion, he thus speaks, to give a further blow to those seducers, whose error
he had been refuting in the foregoing chapter; These men, to recommend their
disciplines, gave out, that they did not at all spare the body; that they had
no regard to the satiating of the flesh; that they opposed its pleasures, and
humbled, and mortified it. And you know, that this is at this very day, the
language of those votaries, who place Christianity in such exercises. They
speak of nothing but their mortifications. St. Paul therefore does here correct
the vain conceits of this error, and shows us what true mortification is, and
that that is worthy of the study and exercise of the faithful. It is (says he)
the members of the old man, we are to mortify, and not those of the body; It
is vices; It Is fornication, and covetousness, and pride, that we must quell,
and kill with blows, and not our body. And as one of the Prophets sometime said
to the superstitious of his age, who fasted, and afflicted themselves, and rent
their clothes: Rend your hearts, and not your garments: Joel 2.13.
in like manner the Apostle here opposes the internal mortification of sins,
as only necessary, and truly worthy of a Christian, unto the external
mortification of the body, unto which error did, and still does tie up its
self. For in truth, to what purpose is it, to beat a man's breast, and rend his
back, while sin mean time reigns in his heart? To what purpose is it, to
afflict the members of this body, while the members of the old man are left
sound, and whole? to stretch out the one upon the ground, and lie in ashes,
while the others are in pleasure? It is not by an hair-cloth, nor a whip, that
vices are subdued. These things incommodate the body; but do not, sure, amend
the soul. They humble the outside; they hurt not within: But leave the old man
there at full liberty, with his thoughts, and lusts. And it is not without
reason the Apostle advertiseth us elsewhere, that bodily exercise profits
little. 1 Timothy 4.8.
Experience has justified his words; the lives of those that addict themselves
to such exercises, being no better, yea, sometimes worse than the lives of
others. And it is not long ago, The Jesuit Tetavius, l. 5 c. 3. de la penit,
public.
since Truth drew this confession from the penn of one of our greatest
adversaries, that such exercises do many times much hurt even men's spiritual
advancement, because of a secret opinionativeness and pride, which they beget,
and feed in some spirits, who become arrogant and haughty upon them, and take
occasion from them, to contemn those that lead a more moderated life. The
Apostle therefore would have us, instead of these childish, and poorly
profitable exercises, to lay our our labor upon the mortifying of the members
of the old man, that is, our (...).

And it is to the same intention of his, that I referr what he adds, namely,
that these members are upon the heart: which is a thing excellently noted, what
way soever you consider it. For first, these vices are all upon the earth, if
you respect either their rise, or their business, or lastly, their end and
desires. It Is clear, they all spring up out of the earth, from admiration, and
coveting of earthly things; they all creep on the earth, in its excrements, or
in its fruits, and rise no higher than its fumes and vapors; wretchedly
cleaveing to these sordid vanities, which they feel to fleet away, and perish
between their hands while they gripe them, and are enjoying them. Where is
covetousness? Where is luxury? Where is gluttony, and ambition? What seek they
for? What desire they? For what do they toil themselves? Sure, you plainly see,
that the earth is their only element; that the metal which the one desires, and
the flesh which the other longs for, and the messes that the third breaths
after, and the vanities; that are the passion of the latter; I say, you plainly
see, that all this is but earth, or fruits, and productions of the earth. They
are then, to say true, these members of the old man, that fasten us to the
earth, and not the members of this body; it is sin, and not simply this flesh.
For, as to our body, it needs but a little, for its conversation, during that
little time we pass here below, whereas the desires of vice are infinite.
Whence it follows, according to the Apostle's conception, that it is vice we
are to mortify, and not the body: the members of the old man, and not those of
the body. Then again, if you consider the place destinated to be the abode of
the one, and the other nature, you will further see, that the members of the
old man, that is, vices, are not, but upon the earth. It Is there they make
their spoil, and exercise all their tyranny; there they live, there they dye,
there they rot, unprofitably consuming themselves in their own wretched
filthiness. They have no place in Heaven, where enters nothing but what is
pure; where perfect sanctity lives, and reigns eternally, crowned with
immortal glory. But the members of our bodies, which superstition fastens ou^
and ridiculously afflicts, though they also be for present on the earth, and
have need of its elements, yet they shall not remain there always. They shall
be one day lifted up into the Heavens, and enter into the Sanctuary of GOD, and
live on His manna, and partake of the fruits of the celestial tree of life.

Knowing now the meaning of this exhortation of the Apostle's, you may easily
of your selves, without my saying any thing of it, comprehend the connection it
has with the precedent words, which imported, that we are dead, and that our
life is hid with CHRIST in GOD, and that we shall one day appear with Him in
glory. For since we be dead to the world, and called to the hope and the
fruition of an heavenly life, which is hidden on high in JESUS CHRIST, and
shall be one day manifested, and given to each one of us: who sees not, that
all this does most strictly oblige us to draw off all our affections from the
earth? and to cut all the ties that fasten us unto it? that is, to mortify our
members which are on the earth, all the vices that engage us, and ensnare us in
the things of the earth.

It remains, that we consider the vices, or members of the old man, which the
Apostle does particularly name, and expressly enjoin us to mortify; He names
five in all; fornication, uncleanness, inordinate appetite, evil concupiscence,
and covetousness. I conceive that the four first are related to one and the
same head, and be but diverse branches of one and the same stock, to wit,
luxury, or sensuality. Fornication is the principal species of them, the
disorders whereof are so evident, and so well known, that no one can be
ignorant of the nature of it. Uncleanness comprehends all the other ordures
and pollutions that are contrary to the chastity and honesty of our bodies; as
incests, violations, and those other abominable furies of carnal passions,
which transgress even the laws of nature, as corrupt as it is. The word, which
we have translated inordinate appetite, does signify literally, perturbation,
or passion, in the original tongue. But it is frequently used, to express the
passion of lubrieity, and the filthy disposition of a voluptuous, and
esseminate heart, that easily receives the impression of all lascivious
objects, and abandons its self to these kind of pleasures, and runs out, and
pours forth its self, in a sort, entirely to them. Evil concupiscence, which
the Apostle adds in the fourth place, is the source, or the root of all the
vices of this sort. For though concupiscence be often taken in general, for all
irregular appetites, and desires, whatever the objects are, to which they are
unduly carried; yet it sometimes signifies those in particular, which respect
the pleasures of the flesh, and we often use the word concupiscence, in this
sense in our vulgar language. Nevertheless, I grant, that in this place it may
be taken in a larger extent, as importing inordinate coveting either of
pleasures, or of profits, and riches; because the Apostle speaks here of
covetousness also, and not of sensuality alone. He calls this concupiscence
evil, to distinguish it from that; which keeping within its just bounds,
desires things lawful, in a due manner and measure.

The last of the vices here touched by the Apostle, is Covetousness, a vice no
less known than the foregoing. Only, notable is the elogium he gives it, in
saying, Covetousness, which is idolatry. For this title surpriseth us, every
one well knowing, that idolatry, and covetousness are, to speak properly, two
different sins; the first directly respecting religion, and the service of the
Deity, when men adore a thing, which is not the true GOD, and render it those
religious honors which belong to none but GOD; whereas covetousness is a moral
sin, that consists in an excessive, and immoderate adhesion to the goods of
this world; makes men get them, and possess them amiss, and contrary to the
laws of justice, and reason. These two things therefore being so different, why
says St. Paul, that covetousness is idolatry? Dear Brethren; I answer, that he
was in no wise ignorant of this; nor did he intend in this place, to confound
these two sins, which in diverse other places he does most expressly
discriminate, and distinguish, as particularly there, where making a list of
the principal sinners, that shall not inherit the kingdom of GOD, he sets down
the idolater, and the covetous severally, and each of them in his rank. But
aiming here, in passing to brand, and blast this vice, for the giving of us a
just horror at it, that we might not account it, as the greater part of men do,
a light matter, and a lowness, and weakness of spirit, rather than a crime; he
qualifies it with the elogium of idolatry, improperly, (I grant) and
figuratively, but very fitly for the discovering of its venoum to us. And it is
not here alone that he has done it. He brands this vice after the same manner
again, in the Epistle to the Ephesians, where speaking of the covetous, he adds
the very same thing, and says, who is an idolater. You know (says he) that no
fornicator, nor unclean person, nor covetous, who is an idolater, has any
inheritance in the kingdom of CHRIST, and of GOD. Now this proposition, that
covetousness is idolatry, may be pertinently resolved two manner of ways:
First, by taking it, as signifying simply, that it is an abominable thing. For
inasmuch as there was nothing in all the horrors of Paganism, that was more
severely prohibited of GOD, nor more hated or abhorred among the Jews, than
idolatry; thence it comes, that they gave this name to every thing which they
would detest; and I perceive, that even to this day, this form of expression is
common among them, and when they would signify, that a thing is abominable,
they frequently say, It Is an idol, or it is idolatry; so that we need not
wonder, if St. Paul, who follows all the idioms and terms of the Jews
language, has said here, in a like sense, that covetousness is idolatry, to
signify, that it is an horrible and detestable vice. We meet with a like
expression, or rather indeed, the same, in Samuel, when the Prophet, to show
Saul how great the horror was, of the fault he had committed in not executing
punctually the thing GOD had commanded him, tells him, 1 Samuel 15.23.
that to resist an order of the LORD's, is a sin of divination (that is, of
witchcraft, or magic) and not to acquiesce in what He has commanded, is a sin
of idols, or images, that is, idolatry. There you see, by the names of the most
abominable sins, witchcraft, and idolatry, he signifies the horridness of
disobeying the voice of GOD; altogether, as the Apostle, in our Text,
expresses the horridness of avarice, I add in the second place, that though
covetousness be not properly, and formally Idolatry, yet it has so much
resemblance with it, that there is scarce any other sin to which this name does
better agree. The idolater looks on his idols with profound veneration; so does
the covetous, on his goods and coin. The one shuts up his idols; so the other
does his. The one serves an image; and the other gold and silver; and when the
idol is of either of these two metals, (as they not seldom are) they both
serve the self-same thing, with this difference only, that the idolater serves
it under one form, and one way figured; the covetous under another; The one
offers incense, and sacrifices to his idol; the other immolates his heart and
affections to his. Add hereto, that the covetous bears more love to the objects
of his passion; and renders them more service than he does to GOD; He puts his
hope in gold, and says to fine gold, Thou art my considence. And if you
thoroughly examine his life, you will find, that he serves none but Mammon.
Mammon is then his GOD; after the same manner, as the Apostle says elsewhere,
that the holly is the GOD of voluptuous men; whence follows, that it cannot be
denied, but that he also is an idolater.

In fine, there are two things here to be yet heeded; The first is, that under
the names of these five vices, fornication, uncleanness, inordinate appetite,
evil concupiscence, and covetousness, the Apostle signifies, not merely the
acts of these sins, which are also commonly called by the same names; but
properly, and precisely, the internal habits of them, as seated in the soul.
For it is they properly, that are the members of the old man: the acts are but
his effects and operations. His meaning therefore is, that we cut them up to
the very root; that we, not only abstain from those vile actions unto which
they sway such as they possess; but that we mortify, and extinguish them
themselves, to the end that these accursed sources or evil being once dried up,
our life may remain (...) and clean from all the ordures and filth of them. The
other thing is, that we must not fancy, the Apostle meant to make here an exact
enumeration of all the vices of the old man. He gives us but a small scantling
of them; intending we should likewise mortify all the rest, as gluttony,
drunkenness, and the like. For it would be no benefit to us to have cut off
one of his members, if we let him live, in respect of others. His life is our
death, and while he conserves it whole in any of his parts, we cannot be in
safety. Let us labor therefore to extinguish it all. Eradicate all its lusts;
repress all its stirrings; and smother all its sentiments. Let us make a
mortal, and irreconcilable war upon this whole brood of monsters. Spare we not
any one of them. Let us exterminate them all as an Anathema. Treating them, as
the ancient Israelites sometime did the accursed nations of Canaan; and as the
Psalmist would have the little children of Babylon treated, Psalm. 137.9.
desiring they might be dashed against the stones. It Is in this case only, that
cruelty is laudable, and that a man may lay aside pity without blame. He that
has pity on the members of his old man, is cruel to himself; to spare them, is
to destroy ones self; and to conserve them, is to betray our own salvation.

This then, My Brethren, is the mortification which the Apostle requires of
us. Neither he, nor any other of the Ministers of JESUS CHRIST, does any where
enjoin us to wear hair-cloth, or to disfigure our countenances with a multitude
of fasts, and watchings, or to go barefoot, or to put on a cowl, or renounce
the usage of any of the meats which GOD has created for our service; much less
to cover our selves with dung and filth, or to gore our selves all over with
disciplines. Isa. 1.12.
God will one day say to those, that amuse themselves in such mortifications,
Who has required this at your hands? and why have ye suffered so much in vain?
Gal. 3.4.
The only mortification he demands of us, is that of the old man: that we beat
down our vices, and not that we rend our bodies; that we deface our passions,
and not our countenances; that we renounce our lusts, and not His gifts. That
we give the discipline to our manners, and not our shoulders. As for our
selves, My Brethren, I acknowledge, that we have renounced the mortification of
the superstitious; the misery is, we do not practice that which is our
Saviors; though without it, no man can have part in Him, or His kingdom; as
the Apostle intimates plainly enough here, where he does not own any person for
a member of CHRIST risen, who is not dead; and elsewhere he affirms in
express terms; that they that are CHRIST's have crucified the flesh, with its
affections and lusts. We amuse not our selves in bodily exercise. No; but
neither do we more heed that of the spirit. We spare our hearts no less than
our bodies; and do not treat the vices of the one, any whit more roughly than
the skin of the other. Men see sufficiently by the actions of our lives, that
the members of this old man, whom the cross of CHRIST has condemned unto
death, remaining very far from being dead, are scarce wounded in us; that they
are not so much as scratched; that they live in us, in their full strength and
vigor, and no more feel our Savior's nails, and thorns, than if He had not
died, or we not believed in Him at all. Our adversaries are nor to seek how to
charge it home upon us; and it is the only one of their arguments that puts us
to confusion. We easily answer all their other reproaches. There Is none but
this, wherein our consciences enforce us to separate the cause of JESUS CHRIST,
and of His Gospel, from our own. For if His truth were to be judged of, by the
quality of our deportments, who could defend it, seeing the horrible disorder
that generally appears in our lives? Let us consider only the two articles
here touched by the Apostle, unchastity, and avarice. In conscience, is the
one, and the other of these two passions, dead among us? Have they not as great
a vogue, as among the men of the World? Is the modesty of youth, the honesty of
marriage, is chastity, and temperance, better practiced here than other-where?
Does the fordidnesse, and eagerness of avarice less appear? Verily, (I am
extremely ashamed to say it) all is alike; except that those without do
confess, and discipline themselves, and macerate their flesh with some kind of
fasts, and say their chappelet; whereby at least they show some sense of their
faultiness, though they apply ineffectual, and ridiculous remedies of it.
Whereas we, after committing the same faults, and dabling in the same filth,
come to present our selves impudently here, without fearing GOD, or having
shame of men. And if the voice of the LORD, that resoundeth in this place, do
draw some sigh from us, at our going hence, we return every one to our vices,
as pleasant, and as obstinate as ever.

GOD is so good, that He has hitherto attended our repenting. But let us
beware, lest our obdurateness do change His patience into fury, and constrain
Him in the end, to punish such a refractory contempt of His word, and His
favors; and avenge the affront we do His Gospel, by living so ill, in so fair,
and so divine a light. Let us all descend into our selves. Let us examine our
carriage, and our consciences. Let each one interrogate himself; Come, my soul,
after so many months, and years, that JESUS CHRIST has so carefully
instructed thee, what pains have thou taken to conform thy self to Him; and to
imprint the image of His death, and of His life, upon thy behavior? Have thou
nailed thine old man to His cross? Have thou mortified his members? Have thou
deprived them of that wretched vigor which they display with so much efficacy
in the children of disobedience? Do they leave thee at rest? Or when they begin
to trouble thee, have thou the courage to resist them? Does not avarice stretch
out thine hand upon the goods of others? or does it not withold the same from
imparting of thine own unto the poor? Have thou not felt its vain sollicitudes,
and fruitless melancholies? it is insatiable cupidity, and unbridled eagerness?
and that impudence it has to despise, and violate honesty, laws, and decency,
for the satisfying its inordinate desires? But if avarice has not importuned
thee, tell me, my soul, has not the lust of the eyes, and the vanity of the
flesh at one time or other ensnared thee? Has not this traitorous Dalila
lulled thee asleep? Have thou guarded the glory of that Nazareat to which GOD
has consecrated thee from her ambushments? Brethren, let us thus catechize our
souls daily, and about our other duties, as well as these? Let us not pardon
them any thing. Judge we them righteously, and with inexorable severity?
Chastise them for all their faults; and bringing them down at the feet of GOD,
make them weep and groan in His presence. Let us reproach them with their
ingratitudes, and set before their eyes the benefits of GOD, and the offenses
with which they have recompensed Him. Denounce we also His judgments on them,
and the horror of His dreadful vengeance; and not give them over until they
have taken a full and firm resolution to return no more to their ingratitudes.
Above all, Dear Brethren, let us make them hate and detest those two pests,
which the Apostle has to day so solemnly condemned to dye, to wit, luxury, and
covetousness. Let us execute his just sentence upon these two passions, and
cause them to suffer that death which they so many ways deserve. For as to the
first, it impudently profaneth a body, which belongs to JESUS CHRIST, was
redeemed by His blood, washed with His heavenly water, fed with His flesh, and
consecrated by His spirit. Rends it from the communion of that divine body, of
which it is become a member, to change it into one of the members of Satan.
Bereaves it of its glory, and despoils it of the greatest honor it had; and
drawing it out of Heaven, whither GOD had called it, drags it into Hell. I know
well, that men of the world flatter themselves, and extenuate this sin. And I
am not ignorant, that there are people among our selves, who suffer themselves
to be corrupted by these shameless sayings of the world. But why do we call our
selves Christians, if we prefer the sentiments of the world, or of our own
flesh, before the judgments of GOD? St. Paul, beside what he says of it here,
protests aloud elsewhere, having spoken of adultery, Gal. 5.21.
fornication, and uncleanness, that they that commit such things, 1 Cor. 6.10.
shall not inherit the kingdom of GOD: And again more formally elsewhere,
Deceive not your selves, (says he) neither fornicators, nor adulterers, nor
the effeminate, shall inherit the kingdom of GOD. Renounce either St. Paul, or
this error of the world. If you persist in it, the Apostle cries to you, that
you deceive your selves; that is to say, instead of Heaven, which you in vain
hope for, while you continue in this evil way, you shall in the end have hell
for your portion, in the communion of devils, whose uncleanness you love more
than the purity of JESUS CHRIST, and of His Saints. Neither may you plead to us
the furiousness of this passion. GOD has provided for it, giving you an
honest, and a lawful remedy of it, namely, Marriage. Why do ye not use it? But
the love of libertinizing, and the fear of an imaginary yoke, and an ambitious
humor, withold most men from thinking on it; who would willingly say, what
the Doctors of Rome have not been ashamed to write concerning their Priests,
even that marriage is a greater sin for them, than fornication; whereby they
sufficiently declare, what opinion they have of this filth, since they prefer
it before a thing which they rank among the Sacraments. But the Epicurians
among Pagans, and Monks among Christians, have cried down marriage as much as
they could, through a mervaillous artifice of the enemy of our salvation; who
rightly judged, that by this pernicious doctrine, he should involve a multitude
of people in the vilinies of luxury, and consequently in damnation. But if this
vice be pernicious, the other, which St. Paul condemns here, is no less so.
And his not being able to name it, without giving it the title of idolatry,
does evidently show you, what indeed it is. Ye covetous, let this thunderbolt
break the charms of your illusion. Judge what a vice yours is, since the
Apostle calls it idolatry; and thereupon conceiving a just horror at it,
renounce it for ever, and all those low thoughts, in which it busieth you; to
become henceforth liberal, charitable, beneficent, communicative, rich in good
works. Instead of these perishing goods, which are exposed to the hands of men,
and the injuries of nature, labor to treasure up a foundation for the time to
come; and to get together on high in the Heavens, those true, and immortal
riches, which JESUS CHRIST, the Father of Eternity, does there keep for us, and
will one day give us, to enjoy the same for ever in supreme glory, with
Himself, and all His Saints, So be it.

THE THIRTY FIFTH SERMON ON COLOSSIANS,
CHAP. III. VER. VI, VII. Verse VI. For which things, the wrath of GOD comes
upon the children of rebellion.

VII In which you also walked other-while, when ye lived in them.


DEAR Brethren; If men had as great a measure of understanding, and generosity,
as virtue has of beauty and attractiveness; there would need no more to induce
them to love it, and embrace it; but a representing to them the image of it.
This admirable object would quickly ravish their hearts, and in an instant
kindle in them a sweet, and an everlasting flame of love, which would govern
all the motions, and sentiments of their lives, and consuming in a short time,
the vices, and the foolish, or unjust passions of their nature, fill their
deportment with piety, honesty, and charity. One of those ancient sages of the
world, whom they call Philosophers, did rightly acknowledge this truth,
notwithstanding the darkness of his Paganism; and said, that if we could see
virtue naked, that is, as it is in its self, it would inflame our souls with a
mavelous love to it. For indeed, what is there fairer, and more amiable than
virtue? the true, and lively image of GOD, the supreme beauty of all beauties?
the resemblance of Angels, the fairest of all creatures? the only jewel of
reasonable nature? the light of our souls? the ornament of our bodies? the
advantage of our being above that of animals? the end, and utmost perfection of
the world? it is just, and legitimate governesse? this vast universe having not
been made, and formed, but that she might happily possess it, governing, and
keeping it under her holy, and divine laws? She sets all our affections in
their true position, bowing them under the Creator, and raising them above the
creature. She reduces all the faculties of our nature to their just symmetrie,
subjecting our passions to the will, and our will to reason. Resting content
with the love of GOD, and the hope of His glory, she coveteth no unjust thing,
and does no person wrong, no, not in desire and thought; but loves, and
obliges all men as much as she can, and sheds abroad continually upon them,
the sweet and innocent rays of her excellent light; remaining always holy,
and just, and honest without; always calm; and peaceable, and happy within.

Who could look upon a thing so beautiful, without loving it? accordingly you
may observe, that where there does appear at any height, for instance, upon the
throne of a nation, some image of it, though not fully to the lire, nor
complete, and every way entire, but only grossly drawn, and in many respects
imperfect, yet it fails not to attract the eyes and hearts of the world
forthwith. It proves the love and joy of the present generation; and the
admiration of all posterity. Men bless it; heaven and earth delight in it; and
the age that produced it, is glorious by it; one single example of this nature
being sufficient to adorn a whole country, and render the time wherein it
flourished, for ever illustrious. What then would our ravishments be, if we
beheld the true and accomplished effigies of it? in all its lively colors,
without defect, and without imperfection? It Is true, GOD has portrayed it
indeed to the life, in the tables of His Scriptures; But the eyes of our souls
are so bad, that we never comprehend it, but very weakly; and again, our
fordidnesse, and wretchlesnesse is so extreme, that commonly we do not love
things according to their inherent beauty, and honesty; but according to the
profit they afford us; and do likewise hate things, not so much for their
deformity, and natural odiousness, as for the hurt that they may do us. This
ignorance, and this mercenary humor, which is common to all men, is a cause
that our Savior contemeth not Himself with proposing to us the beauty of
holiness, and the deformity and disorder of sin, which is the due manner of
dealing with reasonable creatures; but accommodating Himself to our infirmity,
he incessantly sets before our eyes, the good and the evil that will redound
unto us from holiness, and from sin, as we shall be addicted to the one or the
other. He represents to us on one hand, the happiness to which the Saints are
advanced, who obey His will; and on the other hand, the dreadful torments into
which vice does assuredly precipitate all the wicked. And though His Spirit
does in part cure this ignorance, and this sordid disposition in as many as He
does regenerate; yet while we are on earth, there do abide some relics of
them in us. Whence it comes, that He forbears not to use this method, even with
the faithful themselves.

You have a notable instance of it in this lesson of the Apostle, upon which we
now are. For having exhorted us to mortify our members which are upon the
earth, that is, to renounce the defilements of luxury, and avarice; for the
inclining of us to so just a duty, he represents unto us, in this Text, the
judgments of GOD upon the obstinate slaves of these vices; They are things
(says he) for which the wrath of GOD comes upon the children of rebellion.
For he compriseth, in these few words, the fearful and inevitable, but just
judgment of Heaven upon all those, who despising its goodness, do abandon
themselves to the one, or the other of these vices. And then, in the following
verse, he sets afresh before our eyes, for the same purpose, the miserableness
of our fore-pass'd life, which even as the life of children of rebellion, was
e're-while sunk in the turpitude of these same sins: and withal, the infinite
kindness GOD has done us, in drawing us out thence; in which things (says he)
ye also walked sometimes, when ye lived in them. This he does, to the end, that
being seized with a just horror at our former state, and ravished in the sense
of our present happiness, we might heartily renounce the service of our former
masters, and live henceforth in that purity, honesty, and charity, which this
new LORD calls us unto, who has vouchsafed to take us to Himself, and to
shed into us a new life, and nature, as distant from our former one, as Heaven
is from the earth. Now, as these are the two reasons that St. Paul urges, for
the withdrawing of us from those two principal vices of the profane; so shall
they be (by the will of GOD) the two parts of this action. In the first, we
will consider the judgments of GOD upon obstinate adulterers, and covetous
persons; and in the second, the misery of our former state, when we lived in
the same vices, and could expect nothing in the sequel, but the same effects of
the wrath of GOD upon us. The LORD JESUS please, so to accompany our words with
the virtue of His blessing, that such as the loathsomness, the injustice, and
horror its self of these vices, has not been yet able to withdraw from them,
may now at least be plucked from them, by the fear and terror of those dreadful
judgments of Heaven, which are unavoidably prepared for all the children of
rebellion.

The first part is expressed in these words, that the wrath of GOD comes for
these things upon the children of rebellion. I will not stand to tell you, that
to speak properly, wrath has no place in the Divine nature. For who is there
of you, but knows, that GOD is a Spirit most pure, most simple, and most
blessed, enjoying an infinite calm, and tranquillity? whose knowledge can never
be surprised, nor felicity disturbed, as we learn, both from Scripture, and
from reason it self? Now wrath, and such other passions, do consist in the
agitation and emotion of the blood, and of the spirits that stir it; they being
caused in us by our imagination, diversely, as the objects which it does
conceive, are troublesome, or contentful, present, or to come; the one
producing in us sorrow, others joy; some, fear; and others, hope; those of one
sort, wrath; those of another, contentment, or complacency. None of this as you
see, can arrive, but where there is some mixture of humors, and spirits, which
being not in GOD at all, whose essence is most simple, it is also impossible
that any of these passions should take place in Him; and least of all, wrath,
which is one of the most troubled, and most boiling of them. But the Scripture,
which uses the dialect of children with us, as with children, does often
attribute these passions unto GOD, figuratively, to represent thus grossly the
mysteries of Him, under the images of those things that are familiar with us,
because they belong properly to our nature. It Is thus we must understand that,
which it calls the wrath of GOD. For it signifies by this term, not the
perturbation of a commoved Spirit, which cannot be in GOD, because of the
sovereign perfection of His nature; but a just and reasonable will to punish
the person that deserves it. This it terms wrath, by reason of some
resemblance that appears to be between these two things. For a man who is in
wrath, does eagerly desire to avenge himself upon the person that troubles him;
and he does it, if it be in his power, causing him displeasure, and afflicting
him. So does GOD treat those who violate his laws; He makes them suffer evil,
and punishes, or chastises them, according to their deserts. But He does it
without any perturbation, with a calm, and composed will; whereas a man in
wrath does it with emotion. And because we are seldom wont to do otherwise,
there being few that avenge themselves without some trouble, and boiling of
choler, it seems to us that it is so with the LORD too. Wherefore we say, He is
angry, when He avengeth His laws, and punishes the crimes of His creatures;
though at the bottom, and in very deed, there be nothing in His action, but the
purpose, and effect of an avengement, and not the disturbance of any passion.
Thence it comes, that the Scripture also speaks in like manner, frequently
attributing wrath, in this sense, unto GOD. And if you narrowly heed it, you
will find, that it gives this name either to the will that GOD has to punish
men, the arrest and order He passes for it; or to the effects themselves, that
follow thereupon, that is, the punishments He makes culpable persons suffer by
His order. And it is in this second sense, the Apostle intends it here, when He
says, that the wrath of GOD comes upon the children of rebellion. The wrath,
that is, the avenges of GOD, His judgments, the evils, and executions,
wherewith He punishes their rebellion, according to the decrees of His
avenging justice. He speaks in the same manner elsewhere, when he says, that
the wrath of GOD is openly re^ealed from Heaven, Romans 1.18.
upon all ungodliness, and unrighteousness of men, for that they with hold the
truth in unrighteousness.

His saying, that the wrath of GOD comes, some referr unto the judgments,
which He does not seldom execute upon the voluptuous, and covetous in this
World; as if he had said, that for these vices; GOD has been wont to discharge
his avenging strokes upon men. Others understand it of the punishment He will
inflict for them at the last day: and indeed, the Scripture does frequently so
speak of that great judgment, and the things which shall be done in it,
saying, that it comes; elegantly signifying by that word, the certainty, and
infallible coming to pass of a thing, which, it is true, as yet is not, but will
not fail to be; as if it were a person that traveled, and were already on the
way to go to the place where he would arrive. But I conceive the Apostle does
enclose within this word, the execution of both those kinds of judgments,
signifying by it, those great and dreadful torments, into which God will plunge
the wicked, on the day of His anger, which will be the last effect of His wrath
against fin; and also all the chastenings wherewith He scourges them in this
life, which are, as it were, the first fruits of His wrath, and so many samples
and forerunners of His final vengeance. St. Paul compriseth all this, in his
saying, that the wrath of GOD comes. But this form of speech, even that the
wrath of GOD comes upon men, is graceful, and eximious, importing, that the
evils which arrive on earth, do not happen at adventure, nor spring out of the
earth it self, and their inferior causes simply, but do issue from another
source, to wit, from Heaven, which pours them down here below, as a storm, or
deluge, for the inevitable enveloping, and overwhelming of those for whom they
are appointed. They set forth from Heaven; they travel toward us, and fall
whom in the end upon the heads of evildoers, by the order of the most High,
who marks out the whole course they are to take, and dispenses them with the
same judgment, that He does thunders, and tempests, and rains, which come upon
us from on high, by the guidance of His providence. And as you see it is, for
the most part, in the works of nature, that these meteors do not come on a
sudden, but after some signs that precede, and presage their approach: in like
manner is it ordinarily with the judgments of GOD. The thunder of His wrath, as
well as that of nature, does roar before it falls. GOD threatens the guilty
before He strikes them down, and well-nigh always sends men some
advertisements, that are as the van-coureurs, and harbingers of His wrath, to
prepare us, that we may either divert it, by preventing it through our
repentance, or take it to abide with us. Matt. ^4.
Thus you see in St. Matthew, our LORD and Savior predicteth, that the last
judgment should be preceded by many great and terrible signs, for the daunting
of the ferocity of sinners, and the reducing them, if it might be, unto
repentance; and in the same place, He describes the prognostics of that
dreadful vengeance, which GOD was soon after to pour forth upon Jerusalem, and
the whole nation of the Jews: and which failed not to arrive in a little time,
punctually as He had foretold. He observes the same order still in His
chastising of families, and nations; scarce ever involving them in any
calamity, but He signified to them the coming of it, before He executes it;
which may be noted, among others, in those horrible scourges, which have made
havoc in Christendom for these eight and twenty or thirty years.

But the Apostle adds, who they are, upon whom the wrath of GOD does come;
upon the children (says he) of rebellion. It Is an Hebrew manner of speech,
familiar in the Scriptures of the one and the other Testament, to call that
man, the child of a thing, who is addicted to it, and has in him the
impression, and tincture of it; as they call Antichrist, the Son of perdition,
that is to say, a lost man, one devoted, and abandoned to perdition, who
destroys himself in destroying others. And the Grecians, whose language is
extremely polisht, and perfectly well formed, have not however disdained this
form of expression, saying often the children of the Grecians, for to signify,
Greeks themselves: and the children of Physicians, for Physicians. In like
manner here, these children of rebellion, of whom the Apostle speaks, are the
rebellious; such as disobey the will of GOD, and His advertisements; fiercely
despise His counsel: such, who (as St. Peter says) do stumble at the word;
who, whatever care GOD takes to declare His holy will unto them, and to call
them to repentance, will not hearken, but obstinately settle, and harden
themselves in their sins. Whereby they render themselves guilty of two heinous
faults, unbelief, and disobedience. For they reject ^^e testimony of GOD, and
hold it for a fable, sometimes even openly mocking at it, which is an horrible
outrage against the truth of GOD. Then next, they disobey His voice, confirming
themselves in doing what He forbids them, and in neglecting what He does
command them. Such were those profane ones before the Flood, who stubbornly
despising the preaching of Noah, the herald of righteousness continued
impudently in the track of their corrupt ways: taking no heed to the
advertisements of GOD, and His servant. And St. Peter, by reason of this
insolent contempt, terms them unbelieving, or disobedient. They did eat, (says
our Savior) they drank, they married, and gave in marriage, 1 Pet. 3.20.
and perceived not the flood, until it came, and bore them all away.
Afterward, Genesis 19.14.
the people of Sodom and Gomorra did as much; who took the holy, and humble
remonstrance, which GOD's servant, Lot, made them, of thinking on themselves,
and the notice He gave them of the destruction of their Cities, for a rallerie,
or a phr^nsie. They remained obstinate in this profane security, until a
deluge of fire and brimstone, pouring in a moment out of Heaven upon them, and
upon their abominable Country, forced those dreams of their incredulity out of
their heads, and taught them, that there is nothing more true than the word of
GOD, nor more false than an imagination of the security of sinners. In fine, it
is the crime of all those, upon whom the wrath of GOD does fall. They are
children of rebellion, to whom may be applied (though to some more, to others
less) what a Prophet sometime said unto the Jews, Zech. 7.11.
They would not understand, but have pulled away the shoulder, and made their
ears heavy, that they might not hear, and have hardened their hearts as an
adamant, that they might not hearken to the law, and the words which the LORD
of Hosts sent by His Spirit.

I acknowledge, that this is properly the crime, first, of those who reject the
Gospel of the Son of GOD, the true word brought in by the Holy Spirit: and
secondly, of them, that living under the Mosaique covenant, rebelled against
the word of GOD preached to them by Moses and the Prophets. But I affirm, that
even they are not exempt of it, who have sinned, or do sin, in the darkness of
Paganism. For though these people do not reject the word either of the Gospel,
or the Law, which is neither the one nor the other, addressed to them; yet can
they not be excused of contemning that other voice of GOD, which makes it self
be heard from Heaven throughout all the earth, and sounds secretly in every
man's heart, and privily calls them to repentance for their sins, to piety,
to honesty, to justice, and rectitude. They profanely reject this sacred
declaration of the Deity, without which GOD never left a man among the nations,
no, not the most forlorn, or most desperately plunged in idolatry and
viciousness, as the Apostle teaches us in the Acts. They despise those
admirable directions He gives them in the governing of the world, to seek Him,
feel Him and find Him. Acts 14.17. and 17.26 27.
They make light of the evidences He offers them in His administration of the
universe of His eternal power and Godhead; and finally, do abuse the riches of
His mercy, of His patience, Romans 1.20. and 2.4.
and of His long-suffering, by which, His goodness inviteth, and solliciteth
all men to repentance. Whence appears the wonderfulnesse, not only of the
justice, but even of the gentleness, and benignity of GOD, who having right to
punish men upon the first sin, they are sound guilty of, yet does it not; but
calls, and inviteth them to repentance, and waits for them, and causes not
His wrath to come upon them, until to the crime of their sin, they have added
that of rebellion against that second way of salvation, which He in His loving
kindness offers them; to wit, the way of repentance. For that which the Apostle
says here of fornicators, and the avaricious in particular, is true of all
vices in general; the wrath of Heaven comes not upon them that are guilty, but
when by their unbelieving, and obduration, they have made themselves children
of rebellion; and there is not a sinner in the world, how great and enormous
soever his crimes may be, but this good, and all-merciful Majesty receives most
readily to mercy, provid^ only he repent; according to the Prophet's saying,
that God wills not the death of a sinner, Ezekiel. 33.
but that he be converted, and live; so as henceforth it is not simply sin,
that damneth men, but impenitency, and unbelief. And the goodness of GOD does
so much the more gloriously appear in this procedure of His toward them, for
that to have the liberty of treating thus with them, He bought it (if I may so
speak) at the price of the blood of His only Son, whom He (such is His
goodness to us) delivered up to the death of the Cross, to salve the interests
of His justice, which opposed this way of mercy, that He inclined to open unto
men after their falling into sin. But this very thing shows us on the other
hand, how great the corruption of men is, and how untractable the furiousness
of the passion they have for vice; in that not content to be debauched from the
service of their Sovereign, (which is of it self an horrible attentat, and
worthy of a thousand penalties) they are so desperately in love with sin, that
to continue in it, they despise, and even reject, with an enraged insolency,
all this holy and sacred mystery of the kindness of GOD; and are so
enchanted, and bestialized by the poisons of sin, that they prefer its short,
its vain, and wretched pleasures, before Divine grace and salvation, and do
less dread the wrath of their Sovereign, and the society of Devils, and the
torments of Hell, than the loss of that unworthy and shameful delight, which
the practice of sin, and the fulfilling of its lusts, does give them for a few
days.

But we may further observe here, the Apostle's holy art; who aiming to divert
the Colossians from avarice, and the pollution of carnal pleasures, does not
tell them, that GOD will punish them heavily, if they do not avoid them: (this
language would have in some sort offended them, as implying that they had some
inclination or disposition to such a faultiness.) On the contrary,
presupposing, that this would not betide them; to give them horror at these
crimes, he shows them the just punishments of them, in the person of the
unbelieving, and rebellious; like a tender and a prudent father, who to imprint
an hatred of vice and debauch in the heart of his child, chastises the slaves
in his presence, that the example of those vile and wretched persons may teach
him what punishments he will deserve, if he come to fall into any such
disorder, he, who is the son of his house, the heir of his freedom, and estate.
For we must not fancy, that because we have the honor to be of the alliance of
GOD, we may therefore commit with impunity those sins, which the LORD punishes
so severely in those that are without. Far from us be so fottish, and so
pernicious a conceit; It Is vice that GOD hates, and not persons; and whoever
hardens himself therein, live he in any profession, Pagan or Christian,
reformed or otherwise, he is a child of rebellion; and the advantage and
excellency of the profession he makes, is so far from exempting him from, that
it will aggravate his punishment; it being most just, as our Savior teaches
us, Luke 12.47.
that he who knew the will of his Master, and does it not, should receive more
stripes, than he that offends ignorantly. And when a true believer salleth,
through infirmity, into some one of these disorders, (as alas! happens but too
often) GOD plainly shows, how much it does displease Him, never failing to
rebuke and chasten it, except a prompt repentance do prevent such chastening of
His. 1 Pet. 4.17. 1 Cor. 11.32.
Judgment (says St. Peter) begins at the house of GOD. And, He judges us
(says St. Paul,) and teaches us, that we may not be condemned with the world,
as we shall assuredly be, if we persevere in sin without repentance, and
amendment. Hence the Apostle fearing, lest some such imagination should abuse
the Ephesians, he gives them the same intimation, with express advice, that
they suffer not themselves to be beguiled with a false hope of impunity. Ephesians.
5.6.
Let none (says he) deceive you with vain words. For for these things the
wrath of GOD comes upon the children of rebellion.

But further, his threatening here particularly fornication, uncleanness,
inordinate appetite, evil concupiscence, and covetousness, in saying, that it
is for these things the wrath of GOD comes upon the children of rebellion, is
not to signify, that other excesses of such rebellions ones, as their
cruelties, their murders, their ambitions, and the like exorbitances should
remain unpunished, (on the contrary, Romans 1.18. Romans 2.9.
he elsewhere expressly declares, that the wrath of GOD is revealed
peremptorily upon all ungodliness and unrighteousness; and again, that there
shall be tribulation, and anguish, upon every soul of man, that does evil.) But
he has denounced this wrath of GOD upon the luxurious, and avaricious by name;
for that among all vices, these do particularly provoke the vengeance of GOD,
by reason of their vileness and enormity, and also by reason of the disturbance
they occasion in humane society, the interest and conservation whereof, does
often force the LORD to speed the execution of His judgments upon these kind
of sinners, and punish them exemplarily in this world; that so by this severity
of His, He may cool the furiousness of those, who giving up themselves to the
passions of these two accursed pests, would overthrow all order among mankind,
if their rage were not repressed by some notable chastisement.

As for the truth of this sentence, that the wrath of GOD comes for these sins
upon the children of rebellion; since it is the Apostle, that is, the mouth of
Heaven, the oracle of JESUS CHRIST that pronounces it, no Christian may doubt
of it. First, though they should go on altogether unpunished in this world, yet
sure it is, that in the next, this burning wrath of the Almighty, which shall
there manifest its self once for all, at the great and terrible day of the
LORD, shall separate them for ever from the society of the blessed, and strike
them down to Hell, there to suffer eternally with devils the just punishments
of their rebellion. For besides this Text, which is clear, 1 Cor. 6.10. Ephesians.
5.5. Gal. 5.21. Heb. 13.4. 1 Cor. 3.17.
the Apostle does in three other passages, expressly enroll idolaters,
fornicators, and adulterers, among those that shall have no part in the Kingdom
of Heaven. And elsewhere he says particularly of whoremongers, and
adulterers, that GOD will judge them; and elsewhere again, that GOD will
destroy those, who shall have, by such pollutions, destroyed, or violated His
Temple, that is, their bodies. In like manner, St. John assigns them their
part in the lake that burns with fire and brimstone, Rev. 21.8. 1 Cor. 6.9. 1 Timothy 6.9.
which is the second death. And as for the covetous, it is of them in particular
St. Paul says, that the unrighteous shall not inherit the kingdom of GOD; and
elsewhere, that covetous desires do drown men in perdition.

But besides this great and dreadful punishment, which these vices will
infallibly draw down at the last day upon the children of rebellion, they
involve them for the present, in so many diverse evils, that if the worlds
stupidity and passion did not blind it, it might easily perceive the truth of
what the Apostle does affirm. For first, is not that bruitishnesse, and that
horrible eclipsing of good sense, and right reason, and that bestial
abandonednesse to the vilest passions and actions, into which almost all the
slaves of these vices are seen to fall, is not this, I say, an eminent and
plain mark of the wrath of GOD upon them? The debauched, for their part, the
life they lead is naught else, but a continual wandering out of the way.
Consider me Soloni^^^, the sagest Prince that ever was; in whom shone so
glorious, and so splendid a light of knowledge, and of wisdom, that he ravished
his whole age, and attracted a great Queen from the ends of the earth to come
behold his glory. After he yielded up himself to this infamous passion, he so
lost all that force of spirit and judgment, that he became extravagant to such
a degree, as to give up himself to idolatry, the utmost of all bruitalities, in
complacency to his Mistresses. And the Heathen Poets themselves, to represent
what the ordinary sequel of this vice is, do make one of their Heroes assume,
in their fables, the habit, and equipage of a woman, after he had once fallen
into the snares of this wretched passion. It Is an image of what does still
betide those that let themselves be taken in the same: putting off by little
and little, all virtue, and shame, they become effeminate, and so utterly lose
their senses, that at length there is nothing so disgraceful, nothing so
contrary to order, honor, and decency, but they readily do, and suffer. The
same is signified again by another fable of the same Author's, concerning some,
whom the potion of a sorceresse transformed into swine, and other beasts. The
fable is pregnant of truth, and under feigned names and persons, contains the
history of the most part of those miserable men, whom fornication and adultery
has bewitched. They lose heart, and judgment, and humane sense, and commit so
many follies and extravagancies, as it is very easy to perceive, that it is no
longer the foul of a man, but of a mere animal, that guides them. Whence then
comes so strange a Metamorphosis, even in a Solomon, and in persons that
otherwise seemed so advised, and prudent? Dear Brethren, doubt not, but that it
comes from a secret judgment of GOD, who deprives them of that spirit and
judgment which they made such ill use of, and who, so to say, degrading them
of the quality of men, whereof this vice has rendered them unworthy, Romans 1.20.
drives them out among animals, delivering them up unto a mind disfurnished of
judgment, as the Apostle does elsewhere describe this dreadful vengeance of
GOD.

But besides mind and reason, who sees not, that it also usually takes away
their strength, their beauty, their vigor, and health of body, bringing on
them diseases, which gnaw their very bones, diseases which rot them, and
incurvate them before the time, and which creating sharpest pains in all the
parts of their miserable flesh, do make it pay dear for the dishonest pleasures
they have given it? Loss of goods is also one of the punishments which GOD
commonly inflicteth for this sin, permitting its very self to consume, by the
irregularity of its foolish expenses, the means that are necessary for the
support of the life of man; and reduce those that serve it, to an incommodious
and shameful poverty. Whereto may be yet added infinite examples, which the
lives of men are full of, of tragical miseries, wherewith GOD does visibly
strike sins of this sort. It was for them, that He sent the first deluge of
water on the earth; and afterward again, a second of fire and brimstone upon
the coasts of Sodom and Gomorrah. The debauches of Israel with Moah were the
cause of the death of four and twenty thousand men, whom GOD consumed in His
fury. And the tribe of Benjamin, so great and flourishing as it had been, was
reduced to six hundred men, for the uncleanness of one of their Cities. Who
knows not, that sometimes one man's adultery has caused long wars, and ruined
great Estates? And among the instances of it, particularly lamentable is that
of the Goths Empire; which having flourished in Spain a long time, was
destroyed, and utterly overthrown, for a fault of this kind committed by one of
their Kings. This occasion brought in the Saracens upon their hands; who,
besides liberty, and goods, took Christian religion away too, from the most
part of those people; introducing, and maintaining Mahometism in those
Countries, during many ages. It is not to be doubted, but that the precipita^ed
deaths and ruins of so many great ones, whom the world has seen, and still
does see perish with astonishment, are for the most part from the same source,
even the debauches they have been carried into. The accidents of particular
houses, and persons infected with this leaprousie, are less marked; yet are
they nevertheless very remarkable. And he that shall look narrowly into them,
shall find in them admirable examples of the justice of GOD upon these kind of
sins; and this in special, that He commonly takes away His covenant from houses
where such disorders reign. I might easily let you see like footsteps of the
wrath of GOD upon the covetous, whose unrighteousness He often punishes with
loss of senses, of health, of honor, and of that very wealth which they love
much better than their bodies, and their souls themselves; not to speak of the
infamy which GOD sometimes pours out upon them; and the horrible miseries
into which He lets them fall, in their persons, and in their posterity.

But I must pass to the other part of this Text, and speak a few words of it,
and conclude. For the Apostle, after this wrath of GOD, which he has
represented, as falling from Heaven upon the children of rebellion, because of
their pollutions, and avarices, reminds the Colossians, that themselves had
sometime been in the same condition; in which (says he) you also walked
other-while, when ye lived in these things. To live in these sins, is to have
the principles of our life infected with the venom of them. To walk in them,
is to produce the actions of them. The one is the power and faculty of life;
the other is the exercise and function of it. For the having in ones self the
principles and faculties of life, this the Apostle terms living, and by
walking, he understands, a putting forth the actions of the same; as appears
plainly by his saying elsewhere, If we live in the Spirit, let us also walk in
the Spirit. For a man, that, Gal. 5.25.
for instance, is asleep, does nevertheless live, and has life, though he
performs not the actions of it. As therefore to live in the Spirit, is no
other thing, but to have the faculties and powers of our nature renewed, and as
it were neweast, and regenerated by the virtue of the Spirit of JESUS CHRIST;
so on the contrary, to live in sin, is in like manner, to have our
understanding, and will, and the other powers of our nature, putrified, and
corrupted, and, as it were, empoisoned with Adam's sin, by the contagion of his
flesh. And again, as those do walk in the Spirit, who exercise piety, and
sanctity, and do conduct all the actions and motions of their lives, according
to the will of the Spirit; so they, on the contrary, walk in sin, who follow,
and fulfill the lusts thereof, and employ themselves in no other exercise, but
the serving it, and doing those evil works which naturally flow from the
habitudes of it. But we have spoken largely heretofore, if you remember, of
this first life of old Adam, which the grace of the LORD JESUS has destroyed,
and mortified in us. We have only to observe in our way, that since the
exercise of man, in his state of nature before grace, is, to walk in vices, and
in grossest pollutions; it must be an huge error to imagine, that he should be
able, in such a state, to produce works either meritorious, (as some say) or
preparatory to grace, (as others do pretend.) All he does for this time, if you
believe the Apostle in the case, is not good, but to prepare for Hell, and
merit the wrath of GOD; and to have any other opinion of it, will be a
diminution of the greatness of the grace of GOD toward us. Let us think then,
Beloved Brethren, on that shameful and miserable estate in which we naturally
were, and should have continued for ever with the children of rebellion,
living, and walking in sins, the wages, and fruit whereof, could be no other
than eternal death, if the LORD, through His abundant grace, had not delivered
us from such a condemnation. And resenting, as we ought, the greatness of the
benefit He has conferred upon us, let us incessantly bless His mercy and
goodness; Thanks be ever rendered unto thee, O holy, and merciful LORD, for that
we being servants of sin, thou have made us free by Thy Son, and given us by
thy Spirit, Romans 6.17.
to obey that express form of doctrine, which has been delivered us by thy
servants.

But as heretofore the vices, in which we lived, did continually produce all
kind of pollutions, and sins; and henceforth, since the cross, and grace of our
LORD has dried up this source of impurity, let there no more appear any track
of them in our manners. Let the holiness of that new man, whose name and blood
we boast of, shine forth in all the actions of our lives. Above all, let us
banish thence, those two capital and accursed pests of luxury and avarices for
which, you have heard here before, all the mouths of Heaven opened, to
fulminate against the rebellious, that serve them, the curses of this world,
and of that which is to come. And if the ignorance of such as lived in error,
withheld not the wrath of GOD heretofore from coming on them for these two
kinds of sins; what must those expect now, who commit the same crimes in the
light of JESUS CHRIST? Sure, as much as the disobedience, and the rebellion of
the one is more grievous, and more enormous than that of others; so much more
terrible will be the wrath that shall pour from Heaven upon them, than all the
judgments of GOD the world has seen in time past. Your ingratitude,
Christian, who so ill brook your name, and your disobedience, surpasses in
horridness all the unbelief, both of the first world, and of ancient Israel:
they rejected, but the preaching of Noah, and the ministry of M^ses; whereas
you outrage the Gospel of the Son of GOD, and, as much is in you is, make Him a
liar. Yet you know how they were punished; you know the deluges, which the
fault of the one brought upon all the earth. You know, the abyss opened its
mouth to swallow up the others alive; Heaven, and earth, and the elements were
armed against them. If their punishment makes you tremble; why do you imitate
their faults? yea, why commit you such as are more heinous, and blacker than
theirs? GOD is good, and merciful, I acknowledge, but to sinners repenting. To
those that mock at His instruction, and make a jest of His menaces. He is
severe, and inexorable: And if they amend not, they shall know sooner or later,
to their cost, that it is a fearful thing to fall into His hands. But the LORD
JESUS, whom we invocate, please to give us better things; so reforming this
Church by the power of His Spirit, and of His voice, that henceforth these
crying sins be no more seen amongst us; not the ordures of luxury, nor the
vilinies of avarice, which are the infamy of His people, the reproach of our
profession, the scandal of such as are without, the shame of those that are
within, the ruin and eternal misery of those that obstinately continue in
these vices. Rather let honesty, chastity, purity of body and spirit, charity,
and liberality, and all other Christian virtues be seen to flourish and
fructify in the midst of us, to the glory of GOD, the edification of all
within and without, and our own salvation. Amen.

THE THIRTY SIXTH SERMON ON COLOSSIANS,
CHAP. III. VER. VIII. Verse VIII. But now ye also put off all these things,
wrath, anger, maliciousness, detraction, dishonest speech out of your mouth.


DEAR Brethren; The Philosophers have well observed, and with consonancy to
truth, as each of us may perceive in himself by our own experience, that
besides understanding and will, there are in the souls of men two other
inferior powers, one of which desires those pleasing things that sense presents
it; and the other flees from, and avoideth those that look troublesome. In the
barbarous language of the schools, the former is called the concupiscible, and
the latter the irascible. They both were given us by the Creator, for the
benefit of our nature; to serve us, as two goads, which might prick, and move
us, the one to seek, and acquire what is profitable for it; the other, to
repel what is contrary to it. And in the primitive and legitimate constitution
of our being, each of these two powers exactly obeying reason, they had nothing
in their motions, but what was good and just. Afterward sin supervening, by
our fall, did put them into an huge disorder; reason, which had lost its
dominion, leaving them both without conduct, and most commonly favoring their
errors, instead of correcting them. For now desire embraces any gustful thing
that is presented; and anger is stirred up against any thing that seems
displeasing; indifferently, without heeding, or following the judgment of
right reason; whence do proceed the greatest part of the sins and miseries of
the life of man. Accordingly you see, that the principal task of those that
would reform our manners, is to labor above all things in the rectifying of
these two powers of our souls, and for the reducing of them sweetly under the
yoke of reason, that neither of them may ever move its self, but as it
commands, or permits. Our Apostle therefore, having undertaken here, to
give the Colossians, and all other believers, which shall read this Epistle,
the form of that sanctity, to which the discipline of our LORD JESUS CHRIST
does oblige us, took care at the entrance to correct the actions and motions of
the one, and the other of these two powers. He began with concupiscence,
enjoining us, to mortify all that is vicious in it, and religiously abstain
from its principal excesses, which are the ordures of carnal pleasures, and of
avarice. To this end he has minded us of those inevitatable punishments which
this kind of disorders does ever draw down from Heaven upon the children of
rebellion; that if the justness of the thing it self cannot persuade us, at
least the fear of punishment may retain us in our duty. Having thus purged our
concupiscence, he comes next unto wrath; and in the verse that we have read,
does faithfully advise us, to mortify likewise the passions thereof, and all
the evils they produce: that our lives may be not only pure, and honest; but
also innocent, calm, and peaceful, and truly worthy of that JESUS CHRIST, of
whom we make profession, the supreme pattern of sweetness, and benignity. But
now (says he) ye also put off all these things, wrath, anger, maliciousness,
detraction, and dishonest speech out of your mouth.

You plainly see, that these things which he commands us to put off, are five
in all; Wrath, anger, maliciousness, detraction, and dishonest speech. The four
first, are either kinds, or effects of one and the same passion, even that
which we call wrath. The last referrs to somewhat else; nevertheless he ranks
it here with the other, for a reason you shall hear anon. This is the subject
we will treat of in this action, by the will of GOD. Only before our coming to
it, considering that there is nothing superfluous, or useless in this holy
Apostle's language, we must discover in short, the meaning, and reason of those
words with which he begins his exhortation. But now ye also put off all these
things. They depend upon the precedent verse, to which they most evidently
referr. St. Paul did there put the Colossians in mind of their ancient estate,
under the darkness of Paganism, before the Gospel had shone on them. At that
time (said he to them) you wallowed in the ordures of avarice, and luxury, as
well as other children of the generation: Ye walked, and lived in these things.
When therefore he comes to add here; But now put ye off all these things, it is
clear, that he opposes to the time of their fore-past ignorance, the time of
their present knowledge; their faith to their error; their Christianity to
their Paganism; the day to the night, and the light to darkness; and by this
means, he represents to them one reason, to induce them to their duty, drawn
from their present estate. For every thing, as the Wise man shows, has its
time, and every season its business. The actions of the day are of one sort,
and those of the night another; and a thing that becomes childhood, is not
sufferable in riper years. While you were in the darkness of Paganism, that
gross ignorance you lived in, rendered your vices less strange, and more
excusable, says the Apostle. Now, that you live in the light of JESUS CHRIST,
with what excuse can you cover your faults any longer? The laws and customs of
this Divine Kingdom, into which He has called you, are quite different from
those of Paganism, which you have renounced. Be content to have escaped out of
them, and let it suffice you, to have wretchedly lost so many years in the
vices of ignorance, and to have so long fulfilled the will of the Gentiles. Now
that GOD has graciously brought you to quit their errors, quit also their
vices, and henceforth regulate your manners by the light which shines about
you. Have no more commerce with their works, since JESUS CHRIST has brought
you out of their darkness. The Apostle, in another place, explains this reason
more at length, which he does here but touch in a word. The night is passed,
Romans 13.12. 1 These 5.6. 2 Cor. 5.17.
(says he) and the day is come on. Let us therefore cast off the works of
darkness, and put on the armor (that is, the garments) of light; You are all
children of light, and of the day. We are not of the night, nor of darkness.
Old things are passed away; behold all things are become new. Beloved Brethren,
Would to GOD we had this consideration always before our eyes! It would be
sufficient to divert us from the vices of the world, unto which we suffer our
selves to be so easily carried. For if they rendered us guilty of death, when we
practiced them in the darkness of ignorance; of what hells, and maledictions
shall we not be worthy, if we commit them now? Now that we live in the light of
the Gospel? in the communion of Saints and Angels? Who sees not, that if we
live ill, all these great advantages will turn to our misery? and that the
glory we have to know GOD, and His CHRIST, will serve to no end, but the
aggravating the guilt, and augmenting the punishment of our sins? Let us then,
Christians, beware of abusing the gifts of GOD. Let us lead a life worthy of
the condition to which He has called us, and of the age to which He has
advanced us; and following the counsel of His Apostle, now, that we are under
grace, in the kingdom of holiness, let us put off all these base lusts, which
belong only to that estate of error and ignorance which we are come out of.

The word which we have translated, put off, signifies simply, lay by, or,
cast behind you; as when a man throws down a fardle he was laden with; and so
our Bibles have rendered it, in the thirteenth chapter of the Epistle to the
Romans, Romans 13.16.
where the Apostle has used it; Let us cast off the works of darkness. And it
seems, it would not have been amiss to take it so in the place before us;
because it immediately follows, and dishonest speech out of your mouth; in
regard whereof, the word put off is harsh, as you may well perceive. But this
concerns the words only. The sense remains the same still, even that we rid our
selves of all the passions of vice, and cleanse our souls, our senses, and our
mouths of them, and (as the Apostle speaks elsewhere, using again the same
word) cast off all this heavy and killing load of the sins of the world. We may
not forget the word, (also;) ye also put off all these things. Some referr it
to other believers, who endeavor after true sanctification; as if the
Apostle's meaning were, that the Colossians should do the like. But nothing
appearing in the Text, on which such a conceit may be founded, I account it
better to referr it, either to the present state of the Colossians, which
required, that as they had otherwhiles walked in vice, so they should now
renounce it; or (which seems to me more fluent) to the passions whereof he had
spoken. Besides fornication, and covetousness, put off also all these things,
(says he) to wit, wrath, and detraction, of which he comes to speak. For
indeed, friend, if you would be truly a Christian, it is not enough that you
rid your self of one vice. You must also break with all the rest; as for
restoring you to health, it is not sufficient to cure you of one malady; you
must be healed of all, it being clear, that while any one remains upon you, you
may, it is true, be less sick, than you were when you had many others with it;
but for all that, you will not be in health. Accordingly for the being a true
Christian, a disciple of the Spirit, and one of GOD's household, there is need of
being delivered from all vices, and not from some only. If you had mortified in
you the passions of luxury, and avarice; I acknowledge, it is much. But yet it
is not all. Q^it also those of wrath, and detraction, since they alone are
sufficient to destroy you, though you have none other. This is the instruction
the Apostle does here give us; where having ordered us to mortify the former
of those vices, he adds; Cast off also all these things, wrath, anger,
malice, detruction, dishonest speech out of your mouth.

The two first of these five words referr to one and the same passion, which we
do but too well know, and indifferently call, in our tongue, either wrath, or
anger. But in the language the Apostle uses, there is this difference, that
the first of these words (which we have rendered wrath) does properly import a
firm, and fixed desire of revenge. The other, which we have translated anger,
or indignation, is the first trouble which arises in us, when we enter into
choler; that fire, which on a sudden kindles in our spirits, and heating, and
agitating our blood, makes it boil about our hearts. One is the beginning, and
the other the form, and consistency of the passion. One is the first gust of
the storm; the other, the continuation of it. The one enkindles; the other
burns our hearts. The one puts fire to them; the other keeps it in. I confess,
this first boiling up of indignation, is a less evil than formed wrath; but
notwithstanding, it is an evil. Wherefore the Apostle would have us clear our
selves of them both. That malice which he adds in the third place, is also, in
my opinion, a certain kind of anger. I know well, the word is of a great
extent, and signifies in general, that venom, and evil of sin, which is
diffused through any one of our passions, which soever it be. But here, as
frequently elsewhere, I suppose, it is taken for the malignity of anger; when a
mischievous and vindicative stomach broods on its passion inwardly, and feeds
its fire under the ashes, hatching some ill turn for the person it aims at, and
waiting for opportunity to break out. Such a man works under ground, as miners
do, and appears not, till the ruin he prepares for his enemy be fully ready.
His passion is like a stinted fire, that does not burn up until its season. Of
all kinds of anger, there is none more black, and malignant in its self; nor
more noxious, or pernicious in its effects. Wherefore the Apostle calls it
malice, naughtiness, or malignity, particularly; and it seems to be the same
thing he elsewhere calls bitterness, when treating of the same subject, he
says, Let all bitterness, and wrath, and anger, and clamor, and evilspeaking,
Ephesians. 4.3.
be put away from among you, with all malice.

But the Apostle's indication of our duty, is not obscure; and it would be loss
of time to spend any more about explanation of it. The sum of all is, that we
practice it, and labor in the thing, each of us in good earnest. For the evil
that this holy man would take away from among us, is so common with us, as
scarce a person is to be found exempted from it. I confess, it is a great, and
almost incredible calamity, that man, who was created for humanity, and whom
nature seems not to have formed, but for sweetness, and courtesy, and
gentleness, should be so corrupted, as that there is no animal in the world
more fierce, more furious, and more malignant; the poison of serpents, the paws
of lions, and the tusks of wild boars, being not more to be feared, than most
men's choler. I confess also, it is yet a much greater shame, that Christians,
whom the discipline, whom the spirit, and example of their Master, should have
transformed into sheep, and lambs, that is, into creatures without gall, and
void of asperity; that they, I say, should be as much, or more subject to the
furies of this passion, than men of the world, bred up, and fashioned in the
school of vanity and error. But however shameful this default be, we are
constrained, by very evidence of things, to acknowledge, that it is plainly
common among us. There are households, where this Demon of anger governs all at
its pleasure, incessantly troubling the concord of husband and wife, the union
of parents and children, and the peace of masters and servants. There is
nothing done, nothing said, but in choler. You would say of these houses, that
they are the fabled cavern of Eolus, where the winds, that are shut up in it,
are heard night and day, roaring, and tempesting. There is no climate, no sea,
no coast in all the earth, where storms are greater, or more ordinary. For
whereas natural tempests do happen but at some seasons of the year; in these
miserable houses, no calm is ever seen; and there needs but one petty action,
one word, yea, one look, to raise storms of many days continuance: as they say
of certain lakes in the mountains of Bearn: that if one cast but a stone into
them, all the air about becomes turbid, and is immediately filled with winds,
and clouds, which soon break out into lightning, and thunders, and excessive
rain. Yea, some there are, whose passion is so violent, that is cannot be kept
within the enclosure of their houses. It issues out at doors, and without
respect to the faces of them that pass by, without apprehension of scandal,
audaciously shows it self in public, and acts its tragedies in the presence
of all the world. Our angers will sometimes have even these sacred places for
witnesses; in which they are not ashamed to make themselves seen, and to utter
the greatest indignities and provocatious they can form before the eyes of this
holy company, in the sight of GOD, and His Angels. And though this passion has
always had, but too free course among us, I must yet needs say, My Brethren,
that quarrels, injuries, blows, batteries, even to the shedding of blood, were
never seen so srequent, as for a while of late. O GOD! how can it be, that the
Gospel of JESUS CHRIST, which is so assiduously, and so faithfully preached
unto you, should have so little force upon you? should not only fail, to plant
in your souls, that celestial and angelical sanctity, which it had to produce;
but be unable so much as to restrain your carriage within the bounds of some
shamefacedness, and decency? We are Christians, and do things which honest men
of the world, which disciples of heathen Philosophy would not have done. If
they have not more holiness than we; sure they have at least more discretion.

But I forbear complaints, Dear Brethren; though, in truth, if there be any
subject, wherein grief, and emotion, and anger it self may be permitted,
without doubt it might in this. Come we to the thing it self, and condemning
each of us for his own particular, the faults, into which anger has heretofore
transported us, amend for the future, and studiously apply our selves to cure
our souls of this passion. Let us give our souls no rest until we have purged
our hearts of the gall that is in them, and tempered, and seasoned them with the
sweetness and gentleness of our LORD and Savior. When we perceive in our
selves, or in our children, some distemper of the liver apt to breed diseases;
or but some ill habitude, a bending, or other action of body, contrary to the
decency of conversation, we do our utmost to correct it, and there is nothing
but we submit to, for the attaining of our end. Would to GOD we were as careful
to cure inclinations, and passions contrary to an heavenly life. I durst say,
that we should not spend three months in such diligences, but we should, if
not wholly mortify, at least very much mitigate, and tame this fierce and
cruel choler, which causes so many mischiefs in the Church, and in the world.
Though there were nothing but the Apostle's prohibition, which so expressly
orders us to quit, and put off all the kinds of wrath, this alone might
suffice to give us an abhorrence of it. But the ugliness, and venom of the
thing it self, if we consider the same ever so little, will clearly justify
this holy man's injunction; and force us to confess, that though he had said
nothing of it, our own interest would oblige us, to do of our own accord, what
he enjoins us. For behold, I pray, what spoil this passion makes in the souls,
and in the bodies, and in the whole nature of those poor men whom it seizes
on. First, at the entrance, it perturbeth their judgment, and extinguisheth
the light of their understanding; and spreading its poisonous vapors through
all the faculties of their mind, leaves them no clear sight of any thing. In
this agitation they conceive nothing, but ^^th perturbation, and see nothing
but under strange colors. They no longer discern a friend from an enemy; they
forget respect; they lose modesty, and shame. It Is no longer reason that guides
them; but rage, and impetuousness thrust them on, and carry them headlong. They
are no longer men. Choler has transformed them into beasts, or devils. The
very heathen well observed it, saying, as we still read in their books, that
this passion is a short madness, that it differs from madness in nothing, but
that is, it is of less duration. And the Holy Ghost makes the same judgment of
it, when he pronounces in Ecclesiastes, that anger rests in the bosom of
fools; Eccl. 7.9.
and elsewhere He puts among the marks of a prudent discreet man, Prove. 12.16.
that He restrains his wrath, and as he expresses it, covers his ignominy;
justly calling the follies, and extravagancies, which this passion makes us
commit, our ignominy.

For it stops not at that disorder which it creates within us. It soon breaks
out, and discovers its horridness. For that blood which it has heated, and
made to boil about our hearts, rushing forth to the external parts; gives a new
tincture to the countenance, and defacing its natural, and ordinary form, and
covering it, as we may say, with a strange and hideous mask, shows it us quite
different from what it was before. The man has no longer his ordinary eyes. He
has others of fire, and of flame; a look wild, and furious: a visage of an
hundred colors, sometimes red, blue, or violet, sometimes pale and wan,
according to the diverse notions of his fury. His veins swell, the storm within
driving into them with violence, an huge quantity of blood, and spirits. His
voice becomes rough, and loses its natural tone. His speech is confused, and
inarticulate, rushing forth all at once without order, and without distinction.
He biteth his lips, he grinds his teeth, and does a thousand other actions, so
resembling the actions of Demoniacks, as it is easy to see, that the passion
which torments him, is a very demon. If you had seen your selves in this
estate, I do not doubt, but you would have had horror at your selves; and hated
the cause which so vilely disfigured you. But what need any other glass, to see
the image of your anger in, than that which your neighbors passion does daily
present you with? That trouble, and that outragiousness, and that frantic
demeanor, which you cannot without shaking behold in them, is a faithful
pourtraict of your choler. When it seizes you, you are no whit more wise, nor
less frightful, or unsufferable than they.

But as in nature, when the wind and the thunder have roared a while, there
follows hail, and sire, breaking forth from the clouds, and making dreadful
havoc here below: so for the most part does the tempest of anger pass. After
the noise and thunder of a thousand reproaches, and indiscreet, insolent,
ridiculous speeches, in the end it usually comes to blows, which are dealt this
way, and that way, without judgment, or discretion. And when there happens to
be resistance: when one angry man encounters another poffess'd with the same
rage, as not seldom it is: how sad, and shameful is the combat of two such
furies, whom the demon, that guides them, makes to do, and suffer the vilest
and enormousest things he can inspire? Who can utter the other evils which this
execrable passion causes in mankind? It troubles the peace of families, and
states; stirring up seditions and wars in them. It Is it that has invented
duels; and to authorize its rage, makes it pass for a point of honor: so
blinding men, that they will have their honor to consist in the offending of
GOD, and the damning of themselves, by shedding another blood, and hazarding
their own; which undoubtedly is, not only the falsest, but the foolishest, and
senselessest error that ever was. It Is anger that plotteth, and executes the
most part of the treasons, the murders, and assassinates, which are committed
in the world. It Is it that raises clamors. Quarrels and processes are its
workmanship. It breaks the most sacred bonds of civil and domestic society;
and teaches men shamelesly to tread under foot all laws, both divine, and
humane. It instructs them to despise their own welfare, and repose, for having
only the contentment of troubling other men's. There is no vice that carries
men so far, nor that is apt to render them more unnatural. Judge what, and how
cruel its poison is, since David, who otherwise was a person so gentle, and
benign, by but tasting a little of it, became changed in that manner, that he
presently made his men to march, with a resolution to pillage, and massacre an
whole poor innocent family, for only one man's fault. And you know the
inhumanitie which this same passion cast Simeon and Levi upon, causing them to
put an whole City to fire and sword, for one young man's indiscretion, Genesis
49.5, 7.
and folly. Whence it comes, that Jacob their father, even on his deathbed,
calls them instruments of violence, and curses the impudence of their wrath,
and the excess of their fury. But as anger does easily thrust on men, and
precipitate them into all sorts of sins: so is it on the other hand infinitely
contrary to piety and sanctity. It drives the Holy Ghost out of our souls, that
is to say, the Author of all honesty and virtue. For He dwells not in noise,
and outragiousness; And as the Scripture says, in the history of Elijah's
vision, He is not in those great impetuous winds, 1 King. 19.11.
that cleave the mountains, and rend the rocks, and shake the earth. (That is,
in wrathful s^^ls. This Spirit loves peace and sweetness. Accordingly He
appeared to John Baptist, under the form of a dove. By consequence, there is
nothing that drives Him sooner from within us, than the tumult of this
blustering, and tempestuous passion. And indeed, instead of glorifying GOD,
which is the first point of piety, wrath carries men to despite, and blaspheme
Him. It troubles, and overturneth all His service; it being not possible that
a soul should pray unto Him, and invocate Him, Jam. 1.20.
as it ought, while it is in this agitation. And St. James advertiseth us
expressly, that wrath fulfilleth not the righteousness of GOD. It Is an enemy to
charity; which desires the good, and the safety of its neighbor, whereas
wrath wishes, and procures his hurt and ruin. It extinguisheth modesty; it
is incompatible with patience, and humility; it expels consolation, and joy.
For what contentment or joy can there be, amid the tempests of this wretched
passion? which disquiets all things, and keeps our spirits in a continual
agitation? It makes us troublesome, and importune to every one; and instead of
that sweetness and gentleness, which should adorn our manners, it planteth them
with anxiousness, and ill humor, roughness, and rashness, and sourness, as
with so many briers, or nettles, which make all the world to shun our converse,
according to the wise man's counsel, Make no friendship with an angry man,
(says he) and with a furious man thou shall not go. And whereas we ought to be
assable, and accessible, and to attract strangers to us by our sweetness, and
courtesy, and facility, for their edifying; anger, on the quite contrary,
drives away our very friends from us. For where is he, that by his good will,
and without being by some necessity obliged, would live, or converse with a
person subject to this passion? Accordingly you see, that whereas in other
families, every one rejoices at the master's arrival; in the house of an angry
man, on the contrary, nothing is so much dreaded, as his presence; because he
always brings disturbance, and storm with him, where ever he goes.

But if choler be troublesome to others, it does no less incommodate him, whom
it possesses; keeping his spirit in an unquiet, and importune ardor; hindering
all the sweet, and contentful thoughts of his mind; and breeding others, that
are black, and cruel, and tragical. It disturbeth his repose, takes away his
divertisements, eats out his heart, like a viper. And it is not possible, but
that with all this, it should ruin, or at least endamage the health of the
body also; which consisting in a certain equality, and temperature of humors,
and in the regular action, and well ordered moving of the blood, and spirits;
what can be imagined more contrary to it, than this passion, which confounds,
and over-turneth all this inward oeconomie of our bodies, turning, and tossing
our spirits, stirring, and driving our blood hither and thither, with extreme
violence, and rapidity?

Beloved Brethren, These are the characters, and principal effects of this
passion. If reason, wherewith Heaven has adorned your nature, be dear to you;
if the presence of the Spirit of GOD, and His holy image, be of such
consideration with you, as it ought; if you have any affection for the order,
and welfare, and contentment of your neighbors; if you take pleasure in their
society; if you love the exercise of piety, and other virtues; if you desire
to conserve your souls in repose, and your bodies in health; obey the Apostle's
command; pull up, and put away choler out of your hearts. Suffer not so
dangerous a guest to lodge within you; the parent of quarrels, and debates; the
enemy of peace; the cause of hostilities, and murders; the pest of families,
and estates; the storm of the soul; the poison of the understanding; the
blinding of reason; the abhorrence of GOD, and men; the ruin, and hell of
those whom it possesses. Never tell me, that you cannot resist the tyranny of
your choleric temper; or that you did not begin first to be angry; but it was
an injury from your neighbor, that kindled your wrath, and you should pass for
a man of no spirit, if you suffered an affront without emotion, and resentment.
These are but pretext, and vain excuses, which cannot hide the shame of your
fault. For, as for nature, it sorceth no man to wrath. On the contrary, it
loves sweetness, and tranquillity; and it would be a strange thing, that we
could not be men, without having the eagerness, and the transports of animals.
If the Creator had given you choler; He has also given you phlegm to temper it,
and reason to govern it, and the word, and Spirit of His Son, to mortify it.
And as for offenses received from your neighbor, the producing of them is no
justification of your passion: it is a telling us the story, and occasion of it.
Why then, do you imagine, that the LORD never forbids you to be angry, but then
only, when no body gives you cause? If your neighbor does well to be angry
with you, why are you troubled at it? And if he does ill, why do you imitate
him? His having begun, is so far from justifying you, that I doubt, this very
thing will aggravate your crime. For he that casts himself into an evil, into
which he saw another fall, seems less excusable than he. His example, wherein
you might have seen the hideousness of this passion, should have kept you from
it. And, as to the judgment of men; if they be wise, they will never impute it
to you for faint-heartedness, that you have overcome your own animositie; since
it is in this properly, that the highest point of magnanimity consists; it
being clear, that the weakest persons of all, as children, and such as resemble
them, are also ordinarily the most turbulent, and choleric; and that true
generositie is less subject to be moved, and perturbed. But if the opinion of
the vicious, or ignorant, does afright you, sure you have not yet profited much
in the School of CHRIST, where the first lesson is, to despise the fantasies,
and maxims of the world, that we may rest in the laws, and will of GOD.

Lay me then aside all these nullities of excuse, and sedulouslie form your
selves unto that sweetness, and benignity, which GOD requires. Shun all
occasions of anger; and repel them when they occurr. And for the winning of
this ground upon your self, and the being always master of your own spirits,
descend into your selves, and consider well the meannesse of your nature, and
its little worth, that this body, which makes so much noise, is for substance,
nothing but dust and ashes; that this breath, which animates it, is a spirit,
it is true; but full of ignorance, and vanity; and, which is worse, covered with
crimes worthy of hell, if GOD should judge you in rigor. Discharge your selves
of that vain opinion of your nobility, of your riches, of your power, of your
abilities, which puffs you up so much. For, to say true; all this is but a
dream, and a nonentity. Such a consideration would be excellent to keep down
the stirring, and the boiling of your choler, which arises most times from
nothing but our presumption. For esteeming our selves too highly, it seems to
us, that no man can offend us, but it is high treason; and that a daring to
attaque us, is some kind of impiety. But on the other hand, let us also judge
of our neighbors, with more equity, and reason; and think, that in the sight
of GOD, they are as much, or, it may be, more than we; they are the workmanship
of His hand, the pourtraicts of His image, the redeemed of His CHRIST, and the
denisons of His Paradise, as well as we. If we looked upon our selves, and
them, in this manner, we should not be so easily, or so vehemently troubled at
the offenses they do us. Then again, we should lift up our eyes higher, and
meditate the Providence of GOD, and take all the outrages that are done us, as
chastisements, or trials, which beside us by His order. It was this
consideration, that restrained David's anger, on that just occasion for it,
which Shimci's insolency gave him. It is the LORD (said he) who said unto him,
2 Samuel 16.10.
curse David. A brave speech! an holy declaration! If we conform unto it, all
the occasions of perturbation, which men give us, will be so many exercises for
us of patience, and humility. If they revile us, we shall bless them. If they
outrage us, we shall bear with them. If they contemn us, and abase us, we shall
put our selves yet lower, and when they call us, worthless people, we shall
add, yea, we are but dung, and silth. If they reproach us with poverty, or
ignorance; we shall say in surplusage, that we are but worms, conceived, and
born in sin. This would be a profiting by their outrages, and a making other
men's fury, the subject of our virtue, and matter of our praise. It would be
also of use, for the forming of us unto meckness, and patience, to have still
before our eyes, the patience, and meckness of a Moses, of a David, of a
Jeremy, of a St. Stephen, and above all, of our LORD and Savior; Who, when He
was reviled, reviled not again, Pet. 2.23.
and when He suffered, threatened not; leaving us this glorious pattern, that we
might follow His steps. We should too propose unto our selves the example of
GOD Himself; Who is infinite goodness, and love; Who bears His creatures
blaspheamings, and instead of crushing them, causes His Sun to shine on them,
and waters their lands with His rain, inviting them so graciously to
repentance. Which would you rather be? the disciples of this supreamest LORD,
and of His Son, and of His Saints; or of those miserable vassals of sin, whom
the evil spirit does possess? And this again should sweeten our resentments
toward those that offend us, even the remembering, that it is Satan, who
inspires into them all the evil they say of us, or do to us. They are but his
instruments. Mean time we fasten upon them, as if they were authors of the
outrage; doing in this particular, as dogs, who bite the stone that struck
them; and touch not the person that threw it. The man is worthy of our pity.
The devil, that set him on work, does properly deserve our hate. It Is with this
murderer that we should be angry. There it is, that passion would be just. But
if by all these remedies, we cannot prevent, our being sometimes incensed
against our neighbors, at least let us stop when our perturbation boileth up.
Ephesians. 4.26:
Let us not add sin to our emotion, neither let the Sun (as the Apostle speaks)
go down upon our wrath; but hold we for certain, that the shortest angers are
the best.

Now if we can once divest our selves of this wretched passion, we shall by the
same means eradicate together with it, that other of detraction, or evil
speaking, which St. Paul here annexeth in the sequel. For wrath is commonly the
root from which the same does spring, that at least, which the Apostle means
who uses a word that signifies a man's reviling of his neighbor: a thing
scarce ever done, but in choler. But all evil-speaking, whatever origin it
has, is an accursed, and a deadly plant; the production, and workmanship of
the devil, the father of evil-speakers. For his trade (you know) is to
calumniate, to detract, and say evil. They, that do the same, are his
disciples, and it is from his suggestion, and infusion, they derive the poison
of their tongue. And as they have now part in his exercise; so shall they have
one day in his torments; according to that which the Apostle teaches us
elsewhere, namely, that revilers shall not inherit the kingdom of GOD. Indeed,
since Heaven is the inheritance of charity, 1 Cor. 6.10.
and sanctity: what portion in it can detraction pretend to, which is so
contrary to those two Virtues, and gives them at once three deadly wounds?
goring, and outraging by the same blow, both the person of whom it speaks
evil; and the person to whom; and a man's own? It wounds the reputation of the
person of whom it speaks evil; and as much as in it lies, deprives him of his
honor the greatest of our external goods, and such as no riches can equal the
value of. It pollutes the ear of him that hears it, and makes such a poison
glide there-through into his heart, as is apt to extinguish neighbourly
charity; and fill him with suspicions, with aversion and hatred against his
neighbor; even to the raising sometimes of scandalous, and mortal enmities,
and quarrels between them. In fine, the detractor does not spare himself; but
profaneth his own tongue, and abuses it, to the rending and scandalizing of
his neighbor; whereas it was given him by his Creator, to be an instrument of
benediction, and edification. And this seems to be properly the consideration
which the Apostle here had in his eye. Having cleansed our hearts from the
ordures of wrath, and malignity, he also purifieth our mouths, Ephesians. 5.3, 4.
taking out of them what is contrary to their sanctification. Put away (says
he) wrath, anger, maliciousness, evil speaking, dishonest words out of your
mouth. And this is the reason, why unto detraction, he adds dishonest speech;
because it defiles our mouths, and corrupts speech, one of the most precious
presents that Divine bounty has made us; and made, that our mind might use it
for the communicating of its good and holy conceptions unto others, for their
consolation, and edification. Whereas quite contrary, he that makes unhonest
discourses to them, fills their ears with dung, and fouls the purity of their
hearts, and shows the infection of his own: out of the abundance of which his
mouth speaks, as our Savior says. For, as an ill breath does signify some
inward indisposition, and corruption; so filthy, and dishonest talk, discovers
impurity, and unchastity in his soul who makes it. Hence it is, that the
Apostle in another place, expressly puts this among other parts of Christian
sanctity, that our discourses be pure, and chaste, and honest; Fornication, and
all uncleanness, or covetousness, let it not be once named among you (says he)
as becomes Saints. Neither filthiness, nor foolish talking, nor jesting, which
are not convenient. And again elsewhere, Let no corrupt communication proceed
out of your mouth; but that which is good to the use of edifying, that it may
minister grace unto the hearers. Behold, Beloved Brethren, the divine doctrine
of this great Apostle. Conform we our whole life unto the same, serving GOD in
body and Spirit; and sanctifying our hearts and mouths unto His glory, and the
edification of our neighbors; eradicating first out of our souls, all asperity
and bitterness, anger, wrath, and malignity, and planting them with kindness,
and sweetness, and patience toward all men; then purging our tongues also from
the poisons of detraction, and from the filth of all dishonest speech,
consecrating them as precious vessels to the praise of GOD, and the spiritual
utility of men; to the end there be nothing in our carriage, but what is worthy
of the discipline of our LORD JESUS CHRIST; and that after we shall have so
walked in His fear, in all piety, and honesty, He may one day receive us into
His Kingdom of glory, where, without holiness, none shall enter. Unto Him, with
the Father, and the Holy Spirit, be all honor, and praise, to ages of ages.
Amen.

THE THIRTY SEVENTH SERMON ON COLOSSIANS,
CHAP. III. VER. VIII, IX. Verse VIII. Put away also all these things, etc.
Evil speaking, dishonest talk out of your mouth.

IX. Lie not one to another. --


AMong the advantages, which raise our nature above that of animals, speech
does undoubtedly hold one of the first ranks; being, as it is, the interpreter
of the mind, the image of thought, the instrument of communication, the bond of
society, the instruction of ignorance, the consolation of grief, the parent,
and nurse of friendship, and the sweetness of life. If you consider it in its
self, what can be imagined more mavelous than this faculty, which does
represent, by a certain number of sounds, not very different from one another,
the infinite variety of all those things that come into our minds? and bringing
them out of that inaccessible, and impenetrable recess, where our soul
conceives, and forms them within its self, makes them appear abroad, rendering
that in some sort visible, which was altogether invisible; and that corporeal,
which was purely spiritual? I well know, that animals do discover the passions,
and movings of their souls; joy, grief, fear, desire, by certain cries, which
they utter as often as they are surprised with the same. But there is nothing
in this that comes near speech. For the voices of animals do proceed from
nature it self; whereas words of speech are an effect, and an institution of
reason. Those are confused, and inarticulate; these distinct, and formed with
excellent art. Those express nothing but the passions of a sensitive faculty;
these do represent the conceptions of the understanding. But the utility of
speech is no less than the wonder. Without it, assemblies of men would be but
so many herds of cattle, and their reason do them little more service, than if
they had none at all. Whereas now speech brings it forth, and renders it useful
to us, communicating unto many, and almost infinitely multiplying what was at
first but in one soul alone. For as a seal imprinteth the form that is cut on
it, upon all the drops of wax to which you apply it: so Speech gliding, through
the ear, into the hearts of all that hear it, engraveth on them that image
which it carries with it, of the mind and will of the speaker. It guides, and
keeps up the negotiations, the treaties, the alliances, the arts, the sciences,
and the disciplines of men; and is the soul of their commerce, and of their
conversation, and in a word, of all their humanity. It Is by it that superiors
make themselves to be obeyed, and inferiors obtain the assistances they need;
since it is it, that makes both the wills of the one, and the necessities of the
other, to be understood. It Is it that unites the souls of equals, and discovers
to the one, and the other, what each has of reason, and wisdom in himself, or
of sympathy, and aversion for others. It transfuseth the souls of the one into
the others, pouring into them their sentiments, their reasonings, their
inventions, and their affections.

But as the abuse of the excellentest things, is much more dangerous than that
of things mean, and common; so it is plain, that the efficacy of speech is not
less pernicious, when applied to evil; than useful, and beneficial, when
employed to good. It is as powerful to destroy, as to edify; to infect, as to
cure; and is equally capable of communicating unto men health, and sickness,
life, and death, as the springs and intentions be, from which it is dispensed.
Speech being of so great importance in the life of men, it is with great reason,
that the Apostle has taken care, in the rule he here gives us for our
deportment, to cleanse it of the vices which sin has sowl'd it with. You may
remember, that in the precedent text, he purged it of the poisons of
detraction, and of pollutions contrary to honesty, commanding us to put away
evilspeaking, and dishonest talk, out of our mouth. Now, to the end it may be
thoroughly pure, and legitimate, and truly worthy of a Christian mouth, he
takes out of it, lying also, the most shameful of its defilements, and that
which is most directly contrary to its natural constitution. Lie not (says he)
one to another. And because, in the precedent action, shortness of time
permitted us not, to say all that we desired, upon the two former vices of
speech, we will resume that discourse now, with your permission; and treat, if
the Lord please, of all those three sins of the tongue, which the holy Apostle
has here forbidden us; first, evil-speaking; then in the second place,
filthiness contrary to honesty; and thirdly, lying. May it please GOD to guide
us in this discourse, and so purify our lips with the Divine fire of that
heavenly coal, wherewith He sometime touched those of a Prophet of His, that
henceforth our mouths may be so many living sources of benediction, and
edification, from whence shall issue none but good, and innocent, pure, and
honest, sincere, and veritable speeches, unto His glory, and our neighbors
benefit, and our own salvation; Amen.

The Apostle, in the original of this text, makes use of the word, blasphemy,
to signify that which we have rendered evil-speaking. For though that term, in
our vulgar tongue, does import words spoken to the offense of GOD, when things
unworthy of His greatness, and His holiness, and truth, are attributed unto
Him, or those that belong unto Him, are denied of Him; or when that which is
proper to His Divinity, is communicated to creatures; yet so it is, that in
Greek, that is, in the language the Apostle speaks, the word, blasphemy, does
generally signify any offensive, injurious speech, whomsoever it concerns,
whether GOD, or Angels, or men. The truth is, this word, if we respect its
origination, or etymology, does simply denote, an hurting of the reputation,
an offending of some one's honor; as the Greek Grammarians have observed.
Whence it comes, that St. Paul uses it, not here only, but also elsewhere, to
signify such revilings, and detractions, as are directed properly unto men,
and not unto GOD; as when he says, in the first Epistle to the Corinthians; We
are blamed, and do entreat; it is in the original, 1 Cor. 4.13.
we are blasphemed: And when he enjoins Titus, to admonish the faithful, that
they speak evil of no man: It is word for word in the Greek, that they
blaspheme no man. Tit. 3.2.
That evil speaking, which he does in this place so severely banish from all
Christians mouths, is a vice so common, that no one can be ignorant of it. The
world is full of it, and the Church it self beholds but too many examples of
it, in those that make profession of her communion. But that no man may deceive
himself, it will not be impertinent to represent the principal kinds of it. For
as the pestilence is not all of a sort, but great diversity is found in the
poisons it comprehends, and in the manner after which they seize on humane
bodies; so is it with evil-speaking. It Is a poison, that has under it many
different species; a mischief that puts forth diverse branches from one and the
same root of bitterness. If you regard the form of it; one smites uncovered,
another deals its blows in secret: the former revileth openly, and rends the
honor of a neighbor in his presence; the latter manageth its self subtly,
and blackens his reputation in private, with so much the more effect; for that
it is in a place, where no person appears to ward off its blows. If you
consider the causes, and occasions of the thing; some are pushed on to it by
choler, others by hatred; some by a close envy, the most by a secret malignity
of nature. In fine, if you respect their design; some do it to avenge
themselves of offenses, which they believe they have received; others to
satisfy their naughty humor; and a third sort, merely to pass away the time.
It may well be, that the Apostle here did particularly aim at open
evil-speaking, which being pressed by the violence of anger, breaks out into
revilings; since it is of this passion expressly, that He spoke in the precedent
words. Yet we may not imagine, that he permits us any one of the kinds of
this evil. For what difference soever there be in other respects, this is
common to them all, that they offend our neighbor, and deprive him, either in
whole, or in part, of the preciousest of his goods, that is, his reputation. If
it be then a mortal sin to rob a man of his money, or his movables, or his
lands; how much more grievous is his crime, who attempts to bereave him of his
honor, which is more to be esteemed than life it self? To which must be added,
that goods may be recovered, and are actually recovered very often. But it is
extremely difficult, and ordinarily impossible for persons, whose reputation
evil speaking has violated, to repair the loss. And though the wound, which an
evil-speaker has given, be cured, yet it is scarce ever so well and perfectly
done, but there remains a skar still.

But besides reputation, which evil-speaking does properly attake, it most
commonly takes away some of those other goods that depend upon it; yea,
sometimes life its self. For, both the affection of our friends, and the
edification we afford our neighbors, being consequents of the esteem they have
for us; who sees not, that the blows of a slanderous tongue do deprive us of
the one and the other of these good things, in ruining that good opinion which
was had of us? And if the person that takes in the poisons of evil-speaking, be
potent, and in some high authority; how unspeakable are the miseries, and
mournful effects which it produces? It was this accursed operatrix, that
e're-while ruined David with King Saul, and drew upon him a long, and a cruel
persecution. It Is it, that in the Courts of Princes, and in the families of
private men, does daily cause a thousand and a thousand disorders; that
dissolveth the best friendships; that sows distrusts; that enkindleth
hatreds; that embroileth quarrels; that oppresses the innocent; that renders
the fairest virtues hideous, and the greatest abilities suspected, often
depriving Church and state of the exquisite fruits that might be reaped from
their being employed. And the Psalmist, to represent this pernicious efficacy
of evil-speaking, tells us, that its detractions are sharp arrows shot by a
strong man, Psalm. 120.
and coals of Juniper; and Solomon his son, in like manner, compares the
calumniator, to an hammer, to a sword, and a sharp arrow; both the one and the
other, meaning, that there is in nature neither metal nor fire, nor weapon more
dangerous than the tongue of a slanderer. It Is of it we must properly
understand what the Apostle St. James says of the tongue in general, namely,
Jam. 3.6, 7.
that it is a fire, yea, a world of iniquity, which defiles the whole body,
and sets on fire the course of nature, and is set on fire of hell: that it is
an unruly evil, full of deadly poison.

But setting aside the horrible effects which evil-speaking produces in all
societies of men, its malignity and unrighteousness appear of themselves. For
whereas the LORD obliges us, to consider the good qualities and perfections
wherewith He has endowed His creatures, to the end we might praise and esteem
them, and imitate them, to His glory, and our own edification; the Evil-speaker
looks upon nothing but their defects and vices. And as vultures fly over fair
meadows, and flowery and sweet smelling fields, and alight only on dunghills,
and places full of carrion, and infection; and as flies, without touching at
the sound parts of the body, do fasten only upon sores, and ulcers; so the
Evil-speaker, without so much as noting what is graceful and happy in the lives
of men, falls upon that which is weak and sickly in them. If they have chanced
to stumble (as is very ordinary in this infirmness of our nature) thereon it is
that he fixes; therein he takes pleasure, this he gladly discovers, and
publishes, amplifying and exaggerating it with his infernal rhetoric. It Is by
that he knows persons; it is by that he marks them out, and describes them; as
bad Painters, that represents nothing so exactly, as the moles and skars of the
faces they draw, the deformity of the nose, the bigness of the lips, and other
like marks which they have from the birth, or by some accident. Charity
covers sins, and forgets them. The evil-speaker divulgeth them, and
remembers them perpetually, and takes out of the grave what had been buried in
oblivion, and brings it to light again. He loves ordures, and feeds on nothing
but poisons, and immundicities. And for this end, he has always a sufficient
store of such provision by him. His memory is a magazin, or rather a sink,
where he heaps up the vilinies, the sins, and the scandals, not of his own
neighborhood, or his own quarter only, but of the whole City; yea, of the
whole state, if possibly he may. It is from this diabolical treasury, that he
fetches the subject of his sweetest thoughts, and most pleasing
entertainments. These things are his perfumes, and his dainties. But yet he is
not content to rake together, and lay open the ill he finds in his neighbors.
He is so malignant, that he feigneth more, and fancyeth some where there is
none. He spreads it abroad for true, and that he may persuade others of it,
he artificially colors his fictions, giving out shows for truths, and
shadows for substances. He so bitterly hates all good that where he sees any
he bespatters it, and denigrates it, and disguiseth it, and makes it pass for
evil. And, as the snail fowleth the luster of the fairest flowers with its
sordid slime: just so this bad man, by the poisons of his malignity, defameth
the most grateful virtues, and makes vices of them. He takes valor for a
temerity, and patience for a stupidity; justice for cruelty, and prudence for
cra^^^in^ss. Him that is liberal, he calls prodigal; and the frugal person,
covetous. If you be religious, he will not fail to blame you of superstition;
And if you be ^ree, and generous, and far from superstition, he will accuse you
of being profane. In fine, there is no virtue, nor perfection, but this naughty
man has found an infamous name for, taken from the vice that borders next upon
it. Unto this iniquity he usually adds a base, and black piece of treachery,
when to make his poisons be the more easily swallowed, he mischievously sugars
them, beginning his detractions with a preface of praise, and with an affected
commendation of the persons whom he has a mind to revile; protesting at his
entrance, that he loves, and respects them; to the end he may create a
belief, that it is nothing but the mere force, and evidence of truth, that
constrains him to speak evil of them. He kisseth his man at meeting, and then
murders him, as Joab sometime did: he crowns his victims, before he kills
them. A fraud, that for all its being ordinary, is nevertheless the blackest,
and the most malignant that can be.

After these things, we need not wonder, that GOD and his Saints have abhorred
Evil-speaking, and universally treated it, as one of the most detestable vices
in the world. As for our LORD, He forbad it expressly to Israel of old, in those
words, Thou shall not go up and down detracting among thy people. Lev. 19.16.
Exodus 23.1.
Thou shall not raise a false report. And for Saints, David protests, he will
cut off the man that slandereth his neighbor privily; and among the qualities
he gives the persons that shall dwell in GOD's holy hill, he says
particularly, that such a one backbites not with his tongue, Psalm. 15.3.
nor raises up an ill report against his neighbor. He curses this kind of
people, and makes such vehement imprecations against them, in the 109 Psalm,
as we do not find he ever used the like against any sort of sinners. And truly,
with great reason. For indeed, there is no vice more malignant, or upon which
the Devil's marks are more express. Prosit seduceth the thief; pleasure
precipitateth the fornicator, and adulterer: the honor of the world makes the
murderer commit his sin. The evil-speaker can allege no such thing; it being
evident, that he reaps from his vice no fruit at all. There redounds thence to
him, neither honor, nor profit, nor pleasure. What will it give thee, Psalm.
120.3.
(says the Psalmist to him) and wherein will that tongue advance thee, which
is but deceit? as if he had said, that he could draw no advantage from it, and
that by wounding, and wronging others, he got nothing for himself. It Is a mere
sin, a thing that has no allurement, or temptingness to excuse it; affording
him that commits it, nothing but the pleasure of the Devil, who loves evil for
its own sake, and seeks no other satisfaction in sin, but the having committed
it. Accordingly you see, that detraction, and calumny, is the proper exercise
of the Devil. At the beginning, he slandered GOD unto man, inducing him to
believe falsely, that GOD envied his perfection. He slandereth men unto GOD,
mischievously accusing in His presence, the service they do him, of hypocrisy,
and impiety, as you see in the history of Job: It Is for this he compasses the
earth, and traceth incessantly too and fro. He takes all this pain, only to
find food for his evil-speaking, and have matter of calumniation. And it is by
this character, St. John describes him in the Apocalypse, where he calls him,
the accuser of our brethren, that accuses them night and day before our GOD.
There are then no sinners that do more resemble this unclean and accursed
spirit, than Evil-speakers. Their vice, and the pleasure they take in it, is
the true and genuine image of Satan. Certainly the Apostle accounted this sin
so horrible, and so contrary to the legitimate and natural constitution of men,
that he expressly puts detraction, and evil-speaking, among the fruits of that
reprobate sense, Romans 1.30.
to which the Gentiles were delivered up, because of their impiety. And else
where he would have us to hold evil-speakers for anathematized, and
excommunicate persons, with whom we should have no commerce; but drive them
even from our tables, as infamous harpyes, that would polute our repasts. I
write to you (says he) that if any one, 1 Cor. 5 11.
who is called a brother, be an evil-speaker, you keep no company with him, and
not so much as eat with such a one. And as he banisheth them from our communion
in this world, 1 Cor. 6.10.
so does he expressly enroll them among those, who shall have no part in the
kingdom of GOD, in the world to come.

Flee then, Beloved Brethren, flee this mortal pest. Let not the bad examples,
and vain opinions of the world, which esteems and caresseth it, deceive you.
It is not by the examples, nor maxims of this generation, that a Christian
ought to shape his conversation. What disguisement soever be but upon it, the
intrinsic nature of this vice cannot be changed. The good companies it is
found in, the audience that is given it, the colors it is farded with, do not
hinder, but that after all, this Evil-speaking is blasted, and accursed by our
LORD, detested and interdicted by His holy Ministers; the image, and character
of Satan; the daughter of envy, or hatred, or anger, or malignity; the mother
of scandals; the incentive of discords, the scourge of all humane societies,
and at last an infallible inheretrix of hell. Flatter not your selves, ye
evil-speakers. Acknowledge the horridness of your vice, and renounce it
betimes; and know, that otherwise you can have no part either in the grace or
glory of CHRIST JESUS. Do not tell me that you say nothing but what is true. I
doubt it much; it being difficult, that an evil-speaking person should tell any
story of his neighbors, and not add something of his own. Yet suppose it be
so, and that the persons you rip up, are in truth guilty of all the turpitude
you impute to them. You hugely deceive your selves, if you think to be exempted
from evil-speaking thereby. 2 Samuel 22. Mar. 14.58.
Doeg reported to Saul, that he saw David with Ahimelech the Priest. And the
Jews testified, that the LORD JESUS had said, He would raise the Temple again
in three days. The one, and the other was true; and yet the Scripture
condemns both Doeg, and those Jews, as very calumniators, and false
witnesses; and that justly; for that their design, in saying such things, was
to offend the reputation of those they spoke of, and to hurt them. And in
general, whoever says evil of his neighbor, is guilty of evil-speaking,
though what he says of him be true, if he say it without necessity, in place,
at times, unto persons, where there is no need he should say it. To have
discovered a fault, is an evil; seeing fear of scandal obliges us to hide it,
and to wound, by so doing, the reputation of the faulty, is yet a further evil;
it being evident, that except his salvation, or public edification do compel
us, we ought not to awaken up, nor stir such things. Neither again excuse you
your selves, by saying, that it is not a design to harm your neighbor, nor any
hatred you bear him, that moves you to speak amiss of him; but what you say, is
only to pass the time, for want of better discourse. Wretched man, how would
you deal with him, if you hated him, since having not, as you say, any ill will
for him, you forbear not to rend him in this manner? Your soul must needs be
infinitely malign, since it makes a pastime of offending a person, whom you
hate not. As if a man, and he too a Christian, had not matter enough to employ
his tongue, in celebrating the wonders of GOD, and perfections of his
creatures; and as if it were not much a greater pleasure to speak of good than
of evil. Renounce then henceforth this unworthy and infamous exercise, and
leave it to Devils, to whom it does belong, and to those baser and more impure
spirits, which relemble them. Put away all evil speaking out of your mouth, and
consecrate your tongues to the blessing of GOD, and the edifying of men.
Remember that excellent rule, which the LORD has given us; All the things ye
would that men should do to you, do ye also unto them. There is not a person of
you, but holds it for a grievous offense to be slandred and ill spoken of; take
heed then of treating others in that manner; cover their defects, if they have
any; hide their faults, if they have chanced to commit any: considering that
you are not exempted neither, and have need of the charity you exercise toward
them. Busy your selves in curing your own evils, rather than in discovering
other men's; and be more solicitous to correct your own defaults, than curious
to learn or publish theirs. Seek your contentment in your own good deeds, and
not in the evils of others. But as it is not sufficient a man does not steal,
he must not conceal another theft neither: So it is not sufficient, my
Brethren, that we forbear evil speaking our selves; we must not so much as
entertain the evil speakings of others; keep we our ears as well as our mouths,
pure and free from this poison; defend we the absent, when they are ill spoken
of in our presence; favor their honor, and if we cannot otherwise do it, at
least declare we by our looks and countenance, how troublesome detractive
discourses are unto us. This is often sufficient to silence them: For the Vice
is so weak, and so shameful in its self, that to beat it down, we need but put
it back. And this is the Wise man's meaning, when he says, That as the
Northwind drives away rain, Pro. 25.23.
so does an angry countenance a backbiting tongue.

But having spoken of Detraction, it is time to come to the other Vice, of
which the Apostle here would purge our mouths. Put away (says he) dishonest
talk out of your mouths. This is so shameful a filthiness, that it has no
place in the manners of the people of the World, who have ever so little
honesty and gravity. And I cannot enough wonder at the extravagancy of the
ancient Stoic Philosophers, who maintaining virtue and honesty as to other
things, did nevertheless permit their wise man to utter the most unseemly
matters, shamelesly and without any cover at all. It is certain, that this
licentiousness of the tongue cannot come but from the uncleanness of the heart;
a soul chaste and truly holy, having all images of filthiness in abhorrence. And
as this impurity of speech arises from corruption, so it evidently tends
thereto, infecting the minds and affections of them that hear it. And to this,
that Greek Proverb, which the Apostle elsewhere mentions, must be particularly
referred, That evil words corrupt good manners. 1 Cor. 1^.
For such discourses bring into our spirit filthy and abominable images, which
being received, do make impression, and growing familiar with us, do by little
and little take away the shame and horror we ought to have at dishonest things.
I say as much of the unclean and perverse artifice of those who hide the
impurity of their thoughts under covered speeches, and of a double meaning. For
it is these sayings that sink deepest into the imagination, and do so much the
more harm, in that they are closer and more witty. And here I cannot forbear
complaining of their abuse also, who have administered auricular confession as
they call it, among Christians, since it has been in use. For these men, under
pretext of informing themselves of the state of the souls of those whom they
confess, do often make strange questions to them, and such as ill accord with
modesty: Wherein they commit two faults; the one is, that contrary to the
Apostles express prohibition, both here and elsewhere, they license themselves
to say and hear dishonest things, changing the tongue of Ministers of JESUS
CHRIST, which should be nothing but sanctity and honesty, into a vessel of
dung; and their ear into a public sink of all the filth of a Parish. The other
is, that by such demands they open peoples hearts to Vice, and most dangerously
put them in mind of evils, which they perhaps would never have thought on: They
are come so far in this matter, that not content with corners, and the secret
of their confessionals, they have also published great Books upon this Subject,
which the most shameless would be hardly able to read without blushing. Such
among others, is that one of a Spanish Jesuit, P. Aurelius.
in which he has heaped together so many ordures, yea some until now unheard
of in the world; that other Doctors of the Roman Communion have been forced to
make public declaration of the indignation and horror that this infamous
Volume has caused in them; though other-ways, both the writing and the Author
be infinitely esteemed by those of his own order. As for us, my Brethren, who
are not in truth the companions (as these Gentlemen qualify themselves) but
the servants and Disciples of the LORD JESUS, let us form our mouths by the
example of his most holy One, and by the rules of his Apostle. Let there be
nothing in our language, but what is honest, and grave, and seasoned with the
salt of grace; worthy of the ear, not only of chastest Virgins, but of Angels
themselves: For likewise it is for this use, that the LORD has given us a
tongue, not to pollute the ears of our neighbors, not to teach them evils they
knew not, or oblige them to discover to us what they know; but indeed to edify
them, to glorify the name of GOD, to show forth his wonders, and speak that
language in this world, which we shall eternally speak in that holy and
glorious Jerusalem on high, into which no impurity nor filthiness shall enter.

There remains the third Vice, of which the Apostle would purge our speech,
that is Lying; a Vice that has greatest extent of all the rest, and such as
men slip into with most facility: Lie not (says he) one to another. Truth is
properly a correspondence and conformity of our conceptions, with their object;
when the image we form of it in our minds, is such as the thing it self, to
which it has relation; as when we believe that a thing is or is not, which
accordingly is or is not indeed. But truth of speech, to which Lying is
opposed, is measured by our conception, and not by the thing which is the
object of it; that is, our speaking is true, when it accords not with the thing
it self immediately, but with the conception we have of it. Whence it happens
not seldom, that a man speaks a thing which is false, yet does not lie; and on
the contrary, sometimes lies, though what he speaks be in it self true; as
when Jacob said, that his son Joseph was dead, he lied not, because his tongue,
in what it uttered, accorded with his heart, though the thing spoken were not
true; and on the contrary, if he had said, against the belief of his soul, that
Joseph had been alive, he had lied, since he had spoken contrary to his own
thought; though what he had said in that case, would have been in it self true.
Man, being a reasonable creature, is bound to endeavor, that he may have no
opinion or sentiment in any thing, but what is veritable, and conform to the
being of the thing; heedfully keeping himself from being surprised, and from
falling into any error: yet this is not properly the duty which the Apostle
requires of us here. As indeed we must acknowledge, that through the weakness
of our apprehensions and understanding, and amid that infinity of false
appearances, which things or men continually present us with, it would be very
difficult, not to say impossible, to preserve our selves from all error, and
never be deceived in common life. The Apostle demands of us a very easy and
just thing, even that we never speak any thing but what we believe to be true;
and that in the commerce we have with men, our language be sincere and
faithful, without fraud and without fallacy, naturally representing without,
what we conceive within; and that it never betide us, to say one thing, and
think the contrary. The Scripture teaches us in a multitude of places, that
GOD hates lying more than any other Vice; Prove. 12.22.
and the Wise man says expressly, That false lips are an abomination to him;
the Psalmist also, among other marks he gives the Inhabitants of the Hill of
GOD, Psalm. 15.2.
puts this for the very first, That they walk uprightly, and work
righteousness, and speak the truth, as it is in their heart; and elsewhere he
speaks peremptorily, Psalm. 5.7.
That GOD will destroy them that speak leasing. In sum, S. Rev. 21.8.
John proclaims in his Revelation, That the portion of all liars shall be in
the lake that burns with fire and brimstone. Whence you see, that question
here is not of a matter of decency, but of a necessary duty, which we may not
fail of, without incurring perdition. The justice of it is so evident, that the
Sages of the Pagans themselves have acknowledged it; leaving us in their Books,
a thousand notable intimations of that roundness, and simplicity, and truth,
which a man of honor and probity should inviolably observe in his whole life:
For speech having been given us by nature, or to say better, by the God of
nature, to the end we might signify and declare unto our neighbors, what we
have in our hearts; it is clear, that an abusing it, to signify what we do not
think, is a violation of the Law, and institution of Nature. And all true and
generous courages, have this sentiment so imprinted on their souls, that they
cannot endure double persons; whence it comes, that the Prince of Heathen Poets
makes his Hero say, He hates no less than the gates of Hell, the man that says
one thing, and hides in his heart another. Lying is a slavish Vice, that
proceeds either from baseness of spirit, or from badness of conscience, or from
vanity. Accordingly you see, that it is extremely odious among all noble and
civilized Nations; and particularly in ours of the French, where you know there
is no outrage that is accounted more grievous, and more sensible, than to charge
a man with lying. He that has suffered it without justifying himself, is held
to be a man lost in honor, not among Gentlemen only, but even among people of
meaner birth; this generous and veritable sentiment having been left us from
hand to hand by our Ancestors, that lying is an infamous thing, and the mark of
a soul either wicked or witless; and that he, who is not ashamed of it, will
make conscience of nothing; as on the contrary, truth is the foundation of all
virtue and honesty. But the Scripture shows us in two clauses, what we should
think of it; when on one hand it names the Devil, the Father of lies, and on
the other, calls the LORD the GOD of truth, and his eternal Son, the truth it
self. A consideration that renders the temerity of those so much the more
unsufferable, who stiling themselves the companions of JESUS, have not shamed
to favor lying, by that Doctrine of Equivocations, and mental reservations, as
they call them, Ephesians. 4.20.
which they have published and practiced in these last times. But ye have not
so learned CHRIST, if so be ye have heard and been taught by him, as the truth
is in JESUS. He hates all lying and obliquity, in what manner soever they be
disguised; and would not have his truth dishonored by begging from its enemies
hand, the help it needs; that is, he would no ways have fraud and fallacy
employed on his behalf; his providence is potent enough to defend it, without
such infamous succor. It Is a maxim of his Apostles, that we must not do evil,
that good may come thereof. Lying is an evil, contrary to the Law of God, and
the Ordinances of nature. There cannot therefore be any reason, that gives us a
dispensation to commit it.

Thus you see, beloved Brethren, that which we had to say unto you, concerning
these three Vices, which the Apostle does here banish from the mouths of
Christians, Evil-speaking, Impurity and Lying. Let us obey his holy Doctrine,
and remembering that according to S. James; He that offends not in word, the
same is a perfect man; let us diligently purge ours from all these ordures, and
so govern our tongue, that it may not speak, but of wisdom, nor pronounce, but
of judgment; and that all our discourses may be full of goodness, and of
honesty, and of truth, so as our LORD and Savior, who is charity, purity and
sovereign truth, may own us for his, and after the combats and trials of this
life, give us part one day in the peace and triumphs of the next; receiving us
into the society of those pure and holy Spirits, who live on high in the
Heavens with him, to bless him for ever; as unto him, with the Father and the
holy Spirit, the only true GOD, belongs all honor and glory. Amen.

THE THIRTY EIGHTH SERMON ON COLOSSIANS,
CHAP. III. VER. IX, X, XI. Verse IX. Having put off the old man with his deeds.

X. And having put on the new man, which is renewed in knowledge, after the
image of Him who created him.

XI. Where there is neither Greek, nor Jew; neither circumcision, nor
uncircumcision; neither Barbarian, nor Scythian; nor bond, nor free: but CHRIST
is all, and in all.


DEAR Brethren; I know, and freely confess, that being called this day, through
the goodness of GOD, to celebrate the memory of the death and passion of our
LORD JESUS CHRIST; this sacred chair is obliged, for the fitting you to so
important an action, to entertain you with things that relate to this great and
divine mystery. But as I acknowledge, that this is properly the service in
which I should employ this hour; so I conceive, that these words of the Apostle
S. Paul, which you have heard, and which occur in the chain of our ordinary
Text, are very suitable to that principal subject of our exhortation. For this
putting off of the old man, and this putting on of the new, of which they tell
us, are both the one, and the other, the true effect of this death of our LORD,
the remembrance whereof we solemnize. If JESUS had not dyed, we should never
have put off the old man, nor put on the new; since that without His death, we
could not have had the pardon of our sins, nor the grace of the Holy Spirit,
nor the hope of immortality; all which are things absolutely necessary to the
devesting us of the old man, and to the revesting us with the new. Whereas now
JESUS CHRIST dying on the Cross, has there pierced through, and fastened up our
old man; and by the virtue of His sufferings, created and formed in us another
new man, as different from the old, as Heaven from the Earth, and Life from
Death. Therefore the Apostle does elsewhere conclude, from the death of JESUS
CHRIST, the death of the old man in us, and the life of the new. 2. Cor.
5.15.17.
If one died for all, (says he) then are all dead, and He died for them, that
they might live henceforth in Him, and no more unto themselves. If any man be
in CHRIST, he is a new creature. And in another place he says expressly, Romans
6.6, 11.
that our old man was crucified with CHRIST, that the body of sin might be
destroyed, and that we being dead with Him, might live to GOD in Him. Thus the
death of CHRIST is at once, the destruction of the old man, and the production
of the new; the one was abolished by it, and the other created. This flesh of
the mystical Lamb, which GOD to day presents us, has slain our flesh, and
enlivened our spirit; and from that Divine blood of His, wherein the old man is
drowned, is issued forth the new, created in righteousness, and holiness: like
as heretofore, the Israelite was seen to come, alive, and glorious, out of that
very gulf of the Red Sea, wherein the Egyptian lay sunk, and overwhelmed.

But oh new wonder! as our LORD's flesh and blood is the principle, that gives
being to our new man; so is it his nutriment. And as in nature, things are
sustained by the same means that they were set up; so in grace, the new man is
conserved, and increased, and strengthened by the same blood of JESUS CHRIST,
out of which he was formed. And that heavenly meat, and divine drink, which you
shall anon receive from the hand of GOD, are not given you, but for the
feeding, and perfecting of your new man. I go yet further, and durst say, that
this new man, whom the Apostle would at this time vest you with, is none other,
rightly considered, than the same JESUS CHRIST, whom we have put on at Baptism,
and whom we receive in the Supper, propagated (if I may so speak) and
pourtrayed in us by His own virtue; who transformeth us into the likeness of
His death and resurrection by reason, that entering into, and dwelling in us, He
forms in us a man like Himself; that as He did, dies unto the flesh; and
with him, leaves in his sepulcher all his old life, as an infirm, and useless
offal; and being enlivened with Him, and adorned with His light, and endowed
with an heavenly nature leads thenceforth a spiritual, and glorious life. Thus
you see, that the body of CHRIST was crucified, and His blood shed; and that
the one and the other are given us in the Supper, to divest us of the old man,
and vest us with the new. This is the end and fruit of all that mystery, unto
the participation whereof you are this day called. Make account then, that the
best preparation you can bring unto it, is a serious meditating of what the
Apostle does here inform us. He exhorted the Colossians before, to mortify the
vices of their flesh, and all the infamous passions of that Pagan life, they
had sometime led in the darkness of their ignorance; as fornication,
covetousness, anger, evil speaking, impurity of language, and lying. Now to cut
up these and other like vices by the root, and to comprise all the parts of
sanctification in few words, he commands us to put off the old man with his
deeds, etc.

There are others, that take these words for a reason of his precedent
exhortation, drawn from that estate which JESUS CHRIST had put them into by
Baptism; as if his meaning were, that they are obliged to renounce the vices he
had been forbidding them; since in their Baptism, they did put off the old man,
on which these vices depend, and of which they make up a part; and put on the
new, which is contrary to them, and incompatible with them. Whether you
understand it thus, or take the text simply for a prosecution of the precedent
command, showing us, that for the due execution of it, we must perform what is
here added, all amounts to well-nigh the same sense. And for the right
comprehending of it, we will treat, if GOD permit, of the three points, which
offer themselves in the Apostle's words; first, of the old man, which we must
put off; secondly, of the new, which we must put on, and the form it consists
in, to wit, a renewing in knowledge, after the image of Him who created it: and
in fine, of that indifferency of nations, and ceremonies, and conditions, which
the Apostle affirms in this matter, requiring nothing in reference to it, but
CHRIST, who is the all of it, and in all. May it please GOD so to inlighten our
understandings for the right discerning of this saving truth, and touch our
hearts to love, and practice it, effectually sanctifying us by the virtue of
His word, and precious Sacrament, that we may all go out hence new men,
conformed in purity, and charity, and every virtue, to that LORD JESUS, in
whose name, and communion, we, by His grace, do glory.

The Scripture sets before us the person of Adam, and of JESUS CHRIST, as two
different stocks of mankind, or, as it were, two opposite heads, or principles
of this nature, which we call humane. They have this in common, that both the
one and the other has a great number of children, which are issued from them,
and do depend upon them; and that each of them does communicate to his own, his
being, his form, his life, and his condition, imprinting his image on them,
which every of them bears according to the quality of his extraction. They
differ, or to say better, are opposite, in that the one is earthy, the other
heavenly; the one has a carnal, vicious, infirm nature, full of ignorance and
error, and subject to death, and the curse. The other has a spiritual, holy
nature, full of light, and wisdom, acceptable unto GOD, immortal, and
inheriting eternity. The one propagateth in his children, sin, and death. The
other communicates to his righteousness, sanctity, and life. The one transmits
his nature by a carnal generation; the other imparteth his to his descendents,
by a spiritual generation, and such an one, as has nothing in common with
flesh and blood. The nature of the one is depraved by the empoisoned breath of
the old Serpent, which creeps on the ground, and lives on the dust thereof.
That of the other has been formed, and conserved by the Eternal, and
celestial Spirit. It Is for these reasons, that the Scripture calls simply,
the one, and the other of these two persons, man, because of their advantage,
and their holding the first and principal rank, each of them in his kind. For
the same reason again, it gives the one and the other of these two persons, the
name Adam; because they are each of them, the Adam, that is to say, the Father,
and author of his order; the one of sin, and death; the other of righteousness,
and life. But to distinguish them, it calls the one, 1 Cor. 15.47.
the first man, and the first Adam; the other, the second man, and the last
Adam. The former, him, who having corrupted himself by his disobedience, has
also infected us, leaving us vice, and the curse for an inheritance. The
latter, Him, who having repaired our sault by His obedience, has given us
righteousness, sanctity, and immortality. Adam is styled, the first man, and
JESUS CHRIST the second; for that the one's corrupting preceded the other's
repairing, and reforming. Adam first defiled, and poisoned his nature by sin;
and then JESUS CHRIST manifested His full of grace and truth. It Is upon the
same consideration, that Adam is called the old man, and JESUS CHRIST then ne.
Taking in withal, that the first Adam shall be destroyed; whereas the second
remains for ever. For its the custom of Scripture, to call that old, which is
ready to be done away; and that new, which is firm and lasting. But because
each of these two men does communicate to those that are his, the form and
condition of his nature, according to that Scripture-principle, that what is
born of the flesh, is flesh, and what is born of the Spirit, is Spirit; thence
it comes, that St. Paul giving the effect the name of its cause, by a figure
ordinary in all languages, calls that form, and condition of nature, which each
of us receives from the first Adam by carnal birth, the old man; and likewise,
that form and condition which the faithful receive from JESUS CHRIST, by
spiritual regeneration, the new man. This is that he means here, when he speaks
of putting off the old man, and putting on the new; and else where, in a
passage like to this, the truth (says he) which we have learnt in JESUS, is,
that we put off the old man, concerning the former conversation who is
corrupted by the lusts that seduce him; and that we put on the new man, created
after GOD in righteousness, and true holiness.

Now, as to that form of nature which we all receive from the first Adam by our
carnal birth, every one well knows what it is, and in what it consists. For
the Scripture declares, and all men's experience also teaches, that the nature
of the children of Adam is extremely corrupt, and vicious; smitten in the
understanding with an horrible ignorance, and blindness, and full of errors,
and false and pernicious maxims; infected in the will with violent, and enraged
love of a man's self, of the flesh, and of the earth, with brutish affections
and passions. This nature is nothing but pride, ambition, injustice, avarice,
luxury, envy, hatred, malignity, imprudence, furiousness, cruelty, and
inhumanity. Such are all Adam's progeny, while without the communion of JESUS
CHRIST. There are no others born upon the earth; and whatever difference is
between men, in regard of climate, and color, and external appearance of life,
the blood they come of, imprinteth this wretched form upon them all in common;
which seizing them at their birth, grows up, and is augmented with age, and
exercise, rooting its self in them, and thrusting forth the habitudes of diverse
sins, which in the end render them unsufferable unto GOD, and their neighbors.
And if the providence of Heaven, for the conservation of mankind, did not
represss the cursed secondity of this evil, the disorder, and the waste it
makes, would be much greater than it is, and proceed to infinite. It is then
this mass of corruption, this Hydra of vices; that the Apostle calls the old
man; because it is the production of Adam, our old, and first stock, in every
one of us.

Hence it is easy to understand on the other hand, what the new man is, that
is to say, the form which JESUS CHRIST, the principle of the second creation,
does put upon each of them that are His. For it is directly contrary to that of
the first Adam, and comprehends in it all graces and virtues, in opposition to
the other's vices, as faith, wisdom, piety, charity, justice, sweetness,
honesty, temperance; and in one word, a sanctity like that of JESUS CHRIST, the
image of which it is also called. It Is this that St. Paul here styles the new
man; because it is the work, and likewise the pourtraict of the LORD JESUS, our
new Adam. And he describes it thus himself in this place. For, as to the old
man, he only names it, without saying any more of it. But as for the new, he
occasionally explains us the nature of it, saying, that it is renewed in
knowledge, after the image of Him who created it. In which few words he
teaches us, first, that it is created in us; that is, produced by the
operation of a Divine power; by reason whereof we are called, the workmanship,
and the creatures of GOD; and the Apostle says elsewhere, Ephesians. 2.^^.
that we were created in JESUS CHRIST; whereas the production of the old man in
us, is not a creation, but a natural operation. For as it is indeed in our
power to kill a man, but there is none, save GOD alone, that can raise him up
again; so it was easy for Adam to destroy himself, and us all with him; but to
recover, and re-establish us, belongs to GOD alone. Adam could corrupt, and
deform our nature. But neither he, nor any of his, (...) to repair, or reform
it into a new man. This appertains to none but the Creator. It Is the work of
a Divine power. Then again, the Apostle shows us here, who it is that creates
this new man in us, saying, that it is the same person, after whose image it is
created. For it is clear, that the new man is after the image of JESUS CHRIST.
It is then JESUS CHRIST that creates it in us. Vain man, give not the glory to
your pretended free will. It appertains wholly to the LORD. And we may truly
say of this second generation, what the Psalmist sings of the first: that it
is the LORD, the eternal word of the Father, Psalm. 100.^.
who has made us, and not we our selves. But the Apostle, in saying that this
new man is renewed, does teach us a further very considerable thing; to wit,
that this piece of our regeneration, or the production of the new man, is
polished, and perfected by little and little in us, the Spirit of CHRIST
working upon it, during the whole course of our life on earth; and adorning
this its own creature by diverse reiterated operations, with the graces and
spiritual beauties it ought to have, until it attain to the utmost and highest
point of its perfection in the Heavens; when there shall be seen a complete,
and Angelical sanctity, to shine forth in it, with glory, and blessed
immortality.

In fine, the Apostle does also briefly touch at, both the manner after which,
and the pattern by which this renovation is wrought in us. For the manner of
it, he says, That this new man is renewed in knowledge, thereby showing, that
JESUS CHRIST, for the communicating of this new Nature, which is in Him, as in
its source, unto us, does give us, and day by day augment the knowledge of his
truth in us; for as ignorance and error is the first and principal deformity of
the old Man, and the cause of all the rest; so on the contrary, Wisdom and
Knowledge is the first and principal lineament of the new Man, whereby are
formed in us all the other virtues, in which it does consist, as Love of GOD,
and Charity toward men, and all the other holy habitudes, which depend upon
them; it being manifest, that we love none but the things we know, and
proportionably to the knowledge we have of them. Wherefore the LORD begins the
admirable work of his grace, hereat. And we have an excellent image of this
method of his, in the first Creation of the World; where Moses expressly
observes, that the first thing GOD created by his Word, was Light, which is the
symbol of Knowledge, as darkness is of Ignorance. This the Apostle plainly
points at elsewhere; GOD (says he) who commanded the light to shine out of
darkness, 2 Cor. 4 6.
has shined into our hearts. This light of Knowledge once lighted up in our
souls, by the Spirit of the LORD, does presently expel Vices out of them; and
showing us the holy and glorious face of GOD in JESUS CHRIST, transforms us
into his likeness, as says the same Apostle; 1 Cor. 3.18.
We all beholding as in a glass, the glory of the LORD with open face, are
transformed into the same image, from glory to glory, as by the Spirit of the
LORD. It Is this he means in the Text, when he says of the new Man, that it
is renewed after the image of him who created it, that is, of JESUS CHRIST our
LORD. For he properly is the Pattern, by which that new Nature we are made
partakers of, is formed. He is both the Author and Exemplar of it; and it is for
this, that it is called by his Name, to wit, the new Man. Therefore the Apostle
elsewhere, to express the end and effect of his Ministry toward the Galatians,
Gal. 4.19.
says, That he travelleth in birth, until CHRIST be formed in them. He had no
other design, but to revest them with the new Man: Certainly then, the new Man
is nothing else but JESUS CHRIST formed in us; that is, nothing else but the
form of this holy and blessed LORD, engraven and imprinted on us by the seal of
his Word and Spirit; which is precisely the thing he here calls his Image. If
you know JESUS CHRIST, you cannot be ignorant what this his form and image is.
JESUS CHRIST is the Saint of Saints; a man full of all purity, righteousness,
charity, patience, constancy and truth; and in sum of all the lights of
holiness. Sure then his form and image can be no other, than a genuine
representation of these Divine qualities; a soul in which appears a goodness,
an humility, an honesty, I say not, equal, (for it is not possible to arrive
unto so high a perfection) but at least semblable and proportionate to his. And
this is that which S. Paul elsewhere compriseth expressly in two words, saying,
That the new man is created after GOD, in righteousness and true holiness.

Thus you see, Brethren, what that Old, and what this new Man is which the
Apostle speaks of in this place: The one is the image of the first Adam, and
the other of the second. He commands us to put off the old Man with his
Deeds, and to put on the New; a manner of speaking, no less elegant, than
familiar in Scripture, which is wont to say of all the things that are found in
this or that subject, that it is clothed with them. As when the Prophets say,
that GOD is clothed with strength, with Glory, and with Magnificence; that he
is clothed with Justice; that he will cloth his Priests with salvation, and
their enemies with shame; that he will cloth the Heavens with darkness, and so
in a multitude of other places; where it is evident, that the term, Clothing,
is taken figuratively, to express simply, the putting of any thing in such or
such a Subject, whether it be internally or externally. Whence it follows,
that, to put off, on the contrary, is simply to quit a thing which one had, and
rid himself of it. Thus to put off the old Man, is nothing else but to rid our
selves of his Vices, and of his corruptness; to pluck up, for instance, out of
our hearts, his covetousness, and his ambition, and the habitudes of his other
sins. But the Apostle expressly adds, that we put him off with his deeds; that
is to say, that we not only pluck up out of our hearts, the habits of Vices,
which are, as it were, the roots and stocks of it; but that also we cut off
from our lives, all the actions, whether interior, as desires and lustings; or
exterior, as other sins, which proceed from the same, and are as so many fruits
of this accursed plant. For, to speak properly, the old man is one thing; and
the act of sin, that issues from it, another. The one is the corruptness it
self of our nature; the other is the effect it produces: The one is as the
Plant, and the other as its Fruit. For example, cruelty or covetousness is one
of the very members of the old Man; murder or stealing ing are acts of it. The
Apostle would have us put off the one, and the other; that neither Vice, nor
its acts might have any place in us. In like manner, to put on the new Man, is
on the other hand, to deck and adorn our understanding, our will, our
affections, and all the parts of our life, with those excellent virtues, in
which the new man consists, as we have said before; to endeavor it
studiously, and take no rest, till we have them formed in us, and our whole
nature be covered, and enriched with them.

But though these two words, to put off, and to put on, be in this passage
figuratively taken, yet do they show us notwithstanding, against the gross and
senseless error of some, that as well the old Man, as the New, do both of them
signify the form and disposition, not the substance and very essence of our
nature: For when a thing is utterly destroyed, we do not say, it puts off what
it had, but that it is perishes. And when the substance of a thing is produced
altogether of new, we say not, that it is clothed, but created; so as the
Apostle here commanding us to put off the old man, and put on the new; it is
evident, that in this renovation of our nature, we do not lose the very
substance of it, nor acquire another new one; but only quit that unworthy and
wretched form, which sin gave it; and assume another, which resembles that of
JESUS CHRIST. I acknowledge, that that old form which we put off, had seized
on, and blasted, and disfigured all the parts of our nature, both internal and
external; as also, that the new one, which we receive in JESUS CHRIST, does
extend its self likewise to them all; in which respect the one and the other
differs from a garment, which covers but the outside, and reaches not further
in: yet they both are notwithstanding, another thing than the Subject it self,
which is unclothed or clothed with them, as an habit is another kind of thing
than the body it covers. The one is at it were the rust, as it were the
poison, the malady, the loathsomness and deformity of our nature: The other is
the beauty, the health, the perfection, the ornament, and honor of it; and as
it were the jewel, that gives it all it has of worth and value. Neither let
the terms of Old and new Man trouble you: For they are often made use or in all
languages, to signify the qualities, and not the very essentials of our
nature; as when we say of a person, who was once vicious and debauched, but is
now become honest and virtuous, that he is another man, a new Man; though, to
speak properly, he have the same substance, the same soul, and the same body,
he had before; and has quitted nothing of his former nature, but the bad
habitudes it was vested with, not the substance of his Being. Thus it is in
regard of the Old and new Man: The substance of the subject remains the same,
under the one and the other. There is nothing changed but its form^ and
quality. And it is thus also, that we are to understand what, after the
Prophets, S. Peter has said, namely, 2 Pet. 3.13.
That at the last manifestation of the Son of GOD, there shall be new Heavens
and a new Earth: For these creatures which now subsist, shall not be
annihilated. On the contrary, S Paul says, Romans 8.20.
That they shall have part in the deliverance of the sons of GOD; but because
they shall be purged from all vanity, and put into an estate much more
excellent, than that wherein they now sigh and languish, therefore they are
called, new Heavens and a new Earth.

As for what remains, The Apostle injoyns us expressly, both here and elsewhere,
to put off the old Man, and to put on the New; because in truth these are two
different things, even as to depart from evil, and to do good. It is very true,
that in the estate men are, no one puts off the old Man, but puts on the New;
and so on the contrary; and again as true it is, that the same Spirit of JESUS
CHRIST, which effects the one, does also effect the other; even as the Sun,
by one and the same action, dispelleth the darkness of our Air, and diffuseth
into it light: yet this hin^ers not, but that, considering the matter simply,
and absolutely in its self; the putting off of the old Man is one thing, and
the putting on of the New another. For the corruption of the old Man is not a
mere absence and privation of the sanctity of the New, neither is virtue a mere
privation of vice, as darkness is nothing at all, but a simple privation of
light: Otherwise, it were to be said, that the new man is everywhere, where the
Old is not; and so on the contrary, as where there is no light, darkness does of
necessity take place, and so on the contrary. But though these two actions of
putting off the old Man, and putting on the New, be different in themselves,
yet are they inseparably joined with one another; and in the state we now are,
it is not possible that any person should divest himself of sin, and of the
misery of his old Man, without vesting himself with the New; because there is
no other way of salvation, but the Communion of CHRIST, into which no one ever
enters, without putting on the new Man. It Is in this, that all our salvation
consists.

But because those false Teachers, which troubled the Church at that time, did
pretend to the prejudice of this Doctrine, that Circumcision and diverse other
external things were necessary in Religion, as if they were sufficient to save
us without the new Man; or at least the new Man were not sufficient to save us
without them; the Apostle does reject this error of theirs here, which he
refuted before; and to this purpose, in speaking of the new Man, adds, Where
there is neither Greek nor Jew, neither circumcision nor uncircumcision,
neither Barbarian nor Scythian, nor bond, nor free; but CHRIST is all, and in
all. His meaning is not, that among those whom JESUS CHRIST converteth to new
men, by virtue of his Gospel, there are none that be by extraction, Jews or
Greeks, Barbarians or Scythians; and for condition, bond or free, circumcised
or uncircumcised; nor likewise, that these differences are in themselves none,
or ought not to be considered at all, either in nature, or in the state and
politic order. On the contrary, he himself will hereafter establish the
difference of bondmen, and free, and command us to observe it in civil life.
But what he says, must be restrained, and appropriated precisely to his
intention and design, without extending it any further, He speaks of the new
man, and says, that no one of these differences does take place in him. He
means therefore simply, that in this respect (that is, in what concerns the
nature of the new man) all these different qualities and conditions are no way
considerable; that, as to it, they have no force nor virtue; that neither the
nobleness of the Jew, nor the advantage of circumcision, nor the liberty of the
free, does serve at all, to bring us near the new man, and communicate him to
us; that the knowledge of the Greek, and the rudeness of the Barbarian, and the
uncircumsion of the Gentile, and the meanness of the slave, does not remove us
further off from him. That a man, both may not participate of him with the
first of these qualities, and may with the last. It Is the same thing that he
says elsewhere; Gal. 6.15.
even that in JESUS CHRIST, neither circumcision avails any thing, nor
uncircumcision, but a new creature; and again, That in CHRIST, and 3.28.
there is neither Jew nor Greek, nor bond nor free, nor male nor female,
because they are all one in JESUS CHRIST.

He excludes hereby, first, the pretended advantage of the Jew above the Greek.
For the Jews so foolishly presumed upon their birth, that they imagined it
sufficient to render them acceptable unto GOD, and they haughtily disdained the
Greeks as accursed and abominable, by the sole infelicity of their extraction.
The men of Rome are at this day no wiser; as who do not define Christianity,
but by an adherence to the Sea of their City. The Apostle here does
thunder-strike the vanity of the one and the others, proclaiming that neither
the Jew nor the Greek, and by consequent, not the Roman or Italian, are of any
consideration in godliness, so as to confer upon us, or deprive us of the new
Man. And S. John Baptist had aforehand advertised the Jews of it. Mat. 3.9.
Presume not so say within your selves, We have Abraham to our Father. And it is
this our Savior meant, when he told Nicodemus, That to enter into the Kingdom
of Heaven, Joh. 3.3.
he must be born again; signifying, that all that dignity of this carnal birth,
which did so mightily puff up the hearts of the Pharisees and Jews, was but a
thing of naught, and contributed not at all to the entering them in his
Communion. Joh. 8.39.
And elsewhere the Jews crying out, that Abraham was their Father, he answers
them, That if they were the children of Abraham, they would do his works; an
evident sign, that the children of the Saints are they that do their works, as
said one of the Ancients Hierome. Act. 10 35.
, and not they that take up their place; and that, as S. Peter said, Of
whatsoever Nation you be, you shall be accepted of GOD, if you fear him, and
work righteousness.

That which the Apostle adds a little after, of Barbarians and Scythians,
tends also to take away all difference of people, in matter of godliness,
against the vanity of the Greeks, who despised all other Nations, and called
them Barbarians; making no account but of their own, because of the great
politeness of their language, and the civility of their manners, and the study
of Philosophy and Eloquence, which flourished among them. S. Paul denounces
them, that this vain excellency is of no value in Christianity; and that the
illiteratness, and political defects of Barbarians, do not alienate them from
GOD, provided that putting off the old Man, they put on the New. The Scythians
are those whom we call Tartarians, and he makes particular mention of them,
either because of the ferity and extreme rudeness, in as much as they were
accounted the most gross and least polite of all Barbarians; or because of
their probity, justice and moral innocence, as some think.

After nations, he speaks also of the difference of ceremonies, and conditions.
To the former referrs his saying, that in Christianity, there is neither
circumcision, nor uncircumcision; comprising under this one species, all other
semblable observations of things external, and not commanded of GOD in
religion; signifying, that men are neither furthered toward the kingdom of
Heaven by being circumcised, nor set back by wanting of it: and likewise, that
(as he faith elsewhere) if we eat, we have not the more; and if we eat not, we
have not the less. Whence appears, how ill founded the ridiculous opinion of
those is, who put an higher e^^mate upon themselves by far, than upon others,
in point of holiness, by reason of th^se external and voluntary devotions; as
for instance, because they were a cowl, or a certain particular habit; because
they abstain from flesh, either always, or so a certain days, and do other
like things, in which they are not ashamed, even to place Christianity. What
the Apostle adds in the last place, concerning the bond, and the free, does
also comprehend nobility, and peasantry, riches, and poverty, dignity, and
inferiority; and in fine, all that diversity of conditions which divides men
in the present world. Though these qualities put a difference between them on
earth, they put none between them in Heaven, nor in the mystical body of our
LORD and Savior, into which GOD receives us all indifferently, if He see the
new man in us, and does equally exclude those in whom He finds it not. The pomp
of riches, and honors, and the glory of great birth, does recommend no one
unto Him: lo^^ness of extraction, or of condition, and the misery of poverty,
does not (...). Him to reject any. He strips all men of that habit that makes
up no part of them; and judges of them only by that form of the old, or new
man, which they bear within them.

Now having excluded all these things from the true constitution of piety, he
informs us, for a conclusion, wherein its whole force and virtue does consist.
In this renovation of man, there is (says he) neither Greek nor Jew, neither
Circumcision nor Uncircumcision, neither Borbarian nor Seythian, nor bond nor
free; but CHRIST is all, and in all. That which the Jews promise themselves in
vain from their birth, and they that Judaize from their circumcision, and the
Greeks from their Philosophy, and Great ones from their dignity, JESUS CHRIST
alone does give abundantly to all that are in Him. He is all to them. For in
Him the Gentile finds Judaism, and the nobility of Israel; all they that are of
faith, Gal. ^.
being children of Abraham. In Him the uncircumcised have the true
circumcision, which is not made with hands; Barbarians, Divine Philosophy, and
the Bourgeship of Heaven; bondmen, freedom of spirit; poor men, the treasures
of eternity; abject persons, the glory of GOD, and the excellency of His
Kingdom. And as He has in Him an abundance of all sacred and salutiferous
things; so has He them for all: shutting not up the bosom of His grace
against any, who ever he be, and conferring on all those of His communion
universally, righteousness, wisdom, sanctification, and redemption; and in a
word; all graces requisite for conducting them unto, and putting them in the
eternal possession of supreme beatitude.

Dear Brethren, It Is this same blessed LORD, the fountain, and the fullness of
all good, that GOD presents to you at this time, in His word, and in His
Sacrament. Come ye all to Him, seeing He is so bountifully offered unto you.
Let no one imagine either that he may do well enough without Him, or that He
may not enjoy Him. He is both necessary for the greatest, and accessible unto
the least. The dignity of Masters, the abundance of riches, the extraction of
the noble, the observances of the devout, and such other advantages will be of
no use at all to save those that have them; so that JESUS CHRIST is no less
necessary for them, than if they had them not. The low estate of servants, the
distressedness of the poor, and the like other disadvantages, do hinder no one
from approaching, and receiving of Him. And as the brazen Serpent, which
sometime figured him in the desert, was communicated indifferently unto all,
great and small, poor and rich, noble and ignoble; and equally cured all those
that looked on it: and again, as there was no remedy to be had against the
biting of the fiery Serpents, but that alone: neither riches, nor nobility, nor
science, nor any other quality could cure any of them. So is it with our LORD
JESUS. He is equally both necessary, and approachable for all. He offers
Himself to the great; He disdaineth not the least. He gives Himself to the one,
and to the others, and saves them all indifferently. Come ye th^n all unto Him,
whatever in other respects your condition or extraction be. Lift up your eyes
on Him, and behold Him stretched out for you upon Moses's pole; crucified for
your sins, and wounded for your iniquities, His flesh pierced with nails, His
blood spilt on the ground: presenting to you in this scandalous, but
salutiferous infirmity; the treasure of life and happiness. Bring unto Him
souls full of faith, respect, and love; and prepare for the receiving of Him,
not your bodily mouth, or stomach, (places, whatever superstition say,
unworthy to lodge Him) but your hearts, your minds, your understandings and
affections; that is, the nobler part of your being. There it is that He takes
pleasure, there it is that He would dwell. Accordingly it is there that He
should operate, and display His virtue, unto the extinguishing of the old man,
and the engraving of His own image. As the body is not the object of this
operation of His; so neither is it the seat of His presence, nor the throne of
His Majesty.

But you plainly see, My Brethren, that this incomparable favor He places on
you, in being willing to come, and dwell in your hearts, does oblige you to put
off His enemy the old man, and clear your selves of all His pollutions;
eradicate the habitudes of all his vices; smother all his desires, and cleanse
your whole life from all his deeds. This old man is the disgrace of your
nature, the poison of your soul, the death of your life, the cause of your
unhappiness. It Is he that destroyed you, that banished you out of Paradise,
that bereaved you of your true delights, that made you subject unto vanity, and
the wrath of GOD, and the hatred of His Angels, and the tyranny of Devils.
Divest your selves of this accursed and funestous habit. Give your selves no
rest till you be rid of it. Tell me not that he holds too fast; that you feel
him sticking in your inward parts, and in your marrow. Where eternal salvation
is concerned, there (...) is to be taken. If you cannot rid your selves of him
other(...) better to pluck out your very bowels, than spare them, and pe(...)
the truth is, we slatter our selves; and that to keep this pleasing enemy with
us we makes our selves believe, he is part of us; as if we could not be m^n,
without fouling our selves in the dung of his vices. Be not afraid of hurting,
o^ outraging your selves, by driving him from you. It Is but the p^st and poison
of your nature, as we said before. Your life will be not (as you imagine,
incommodated, but discharged, more free, and more happy by it, th^n it was.
Besides, after the victory over him, which CHRIST has won upon the Cross, it
ill becomes us to complain of the strength of this enemy. All his strength
consists only in our cowardice; in our feebleness, and effeminacy. JESUS
CHRIST has taken from him all the true strength he had. He has crucified him,
and overthrown all the foundations of his tyranny, and of his life,
discovering to us the horridness thereof, and opening us the way to liberty,
and the gate of the house of GOD. Instead of this wretched, and fordid, and
shameful form of life, let us put on that new man, who now presents, and gives
Himself unto us. Let us have Him night and day before our eyes, as the only
exemplar of our true nature. Let us copy Him all out, and faithfully engrave
upon our souls all the features of His Divine, and glorious form. Let the image
of this new Adam shine forth in our whole life, in our souls, and in our
carriages.

Dear Brethren, it must be acknowledged, that hitherto we have greatly failed
in this duty. For what is more unlike, than we, and this JESUS CHRIST, to whose
image we should be conformed? He is humble, and meek, and p^tient, as a lamb;
We are fierce, and proud, and choleric, as Lions. He did good to His enemies;
and we hardly spare our friends. He loved the greatest strangers, and we hate
our nearest neighbors. He was most pure, and holy; and we are polluted with
the ordures of intemperance. He sought only His Father's glory, and the
salvation of men. We muse upon nothing but earth, and consider only our own
interests; With this dissimilitude, or to say better, contrariety, how can we
pretend to have put on the new man, which is created after the image of JESUS
CHRIST? And how can it be thought, but that we rather bear the image of His
enemy? Yet you are not ignorant what depends upon it; and do well know, that
it is not possible to have part on high in the glory of the new man, except we
put him on here below. In the name of GOD, Beloved Brethren, and as your own
salvation is dear to you, travel on this great and necessary design. Repair the
negligences of the time passed; and discharging for the future, with good
fidelity, what the Apostle's word, and the Sacrament of this mystical table, do
equally require of you; put off the old man, who has destroyed you; Put on the
new man, who has saved you, renewing you in the knowledge, and unto the
likeness of this sweet, and merciful LORD, who died, and is risen again for
you; that after you have born on earth the image of His holiness, and charity,
you may bear it eternally in the Heavens, together with that of His glory, and
immortality. Amen.

THE THIRTY NINTH SERMON ON COLOSSIANS,
CHAP. III. VER. XII, XIII. Verse XII. Put on therefore, as Elected of Gods
Saints, etc.
chosen of GOD, holy and beloved, bowels of mercy, kindness, humility,
meekness, patience.

XIII. Bearing with one another, and pardoning one another, if one has a
quarrel against the other; even as CHRIST pardoned you, so also do ye.


DEAR Brethren, That which the Sacrament of the LORD's holy Supper requires of
us, and which it effects and produces in us, when we duly receive it, is the
very thing which the Apostle commands us in this Text; and unto which he
forms us by these words of his. He wills, that we be merciful, kind,
humble, meek, patient and facile to pardon one another. And the end and effect
of the Sacrament is, to make us so: For it communicates the LORD JESUS CHRIST
unto us, not that the substance of his Body may enter into ours, nor that his
flesh may be touched by our mouths and stomachs (a thing both prodigious and
impossible, and which is moreover unprofitable and superfluous) but indeed to
transforms us into his Image, and render us like him, that is, humble, meek,
patient, kind and merciful as he is, forming these divine virtues in us by the
essicacy of his Death, which is celebrated in this Mystery. Whereby you see a
notable difference between the heavenly food which we receive in this
Sacrament, and the earthly meat we daily take; for whereas the latter is, for
the nourishing of our bodies, changed into their nature; the former, on the
contrary, for the enlivening of our souls, transform them into its own. Thus,
since we have participated this Morning of this precious Sacrament, we cannot
better employ the present hour, than in meditating these words of the Apostle,
which contain and represent one of its principal effects. Consider them
therefore, my Brethren, attentively. And that we may discern whether or no we
have truly communicated of the bread of Heaven, let us examine whether it has
produced and formed in our hearts that humility and kindness, and all those
other virtues, which the Apostle enjoins us in this place; and reckon we, that
without this, neither the LORD's favor in inviting us unto his Table, nor the
heavenly food there presented us, will benefit us at all; and that remaining
far from contributing to our salvation, it will aggravate our condemnation,
according to the Apostles saying in another place, That whoever cateth of the
bread of the LORD, and drinks of his cup unworthily, eats and drinks his
own judgment.

S. Paul, if you remember, having in general exhorted the Colossians to
mortify the members of the old Man, did particularly nominate and specify to
them some of his principal Vices, as covetousness, fornication, malignity,
wrath, and such others, expressly injoyning them to put them away: But because
it is not enough to forbear evil, there must also be a doing good; and it
suffices not that we abstain from vice, if we do not exercise the actions of
virtue: This great Apostle having forbidden the lusts and fins of the old Man,
commands us first in general, to put on the New, as you heard a week since; and
then in the progress of his speech, he points at some of the principal parts
of this new Man, by name. It is precisely at the Verses we have read, that he
begins this discourse; Put on then (says he) as elected of GOD, Saints and
Beloved, bowels of mercy, etc. -- This exhortation he infers from the precedent
Verses, and proposes us at the entrance, a reason that obliges us unto this
pursuit, taken from the honor GOD has done us, to choose us for his Saints
and his Beloved. Next, he commands us compassion, benignity, humility,
meekness, patience; five Virtues, that refer, as you see, to the manner after
which we are to carry our selves toward our neighbors, and particularly
toward those of them that suffer evil, or do us any. Afterward he points
out two acts of patience and benignity; the one is a bearing with, and the
other the pardoning of one another; and to incite us to them, he adds the
example our LORD and Savior has given us of them. So we shall have three
Points to treat of in this action, if the LORD will; First, the quality of
elected of GOD, Saints and Beloved, which the Apostle gives us at the entrance,
to sway us to our duty. Secondly, the five Virtues which he recommends unto us,
and the exercising of them in the matter of that forbearance and mutual
forgiveness which we owe one another. And finally, in the third place, the
example of JESUS CHRIST, which he sets before our eyes, as an accomplished
pattern, and a most effectual argument of our sanctification. Dear Brethren,
hear, meditate, and duly put in practice that Divine Lesson, which the LORD
JESUS gave you this Morning in the Mystery of his Table, and now repeats by
the mouth of his Apostle.

The Apostle deduceth it from what he had generally asserted in the precedent
Verses, namely, that we have put on the new Man, which is renewed in knowledge,
after the Image of him who created him. Thence he now concludes, Put on then
bowels of mercy, kindness, humility, meekness, patience. The consequence is
evident. For since we do put on the new Man in JESUS CHRIST, it is clear, that
these Virtues being as they are, members and parts of this new Man, it is a duty
of ours to put them on; and that in defect of them, this new Nature, which
makes us Christians, would remain imperfect in us. Brethren, Mark well this
reasoning, and learn by it, how hugely they deceive themselves, who pretend,
without these Virtues, unto the name and inheritance of Christians; imagining
that they are not necessary for all, but only meet for such as will be
perfecter and more excellent than the commonalty of the faithful. It Is a
principle laid down in diverse places by the Apostle, and acknowledged by the
whole Church, that no man is in CHRIST, except he be a new Creature. And
himself teaches us here, that whoever is a new Creature, must put on
compassion, and those other Virtues he names in order; sure it follows then,
that whosoever has not put them on, is not a new Creature, nor by consequent a
Christian. If therefore you will be Christians; if you will aspire to
salvation, which GOD gives to none, but those that are so; renounce that
pernicious error, and embrace the pursuit of all these Virtues with vigorous
resolution, traveling incessantly in it, until you have vested your souls with
their habitudes, sentiments and affections, and filled your whole life with
their actions.

It Is the thing to which you are also evidently obliged, by the dignity of
being the Elect, the Saints, and the beloved of GOD, which you are stated in,
and the Apostle in this place minds you of. Put on (says he) compassion,
kindness, as elected of GOD, Saints and beloved. The Hebrew Grammarians have
noted, that the word, as is used in that language two manner of ways; sometimes
to signify the analogy and resemblance of one thing to another, and this they
call, the as of likeness: For instance, when our Savior says; Be wise as
Scrpents, and simple as Doves: Sometimes to signify, that the subject we speak
of, has not the resemblance, but the reality of that particular, which we
attribute to it, and this they term the as of verity. As when S. Joh. 1.14.
John says of our LORD JESUS CHRIST; We beheld his glory, to wit, a glory, as
of the only begotten of the Father. His me^ning is, not that JESUS CHRIST was
like the only Son of God: but that he was so indeed, and in truth; and that the
gl^^y which he and his companions beheld in him, was just such as the glory of
GOD's true Son should be. An as of the first kind, compares one thing with
another: An as of the second compares a thing with its self. The first is a
comparative Particle, as the Grammarians speak; and the second a rational one.
The as here used by the Apostle, is of the second kind, not of the first: For
he does not mean, that we should addict our selves to those Virtues which he
enjoins us, as do certain other persons, elected of God; but that we do addict
our selves unto them, because we have the honor to be elected of GOD our
selves. This as does not compare us with others, but with our selves, and
impo^ts as much as if S. Paul had said, seeing that, or since that you be
elected of GOD, containing in it this reasoning: Such as have the honor to be
elected of GOD, his Saints and his Beloved, ought to be clothed with humility,
benignity and meekness: Since then you have in JESUS CHRIST the honor to be
the Elect, the Saints, and the Beloved of GOD; judge if you (...) not obliged
to put on all these Virtues. We use the word as, to the same sense often in our
common speech: As for example, when we say of a good man, that he lived and
died religiously, as a Christian, that is, so as was meet for that quality of
Christian which he had; and when we advise a young man of good rank, to be
^onest in all his conversation, as born of a good house, and issued from a
noble and a virtuous Father.

Of these three qualities, which the Apostle here gives the faithful, the first
is, that they are elected of GOD. The election of God is the choice. He makes,
according to his good pleasure, of certain persons to call them unto the
knowledge of himself, and unto the glory of his salvation. And this term,
Election, signifies, sometimes the resolution he has taken in his eternal
counsel, to choose and call them, which the Scripture elsewhere calls, Ephesians.
1.11.
The determinate purpose of GOD; sometimes the execution of this eternal
determination, when GOD does in time, touch the men of his good pleasure by the
efficacy of his Word and Spirit, converting them to the faith of his Gospel,
and separating them by this means from the rest of men, who continue in the
miserable estate of their nature, through their impenitence and unbelief. The
Apostle, in my opinion, does comprehend both the one and the other of these two
senses, when he says here, That we are elected of GOD, that is, such as he
has chosen, and effectively separated from the world, according to his
determinate purpose, calling us unto himself, to serve him according to the
discipline of his Gospel. Now that this quality does oblige us to put on all
the virtues which he recommends unto us in the words following, is evident. For
this very thing is the aim and end of his Election, as the Apostle elsewhere
informs us, when he says, That GOD has elected us in CHRIST, Ephesians. 1.4.
that we might be holy and blameless before him in love. And it is that that
Moses yerwhile represented to ancient Israel the type of the new; Deuteronomy. 26.18.
The Lord (says he) has set thee on high this day (that is, has raised thee
above other Nations by his election) that thou might be to him a peculiar
people, and keep his commandments. Whence appears how false their calumny is,
who accuse the doctrine of Election, of favoring vice and impenitency. If it
were so, what could have less of reason in it, than the Apostles discourse, who
alleges our election, to incite us unto the studious pursuance of holiness?
But it is quite otherwise than these men pretend. As GOD's election is the
source of sanctification and good works; so the asserting and teaching of it,
is an establishing and a founding of them. And they that make their boast of
their being elected of GOD, but mean time lead a licentious and profane life,
do mock GOD and men; and shall infallibly perish in this false and vain error,
if they amend not. For since GOD's election is never executed without
converting a man, and sanctifying him; and it is not possible on the other
hand, that any one should know himself elected otherwise, than by feeling the
real execution of his election; it is evidently rashness, and a palpable error
to imagine that one is elected, except he be truly converted unto GOD, and
indu'd with piety and charity.

Another quality which the Apostle here gives us, is, that we are Saints: For
he is not of the opinion of Rome, who calls none Saints, but those whom she
has canonized. Saint Paul acknowledges none for believers who are not Saints.
Accordingly you know, that in the Creed, the Church, which is the body of all
true Christians, and not of the canonized only, is called holy, and the
communion of Saints. Indeed, since there is not a Christian but has been
baptized into JESUS CHRIST, and received the holy Ghost, according to the
Apostles saying elsewhere, Romans 8.
That if any man have not the Spirit of CHRIST, he is none of his: How can he
be a Christian, who is not a Saint? Seeing both Baptism and the Spirit of
CHRIST do sanctify all those to whom they are truly communicated? Now, that
this quality of Saints, or holy Ones, does also oblige us to all the virtues
that the Apostle gives us in charge, in the following Verses, is as clear as
the Sun at noonday: For what else is sanctity it self, but a piety, and an
exquisite charity, complete in all its parts, and adorned with every virtue?
Besides, by sanctification we are dedicated and consecrated unto GOD, so as
henceforth we ought not to dispose of our selves but for his service, and
according to his will; which is no other, but that we live in all purity,
honesty, and virtue. And this is that the LORD signifies, when he so often
charge his people to be holy: You shall he holy unto me (says he) for I am
holy; Lev. 11.44. and 20.26.
and have separated you from other people to be mine.

The third quality the Apostle gives us here, is, That we are the Beloved of
GOD; that is to say, those of all men, whom he most loves, and dearly
respects in his Son JESUS CHRIST. Since then, the love wherewith God
honors us, does oblige us to love him, and that we cannot fail of this
reciprocal love, without herrible ingratitude; it is evident that our being the
beloved of GOD, does necessarily require of us, that we put on all these
virtues, which the Apostle is about to give us in charge: First, because it is
a necessary and infallible effect of the love we bear to GOD, to do what he
commands us, and he commands us nothing else, Joh. 14.15.
but the exercising of every virtue. If you love me (says he) keep my
commandments. Secondly, because true love transformeth him that loves, into
the image of the thing loved; so as GOD being charity, justice, and holiness it
self, it is not possible if we love him truly, but that we put on all these
divine Virtues. Thus you see, Believers, that the honor we have, to be elected
of GOD, Saints and Beloved, does most strictly oblige us to do what the Apostle
commands us, that is, to embrace all the virtues he is about to represent unto
us; which he expresses in one word, bidding us, put them on, that is, that we
seat them in our hearts, and show them in our lives; that we deck our souls
with their habits, and adorn our manners with their acts. For it is this is
signified by the word put on, here figuratively used, according to the usual
style of Scripture; as we gave you notice, in expounding the precedent Text,
where the Apostle exhorted us to put off the old Man, and put on the New.

The foremost of these Virtues which he recommends unto us, are those five
which he does expressly nominate in the present Text, mercy, kindness, humility,
meekness and patience. Mercy is a goodness and tenderness of spirit, which
causes us to resent the miseries of others, and have compassion on them, and
take part in them, as if we suffered them our selves. And the Apostle, to show
us how quick and deep this sentiment should be in us, would have us to put on,
not mercy simply, but bowels of mercy, which is a form of speaking taken from
the Hebrew language, in which the word Bowels is often used, to signify the
resentments of piety, and the tendernesses of compassion; and this not without
reason, it being clear, that compassion does affect and hugely move the heart,
the principal of our internal parts. It is not enough, that we lodge pity in
our faces, and in our looks, externally showing the movings and appearences of
it. The miseries of our neighbors must descend into our hearts, and reach the
depth of our bowels; they must affect them with a real grief, that may move
them, and stir up all that is in our power, to the affording of them succor.
For the discipline of JESUS CHRIST does not at all approve of the rigidness of
the Stoic Philosophy; which plucked up mercy as well as other passions out of
the bowels of its Wise man; as if to resent trouble, or grief, were a thing
unworthy of a virtuous person. Let him remedy the miseries of others (said
they;) but let him not feel them. Let him succor the men, but let him not be
touched with their passion. First, that which they presuppose is false; namely,
that to suffer one's self to be touched with sentiment of grief, is a defiling,
or polluting of virtue. There Is nothing unworthy of true virtue, but vice: now
grief is not a vice; it is a simple sentiment of nature: and for the being
wise, it is not needful a man should renounce the sentiments of nature; it is
sufficient to govern them, and keep them within their bounds, and use them with
reason. Again, this insensibility, which they suppose is a chimera, and a
fiction of their own, which cannot take place in the soul of man, which GOD
has formed unto sweetness, and tenderness, more than any other creature; as is
evident by tears, of which none none but man is capable; Lastly, whereas they
would have the wise man succor the miserable, without resenting their misery,
this is both difficult and dangerous. For it is a taking away one of the
sharpest incitements that spurs us on to assist them; it being clear, that
nothing moves us more powerfully thereto, than compassion. We must not (as
those people said) remedy other men's miseries without feeling them, (which is
both difficult in our nature, and unprofitable, though it were easy) but quite
contrary, we must feel them, that we may remedy them. So likewise there is
nothing more cold, and less helpful, than these insensible persons. For
eradicating compassion out of our hearts, they put in them obdurateness, and
inhumanity, which are infinitely more contrary to true Virtue, than grief and
emotion.

Renounce we then, Beloved Brethren, this rough and inhumane philosophy. Let it
be no shame to us to be tender, and sensible of our neighbors miseries. Let us
hold compassion, not for an infirmity, but for a virtue, unto which GOD calls
us, both by His commands, and by the examples, as of His Saints, so of His Son
Himself, JESUS CHRIST our LORD. Luke 6.36. 1 Pet. 3.8.
Be ye merciful, says He; and one of His Apostles exhorts us, to be full of
mutual compassion, pityful, courteous. And our St. Paul goes so sar, Romans 12.15.
as he would have us weep with them that weep; and the truth is, our tears, and
our resentments, though we can do nothing else, afford yet some ease to the
afflicted. The Saints, of whom we are told in Scripture, have all of them this
character of sweetness, and humanity. They were tender, and full of compassion
toward all afflicted persons: and to allege no other examples, you know how
the miseries of men did touch, and pierce the heart of our LORD and Savior;
who wept when He saw Lazarus's grave, and of whom it is said, that He is apt to
have pity on the ignorant, Heb. 5.2. Heb. 4.15.
and them that are out of the way; and again, that He has compassion of our
infimities. But beside the law of GOD, nature it self demands these
resentments of us. For men being our neighbors, that is, of one and the same
nature we are; who sees not, but that it is reasonable we should be touched
with their miseries? And this the rather, for that it may betide us to fall
into the like our selves, and one day need that compassion and succor they now
crave of us?

After the movings of compassion, the Apostle commands of us, the succor and
offices of benignity; which is a goodness of nature, that takes pleasure in,
and makes it its study to serve, and oblige every one, and incommodate, or
disoblige no body; that readily stretches out its helping hand to the
afflicted, and freely communicates its goods to the necessitous. A thing which
GOD commands us every where in His word, willing us there to be communicative;
to break our bread to the hungry, and impart of our substance to those that
need. The charge of stewards, or dispencers, which he has given us, obliges
us thereto; For He has put into our hands all the wealth we do possess; to the
end we should prudently and charitably dispense it to our neighbors. And as He
promises great benedictions and recompenses, as well in this life, as also in
the next, to those that acquit themselves faithfully of this duty, and are kind
and beneficent; so does He menace all those that shall fail to do it, with
grievous and eternal punishments, and treats them at every turn, as persons not
only cruel, and inhumane, but also unequitable, and unjust.

Unto mercy, and kindness, the Apostle wills that we add humility; the bafis
and foundation of all Christian Virtues: the ornament of a believing soul, the
mother of patience, the nurse of charity. There is no disposition of soul more
pleasing to GOD, or more profitable unto men. I confess, the exercising of it
is difficult unto man, naturally proud, and wilful. But the light of the Gospel
of CHRIST, and the power of His grace, do render that easy to us, which is
hard of it self. The pride of man, sure, springs not but from his ignorance.
If he knew himself as he ought, he would be humble, and instead of glorying in,
be ashamed of himself. Why then do not we, who know the vanity of our being,
the feebleness of our bodies, the malignity of our hearts, the ignorance and
folly of our minds, the perverseness of our affections, the uncertainty and
misery of our life, the demerit of our sins, and the eternal woe whereof they
are worthy; I say, why do we not clothe our selves all over with a sincere and
profound humility? After these consideratons, how can we have any puff of
pride? If you tell me; it is true, you were such by nature, but that the grace
of JESUS CHRIST has made you otherwise; I answer, that herein you have cause
indeed to acknowledge, and glorify His bounty; but none to lift up your
selves. For you have nothing that is good, but you received it of GOD; and if
you have received it, why do ye boast of it? The more He has given you, the
more ought you to humble your selves: as those branches bow most, and hang down
lowest, which are most laden with fruit. Thus you see, that being nothing in
your selves, and having received of GOD all that you can have, it is just that
you be humble: not to report here either the command for it, which GOD gives us
in a thousand places, or the graces He promises unto humility, or the pattern
of it, which He sets before us in His Son JESUS CHRIST, or the ruin wherewith
He menaceth the haughty.

After humility, the Apostle lodges two of its daughters in our souls, namely,
meekness, and patience. Meekness is properly that which we call gentleness; the
greatest grace of our behavior, and the amiablest ornament of our life. It
receives every one with an open heart, and a pleasing countenance. It is not
easily provoked, and as far as it can, takes all things in good part. It is
assable, and judges not with rigor. It restrains the stirrings of choler, and
notwithstanding the occasions offered for it, keeps, and maintains it self in a
sweet calm, without becoming angry, easily receiving as far as reason
permits, the excuses of those that have offended it, and being much more
readily appeased, than irritated. As this virtue is very grateful to others, so
is it exceedingly profitable, and beneficial to our selves. For living with
men, that is to say, with weak, and wretched creatures; without gentleness,
that sweetneth all things, we must needs be in a continual irritation, and
never have joy, nor repose. Patience is the sister of gentleness, they do both
of them bear vexations things, without exasperation; only with this difference;
that gentleness is exercised in reference to the fullenness, the sottishness,
and the impertinency of those we converse with; patience undergoeth other
greater evils, as outrages, and affronts, and those very afflictions which are
sent us of GOD, as sicknesses, and losses, and the like.

But for the better clearing of the nature of these two Virtues, the Apostle
particularly recommends unto us two eminent acts of them, extremely necessary
for Christians, and of singular use in our whole life; when he adds, bearing
with one another, and pardoning one another, if one has a quarrel against the
other. The first of these two acts pertains as well unto meekness, as to
patience. For first, if there be any defect, either in the humor, or in the
person, or even in the faith, and piety of our brethren, (provided it be not a
capital crime, that tends to the overthrow of religion, and salvation) we
ought not for this, break with them, nor reject, or sadden them: but bear with
them with all sweetness, remembering both the need we have, that the like equity
and condescendance be used toward us in many things, wherein we are no more
perfect, than our brethren in the forementioned; and the example of our LORD
and Savior, who according to the Prophet's prediction, M^^. 12.20.
did not break the bruised reed, nor quench the smoking flax. Then in the
second place, if our neighbors have offended us, either by word, or deed, we
must not forthwith betake our selves unto revenge; as men of the world do^ but
endeavor to overcome them by sweetness, bearing their wronging us with a
Christian and generous resolution. The other act that the Apostle commands
us, and which likewise respects those two virtues, is, our pardoning one
another, if one has a quarrel against the other. This is yet more than our
bearing with one another, which he first required of us: For there are people
found, that bear with the fullenness or the infirmities of their neighbor, yea
with his offenses, whether it be that they have not the means to avenge
themselves, or that they count it not expedient to do it for the present; who
mean time, keep and brood upon their resentments, in the secret of their
hearts, waiting for an opportunity to show them with advantage. Wherefore the
Apostle is not content to tell us, that we should bear with one another; he
adds further, that we do pardon one another; that is, efface out of our souls
all resentment of an offense received, and eradicate all desire of revenge,
heartily remitting to our neighbors, Mat. 18 35.
the fault they have committed against us; as our LORD enjoins us, when he
says, that his Father will irremissibly punish us, if we do not from our
hearts forgive every one his Brother. This duty reaches universally to all the
faithful, and takes place in all kind of subjects; as the Apostle signifies,
when he adds indefinitely, if one, that is, any one of us, has a quarrel
against another; whatever the occasion of the quarrel be, whether injurious
speeches given, or actions done, either against our selves, or any one of ours.

But because S. Paul was not ignorant how difficult this piece of Christian
piety is, our flesh having no passion stronger, and more uneasy to be subdued,
than the resentment of offenses, and the desire of revenge; to reduce us to
this sweetness and divine patience, and to beat down the fierceness of our
hearts, he proposes unto us the example of the LORD JESUS, the Prince of our
discipline, and Pattern of our life; As CHRIST (says he) has pardoned you, so
likewise do ye. He does the same also in the Epistle to the Ephesians, Ephesians.
4.32.
where he sets before us the example of GOD forgiving us all our sins for his
Son's sake. And what stronger reason than this, could the Apostle allege? For
JESUS CHRIST being our Head, and our elder Brother, unto whose image we ought
to be conformed, according to the predestin^tion of GOD; how shall we be his
members, his Disciples, and his living Pourtraits, if we have nothing in us of
that great and divine goodness he has showed us? Though he had not exercised
it, but toward others; yet we should be obliged to an imitation of Him. But
it is our selves that he has pardoned, and not others only; so that his example
does yet much the more strictly bind us: For the inhumanity of that wretched
servant in the Parable, who when he himself had been gratified by his Master,
would forgive his fellow nothing, is much more detestable, than if his Master
had showed such kindness only to some other man. Nor does the Lord omit the
noting of that circumstance expressly to him. Mat. 18.32, 33.
Wicked servant (says he to him) I quitted thee all that debt; ought not
thou also to have had pity on thy sellow servant, as I had pity on thee? Judge
then what an hell our obdurateness will deserve, if we, having experienced in
our own persons, the wonderful goodness of our LORD and Savior mercifully
forgiving us our faults, have hearts so refractory and so cruel, as to refuse
to forgive our Brethren. He is our Master and our GOD, and we are but his
servants, and his vassals; or to say better, we were his enemies, his
fugitives, and his rebels. And notwithstanding all this, he forbore not to
receive us to grace. Our faults were infinite for number, and extremely heinous
and criminal, as which being committed against GOD, deserved eternal
punishment: yet this hindered him not from pardoning them all. Think, if now our
pride be not altogether intolerable, who being neither Gods, nor Kings, nor
Rulers, but poor worms of the earth, and brands plucked out of Hell, by the sole
clemency of our GOD, have yet the stoutness to deny, not our vassals, or our
servants, but our neighbors, our Brethren, the domestics and children of our
common Master, the pardon, not of many faults, but of one or two only? not of
such as are grievous, but of slight ones? not of capital ones, but such as are
remissible? yea sometimes rather pretended, than real? Add hereto, in fine,
that as for the LORD JESUS, no one prayed him to forgive us; there was nothing
but his own goodness alone, that induced him to do us this grace. Whereas both
He, and his Father, and his Spirit, do exhort us and command us, to forgive our
Brethren; and this too, with promise, to render us for ever happy, if we do it;
and threatening to condemn us to eternal fire, if we fail of it. Thus you see,
how proper this example of our LORD is, for the Apostle's purpose and design.

But observe yet, in passing, that the comparison he makes between our duty in
this behalf, and the grace of JESUS CHRIST toward us, does evidently infer,
that the pardon of our sins, which the LORD gives us, is pure and simple, and
without reservation of those temporal punishments and satisfactions, which they
of Rome pretend he does exact of them, after he has remitted them their
faults. For as to us, it is clear, that as often as our Brother repents of
having offended us, we ought to forgive him, according to the command of
CHRIST; and he would be a mocker, and impious, who would not remit him his
fault, but on condition that he were for some while punished for it in a fire.
Since then the Apostle wills, that we forgive our Brethren, as JESUS CHRIST
forgiveth us, who sees not, that this unheard of rigor, has much less place
in the grace we receive from our LORD, than in that we do our Brethren, by
forgiving them, when they have offended us.

This my beloved Brethren, is, what we had to say to you for exposition of this
Exhortation of the Apostle's. Would to GOD the practice of it were as common
among us, as the understanding of it is easy, and the justness of it evident!
But we know well, what he requires of us, and are not ignorant, that it is our
Masters will, neither can we deny but that it is most reasonable; and yet we do
it not. He commands us mercy, and kindness; and nothing is more rare among us.
They are as little to be seen here, as in the societies of the World. We have
for the most part, little or no resentment, of the miseries of our neighbors:
For if we were touched with a true compassion for them, we should visit them in
their ficknesses, we should succor them in their necessities, we should
assuage their griefs; at least our tears would declare the part we take in
their troubles; whereas we do, wellnigh all of us, the contrary. We shun
meeting the afilicted, as if misery were a contagious malady; and to color our
hard-heartedness, we feign, that they are wicked, and have verily deserved the
evil, that they suffer. We insult over their unhappiness, so far are we from
alleviating it; and instead of oil, and balm, we pour vinegar into their
wounds; not considering, that by adding calumny to rigor, we do not justify,
but redouble our cruelty: For though it were so, that the afflicted had been
worse, than you represent him; does it follow, that you ought not to have pity
on him? Do you owe compassion to none but the innocent? Good LORD! what would
become of us, if GOD and men should so deal with us? For who of us is not
culpable? You that reproach the poor afflicted, unseasonably with their faults,
in conscience, are you pure, and without reproach before God? If you look
narrowly into it, you will see, that if you be not miserable it is not for that
you have not deserved it, as well as any other, but for that GOD spares you, or
reserves you, perhaps, for some harsher chastisement. But it is uncertain too,
whether the person, whom you treat so ill, be afflicted for the faults you
accuse him of, or no: For seeing the impenetrable depth of the judgments of
GOD, no man can know of a truth, how the case is; and in the uncertainty we
are, it is best to carry our selves wisely toward the man, and to judge
moderately of his affliction. After all, the LORD has not made you Inquisitor,
or Judge, of your Brethren, that you should pity none, but those whose
innocence you should justify. He reserves the examen of them to himself, and
the authority to make it. For your part, who are an infirm man as others be, he
gives you order only to consider, whether your neighbors, and especially your
brethren, be afflicted; and if they be, to have pity on them; to seel their
evils as sensibly as they themselves; and after this first dr^^ling by
compassion, to follow the curing of their miseries with a gentle hand,
liberally imparting to them your alms, if they be necessitous, your
instructions, if they be ignorant, your credit and assistances, if they be
oppressed, and in sine, your succor, if they need it.

But as we have little or no resentment of the affairs of others; so have we
too much for our own: Our private interest swalloweth up all the thoughts and
affections we have. We are sollicitous for none but our selves, and those
hearts of ours, which see our Brethren pine away, and languish, and dye,
without sheeding so much as one tear, cannot endure the least prick in our own
skin, without perturbation, and being pierced through with grief. This
delicateness makes us unable to bear any thing. The heaviness, the simplicity,
the least defect we see in our people about us, or in our friends, does offend
us. And though we have more need than any, of the equity, and indulgence of
others, yet we can bear nothing from them, but imitating in this part of our
lives, the furious and extravagant rigours of Rome in her Councils, do
excommunicate and anathematize indifferently, all that crosses us. And as for
the offenses that are done us, we make them so heinous, that if we were
believed, they would all be taken for treasons, which cannot be pardoned
without injustice, and notable prejudice to all humane society. Hence come
those hatreds and quarrels, wherewith all is full among us, and which are kept
on foot, and perpetuated to the reproach of the Gospel, and scandal of the
world, between great and small, yea, the more the sorrow, between neighbors
and nearest alliances, not so much as Brethren and Sisters exempted; neither
the communion of grace, nor of nature, being sufficient to reduce our
refractory and untr^ctable stoutness to reason. Now, though this be horrible,
yet need it not be wondered at: For the cause of it is very evident, even pride,
which has taken up the place of that humility which the Apostle commands us.
It Is this arrogance, and that haughty opinion, which every one has of himself,
that renders us so cruel and unnatural, insensible of the miseries of the
afflicted, and implacable toward those that have offended us. This is the
poison that kills all sweetness and gentleness, all tenderness and humanity in
us, and draws out of our bowels all the sentiments of the charity of JESUS
CHRIST. Restore humility, and you will soon recover all those divine Virtues.

But, dear Brethren, enough of complaints; especially on so good a day, in
which we have communicatted at the LORD's own Table; I would now much rather
praise your virtues and graces, than reprehend your faults and vices, I shall
therefore leave the charge of examining them to each one of your selves, to be
performed by you apart, under the eyes of GOD, and in the secret of your own
consciences; and will, for a conclusion, content my self with exhorting and
conjuring you to obey henceforth this command of the Apostle, and to put on (as
he enjoins) bowels of mercy, kindness, humility, gentleness, and patience,
bearing with one another, and pardoning one another, if one has a quarrel
against the other, as CHRIST has pardoned you. This is required of you, by
that sacred Bread and Wine, which you all have taken together this Morning, at
the Table of JESUS CHRIST, and are the symbol of your union, and the badge of
your concord. Has not that mystical Cup indeed sweetened your hearts? Has it
not mitigated your gall and bitterness? and mollified your stoutness? and
expelled out of your minds, all thoughts contrary to charity? This again, that
holy and glorious LORD calls for of you, who has to day been communicated to
you. Christian, says he, I have showed thee mercy, that thou might so do to
others; I have had pity upon thee, that thou might have compassion upon
them; I have given thee my flesh, and blood, that thou might impart of thy
good things to my poor members, who need them; I have died for thee, that thou
might live for them; and have satisfied thee with the bread of Heaven, that
thou might distribute unto them, that of the earth; I have pardoned thee thy
crimes, and drowned them all in my blood, that thou might cheerfully forgive
them the offenses they have done thee. Thus it is, my Brethren, that the LORD
bespeaks us.

The name of Christians, which we bear, and the quality of elect of GOD, Saints
and Beloved, which is inseparably annexed thereto, does also oblige us to the
same devoirs. For with what face can we say, that we are elected of GOD, if we
still abide in the commerce of the World, and its vices? Or his Saints, if we
have no mark of his sanctity? Or his Beloved, if we despise his commandments?
In fine, the interest of our own welfare and salvation, demands too the same
thing of us: For what is there more miserable, than cruel, haughty,
hard-hearted, and implacable souls? whom their own vices do torment night and
day for the present; and the fire of Hell will torment eternally in the world
to come? And on the contrary, what is more graceful or more happy, than a
Church, in which do reign pity and benignity, humility, meekness and patience?
And these holy virtues bind all the faithful together. It Is there, that the
LORD has commanded life, and the blessing for ever, Psalm. 133.3.
as the Psalmist sings: It Is there he pours forth the graces and consolations
of his Spirit during this world, and will in the next, distribute the crowns of
his Glory, and of his Immortality. Amen.

THE FORTIETH SERMON ON COLOSSIANS,
CHAP. III. VER. XIV, XV. Verse XIV. And besides all this put on Charity, which
is the bond of persection.

XV. And let the peace of GOD hold the chief place in your hearts, unto which
ye are called in one body; and be ye thankful.


DEAR Brethren; Hypocrisy, that piece of wickedness, which GOD most abhors,
has a great extent in humane life. It not only counterfeiteth piety, doing
external actions of religion, and hiding a protane and impious heart under this
handsome veil: but also frequently puts on a false thew of justness and
goodness toward men; that by this outside it may deceive them, and through
their credulity, accomplish its unhonest, and vicious designs. Hereby, first,
it commits an iniquity of blackest note; it being, as a wise Heathen sometime
said, one of the unjustest things in the world, to make a wicked wretch pass
for an honest man. And secondly, it does unworthily profane the acts of virtue,
as holy, and sacred a thing as any is, making them serve the passions and
interests of vice, than which a more unclean and baser object cannot be
imagined. For an Hypocrite does good, not out of any affection he has unto
virtue; but to get reputation, or win peoples hearts, or advance his own
affairs. Ambition, or avarice, or pleasure, is the idol, to which he
sacrifices the noblest, and most splendid actions. For instance, when he gives
alms unto the poor, it is not, for that he cares for them, as the Scripture
speaks of Judas; but he does it only to win credit. He gives properly to his
own vanity, and not to the necessitousness of men. Again, when he acts the part
of a merciful man, and forgives those that have crossed him, the offenses they
have done him; it is not any sentiment of goodness, but merely the interest of
his glory, that sways him so to do. There are a multitude of people that do
thus abuse beneficence, and gentleness. As the more expert sort of Tyrants,
they make 'em instruments of their lust; and when they perform any actions of
'em, it is not at the command of those virtues themselves; but in subserviency
to their own vices; retaining a disposition to be cruel, and inhumane, if their
interest requires it. Such as are not virtuous but after this manner, are not
so indeed. They are subtle, and dextrous; but not good men. And though the
external luster of these goodly works they do, be apt to deceive men; yet it
will not be able to satisfy their own conscience, if they have any; and much
less to content the eyes of GOD, who judges of things by their inside, and
their verity; not by their appearance. For that any act of beneficence, of
clemency, of meekness, and humanity, may be holy and acceptable unto GOD, it is
requisite it should proceed from a sincere love toward our neighbors. If it
come from any other principle, it is of no value in reality, how plausible and
pompous soever it be in show. It Is a false and spurious production; a fruit
sair without, but worm-eaten, and corrupt within. Beside that the thing speaks
of its self, St. Paul proclaims it, in the thirteenth Chapter of the first to
the Corinthians. If I distribute all my goods (says he) to feed the poor, and
have not charity, it profits me nothing.

Therefore, Brethren, the same Apostle, having here before charged us to bear
with one another, to pardon one another, and to perform all other acts of
kindness, mercy, meekness, and patience, does now add very pertinently for the
purging of our hearts and works from all the venom of hypocrisy, that
together with these virtues, which he has exhorted us unto, we have, above
all, charity, as that which is the soul of every true virtue: and without
which, the fairest, and most esteemed actions, are but, as an ancient Doctor
said well, glittering sins. And beside all this, (says the Apostle) put on
charity, which is the bond of perfection. And let the peace of GOD hold the
chief place in your hearts, unto which ye are called in one body; and be ye
thankful. You plainly see, that he recommends unto us three Christian virtues,
Charity, the Peace of GOD, and Thankfulness. Now as for the last of these, he
only names it, without saying ought else of it; whereas in referrence to the
other two, he briefly sets before us some considerations, that may oblige us to
take up the studious pursuance of them. For he says of charity, that it is the
bond of Perfection; and of the Peace of GOD, that we are thereunto called in
one body. In compliance then with the order of our Text, we will treat of three
heads in this action, if GOD please; first of Charity; secondly, of the Peace
of GOD; and then for a conclusion, in some brief touches of gratitude, or
thankfulness; about which the Apostle speaks but a word, and no more.

There is no person in the Church, but knows, that Charity is that pure, and
sincere, and virtuous love, which each of us does owe to other men our
neighbors, upon the account of that communion of nature we have with them, as
also principally because of the image of GOD, after which they all are created,
according to the express command that He has given us, to love them as our
selves. I grant, it has diverse degrees, and does embrace men with some
inequality, these more strictly, and those less, according to the differences
of their merit and worth, as also of the union we have with them, either in
nature, or in the state, or in grace. Nevertheless it extends its self unto
all, and does not account any one a stranger; but obliges, and serves them
freely, as far as its ability permits, and when occasion is offered. For our
LORD and Savior teaches us, in the parable of that poor man, whom the
Samaritan assisted, Luke 12.36.
finding him in that pitiful estate the thieves had left him, on the way from
Jericho to Jerusalem, that every man that needs our help, is our neighbor;
So that GOD, and right reason obliging us to love whom ever that is our
neighbor, it is out of all doubt, that there is no man but we ought to love.
But as Charity has a much greater extent than the friendship of the world; so
is its flame much more pure and holy. For to say true, men of the world love
none but themselves; it being evident, that if they affect any, it is not so
much to do them good, as to draw profit or pleasure from them. But Charity does
sincerely affect its neighbor, desiring to him, and procuring him that good
which is necessary to make him happy. And the difference of these two
affections comes from their causes. For Charity issues from the love of GOD;
whereas worldly friendship proceeds from that vicious, and inordinate love
which every one bears to himself; so as Charity loving our neighbor for
GOD's sake, seeks nothing but GOD's glory, and the welfare of the person it
loves: whereas a man of the world, not loving but for his own sake, does
accordingly seek nothing but his own interests. And though this does plainly
appear in the whole conduct of the one and the other of these loves, yet it may
be particularly observed in this one event, namely, that that affliction and
misery which extinguisheth worldly amity, does make the affections of charity
to flame more than ever; an evident sign, that the one is neither bred, nor
fed, but by the fruit it gathers from the thing it loves; whereas the other, on
the contrary, being kindled by that ray of the Divine image, which it sees
engraven on the nature of its neighbor, is kept always in, and the more it
sees him need its compassions, and good offices, the more it increases, and
redoubleth its endeavors. It Is this holy, and Christian Charity, which the
Apostle would have us put on. And besides all this, (says he) put on Charity.

These words, as they lie in the original, may be taken two manner of ways,
both of them apt, and good, and such as have their authors. Some interpret
them, and above, or over all these things. Others, a little otherwise, and for
all these things. Both the one, and the others, do accord, that all those
things which the Apostle intends, are the same he had spoken of immediately
before; to wit, those bowels of mercy, that kindness, that humility, meekness,
and patience, which, in the precedent verses, he commands us to put on. Now
then, after the sense of the former of those interpreters, he means that to
this rich garment, we should add charity: putting it uppermost, as a precious,
and an useful robe, to cover, and keep all the rest. Not that we must put on
charity last, in regard of time, after all those other virtues: for on the
contrary, it ought to be first formed in us, as the parent, of whom the most
part of the rest are to be brought forth. But the Apostle makes use of this
comparison, upon the account of other resemblances that these things have with
one another; and the authors of this exposition do note three of that kind;
One, that as the robe we put over our clothes, is greater and larger than our
other clothing, so charity has by much a greater extent than any of the
forementioned virtues. For whereas Mercy does but succor the miserable;
Kindness, but help them that have need or us; Sweetness, but caress those with
whom we converse; and Patience, but bear with those that offend us; charity
embraces them altogether, and is affectionate toward our neighbors
generally, both those that are in adversity, and such as are in prosperity;
persons accommodated, as well as those that are necessitous; friends, and foes;
the perfect, and the infirm; those that oblige us, and those that offend us;
and those likewise that look upon us as indifferent. Secondly, as that last
piece of our clothing, which also covers all the rest, and is most in sight, is
commonly fairest, and the richest; so likewise is Charity, without doubt, more
excellent than all the other Virtues, which make up a Christian's clothing.
Lastly, as the one does mark out, and distinguish men, being usually the
character of their rank, and of their quality in the Town, or in the State: so
the other is the Christians livery, and a mark of the honor they have to be
the children of GOD, and disciples of his Son: Joh. 13.35.
as our Savior said; By this shall all men know that ye are my disciples, if
ye love one another.

These considerations are pretty, and pleasing; But I doubt whether they be not
over-sine, and something too far fetched. I should rather say, that the
Apostle, by those words of his, And above all these things put on Charity, does
purely, and plainly mean, that above all, that is principally, we be owners of
Charity; signifying to us thereby, as he elsewhere teaches us at large, that
it is the excellentest of all Christian Virtues; to that degree, that all the
rest do remain useless without it, being but so many vain, and fallacious
pictures, which have nothing of sirnmesse, or solidity in them. For instance;
Mercy without Charity, is but a weakness of nature. Without it kindness, or
benignity, is but indiscreet profusion. Courteousnesse, but deceitful tattle;
Humility, low spiritednesse; and Patience, a stupidity. It Is the Divine sire of
Charity, that animateth all these Virtues, and makes them perfect, and gives
them all the nobleness, and acceptablenesse to GOD, they have. It Is with good
reason therefore, that after the Apostle had recommended them to us, he adds,
that above all we have charity, as that which is of all the richest, and most
excellent. 1 Cor. 23.
Not to speak here of the advantage he elsewhere gives it above all other
parts of Christianity; even to the preferring it, not only before the gift of
tongues, and miracles, before the grace of prophecy, and all the other
mervails, wherewith JESUS CHRIST adorned the beginnings of His Church; but
even before Faith, and Hope; as that which will endure for ever, and flourish
in the very sanctuary of immortality; whereas all those other gifts of GOD,
which have their exercise only here beneath, shall cease; whence he concludes,
that Charity is greater than all those other graces.

The other Exposition, which interprets these words of St. Paul, And for all
these things put on Charity, is also very pertinent, and what we have been
saying, does sufficiently explain the sense of it. For since Charity is the
soul, and the perfection of all the sore-named Virtues, which gives them all
the valuableness and worth they have, the acts of them being vain without
Charity, as the Apostle says, it is clear, that for the having possession of
them, Charity must be had. Beside, it is it that exciteth, and sett^th them on
work: as also that, with a kind of necessity, produces, and forms them in
our souls. For it is not postible, but that the man that truly loves his
neighbor, should be sensible of his distresses, if he be afflicted; gratify
him with his beneficence, if he needs it; stoop to his necessities, and humble
himself about him; bear with his defects, if he discover any; treat him kindly;
condescend to his infirmities, and seek to him, if he withdraw from his
friendship, and patiently take his offenses, if he so far forget himself, as to
do him any; according to the Apostle's saying, that Charity is patient, and
kind, not envious, nor insolent; 1 Cor. 13.4, 5, 7. Romans 13.9, 10.
that it is not puffed up; that it endures all things, believes all things,
bears all things. Wherefore he affirms elsewhere, that He that loves
others, has fulfilled the law; and that this command, Thou shall love thy
neighbor as thy self, does comprehend in it, and sammarily re-capitulate all
the duties enjoined in the rest of the Commandments, and concludes, that
Charity is the fullness of the Law, that is, the thing that fills up all the
articles of it. Hence it comes, that St. John, the LORD JESUS His beloved
disciple, as we read in the Church History, in his extreme old age, having no
longer the strength, as afore-time, to make large Sermons in the assemblies of
the faithful, contented himself to say th^se sew words, Little children, love
one another; judging, and that rightly, that he had comprised in this short
sentence, all the true duties of Christians. Since then the nature, and
secondity, and efficacy of Charity is such, you see how great reason the
Apostle had to recommend unto us the putting of it on, for our having, and
exercising that mercy, benignity, humility, meekness, and patience, he told us
of before.

His adding, that Charity is the bond of perfection, has the same tendency;
But here it comes into question, what that perfection is, which Charity is the
bond of; and Expositors do labor to explain it to us; Some understand it of
the perfection of all virtues; which this one does bind, and put together,
comprehending, and embracing them all, as we said even now; and the Romanists
do thence draw an argument, to consirm their doctrine of justification by
works. For, say they, those that perfectly fulfill the law, are justified by
the works of the law. Now, since Charity is, in this sense, the bond of
perfection, it is evident, that such as have true Charity, do perfectly fulfill
the law; whence it follows, that they are justified by the works of the law.
But letting pass for the present, that which they presuppose, namely, that
Charity is here called, the bond of perfection, because it binds together,
and comprehends in it the observation of all the commandments of the law; it
is clear however, that that which they pretend will not follow. First, because
it is not sufficient for a man's being justified by the works of the law, that
he fulfills it after some certain time unto his life's end. It Is necessary he
should have fulfilled it from the beginning, and been exempt of sin, not only
from his childhood, and youth, as that justiciary says in the Gospel, but even
from his nativity; supposing then, but not granting, that he that has Charity,
does perfectly fulfill the Law, without failing in so much as one point; this,
as you see, would have place in him, but from the time he had put on the habit
of Charity; and could not hinder, but that he might have transgressed diverse
ways before. Since then the law justifyeth none but those that never violated
it, at any time whatever; it is manifest, that though a Christian should never
violate the law after he has Charity; yet could he not be justified by his
works; nor would he be exempted from needing the grace of GOD, for the
remission of the sins he committed before he had Charity. But where grace is,
Romans 11.6.
there justification by works cannot have place, according to St. Paul's saying
in the Epistle to the Romans. If it be by grace, it is no more by works.
Otherwise grace is no more grace: but if it be by works, it is no more by
grace. Otherwise work is no more work. But I add, in the second place, that
what they do suppose, to wit, that he that has Charity, does perfectly fulfill
the law, and so, as never to fail so much as in one point, that this, I say
moreover, is evidently false, and contrary unto experience, and unto Scripture.
Unto experience; for who but daily sees, and perceives how often, and how many
ways those very men among the faithful do offend, who have greatest degrees of
Charity? 1 John 1.
Unto Scripture; for it plainly tells us in diverse places, that if we say
(they are the words of an Apostle) we have no sin, we lie, and the truth is not
in us. True it is, that Charity does not cause us to offend; nay, such
offending is, on the contrary, a deviation, and a departure from Charity.
However, I affirm, it is no impossibility, but that a man that has true
Charity, may sometime falter in it, as you see it often comes to pass in all
habits; he that is endowed with them, does some actions not very consonant unto
them. A good Archer, for instance, does not always hit the white, and a good
Advocate does not always plead exactly well. It befalls the best Writers, and
the exquisitest Painters, and the most accomplished Politicians, to commit
errors now and then in the matters of their profession. And it was said long
since, of the excellentest, and most admired piece of heathen Poetry, that
there are passages in it, at which the author slept: from whence others have
derived the privilege, that in a prolix work they may sometimes forget
themselves. The same event attends the habitudes of moral virtues; for neither
do these so absolutely fill up the souls of men, but that actions, contrary to
them, do sometimes escape those who have obtained them to an hi^^ degree: as
experience shows; and Philosophers have expressly noted. Therefore neither are
faults incompatible with the habit of Charity, as we possess it here beneath.
Only it withholds such as are truly endowed with it, from committing them
often; and when they are overtaken, it eftsoons touches them with regret at
it, and moves them to repent of what they have committed. Since then, that to
be justified by works, a man must present such ones unto GOD, as have no way
any need of pardon, it is still evident, that Charity, how accomplished soever
we may have it here below, yet is not capable of justisying us before GOD. If
our adversaries will be obstinate, and maintain that Charity is exempted from
all sin, I will grant it them, of that Charity, which reigns on high in the
Heavens, being kindled, Aug. Ep. 29. ad Hieron.
and kept up by the vision of the glorious face of GOD: but I will say with St.
Augustine, that no man has such a Charity upon earth: ours here is but begun,
and impersectly formed. Yet the Law requires of us a Charity full, and entire,
and perfect in every particular. Surely then, that which we for present have,
is not able to satisfy the Law, nor by consequence, justify us.

But others conceive, that by this perfection, which Charity is the bond of,
the integrity and unity of the Church is to be understood: for that the
perfection of bodies does properly consist in the collection and colligation of
the parts whereof they are composed; those that want any one of them, being not
in a condition to be called perfect. These authors therefore make account, that
Charity is here styled, the bond of perfection; because it is it that joyneth,
and binds all the faithful together, by means of the mutual love they bear to
one another. For my part, Dear Brethren, I think we must join together these
two expositions, and reduce them to one; for this end, taking the Apostle's
words, the bond of perfection, as simply importing, that Charity is a perfect
bond, by an Hebraism very frequent through the whole Scripture; as when it is
said a man of sin, or a man of peace, to signify a sinful man, Romans ^.26.
or one that is peaceable, or pacifick; affections of infamy, for infamous
affections: and so in a multitude of other places. Here then, in like manner,
the Apostle says, a bond of perfection, instead of a perfect bond, an exquisite
bond, capable of binding up in perfection both all Christian Virtues in every
faithful soul, and all the faithful in the Church with one another. For as
concerning Virtues, Charity binds them together; both by that common principle,
whence it causes them to spring, to wit, love of our neighbor; and by that
common end, unto which it directs them, namely, his benefit, and edification;
It gathers up, and puts all of them together in its bosom, not leaving one out
of its enclosure, because they are all necessary for it; mercy to comfort those
whom it loves; benignity to succor them; humility to win them; gentleness to
please them; patience to conserve them; and in fine, all the rest, to acquit it
self of those duties it would do them. And as for the faithful, who knows not,
that Charity is the perfect bond of their union? The considerations of blood,
of state, of interest, and of pleasure, do sometimes bind other men together;
but it is with a great deal of imperfection; these unsure bonds being daily
broken; and so badly compacting the persons they enclose, that they are soon
separated, and do sometimes even fall foul with, and rend one another. But
Charity is in very deed, a perfect bond, that uniteth those whom it ties
together, so close, and with such firmness, as neither the accidents of
fort^ne, (as they call them) nor the mutations of the earth, nor death it self,
which ruins all other unions and conjunctions in the World, can loosen them,
or separate them from one another. It was this sacred bond, that heretofore
made all the believers at Jerusalem to be of one heart, and of one soul. It Is a
bond, Acts 4.32.
that all the force of men and elements can neither break nor untye; a bond
stronger than death, and the grave, as the mystical Spouse sings in that
excellent Song. It does not only join the souls of the faithful; it mingleth,
and consociates them, changes them into one body, and one spirit; gives them
the same will, and the same affections.

Now surther, it is to form and conserve this holy union among us, that the
Apostle does recommend to us the peace of GOD, in the second part of this Text.
Let the peace of GOD, says he, hold the first place in your hearts, to the
which you are called in one body. For this peace of GOD, is not that which we
have with GOD, by faith in JESUS CHRIST His Son; when as being appeased by the
satisfaction of His Cross, He looks upon us in Him with a propitions, and
favorable eye, as a Father, and not as a Judge, not imputing our sins to us,
which may be termed, Peace of conscience. But it is the peace we ought to have
with one another, all of us living amiably together, as children of one and the
same Father, and heirs of one and the same grace and glory. It Is the daughter
of Charity, and a fruit of that holy and Christian love which binds us
perfectly together. The Apostle calls it the peace of GOD; first, because He
loves it above all things, and upon this account is often styled in the
Scriptures, the GOD of peace; hating nothing in the world more than trouble,
and discord, and contentions, and wars. Secondly, because He commands it us
every where in His word. And lastly, because He is the Author of it, who gives
it, and inspires it, by His Spirit, into all those that are truly His children.
And the Apostle has expressly given it this title in this place, for the more
effectual recommending of it to us, and that He might induce us to receive it
with the greater respect, as a thing of GOD's holy, sacred, and divine, which
we cannot violate without offending grievously that Sovereign Majesty to whom
it does belong (...) many ways.

He wills, that this Peace of GOD do hold the chief place in our hearts; The
term he makes use of in the original is admirably expressive, and elegant; for
it properly signifies, to have the super-intendance of a thing; to be the
judge, and arbiter of it; to govern, and regulate it, and give it law. That is,
the Apostle means, that this Divine peace be the Queen of our hearts; the
mistress and governesse of all your motions; that that keeps them in due
respect, and withholds them from ever attempting ought that tends to
violate, or disturb it. And if the resenting of an offense, for instance, or an
opinion of our own worth, or any other such consideration, do begin to kindle
wrath, or hatred, or animosity against our brethren, or excite some other
passion of like nature in our hearts, that this Peace do forthwith advance, and
stay the commotion and agitation of our minds, calming the storm, and speedily
repelling all these sentiments of the flesh, as so many incendiaries, or evil
spirits, without giving them entrance, or audience. That it do enjoin us, and
inspire into us humility, and patience, when we have been offended; regret, and
the making of satisfaction, when we have offended any other: and cause us to
seek carefully after all that it shall judge necessary to maintain amity, and
good intelligence among us, as kind words and obliging deeds; banishing both
from our mouths, and from our manners, all that is apt to cause, or keep up, our
dividing from our neighbors.

The advertising of us, that this is the peace of GOD, were enough to persuade
us to give it such place in our hearts. But that the Apostle might overcome all
possible obstinacy, he here further represents unto us two considerations
besides, which oblige us to give it this super-intendency over our souls. The
one is, that we are thereunto called; and the other, that we are one body. For
the first, you know that our LORD and Master JESUS CHRIST, does every where
call us to this Peace of GOD, and that He has given us precepts for it in His
Gospel, and examples of it in His life. For what was there ever in the world
more meek and peaceable, than this Divine Lamb? He contended not, Mat. 12.19.
nor cried, and His voice was not heard in the streets; as the Prophets
foretold of Him. He was gentle, and lowly in heart. He never repulsed any; and
received sinners with open arms, how bad and abominable soever they had been.
He invited His greatest enemies unto His salvation, and offered His grace to
the most obstinate, and bore their contradictions without answering again, and
their reproaches with silence, and their rage without exasperation; and did
weep bitterly for that Jerusalem, that rebellious City would not know the
things of her peace. Such is the pattern He gave us; commanding us likewise
expressly to be sweet, Mark 9.50.
and simple as doves, without gall, and without bitterness, and to be in peace
among our selves. And His Apostles repeat this lesson to us in diverse places,
Romans 12.8.
as St. Paul here, and other-where again. If it be possible, as much as in you
lies, have peace with all men. And it is for this that JESUS CHRIST came into
the world, even to pacify Heaven and Earth, Jews and Gentiles; Isa. 2.4 and
11.6, 7, 8.
to extinguish enmities and wars, and change swords into plow-shares, and
spears into pruning-books; to take away the poison of asps, and the cruelty of
wolves, and the fierceness of lions, and transform bears, and the savagest
beasts into lambs, Isa. 66.12.
and make them all live, and dwell peaceably, and amicably together; finally,
to make peace overflow as a river, as the ancient oracles had magnifically
foretold; Isa. 9.5.
by reason whereof He is also expressly styled the Prince of Peace. And you know
it was the legacy He bequeathed us, when He was preparing to dye for us. Joh.
14.2.
Peace I leave with you, (said He) my peace I give unto you; not to speak of
the blessing, and the dignity He promises those that shall love the same.
Blessed (says He) are the Peacemakers; Matt. 5.9.
for they shall be called, children of GOD. After all this, who can doubt, but
He calls all His unto peace, as the Apostle here affirms? Since He forms them
to it by His voice, by His lise, by His promises, and by the whole design of
His Mediatorial Office?

But besides the command and order He has given, the very estate and condition
He has by His vocation put us in, does manifestly oblige us thereunto; and
this the Apostle represents unto us in the second place, when having told us,
that we are called unto peace, he adds, in one body, or to express the full and
whole force of the Greek words, in one only body. It Is a doctrine universally
received, and most expressly asserted in diverse places of Scripture, that the
whole Church does make up but one only mystical body, of which JESUS CHRIST is
the head, and the faithful are the members, being animated under Him with one
and the same spirit, and knit together by one and the same Faith, Hope, and
Charity. No one has part in the Kingdom of Heaven, who lives not in the
communion of this body. Sure then it is one of our greatest concernments to
maintain peace among our selves; and to put it, as the Apostle gives us order,
in the highest place of our hearts, that it may govern with supremacy all our
thoughts, all our motions, and sentiments. For there are no natural bodies, but
their members do conspire, and live with one another in a perpetual and
inviolable peace. The societies of States and Families, which are bodies, but
of another kind, namely, political and oeconomical are governed in the same
manner; their primary and most sacred law is, that all the orders and persons
of which they are composed, have peace with one another. Now if this has place
both in nature, and in the societies of mankind; how much more ought it to be
observed in the Church, which is a divine, a celestial and supernatural body?
Our own interest does naturally require it; For as war does weaken and ruin
the States into which it thrusts its self, and whose members it divides; so on
the contrary, Peace establishes, fortifieth, and conserves them, according to
that saying of our Savior, Matt. 12.2^.
Every kingdom divided against its self, shall be brought to naught: and every
City or house divided against it is self, shall not stand.

The Apostle adds in the close, and be ye thankful; which some referr to the
same scope that the rest of the Text has; as if he intended that those thanks
we owe to GOD for the free favor He has showed us in receiving us unto peace
with Him, do also evidently oblige us to maintain peace with our brethren. And
I acknowledge the argumentation is good, and pertinent. Yet it is better to
take this clause for an exhortation, he makes us in general to be thankful
toward GOD, and toward men. For, as ingratitude is one of the blackest, and
most detestable vices, expressly enrolled by the Apostle among the marks of
those wretched times, whose extreme corruption he foretells in the second
Epistle to Timothy; so is it sure, that gratitude, 2 Timothy 3.2.
or thankfulness, is a virtue most necessary of any: and in my opinion, he went
not very wide from the truth, who called it the mother of all other virtues.
Cicers.
It enkindleth piety in our hearts; raises up the love of GOD, and of His
CHRIST, and carries us to serve and obey Him, and by consequence, to exercise
all honesty and virtue. It is certain, that upon this account, no man sins
without ingratitude. Add hereto, that thankfulness is the source of all the
services and duties we persorm to our Princes, to our Country, to our Parents,
to our Superiors, and all that have obliged us; offices as you know, that have
an huge extent in (...) it is with a great deal of reason, that the Apostle
(...) give us charge also touching Thackfulnesse.

Dear Brethren, These are the three Virtues which he tells us of in this Text.
Let us not neglect any one of them. But embrace them all three, and deck our
lives internally and externally with them. In the first place, above all let us
put on Charity; as the soul of Christianity, the perfect bond of your union,
the mark of GOD's children, the abridgement of all our duties, and the mother
of all Virtues. Having it, you have all; and without it, you have nothing.
Without it, all the profession you make of the Gospel, your prayers, your
religion, and your services, are but an empty noise, a sounding brass, 1 Cor.
13.1.
(as the Apostle speaks) and a tinkling cymbal. Because the Israelites wanted
this, GOD had all their devotions, and all their sacrifices in abomination. How
much more will He reject yours, if you have the impudence to present Him any
without Charity? Now that His Son JESUS has so magnifically discovered to you
the necessity and excellency of it? For what can you allege any longer, for
excusing your selves from this duty? Nature it self, verily, sufficiently
obliged you before to love your neighbors, since that they are your brethren,
even after the flesh, issued from the same Adam, and the same Noah, animated by
the same Spirit, clothed with the same body, born and bred upon the same earth;
and if you divest your selves of all the difference that vanity and opinion
has created, you will see, that in truth there is none at all between you and
them. You are subject to the same accidents they are; and the death that at
last brings them down, will no more spare you than it does them. Having so
strict a conjunction with them, you ought to look upon them as your other
selves, and love them as your near relations, and not account any thing that
betides them, foreign, or indifferent. The Heathen, who knew no more, had the
understanding to draw this conclusion from it. But the Cross of our LORD and
Savior has discovered to us other reasons of Charity, that are much more
excellent, and much more pressing. For He so loved men, that He died to save
them. Christian, how can you hate or despise persons whom your Master has so
much loved and esteemed? upon whom you see His blood, whereby they have been
washed and purified together with your selves? His Spirit, with which they have
been sealed as well as you? The first fruits, and earnests of that heavenly
inheritance unto which they and you are called to live eternally together in
the same? It Is by that they are to be considered, and not by what they are upon
this earth, which with the whole heap of all its pomps, and riches, and
nobility, and honors, and other pieces of vanity, is but a figure that passes
away, and perishes. If your neighbor has nothing on the earth; if he be
despised, and accounted the filth and offscouring of the world, as the Apostle
speaks, remember, that he has his share in Heaven, that he is an heir of this
eternal Kingdom, the child of GOD, and brother of JESUS CHRIST. Let this
dignity of his, which is so high, and so precious in the sight of GOD and His
Angels, induce you to love him, to tender him, and apply your self to him; let
it mitigate your resentments, if he has offended you; let it stretch for your
hands to a ready communicating of the succor of your alms, of your
consolations, and of your good offices, if any necessity of his does call for
them. For such is the nature of true Charity; it loves not in word, and with
the tongue, but indeed, and in truth. Let ours then abound in alms, and in
beneficence unto the poor; in consolations of, and in good offices to the
afflicted. Let it be firm and constant. Let not our brethrens ill successes no,
nor their offenses if it befall them to do us any) be ever able to break this
sacred bond of perfectness, which spiritually joyneth us and them together in
our LORD.

Let us also heedfully keep, as committed to our trust, that peace which JESUS
CHRIST has let us at His death, and unto which He calls us in one body, by
all His religious mysteries. This, says the Apostle, is the peace of GOD: and
he that keeps it, may be sure to have GOD with him, according to the promise
which the same Apostle does elsewhere make us. Live in peace, (says he to us)
and the GOD of love, and of peace shall be with you. Object not those petty
reasons which flesh and blood inspires. Nothing must be heard against the Peace
of GOD. The Apostle requires that it have the prime place in our hearts; that
it be the Governesse, and Super-intendant of them. Account then every thought
that would disturb it, as rebellious, drive it out of your hearts, and crush it
as an infernal thought, which cannot come but from the enemy, since it is
contrary to the peace of CHRIST. Now here, Dear Brethren, I might make large
complaints upon that rebelling, whereof the most of us are guilty, against this
Peace of GOD, which the Apostle sets up to rule in our hearts. We have shaken
off its yoke. Flesh and blood, and their interests have driven it out from
among us. It is so far from possessing the first place here, that it has
scarce any at all: and it seems, that offended with our contempt, it has
quitted the Church as well as the world, and is altogether retired into Heaven.
For all among us is full of divisions, and discord, of suits, of quarrels, of
little wars, which we make upon one another, with a scandalous eagerness and
obstinacy. In the name of GOD, let us recall, Beloved Brethren, into our
communion, this holy and blessed Peace of GOD, unto which JESUS CHRIST and His
Gospel, with so much instance invite us, and henceforth give it that place in
our hearts which the Apostle assigns it. This is the best thanks we can
render this great Savior for the kindness He has showed us. And if we deny
Him that peace He demands of us for our Brethren, I know not how we can ask of
Him His, for our selves; or clear our selves of the fowlest ingratitude that
ever was. But I hope better things, and do beseech the LORD, that Himself would
shed abroad His peace into our hearts, and absolutely settle it in them: that
hereupon we may see all His blessings abound in the midst of us, both those of
the present life, and those of the life to come. Amen.

THE FORTY FIRST SERMON ON COLOSSIANS,
CHAP. III. VER. XVI. Verse XVI. Let the Word of CHRIST dwell in you richly in
all Wisdom, ye teaching, and admonishing one another by Psalms, and Hymns, and
Spiritual Songs, with grace, singing from your hearts unto the LORD.


DEAR Brethren; Experience shows us, that most things are sustained by usage
of the same means that gave them being. Thus in nature, we see that nothing
does more confirm, nor better conserve the habits of Arts and Sciences, than
those very actions and exercises which sormed them, and that nothing does
better maintain Estates, than the same prudence and valor that raised them:
Also, as frequenting the converse of virtuous persons: does commonly enkincle
in our hearts a love of, and an aim at probity; So does it advance our constant
persevering in the same. Semblably in Religion, the Word of GOD, which
produces faith and holiness in our Souls, is the very thing that conserves and
perpetuates it there. This Word is the power of GOD, both to form the piety of
His Elect at first, and to keep it in them for ever, after it is formed; It is
both the Parent, and the Nurse, and Gardienne of the new man. It administreth,
both the seed of our Regeneration, and the milk of our spiritual nutrition.
It Is it that gives us spiritual life; it is it, that conserves the same. It Is
upon it, that both the beginnings, and the progressions; both the production,
and the perseverance thereof do depend. Wherefore the Holy Apostle, having
before exhorted the Colossians unto Christian Sanctification, and pointed at the
principal pieces of it, as mercy, benignity, patience, charity, and peace; now
to abridge this discourse, and comprise all in few words, does recommend to
them the Word of GOD; as the only means, not only to maintain and conserve, but
even to perfect and complete all the parts of their piety; as a living and a
plentiful spring, whence they might draw both those virtues which he had
nominated, and all others that were necessary for the persecting of their
Christianity. There is no need, (says he) I should take the pains to reckon up
particularly to you all the graces that ought to beam forth in your actions,
nor recommend one by one each of those perfections which the name and
profession of JESUS CHRIST obliges you unto. You have a good Master near you,
that will teach you them, and excellently form them in you; I mean, The word of
CHRIST, which I count it sufficient for me to recommend to you. Hear it, and
practice it, and let it be familiar with you. To direct you to it, is to say
all. You will want nothing, if you hear, and study, and believe its
intimations, with that heedfulness and respect you owe it. Let it dwell richly
in you in all wisdom, etc.

This is the advice, Beloved Brethren, that the Apostle heretofore gave the
Colossians; Advice, so much the more necessary for us now; because beside the
negligence and disgust of our nature, there are people found in this unhappy
age, who decry the Word of GOD, and do all they can to make Christians suspect
it, and to wrest out of their hands this precious treasure of faithful Souls.
An attempt unheard of in all the first ages of the Church, and not to be
believed, did not our eyes and senses testify of it? Therefore if you have any
zeal for your Masters Glory, upon whose wisdom all the blame that is laid upon
His word, does evidently reflect; if you have any charity for the edification
of your Neighbors; in fine, if you have any affection for your own Salvation,
Christians, hear with attention the Apostle's instruction. Take home to you,
and keep with you this Heavenly Word which he would lodge and have to dwell
there. Defend these Divine springs of life, which all our Fathers drank of,
against the injuriousness of these new Doctors, who would by all means stop and
fill them up; doing the House of JESUS CHRIST such wrong as the Philistines
sometime did the Family of Isaac, Genesis 26.15:
whose Wells they closed up and filled with earth, to render them useless; as
the Sacred Story tells us. Now to guide you in this Meditation, I will (if
please GOD) consider in order, the two parts that offer themselves in the
Apostles Text; First, that wherein he recommends unto us the studying of the
Word of GOD in these terms, Let the Word of CHRIST dwell in you richly in all
Wisdom. Secondly, that, wherein he represents to us some of the principal uses
we ought to make of it, Ye teaching (says he) and admonishing one another in
Psalms, and Hymns, and Spiritual Songs, singing from your heart unto the LORD.

All the terms he uses in the first part, are worthy of not a little
consideration. First, his calling the Word of GOD which was delivered by the
Prophets and Apostles, and is contained in the Scriptures of the Old and New
Testament, the Word of CHRIST. The Word of CHRIST, both because He is the
subject and the end of it; as also for that He is the Author of it, who
inspired it by His Spirit into His servants; in the same manner, as the Apostle
elsewhere terms all the afflictions of the new and of the ancient Church,
Hebr. 11.
even to those which Moses and the Israelites suffered in Egypt, the
afflictions and reproach of CHRIST; because CHRIST is both the cause for which
the faithful are afflicted, and also the Director of their afflictions, who
sends 'em them, and governs them by His Providence. Whence it clearly follows
that He is GOD, since all Scripture is by inspiration of GOD; and that He did
subsist in the time of the Patriarchs, and of all the ancient Church; against
the impiety of those Heretics who deny the Divinity of our LORD, and pretend
that He had no subsistence in Nature until He was born of the Blessed Virgin.

Further in the next place, we are to weigh in what manner the Apostle
recommends unto us the study of this Word. He says not, Let it be among you,
let it be read, let it be known of you; but using a term of much more force and
efficacy than all that amounts unto; he wills that this Word of CHRIST do
dwell in us. Dwelling, you know, is properly affirmed of men, and does import
their making their abode in this or that place their living, and being
ordinarily and almost always there. R. Moses Ben. Maim. in More Nevo. Chim. l.
1. c. 25.
Hence it comes as the the Learned of the Jewish Doctors has well observed,
that the Scripture uses this word figuratively, to signify the constant and
settled abiding of one thing in another; though the thing which is said to dwell
in the other be not animate, and that other which it is said to dwell in, be
not properly a place or a space that contains it. As when Job execrating the
day of his birth, wishes among other things, that clouds may dwell upon it,
meaning that that day be continually covered with clouds, that it never be
without that sable and sad veil, and as he explains himself, that darkness and
the shadow of death do for ever pollute it; Though to speak properly, it cannot
be said that clouds which are inanimate things, do dwell any where, and much
less dwell in a day or upon a day, which is not a place, or comprehensive
space, but a part of time. And it is also in this figurative way that we must
take all those passages of Scripture, in which GOD His dwelling somewhere is
spoken of; as when He protests in Exodus, and elsewhere often, Exodus 29.45.
Lev. 26.12. 1 Cor. 6.16.
that He will dwell in the midst of the Children of Israel; (a particular which
the Apostle applies also to the Church of the New Testament) the meaning is,
that His Majesty and His Providence, should always be with the faithful, and
never forsake them; though to speak properly, the LORD who is an infinite
Essence, and fills Heaven and Earth without being enclosed by them, dwells
no where. It Is in this figurative sense, that the Apostle here does use the
word dwell; and verily with much grace and emphasis, when He says, Let the
Word of CHRIST dwell in you. His intention is, that it be constantly and
setledly in you; that it be an inmate with your hearts and lips; that it never
leave them; And as our Souls dwell in our Bodies, to quicken them and to govern
all their motions; in like manner that this Divine Word be the soul of your
hearts, abiding day and night there, to conduct and regulate all your actions;
that it be as well known and as familiar to you, as the persons that dwell at
your house, and pass their whole time with you.

But the Apostle not content with so vivid an expression, adds yet another
term, to signify more fully how studiously we ought to fill all the faculties
of our Souls, with this Word of the LORD. Let it dwell in you (says he)
richly, that is abundantly, and as the French Bibles have it, plentiously, in
such sort as there may be neither any part of its mysteries, which is not found
in you; its promises, its commands, its assertions, its prophecies, its
instructions, being all entertained, and not one of them excluded; nor any part
of your selves, but this Divine g^est is admitted to lodge and abide in; your
understandings, memories, wills, affections, deportments; that it appear in
your whole life, and shine forth there in such a manner, as every one may
perceive it. It Is also hereunto, that the last words which he adds, in all
Wisdom, do refer; wherein he shows us the end, and the immediate effect of this
dwelling of the Word of GOD in us: namely the rendering us wise unto salvation,
and the giving us all the wisdom that is necessary to glorify GOD, and obtain
eternal happiness. He would have it dwell so abundantly in us, that we might
derive from it all the knowledge it gives, both of the things we should
believe, and of things we should do to be saved. For it is this he usually
means by that Wisdom which he recommendeth unto us. And because this
knowledge has many parts, of which some are useless without the rest; thence
it comes that he says not simply, let the Word of Christ dwell in you richly
in Wisdom, but in all Wisdom; to show us, that it is not enough to study some
part of this Heavenly knowledge. This it may be might have been sufficient for
men under the Old Testament, who were but in a minority; a Christian being come
to mature and full age, ought to know all the will of GOD, all His counsel, and
all that admirable Wisdom, which He has revealed to us by His Son, and
unfolded in His Scriptures.

Thus you see, Dear Brethren, what the meaning is of this precept of the
Apostle: In it now, we have a great many things to observe. And first, his
procedure, in that having begun discourse of our Sanctification, and not
inclining to enlarge upon it further for the present, he remits the faithful
for learning the rest not to the voice of the Church, but to the Word of
CHRIST; an evident sign that it is not the Church, as those of Rome pretend, but
Divine Scripture which is supreme directress of the faithful. It is true, that
Pastors are serviceable unto their instruction, but it is as Ministers only,
and not as Masters; nor do they Minister of their own, but out of the stock of
this Divine Word; beside which they ought to teach nothing of themselves; and
if they do they are not to be heard. Secondly, the express order which the
Apostle gives us, that the Word of CHRIST should dwell richly in us, does show
that it is the duty of Pastors, sedulously to exhort their Flocks unto the
study, and reading, and meditation of the Divine Scriptures, and that it is
incumbent on their flocks to addict themselves assiduously thereto. Whence it
follows in the third place, that this Word of CHRIST ought to resound
continually every where, in the Church and in its public Assemblies, and in
private Families, and the very Closets of its Members: Otherwise how would it
dwell plenteously in us? Moreover, since the Apostle speaks here to all the
faithful in general, as well people as Ministers, this Epistle being directed
by him to all the faithful Brethren in CHRIST, which are at Colosse, its
evident further, his intention is that not only all Christians do hear this
Word in the Church, but that they also read it each one in private if they can;
and that such reading is not only permitted but commanded them, as profitable
and necessary. Again, the Apostles requiring it should dwell in them, yea dwell
richly in them, does necessarily infer that it is not enough to know some
general points of this Heavenly Doctrine; but that men ought to be fully and
distinctly instructed in it, and in such sort, as there may not be any part of
this Divine treasure, but we are possessed of. The same appears further from
the effect which the Apostle would have us draw from it, namely our abounding,
by means of this word, in all Wisdom; a thing which has no place in those that
have but a superficial, and (as they speak) an implicit, that is a confused,
involved, and entangled knowledge of it. Whence, in fine, it clearly follows,
that the Word of CHRIST contains all things necessary to Salvation; it being
evident, that he that is ignorant of any part of them, is not owner of Wisdom,
and much less of all Wisdom; which yet the Apostle intimates we shall have, if
the Word of the LORD does dwell richly in us.

Compare now the Law and the Discipline of Rome, with this Doctrine of S. Paul,
and you shall find such a difference, or to say better, so palpable a
contrariety between them, as that the night and darkness are not more contrary
to the day and its light. First, the Apostle remits his Scholars to the Word of
CHRIST, to learn there all the duties of Christianity. Rome directs hers unto
the Pope and his Officers, to be instructed about their Salvation. The Apostle
gives Sentence, that the Word of CHRIST is capable of giving us all Heavenly
Wisdom, if it dwell in us. Rome asserts, that it is not sufficient for this
end, and that it contains but some part of saving Wisdom, for the completing
whereof, unwritten tradition must be added. The Apostle would have this divine
Word dwell in us. Rome would not that it should; and introduces in its place I
know not what kind of fabulous Legends, with which it fills the world, giving
them to her votaries for the instructing and feeding of their Souls. The
Apostle wills, that this Word be read, both in public and in private among
the faithful: Rome will not, that either the one, or the other be. As for the
public, if she show her assemblies any pieces of it, she shows them hidden,
and wrapped up in a Language not understood, that is, she reads them, and reads
them not; it being evident that the proclaiming the Laws and Ordinances of a
Sovereign to a people in a language which they do not understand, is all one as
if they were not in effect proclaimed. It Is the holding out a Candle, but a
Candle hid under a Bushel; that is, an holding it not out. It Is a presenting
the face of CHRIST unto his people; but a presenting it veiled and disguised
under such a form as they discern nothing of it. And as to private respects,
you know with what indignity Rome does treat Christians, and how she forbids
them to read their Father's Testament, and judges it a crime, that they should
handle Books which were made for them, or see those Letters which are expressly
directed to them. And that the permission of this reading, which they give some
Tradesmen of this City, and the boldness of some Doctors, who deny even the
clearest things, may not deceive you, I think it pertinent to represent unto
you here the Doctrine of Rome, touching this matter. Know then that in the
Treatise and Index of prohibited Books, drawn up by the Authority of the
Council of Trent, approved and published by the Authority of Pope Pius IV,
Index libr. pro hibitor. Reg. 4.
and of all His Successors, one of their first Rules runs expressly in these
words. Since it is manifest by experience, that if the Holy Bible be commonly
and indifferently permitted in the Vulgar Tongue, there comes of it more
damage, than profit, by reason of the temerity of men; the judgment of the
Bishop or the Inquisitor must be stood to, in this case; so as they by the
Counsel of the Parish Priest, or of the Confessor may grant the reading of the
Bible in a Translation made by some Catholic Author, unto such as they shall
find capable of drawing from such reading, not damage or prejudice, but
increase of faith and piety; and this License they must have in writing. As for
those that shall presume to read it without such License, they may not receive
absolution of their sins without having first rendered up their Bible into the
Ordinaries hands. Thus far the Papal Law.

Was their ever Ordinance more injurious to the Word of GOD, and to His
Apostles authority? First, their position at the entrance, namely, that the
common reading of the Bible does more hurt than good, and causes more damage
than profit; this I say is horrible, and directly contrary both to the Wisdom
and Goodness of GOD, as also to S Paul's declaration. For who can believe that
GOD should give such Books to His Church, as are more apt to hurt, than to
help? And how does His Apostle recommend them to all Christians indifferently,
willing that this Word dwell plenteously in them, if this be dangerous for
them, and rather pernicious than profitable? And why does he promise us from it
the fruit of Wisdom yea of all Wisdom, if the reading be so perilous? Is
Wisdom an evil and damageable thing? But it is easy to comprehend the thoughts
of Rome; She means assuredly that reading of the Bible is prejudicial to Her;
that it discovers her impostures, and giving Wisdom to the Simple, does arm
and fortify them against her corruptions, and pretended traditions. This is in
truth the damage and loss she fears, and which makes her so careful to
extinguish or set aside all glimpses of this Heavenly light, to the end she may
reign at her care by the favor of darkness, And if she would have sincerely
represented her motives in this ordinance of hers, there should have been not
the Preface, we even now reported, but such a one as this, to wit, it being
evident by experience tha^ the reading of the Bible is very prejudicial to her
interests, giving men the hardness to reject the authority, and Doctrine of her
Pope, who is not only not found any where in this Word of GOD, but even
contrarieth it in diverse instance; for these reasons it has seemed good to her
to shut up and restrain the knowledge of it as much as she can, since the
abolishing it altogether is both impossible, and scandalous. This is their true
meaning, this their true motive. And in very deed you see how in conclusion
they straiten this reading as much as possibly they can. First, they will not
have men read any version of the Scripture, though never so good and faithful,
and exactly made out of the Original Texts, except it have (as they speak) some
Catholic for its Author; that is one or other of those people, who being
passionate for the Roman cause, would weaken the words of the Scripture the
most they may, and sometimes even audaciously corrupt them for their own
advantage; as you may plainly perceive by the example of him, who passing the
bounds of the modesty of all others, has not long since put the express term,
Mass, a stranger to all Scripture, into the Book of the Acts of the Apostles,
and written at the third Chapter, that the Prophets and Teachers which were in
the Church of Antioch, did say Mass against the Warrant of the Original, and of
all ancient Versions, the Syriac, the Arabic and the Latin it self canonized
by the Council of Trent, every of which does say conform to the Original, that
those persons served or Ministered to the LORD; against the example of the
vulgar versions of the Roman Communion, as that of the Doctors of Lovain, that
of Benedict, and of Frison, and others; and in fine, against the evidence of
the thing it self, this latter version falsely supposing that there could be no
Divine Service, but it is pretended Mass. Judge by this scantling what the
versions of the Bible made by these good Catholics, are like to be. But
however altered and disguised in favor of them these versions be, they yet
fear them still; well knowing that it is not easy so to sophisticate this
Heavenly word, but that it will always have virtue enough left to confound
their errors. Therefore they add another restriction, that for the reading of
such Bibles there must be had a License, and in writing, not from the Parish
Priest (this suffices not) but from the Bishop of the Diocese, or from the
Inquisitor (an office in the Modern Church, which is no more found in Holy
Writ, than the office of their Mass.) And yet they do not leave them an
absolute disposal of the matter; but oblige them to secure themselves first, by
conference and deliberation with the Curates of the Petitioners, that they are
persons whom the Word of GOD will do no hurt to; that is, will not make them
disgust the Roman Religion; which is at the bottom, all the danger that they
apprehend.

Christians, do you not tremble to hear that these Masters forbid what the
Apostle gives you order to do? a thing that JESUS CHRIST Himself commands you,
when He says, Search the Scriptures? and that their dispensation must be had
to do what JESUS CHRIST and His Apostle enjoin you? The Apostle says, Let the
Word of CHRIST dwell in you; and these Gentlemen cry on the other side, No,
meddle not with it. Cast not your eyes on it. Have not so much as the Book in
your Houses, (which is far indeed from getting it to dwell in your hearts)
except one of our Bishops, or of our Inquisitors give you permission for it. Oh
new and unheard of Theology! That a Christian must have a dispensation from
Rome, or one of her Ministers, to obey JESUS CHRIST; and cannot do what S. Paul
commands him, except the Pope's Officers give him a permission in writing. Can
men more openly debase the authority of CHRIST, and His Apostle? Sure what is
commanded is a duty; and that which is permitted (especially what one is
obliged to have a permission for in writing) is a thing contrary to our duty,
as every one knows, and as you may see by the practice of Rome it self, where
permission to eat flesh in Lent is indeed demanded, but not to cat fish in the
Carneval; because, according to their Laws, the first is contrary to a
Christian's duty, and not the second. If then a Christian must have a
permission to read the Bible, it is evident, that the reading of it is a matter
of some contrariety to a Christians duty; that of it self it is unlawful and
prohibited. Again if such reading be duly commanded, it must of necessity be
said, that every one is obliged to it, (at least every faithful man or woman
that can read) and that they no more need any one's permission to read the
Bible, than to give an alms, or to comfort an afflicted person, or to obey
their Father or their Prince. S. Paul's command as you see is express. Let the
Word of CHRIST dwell in you. It Is then our duty to read it, and meditate it:
It Is then a manifest enterprise against the Apostles authority, to bind us up
that we may not read it without any man's permission who ever he be. It Is a
changing of what Paul has ordained. It Is a taking it out of the rank of duties
where he had let it, and a placing it among transgressions. It Is a making that
to pass for prohibited, which the Holy Apostle has commanded; there being no
place for a permission, but in things, which the Law of GOD, or of men have
forbidden.

Can a stranger thing be ordained? Yet they stoop not here. For fearing least
such a permission, though difficult, and strait, and depending upon the will of
their Officers, should yet prejudice their Religion, if any use were made of
it, they withdraw welnigh altogether, the power to grant it, which they gave
the Bishop and the Inquisitor before. Index libr. prohibit. observe. circa 4.
Regul.
For in the observation which they add upon this fourth Rule, they declare
expressly, that the meaning is not, there is by it any power attributed of new
to Bishops or Inquisitors, or to the Superiors of Regular Societies, to give
leave to any to read, or buy, or keep the Bible, or any piece either of the
Old, or of the New Testament, or so much as summaries, or historical
abridgments of the Books of Holy Scripture, in any vulgar tongue whatever;
because (say they) they have hitherto been deprived of the power of giving such
permissions, by the Roman holy general Inquisition, and it must be inviolably
observed. See, I beseech you, a most manifest illusion! They forbid all
Christians to read the Bible, without the Bishops or the Inquisitors
permission; But they presently declare that no Bishop nor Inquisitor has power
to give any. Thus there shall no person be permitted it. Is not this an evident
mocking of the world? But these gallants do so hugely dread the Scripture, that
they had rather become guilty of thus shamefully, and openly deluding
Christendom, than suffer any one to have or read so dangerous a Book. They
would rather salve their interest, than their honor. And in very deed, such
the practice is in Spain and Italy, and in the Territories of the Inquisition;
where this permission to read the Bible is not given to any man, whoever he be;
and where it is held for a capital crime, and a sure mark of Heresy, to have in
house but a volume of the Old or New Testament in the vulgar tongue. So as it
must of necessity be, that those who do in these parts permit this reading unto
some, are either guilty of violating the general ordinances of that Church they
profess themselves members of; or have some particular and extraordinary power
from the Pope to do, as they do; which yet does not appear.

This crime would be less strange, if it did clash only with this passage of
the Apostle. But it also overturneth diverse other most express instructions,
Deuteronomy. 17.18, 19.
which occur in the holy Scriptures. For GOD commands the King of Israel, who
was a Laick, no^ a Clerk, to write a copy of His law, and to have it by him,
Deuteronomy. 11.18, 19. and 6.7, 8, 9.
and read it diligently; and generally all His people to lay up all His words
in their hearts, and in their minds; to bind them for signs upon their hands,
and for frontlets between their eyes: that is, to have them as familiar as
their own hands and eyes; to teach them their children, and discourse of them
at home and abroad, lying down, and rising up; and write them on the posts of
their houses, and on their gates, which is just the same thing St. Paul here
calls in short, an having the word of GOD to dwell in them. In effect, St. Luke
praises the Ethiopian Eunuch, Acts 8.28. and 17.11.
for that he read the Scriptures; and the men of Berea, for that they consulted
them daily, to know, if the things which Paul and Silas preached to them, were
so. Yet we no where read, Psalm. 1.2.
that they had leave of any Papal Bishops, or Inquisitors. And David
pronounces that man blessed, who meditateth day and night in the law of GOD.
Again, Joh. 20.31.
the word of GOD being written, that we might believe that JESUS is the CHRIST,
and that believing we might have life through His Name, as says St. John; Romans
15.4.
and for our learning, as says St. Paul, that we through patience and comfort,
might have hope. It must of necessity be concluded, that the forbidding of
Christians to read the Scriptures, evidently is, either a frustrating the LORD
of His intention, or an accusing Him of having been unable to give us
Scriptures proper for His aim, and our aid. I say as much, and that more
positively, of the Apostolical Epistles; which being directed to the faithful
Clergy, and Laity indifferently, there is no reason to bar any of them from
reading what the first Ministers of GOD wrote to them all.

In fine, the fault of our adversaries is so much the more inexcusable, for
that the ancient Doctors, of whom they make so great account, Homil. 9. on
Levitie.
are directly contrary to them in this particular. As Origin for one, who would
have Christians not only hear the word of GOD in the Church, but exercise
themselves in reading it at home, and in meditating on it night and day. St.
Hierom for another, Hierom. Ep. 14. and 30. August. lib. de Catech. rud. c.
6.8. Gregor. in his Epistles, lib. 4. Ep. 40.
who would have women and maids themselves to learn the Scriptures by heart.
St. Augustine for a third, who does most earnestly recommend the reading of the
word of GOD to the very Catechumeni, that is, Christians of the lowest form,
such as had not yet received holy Baptism. St. Gregory the Great, that famous
Bishop of Rome, for a fourth, who gravely reproves a Physician of the Court,
for that he took not the pains to read the words of our Redeemer every day. For
what is holy Scripture (says he) but a letter from GOD to His creature? If you
were in a far Country, and there received letters from the Emperor your
Master, you would not be at rest, nor sleep at your case till you had read
them, and perceived what your earthly Prince should have vouchsafed to write
you: The Monarch of Heaven, the LORD of men and Angels has sent and conveyed
to your hands, His letters about the concernments of your life. And yet, my
Son, you deign not to read them. Apply to them, I beseech you, and meditate
daily your Creator's sayings. Thus Gregory, more than a thousand years a-go.
Judge how far the language of later Popes is from his spirit, and from his
principles. I pass by other Doctors of antiquity, who are no less contrary to
this modern abuse, and will only mention further, John of Antioch, Bishop of
Constantinople, to whom the Church has given the name of Chrysostom, that is,
Golden mouth, because of the richness and sweetness of his incomparable
eloquence; he alone would furnish a man with enough to make a small volume, if
any would put together all the passages of his works, in which he exhorts all
the faithful, and in special, those of the people, to an assiduous reading of
the Holy Scripture; and particularly in the Sermon he made upon this very Text
of the Apostle, which we are expounding. Hear, Chrysostom Homil. 9. in Ep. ad
Coloss.
(says he) you that live in the World, and have wife, and children; hear how
he orders you, yea, you principally, to read the Scriptures, not slightly, and
heedlesly, but with great care and diligence. He would have them heed no other
master; You have (says he to them) the oracles of GOD and no one can teach you
so well as these divine books. And a little after, Have (says he) the books of
the Bible, the true medicines of the soul. Get at least the New Testament, the
Acts of the Apostles, the Gospels. Let these be your perpetual Masters and
Teachers. If any affliction befall you, loss of goods, of children, or of
friends; if death it self present its self unto you, make search forthwith in
this book, as in the storehouse of celestial medicaments, and fetch out of it
the remedies that are necessary for the mitigating of your miseries; Or rather,
that you may not be put to the trouble of such search; lay them all up in your
soul, and have them ready upon all occasions. Ignorance of the Scriptures is
the cause of all our evils. Thus far Chrysostom. And truly, as you see, he was
not of the opinion of the latter Popes of Rome, who do accuse, as you heard
before, the reading of the Word of GOD, of doing more harm than good.

It the reading of them must be interdicted upon the pretense, that some
unstable spirits wrest them unto their destruction, it should be in the first
place prohibited to Bishop, Priests, and Monks; it being clear, if my memory
does not deceive me, that such as have forged heresies by an ill understanding
of the Scriptures, were all of one of those three orders, and not of the common
people. But it is a very wild expedient, and a remedy altogether extravagant, to
condemn the use of things, because of the abuse of them by some certain
persons. By this account, best, and most innocent things, and things most
necessary for the life of men, should be taken from them; the light of the Sun,
the savouriness of meats, the excellency of wines and fruits, iron, silver,
gold, and other metals; the accomplishments of learning, and the marvels of
eloquence. For which of these gifts of GOD does not the intemperance, or the
malice of men abuse? And, as the Prince of Pagan Philosophers has rightly
observed, there is nothing they so perniciously abuse, as that which is of its
self best, Aristot. Rhet.
and most profitable. To conclude, since the same GOD, who knows the nature,
and the efficacy of His own Scriptures better than any, commands us all to read
them; it is an insufferable temerity for a man to intrude with his advice, and
change what the LORD has appointed, as if he were wiser than the Most High.

But the Apostle clearly refuteth this calumny of Rome against Scripture, in
the other part of this Text, 2 Timothy 3.16.
where he sets before us the fruits and uses we ought to draw from it. Ye
teaching (says he) and admonishing one another by Psalms, and Hymns, and
Spiritual Songs, with grace, singing from your heart unto the LORD; Elsewhere
he advertiseth us, that the Scripture is profitable for doctrine, for reproof,
for correction, for instruction in righteousness. Here in like manner he
sets down, for the first fruit we are to gather from this rich knowledge of
the word of GOD, that mutual teaching we owe one another; for the second,
advertisement or admonition; for a third, consolation by the singing of Psalms,
and spiritual Hymns. As to the First; I grant, the charge of teaching in the
Church does principally pertain to Pastors appointed to this end; yet there is
not the privatest believer, but does also participate some way of this
function, when he has the gift, and the opportunity, to edify men in the
knowledge of true religion. Particularly Fathers and Mothers owe this office to
their children, husbands to their wives, masters to their households, the elder
to the younger, and in fine, each one to his reighbour, when he has the
convenience. Whence appears again how far distant the Apostles sentiment is
from Rome's. Paul would have the Faithful entertain with, and instruct one
another in the things of the word of GOD. Rome will not let any but the Clergy
have power to speak of them.

The second use we ought to make of the Word of GOD, is our admonishing one
another. Teaching does properly respect faith; admonition has reference to
manners. The Scripture furnishes us wherewith to discharge both the one and
the other of these two duties; informing us plainly and plentifully, as well of
things that are to be believed, as also of those that are to be done. And it is
incumbent on the believer to acquit himself in the matter according to the
knowledge he has, instructing the ignorant, and reproving the faulty; all,
with a spirit of sweetness, and discretion, as the Apostle does elsewhere
prescribe. For every man ought to look upon his neighbor as his brother;
reduce him, if he stray; raise him up, if he fall; clear things to him, if he
doubt; and have, in fine, as much care of his welfare, as of his own. Far from
us be the ferity of those proud spirits, who would not be sollicitous in the
least for their brethren's concerns: and who, if GOD should demand an account
of them at their hands, would be ready to say, as Cain sometime answered, Am I
my Brother's keeper, or Pedagogue? Now as we are to be charitable and prudent
for the performing of this service to our brethren; so ought we again in our
turn, receive it from them, with patience, and meekness; Remembering how the
Psalmist says, Let the righteous smite me, Psalm. 141.5.
it shall be a kindness; and let him reprove me, it shall be an excellent balm
unto me.

The third and last use the Apostle would have us make of the word of CHRIST,
is in Psalms, and Hymns, and Spiritual Songs, to sing from our hearts with
grace unto the LORD. The so doing does respect partly the glory of GOD, which
we ought to celebrate by our singing; and partly our own consolation, and
spiritual rejoicing. For the LORD is so good, that He has provided even for
the recreating of His children; and knowing, that Song, is one of His most
natural means, extremely proper both to dilate the contentment of our hearts,
and render it full-blown, as also to alleviate, and mitigate their sorrows, He
has not only permitted us, but even commanded to sing unto Him spiritual
songs. And for the forming us unto so holy, and so profitable an exercise, He
has given us in His word a great number of these Divine Canticles, as the
Psalms of David, and the Hymns of diverse other faithful and religious persons,
dispersed here and there in the books of the Old and New Testament.

The Apostle names three sorts of them, Psalms, Hymns, or Prais^; and Odes, or
Songs. Now, though there be no need to take much pains in an exact
distinguishing of these three sorts of Sonnets; nevertheless I think their
opinion very probable, who put this difference between them; that a Psalm is in
general any spiritual ditty, whatever the subject of it be; that an Hymn
particularly signifies Sonnets composed to the praise of GOD; and that an Ode,
or Song, is a kind of Hymn, of more art, and various composition, than others.
You have diverse examples of them all in the book of Psalms. First, all the
composures there, are called Psalms in general. But it is very evident they are
not all of a sort. There are some, in which is celebrated the goodness, the
wisdom, and the power of the LORD, either toward David, or toward the Church,
or in reference to all creatures. These are properly Hymns, and such is the
eighteenth Psalm, the hundred and fourth, the hundred forty fifth, and many
others. There are others, in which are mystically and elegantly represenced
with an excellent artificialness, either the wonders of CHRIST, as the forty
fifth, the seventy second, the hundred and tenth, and the like; or the
histories of the ancient people, as the seventy eighth, the hundred and fifth,
and hundred and sixth. To these properly does the name of Odes, or Songs,
belong. It Is with these sacred lays, of which the word of CHRIST affords us
both the matter and the form, that the Apostle would have us solace our selves.
St. James gives us order for it; Jam. 5 13.
Is any among you merry (says he) and in repose of spirit? let him sing Psalms.

The Apostle calls all these sonnets, spiritual, both because of their
author, who is the holy Spirit, and also for their matter, which concerns
only divine and heavenly things, the glory of GOD, and our salvation, not the
vanities, and passions, and follies of men, as carnal Poems do. He adds, with
grace; signifying by that expression, the sweet and saving effect of these
spiritual songs, which do profit and refresh both together. He would have us in
the third place, to sing from the heart; that is, not barely with the mouth, as
hypocrites, but with the attention, and affection of the heart. In conclusion,
he intends that we sing unto the LORD, that is, unto the praise and glory of
CHRIST, who is ordinarily signified by that term, the LORD, when it is couched
single, as here it is.

This is the rule he gives us for this holy and spiritual melody; a rule, which
Rome has as little spared as the other, which we have seen him prescribe,
about our being studious of the word of GOD in general. For first, She has
banished from the Church the faithful peoples singing; and that so far, as
those that be of her communion do downright declare, that to sing the Psalms
of David, as we do, is an huge scandalizing of Christians. Strange
Christianity, which is scandalized at a singing, that the Apostle commands; a
singing, that celebrateth the glory of GOD; a singing of what was endited by
His Spirit, composed by His Prophets, and tends not but to the edification
and consolation of faithful souls. Certainly, beside the authority of the Book
of GOD, it appears also by the writings of men, that heretofore in the
ancient Church, the Christian people bore a part in the singing of Psalms, and
did it both in public and in private. Again, for what our adversaries make
their Clergy sing; of what conscience can they say, that they sing it with the
heart; since they that hear it, and the greater part of them that sing it,
understand it not? all their Anthems being in Latin, a tongue long since dead,
and unknown to the people. Consider too, whether the pomp, and the niceness,
and the curiosity of their singing, and such a many of instruments as they
mingle with it, and all the other artifices of their music, be not more proper
for the pleasing of the ear, than the edifying of the spirit.

But dear Brethren, let us lay ^side the defaults of others, and mind our
selves. First, bless we our good GOD, for that He has set up the word of His
CHRIST again among us, in its light, and in its genuine use; and acknowledging
this grace of His from the bottom of our hearts, improve His favor. Let this
word be the only governess of our hearts, and lives. Hear we its voice in
public, consult it in private. Let us have these divine Books, in which the
Holy Spirit has consigned its instructions. Read them without scruple, and
without fear of finding ought that is dangerous, or venomous in them. They are
the Paradise of JESUS CHRIST, in which the tree of life grows; and whence flow
the streams of sanctity, of joy, and of immortality; but a Paradise, where the
old Serpent never entered; where his breath and poison are unknown. Fathers and
Mothers, instruct your children in this wholesome study. Young ones, addict your
selves to it betimes. Fill your memories out of this treasury of wisdom. Men
and women, old and young, rich and poor, learned and unlearned, receive ye all
this Divine guest whom the Apostle has now lodged at your house. Let it dwell
there (as he has ordered) richly, and abundantly in all wisdom. If you
receive, and treat it with the respect it merits, it will cure your souls of
all their maladies; it will inform your understandings of all heavenly truth,
and purge them of all the errors of earth, and superstition. It will fill your
hearts with love to GOD, and charity toward your neighbor, and by the
efficacy of its truth, extinguish all those petty passions that tie you to the
World. It will comfort you in your troubles; it will fortify you in your
weaknesses; it will sustain you in your combats; it will arm you against all
sorts of enemies; and guide you in all your ways. It will sweeten your
adversities, and govern your prosperity; and to comprise all in few words, it
will conduct you to the haven of eternal salvation, notwithstanding all the
storms of this wretched life. Employ likewise this word of the LORD to those
uses which the Apostle recommends unto you; even to those mutual teachings and
admonishings which you owe one another, giving, and receiving them, as there is
occasion, with a sincere, and truly Christian charity.

In fine, possess the liberty he gives you, of singing from the heart with
grace unto the LORD, Psalms, and Hymns, and spiritual Songs. This sole Book of
Psalms, if ye learn it aright, is able to make you for ever happy. Oh GOD! what
a source of blessing and joy do they deprive themselves of, who reject it, or
neglect it? It Is a public magazine of heavenly wisdom, in which every one may
find what is meet for him; the ignorant, whereby to be instructed; the knowing,
whereon to be exercised; the afflicted, wherewith to comfort; and the
contented, to recreate himself. There are repentant tears for the guilty, and
songs of thanksgiving for the faithful; preservatives against vice,
attractives, and excitements to piety; and lessons for all kind of Virtues. And
the wonder is, that these so high, so useful, and so necessary things, are all
presented us there, in the delicious sonnets of a graceful, and a pleasing
poetry, as in so many vases of pearl, and diamonds, and emeralds, to induce us
to receive them the more easily. Oh sage invention of our Great Master! wherein
we have together pleasure, and profit; refreshing, and instruction of soul; at
once singing, and learning what is most necessary for us. May Himself please to
bless this Divine artifice, by which He invites, and allures us to Himself; and
so touch our hearts by the efficacy of His Spirit, that as He draws us to Him
with these holy cords of His sweetness, and love, we also on our side may
freely and cheerfully run after Him; to the end that having faithfully followed
Him in this World, He may in the next lodge us with Himself, in the Sanctuary
of His Glory; where bearing our part with the Angels, we shall bless, and
glorify Him eternally. Amen.

THE FORTY SECOND SERMON ON COLOSSIANS,
CHAP. III. VER. XVII. Verse XVII. And whatsoever ye do, whether in word or in
work, do it all in the name of the LORD JESUS, giving thanks by Him unto our
GOD and Father.


DEAR Brethren; The love that the LORD JESUS has born us is so great, and the
benefits He has conferred upon us, are so various and so precious, that we are
evidently obliged to give our selves entirely to Him, and we cannot substract
from Him without ingratitude, any part of what we are, or have. He has laid
down His life for us. It is just therefore that we again do consecrate ours
unto Him. He has redeemed us at the price of His blood, and by this admirable
ransom delivered from death and hell, not only our Souls, but also our Bodies,
and our whole Nature. We are therefore wholly His, and have no more any other
Master, but Him; neither is there any justice in the world but will adjudge Him
the propriety, and possession of what costeth Him so dear. But though of right
we be his Vassals, yet it has pleased His love that we should belong to Him
under another much more glorious title. For He has made us His brethren,
having obtained of His Father, that He should adopt us for His children, and
accumulated this grace with all the highest favors that creatures can be
exalted to. I mean, He has made us partakers of His inheritance, and
communicated to us His Nature and His Spirit, and crowned us with His
immortality, and with His glory. Though he had not shed His Blood for us as He
did; who sees not, but that this His great and divine liberality should have
purchased Him all the life, and being, and motion we can have? and that to
divert any part of it from His service, would be a robbing of Him and a
bereaving Him with abominable Sacrilege of a thing belonging to Him so
legitimatly, and for many so just and weighty reasons. If we be not the most
unjust and ungrateful persons in the world, we ought all to have such
sentiments, and consequently look upon our nature, and our life, as things no
longer ours, but JESUS CHRIST's; and dispose of them not after our own fancy,
and for our own interest, but at His pleasure, and for His glory. And as you
see that the servants of a Prince (above all those whom he has particularly
obliged and favored) do set up his arms through all their houses, and adorn
their Halls and Chambers with his Picture, and have his praises always in
their mouth, and fill up their whole life with his name and glory; so should we
do to JESUS CHRIST, and with so much the more zeal, for that He is a LORD
infinitely more rich, more clement, more liberal, and more beneficent than any
Monarch of the Earth. Let our Souls and Bodies therefore bear His badges; let
His glory appear exalted in all our actions; let the words of our mouths be
dedicated to Him; and our whole lives full of His Name, breathing throughout
nothing but His honor and service, without ever swerving from His Will, from
His interests. This, Beloved Brethren, is the Lesson which the Apostle S. Paul
now gives us, in the words that you have heard. And whatever ye do (says he)
whether in word or work, do it all in the name of the LORD JESUS, giving thanks
by Him unto our GOD and Father.

By these words he concludes that excellent exhortation which he makes to all
Christians in general, of what sex, or age, or condition soever. He began it at
the first Verse of this Chapter, and continues it on to our Text, pointing out
in it briefly, but divinely, as you have heard in the precedent exercises, our
principal duties; on one hand the mortifying of the flesh with its lusts, as
fornication, covetousness, wrath, and the like; on the other hand, the studying
and exercising of all Christian virtues, as humility, kindness, patience,
gentleness, charity and peace. To all these he adds, our knowing and
continual meditating of the Word of GOD, with Psalms, and spiritual Hymns. And
here it was, we made stay in our last action upon this Subject. Now, that he
might not stand to treat severally of all a Christians other duties, which
would be prolix, and even infinite, and a Discourse of too great extent for an
Epistle, before he passes to that particular exhortation, which he addresseth
in the following Verses to some certain ranks of believers, as to Married
persons, to Fathers, to Children, to Servants and Masters, he closes up his
first matter, with the precept he here gives us. A precept verily excellent,
and well worthy to Crown his exhortation, since it comprehends in few words all
the duties of a Christian, both those which the Apostle has expressly pointed
at, and those which his design of brevity caused him to pass over in silence,
without speaking of them by name. To the end we may give you an exposition of
it, we will endeavor, (by the grace of our LORD) to explain one after another,
the two parts, that offer themselves in it: First, that whatever we do either
in word or work, we do it all in the name of the LORD JESUS. Secondly, that we
give thanks by Him to our GOD and Father

When the Apostle pronounces, that all we do in work or word be done in the
name of the LORD JESUS, he clearly gives Him our whole life. For these two
sorts of things, which he subjecteth unto Him, words and works, do comprehend
all the other parts of our life; it being evident that nothing issues from us,
but what may be referred to the one or the other of these two kinds: They are
either words, or works. Words are the fruits of our mouths; works are the
effects or actions of our other parts and faculties. I acknowledge, that beside
this, our spirit also does act within us, when it knows or considers things,
and desires or rejects them. But besides, that these internal actions might
be put into the rank of our works, by extending the word a little beyond its
ordinary signification, (as in effect some interpreters do give it such a
meaning here) beside this, I say it is evident, that most of the conceptions,
and affections, and resolutions of the Soul do refer to words, and external
works, as being the principles and motives of them. For it is not possible that
our words and works should be in the name of our LORD and Savior, except our
understandings and wills do so address them, and it is properly this action of
the Soul, the Apostle signifies, when he orders, that we do in the name of
CHRIST all we do. The tongue indeed pronounces the words, and the hands and
other parts of our bodies do execute those actions of ours, which are called
works. But it is the Spirit that moves them all, and that directs and guides
on their functions to that end or design it has proposed to its self, and
draws them from such motives as it has conceived, and formed within its self.
And it is properly upon this, that the difference of men's actions does depend.
It Is this Character that gives them the name, and title they have in Christian
Morality. Works, that are the same as to the external action, do sometimes
prove nevertheless very different, and even contrary, one good, another bad;
because the Spirit that produces them is not the same. As for instance, the
alms of an ambitious man, and of a true believer have no external difference;
the ones act in that regard is the same the others is; yet if you consider the
inward springs of them both, you will find that the one is a piece of vanity,
and the other a fruit of charity. Whence it comes, that notwithstanding all the
resemblance they have in open view, they are yet at the bottom, works of a
quite different nature; the one evil and condemned of GOD, the other good and
acceptable to the LORD. The one with all its outside paint and color, is an
act of vice, the other of virtue. The same is to be said of those two kinds of
Preaching, which the Apostle, mentions in the Epistle to the Philippians; the
one of those that Preached CHRIST through envy, Phil. 1.15, 16.
and of contention; the other, of such as preached Him of good will, and of
love. The language of them both was the same; but the diversity of their
designs rendered their actions so different, that the one's to say the truth
was a sacrilege, and an abomination; the other's on the contrary, one of the
best and most excellent works of Christian piety and charity. Thus you see the
rule, which S. Paul gives us, to order all the external actions of our lives,
our words, and works; even that we do all in the Name of the LORD JESUS.

The rule is short and easy; but of vast and almost infinite use. As a little
square serve's an Artificer to design, and mark out a multitude of lines, and
to discover and correct all those that are amiss; so by this little rule, which
the Apostle puts in our hands, there is no humane action but we may certainly
perceive, whether it be right or wrong; good or evil; and conform to the will
of GOD, or otherwise; neither is there any part of our lives, but this rule, if
we take care to adjust them by it, is capable of guiding and forming unto
perfection. Now as the name of GOD in Scripture signifies sometimes that Ebrew
word of four Letters, which the LORD takes for His name and memorial
distinguishing Himself by that appellation, from all those GODs, to whom the
error of Nations wrongfully gave that quality, and the honors due to it; so
likewise the name of JESUS is sometimes taken, for this very word JESUS, which
(as you know) is the name that was given Him by the express command of GOD. And
so those of the communion of Rome seem to understand it, Phil. 2.10.
in that passage of S. Paul, where it is said, that in the Name of Jesus every
knee should bow, of things in Heaven, and things in Earth, and things under the
Earth; uncovering, as often as they hear the word JESUS pronounced; as if the
Apostles meaning were, that all creatures, celestial, terrestrial, and
infernal, should do reverence when those two Syllables JESUS are uttered.
Wherein verily they are much mistaken: the import of that passage being quite
otherwise. It Is not thus neither, that S Paul takes the name of JESUS in our
Text: as if he simply intended that in our actions and discourses we should not
fail to intermix always the word JESUS, having it incessantly in our mouths,
and never doing nor saying any thing without pronouncing it first. Far be it
from us to imagine that such a thought should fix upon the Apostles mind. It is
not the word, nor the letters, or syllables of this name that he recommends
unto us. I grant, we cannot have it too much in our mouths; provided it flow
into them from the heart, and that it be a religious and respectful
consideration, which makes us mention it, and not a vain and childish
superstition, as if there were some secret virtue annexed unto words.

We are to note then in the second place, that as the Name of GOD is very often
taken in Scripture for the power, the authority, the will, respect, and
consideration of GOD; in like manner is the Name of JESUS. Thus Moses
foretelling the coming of the Messiah; Deuteronomy. 18.19.
And it shall come to pass (says he) that whosoever will not hearken unto my
words, which He shall speak in my Name, I will require it of him. Which He
shall speak in my Name, that is, by my order and authority, and in acquitting
himself of the charge which I have committed to Him; And it is thus we
frequently read, that the Prophets spoke in the name of GOD; that is, by His
express command, they being sent and dispatched from Him. 2 Kings 2.24.
And it is said of Eliah, that he cursed the children that reviled him in the
name of the LORD, that is, by His authority. And this form of speech was so
common among the Jews, that the Priests and Elders demanded of the Apostles in
the fourth Chapter of the Acts, Acts 4.7.
in whose name they had done that miracle; meaning upon whose authority, and by
whose order they had undertaken it. The same exposition is to be given of that
which the Psalmist sings, We will boast in the name of the LORD our GOD,
Psalm. 20.8.25.
that is, in His help, and power; and speaking of the faithful unto GOD, They
shall rejoice (says he) in thy name; that is, in the confidence they have in
thy power and goodness; of like import is that which he adds, that the Horn
of His anointed shall be exalted in His name; that is, by His might, and by the
virtue and order of His providence. So David entering into combat with the
Philistin, 1 Samuel 17.4^.
Thou come against me (says he) with a sword, and with a spear, and with a
shield; but I come against thee in the name of the LORD of hosts, whom thou
have defied. In the name of the LORD, that is, for His glory which thou have
reproached, and in assurance of His protection and succor; in the same sense,
that King Asa meant it on a like occasion. Help us (says he) O LORD our GOD.
For we rely on Thee, 2 Chr. 14.11.
and are come forth in Thy name against this multitude; that is, in Thy
quarrel, and with confidence in Thee.

It Is therefore in the same manner, we are to take this phrase in the name of
CHRIST, which often occurs in the Books of the New Testament, as in S. Matthew,
Prophesying, and casting out Devils in the name of the LORD, that is, Mat.
7.22. and 24.5 Acts 5.28.
by His authority, and in His might; and when men are said to come in His name,
that is, to avouch themselves His, and to affirm themselves sent by His order;
to speak, and teach in the name of JESUS CHRIST, and likewise to be assembled
in His name, Mat. 18.30.
that is, for His cause, and unto His honor, and with confidence in Him. It Is
in this sense the Apostle takes these words in our Text. Do all things in the
name of the LORD JESUS. He means, first, that we refer all we do unto His
glory, and take His honor for the end of all our actions: and secondly, that
we act according to His will, and order; and lastly, with an entire confidence
in Him; not presuming ought of our selves; as if we were able to do any thing
considerable by our own strength: nor expecting any success, but only from His
favor, and benediction. Such is the rule, which the Apostle here gives us.

By it you see, First, that he banisheth out of our lives, all the unfruitful
works of darkness, that is all vicious actions, actions contrary to justice, to
charity, and to other Christian virtues; it being evident, that if we do
nothing but in the name of the LORD JESUS, we shall do none of these things;
since they all are opposite to His will, to His commands, and to His glory.
Secondly, by the same means he perfecteth and enliveneth all those works of
ours, which of themselves and in their kind, are good and commanded of God;
engrafting them, by this rule, upon the true motive from which they ought to
proceed, and directing them to the true end unto which they ought to tend,
which is without doubt the name of CHRIST, and clensing them from all that
impurity and viciousness which vanity, or self-love might taint them with. Good
will be truly good, if we do it in the name of JESUS CHRIST, that is, for His
sake, upon consideration of Him alone, without seeking the approbation and
acceptance, or the interest and service of any other. Lastly, by the same rule,
the Apostle sanctifies those of our words and actions, which are in their own
nature indifferent, purifying them by the name of the LORD from the filth and
abuse wherewith the viciousness of men does pollute them, and elevating them to
a degree of moral goodness, which they had not of themselves, in that he
consecrates them to the name of the LORD, and makes them to serve grace,
whereas of themselves they were instituted only for the uses of nature. For
instance, if you observe this rule of the Apostle in your eating and drinking
actions, as every one knows indifferent of their own nature; first this sacred
name of the LORD JESUS will purge the exercise of them, of the excesses of
intemperance and drunkenness on one hand; and of the vain and foolish scruples
of superstition on another. Secondly, being referred to the honor of GOD, and
accompanied with invocation of His grace, and thankful acknowledgement of His
bounty, of indifferent as they were in themselves, they become good, and holy,
and acceptable unto GOD.

However, I willingly grant, that we must not so take the Apostles precept, as
if we were obliged in every act, even to the least word we utter, to raise our
thoughts actually to the name of JESUS CHRIST, and expressly implore His
assistance by a particular prayer, and formally eye His glory. It suffices,
that we frequently, and ordinarily make this application of mind, to the name,
to the command, to the help, and to the glory of our LORD. But necessary it is,
that we have the habit of this holy disposition so formed and radicated in our
hearts, that even when time or place, or some other necessity surprizeth us,
and gives us not the leisure to think actually on the name of the LORD, our
souls yet do bend that way, as of themselves, being so habituated to it, as
without other discourse or consideration, they may as to the substance,
discharge this duty: and never do, nor say any thing that tends not to the
glory of our Savior, and is not conform to His will, and consistent with the
resolution we all ought to have of relying on JESUS CHRIST alone, and referring
none of our actions to any other end, than His honor.

But I come to the other part of our Text, wherein the Apostle adds, that we
give thanks by JESUS CHRIST unto our GOD and Father. These words may be taken
two ways, either for another precept apart added to the former; or for some
part and dependence of it. In the first relation, it is a new order the Apostle
gives us, to thank GOD for the benefits He has vouchsafed us in His Son. He
gives the same order to the faithful at Ephesus, in welnigh the same words.
Giving thanks always (says he) for all things in the name of our LORD JESUS
CHRIST, unto our GOD and Father. Under the second consideration, the words are
a reason of what he recommended before, and the title, under which we ought to
do all things in the name of the LORD JESUS; namely, for the rendering unto GOD
the Father by His Son the thanks we owe him: so as our whole life may be but
homage, and a perpetual act of gratitude to GOD by JESUS CHRIST His Son our
LORD. For it is not to be doubted, but that the best and most proper means of
thanking GOD the Father for those infinite benefits He has conferred upon us,
by the communion of His Son, is so to frame our lives, that we neither do nor
say any thing, but in the name of that Son of His: that is, (as we have
explained it) according to His will, and for His glory. Now though it import
not much which of these two expositions we follow; since at the bottom the
thing is still the same; yet it seems to me the latter is more pertinent,
because it does better and more clearly connect the Apostles words.

Thanksgiving is one of the most necessary and most universal offices of a
Christian. For if it be ingratitude to receive a kindness from any one, without
resenting it, and giving him thanks for it; what moment of our lives is there,
wherein we are not obliged to perform this duty unto GOD? First of all, this
being of ours, this life, this body, this soul, and all the faculties of our
nature, are largesses of His, which for all they be common to us with other men
are not to be despised, but ought to be considered as effects of an infinite
goodness. Then again, what remerciments, does not the sending of His Son into
the world, and the death He suffered for us by the will of His Father, oblige
us to? What shall I say, as to those infinite blessings. He has obtained for
us, the remission of our sins, our adoption to the number of His children, the
glory and immortality we hope for? Add hereto, His continual providence both
over His Church in general, and over each of us in particular; His favorable
bearing with us, however great be not only our infirmities, and imperfections;
but even infidelities and ingratitudes; the admirable constancy of His Divine
grace, which our indignities can neither overcome, nor put off; and
imperfections; but even infidelities and ingratitudes; the admirable constancy
of His Divine grace, which our indignities can neither overcome, nor put off;
and though often refused, or ill received, yet cease not to follow us; but He
comes again toward us every morning, and dispatcheth daily some new Herald to
solicit us to repentance; this Sun that shines about us; this air with which
he refreshes us; so many various fruits of the earth, with which He feeds
us; the Word of His Gospel, by which He instructs us; His Sacraments, at
which He feasteth us; the voice of His Spirit, either to comfort us, or awaken
us in our evils; the strokes of His paternal discipline, which he so aptly
administreth, tempering them in such sort, that it is easy to see; He
scourges us for our amendment, to win us, not to destroy us. And if we love
our Neighbors as we ought, what ample matter of thanksgiving, does GOD's
dealing with them afford us? His forbearance to some, waiting for, and inviting
them to repentance? the grace He exercises toward others, either in bringing
them to, or conserving them in His Son? the admirable gifts, so richly and so
wisely diversified, which He imparteth to one? and the prosperous success
wherewith He favors the employment of others? there being not a person in the
Church, how unfurnished and inconsiderable soever in our seeming, but this good
Master has given one or other of His talents to? Though we had the tongues,
and voices of all the Angels of Heaven, yet could we not worthily acknowledge,
or repay with thanks enough, a goodness so inestimable, and so every way
infinite.

But observe, that it is to our GOD and Father the Apostle orders us to make
our thanksgivings: and reasonable it is, that the glory of it should be given
Him, since He is the first and head spring of all. Not but that we may rightly
address our retributions as well as our petitions unto the Son also, and the
Holy Spirit, according to the examples the Apostles themselves have left us of
it in diverse places of Scripture. But both in the creation, and also in the
restoration of the world, the Father is still represented unto us as the first
principle of the action, the Son and the Holy Spirit acting next; as persons
who subsist in such order, that the Father is the first, the Son the second,
and the Holy Ghost the third; though setting aside this order, and the
distinction of their persons, their nature be in all things, and every way the
same, in respect both of essence and of properties or attributes, and of all
essential operations. In fine the Apostle prescribes yet further, that it be by
JESUS Christ we render thanks to GOD the Father. First, for that He is as it
were the first and the chiefest channel, by which all this goodness of GOD is
poured forth upon us. For it is He alone that has acquired all the graces which
mankind possess; by reason whereof He is called the Sun of righteousness, the
light and the Savior of the world, the Prince and the author of life, in whom
dwells all the fullness of the Godhead bodily; And Secondly, because our
thanks themselves cannot be grateful to the Father, nor come into His presence
before the throne of His grace, except they be addressed and presented by JESUS
CHRIST, who alone is able to perfume both our persons and our poor
performances, with that odor which is necessary for all that would appear
without confusion, before this Supreme Majesty. This is that, Beloved Brethren,
which we had to deliver to you, for the expounding of these words of S. Paul.

There remains now the chiefest point of all; even that you engrave them
deeply on your hearts, and take them for the rule of your whole lives, applying
them to each one of your actions, and making those wholesome uses of them, which
this great Apostle gave them for. I will point at some of them at present,
beseeching GOD to bless them unto your edification, and remit the rest to your
own pious meditation. Observe then first, for the confirmation of your faith,
that excellent proof the Apostle gives us here, of the Divinity of the LORD
JESUS. For as the Epistle to the Hebrews concludes it, from the Father's
naming Him His Son, Hebr. 1.5, 6.
and treating Him quite otherwise, than he does the Angels, the highest of all
creatures; so may we reason in like manner from this passage of S. Paul, and
say as that Epistle says of the Angels; of which of the Prophets, or the
Martyrs, or the Apostles, o^ of all the Angels of Heaven was it ever said unto
the Faithful, Do all things in his Name? Sure the faithful both in the Old
Testament, and in the New, neither believe, nor hope, nor rejoice, nor speak,
nor act but in the Name of GOD: and there is not one to be found in the Divine
records, whose piety and the exercises that depend upon it, are addressed to a
mere creature. Here, as you see the Apostle requires, that not only some part
of our faith, but that our whole life, and all our sanctification, be referred
to the Name of the LORD JESUS. It must be therefore necessarily concluded, that
He is, not a mere creature, but very GOD, of an infinite goodness, power, and
wisdom, eternally blessed with the Father. It is not possible, that an
inferior nature should be the support, and the foundation, and the last, and
highest end of all the works and words of all the faithful. Either all the
Scriptures of GOD are to be effaced, and new ones made after the fantasy of
Heretics, or it must be confessed, that this JESUS is GOD, to whom they give
a Name, capable of being both the beginning, and the end of all parts of the
lives of all the faithful that are, or ever shall be in the world; conformably
to their own asserting elsewhere, that He is the Father of eternity, the Prince
of peace, our great GOD, and Savior.

Judge again, My Brethren, if it be not an outrage unto Him, and an investing
of creatures with some part of this glory of His, to require, (as those of the
Communion of Rome do) that part of the piety, of the good works, and of the
very faith of Christians, be in the Name of Saints of one and the other Sex:
who, how sublime, and excellent a dignity soever you give them, cannot after
all, be set above the rank of creatures. We daily hear them repeat their
Orisons, say their Beads, ask and give Alms, one of the choicest Sacrifices of
Christian Religion, make their pilgrimages for devotion, build their temples,
consecrate their images and their holy places, and their preciousest
possessions, and in fine their own persons to the name of the Blessed Virgin,
of S. Peter, of S. Denis, and a multitude of other creatures ancient and
modern. Adversaries! where find you the institution of these Devotions? In what
Prophet, or in what Apostle have you read a command for them? In what Gospel,
or in what Acts, and in what Divine Histories have you observed examples of
them? What would S. Paul say, if he were in the world to see his discipline so
strangely forgotten among men that make profession to hold him for one of their
principal Apostles? He recommendeth to us, not one of these names to which you
oblige your selves. He speaks of none, but that of the LORD JESUS; it is in that
name alone, he commands us to do, all we do, whether in word or work: because
indeed, Acts 4.12.
there is none other under heaven given unto men, wh^^eby we must be saved, as
said S. Peter, the same Peter, whom you pretend to be the head and the
foundation of your Popes. S. Paul, sure gave and conserved this glory to his
LORD's name alone, with so much zeal and jealousy, that understanding how some
in the Church of Corinth joined in some sort the names of servants of His with
it, calling themselves, 1 Cor. 1.12.
some of Paul, others of Apollos, others of Cephas, and others of CHRIST; as
you see among our adversaries at this day, some call themselves of Augustine,
others of Francis, and others of JESUS; this Holy man cries out upon it as a
Sacrilege, and an utter overthrowing of Religion. Is CHRIST divided? (says
he) was Paul crucified for you? Ibid, ver. 13.
or were you baptized in the name of Paul? Prescribing by these words, or
rather by this flash of lightning, that the faithful ought not either call, or
distinguish themselves, or glory, or speak, or do whatever in Religion, in any
other name, than that of this holy and merciful LORD, who was crucified for
them, and in whose name alone they were baptized. Yea, he thanketh GOD that he
had administered baptism but to few of them; lest any once should thence taken
occasion to believe or say that he had baptized in his own name. Then a little
after resuming the discourse, so much took he the thing to heart; 1 Cor. 3 4,
5, 9.
Are you not carnal (says he to these people while one of you says, I am of
Paul? and another, I am of Apollos? Who then is Paul, and who is Apollo^ but
Ministers by whom you believed, even as the LORD gave to every man? Ye are
GOD's Husbandry, Ye are GOD's building. Is not this a telling us plainly, that
we ought neither bear the name of any other than of GOD; nor act in matters of
piety, in any name but that of JESUS CHRIST? In which likewise he here
commands us to do, and say all that we shall act in word or work?

But having considered what the Apostle affords us here against error, for the
instruction of our faith; let us now observe what he teaches us for the
correction of our manners, which is his principal intention. He teaches us, My
Brethren, that if we will be truly faithful persons, and Christians, as we make
profession to be, we must have JESUS CHRIST continually before our eyes; must
examine, address, and suit our actions, our speeches and purposes unto the name
of CHRIST; take it for the North-star in our course, and in one word for the
rule of our whole life. That we never do any thing little or great, otherwise
than in His name. That His name be the only motive inducing us to speak, and
act; and the only mark at which our words and actions tend. Think now first,
how great our confusion ought to be, The Apostle wills, that whatever we do
in word or work, we do it all in the name of the LORD JESUS; and the most of us
quite contrary, do almost nothing in His Name. Heaven and earth are witnesses,
that the name of JESUS has no part in our works or words. They are all
consecrated to His enemies; they are inspired by their spirit; and aim at
nothing but their interests. Tell me, ye covetous, is it in the name of JESUS
CHRIST that ye toil night and day to heap up dung? Is it He that taught you
those black arts and inhumane dexterities, to spoil the Orphan, and the Widow
for the enriching of your selves? Have you had the confidence to call upon the
name of JESUS, that He might teach you and guide your hands to work deceit, and
bless your violences? Is it to advance His glory, and give His name a good
odor, that you make your selves famous among the Vassals of Mammon? not
disdaining any part of his drudgery, how distastful soever to GOD and man? And
you that are ambitious, can you indeed persuade your selves, that those
vanities that take you up, are so important unto JESUS CHRIST? Or that it is in
His Name you lose your time about them? You also, whom the flesh and its
pleasures do drown in their ordures; in conscience, is it in the name of JESUS
CHRIST you are employed? Is it for His glory, or according to His will? I say
as much of the revengeful and the drunken, and of all those that serve any one
of the other vices, which JESUS CHRIST has expressly condemned, and forbidden.
No one of all these does act in His name. Dear Brethren, let us renounce these
things, if we will be Christians. Let us never make any enterprise, never set
upon any action, but first consider, whether it may be done in the name of the
LORD JESUS; that is, whether it be such as we may with a good conscience
implore His help to finish it: and judge either proper to advance His glory and
conform, or at least not contrary to His will, and interests. Hereby we are
obliged to banish out of our lives? first, all vicious actions, of which none
can be done in the name of JESUS CHRIST, since they are all displeasing to Him.
And they that in designs of such nature have the impudence to ask assistance of
Him, (as some there be, whom superstition has inspired this sottish conceit
into, that they may do evil for a good end) these I say offend JESUS CHRIST
excessively, rendering Him guilty of their crimes, as much as in them is, and
inviting Him to take part in their vices. But this rule of the Apostle does not
only oblige us to eschew evil, and abstain from sin. It requires also, that
what good we do, be done for CHRIST's sake, and in His name; that in our alms,
and in our devotions, and in all the acts of our piety and charity, we seek
nothing but His glory, the fulfilling of His will, and the advancement of His
Kingdom, and not the praise of men, or the interest of our own affairs. It Is a
taking of His name in vain to do otherwise, It Is a profaning the actions of
virtue, by employing them in the service of flesh and blood; them which of
their own nature, and by GOD's intention, are not to be done but for His glory,
and for His Son's name sake.

In fine, this maxim of the Apostle's embracing generally all the things a
Christian does both in word and work; it is evident that it ought to regulate
those also, which are in their own nature indifferent; he never setting about
them, but when he may do them in the name of CHRIST. For though the nature of
them be indifferent, the usage of them is not so; but must be governed by the
good and the evil, that may thence redound, either to, or against the glory of
GOD, and the edification of men, as the Apostle says elsewhere; All things are
lawful for me; but all things are not expedient; All things are lawful for me;
but all things edify not. Whence you see, 1 Cor. ^0.2^.
how vain the pretext of those is, who excuse the excess of their habits, of
their tables, and of their houses, by the liberty, which they pretend the LORD
has left them, to clothe, and feed, and lodge themselves, as they think good;
alleging that He has not forbidden them Velvet, or Silks, or Gold, or Silver,
or precious Stones, or Tapistry, or any sort of Furniture; nor excluded from
their Tables any kind of Meats, or Services, they being taken with
thanksgiving. I grant the use of these things to speak in general, is free;
they all being created of GOD for man. Yet this hinders not, but each of you
ought to observe certain rules about them, and this one in particular, namely,
that ye consider whether the thing be such as ye may do it in the name of JESUS
CHRIST; whether the money you waste in it, might not be better employed in the
service of His poor, or of His Sanctuary; whether your making men believe that
you are vain glorious, or intemperate, or voluptuous, by clothing or lodging,
or treating your selves more richly and more magnificently than beseems your
condition; whether this opinion, I say, which you give your Neighbors of you,
does not scandalize them; and be not prejudicial unto the name and interests of
our Savior.

Hence again appears, how inexcusable they are that marry with persons of a
contrary Religion, I confess, that Marriage is honorable; and that it is not
prohibited to any: But this action, as well as all a Christians others, must be
done in the name of the LORD JESUS; 1 Cor. 7.9.
and so much the rather, for that it is more important, and continues as long
as our lives. Wherefore the Apostle does expressly modifie the liberty he gives
the believing widow by this exception. She is at liberty (says he) to marry
again; only so as it be in the LORD. Now judge if it be a marrying in the LORD,
when you make alliance with a person allienate from your communion; who will be
a snare to pervert you from it; will pluck the name of CHRIST out of your
house; and consecrate your blood to error; and be so far from helping you in
the exercises of your piety, that the person will disturb them.

In fine, this saying of the Apostle's shows us also, what we are to think of
Dances and Balls, and such other vain pomps of the world; If you can truly say,
that it is in the name of CHRIST you Masque and Dance; I will accord, that you
fail not of your duty in it. But if it be clear, and manifestly known as it is,
that the LORD JESUS has no part in these follies, that in them His name is
blasphemed rather than glorified; that His Spirit breaths not in them, but
indeed the Spirit of Satan, and the world; that scandal is given in them, but
no edification received; confess it a thing contrary to your duty. Add not
impudence to guilt; acknowledge if you be a Christian, that it is a violation of
the Apostle's order, to participate in such things which neither are, nor can
be done in the name of our LORD JESUS CHRIST. I advertise you particularly of
it, because we are entering on the season, in which the world is will not to give
it self the greatest license for such debauches. Dear Brethren, let not it is
ill examples seduce you. Let not the custom of the age, nor the pleasing of
men, induce you to forget the respect you owe to the Apostles voice, and the
Churches consolation. Seek your joys in the service of your LORD, and Savior,
and in the meditation and expressing of His life; and having always before your
eyes, the love He bears you, the death He suffered for you, and the Heaven to
which He calls you, love Him with all your heart; and whatever you do,
whether in word or work, do it all in the name of this sweet and merciful
Savior, rendering thanks by Him to our GOD and Father, unto His glory, and the
edification of your Neighbors, and your own Salvation. Amen.

THE FORTY THIRD SERMON ON COLOSSIANS,
CHAP. III. VER. XVIII, XIX. Verse XVIII. Wives, be subject unto your own
Husbands, as is meet in the LORD.

XIX. Husbands, love your Wives, and be not bitter against them.


DEAR Brethren; As man is subject to a twofold consideration; first, in regard
of his nature simply, as he is a reasonable creature; secondly, in reference to
his condition, or the rank he holds in humane society, that is, as either a
Master or a Servant, a Magistrate or a Subject, or the like; so he is obliged
according to these two different respects, to two diverse sorts of duties; those
of the first sort are general, and common universally to all men; the others of
the second do relate, but to some certain order of persons only. I place in the
first rank piety toward GOD, honesty, temperance, justice, and charity, and
such other virtues, for which neither sex, nor age, nor condition does dispense
with any; because every man, whatever he is otherwise, being a reasonable
creature, is bound upon that account to practice all those virtues, as a
perfection and ornament meet for such a nature. I reckon among the duties of
the second sort, the service that bondmen owe their masters, the obedience of
children to their fathers, the dependence of wives in relation to their
husbands, and the like; which pertain as you see, only to persons in such
conditions, and not to all men generally. This difference has produced in the
Schools of Heathen Sages, the distinguishing of active Philosophy into diverse
parts; the first whereof, which they call Moral Philosophy, or the Ethiques,
does explain that first sort of common, and general duties; the others do treat
of the second; to wit, the Economicks, which regulate and form the several
different conditions, that constitute a family; namely husband, and wife;
parents, and children; master, and servants; and the Politics, whose task is
to expound the devoirs of all the diverse orders that compose an Estate, as the
Prince, and the Subject; the Magistrate, and the Citizen; men of the long Robe,
and of the Sword; and the like.

The Apostles of our LORD, in those writings, which they have left us, where
they have unfolded to us the Divine Philosophy of their Master, have also
followed the same order; though their difference otherwise be very great. For
they set before us in like manner some general duties, which oblige all
Christians of what quality soever, and in whatever degree of society, either
civil, or domestic, or religious, they be placed. And though this part being
once well comprehended, has in it a great and almost sufficient light to
direct and govern all the rest: yet they forbear not upon it, to descend unto
the particular duties of each of those estates and conditions which the
faithful live in, in humane society. Thus the Apostle S. Paul has done in this
Epistle; for after having formed us all in general unto piety, and sanctity,
and charity, which belong to all Christians equally; as you have heard in the
precedent exercises; he now addresseth himself in particular to each of those
three orders, of which an household is composed; the first whereof is the
Husband, and the Wife; the second, the Father, and the Children; the third,
Master, and Servants; giving each of them a good lesson, for their conduct in
the condition to which GOD has called them. Elsewhere he regulateth the duties
of Subjects in reference to the civil Powers under which they live; of the
faithful in reference to their Pastors, and reciprocally of Pastors in
reference to their flocks; not omitting Deacons, the other part of
Ecclesiastic Ministry: and this not in one place alone, but many. In
consideration hereof, before we proceed any further, permit me, I beseech you,
to make here at the entrance one general reflection upon this the Holy Apostles
way of treating; thus,

Whence comes it, that having been so careful to instruct and to direct in
particular each of those different ranks of persons, which then were, and still
are in the Church, they never dropped one word of the duties of three kinds of
conditions, in which now a days Rome makes the main, and in a manner the all
of the Christian Commonweal, to consist, I mean the Pope, Sacrificers or
Priests, and Monks? The Apostles do instruct the lowest Masters, how they ought
to treat their attendants; and the simplest Presbyters, or Bishops (that is,
Pastors) how they ought to feed their flocks. They never tell the Pope in what
manner he ought to deport himself, in that great government of all Christendom,
which, as is said, has been given him of GOD. The Apostles do advertise the
most abject slaves, of the servitude they owe their Masters; and every flock of
the diference and respect it owes its Pastors. They never speak a word, either
to single believers or their guides, of that infinite subjection which they are
obliged to profess unto the Pope, or of ki^^ing his feet, or of submitting the
conscience, or any other such like thing. The Apostles do exactly inform
Bishops or Pastors of the duties of their charge: of preaching, exhorting,
instructing, of watching, of correcting, of censuring, of excluding the
scandalous from communion. They never order any Sacrificers to offer a
propitiatory host unto GOD, for the sins of quick and dead; nor tell them of
the preparations, ceremonies, and observances necessary thereto; nor of
purifying, by means of an auricular confession, the consciences of such as are
to participate of such a sacrifice; nor of the precautions and subtilties that
are necessary for the right administration of it. In fine, the Apostles verity
vouchsafe to take the pains to enter into Families, and there regulate the
demeanor of Husbands and Wives, of Virgins and Widows, of Fathers and
Children, of Masters and Servants. Why say they nothing unto Monks? neither to
the solitary, as Hermits and Anachorets; nor to those that live associated in
separated dwellings? Why do they not somewhere instruct the Guardians, the
Abbots, the Superiors and Generals of these orders? Why do they not exhort
their inferiors to yield them a blind obedience? Why say they nothing of their
three vows? and of the means of well observing them? And why give they no
instructions to Religious women, who imitating the zeal of men, shut themselves
up in Convents? But what say I; that they no where regulate the carriage and
particular duties of these three sorts of conditions? More than so, they make
no mention of them at all, neither expressly, nor implicitly. And if you read
the Books of the New Testament, you will find that there is no more speech in
them, of the Pope and the Sacrificers, and the Monks of Rome, than of the
Bramines of India, or the Bonzians of Japan, or the Muphti of the Musulmen.
Whence comes so strange a silence; so universal an obliviousness? Is it that
the thing was not worthy of the Apostles care and quill? But how can that be
imagined, since, if you believe those of Rome, it is upon these three orders,
that Christianity depends? For as to the Pope, he is the head of the Church,
and exercises so necessary an imperial power, that out of his communion, there
is no salvation. And as for Priests, or Sacrificers, it is they alone that
purify the souls of men, both by the absolution they give those whom they
confess, and by that Deity which they deliver unto such as they communicate.
Lastly, as for Monks, their order is the state of perfection: They are the
Angels of the earth; the glory, and the rampart of the Church; the sole
patterns of Evangelick piety and sanctity; wherefore they call their
fraternities Religions, and disdaining their old name of Monks, each sex of
them styles themselves Religious; as if the piety of other Christians did not
deserve to be called Religion, in comparison of theirs. Whence comes it then,
that the Apostles have so forgotten these three sorts of people, which are as
highly or more necessary in the Church, than the four elements in the world?
Dear Brethren, you plainly see the reason; and if passion did not blind our
adversaries, they might see it too as well as we. The Apostles have said
nothing to these three sorts of people, because there were none such among
Christians in their time. Had there been then a Pope and Sacrificers in the
Church, the Apostles without doubt would have told them their duty, as well as
Bishops and Elders, (that is Pastors.) And if there had been Monks and
Religiouses, they would undoubtedly have spoken unto them, as well as unto men
and women that live in wedlock. Since they did it not, be we certainly assured,
that neither of these three plants was sown, or set by JESUS CHRIST, or His
Apostles; but they have all sprung up since their days, partly from the
imprudence, partly from the superstition and corruptness of men, who also
affording them cultivation, have raised them by little and little to that
prodigious greatness, which now for diverse ages they have had. And this be
spoken at the entrance, upon occasion of the care the Apostles in general had,
to form and regulate the duties of the diverse conditions of persons, which are
found in the Church.

As for S. Paul's particular in this place, he speaks here, first, unto
Husbands and Wives; next unto Fathers and Children; and last of all, unto
Masters and Servants; following therein the natural order of the things
themselves. For if you consider the dignity of them, the union of Husband and
Wife is the most excellent, and that upon which the others do depend; or if you
regard their rise; Man was an Husband, before a Father or a Master; GOD gave
Adam a Wife before He gave him Children or Servants. Now though in this prime
union, the Husband possesses the first place; yet the Apostle begins at the
Wife, and does the like in the two following orders, instructing Children
before Fathers; and Servants before Masters; either for that the subjection to
which Wives, and Children, and Servants are obliged, is more difficult and
displeasing to our nature, than the love and government of Husbands, and
Fathers, and Masters is: or for that the subjection of the one is the
foundation upon which the others good government does depend. We will handle at
the present no more but the lesson which he gives to Wives and Husbands,
contained in the Text that you have heard, reserving that which concerns
Children and Fathers, Servants and Masters, to another time.

The Wife's lesson is for words short; but for sense of great weight, and large
extent. Wives, (says the Apostle to them) be subject to your own Husbands; as
is meet in the LORD. In which words, first, he commands Married women that
subjection which they owe to their own Husbands; and next shows them the manner
of that subjection; as is meet in the LORD. As for subjection, it is an order
that GOD has established generally in all things, which constitute any kind of
body, whether it be in nature, or in either Angelical or humane society, that
some should depend on others. Thus you see in plants, the other parts depend
upon the root and in animals upon the heart; and they all upon the soul that
makes them live. Among men there is no estate without a superior that governs,
and inferiors that are governed. In the composition of the world it self, as
it is one total, you know that earthly things depend upon the heavens, it is
they that govern all the rest: neither is there any union, or any body, or
natural compacted frame in the whole universe, all whose parts are entirely
equal. GOD, whose wisdom is infinite, has so ordered it, for the benefit of
things themselves; those that are feeble, and imperfect, finding their
perfection in the conduct of such as are more perfect; and the more perfect
reaping commodity and dignity from the subjection of those that are less. This
induced the Apostle to say in another place, that GOD is not a GOD of
confusion, or of disorder, but of peace. Whence follows, that to resist
subjection when persons are called to it, is a thwarting of His will and a
perturbing of His order: a mark also, not of fortitude and courage, but of
folly and malignity to oppose it: conform to that which experience taught the
Heathen themselves to observe, even that good men are easy to be governed; and
that those that most unwillingly endure a superior, are always such as have
least worth. It having therefore pleased GOD, according to this general
disposition of His wisdom, that in marriage, man should be the head, it is with
good reason, that the Apostle exhort^th married women to be subject.

That word compriseth all the duty of the condition to which GOD calls them;
and therefore the Holy Spirit uses it almost always in this matter; as in the
Epistle to the Ephesians, Ephesians. 5.22. Tit. 2.5.
where these self-same terms occur; and in the Epistle to Titus That (says he)
they be discreet, chaste, keepers at home, good, subject to their own husbands;
1 Pet. 3.1.
and in the first Epistle of St. Peter; Ye wives (says he) be in subjection to
your own husbands. I know well the expression does displease our nature, which,
in the corruption that sin has brought upon it, hates all, even the most
lawful subjection. And perhaps it is upon this accont, that the Apostles have
so often recommended it to Christian women, that they might instruct them to
combat this sentiment of our depraved nature, and submit themselves unto GOD's
order. But certainly, setting aside the word, and the disorders which our sin
does sow in every condition, there is no harshness in this conjugal subjection;
there is nothing in it, but is sweet, and beneficial, and advantageous both to
the wife her self, and also the whole family. For it is an error to think, that
all subjection is hard, and vexatious. That which the body owes to the soul,
and the members to the head; that which the air and earth do render to the
heavens, has nothing of constraint, nothing shameful in it; on the contrary,
it is in it, that the glory of the body, and the members, and the elements, does
consist. Among the Angels themselves, whose being is full of perfection, and of
glory, there wants not some kind of subjection, the inferior Angels having
dependence upon their chiefs. And in the terrestrial Paradise, if sin had not
banished us thence, amid the delights and perfections of an happy state, the
wise would not have been exempt from being subject to her husband; an evident
sign, that this subjection is not incompatible, either with her felicity, or
with her glory; and that all the bitterness now found in it, comes not from the
thing it self, but from sin, which has altered it, as it has all the other
parts of our life, and nature. For in reality, what does this subjection
signify, but a just and rational, a sweet and amiable dependence of the wife
upon the husband, like that of the body upon its head, or upon its soul?

Of this subjection, the first part, which is as the root and stock of all the
rest, is a senti^ent, and disposition of heart; when the wife acknowledges in
her soul, that the husband GOD has given her, is her head, and as the wise man
says, her guide; who, in the due order of their life, ought to have the first
place; and that she is inferior to him, since she is his wife, whatever
advantage she has other-waies above him, be it in wealth, or in nobility, yea,
even in prudence, and abilites of spirit. If she has once settled this holy and
respectful persuasion in her heart, she will no more find ought of harshness or
difficulty in all that subjection which she owes her husband. This sentiment
alone is sufficient to form her unto it, and bow without any violence all the
actions of her life that way. And it is this, in my opinion, Ephesians. 5.33.
that the Apostle means, when he says else where, that the wise should
reverence her husband. 1 Pet. 3.6.
Such was the sentiment of Sarah, whom St. Peter proposes unto Christian
women, for a pattern of their demeanor. She called Abraham her Lord, as that
Apostle does expres^y note, declaring by such respectful language, in what
esteem she had her husband, and that she held him for her superior, for the
guide and governor of her life. After this reverence, the wives subjection
comprehends also the complacency she ought to have for her husband,
fashioning her self to his mind, and devesting her own disposition of all she
sees offensive to him, to put on his affections and manners in every thing, as
far as piety and honesty will permit; bending, and accommodating her
inclinations and humors in such manner, unto her husbands, that she may be as
a faithful mirror to him, wherein he may see his own image. This, you will
say, is difficult. Sure it is so: But to such as bear their husbands little
respect, and love; and yet more difficult to those that love them not at all.
She that loves her husband ardently; that looks upon him as the head which GOD
has given her; as her weal, and her honor, and her glory; will easily
discharge this duty; yea, take pleasure in it; it being the nature of true
love, to transform sweetly, and without constraint, the person loving into the
beloved.

In fine, this subjection comprehends in sequel, the cares a wife ought to have
of her husband's person and family; all which the Scripture compriseth in two
words, when it terms her, an help, which GOD has given him, like unto him,
that is, another himself. That she love him constantly; be a consolation to him
in adversity, and an augmentation of joy in prosperity; and as the Wise man
has it Pro. 31.12.
do him good all the days of her life. That she breed his children, the sweet
pledges of their amity and union in all probity; and form them betimes to the
giving him contentment. That she keep his house, as S. Paul expressly orders;
govern his family, Tit. 2.4.
and hold all in it in good order; and in the end make account, that this is
the business, to which GOD calls her even to employ all her cares, all her
labor and vigilance, to the contentment, to the welfare and honor of her
husband; and that it is in this, her own glory and felicity does consist. Such
is that conjugal subjection, which the wife owes to her husband.

But the Apostle, for the founding and the regulating of it, after his giving
it in charge to Christian women, adds, as is meet in the LORD. I say in these
words, he first foundeth that duty of subjection, which the wife owes to her
husband. For saying, that this is meet in the LORD, he shows us, that the
will of GOD is, this be performed; and that it is His order and institution
that the wife be subject to her husband. This receives evidence first from
that particular which we learn from Moses, even the LORD's saying expressly to
Eve, and in her to all women, Thy desires shall refer unto thy husband, and he
shall have dominion over thee. Genesis 3.16.
The order also, which he followed in the creation, manifestly proves that
this was His intention. For He created Adam first, and then afterward Eve; an
evident sign that Eve was made for Adam, and not he for her. And it is for the
same end too, that he formed Eve of one of the ribs of Adam: to show namely,
that the woman belongs to the man; that she is his own, as being made and
formed of matter that was his; and that he has title to her, and a right over
her. S. Paul has prudently noted it, Adam (says he) was first formed, and
then Eve. And elsewhere; 1 Timothy 2.^4. 1 Cor. 11.8, 9.
The man (says he) is not of the woman, but the woman of the man. For neither
was the man created for the woman: but the woman for the man. The nature of
both sexes does teach us the same truth; as well as the order and manner of
their creation; For though both the one and the other be for substance the same
being, alike rational and capable of immortality, yet it is evident, that the
constitution of woman is more weak, and less active, nor so proper for
government. It Is this S. Peter means when he terms her a weak or fragil
vessel. And hereto refers, 1 Pet. 3.7. Aristot. in his Polit. l. 1. c. 8.
what the Master of Heathen Philosophers has left written; that the woman
reasons and con^ulteth, and deliberateth; but more feebly, and less
resolutely than the man. Whence he concludes, that her virtue or perfection is
to serve, and not to rule; that is, to follow rather than to guide; and to obey
rather than to command. Which is to be understood yet of the generality; and
the ordinary, the natural and legitimate constitution of the one, and the other
sex: it being otherwise very mani^est that some women are found, not only as
much, but a great deal more reasonable, more vivid and active than some men.
Upon these reasons all Nations have rightly judged, as the Scripture expressly
teaches us, that in Marriage the woman ought to be subject, no one of those
that have received the institution of Marriage ^^ing sound, but that has so
regulated it. S. Paul adds yet another reason, drawn from the fault which the
woman committed, in lending ear to the Serpent, and upon it inducing her
husband unto disobedience. 1 Timothy 2.14.
It was not Adam (says he) that was seduced: but the woman, having been
seduced, was in the transgression. For since they both sped so ill, upon the
husband's obeying of the wife; it is very reasonable, that the wife resume the
first order, and without putting of the yoke any more, as she did then, obey,
and be subject unto him, whom she did so unhappily undertake to govern, to the
extreme misery of the one and other of them.

But though all this be true and evident, yet I think the Apostle intends here
somewhat more. For when he orders wives to be subject to their husbands, as
is meet in the LORD, by the term LORD, he understands according to the ordinary
style of the New Testament, not GOD simply; but JESUS CHRIST; and represents
unto them the honor they have of being in the communion of this Sovereign
LORD, to put them on unto a faithful discharge of this duty. For though it be a
thing of a bad grace, and contrary to the Laws of GOD, that the wife should
either assume superiority over her husband, or however that be, refuse him this
just subjection; yet there is no State nor Religion in which it is more
unseemly, and less permitted than in the discipline of CHRIST; first, because
He has discovered and established the dignity, and sanctity, and indissoluble
union of the married state, which this subjection appertains unto, much more
clearly and excellently, than ever did any Lawgiver, not Moses himself
excepted. Secondly, for as much as He has far better, and much more perfectly
formed than any other, all His disciples in general, unto peace, and meekness,
and humility; and women in particular unto that decency, and modesty, and
reservedness, which is proper for their sex; it is evident, that Christian
wives are much more obliged to the subjection we speak of, which is a thing
depending on those virtues, than any other persons of their sex. Moreover the
interest of their Religion requires this performance at their hands; though law
and reason had not imposed subjection on them; to the end it might appear by
their obedience, that JESUS CHRIST does not disturb the just order of humane
societies; but on the contrary, form both men and women to all kind of
righteousness and honesty, much more exactly and effectually than other
Religions do. Lastly, the Gospel of JESUS CHRIST having in diverse places taken
Marriage for a symbol of the union, which is between Him, and His Church, he
has by that usage authorized and confirmed the duties of both the two Married
parties, and particularly the subjection of the wife, since she is the image of
the Church, which ought to be subject unto CHRIST; a matter which the Apostle
has elsewhere excellently made use of in this subject. Ephesians. 5, 23.24.
The Husband (says he) is the bead of the Wife, even as CHRIST is the head of
the Church. Therefore as the Church is subject unto CHRIST; so let wives be to
their own husbands in all things. Thus you see with how much truth and wisdom
the Apostle here alleges unto Christian women that it is meet in the LORD,
(that is, in JESUS CHRIST) they should be subject to their husbands; it being
clear by all we have been saying, that all the considerations of the discipline
of this same LORD, and of the communion they have with Him, do so strictly
oblige them to this duty, that if they fail of performance, beside the fault
and the disorder which they commit against the Law and institution of GOD and
nature, they also particularly offend the LORD JESUS, and outrage the mysteries
of His Gospel, and scandalize His people.

But I have said, that the Apostle does also by these words regulate and limit
that subjection which the wife owes her Husband. For adding to the rest that
in the LORD, or according to the LORD, he evidently shows that it reaches no
further than to such things as do not offend JESUS CHRIST. She is subject to
her husband (I acknowledge) but in things wherein she is not rebellious against
GOD. She ought to please him; but on condition she displease not their common
LORD. She owes him her obedience, and her assistance, and her service in
adversity, and in all the troubles of household affairs; but not in sin. The
will of JESUS CHRIST is the true boundary of her subjection and complacency.
She ought to put on so far; but further she may not pass, without perrishing.
Whatever tie we have to any creature, it still leaves the rights of GOD entire;
because our obligation unto Him is the first and most ancient, the strictest
and most necessary of all, that we are under. And if the Husband pretend to
oblige his Wife, or the Father his Child, or the Prince his Subject, unto any
violation of the commands of GOD, that is, either to do what He forbids, or not
to do what He injoyns; Acts 5.29. Luke 14.26. Matt. 10.37.
in this case the faithful soul is to remember, that we ought to obey GOD,
rather than men; and that if we love father or mother, husband or wife,
children, or brethren or sisters, or even our own lives more than CHRIST, we
are not worthy of Him, nor can be His disciples.

But having thus heard the lesson which the Apostle gives the wife, let us now
hearken unto that he gives the husband. Husbands, (says he) love your Wives,
and be not bitter against them. He commands 'em to love them; and forbids 'em
to be bitter against them: and in these few words compriseth all their duty.
This duty is no whit less just; but indeed more sweet and pleasing than that
which he prescribed the wives. And observe, I pray the Apostles prudence. For
when he had allotted the woman subjection for her share, consequence seemed to
require that he should give the man, command and government for his. But he
does it not. He established the man's authority sufficiently, by putting the
woman in subjection to him; and for the most part his strength and the other
advantages of his sex, do cause him to assume but too much. Wherefore in stead
of saying, Husbands govern your wives, or command them, or of using some such
word, importing authority, he says unto them, Love your wives; to sweeten on
one hand the subjection of the wife; and to temper on the other hand the
authority of the husband. Wife, let not your subjection fright you; the Apostle
subjects you not, but to a person who loves you. Husband, let not your
authority make you insolent. If the Apostle subject your wife unto you, it is
only to the end you love her. Derive no vanity, either the one or the other of
you from the advantages he gives you. If the love which the husband owes his
wife make her haughty; let her remember, that withal she is subject unto him
that loves her. And if the authority which GOD gives the husband, flatter him;
let him not forget that the wife is not submitted to him, but for the obliging
him to love her the more.

Further, this love which the Apostle would have husbands bear their wives, is
a sacred and sincere affection; produced in their hearts, not simply by that
pleasing form, and that grace and sweetness which naturally makes men love and
seek unto this sex, and which, how perfect and charming soever it may be, is at
most but a flower of a very short and uncertain duration: but principally by
the will of GOD, who has joined them with 'em; who has given them to them for
companions in their good and bad fortunes; for helps in all the parts of their
life, for a perpetuating of their name and lineage; for the diminishing of
their troubles, and the augmenting of their joys. This perpetual and
indivisible union which binds them together, and which of two persons has
changed them into one flesh; which has mingled together all their interests;
and in their dear Children, inseparably combined, and confounded their blood
and very nature; all this I say, must kindle in the foul of husbands, a pure
and an inviolable love unto their wives: then again, this love must flow forth
from the heart into the external actions, discovering and evidencing its self,
by such continual effects, as may be truly worthy of it. For love is not a dead
picture, nor a vain fantasy, nor an idol without life and action. It Is the
liveliest, and most active of all our sentiments. It Is a will that affects,
and sets all the power one has on work to procure some good to the person whom
it loves. The first effect of this love is to be pleased in the presence of
that which a man loves; and not be able to suffer the absence of it long,
without disquiet. The second, to communicate to it all a man possesses, that
is good; and the third to guard and preserve it from all incommodity and
molestation.

It Is thus the Apostle would have husbands love their wives, even First, that
they live ordinarily with them, as far as the necessity of their affairs
permits; not finding sweeter divertisement, nor more pleasing company any other
where. Then next, that they carefully make them partakers of the graces GOD
has given them: and principally, in all that concerns the salvation of their
souls; which is the greatest good of all; faithfully directing them about it
both by good and holy speech, and also by pure and virtuous deportment. It Is in
this they ought to exercise that advantage which nature and the Apostle gives
them, showing themselves to be truly the heads and guides of their wives, in
the matters of GOD's service, and of holiness of life; for this end making
provision of all necessary knowledge; that if they at any time consult them in
their doubts, 1 Cor. 14.35.
as S. Paul commands, they may be able to instruct them; least in defect of it,
it might be said of them as a Prophet sometime said of Idols, Hab. 2.18:
that they are teachers of nothing but vanity. But unto these cares for the
soul, the husband ought to add those also which respect the present life,
laboring in his vocation, and imparting to his wife a share of all the
substance he possesses, or acquireth, proportionably to her need of it, either
for her own necessary food and raiment, or for the maintaining her children and
family, as befits her condition. It Is this the Apostle means, when he
commands husbands to love their wives.

But he forbids them in the following words, to be bitter against them; that
is, to be ^roward to them; requiring that all their conversation with them be
full of sweetness and amity. The Pagans themselves have observed the justness
of this duty, as what we read of one piece of their devotions bears witness.
For when they sacrificed unto that idol of theirs, whom they called Nuptial
Juno, because they gave her the superintendency of Marriage, they were wont to
take the gall out of the victim, and cast it behind the altar; signifying
thereby (as say the interpreters of their Ceremonies) that there ought to be no
gall nor bitterness in marriage. The Apostles meaning then is, that the husband
do first purge his heart of all this sowrness and bitterness; that he never
suffer hatred, nor malevolence, nor anger, nor provocation, nor fretting, nor
disgust to enter there against a person whom he ought to love as himself. Next,
he would have the husband cleanse all his words and actions from the same
poison. For if he, who is angry with his neighbor without cause, and gives him
the least reviling word, does deserve torment, as our Savior declares; of
what hells is not he worthy; who outrageth his own flesh? Her, whom he ought to
cherish and tenderly affect, as CHRIST does His Church? But if the Apostle
command a Christian to use no offensive or opprobrious speech against his wife;
he does as little permit him to show bitterness of spirit by an angry, sad, and
obstinate silence; which is no less provocative, nor less sharp, to say truth,
than the most outrageous reproaches. In conclusion, by this clause, the Apostle
does further, and with greater force of reason, banish out of conjugal converse
the cruelty, and rigor, and tyranny of those boisterous, barbarous husbands,
who treat their wives as bond-servants, denying them that share which the laws
of GOD and man do give them, in the government and administration of the
household. And the utmost degree of this inhumanity is, when unto revilings and
contempt, they add blows, and excesses of hand; an outrage, which the authors
of the Roman Civil Law thought so unworthy of the conjugal alliance, that they
permit the wife so exceeded against, to break with her husband, approving, and
authorizing her divorce, if she can prove he struck her.

Thus, Dear Brethren, you have heard what we had to deliver for the exposition
of this Text. It teaches us all in general, first, that all sorts of people
may, and ought to read St. Paul's Epistles, and by consequent, all the holy
Scriptures: For why should this holy man address his speech here to wives, and
their husbands; to children, and their fathers; to servants, and their masters,
if he meant not, that all these persons should have the reading of this letter?
Christians, fear not to read what the Apostle has vouchsafed to write you.
It Is in vain that some forbid you the reading, which it is his mind you should
practice; None can know better than he, how those Epistles must be used which
he wrote. Then again he shows us further here, how unjust the indiscretion of
those is, who have so ill treated the worthiness of marriage, that by their
manner of speaking of it, you would say, they held it incompatible with
Christian purity. St. Paul does every where maintain the honor of this holy
order, and never prohibit, or disparage it at all. Also, as the precepts which
he gives to Masters, to Pastors, and others, do clearly authorize the right,
and the dignity of those conditions; so is marriage established by the lesson
he writes here, and often elsewhere, unto married persons. But the Devil
knowing well, that this holy institution of GOD is infinitely profitable unto
men, both to preserve them from tentations to incontinence, one of the broadest
ways to Hell, and also to sweeten the harshness of their natures, by the
tenderness of conjugal and paternal affections, and for diverse other ends, of
great importance unto civil life, and unto piety it self; the enemy, I say,
not ignorant hereof, has subtly made hatred, or contempt of marriage, to
insinuate its self into the spirits of a sort of men, under diverse plausible
pretexts; so as in conclusion, Christians (who would think it?) have asserted
it a piece of sanctification to abstain from it, and in the sequel prohibited
to the Ministers of Religion. For our parts, Beloved Br^thren, we constrain
none to marry. If any have received this grace of GOD, that they can contain,
and live pure, out of this estate, let them forbear it, if it seem them good.
Only we say two things; first, that the making use of it is free to all; there
being no dignity, nor profession in the Church, excluded from Divine permission
of it. Secondly, that to such as have not the gift of continency, marriage is
not only permitted, but even necessary; and of whatever rank they be, their
marrying is so far from offending GOD, that they offend Him much, if they marry
not.

Hereto, for a conclusion, we adjoyn a serious exhortation to all who are in
this estate, that they sedulously put in practice the lesson which St. Paul
has now given them. Even that wives be subject to their husbands, as is meet
in the LORD; that Husbands love their wives, and not be bitter against them.
Many complain of finding thorns in this condition, instead of the roses they
hoped for. Men charge it upon the pride, the levity, the vanity, the
gorgeousness, the frowardness, the obstinacy, and the tongues of their wives,
and ^ay many other odious reproaches upon them. Women, on the contrary, impute
all this mischief to the husbands; complaining, some of their contempt, and
want of love; others, of their niggardliness toward them, and profuseness
other-waies. Some declaim against their idleness, and the little care they take
of their affairs; others against their excesses, and compotations. There are
some that are angry at their speaking, and others at their silence: and in
fine, they forget not one ill treatment which they have received. I know well,
that upon strict examination, some fault would be found on each hand, and that
if cause appear to reprehend wives, there would be no less to censure husbands.
But I had rather lay aside all this vexatious process; and do conjure you, Dear
Brethren, and Sisters, in the name of GOD, to do the like; sparing one another
honor, consider what you are, and what an union GOD has called you to; and
each one for his part acknowledging your defects in the duty it requires,
terminate all your complaints in a reciprocal pardon; and forgetting all that
is passed, endeavor to procure to one another in the estate you are, that
peace and contentment which hitherto you have not had. Do what the Apostle bids
you, and you shall find as much sweetness, as heretofore you have tasted
bitterness. For as there is nothing more wretched, than a marriage in which the
wife has no respect for her husband, and the husband no love for his wife. So
neither is there any thing in the world more happy, than a marriage, in which
the wife, by an humble and respectful submission, and the husband, by a
sincere, and faithful love, have their hearts and wills united in an holy
concord. As the first of these two conditions is an hell, so the second is a
very Paradise.

In fine, My Brethren, since JESUS CHRIST is the Spouse of all faithful souls,
you see what service and submission we are obliged to render Him. May it please
this Divine Spouse, from that nuptial palace where he dwells, to make us
smell the odor of His mystical perfumes, and to form our souls unto all the
obedience, the fidelity, and servitude we owe him, and govern us by His Spirit,
as He has purchased us with His blood; that after having here beneath sighed
for Him, we may one day eternally enjoy Him, according to His promises, and our
hopes. Amen.

THE FORTY FOURTH SERMON ON COLOSSIANS,
CHAP. III. VER. XX, XXI. Verse XX. Children, obey your parents in all things,
for this is pleasing to the LORD.

XXI. Fathers, provoke not your children, lest they be discouraged.


DEAR Brethren; Among all the mutual offices, by which the society of men is
conserved, those incumbent on Children toward their parents, and on parents
toward their children, are without doubt of the first rate, and most
necessary. It Is upon them, that all the rest do in some sort depend, and they
are in humane society what the foundation is in an edifice; the foundation once
demolished, all the building goes to ground; so the subjection of children, and
the superiority of parents once removed or unfixed, the ruin of all other
parts of society does necessarily follow. For if a man neglect his children, or
misgovern them, how will he duly and inhumanely treat servants, or subjects, or
any other persons, whomsoever? Again, if a child shake off the yoke of his
Father and Mother, how will he bear that of a Master, or a Prince? There is no
likelihood that the one or the other, having failed in offices so sweet and
natural toward persons that are so nearly in conjunction with them, will ever
rightly discharge any of those other, which they owe to persons more remote,
and with whom they have much less union. Whence appears the admirable wisdom of
the Providence of GOD, who for the forming of us unto the devoirs of love,
subjection, and obedience, which are necessary in the Civil, or Ecclesiastique
society we are to live in, puts us at first into the bosom, and under the
conduct of our Fathers and Mothers, that there as in a sweet and a commodious
School, we may timely learn the bending of our spirits unto love, and respect
for men; and after this previous apprentiship, find the yoke of those
superiors, under whom we are to live in Church or State, less uneasy. For one
that has been a good child in the house, will without much trouble, be a good
subject in the State; and likewise he that is a good Father will easily prove
also a good Master, a good Magistrate, a good Pastor, if GOD call him to either
of those charges. Wherefore S. Paul requires, among the other qualifications of
a Bishop or Pastor, that he rule well his own house, having his children
insubjection with all reverence. For (says he) if a man know not how to order
his own house, 1 Timothy 3.4.5.
how shall he govern the Church of GOD? These reciprocal duties therefore of
parents, and of children being of so great importance in the whole life of men,
it is with good reason, that our Apostle takes care to regulate them in the Text
which we have read; immediately after having in the precedent Verse, formed
those of Husband and Wife. He speaks first to children, according to the
general order of beginning with the inferiors, which he observes in all this
part of his institution, for reasons we pointed at in our last action. Children
(says he) obey your Fathers and Mothers in all things; for this is pleasing to
the LORD. Then he prescribes to Fathers also, what pertains to them, in these
words. Fathers, provoke not your children, lest they be discouraged. These are
the two heads we will treat of in the present action, if GOD so please; First,
the duty of children; and Secondly, that of Fathers.

As to the first of these, we are to consider the Apostle's command, contained
in those words, Children, obey your Parents in all things; and then the reason
of this command, which the Apostle annexeth, when he says, For this is
pleasing to the LORD. He directs the command to children, and uses here, in
the original, a term, that signifies any person begotten of another, his
fruit, his production; a term, that consequently comprehends all children, of
which soever sex, that is, both sons and daughters; and of whatsoever degree,
that is, grandsons in regard of their grandfathers, as well as sons in regard
of their fathers; For the word [Children] according to the sense and authority
both of Scripture, and of the learned in the laws, does enclose the one and the
other. Let all those therefore, to whom this title does belong, make account,
that to them is this injunction of the Apostles addressed. Let not daughters
object the weakness of their sex; nor sons the strength and excellency of
theirs, to be dispensed with for the obedience they owe; since the difference
of their sexes does not hinder, but that they are equally children. Nay, the
weakness of maids, is so far from diminishing, that it strengthens their
obligation, in that it renders the conduct of those who brought them into the
world, so much the more necessary for them, as they are of themselves more
infirm: and the fitter young men's strength makes them to serve their Fathers,
and their Mothers, so much the more do they owe them obedience. Tell me not,
that time, or fortune, as they call it, has freed you from this subjection;
whatever years you have attained to, and whatever degree or honor ye possess,
you remain unalterably your Fathers and your Mothers children; so that since it
is unto this name, the Apostle affixeth the obligation you have to obey them,
it is evident that there is neither age, nor Office, that can, or should give
you a dispensation for it. The Scripture sets before us an eminent example of
it in Joseph, who, though of ripe years, and the father of a family, and a
great LORD in Egypt, where he was the second person in the State; yet all this
made him not forget that he was Jacob's son; Genesis 46.2^.
and when he knew him to be come into the Country, he went presently to meet
him; his dignity withheld him not from rendering this honor to his Father. He
bowed down his purple before him, and notwithstanding the extreme inequality of
their conditions in the world, respected him always as his Father.

But let us see what that duty is which the Apostle here commands children to
perform. [ Obey (says he) your Fathers and your Mothers in all things.] The
Law of GOD uses the term, honor. Honor thy Father and thy Mother. But all
comes to one. For sure it is, that under this honor which the Legislator
injoyneth, just obedience also is comprised; and in like manner, under the
obedience which St. Paul commands, is that respect, which is one of the
principal sources of it, understood and presupposed. Only it may be noted, that
perhaps he chose the word obey, the more effectually to show us, what that
honor is which we owe our Fathers and our Mothers; that it is not a vain
respect which consists merely in countenances, and in ceremonies; but a true
and real reverence, accompanied with obedience, so as to execute readily and
cheerfully what they order us to do, learn what they teach us, correct what
they dislike, and forbear what they forbid us. And hereby is condemned the
hypocrisy of those, who give their parents respects and civilities enough, as
to words and gestures; but at the bottom, take no pain to do any thing they
desire of them. Mat. 21.30.
Like that mocker in the parable, who having promised his Father to go and
labor in his Vineyard, yet went not.

But the Apostle to anticipate the vain pretexts which impiety does inspire ill
natures with, orders children, not simply, to obey their parents, but to obey
them in all things; extending their authority to an infinity; nor shutting up
within any bounds that power which GOD and nature have given them to command the
persons they have brought into the world. Why then? you will say, is it true
indeed that Fathers and Mothers have so vast and immense an Authority; and that
their Children, whom GOD has created reasonable, are obliged notwithstanding
this advantage to obey all their commands, how harsh soever, and contrary to
the light of their judgment they be? Dear Brethren, if you consider the thing
in its self, according to its own nature, and the terms of its first
institution, it is very true, that the authority of Parents is so great, as
Children are indeed obliged to obey them generally, and without exception, in
all things they command them. Nor does this disagree with that advantage of
reason, wherewith GOD has honored children. For if things had continued in
their due order, Fathers would command their children nothing that were
contrary to right reason. Now I confess, sin has disturbed this order, and it
often happens that such as are Fathers do command their children unjust things;
yet neither can it be denied, but that in this case they decline from the
quality of Fathers, and become Tyrants. For the name of Father involving in it
an unfeigned love of the child, a love desirous of his good, and most remote
from all that is contrary to his welfare; it is evidently a renouncing of this
quality, when a man would oblige him to things that are evil, and incompatible
with the duties of a reasonable creature. It Is therefore this abuse, and this
corruption of our nature brought in by sin, that has bounded the paternal
power which of its self, continuing in its right use, would be absolute; it is
this that has obliged both Divine and Humane Laws to annex unto it certain
just and reasonable exceptions; which the Apostle in another place; where he
treats of the same subject, has comprised all in one word. Ephesians. 6.1.
Children (says he) obey your Parents in the LORD; that is, as far as you may
without disobeying the Sovereign LORD, both theirs and yours: as far as their
commands thwart not GOD's orders; and the words he adds in the Text it self
do necessarily lead us thereto. Obey them (says he) in all things; for this is
pleasing to the LORD; an addition, that evidently restrains the obedience of
children to that which is pleasing unto GOD; so as if the Father happen to
command what displeases GOD, the child is obliged by all kind of rights to
regard more the will of GOD, than the will of man; This maxim remaining firm
and immovable, that whatever we owe to an inferior and subalternate power,
the rights of the superior and sovereign must still remain entire. For since
it is GOD, who gave the father himself all the authority he has, it is clear
that he has none against GOD; but that as the child ought to obey him, so he
ought to obey GOD. When he does it not; but by an unsufferable felony casts off
the yoke of this heavenly Father, to whom both he and we do owe infinitely more
obedience, than to all the men on earth, it is just to deny him that obedience
which he gives not to GOD; it is just, that of two contrary commands, the one
of GOD, the other of a man, we do prefer the Divine, before that which is
humane. As if a Father should command his Son to be an Idolater, or to kill or
to hate his Neighbor; or should forbid him to embrace the service of GOD, or
to make profession of the Gospel of His CHRIST* in these cases, and other such
as these, disobedience would be just, and obsequiousness criminal. And hereto
properly does that saying of our LORD and Savior refer; Luke 14.26.
If any man come unto me, and hates not his Father, and his Mother, and Wife,
and Children, and Brethren, and Sisters, and even his life it self; (that is,
as another Evangelist expounds it, Mat. 10.37.
if he love these more than me) he is not worthy of me; he cannot be my
Disciple.

Saving this just and reasonable exception, children owe their fathers that
obedience in all things which the Apostle here enjoins them. And first in those
which are of themseves good and holy, and conform to the Divine will; beside
that the Law of GOD obliges us all to them, the command of a Father does
moreover oblige anew his children; and if they fail in it, beside the crime,
they thereby commit against GOD; they commit another against paternal
authority, which shall be charged on them, and punished apart, as a different
sin, and worthy of its particular penalty. Secondly, the child again owes
obedience in medial, and indifferent things, that is, things which are morally
neither good nor evil, the extent whereof is very great. Though such things be
free of their own nature, yet they are so no more unto a child after the
father's order. His command draws them forth of that indifferency, in which
they lay, and renders them necessary in reference to him. And here must no
self-flattery take place. I wish, (and it is their duty, as we shall hear anon)
that Fathers would command nothing, but what is humane and equitable: yet if
they forget themselves, and pass these bounds, how harsh and troublesome soever
their commands be, obeyed they must be; if they contain in them nothing
impious, or contrary to the Divine Law; according to the express order, that S.
Peter gives Servants to be subject to their Masters, not only to the good and
gentle, but also to the froward. The reason for children in reference to their
fathers is the same in this behalf, with that for servants in reference to
their Masters You see then, Beloved Brethren, the just extent of all those
things, in which the Apostle, would have children obey their Parents.

Whence appears, how unrighteous, and dangerous, and contrary to the Word of
GOD, the Doctrine of those of Rome is, who enfranchise all Christian children
from this paternal authority and power, daughters at twelve, and sons at
fourteen, giving them liberty at these so green years of age, to go from their
parents house, will they, nill they, and retire from under their obedience into
the cloisters of their monasteries; where they have erected an assured
sanctuary, and an inviolable safeguard for the rebellion of children against
their fathers, and their mothers. There under the umbrage of a false devotion,
they entertain children in idleness, and foment their impiety, tyrannically
giving them a dispensation for that obedience, and those just succors, which
by all the laws of GOD, and men, they owe to the sacred persons of those who
gave them being in the world The father demands of 'em the assistances and
consolations which he promised himself from them. He shows them his gray
hairs, and his limbs, trembling through age; he conjures them, by the life he
gave them, and by the cares he took to breed them up. He summons them to render
him the just rewards of his pains; and not to despise the tears, and treaties
of a person to whom they are obliged for their life. The mother all in mourning
presents them the paps that nursed them, and sets before their eyes the
tenderness of her affection, and all the ties of nature. And they both together
adjourn them before GOD, that they may see themselves condemned at His dreadful
tribunal, to pay the honor which they owe them. What say our adversaries
hereupon? They say, that children ought to look upon their fathers, and their
mothers without emotion. That neither their words, nor their weeping, should
make any impression upon them. That if they cannot enter into the monastery
otherways, than treading their bodies under foot, they ought to have no
horror at all, at so unnatural an action. That it is piety, to be cruel and
insensible on such an occasion. They say, the monastic vow has broken all the
bonds of filial subjection; and that the child who has made it, does no longer
owe any thing to father or mother; that he is dead to them, and they have no
more power over him; no more, than if he were out of the world.

Oh unrighteous, and cruel, and unnatural doctrine! How could these men more
plainly contradict the holy Apostle? The Apostle says, Children, obey your
parents in all things; for this is pleasing to the LORD. And these Masters say,
Children, obey them not in all things; if they forbid you to be Monks, scorn
their Order. It they command you to abide with them, be gone against their
will. For you would do a thing displeasing to the LORD, if you did not disobey
them. Neither let them allege us here, that they are now grown up. If they
cease to be children, by attaining unto twelve or fourteen years, I will
acknowledge, that they are no longer subject to their parents. But if they must
confess, that no age does divest them of this quality, it must be acknowledged,
that neither does any give them a dispensation for obedience; since the Apostle
commands it to all such as are children. They excuse themselves upon the
account of devotion. This would pass, if the father called his child unto
impiety; or commanded him to deny JESUS CHRIST, or to serve idols. But this
father, and this mother, who would keep their child at home, are Christians, as
well as Monks are; and their house makes a part of JESUS CHRIST's, as well as
the Cloister where he is kept in. The obedience they demand of him, is a duty
commanded by the Law of GOD; and very far from being contrary thereto. I urge
not at present, that the vows by which he is pretended to be bound, are
contrary to the word of GOD; as particularly, that of mendicancy; are rash, as
that of never marrying; are injurious to the LORD, as that of the blind and
absolute obedience which they promise to a mortal man. Let them go for
permitted. Certainly at least, are they not necessary; and themselves, as great
admirers of them as they are, do confess, (I take it) that one may serve GOD,
and obtain His kingdom, without the precinct of a monastery: and that neither
beggary, nor single lite, nor the frock, are things absolutely necessary to
salvation. There is neither place where one may not serve JESUS CHRIST in
spirit, and in truth; nor habit, but is compatible with piety. Now the child
ought to obey his father in all that GOD has not prohibited. Since then He
has not prohibited the living abroad out of the houses and habit of Benedict,
of Francis, of Loyola, and such other institutors of monastic life; every
child is necessarily obliged not to enter into them, when his father forbids it
him. But (you will say) what if he has made a vow to enter? If he has, he
has done ill against the dues of piety, and charity; and such vows, if it be
an error to make them, it is blindness, and obduration to keep them. The first
and most inviolable of our vows, is that which binds us to the obedience of
GOD, and after Him, to the obedience of our Parents. If we have chanced,
through imprudence, or other-waies, to tie up our selves elsewhere, we must
speedily break the bond, and make no scruple, nor conscience to break it, but
to observe it. Beside evident reason for it, and the confession of all wise
men, who hold that vows made against moral duty, do not oblige, the word of GOD
expressly makes this decision. If a woman (says the Law) shall vow a vow unto
the LORD, Numb, 30.4.6.
and bind her self by a bond, in her youth, being in her Father's house; if her
Father disallow her in the day he hears it, not one of all her vows, nor of
the bonds wherewith she has bound her soul, shall stand. Here you see, that
vows, though in other respects good, and lawful, yet oblige not, if made by
children of the family, without their fathers allowance. And this is yet more
forcibly concluded from the Lawgiver's adding, Number. 30.7 8, 9.
that the vows of a married wife, disallowed by her husband, are null, and
void; it being evident, that the authority of a Father over his child, is much
greater, and more strict than that of an husband over his wife.

And hither must that censure be referred, which our LORD and Savior passed
upon the Pharisees; who, under color of the religion of vows, did also annul
the honoring of parents by their children, so expressly commanded in the Law.
Says He, Matt 15.4, 5, 6.
GOD has commanded, saying, Honor thy Father and thy Mother. And again, He
that curses his Father or Mother, shall dye the death. But ye say, whosoever
shall say to his Father, or his Mother, All that whereof thou might have
profit by me, is a gift, or Corban, though he honor not his Father, or his
Mother, shall be free. Thus have ye made the commandment of GOD of none effect
through your tradition. For the right understanding of this discourse of our
Savior's, and of that tradition of the Pharisees, he opposes; we are to know,
that the Jewish Rabbis, as we learn by their own books, did, and still do make
a very great account of vows, holding the religion of them absolutely
inviolable. Moreover, they listed in the rank of vows, not those only which
were legitimate, and conceived in solemn manner, with terms of a full extent,
as when one said, I make a vow unto GOD, not to taste wine, or strong drink,
during the space of forty days, and the like; but also all other words, in
what form soever conceived, and uttered, whether upon deliberation, or in
choler, or otherwise, by which one devoted any thing whatever, were it expressly
or covertly: as for instance, if a man in a fit of choler, or in the trouble of
a quarrel with his neighbor, came to say through indignation, Let me dye, if
ever I do thee any service; the Rabbines took this for a true vow; and
accounted such a man obliged in conscience, never to do that person any
service, against whom he had uttered such words. Now, because the Corban, that
is, the sacred gifts given to the Temple, were a thing which they esteemed most
inviolable, and the offerings there kept, might not be employed to any profane
use, nor any private person put his hand into the treasury for that end, upon
pain of death; hence it comes, that to signify the use of a thing, was totally
interdicted unto any one, they said, it was to him corban, that is, he was no
more permitted to make use of it, than of the sacred gifts, which in their
language were called by that name. When therefore it fell out, that a son,
through distaste, or anger at his Father, once came to say, All that of which
you might have profit by me, is a gift, or corban; that is, you shall never be
the better for me, or you shall never draw service or profit from me, no more
than from the corban; the Pharisees, and other Rabbis, held, that such a man
was obliged by this vow of his, to do his Father no service any more; and they
judged him innocent, and blameless, though he never did him any, how pressing
soever the Father's necessity might be; alleging, that the religion of a vow
was above the natural obligation of children toward their fathers, and their
mothers; which was in very deed, to annull the Law of GOD by their tradition,
as our Savior charged them, Judge, if those of Rome do not the same thing;
dispensing with children for the obedience due to Parents, upon pretense of
monastic vows, in like manner; and if by consequent we have not all the
reasons in the world, to apply unto them what our LORD said of the Pharisees,
even that they make the commandment of GOD of none effect by their tradition.

Let us then lay aside, since the LORD does so enjoin it us, all humane
inventions; and simply, and faithfully keep to the will of our Sovereign
Master, as He has declared it to us in His word. As also you see, that in the
Text, it is the only reason the Apostle does allege, to oblige children to this
duty. He might have urged the justice of the thing it self; it being evident,
that we owe respect and honor unto those who gave us both life and education,
and if not all, at least the greatest part of whatsoever help and honor we
possess, and understand. He might have argued from Nature, which has engraven
this law in the heart of animals themselves; whom we see, especially while they
are little, to be subject to those that brought them forth. He might have
produced the custom of all nations, even the least civilized not excepted, who
by their usage, and some of them by their laws, have authorized the veneration
of parents, as of sacred persons; and have noted (as is indeed very notable)
that the Pagan, both Greeks, and Romans, made so great an account of this duty,
as to give it the same name they gave unto the fearing, and worshipping of GOD,
calling not only devout, and religious persons, but those also pious, who were
industrious to honor and to serve their Fathers and Mothers; whence it came,
they held, that excesses committed against Parents, Val. Man.
were to be punished as violations of the honor of the Deity were. The Apostle
might have produced all these things, and diverse others. But he does it not. He
alleges nothing, but the sole will of GOD, as the best, and the strongest,
and the most considerable of all reasons. Children, obey your Fathers and your
Mothers in all things. Why? Because this (says he) is well-pleasing to the
LORD. If you be a Christian, this is sufficient to persuade you to render to
your Parents that obedience which the Apostle commands you. For how can you
neglect what is pleasing to that LORD upon whom depends all your Salvation? who
has been so good to you, as to redeem you from eternal perdition, by the death
of His only Son; and to give you in Him, His Spirit, and His peace, and the
assured hope of everlasting life.

That this dutifulness of children toward their Parents, is well-pleasing unto
Him, beside that, the Apostle (whose authority is irrefragable) does expressly
assert it here, the LORD Himself does evidence diverse ways; First, by His
commandment, engraven by His own hand at the head of the second table of the
Law. Honor thy Father and thy Mother. Secondly, by the promise He annexeth
thereunto, to prolong your days upon the earth, if ye be diligent to discharge
this duty. In the third place, by the punishments He threatens unto children
disobeying their Father and Mother, ordaining in the political laws of Israel,
Deuteronomy 21.18. Exodus 21.17. Lev. 20.9.
that they should be publicly stoned by all the people of the City where they
dwelt; and elsewhere, that they should irremissibly put to death him, who
cursed his Father or his Mother. In another place, He pronounces by the mouth
of sage Solomon, Prove. 20.20. and 30.17.
that the lamp of such a man shall be put out into blackest darkness; and that
the ravens of the valley shall pluck out, and the young eagles eat the eye of
him that mocketh his Father, and despises the instruction of his Mother. In
fine, the LORD's calling Himself our Father, and honoring us with the name of
His children, that He might oblige us to serve Him, does sufficiently show of
what kind, and how holy and inviolable that obedience is, which we owe to
parents. Mal. 1.6.
If I be a Father (says He) where is my Honor? Not so much as Pagans, but
have acknowledged, that the performance of this duty is well-pleasing to the
Deity: witness some of their Poets confidently promising a long and happy life
to such as shall honor their Fathers and their Mothers; and pay those just
diligences to their old age, which are due unto it.

But it is time to come to the other head of the Text, wherein the Apostle,
after his having reduced children to their duty, turns him unto Fathers, and
advises them to use the power he has given them, moderately, and in such
manner, as their conduct may not tend but to their childrens benefit, and their
own contentment. Fathers (says he) provoke not your children, lest they be
discouraged. This provocation which he forbids, is an ill effect, which the
abuse of paternal authority produces in the hearts of children; when fathers
exceed in rigor, and treat them too roughly; which comes to pass a great many
ways. First, when they deny them a just allowance, and what is necessary to
accommodate them according to their birth. The Apostle has judged this so
enormous a sin, 1 Timothy 5.8.
that he sticks not to say, that he that commits it, has denied the faith, and
is worse than an infidel. Secondly, Fathers provoke their children, when they
give them unrighteous, and inhumane commands, 1 Samuel 20.30.
as when Saul would needs oblige Jonathan his son, to hate, and persecute
David, a very virtuous, and innocent person: whereupon ensued, that this
generous son, most unworthy of so bad a Father, was vexed, and inflamed with
despite and anger. If the daughter of Herodias had had any sparkle of this
good nature, she would have been in like manner offended at that cruel and
barbarous command her mother made her, Mat. 14.8.
to ask of King Herod the head of John the Baptist in a Charger. It Is also the
provoking of a child, when he shall, without any necessity, be compelled unto
sordid, and servile actions, and such as are beneath his birth. In this rank
too I put those, who without cause do beat their childrens ears with
contumelious words, whether present passion does inspire them, or an
ill-favored custom has habituated their tongues to so venomous a style. For
we see some that cannot speak unto their children, nor reprove them, nor so
much as call them to 'em, in any other dialect; but discharge at every turn an
hail-shower of maledictions, and opprobrious terms upon them. A kind of
carriage, as abject, and odious as may be, extremely unworthy of any honest and
ingenious man, especially of a Christian, whose mouth ought to be a source of
blessing, and have nothing issue from it, but what is grave, and holy, and
proper to edify. But neither is there any person with whom a wise man should
less deal in that manner, than his child; whom such indiscretion does deject,
and infinitely dismay, if he has ever so little spirit, and sensibility. It
was with this black, and piquant salt, that Saul did season the remonstrances
he made to his Jonathan. Thou son (says he to him) of a perverse, 1 Samuel 20.30.
rebellious woman, do I not know, that thou have chosen the son of Jesse to
thine own confusion, and to the confusion of thy Mothers nakedness? Are these
the words of a Father? and not rather of an Enemy, yea, of a barbarous enemy,
that has neither honor nor civility? As indeed it was choler that spoke, and
not reason; And he suffered himself to be so transported by the fury of his
passion, that after such a tempest of rude words, he failed not to throw his
lightning, casting a javelin at him (as the Scripture relates it) to smite
him. And this is the height of those excesses, which the Apostle intends here
by that provoking, which he forbids; when fathers chastise their children,
either without cause, or without measure, and beyond what they deserve. For if
justice oblige us to keep our minds free, and composed in punishing the
greatest strangers, and the heynousest malefactors, that we may exactly
proportion the penalty to their faults, Den
as the LORD expressly commanded the Judges of His people: how much more should
a Father, whose name breaths nothing but benignity, and sweetness, observe the
same moderation, when his business is to chasten his child? GOD gives us
example of it in His treatment of His children, chastising them in very deed,
but as Himself says, with the rod of men, and with the stripes of the children
of men, 2 Samuel 7.1^.
that is, moderately, and with an humane rod, a rod tempered with gentleness
and benignity.

The Apostle, to take off Fathers from this fault, shows them the evil that
comes of it. Provoke not your children, says he, lest they be discouraged. For
there is nothing that does more deject the heart of a child, especially if
ingenious, than this rigor and roughness of a Father. First, it saddens him,
when in the countenance and actions of that person, to whom of all men in the
world he should in reason be dearest, he sees nothing but anger, and aversion.
This grief does often cast him into languishings, and mortal maladies, which
make Fathers regret, and execrate, though vainly, and too late, their unhappy,
and imprudent severity: Then again, this kind of carriage intimidateth
children, and depriveth them of all courage for any good and honest
undertaking; and smothereth in them all the fire and vivacity they had. For
seeing themselves still put back by their own Fathers, what can they hope for
from other hands? Some, which is yet worse, are by this means hardened, and
together with sensibility, and nature, do lose all shame, and modesty, and fall
at last by little and little into desperate impiety, no longer making any
account of GOD, or men, which is the utmost, and horrid'st degree of
viciousness. Consider, if the fear of so great a mischief, do not oblige all
fathers, who have any remainder, I will not say of piety, but even of
judgment, and good sense, to take heed, that they provoke not their children.

Brethren, I beseech you, improve now this instruction of the Apostles.
Children, to whom first he addresseth his discourse, render ye to your Fathers
and Mothers in all things, the obedience he commands you. Remember the life
they gave you; the pains they have taken to preserve it to you; the cares they
have had to adorn, and enrich it, both with necessary knowledges, and with
conveniences requisite for the happy passing of it; the fears, and tears they
have been, and at every turn are still in for you; their patience in bearing
with the weaknesses of your infancy, and the extravagancies of your youth; the
tenderness and constancy of the love they bear you, a love so great, so ardent,
that you are the principal object of their desires; that they prefer your
contentment before their own, and toil not but for you, and have you night and
day in their hearts; the vows wherewith they follow you every where, craving
nothing of GOD more instantly, than your advancement and happiness; and looking
on you as the principal subject of their hopes, and of their joy. Have not so
unnatural a soul, as not to resent all these strict obobligations which you
have to love, and serve, and honor them. Pay their love with your respects;
and their pains with your obedience; and be not so wretched as to render them
trouble and affliction for so many benefits as you have received of them; nor
so ungrateful, as to frustrate the just hopes they have conceived of you.
Certainly you would owe them this obedience, though no other consideration did
oblige you; than what is founded in themselves. But there is more than so. The
Apostle assures you, that in performing your duty unto men, you will please
GOD, the Father of Spirits, and Ruler of the World. This (says he) is plaesing
unto Him. He will reckon it to you, as a part of the piety you owe Him, and
charge Himself with the services you shall render unto those whom He has given
you for authors of your life. It Is the best, and the most pleasing devotion you
can offer Him. Miserable Superstition, that go to seek in cloisters for
exercises pleasing unto GOD! There was no need to go out of the Fathers house
for this. Thou have enough at home wherewith to please the LORD. As for the
particular exercises, about which Monks are busied in their cloisters, we know
not whether they please GOD, who never commanded them. But for the services
which our Parents demand of us for their consolation, and the easing of their
lives, we cannot doubt but that they are most pleasing to Him, since He
commands them, and His Apostle assures us here expressly of it. Consider, I
pray, the imprudence of these people. They say they would please GOD, and that
it is their whole aim to content Him. Mean time to attain thereto, they renounce
the obeying of their Parents, which is pleasing to him, and subject themselves
unto the fancies, and the rugged rules of certain men, of which they neither
have, nor can have any assurance, that they please GOD; Is not this to quit a
certainty for an uncertainty? and to do the wrong way, what one pretends; and
go further off from what one seeks, and cast one's self upon what he would
eschew? But ye, Brethren, better instructed by the word of the LORD, seek to
please Him, in doing what He orders you, and in employing that time and labor
to the serving of, and obeying your Parents, which superstition loses in its
painful, but vain, and fruitless exercises. This is the way to be pleasing unto
GOD, and to assure unto your selves that crown of blessedness, which He has
promised to such children as faithfully discharge this duty.

As for you, Believing Parents, nature it self, and the interest of your own
happiness so forcibly impelleth you to love your children, and to treat them
well, that if the Apostle had forborne to give such an express advertisement
against provoking them, I think there would not have been much need to say any
thing of it. We offend much more on the other hand; I mean, in excess of
affection, and in the softnesses of indulgence; not heeding, that to treat them
so laxely, is in truth, to hate, and not to love them; to destroy, and not to
breed them up. The Apostle forbids you to provoke them; but hinders not your
correcting, your reproving, your chastening them, if they deserve it. He
wills only, that your conduct be just, and temperate; that it keep a mean
between the two extremes, the roughness of severity, and the remissness of
indulgence. The care you owe them, is to form them unto true Virtue, unto the
knowledge, and the fear of GOD, unto charity, and justice, and honesty toward
men; to give them examples hereof in your lives, and inculcate the lessons of
them with your lips. Whereas we our selves ruin their manners, and form them
early to our Vices, almost before they know them. Our greatest care is to keep
their courage high, and instruct them unto pride, and inure them unto vanity,
as if nature had not given them enough of it. And hereto, they that have the
means fail not to add Ball, and Dance, and Comedy. And that they may the better
learn these brave lessons, Fathers and Mothers give them examples of 'em. We
need not wonder, if under such education we see our youth to speed so ill; if
it become insolent; if it has little sentiment of true piety; if it treat
those so much amiss, to whom it owes most respect. Brethren, if you have
children, remember, that beside the interest you have in their virtue, and
their vices, you shall render an account for them unto GOD, who has given them
to you, to breed them for His glory, and for the edification of His Church; and
not to content the world, or to serve vanity.

But, Dear Brethren, of whatever state or condition we are, let us further take
out two lessons here, which the Apostle gives us. The one is, to render all of
us unto GOD an exact, and humble obedience in all things, since we have the
honor to be His children. It Is this that the child owes his Father. We are not
His, if we obey Him not. We falsely vaunt our selves in that glorious title, if
we neglect the duty to which it obliges us. The other lesson is, that the Will
of GOD should be the only rule of our lives; so as we do nothing but what is
pleasing unto Him. This is the sovereign reason of our duties, not to dare any
thing that displeases Him, nor neglect any thing that is agreeable to Him. This
rule is of very vast, and perpetual use in all the parts of life. And omitting
others for this time, I beseech you only to apply it to the pastimes, to the
balls, and banquettings, and comedies of the present season. Each of you
consult your own conscience hereupon, if it be informed by the word of GOD; and
ask it, if these exercises of the world be verily pleasing unto GOD; and
whether running after them with the multitude, you can assure your self you do
therein a thing that delights him? If it answer, that there is no reason to
believe it, but very much to the contrary; in the name of GOD, my Brethren,
follow this resolution of your own conscience. Abstain from these works of
darkness; Spare the Church; Give it no scandal; Expose not its name, and its
profession to the scorn of those without, by engaging them in the disorders of
the present generation. Let your manners have no less purity in them, than your
faith; and let there be a difference between the very divertisements of
children of GOD, and of others. Give to the poor what is cast away usually in
such follies, and you shall acquire a firm and solid consolation, which shall
never be followed with repentance, and regret, but go on still increasing,
until it be changed into that eternal, and incomprehensible joy which is kept
for us in the Heavens by our LORD JESUS CHRIST, to whom, as to the Father, and
the Holy Spirit, the true and only Eternal GOD, be Honor, Praise, and Glory,
unto ages of ages, Amen.

THE FORTY FIFTH SERMON ON COLOSSIANS,
CHAP, III. VER. XXII, XXIII, XXIV, XXV. And Chap. IV. Ver. I. Verse XXII.
Servants, obey in all things, them that are your Masters according to the
flesh; not serving to the eye, as willing to please men, but in singleness of
heart, fearing GOD.

XXIII. And whatever ye do, do it all with courage, as unto the LORD, and not
as unto men.

XXIV. Knowing that ye shall receive of the LORD, the reward of the
inheritance; for ye serve the LORD CHRIST.

XXV. But he that does unjustly, shall receive what he has unjustly done, and
there is no regard to the show of persons.

CHAP. IV. Verse I. Masters, render right and equity to your Servants, knowing
that ye also have a Master in Heaven.


IF mankind, after the devastation sin has made, has any thing left it, that
is laudable, and commodious, and conducing unto welfare, it is without doubt
the order of those societies which compose it. For this correspondence, and
this harmony of several persons, different in themselves, and yet knit together
by the mutual offices they do one another, and by that common end unto which
they direct them, is an effect, and production of a very perspicacious, and
exquisite reason, and bears such evident marks of it, as no one can choose but
perceive, if he ever so little apply his mind to this consideration. The thing
is such, as made an Heathen sometime say, Cicero.
that that grand and supreme Divinity which governs the world, does see
nothing on earth more agreeable to Him, than the bodies of Families, and
Re-publicks established among men, and governed by good equitable laws. For as
there is nothing, not only more unsightly and deformed, but also more
incommodious, than confusion; so on the contrary, there is nothing that is at
once both more beautiful, and more beneficial, than order. For order, setting
every thing in its place, and uniting all together, by the co-aptation and
combining of particulars; does cherish, and conserve the whole; and by their
union frames up a body, which, conjoyning in one the forces and perfections of
each of them, becomes by this means extremely fair, and most considerable. This
is the reason why the Apostles of our LORD and Savior did carefully
discriminate this order from those defects and imperfections which their Master
came to correct in the world. And whereas their holy discipline does batter,
and overthrow, and bring to naught all that the unrighteousness, and the pride
of sin has reared up among us: it does establish, and mightily confirm the
civil, and domestic societies which it found in mankind; as so many holy and
necessary institutions of GOD our Creator.

You have heretofore heard with what affection St. Paul recommends to
Christians the sacred and inviolable duties of husbands and wives, of fathers
and children, for conserving domestic society in its integrity among us. Now,
that he might leave no disorder at all in it, he speaks to Servants and
Masters; and in this Text discreetly regulates the subjection of the former,
and the domination of the latter; representing to the one and the other of
them, excellent considerations, taken from fundamentals of Gospel-doctrine, to
sway them to their duty. The same, namely, the subjection of Servants, and the
superiority of Masters shall be the two points we will treat of, if GOD permit,
in this action; observing briefly the particulars they may afford for our
common edification, and consolation.

He insisteth most upon the first point, which respects servants; because
subjection is bitter, and a thing which our nature is loath to accommodate its
self unto; especially in the condition that servants at that time were. For it
was not with them, as it is now with ours; who are persons in reality free, and
disposing of themselves, do only let out their services for a time, and upon
certain conditions; but not divest themselves of the liberty they were born in.
The servants of the ancients, in the Apostle's time, and among the nations to
whom he wrote; were slaves; which belonged to their Masters, and were theirs by
the same kind of property their cattle were. They could not dispose of their
own persons, nor of their children, but by the authority and will of their
masters. The law of servitude was of like nature among the Jews also; excepting
only, that such servants as were of the Hebrew race, went out of that
condition, and were set at liberty when they came to the year of Jubilee; as is
evident by diverse places in the books of Moses. The Apostle knowing how harsh
this condition was unto men, took a particular care to sweeten it, and to
recommend the duties of it to such as Divine Providence had ranked in it; least
disgust at so strict a subjection, and love of liberty, should carry them to
shake off the yoke, and to disturb the order of public society by their
rebellion. First, he orders them to obey; next, he prescribes them the manner
of this obedience; not serving to the eye, as willing to please men; and
finally, in the two last verses of this Chapter, he sets before them some
considerations taken from the benignity and justice of GOD, to incite them unto
a faithful discharge of their duty. The command of obedience is expressed in
these words; Servants, obey in all things them that are your Masters according
to the flesh. The very names which he makes use of, do show the justice of the
duty which he gives them in charge. For since they are servants, and those whom
they serve, are their masters; it is evident, that they are obliged by the
reason and nature of the things themselves, to render them exact and faithful
obedience. But his saying of Masters, that they are their masters according to
the flesh, does mitigate the rigor, and the meanness of servitude, limiting
the power of masters, and superiors, and extending it no further than unto
temporal, and corporeal things, not unto the soul, and conscience. Man may be
master of our flesh, GOD alone is LORD over our Spirits. Whatever be the
subjection of our bodies, we have still our souls free, and dependant on none
but GOD their Creator; who alone has the power, as well as the right, to do
them good or evil; as our LORD and Savior remonstrates unto us. Fear not them
(says He) that kill the body, Matt. 10.28.
and cannot kill the soul: but rather fear Him who is able to destroy both soul
and body in hell. It is with this distinction, that we are to take the
obedience which the Apostle recommends unto servants in all things: his meaning
is, in all things that lie within the Master's power, and do purely and singly
refer unto the flesh, not reflecting on, or touching the interests of the
spirit. For if our master according to the flesh, command us things contrary to
the will of our Master according to the spirit, (that is, of GOD;) in this case
it is evident, that we ought to obey GOD rather than man; and that if we owe
much, and in some sense even all things unto men, yet we owe them nothing to
the prejudice of GOD; and that there is nothing but we should suffer, rather
than fail of that first and eternal servitude we owe to our Creator and
Redeemer.

This holy doctrine of the Apostle's, shows us, first, that the LORD JESUS
CHRIST does not at all disturb the order of humane societies. He leaves to
every one in them, the just rights they are possessed of, unto persons or
things. He subjecteth us unto Himself, and unto GOD His Father; but without
doing wrong unto Caesar, or any of the lawful powers that govern either Estates
or Families. He intends, that all His should render to them what they owe them;
He destroys but the treacheries and tyranny of sin and Satan. Herod, dread not
His coming; He will neither pull your Scepter out of your hand, nor diminish in
any thing the rights of your Crown. His design is to give you Heaven, not to
out you of the earth; to enfranchise you from the slavery of vices, and not to
deprive you of the service of your subjects. Whence appears, how unjust and
scandalous the pretention of those is, who under the ombrage of Gospel-liberty,
would abolish all dominion and sovereignty among Christians; accounting it
incompatible with the state of grace: and theirs no less, who subject, even in
respect of temporals, all that are Christians, not the greatest Monarchs
excepted, to one mortal man; making their Crowns to depend upon his will, and
giving him authority to depose them, and to loose their subjects from the yoke
of their obedience; dogmatizing too by the same means, that a Christian Prince,
who falls into heresy, loses the right he had over his people. Can there a
thing be said, more pernicious, or more contrary to the Apostle, who would not,
that Paganism it self, a matter worse than heresy, should make Masters and
Superiors lose any of the lawful rights they have over their Christian slaves?
Secondly, the Apostle's limiting the authority and power of masters over their
slaves, in things of the flesh, naming them, their masters according to the
flesh, does show us, that there is none but GOD alone, who is our Master
according to the spirit: whence it follows, that such, as under any pretext
whatever, do peremptorily invade the Lordly ruling of our souls, do grievously
err, and usurp a thing which belongs to none but GOD; an attentat, which those
of Rome are evidently guilty of, in that they put the consciences of all
Christians in subjection to their Pope, and Council; whereas the holy Apostles
do expressly declare, that they have no dominion over our faith; 1 Cor. 1.19. 1
Pet. 5.2.
and advertise all the Ministers of CHRIST, to feed the flock committed to
them, not as being Lords over GOD's heritage, but so, as they may be a pattern
to them.

But I return unto St. Paul, who having in general enjoined servants that
obedience which they owe their masters according to the flesh in all things,
does adjoyn the manner after which he would have 'em to obey them; not serving
to the eye (says he) as bent to please men; but in simplicity of heart,
fearing GOD. He first purges the carriage of Christian servants, of a vice
very ordinary with persons of that quality; namely, serving only to the eye;
because they have no other design, but to content men. They do not think
themselves obliged by reasons of conscience, but only by those of their own
interest, to do their masters any duty or service; And so they serve them no
further, than they judge necessary for the exempting themselves from that
chastisement which they should incurr, if they failed to obey; or for their
procuring some recompense, by winning their favor. They respect nothing but
this in all the obedience they render them. Whence it comes, that when they see
their master present, they play the good husbands, as we say, and labor at
their work with most officious diligence and care. But if he turn his back,
they return unto their nature, caring for nothing less, than for his service;
like that evil servant in the parable, who seeing that his master delaid to
come, betook himself to his debauches, and fell an outraging his Lord's
household, and wasting his goods. All these peoples servitude is but a Comedy.
And as Players put on their disguise, and act their parts when there is an
assembly of spectators; so these do not their duty but when their master
looks on. And if they thought they could deceive his eyes, and knowledge, or
avoid his correcting them, or save their salary, they would surely never take
the pain to do ought of what he has commanded them. It Is this fallacious, and
truly servile disposition of heart, which the Apostle here forbids to Christian
servants, when he says, they should not serve to the eye, as aiming only to
please men.

But instead of this, he would have them serve in singleness of heart, fearing
GOD; that is, sincerely, without fraud, or feigning, and having more respect to
GOD than men. To that eye-service he had mentioned, he opposes singleness of
heart; and to the pleasing of men, the fearing of GOD. The Scripture is wont to
attribute two hearts, or a double heart unto a feigning person; because he
makes show of one intention, and yet has another quite different: so he that
serves to the eye. To see him, you would say, that he loves his master, and
desires his profit; yet under this deceitful masque, he hides quite different
thoughts and affections; heeding nothing less than the interests of him whom he
serves. But the servant whom the Apostle forms here, has but one affection,
and one thought; and having learned in the School of CHRIST, that it is just
and reasonable the servant should obey his master, he serves his, to fulfill
this piece of righteousness, and acquit himself of his duty, which he would
think himself deficient in, if he did otherwise; so that bearing about every
where this sentiment with him engraven in his conscience, there is neither
place nor time wherein he does not faithfully serve his master; whether he be
absent or present, seen or unseen.

Hereto the Apostle further adds, that he do fear GOD. Whereas others totally
referr the condition of servants only unto man; he would have a Christian know,
that GOD is the author of it; that it is He who has appointed it; and would
have us approve our fidelity in it, when His providence has called us to it.
Think not, (says he) that you have to do with none but men. It Is GOD who has
put you in this estate. Do not imagine it sufficient, to respect, and content
the eye of your master. You must reverence, and satisfy the eye of GOD, whom
you cannot deceive, nor content at any lower rate, than the doing of your duty
exactly, and sincerely. But the Apostle would not have a Christian simply to do
all his Master commands him. He would also have him do it cheerfully, and with
the heart; Whatever ye do, (says he) do it all with courage; that is, first,
not by constraint, and with murmurring; but voluntarily; and secondly, with
affection for those who command you.

Verily, you will say, an hard law. For if the Master be froward; if he
command, as often happens, things that are difficult, and harsh, and inhumane;
how is it possible a servant should fall to work about them, with any
cheerfulness? I answer, that our flesh finds it uneasy to relish such
obedience; and cannot suffer so hard a bit without reluctance, and
recalcitration. But the fear of GOD inclines us to account those things sweet,
which are of their own nature very harsh. If you look upon man only, I
acknowledge you have some ground to think it hard, that one, who is at the
bottom but a man as you are, should have you in such subjection to his will.
But if you lift up your eyes higher, and consider that it is GOD who has
instituted this order; that it is He who has called you to this condition; that
the master whom you serve, is His Minister, and Officer; then the roughest of
his commands will become supportable to you. And it is to this the Apostle
reduces you, when to bend you unto this sweet and willing obedience, he
advises you, to do all things as unto the LORD, and not as unto men. Make
account (says he) that it is to JESUS CHRIST, and not to a mortal man, that
you render your services. Respect this sovereign LORD in the person of your
masters; and think that it is He who orders you to do all that they command you.
For He likewise it is, who has given you them, by His providence, for Masters.
Withal, He declares expressly in His word, that it is His will you should obey
them. Admire now, Christian, I pray, the virtue of the Gospel; which, as
sometime the tree of Moses does sweeten the bitterest things, and so changes
their nature, that of distasteful, and forced, it makes them pleasing, and
voluntary. What is there harder, or more abject, than the servitude of a slave?
The Gospel changes it into a devotion, into a religious service; that is, into
the noblest, and most voluntary of all humane actions. The believer directs
that obedience unto JESUS CHRIST, which an infidel gives only to his master. He
does that for his GOD, which the other does but for a man. Wherefore he does it
cheerfully, and heartily, while the other does it not, but by constraint, and
with regret. Hence the Apostle says elsewhere, that a servant, called in the
LORD, 1 Cor. 7.22.
is the LORD's freeman. Not, that he cease to do his former master the
service he was wont; This he is so far from, that he now becomes much more
faithful, Philem. 10.
and much more profitable to him than he 'erst was: as Onesimus the servant of
Philemon, who after he once knew JESUS CHRIST, went voluntarily to put himself
again under his old Master's yoke, which during the darkness of his unbelief he
had cast off. All the difference is, that whereas in the time of his ignorance,
he had respect merely to his master's will, and authority; now he has little
regard thereto, considering principally his LORD and Savior's; so that, to say
the truth, it is Him he serves, and not a man. CHRIST has freed him from man's
yoke, and put him under his own; since henceforth his aim in all he does for
man, is chiefly to please, not man, but JESUS CHRIST.

For the forming of the spirits of Christian servants to this holy disposition,
the Apostle represents unto them, in the two last verses of this Chapter, that
the LORD JESUS is indeed the true Master, and super-intendent of their whole
lives, who sets them their task, and looks on their labors whatever condition
they are in, and will not fail when His day is come, to make up a true and
faithful account with them; largely recompencing such of them, as shall be
found to have honestly discharged their duty, and severely punishing the
negligent. Do all things, as to the LORD, and not as unto men; knowing (says
he) that you shall receive of the LORD the reward of the inheritance, for ye
serve the LORD CHRIST. But he that does unjustly, shall receive what he has
unjustly done, and there is no respect of persons. First, he would have them
take for certain, that their servitude shall not be in vain, nor unfruitful, if
they acquit themselves in it, as he has prescribed; and if their masters
according to the flesh have no regard to it, their sovereign LORD will not fail
to give them their pay, and recompense. Next, he shows them what this
recompense is, which they are to expect from the LORD. It is (says he) the
reward of the inheritance. Thers's no one in the School of CHRIST, but well
knows, that this inheritance which the Apostle speaks of, is that blessed and
glorious immortality which JESUS CHRIST has purchased for us by the merit of
His death, and calls us all to the possession of, by His Gospel. Now see how
prudently the holy Apostle has balanced his expressions of it! He calls it
a reward, or guerdon, that is, a retribution, and a prize; to the end he might
raise our hearts unto this sublime hope, and incite us thereby to labor
cheerfully for the receiving of so rich a recompense. For as prizes are not
given, but to those that have labored, and striven; so this life of GOD is not
prepared, but for those that shall, in their vocation, have fought a good
fight, and kept the faith, and duly finished their course. And, as the Prince
promises a Soldier, honor; and the Master a workman, wages; and the one do
perform, if the others discharge their duty: so the LORD promises us His
kingdom, and will according to His faithfulness, assuredly give it to every
one that does believe, and persevere. Lo! wherefore the holy Apostle calls that
blessed life, we hope for, a reward, or guerdon.

But lest this term should cause us to presume of some merit in our labors; he
pertinently adds another name, to cure us of that error; and calls the same
reward, an inheritance. For an inheritance, (as all know) comes not by merit;
but by another different title, even because one is a child of the Family.
Expect then, Faithful souls, this Divine retribution, not from the dignity or
merit of your works, but from the bounty and munificence of GOD; who having
freely adopted you into the number of His children, will give you part in this
eternal inheritance: to which neither you, nor any mortal man, had naturally
any right at all. It is His grace, and His faithfulness, and His promise, that
conferrs upon you all the share you have in it. And His goodness, and word
being immutable, you ought to expect it with as much assurance as if you
merited it; though you acknowledge that you never can. But because it might
seem strange, that the Apostle should promise Christians the reward of the
inheritance of the LORD, for services done to men; he repeats what he had
intimated before, namely, that to speak properly, it is JESUS CHRIST they serve,
and not men; For (says he) you serve the LORD CHRIST. It is true, this
Sovereign LORD is in Heaven, in perfect glory, and has no need of our services
much less of such as slaves and mercenaries do their Masters. But such is His
goodness, that He allows us, all that as done to His own person, which we do to
men according to His command, and for His sake. Thus He assures us in the
Gospel, that it is to Him we give all the alms, the visits, and assistances,
wherewith we gratify the least of His servants in His Name. Mat. 25.40.
You have done it unto Me, (says He) in that you have done it to one of the
least of these. All the duties of that obedience which He commands us, are of
the same nature in this behalf. Doing them unto men, we do them unto JESUS
CHRIST, who has commanded them; therefore it is also unto Him, that the least
and lowest services do pertain, which men perform to the Masters, unto whom the
order of His Providence has put them in subjection, which they perform, I say,
because of Him, or for His sake: so that He being infinitely good, and liberal,
they ought to attend assuredly, that precious recompense which He promises
those that serve Him.

But if so high and glorious an hope be not sufficient to affect us, and sway
us to that willing obedience which He requires of us, let us regard at least
the penalty He denounces, in case we fail of our duty. It Is this the Apostle
sets here before the eyes of Christian servants, when after proposal of the
reward of the heavenly inheritance to such as discharge their duty, he adds;
But he that does unjustly, shall receive what he has unjustly done, and there
is no regard to the show of persons. It Is a general sentence, reaching all men
of whatever condition they be, servants or masters, men or women, poor or rich.
Whoever does another wrong, either by positive outrage, or by not rendering what
he owes him according to the laws of the Gospel, shall receive at the hand of
the supreme Judge, what he has unjustly done; that is, be paid for his fault,
and punished with a penalty exactly proportioned to their crime. Nor should any
one persuade himself, either that the miserableness of his condition will move
the Judge to pity him, or that the splendour and grandeur of his quality will
blind His eyes, and so conceit the possibility of an escape. In this Divine
judgment, no regard (says the Apostle) is had to the look, or outside of men.
GOD will weigh your cause alone; not consider your person. And as He will not
take notice of the rich, or the mighty; not of Lords, or Monarchs, so as to
spare them, if they have lived in the practice of unrighteousness, and
violence; so neither will He regard the poverty, or meanness of the lowest, as
to exempt them from the punishments which their unjustness or infidelity
deserves; but, as He sometime commanded the Judges of Israel, Lev. 19.15.
He will judge justly, not honoring the countenance of the potent, nor
respecting the person of the poor. Whence it follows, that servants which rob
their masters, or serve them not as they ought, shall surely suffer for their
injustice; since granting, that men do let their wickedness pass unchastised,
yet the supreme Judge of the World will not fail to call them to their trial
one day; and bring to public light, the infidelities, the theeveries, and acts
of disobedience, which they think they have hid safe enough in the dark of
their deceits; and condemn them to the just torments they have merited, by
violating the sacred orders He has made for humane society, and doing that to
others, which they would not any should do to them. Such is, Brethren, the
Apostle's instruction to servants.

Let us now peruse what he prescribes to Masters. Masters, (says he) render to
your servants right, and equity, knowing that you also have a Master in Heaven.
First, he gives them in charge their duty; Secondly, sets before them an
excellent reason to sway them to it. Their duty is, to render right and equity
to their servants. It may not be imagined, that the power of Masters over their
servants is unlimited.

A mutual justice there is between them, which obliges them each to other
reciprocally; and either of them, that trespasseth against the rules thereof,
is faulty. And as it is just, that servants should obey, and be subject; so is
it likewise just, that Masters should be of good conduct, and give meet
entertainment. It Is this the Apostle means by that right, which he charge
them to render to their servants. It compriseth work, maintenance, correction,
and wages. So that Masters are obliged, for the right discharging of this duty
toward them, to carry themselves in these four points, with all prudence, and
equity, giving them a reasonable task to do, sufficient food, moderate
chastisement, and a meet salary. They that do otherwise, and transgress in
these things, either by defect, or excess, do not render to their servants what
is right; as for instance, those that overbear them with toil or strokes; and
they that quite contrary, let them live idle, and in debauches; those that diet
them ill, or too well; and lastly, they that defraud them of their wages, which
is one of the most horrid, and cruel acts of injustice, that can be committed.

But besides right, the Apostle would have Masters render also to their
servants, equity. The word he makes use of in the original, properly signifies,
a certain equality, and correspondence, that should appear between the offices
of the one of them, and the deportment of the other; so that, as the servant
obeys in singleness of heart, and in the fear of GOD, the Master likewise do
command holily, and religiously; and that, as the one serves with joy, and
respect, in like manner, the other do govern with mildness, and affection. In a
word, right comprehends all that refers to justice; and equity, all that
pertains to Christian Charity, and gentleness.

For the reducing of the faithful unto this holy moderation, he orders them to
remember, that they also have a LORD in the Heavens. His meaning is, that the
dominion they have over their servants, is not absolute, but dependant on GOD,
and by consequence, such as ought to be regulated by His word, and will. If
they have people beneath them; they have a Master, and a Sovereign above them,
who is the common LORD of them all, and unto whom they are to give account of
the treatment which their servants shall receive at their hands. He says
particularly, that this LORD is in the Heavens; to hold them the better to
their duty by the consideration of so redoutable a Majesty; who is, not here
beneath, on earth, the place of misery, and vanity; but on high in Heaven,
sitting on an eternal throne; and from that glorious habitation of light, and
immortality, does consider, and govern all things at His pleasure, nothing
coming to pass in His whole Empire, but He plainly perceives, and most justly
judges of. This great LORD is above all; and there is neither Master, nor
Prince of such elevation among men, but is under His feet. He is superlatively
holy, just, and good. He loves all His creatures, and concerns Himself in the
wrongs of the meanest, and most contemptible ones; hating nothing more than
injustice, and insolence, outrage, and cruelty; possessing withal, an infinite
wisdom, and an almighty power, which none is able to resist. Sure then,
consideration of the Empire, and sovereign dominion that He has over us, is
very proper to keep us within bounds, and to restrain us from abusing the power
He has given us over persons subject to us; nor could the Apostle put those
that have servants, in mind of any thing more pertinently, that should oblige
'em, to render them right, and equity. Thus we have explained his instructions.
It Is now for you, Beloved Brethren, to make your profit of them, and to gather
the fruits he offers you in them, for the amendment of your lives, and the
consolation of your souls.

First, Ye Christians, whom the meanness of your birth, or (as they call it) of
your fortune, has reduced to the condition of serving, rejoice ye at the the
honor done you by this great Minister of CHRIST, who disdaineth not to address
his holy voice unto you. Set the care he has of you, against the contempt that
men cast upon you. Let his speaking to you comfort you, and raise your hopes of
the inheritance of GOD. Think well upon the report he makes you, that the
persons to whom ye are subject, are not your Masters, but in reference to the
flesh. Your servitude will not be eternal. Nay, it will not be very long, nor
extend further at most, then to the end of that carnal life, which ye lead upon
the earth. When this earthly tabernacle is once dissolved, you shall enter into
the glorious liberty of the children of GOD; and then there will no more be any
difference between you and your Masters. For the present, your better part is
already in possession of this liberty; namely, that spirit, which GOD has
formed in you after his own image, and which, maugre all the outrages of men,
will ever remain master of it self, if you give it to JESUS CHRIST, the great
freer of mankind, who does faithfully, and speedily enfranchise every one, that
receives and embraces His truth. Only take heed, that ye abuse not His grace;
as if the spiritual liberty, He has gratified you with, did discharge you from
doing faithful service to your Masters after the flesh. The more He has
illuminated you in the knowledge of Himself, the more fidelity and love do you
owe. For besides other reasons, the fear of GOD, and the will of JESUS CHRIST,
does now oblige you to obey them; so that the serving them makes up a part of
your piety. According to your acquitting your selves therein, well or ill, GOD
will give you, or deny you his inheritance. But besides your own interest, the
glory also of the Gospel is concerned in the case. For your faults defame our
religion, and make it believed to be a licentious discipline, whereas your
fidelity will produce us praise. Every one will be constrained to acknowledge
the sanctity of our doctrine, when they shall see it reform the deportment even
of man and maidservants. And this, the Apostle does expressly represent unto you
elsewere. Tit. 2.9, 10.
Let servants (says he) be obedient to their masters, pleasing them well in
all things, not answering again, not purloyning, but showing all good fidelity,
that they may adorn the doctrine of GOD our Savior in all things. Object me
not the ill humor and rigor of your Masters. Remember the words of St. Peter,
1 Pet. 2.18.
who obliges you to serve not only such as are good and equitable, but also
the froward. Take their ill treatment for an occasion, by which GOD would
exercise and refine your faith. Receive those strokes of the rod from His hand,
and not from theirs, making them matter for your patience, and a trial of your
faith. Let the eye of JESUS CHRIST, who looks on you; let His favor and
benediction, which always accompany conscionable sufferings; let the hope of
his inheritance for your Salary, sweeten all the pains of your servitude. How
ungrateful soever men be to you, your patience shall not be left unrewarded, if
ye persevere in it constantly for CHRIST'S sake.

And you Masters, who so much desire to have faithful, and obedient servants,
render ye to them that right and equity, which the Apostle commands you. Though
your extraction or estates set you above them in humane society; yet your
nature is no other then theirs. Ye are subject to the like infirmities with
them. One and the same death will consume you both; nor will there be any
difference between your dust and theirs. You shall appear before the same
Judge, and the tribunal at which you shall be examined, will have no more
complacency for you, then for them. That LORD whom you see over you is their
Creator and Redeemer, as well as yours. He has put them under you: but to
govern them, not to tyrannize over them; to have care of them, as his creatures
and children, not to tread them under foot as worms. Remember, He will treat
you, as ye shall have treated them. You are his servants, as they are yours; or
to say better, they are your brethren, and ye are not worthy to be so much as
His Vassals. You and they are one and the same flesh, that came out of the
earth, and unto earth shall return: but neither they, nor you, have any thing
in common with GOD. He is in the Heavens, and you crawl in the dirt. He is the
King of Glory, and ye are but dust and ashes. Yet, such is His goodness, that
notwithstanding this infinite inequality, He has not disdained your
nothingness. He has pardoned you your sins; He has washed you in the blood of
his Son; He has forgiven you all your debts; He has communicated to you His
divine nature. Respect His graces; and have no less gentleness and goodness for
your own flesh and blood, then this Sovereign LORD has had for you, who were
His enemies. With what face will you beg mercy of Him, if ye be inexorable to
your people? How can you hope for the grace of your Master, if you have none
for your Servants? I beseech you both, have these holy thoughts night and day
fore your eyes; to the end, you may faithfully discharge those mutual duties,
which the Apostle enjoins you; the one, subjection, and obedience; the others,
justice, and equity; both of you living in such an holy correspondence, as that
the loyalty, the respect, the humility, the submission, and the diligence of
servants may go in conjunction with the gentleness, the gravity, the
liberality, and benevolence of Masters. If ye so do, you will be happy; the
families where you live together in this manner, will become the wonder of the
earth, and the honor of the Church. The blessing of Heaven will fall
continually on them, and besides the contentment, and repose, which this kind
of life will give you abundantly for the present, it will also bring you
hereafter into the possession of the heavenly inheritance.

But, Dear Brethren, it is not enough, that those Masters and Servants, to whom
St. Paul particularly speaks, do make their profit of his instructions. We all
have in them what to learn of whatever quality and condition we be. For since
he would have servants render so exact, and so frank an obedience to their
Masters according to the flesh, judge ye, what kind of obedience we owe to that
Highest LORD, whom we all have in Heaven. The Master according to the flesh,
gave not his servant the being he has; and if he redeemed him, he redeemed but
his flesh, and that at the price of a sum of money only. Ours did make us, and
it is by His liberality alone, that we hold all the being, life and motion that
we have. Nor has He only created us; He has also redeemed the whole of us,
our soul and body, flesh and spirit; not with silver and gold, which are
corruptible things, but with His own precious blood, having voluntarily
sacrificed His life to preserve us from death, and give us an happy
immortality. Never Master had so much right to command His servants, as He has
in reference to us. Let us obey Him then in all things without reservation; and
consecrate this whole life of ours to His service, the whole whereof we have
once and again received from His grace. Neither is it with this LORD, as with
Masters according to the flesh; These oftentimes command things unjust, or
unhonest, things contrary to our salvation, which we cannot do without
destroying our selves. He commands us nothing, but what is just, what is honest
and reasonable, what is worthy both of Himself and of us. Wherefore the most
abject bond-servant owes his Master but a limited obedience? whereas we owe
ours such as is absolute and infinite. His yoke is easy, and His burden
light. He demands no other thing of us, but that we love Him, and our brethren
for His sake; that we live honestly and holily, that is, be happy. O ungrateful
and execrable creatures that we are, if we deny a Master, to whom we owe so
much, so just, and so reasonable, so beneficial, and so blessed an obedience!

Again judge, ye Faithful, if the bond-servant ought to obey his Master in
singleness of heart, with courage and affection, (as the Apostle says,) with
what ardour, promtitude, and devotion should we serve ours, who is not only
allmighty, and allwise, but also goodness, love, clemency, and beneficence it
self? Then, as for the bondman, though he ought to serve his Master at all
times, and in every place; yet his Master sees him not always; whereas we are
ever under the eye of ours. He has a full view of us, sees us within and
without: nor can we hide our selves in any place, where He is not present. We
cannot speak a word, nor form the least thought in the secret of our hearts,
but He Is a witness of it, knows the whole as soon as our selves. Now sure there
is no slave so sottish and shameless, but the Master's eye will keep in order,
and compel unto obedience. It such a one be idle, or exorbitant, he is not so
but in the other's absence. Since then we have ours always present, what
remains but that we be never idle? that we employ all our time in His
service? bearing respect to His Divine eye, that looks on us, and is over us,
both day and night.

Again, even when the serving of a man is in question, the Apostle would have
the slave, not serve to please the man merely; so great an integrity and
probity does he require in all our performances. Judge then how much more holy,
and how much more pure from all interest, that obedience should be, which we
render to the LORD JESUS, GOD blessed for ever? Undoubtedly, they that serve
Him to please men, to gain their esteem, and acquire a reputation for sanctity
among them, or to draw thence any other profit; they, I say, beside their being
ridiculous and vain, do commit also an huge and an inexcusable sacrilege;
profaning the Name of GOD, and the sacred acts of religion, Matt. 6.2.
and most unrighteously abusing them for worldly ends. Such are those
hypocrites, that fast, and pray, and hear the word of GOD, and celebrate His
Sacraments, and give alms, to be seen, and had in honor; that, in short, serve
not GOD, but to please men. They, says CHRIST, have their wages. They are
paid, they have nothing more to look for at GOD's hands. For such vain and
deceitful service, they shall have no other reward; but that vain and deceitful
breath, which they have coveted, and sottishly preferred to the glory of GOD.

Let us eschew at once these peoples miscarriage, and their misery; and
according to the Apostle's prudent, and divine injunction, whatever we do,
whether the action be addressed unto GOD, or respect our neighbor, do it all,
as unto GOD, and not as unto man. Let us seek for, neither other spectator, nor
other remunerator, than Him alone. Be we content with his approbation, and with
the testimony of our own consciences, whatever censure men do pass upon us;
being assured, as St. Paul here adds, that if we serve the LORD, if it be Him,
we obey; if it be to His will, and glory, that we consecrate, and direct the
course of our lives, we shall infallibly receive from His bountiful hand, the
reward of the inheritance; and on the contrary, that they that do unjustly, and
despising His truth, are injurious either to His Majesty, or His creatures,
shall receive what they have unjustly done, without respect of persons. Looking
for so great and dreadful a judgment, at which the least of our actions,
whether they be good, or evil, shall be examined in presence of the assembly of
the whole universe, what manner of persons, 2 Pet. 3.11.
I beseech you, ought we to be, in all holy conversation and godliness. Let us
search our hearts, and make inspection into all the parts of our life; let us
cleanse our souls and bodies from all filthiness, and impurity; and timely
judge our selves; wounding, and cutting off, with the righteous sword of a
lively, and serious repentance, all the evil we find in our selves; and living
henceforth justly, soberly, and religiously, without scandal before men, and
with all good conscience in the sight of GOD; that we may next week present our
selves at His holy Table; to our edification, and comfort; and appear at the
last day, before His sacred, and dreadful tribunal, without confusion, to the
glory of JESUS CHRIST, who has redeemed us, and our own eternal salvation.
Amen.

THE FORTY SIXTH SERMON ON COLOSSIANS,
CHAP. IV. VER. II, III, IV. Verse II. Persevere in Prayer, watching in it with
thanksgiving.

III. Praying together also for us, that GOD do open us the door of the word,
to publish the mystery of CHRIST, for which also I am prisoner.

IV. That I may manifest it, as I ought to speak.


DEAR Brethren; Prayer is the Christian's sacrifice, the holiest exercise of
his devotion; his consolation in troubles, his stay in weaknesses; the
principal weapon he uses in combats; his oracle in doubts, and perplexities;
his safety in perils; the sweetning of his bitternesses; the balm of his
wounds; his help in adversity; the support, and ornament of his prosperity; and
in a word, the key of the treasury of GOD, which opens it to him, and puts in
his hand all the good things that are necessary for the one and the other life,
this of the earth, and that of heaven. Hence it is, that the holy Apostles give
it us in charge, with so much affection, and diligence, in all those divine
instructions of theirs, which are come to our hands. Not to seek further off
for instances of it, you see how St. Paul, being upon the point to conclude
this excellent Epistle to the Colossians, after he had informed their faith,
and regulated their manners, and explained their duty, both in general toward
all men, and toward certain sorts of men in particular, within the societies
in which they live; sets an exhortation to prayer at the head of some other
documents, which he adds before he makes an end. Persevere in prayer, (says
he) watching therein with thanksgiving. And in truth, it is with a great deal of
reason, that he reminds us of so important, and so necessary a duty. For since
GOD is the Father of lights, from whom comes down every good and perfect gift,
how can we, without His favor and benediction, either acquire, or conserve the
faculties and habits of this divine life, unto which the holy Apostle would
form us, together with the virtues that relate to it? Since then prayer has
the promise of obtaining from His liberality, whatsoever it shall ask of him in
faith, it is upon good ground, that the Apostle wills the Colossians to address
themselves continually to GOD by prayer, for the meet and faithful discharging
of those duties he prescribed them. After this, he further adds two
advertisements more; the one, of conversing wisely with those that are without;
and the other, to season their speech, the principal instrument of
conversation, with the salt of grace. Whereupon he concludes this Epistle with
the praises of Tychicus, and Onesimus, who were the bearers of it; and with
salutations he makes them on the behalf of some then with him; adjoining his
own to the Colossians themselves, and likewise to the faithful of Laodicea.
This is the sum of this last Chapter of his letter; as you shall here more
particularly (by the will of GOD) in the following actions. At present we
purpose, His grace assisting, to entertain you with what he says of prayer, in
those three Verses we have read: and to do it in order, we will treat one after
another, of the two points that offer themselves in the same: first, of prayer
in general. Persevere in prayer, watching therein with thanksgiving. Secondly,
of their praying particularly, and expressly for him, which he requires of
them. Praying together also for us, etc.

Man being in some sort secretly conscious of his own weakness, and knowing how
little succor second causes can afford him, for the conservation, and the
happiness of his life, is in a manner naturally inclined to call unto his aid
by prayer, that veiled, and invisible Deity, whose Providence he scenteth in
every thing, though he perceives not its form. All religions in the world do
give clear and very express testimony to this truth, there never having been
any known, but that had its prayers and letanies addressed to GOD: and greatest
idolaters, and the deplorablest wicked men are wont to cry out when a danger
surpriseth them, O LORD, help me. O GOD deliver me; lifting up their eyes at
that time to Heaven, as if nature in that case did its self compel them to do
homage to that Majesty, which they outrage or blaspheme through the rest of
their lives. But what Nature does too too imperfectly teach us, we learn
plainly, and fully from the Scripture; where we have both express commands to
call on GOD, and promises of favorable audience, and examples of all holy men
under the one and the other Covenant; whose orisons the Holy Spirit has taken
care to keep up for us in these sacred registers of the Church. St. Paul
presupposing therefore here, that the Faithful he wrote to, had this exercise
of prayer familiar among them, according to that common principle of nature,
and of Scripture, does only regulate them in the manner of performing it,
advising them to persevere in it, to watch in it, and to accompany it with
thanksgiving.

As for perseverance in prayer, it is not without reason, that he expressly gives
it us in charge. For though the duty be not only very just, but even most
necessary; yet we are of our selves so cold, and sluggish, and so indisposed to
the performance of it, that we all need the heavenly voice of this Minister of
GOD, to excite us unto it. Presuming that we have the things we need, in our
own power, or shall find them in the sufficiency of nature; and not considering
how they all depend upon the hands of GOD, we remit the assiduous invocating of
him, and make not use of prayer, but on extraordinary occasions, when humane
succor fails us; as the manner is in tragedies, where the Deity is not
brought in, but at some difficulties, which no created power or prudence is
able to clear. On the other hand, we are so proudly delicate and tender, that
if we are not heard as soon as we have spoken, we fly off, and are ready to
say, as that King of Israel once did: Why should I wait on the LORD any longer?
2 Kings 6.33.


For the curing our selves of so pernicious an humor, and that we may
persevere in prayer, according to the Apostle's advice, let us consider in the
first place, the continual need we have of GOD's assistance: For since it is in
Him that we have being, life, and motion; since it is He who sends poverty,
and makes rich; who sets up, and puts down; who dispenceth health and
sickness; who brings to the grave, and reduces thence; who governs the
hearts of men, and the elements of nature. Since it is He again, who begins,
who polisheth, and perfecteth all the work of grace, and crowns it with
glory; who effectually produces in us both the will and the deed of his good
pleasure; it is evident, that without the help of His holy, and most happy
hand, we can never come to possess any good either in our own persons, or in
our families; either in the State, or in the Church; nor be preserved, and
secured, or freed, and saved from any evil of any kind whatever. You cannot
refuse belief of this great truth, without imputing falsehood at once to the
Scriptures of GOD, and the depositions of Nature, both which do harmoniously
report, and averr it to us on all hands. Yet if thou credit it, why do you not
consider what it necessarily inferrs, namely, that having continual need of
GOD's assistance, you are by your own interest obliged to implore it
continually? And that as you cannot pass a day without His favorable succor,
so neither should you spend a day without calling on His Name? Look, I beseech
you, upon poor beggars, with what earnestness, with what indefatigable
perseverance they spend whole days, nay, their whole life a petitioning of us.
It Is a sense of their necessity, that gives them this constancy, and inspires
this courage into them. Dear Brethren, we have infinitely more need of the
succors of GOD, than these poor people have of ours. Why are not we at least
as earnest, as constant, and assiduous in beseeching Him, as they are in asking
alms of us? As for them; our flintiness is such, that for the most part they
reap little or no fruit of their perseverance in praying of us: whereas the
LORD according to the riches of His infinite goodness, and power, never sends
away ashamed such as persevere in prayer to Him. He has so promised, He does
daily so perform, and the Church's experience in all ages assures us of the
truth of the word He has given us in that behalf. I confess, He does not
always presently give us what we crave. But if we be constant, if undismayed
at His first denials, we press Him with a vigorous, and an ardent faith,
there is nothing but perseverance will draw it from His bounty, Genesis 32.25, 26.
Hos. 12.4.
in the end. It was thus that Jacob obtained the blessing he desired. He
wrestled stoutly with GOD all night, and had power over Him, he wept, and
begged favor, and constantly holding fast his LORD, I will not let thee go,
(said he to Him) until thou bless me. The Canaanitish woman in the Gospel took
the same course, and was heard in like manner. She bore our Savior's first
put-offs without dismay, and those hard words, It is not good to cast the
childrens bread to dogs, Matt. 15.26.
astonished her not. She received this great blow without giving over; and her
holy importunity came off victorious, having drawn from our LORD's mouth, that
sweet and desirable answer, O woman, great is thy faith! Be it unto thee as
thou will. Imitate this violence. It offends not GOD. It appeaseth Him. The
LORD Himself commands it us expressly, and teaches us, that we ought to pray
always, and not faint, by the parable of that poor widow, whose importunity
overcame the obdurateness of the unjust Judge, and drew that from him in the
end, which neither fear of GOD, nor respect of men could sway him to. This
Judge was wicked and cruel, yet the perseverance of a woman conquered him. How
much rather shall ours bear away what we desire of GOD, who is goodness and
clemency its self? As for that Judge, it was his nature, and the disposition of
his heart, that rendered him cruel and inexorable; But if the LORD grant not our
first requests, it is not that He means indeed to be sparing of His benefits
toward us. (To say true, He is more willing to give them, than we are to
receive them.) This in total, is but a mysterious act of His wisdom; and by
such delays He would exercise our faith, inflame our desires, and make trial of
our constancy. He hides himself, that we might seek Him. He retires, that we
might press after Him; and holds back His blessing, that we might pluck it from
Him. His favors are no boons that should be faintly desired. We do not know
the value of them, if we do not esteem them worthy to be asked with instancy.
The favors we sue for at the Courts and Palaces of men, are verily but terrene
things, things of little value, and of a short and uncertain duration. Yet what
do we not do to obtain them? We besiege their gates in the morning early; we
abide there till late at night; we suffer their put-offs, and disdains, and
oftentimes even their reproaches, and the outrages of their domestics. They
drive us from them, they call us troublesome people; they accuse our hardiness
of impudence, or insolency. We swallow all these affronts; and after all,
forbear not to come on again, inventing, if it be possible, some new submission
to soften them; so great and pressing is our desire of those things which we
petition them for. Christians, do ye not blush at having more passion for
things of the earth, then for things of Heaven? Are you not ashamed to
solicit the justice, or the favor of men, with more earnestness, then the
grace of GOD? To have more patience and perseverance in seeking to win the
heart of a worm of the earth, then to overcome the King of Kings? your
salvation is concerned. The grace you crave of Him is the abolition of crimes,
that merit an eternal death; and that which you solicit with Him, is not a
piece of ground, or an house, or a small sum of money, or some years of a
temporal life, or liberty. It is Heaven and Eternity which you beg: the
treasury and palace of His CHRIST; the peace and joy of his Spirit, an immortal
liberty, an immortal life and glory. It Is for this, Beloved Brethren, that we
should be violent, eager, and obstinately importunate. It Is for this we should
spend days and nights in solicitation at the feet of GOD; and seize resolutely
on Him, and protest unto Him with a firm and fixed determination, that we will
not quit Him till He accord our desire. No, LORD, thou shall not escape me.
Either Thou must suffer day and night my importunities; or I obtain what I
petition for. I will give thee no rest, until Thou have fulfilled the desire
of my heart. I will have it from Thine hand, or die begging it. Such,
Christians, is the perseverance, which the Apostle commands us here, and again
elsewhere, when he gives us order to pray without ceasing.

I have only two advertisements to add; The first is, that we may not
understand these words, as if he obliged us to quit all other exercise, and lay
aside the labor of the callings in which GOD has set us, and do nothing but
pour out prayers; as they say, certain extravagant heretics called the
Eutiches, that is, the Prayers, did sometime interpret it. The Apostle who
orders us here to pray without ceasing, commands us also to labor, and that
with such necessity, as he sentences that man not to eat, who does not labor.
These acts of our piety do not thwart one the other. Prayer seasoneth and
animateth labor; hinders it not. That perseverance in it, which is our duty,
is not continued praying without intermission, but prayer frequently resumed,
and assiduously reiterated, so as neither the trouble of waiting, nor despair
of obtaining, nor any other consideration, makes us give over the diligent
practice of it.

The other advice we have to give you in reference to this subject, is against
superstition, which regulateth prayers, you know, by the clock, and
scrupulously ties men up to the number, and to the words of their orisons. A
Christian, who has his conversation in Heaven, above time, and the motions
that make it, measures his devotion by things themselves, and makes his
prayers, not at the toll of a bell, but at the signal of his need: he lengthens
or ends them, not according to the number of beads in a chaplet, but according
to the movings of his heart.

Now after Perseverance in prayer, the Apostle requires also of us vigilance in
it. Persevere in prayer, (says he) watching in it, with thanksgiving. I freely
yield, that the faithful may steal away some hours from their repose, and
employ them in prayer; provided it be done without superstition. Nor do I deny,
but that the Prophets and the Apostles, and the Christians of the primitive
Church often did so, rising at night, and spending, either in private, or in
their temples, some hours in prayer, and other exercises of piety. Yet it seems
to me, that it is not of these watchings the Apostle speaks here. For there
is another kind of Watch, which we may call the Watch of the Soul, and it is
only an attention of mind, when we keep all our faculties in a good estate,
lively and working, not asleep, nor drowned in idleness, or in love of the
world, or in it is errors and vanities; but awake, and elevated unto GOD heeding
him, and intent upon His work; looking unto CHRIST, and for His day, and
expecting His salvation with earnestness and constancy. Psalm. 130.^.
It Is thus the soul of that Prophet watched, who waited more attentively for
GOD, then the morning watchmen, that waited with impatience for the break of
day. And hereto must be referred so many places of the New Testament that
commanded us to to watch. Watch and pray, that ye enter not into tentation.
Watch; Mat. 26.41. Mark 13.35. 1 These. 5.6.
for you know not when the Master of the house will come. Let us not sleep, as
do others; but let us watch, and be sober. 1 Cor. 16.13. Rev. 3.2. and 16, 15.
Watch ye, stand fast in the faith, quit you like men, be strong. Be vigilant.
Blessed is he that watches. And the like often elsewhere. For as the Apostle
somewhere elegantly says of a widow, who spends her time in the pleasures of
sin, that she is dead, while she lives; so may we say in like manner, of a
person, that takes no thought of GOD, nor of his service, nor minds the
occasions of doing good and holy works, how active, and busy soever he
otherwise is in the affairs of the world, that he sleeps while he is awake.
This mystical sleeping, is an insensibility of soul for the things of GOD. The
waking, or watching opposite to it, is the attentiveness, the sensibility, and
the acting of the soul about the things of salvation. It Is true, this kind of
watching is necessary for us in all the parts of our lives, and that no season,
no occasion should ever find a Christian asleep in this sense. But as prayer is
the excellentest of all our services; so does it particularly require of us,
this watching, this attention. I account therefore, that it is precisely this
the Apostle means, when he commands us to watch in prayer. He would have us
bring unto it a soul awakened, not overwhelmed in the cares, and passions of
the world; not laden, and weighed down with thoughts of the flesh; not
spiritless and languid, but stretched forth, and lifted up to GOD; not heedless
of what it does, or heeding it by halves; but minding the things it asks of
Him, and that CHRIST of his, in whose name it presents it is requests to Him.

By which you may judge, what account we are to make of most men's prayers, that
are pronounced by the mouth alone, without any attention of heart, for custom
rather then out of any solid devotion. Certainly since prayer ought to be made
with watching thereunto, it is evident, that these peoples supplications are,
to say true, dreamings, and not prayers. They are vain words, like to those,
which a man that dotes utters sometimes in his sleep. Those of Rome are so far
from taking Christians off from this abuse, that they precipitate them into it,
by that strange and extravagant law for their services, which orders the
performing them to be in a language that the people understand not. Our hearts
are so vain, that they can hardly keep close to the things and words we
understand. I beseech you, what attention can they have for those they
understand not? And how do they watch in praying, that are so far from thinking
upon what they say, as they know not what is meant? Pies and Parrots are
capable of prayer, and of devotion, if the uttering of a few words without
understanding them, be praying to GOD.

In fine, the Apostle would have us further add to prayer, giving of thanks.
And truly with great reason. For how can we ask of GOD new favors, if we make
not our acknowledgments to Him for those we have already received? This duty is
so rational, that though no other consideration did call for it, the thing it
self would oblige us to perform it. The having received a benefit, is cause
enough for rendering of thanks. It Is an odious ingratitude, to have, and use the
gifts of GOD, without expressing to Him our resentments of them. But besides
ingratitude, it is impudence too, to present our selves to GOD and ask new
benefits of Him, if we thank Him not for the old. It Is herewith therefore, that
all our prayers should begin; and there is no kind of Rhetorique, so powerful
to persuade His giving for the future, as an acknowledgment of what is past. He
loves to sow His mercies upon such ground, as receives them with gratitude: and
He readily hears the vows and prayers of those, who have a deep and respectful
sense of the favors He has done them. Now tell me not that ye have not yet
received any thing from His liberality. There Is not a man how wretched and
forlorn soever, but this Divine Sun of grace, and bounty has visited and
imparted some of his benefits unto. How much more has he done it toward you,
whom He has honored with his covenant? and unto whom He offers His Gospel,
and his CHRIST, and in Him all the treasures of His grace, and of His glory?
For I omit this body and this soul, this breath and light, and that multitude
of other good things, which he communicates unto all men in the course of
nature. But how can you, without being dead, or at least utterly stupid, have
no resentment of the grace He has showed you, in calling you to His communion?
and thereby to the hope of salvation and eternity? Yet though he has done you
so many favors already, He forbids you not to crave more of Him. His goodness
is an inexhaustible deep. Beg and pray boldly. All that he requires of you, is
that ye do it with thanksgiving: that ye tender Him your resentments for His
first favors, if ye would have Him grant the requests ye make Him for further
graces. This is it, Dear Brethren, which the Apostle enjoins the Colossians,
concerning prayer in general, even that they persevere in it, and watch unto it
with thanksgiving.

He next sollicits them, in the second part of our Text, to pray particularly
for Him. Pray ye says he) together also for us; that GOD do open, etc. As to
this, I will not stay to chastise the silly subtility of the superstitious; who
do conclude, from the Apostle's requiring the Colossians to pray for him, that
therefore we may also pray the spirits of the faithful departed, which are in
Heaven, to do us the same office. As rationally, as if I should infer, from St.
Paul's writing this Epistle to the Colossians, that therefore we have warrant
to write letters to the dead. These Colossians of whom St. Paul demands the
assistance of their prayers, were persons living here beneath on earth;
persons, with whom he had mutual commerce in such offices of charity. He wrote
to them, they answered him. He knew his words would reach them, and he looked
again for theirs; whereas we have no such commerce with the deceased. And as
for the reply which is made, that they do know our desires, and hear our
prayers; it is a fancy asserted without proof, and without reason; such as
nothing but the passion of a bad cause has inspired error with: and which we
may not believe, since the word of GOD, which is the rule and measure of our
faith, says nothing of it. However it be, since GOD, who everywhere commands us
to pray, does no where order us to pray to men departed; since the Apostle, who
presses the Colossians, and diverse other believers that were alive, to pray
unto GOD for him, does no where solicit them, either by his order, or by his
example to do him the like office, by addressing prayers to Saints deceased; we
cannot be faulty in keeping religiously as we do to the commands of GOD, and
the examples of St. Paul, and the other Saints of the Old and New Testament,
who have indeed prayed unto GOD, and verily required the aid of the prayers of
living faithful people; but never invocated or solicited the dead to pray for
them. All that can be duly concluded from this example of the Apostle, is that
while we war here below under the ensigns of JESUS CHRIST; the charity that
uniteth us all into one body, obliges us to pray for one another; and not only
Pastors for their Flocks, but also Flocks for their Pastors. Who was then, or
who has since been greater then St. Paul? Yet you see how he disdaineth not
the prayers of private Christians. He disdaineth them not, said I? He demands
them, and requires them expressly. Elsewhere he demands the same assistance of
the Ephesians and the Thessalonians.

Hence we may conclude, that for any one to have the title given him of a
Mediator between GOD and us, it is not sufficient that he pray unto GOD for us.
For by this account, the Colossians praying for St. Paul, according to the
warrant he gives them for it, and the request he makes them about it, might,
and should be styled his Mediators toward GOD; which is infinitely absurd, as
every one would confess. Whence first is refuted the abuse of those that give
this glorious quality unto Pastors, calling them Mediators between GOD and the
people; an abuse, against which St. Augustine cried out long ago, saying, That
if any man boasted, Lib. 3. cont. ep^ Parmen, c. 8.
he was a Mediator between GOD, and his Flock, good and faithful Christians
could not suffer him: but would look upon him as an Antichrist, and not as an
Apostle of JESUS CHIST; and concluding, that all Christian men recommend one
the other unto GOD by their prayers; but that we have one only true Mediator,
Him that makes request for us, and for whom none makes request, to wit, our
LORD JESUS CHRIST. Hence secondly appears further, that supposing the faithful
departed do pray to GOD for each of us in particular (as those of Rome
pretend;) yet this would not be sufficient to acquire them that title of
Mediator, which they give them: since that Flocks praying for their Pastors,
are not therefore their Mediators; it being evident, that for the meriting of
this title, there must be offered to GOD for us, besides prayer, a propitiation
capapable of supporting it, and of acquiring us the favor of the Father; a
thing that pertains to none to do, but the LORD JESUS; the prayers we make for
one another having no other efficacy, then what our common Head does give them,
unto whom they ascend in the heavens, and in whom is the propitiation for our
sins; Ibid. Paulo post.
as excellently says St. Austin. It Is the express doctrine of St. Paul; who
having said, that there is but one Mediator between GOD and men, even the man
JESUS CHRIST, immediately adds for a reason of this quality: that He gave
Himself a ransom for all.

But let us now see what prayers the Apostle requires of the Colossians, and
what particular he would have them crave of GOD for him. Being prisoner at
Rome, one would think he should desire, above all things, to be set at liberty.
But behold, I beseech you, the generosity of this holy man, and how nobly he
despises the interests of the flesh. He says nothing of this. He would have
them entreat GOD to open him the door, not of his prison, but of the word, that
he may publish the mystery of CHRIST. This is all his heart is set upon. He
takes no thought for his ease, or liberty. He has no sentiment, nor desire,
but for the exercise of his ministry; that is, for the advancement of the
glory of GOD, and for the edification of men. He is content, provided he may
disseminate his Master's Gospel with fruit. If his prison hinder, that he does
it not with such convenience, and to such a latitude, as he would were he free;
in this case only, and out of no other design, would he have prayer made to
GOD, to take him out of bonds. If not, his chain is indifferent to him,
provided it obstruct not the course of the Gospel, and that notwithstanding his
bonds, the word of GOD be not bound. 2 Timothy 2.9.
This is all he craves of the LORD, and all that he desires others should crave
for him, that He open (says he) the door of this word; that is, give him in
His providence, the opportunity and ability to preach it, removing from before
him the aversion, and hatred, and fury of men against this holy doctrine, and
those other scandals which the Devil never fails to raise in its way, as so
many thick and impenetrable gates, to hinder this Divine scepter of CHRIST from
entering in among men, and accomplishing the good pleasure of GOD upon them. He
uses the same phrase otherwhere also, in the same sense; and the reason of it
is evident. 1 Cor. 16.9.
For speaking of the fair occasion he had to preach at Ephesus, he says, that
a great door, and an effectual, was opened to him by the LORD: and again, to
signify the same thing in reference to the Country about Troas, he affirms,
that being come thither on the account of the Gospel of CHRIST, he found the
door opened to him by the LORD. 2 Cor. 2.12.


In process, he adds the end, for which he desires the LORD would grant him
such an opening. For the declaring of the mystery of CHRIST (says he) for
which also I am a prisoner. The mystery (that is the secret) of CHRIST, is
precisely the very thing which even now he termed, after his wonted manner, the
word; that is, the Gospel, the sublimest, and most admirable of all the
revelations of GOD. It is called a mystery, both here, and also often
elsewhere; because it is a wisdom hidden of its self to men and Angels; Ephesians.
6.19 Romans 16.25. Col. 1.26 and 2.3.
such, as no created understanding could have ever penetrated: This counsel
which GOD had taken to save men by the cross of His only Son, being above the
conception of all creatures: and one may say of it in truth, with the Apostle
in another place, that it is things which eye has not seen, 1 Cor. 2.9.
nor ear heard, and which never ascended into the heart of man. 1 Timothy 3.16.
He gives us the sum of it in another Text, where he clearly explaineth what
this mystery of CHRIST is; Without contradiction, says he, great is the
mystery of godliness; GOD manifested in flesh, justified in Spirit, seen of
Angels, preached to the Gentiles, believed on in the World, and raised up into
glory. Now he calls this grand secret, the mystery of CHRIST; first, because
JESUS CHRIST is all the fullness thereof, that is, the sole subject that fills
up the whole of it. Whence it comes also, that the Apostle, who was an
excellent, and most consummate Preacher of it, 1 Cor. 2.2.
for the right discharging of his Office, does determine to know nothing among
those he preached to, but JESUS CHRIST crucified. Secondly, because it is the
LORD JESUS who first revealed it unto men; who brought it out of the abysses of
the Divine wisdom, Romans 16.25. Ephesians. 3.9.
and from under the figures and obscurities of the old Law, where it lay hid
during precedent generations, and communicated it to the holy Apostles in the
light of that heavenly Spirit, with which they were baptized on the day of
Pentecost; and afterward set it, by their ministry, before the eyes of Jews and
Gentiles. It Is not in vain, that the Apostle says here by the way, he is a
prisoner for this Gospel of his Master's. For what allegation could be more
proper, or more potent to affect the Colossians, and render them prompt, and
earnest to pray unto GOD for him, and for the progress of the Gosspel, than a
remonstrance, that it is for this holy, and glorious cause he suffers? And that
this mystery of CHRIST, which he so passionately desires he may report, is so
divine a thing, as he stuck not to seal the truth of it, by a constant and
courageous enduring of the captivity he was in? But after this opening the door
of the word, the Apostle would have the faithful crave of GOD further, that he
may manifest the Gospel as he ought to speak; that is, preach it in such a
manner, as may be worthy of so sublime a subject; with meet liberty, diligence,
and fidelity. For it is not enough to have once received of GOD gifts necessary
for the executing of this holy office, except he conserve them in us by a
continual influx of His light, and give us the courage, the zeal, and spiritual
prudence, to use them in such sort as is proper for the edification of men.

Thus you see, Beloved Brethren, what the Apostle e're-while demanded of the
Colossians, both in general, and for himself in particular. Make account, that
this great Minister of CHRIST does now demand the same things of you, by our
mouths; in general, that ye persevere in prayer, watching thereto with
thanksgiving; and in particular, that ye pray for us, who have the honor to
preach the Gospel to you. As for prayer; we have before sufficiently justified
the necessity of it to you. It remains only, that you make your profit of it;
that this holy exercise be ordinary in your families; that this sacrifice be
there daily offered unto GOD morning and evening; that ye do not undertake, nor
begin any thing, before ye have dedicated it unto GOD by prayer. Instruct your
children and servants in the same devotion: That there may not be a person
within your doors, but understands, and exercises himself in this divine
liturgy of all Christians. Then take heed to acquit your selves in this duty
as you ought; that is, to perform it with fervency, attention, vigilance, and
perseverance; to wash your hands in innocence, to purify your souls and
bodies, for the presenting them unto this supreme and most holy Divinity,
without offending His sight. Ye know what the Prophets say of those whose hands
are full of blood; even that they are an abomination to the LORD; that He is
weary to bear them; that He abhors their devotions, and disdaineth their
vain oblations; that He hides His face from them, when they dare stretch out
their polluted hands unto Him; and will not hear their prayers, though they
should multiply them to the utmost. Wash you (says he) make you clean, Isa.
1.11, and seq.
take away the evil of your doings from before mine eyes; cease to do evil,
learn to do well; seek judgment, relieve the oppressed, do right to the
orphan, debate the ease of the widow. This, Christians, is the incense
wherewith the LORD would have you persume your offerings of prayer, that they
may be pleasing to Him. Hearken to His voice, if you desire He should hear
yours. Obey the word of His Gospel, if you would have Him receive the words of
your supplications. We complain that we have long prayed in vain. But let us
not disparage His veracity; rather confess we have not prayed as we ought; that
is, with such faith, such repentance, and amendment of life, as necessarily
should have accompanied these sacrifices. Henceforth then (for it is yet time)
turn ye unto Him with all your heart, and lift up pure hands, without wrath,
and doubting; and vigorously persevere in this holy exercise, with assurance
that He will hear you.

But, Dear Brethren, among other things which you shall crave of GOD, pray Him
also for us, that He would open us the door of the word, to the end we may
declare the mystery of CHRIST, and manifest it to you as we ought. For if
Paul, a chosen vessel, made, and formed immediately by the hand of Heaven,
consecrated by CHRIST's own voice, and filled with the treasures of His Spirit
in all abundance, did notwithstanding require the assistance of the Colossians
prayers, in the administration of this charge; how much more is the succor of
yours necessary for us; for us, I say, who, in comparison of him, are but
children? We conjure you therefore, both by the glory of our common Master, and
by the interest you have in His work, that you never fail to remember us in
your sacrifices of prayer; but always beseech this supreme LORD, to perfect
His strength in our weakness; to give us a mouth fit to declare His mysteries,
and to purify our lips, as He sometime did His Prophets, and untye our tongue,
as He did Moses's; and fill our souls with that Divine fire, which heretofore
did, in a moment, form His Apostles; clearing up our minds unto a distinct
knowledge of His Gospel wisdom; inflaming our hearts with the zeal of His
house, and cleansing them from the filth of all humane passions. Now if the
LORD, inclined by the ardency and constancy of your prayers, do vouchsafe to
conferr upon us some small portion of His grace, look ye on it as a thing that
pertains to you; a thing given to your prayer, and for your edification. Use
it, and make advantage of it. Let it not be said, that this great mystery of
CHRIST was declared unto you in vain; and that it being manifested to you as it
ought, ye received it not as you should. GOD keep you from such an unhappiness.
For how weak soever our preaching be, it is notwithstanding sufficient, My
Brethren, to render every one inexcusable, who shall not have received it with
faith; neither your ears nor consciences being able to deny, but that we
declare unto you all the counsel of GOD in His Son JESUS CHRIST. Let us all in
common beseech Him to deal so graciously with the one and the others of us,
that all may rightly discharge their duty; we speak unto you, ye hearken unto
us, as is meet: and that being knit together by a firm and indissoluble
Charity, we may prosperously advance His work in all sanctity, innocence,
patience, and constancy, to the glory of His Name, the edification of those
among whom we live, and our own salvation. Amen.

THE FORTY SEVENTH SERMON ON COLOSSIANS,
CHAP. IV. VER. V, VI. Verse V. Walk wisely toward those that are without,
redeeming the time.

VI. Let your speech be always with grace, thoroughly tempered with salt, that
ye may koow, how ye ought to answer every one.


DEAR Brethren; while the Church of CHRIST is here on earth, it is condition is,
to sojourn for the most part amid people of another profession. For though the
merit of our LORD and Savior be sufficient, to bring all mankind unto the
communion of GOD, and though his salvation be tendered by His own will and
order, to all those, that have His Gospel preached to them; yet so horrible is
the obduration and blindness of our nature, that the most of men abide out of
the covenant of GOD, wickedly and foolishly rejecting the great honor He
offers them. Diverse whole Nations there are, that irritated with the same fury,
have utterly shut the door against JESUS CHRIST, refusing to suffer any of His
servants within their coasts. And even of those, in which He has some
reception, it is commonly but a little part that does acknowledge Him, the
greatest and most considerable in the world, persecuting Him, or deriding His
mysteries. Not so much as private families, but the Gospel sometimes makes this
partition in. The same roof often covers persons of different religions. It Is
a division, which JESUS CHRIST has raised in the world; not that He positively
willed, and designed it; or that such is the nature of His doctrine; (neither
of those does properly tend, but to unite all things, and recombine Earth with
Heaven in an eternal peace) but it grows from the naughty and the cruel
disposition of men, who despise His counsel, and disdain their own salvation.
Once by this means it com's to pass, that the Kingdom of CHRIST remains, as it
were inlock'd with forcin States, and His faithful ones mingled among persons
of a contrary religion; with whom this commune habitation does of necessity
oblige them to have much commerce.

This is the reason why the Apostle having regulated before most of the duties
of our life, does here in a few words point out, in what manner we should
converse with these aliens, as to faith, among whom we are dispersed. And this
advertisement was at that time the more necessary, for that Christians in those
beginnings, which were as the nativity of the Church, saw themselves environed
on all sides with Jews and Pagans; the two religions, which then took up the
whole universe. In a peculiar manner the Colossians, to whom he writes this
Epistle, they dwelt in a City, and a Province, of which the people were much
addicted to the most infamous of heathenish superstitions. He commands them,
first in general, to walk wisely toward those that are without, and redeem the
time. Next he orders them in particular to have care of their speech, one of
the principal, and most important pieces of the commerce we have with men. Let
your speech (says he) be always with grace, seasoned with salt, that ye may
know how to answer every one. This exhortation, My Brethren, does well fit our
selves, and is proper for the condition we are in: as who live under powers,
and among countrymen of a religion different from ours. Let us consider it
therefore, and practice it with care. To help you for a right understanding of
it, we shall, if GOD will, treat in the presentation of the two parts it
contains. First, our conversation with those that are without in general:
Secondly, the qualities in particular, which our speech ought to have in that
converse; noting to you upon each of 'em, what we shall judge proper for your
edification and comfort.

The Apostle's general exhortation consists in two heads: the first is, that
we walk wisely toward those that are without; the second, that we redeem the
time. As to the first, I presume you all know without my advertizing it, that
the Apostle here does signify by the word, walking according to the ordinary
style of Scripture, living and conversing; and again, that he means by those
that are without, such as are not of our communion, but do, in point of
religion, follow other sentiments and services, then we profess to embrace in
conformity to the Gospel of Jesus Christ. He gives them the same denomination
in another Epistle also, where after his ordering us to shun the commerce and
frequentation of some that are called brethren, that is, who make profession of
our communion, 1 Cor. 5.12.
but mean while lead an ill, and scandalous life, he adds; For what have I to
do to judge of them that are without? He wills then that we converse wisely
with them, that is, that in all negotiation and conversing with them, we
exercise a great deal of prudence and circumspection. Not that he permits us
foolish and indiscreet deportment toward the faithful, that are of the same
body with us. GOD forbid. A Christian's whole life ought to be prudent and
advised; and whomsoever he converseth with, he ought to govern his actions with
judgment, and do nothing without reason, remembering the rule his Master gave
him for the forming of all his carriage, Be ye wise as serpents (says He) and
simple as doves. But because they without are usually enemies to our religion,
and do detest, or at least are ignorant of, or despise its mysteries, there is
none but sees that it concerns us, in treating with them, to use much more
restraint and consideration, then when question is of our brethren. As when a
Soldier is in an enemy's country, he stands much more upon his guard, and
marches, as they say, with bridle in hand. Besides you know, if persons be but
strangers, we treat them with more care, and if I may say it, with more
ceremony then our acquaintances. A brother lives with us without design; a
stranger is a spy. The one bears with even those actions of ours, in which a
severe Judge would find something to reprehend. The other does not pardon us
any thing; nay, is offended sometimes at the innocentest actions. Being
persuaded of the charity of the former, we live securely with him; nor does his
person put us in pain, because he approves all that accords with our rule. With
a stranger it is not so. Besides the care we ought to have, that in all
transactions with him, we do well; we must also be further heedful, that we so
do all, as may be to his gust. It Is then with a great deal of reason, that the
Apostle advertiseth us, as to those that are without, to live and converse
wisely with them in a particular manner, that is, to exercise in all our
deportment toward them, more attention, prudence, and consideration, then in
the other ordinary passages of our lives.

The first point of Christian wisdom in this deportment toward them, is to
observe the end it ought to be directed to. The second, to discern the persons;
And the third, to choose such means as are proper for our design. As to the end
whether an accidental encounter do cast us upon treating with such as are
without, or whether some design does lead us to it, we ought always to aim in
it, either at the edifying and winning them to CHRIST, or at the least, to
hinder their taking any offense or disgust at our religion. In the commerce,
which the subjects of a civil state have with foreiners, it is enough that they
keep sound and entire, the fidelity they owe their Prince, and the love and
respect they have for their Laws and Government of their own Country. It is
not necessary, nor will it be suffered, that they should attempt to withdraw a
stranger from his subjection to that power, under whose Scepter he was born;
because it is a lawful subjection, and whoever would unfix it, does entrench
upon another right, which cannot be done without injustice. But in the matters
of religion it is not so. It Is not enough that you preserve your selves from
theirs, who are without, you must endeavor, if you can, to draw them from it,
and bring them over unto yours. For in this you do no one wrong: you hurt
nothing but error; nor diminish any's right, but superstition's, impiety's,
and Satan's the common enemy of Mankind, who inspireth them. You do not acquire
any thing to JESUS CHRIST, but what did lawfully pertain unto him, since He of
right, is LORD of all men; both by reason that He did create them, and also for
that he has redeemed them. You do an act of justice in reducing bond-servants
under their true and lawful Master's yoke, whom error had debauched from it.
Thus as often as you treat with those that are without, you ought to propose
unto your selves the edifying of them in reference to religion, and to have a
will, and a desire in your hearts, like to St. Paul's wish for Agrippa, and for
the rest that heard him; Act. 26.29.
I would to God (says he) that not only thou, but also all that hear me this
day, were both almost, and altogether such as I am, except these bonds.

But it is not enough to have a good end: there must be an application of proper
and fit means; and for this effect the diversity of the persons, with whom we
have to do, is to be heedfully considered. For the same things do not suit with
all. Wisdom therefore, being obliged to diversifie its conduct, according to
the difference of those with whom it treats; a Christian must, together with
that good intention, he brings with him unto such encounters, diligently
discern the persons he is engaged with; not only in respect of the different
conditions they are of in the world, or in respect of their diverse capacity,
but also principally in regard of their humor, and their disposition in
reference to religion. For they that are without, have not all of them an equal
aversion for ours. There are some that have a sweet, and an humane, and
tractable spirit, and that hate not our persons, though they approve not our
sentiments. There are others, that are furious, and look not upon us but as
monsters, whom they could with all their hearts, as one may say, devour. For
it is the property of error, and of superstition, to inspire their zealots
oftentimes with these cruel and inhumane passions. You shall again meet with
spirits, who though perhaps they rise not to this excess of rage, yet are
retchless and obstinate, and having smothered, or as St. Paul speaks, feared up
with an hot iron all sentiments of true conscience, reason, and honor, are
wilfully become a prey to error, and have stopped up their ears, and all the
entrances into their understandings against the words, and lights of truth,
with a determinate resolution, not to admit any thing that crosses their
opinions, and rather to renounce the quality of reasonable creatures, then the
maxims of their false religion. That there must be very different demeanor
toward these diverse sorts of persons, there is no one but sees. And our
savior plainly tells us as much, when notwithstanding the order He gives His
Apostles, to publish His truth on the house tops, He yet advises them expressly
elsewhere, Mat. 7.6.
not to cast their pearl before swine; and the reason He annexeth is
considerable, lest (says He) they tread them under their feet, and turn again,
and rend you: plainly signifying by these words, as experience sufficiently
confirms, that the spirits of those He speaks of, are irritated and inflamed by
that very endeavor, which is used to cure them; and that they are so far from
amending, as they become more fierce, and more cruel upon it. But now this
discrimination of persons is not made for the having in sequel the liberty to
hate the one, and love the other. For a Christian's religion permits him not
to hate any man; it indispensibly obliges him to love all, whatever be their
nature, or their religion, or their disposition toward us: yea, it requires
him, even to bless those that curse him, Mat. 5.44.
and do good to them that persecute him, and make prayers and votes for them
that crucify him. He considers not these differences of men, but for the
regulation of his deportment; for the diversifying, not of the passions of his
heart, but of the actions of his life toward them. For though his carriage be
different in one manner to some, and in another manner to others; yet his heart
is the same toward all; and to say true, it is the love he has for them,
rather than any other reason, that makes him to deal diversely with them.

To come then unto the choice of such means as are necessary, and may be
suitable for the end that we propose unto our selves in this kind of carriage:
Christian wisdom excludes from the number, first, all evil actions, all
actions that are contrary to piety, or justice. We owe this respect, not only
to GOD and our own consciences, but also to men, and especially to such as are
without, that we at no time do any ill before them. For unjust or impious
actions, beside the venom they have in themselves, have also this bad
property, that they are directly contrary to the end we ought to have in our
deportment toward persons without; which is (as we have said) the winning them
to CHRIST. Instead of attracting, and bringing them on, such actions drive them
off, and disgust them at the thing, inducing them to judge ill of our religion,
by the ill fruits it produces in us, and to suspect that our belief is like
our works, and our Gospel as false as our lives are foul. It was one thing that
Nathan noted in King David's sin. Thou have made enemies (says he, 2 Samuel
12.14.
to blaspheme the Name of GOD; And St. Paul in the evil lives of the Jews. Thou
(says he) that make thy boast of the law, Romans 23.24.
by transgressing the law, dishonourest thou GOD? For the Name of GOD is
blasphemed, because of you, among the Gentiles. The Heathen heretofore took
like offense at the debauches of bad Christians, and did not forbear to
reproach them with it. The men vant (said they) that they are delivered from
the tyranny of Satan, and dead unto the world; yet their affections and lusts
do no less overcome, and master them, than ours do us, whom they call slaves of
Satan. For what serves this Baptism, wherewith, as they pretend, they have
been washed; and that Spirit, which, as they say, does govern them; and that
Gospel, which they make so great a noise withal, since their whole life is full
of filth, and flesh, and disorder? Accordingly you see, how the Apostle, among
other reasons which he alleges to divert the faithful from things contrary to
justice and honesty, does not forget to urge this for one, that the Name of GOD
(says he) and his doctrine be not blasphemed; 1 Timothy 6.1.
and in another place, that the word of GOD be not blamed; and a little after,
that ye may make the doctrine of GOD our Savior honorable in all things. So
the first thing we owe to those that are without, is a pure and constant
innocence in all our treating with them. The beginning, and the first point of
prudent converse in this behalf, is, that we neither say nor do any thing in
all the communication we have with them, which they may justly accuse of
wanting devotion toward GOD, or of covetousness, or cruelty, or any other
unseemly or unjust passion toward themselves.

But after abstinence from evil, we owe them also the performing and practicing
of that which is good; first, by rendering to them readily and uprightly all
that is their due by the laws of GOD, and of Nations; to Princes, fidelity and
obedience; to Magistrates, respect; to Kindred and Contrymen, amity; each in
their degree: Romans 13.7.
and as St. Paul says elsewhere, tribute, custom, fear, honor, to
whomsoever either of 'em does belong, not defrauding any one of his right, nor
lying indebted unto any. Let Sovereigns see us zealous for their service;
private men, round, and sincere, and trusty in all the affairs we have with
them; religious observers of our contracts, and our words; honest debtors;
mild, and humane creditors; courteous and helpful neighbors. Let them not
find us faulty, in reference to any of the offices of an honest, and a civil
life. For GOD forbid that we should ever admit into our hearts, so impious, and
barbarous, and inhumane a conceit, as some do harbor, namely, that it is
lawful to break promise with such as are without, and to deceive, or use a
person ill, when we can plead that he is not of our communion. On the contrary,
it is to these that we must show most justice and integrity: these, of all men,
are the persons toward whom we must acquit our selves of all that we owe them,
with greatest religiousness and scruple. And he that thinks to draw me to side
with him, by an act of injustice, or cruelty, or perfidiousness, is so far from
gaining any thing that way, that he makes me believe with a great deal of
reason, the religion which permits him such things, and excuses them under
color of a good intention, and pretends them serviceable for greater glory to
GOD, is an impious, and abominable superstition, and much worse in this
particular, than the sects and disciplines of Pagans themselves, who, how
ignorant soever they were, yet never held any of these horrible maxims. GOD
will not be served at all with unrighteousness, and treacheries; and to make
account, or ascribe to Him that He takes pleasure in such services, is one of
the greatest outrages that can be done Him. They are grateful to the devil, and
to none but him. A Christian looks not upon any man on earth as his enemy; he
knows that they are all the creation of the LORD his GOD, and that his Master
died for them, and shed His blood to save them. He respects this character in
them, however disfigured by vice, or error. And his rendering them these dues,
is not out of a fear he has of their power, or their ill will; as some would
persuade us, that the primitive Christians submitted not to their heathen
Emperors, and Magistrates, but only out of prudence, or rather a world-like
craftiness, because they were the stronger, and themselves the weaker; and that
had they had the means, they would have plucked the scepter out of their hands,
and without scruple trampled that diadem under foot, which they made semblance
to honor with such humbleness. No, dear Brethren, this is not the nature, or
the foundation of a Christian's carriage toward those that are without. It is
GOD, it is his conscience, and not simply some other consideration that
obliges him to live with them, as he does; according to the Apostle's doctrine
in another place, where he says, we must be subject, Romans 13.5.
not only for wrath, that is, for fear of vengeance, and of the sword which the
Magistrate bears in his hand, but also for conscience sake; which in like
manner extends to all other duties; that is, we must pay our creditors, keep
our word, perform our promises, honor our fellow subjects, live honestly with
them, though they be not of our religion; not only for avoiding of the evils we
should incurr by doing it not, but also for conscience sake; so as what
impunity, yea, what salary soever we might expect for neglecting such duties,
we yet do never neglect them, accounting our selves bound to do them by a
supreme and indispensable law, namely, the just and holy will of GOD.

But besides these things which we owe, Christian prudence, in its conduct
toward those without, makes use of others also, which in rigor of right, we
owe not. For in this behalf, it aims not simply at our discharging our
selves, but at the winning of those whom we treat withal; so that if any thing,
unto which otherwise justice obliges us not, may be serviceable to this its
end; that reason is that reason is sufficient to make us do them. On which
account it opens the bosom of our humanity, courteousness, and beneficence to
those that are without, to give them all the assistance, favor, and succor
that we can, in their need, as often as they ask it of us, yea, when they ask
it not. We should in this case imitate the goodness of our LORD, who makes His
Sun to shine, and His rain to fall even on them that blaspheme Him. Make me not
those frigid and frivolous excuses; that they are out of our communion; that
they hate us; that they do us evil; that they are ungrateful. This is good
discourse for a worldling; who measures his devoirs by nothing but his own
interest. As for you, that are a disciple of JESUS CHRIST, it is the least thing
you should consider. You should principally respect the glory of GOD, the
service of his Son, and the edification of men. Do you good to all, as your
Heavenly Father does; disdain no one whom He has made. Account any one your
neighbor that has need of you, be he Samaritan, or Pagan. It imports not, so
he be a man. There is nothing more effectual to persuade him that your religion
is holy, and divine, than this virtuous, and generous deportment. At least you
will hereby take from him all pretext of calumniating your profession. You will
remain justified in his thoughts, and oblige him, if he be ever called to give
testimony of you, to speak in that glorious and honorable language, which the
probity, and innocence of the primitive believers sometime drew from the mouths
of Pagans, such a one is a good man, and there is nothing to be blamed in him,
but that he is a Christian.

Again, for our living prudently with those that are without, it is one
principal duty incumbent on us, to accommodate our selves to them, as far as
piety will permit; not needlessly contrarying them at any time; nay, willingly
yielding them some part of our rights; bowing, and conforming themselves to
their laws, their humors, and wills, in things indifferent; that they may see
it is not capriciousness, nor hatred, but the force of our consciences alone,
that constrains us to dissent from their religion; and that setting this
aside, and our consciences salved, there is nothing but we would both do and
suffer to pleasure them. Such was the Apostle's practice; and he has left us
an excellent pattern of this holy prudence, which he proposes, and
represents at large, in the ninth Chapter of the first Epistle to the
Corinthians. I have made my self (says he) a servant to all, 1 Cor. 9.19, etc.
that I might gain the more. Unto the Jews, I became as a Jew, that I might
gain the Jews; and unto the Law, as if Jew, that I might gain the more. Unto
the Jews, I became as a Jew, that I might gain the Jews; and unto them that are
under the Law, as if I were under the Law; to them that are without the law, as
without the law, to the weak, became I, as weak; and all things to all men,
that in conclusion I might save some. Imitate we this holy example of the
Apostle: only take heed to limit, as he did, this complacentialness unto things
which we have power to dispose of; that is, such as are free, and indifferent
for us; not extending it to those that are evil, and prohibited in the School
of CHRIST, as contrary to piety, or sanctification; remembering the lesson which
the same St. Paul elsewhere gives us, 2 Cor. 6.14, 15.
that there is no participation between righteousness and unrighteousness; nor
communion between light and darkness; nor accord between CHRIST and Belial. In
fine, this prudent demeanor toward those without, which he here prescribes
us, does require, that we avoid, as much as is possible, all actions and
speeches that offend them; and that, saving those to which our religion does
necessarily, and inevitably oblige us, there escape us not any that may
displease them.

The clause, redeeming the time, which the Apostle subjoyns, contains the
utility and fruit of this sage and prudent demeanor, which he has enjoined
the Colossians toward those that are without; the meaning is, that by
governing themselves in that manner, they would gain time, and mitigate by such
an address, the rigor of that difficult and dangerous season which they lived
in, and had the aversions and persecutions of the heathen to surround them. I
well know, there are, that expound these words otherwise. Some, as signifying,
that the Colossians were to repair their loss of the time past, by well
employing the present altogether in a good, an holy, and a prudent way of life.
For this is that we commonly call, redeeming of time. Others with more color
say, the Apostle's intention is, that we should seek, and purchase, even at the
price of what is dearest to us, occasions to edify those that are without; and
make no difficulty of losing somewhat in matter of estate, or ease, or even in
point of honor, or reputation, to get the means of obliging them. For it is
true, that the word the Apostle uses here in the original, does often
signify, an occasion, and opportunity, rather than time simply. But, not to
dissemble the one and the other of these two conceptions, though both of them
veritable as to the thing, and Christian, yet seems to me a little beside the
Apostle's scope and intention here. Moreover, the Interpretation I proposed at
first, is more conformable to the style of Scripture: For the phrase which St.
Paul uses in this place, is found word for word in the Greek Version of the
Prophet Daniel, at the second Chapter, where King Nebuchadnezzar tells the
Chaldeans, Dan. 2.8.
He knew well they would redeem the time; meaning, as our Bibles have aptly
rendered it, that they would gain time; that is, would fain escape, and smoothly
get out of that ill piece of way, in which they perceived themselves put to
such a plunge. To the same sense, the Apostle here, though in a very different
subject, bids us redeem the time, by walking wisely toward them that are
without, that is, that we should by such prudent and dextrous conduct, sweeten
their spirits, and handsomely divert the storm of their fury, as an ill
influence, which might overwhelm us, gliding gently on, and gaining time,
until things, governed and ordered by the providence of GOD, have changed
their posture. It Is also hereto, that that reason does evidently referr, which
the Apostle elsewhere annexeth to this very command, in a passage of the
Epistle to the Ephesians, conform, and parallel to our Text: Ephesians. 5.15, 16.
Walk heedfully (says he) not as fools, but as wise; redeeming the time; for
(he adds) the days are evil. He would have us use much circumspection in the
ordering of our lives, and redeem the time, because it is evil; that is,
troublesome, and difficult to pass, by reason of their ill-disposition toward
us, among whom we live; they being ready at every turn to destroy us, upon the
least occasion of exasperation, and of executing their malevolence that we give
them. Therefore, as a wise Mariner at Sea, when the wind arises, and the
waters threaten, and the presages of a tempest do appear, he haleth in his
sails, and prepares; then accommodates himself to the violence of the waves,
and lets drive a little, not daring to bear up full against it: all to gain
time, and redeem himself by such care, and conduct, out of so sad and angry a
season; like industry would the Apostle have us use, to ward off the blows,
which the not-so-favourable disposition of those without toward us, does
menace: he would have us, not take all our liberty with them; but manage our
words and actions prudently, accommodating our selves the most we may, unto
their temper, and avoiding all that is apt to provoke them; giving them no
occasion to enterprise upon us: that if it be possible, we may by such holy and
advised conduct, gain time, and eschew an ill encounter, and redeem our selves
from the troubles and disorders it threatens us withal. It Is a reason of the
command he gave us, to walk wisely toward them that are without. For besides
the interest of the glory of GOD, and of the edification of men, which calls
for this endeavor at our hands, as has been said, our own good, our safety,
and preservation does also necessarily oblige us thereunto; it being evidently
impossible for us to subsist, in the estate we most times are, if we do not
with a great deal of heedfulness, and prudence, put by, and lenifie the ill
affections of those among whom we live, and upon whom, in an humane way, our
lives and liberties depend.

But after this general exhortation, the Apostle makes us another, for the
government of our speech in particular, which we must now explain with all the
brevity we may. Let your speech (says he) be always steeped in salt with
grace, that you may know how ye ought to answer every one. I must needs say,
that this is requisite in all the discourses of the faithful, whomsoever they
speak to: and that their mouth ought to be a treasury of benediction, out of
which should issue not a word, but that is holy, and full of grace, and good
(as the Apostle says elsewhere) to the use of edifying; that is, proper to
edify them that hear it. But as in the precedent verse; though wisdom be
necessary in all the parts of our carriage, yet he gave it us in charge
particularly, in reference to our commerce with such as are without. I count,
that in like manner here, pursuing the same subject, he does appropriate those
characters, which ought to appear generally in all the words of our mouths, to
that discourse, and converse in particular, which we have with persons without.
Besides the continuation of his discourse, which there is little likelihood he
should here suddenly break off without reason; his adding that of answering
every one, etc. confirms me further in this opinion; those words evidently
referring to the answers we are to make to those without, when they
interrogate, or question us about our religion; as appears by St. Peter's
making use of wel-nigh the same words in the same subject, Be ready always
(says he) to answer every man that asks you a reason of the hope that is in
you, 1 Pet. 3.15.
with meekness, and reverence. Now truly the Apostle had good reason to take
the pains himself, to form our speech on such occasions; namely, when we are to
entertain those without, about our sentiments in matter of religion. For
certainly, this is the tenderest part of all our converse with men; and that
which would be managed with greatest exactness. It is a very slippery passage,
and the events frequently are of great importance, and have long and
considerable consequences for good, and for evil, according to men's different
carriage in it. And if there be any case, in which the tongue has any reason
to vant of great matters, Jam. 3.6.
as St. James says, without doubt it is in this; an answer here, as it is
qualified, being capable of amending, or empairing the condition of an whole
Christian people: a sage and moderate discourse having sometimes averted, or
stayed the persecution of the Church, and appeased the rage of its enemies:
whereas on the other hand, a speech, though for substance true, yet being
indiscreet, and ill-placed, has often inflamed the hatred of the mighty, and
troubled the Church's peace, and caused a thousand disorders and devastations.
The Apostle then would have us, on this occasion, (that is, when we speak with
those without) more than on any other, govern our lips with so much judgment,
that there may not a word break out, but what is seasoned as it ought to be.
Let your speech (says he) be always with grace, seasoned with salt.

He presupposes in the first place, and precedently to other things, that it
have its principal virtue, to wit, truth, which is the soul of it; according to
that general rule he elsewhere gives us, Ephesians. 4.25.
to speak truth, every one with our neighbor. But in conjunction herewith, his
intention is, that our speech have these two further qualities; first, that it
be with grace; and secondly, that it be seasoned with salt. The grace he
requires in it, is not that which is given to a discourse by the ornaments of
Rhetoric, which respects only the pleasing of the ear, and consists in a
choice of elegant words, and in a sweet and grateful composition. The grace a
Christian ought to seek for, and have in his speech, is, so to utter truth, as
it offend not the hearer; that it express our minds without exulcerating his;
that it have neither gall, nor venom, nor virulency; that it be simple,
humble, and modest; without reviling, without scoffing, and other such stings
as may inflame those whom we speak to. The other particular he adds, namely,
that it be well salted, that is, prepared, and as it were seasoned with an
exquisite prudence, does referr to the same thing for substance; For as salt
does desiccate meats, and eat out the moisture and putrid humor of them,
leaving a sharpness in them pleasing to the taste: so this Christian prudence,
which he would have all our speech imbued with, works out of it all that it
might have in it superfluous, and noxious; and tempers it in such sort, that
the sorce and vigor which it leaves it, pleases the spirit, and enters
gratefully into it. The masters of common Rhetoric would too, that there be
salt in their Scholars speeches. But it is not that which must season a
Christian's deliveries. By this salt which they make such account of, they mean
certain pleasantnesses that border upon raillery and jesting. Expressions that
are quick, but offend not; and touch the Spirit, but do not gall it. We for our
part do pass by this artifice, and draw the salt wherewith our speeches are to
be impregnated from a quite other vein; even an holy Christian prudence, which
avoids all that may displease, or scandalize our neighbor, and chooses what
is proper to edify him, so seasoning discourse, that nothing unsavory, or
insignificant be uttered, which might disgust him at our persons, or our
religion. This salt cleanses our talk; first of all discourses, that are
either noxious and dangerous, as those that lead to viciousness; or vain, and
fruitless; and secondly, of all that may offend those we talk with, and
alienate them from our religion. For this end, that knowledge is necessary,
which the Apostle speaks of in the following clause: that you may know (says
he) how ye ought to answer every one. It Is clear, that this grace of speech
seasoned with salt, does not teach us how we ought to answer every one; but on
the contrary, this science or knowledge, when we have it, seasoneth our speech
with its necessary grace. So that, whereas the Apostle says, that ye may know
it; it must be understood of the event, and success, as if he had said, let
your speech be with grace, and seasoned with salt, so as it may appear, you
know how to answer every one. Or the word know, which he uses in the original,
must be taken for as knowing, and as judging, and discerning how we ought to
answer every man.

First, his calling our discourses an answering, does intimate, that we should
not cast our selves upon such kind of conferences inconsiderately; nor enter on
them, but with judgment, and advisednesse, being called to it, either by some
one's demand, or by the voice of such a necessary occasion as obliges us to
speak. Then again he shows us, that we ought to diversifie our speech,
according to the difference of persons; and in this it is, that that discerning
of persons, which we touched at before, must do us service. There are those to
be met with, whom it would be best not to speak to at all. The dispositions of
some may suffer a firm and free discourse. The temper of others requires a
more soft and tender treatment. As you see, that meats for several bodies must
be diversely prepared, according to their different constitution: so we should
diversely season our speech; according to the diversity of spirits.

Such, Dear Brethren, is the holy and wholesome lesson that the Apostle gives us
in this place. Practice we it diligently, and regulate by it our speech, and
deportment, in all the commerce we have with those without. Hide we not our
sentiments in religion from them; but explain our selves to them in such a
manner, as may be proper both for their edification, and our own satety. First,
let us never speak of them but in season, and when occasion offers its self for
it; do it with that gravity and decency that is due unto so high, and so
important a subject. Next, let us take out of our speech, all the stings that
might incense those that hear us. Let not it have in it any thing reproachful,
or offensive; any thing that scenteth of hatred, or contempt. Let it be sweet,
and full of affection, and respect. Let it bear the image of a well-disposed,
and a truly charitable soul, and breath nothing but the good, and the
edification of our neighbor. And as for truths themselves; let it discover,
and with full liberty expose such as are grateful to our adversaries; as thanks
be to GOD, there are many; in particular, I make bold to say, all those that
are principal, and essential in religion, about which they make no contest with
us. As for others, which consist in a rejection of their errors, and
consequently cannot but be odious to them, we must deliver our selves about
them with much discretion; meekly showing them the reasons of our sentiments,
that they may see it is not out of wilfulness that we depart from their
belief, but by the constraint of necessary reason. Let us forbear atrocious and
opprobrious terms; and keep a just medium between flattery, and unworthy
complacenciousness, which covers in silence, or disguiseth the malady on one
hand; and indiscreet, and furious zeal, which angers, and invenomes it instead
of healing it on the other. Error is a sore that must be neither neglected, nor
roughly handled: it must be touched, but tenderly, and in such a manner, as if
possible, we do not in our meddling with it, put the Patient to pain.

See how St. Paul took such a case in hand. He was at Athens, a City full of so
much impiety and idolatry, as cut him to the heart. And having discovered the
offense he took at it; when they had brought him forth, and asked him, what
then his doctrine was, he does not tell them, that they were idolatrous, and
impious, and brutish, to worship wood and stone: though all this was very
true. But the prudent Minister of GOD, saw well, that if he had proposed this
truth so crudely to them, he should have lost himself, and not at all have
edified them. What does he then? He gives them at first some praise,
acknowledging that they were extreme devoutly given. Thereupon he tells them of
that unknown GOD, to whom they had consecrated an altar: and thence,
dexterously takes occasion to preach the true GOD to them; insinuating the
truth so skilfully to them, that to hear him speak, one would think he had not
brought it from abroad, but found it there among them. This truly was, speech
seasoned with the salt of grace. Let us imitate, I beseech you, Brethren, this
rich example of prudence, and modesty, rather than the eruptions, and
indiscretions of zeal without knowledge; which serve only to irritate those
that are without, and draw the bad effects of their aversion and hatred upon
those that are within. But let us have yet more care to order our ways than
our words. We cannot usher in our discourses with a better, or more persuasive
preface, than a good, and holy life; if we walk wisely with them that are
without, (as the Apostle gives us in charge) if we eschew not only evil
actions, but those also that have the appearance of such, and are reputed of
men to be such; if we show them nothing but piety, honesty, humility, charity,
meekness, and sincerity; if we affectionately seek, and embrace occasions to
oblige them, and do them service; if we patiently bear the offenses they do us,
and revenge not our selves, but by offices of beneficence. This conduct, if we
follow it, will mitigate some of them, and entirely gain others. It will invite
the King our Sovereign Lord, and His Ministers, to continue, and more and more
confirm to us, that sweet and precious liberty of conscience, which having been
given us in this great Estate, by the clemency and wisdom of his Fathers, has
been hitherto conserved to us by his Grace. In fine, this conduct will render
our doctrine honorable in all things, and make the Name of the LORD JESUS,
whom we serve, to be glorified: and being acceptable to Him, will draw down His
benediction upon us; and after the first fruits of His bounty, which He will
make us taste of in this life, introduce us one day, to the full, and eternal
possession of His immortal glory. Amen.

THE FORTY EIGHTH SERMON ON COLOSSIANS,
CHAP. IV. VER, VII, VIII, IX, X, XI. Ver. VII. Tychicus, our beloved brother,
and a faithful Minister, and fellow servants in the LORD, shall make known unto
you all my state.

VIII. Whom I have sent unto you expressly, to the end he might know your
estate, and comfort your hearts.

IX. With Onesimus, our faithful and beloved brother, who is of you. They shall
advertise you of all affairs here.

X. Aristarchus, my fellow-prisoner, saluteth you, and Marcus, sister's son to
Barnabas, touching whom you have received commandment. If he come to you,
receive him.

XI. And Jesus, who is called Justus, which are of the circumcision; These
alone are my fellow laborers in the Kingdom of GOD, who have been a comfort to
me.


DEAR Brethren; The infinite wisdom of GOD is very clearly manifested in His
works, not only by the admirable disposition of the parts, whereof they are
composed, and the exquisite order, in which He has ranked them together; but
also in that there is not any thing about them, without its utility. View me
the world, this vast and first masterpiece of His hand; Consider me the
Scripture His other work, the second, and more excellent discovery of His will
and nature. You shall not observe ought in either of them but is of use, both
for the completing of the whole, and for the benefit and edification, and
consolation of men. I acknowledge, that among the parts of these two composures
of GOD, there are some more useful, and more necessary than others; some, in
which His wisdom and goodness do shine bright, and beam forth an abundant
light; others, in which, they are but dimly to be seen. However, there is not
any, though little and dusky in appearance, but has its usefulness. It
concerns us therefore, not to despise one of them, but heedfully remark
whatever of worth the Creator has put in them all, that so we may, both give
Him the glory of it, and by it benefit our selves. I desire, the truth is, we
should insist most upon those, in which the wonders of this great Authors hand
is most resplendent; yet so, as we neglect not the rest, when by His providence
we meet with them.

In conformity to this order, having hitherto considered the divine
instructions, both concerning faith and manners, which this Epistle of the
Apostle to the Colossians does contain; we now present you the later part of
it, wherein this holy man recommendeth certain particular persons, and saluteth
others, both in his own name, and in the name of some of his friends, and
colleagues in the Gospel of JESUS CHRIST. Disdain not, Dear Brethren, this
conclusion of the Apostle's divine letter, nor do ye imagine, that it can yield
you no profit, because it is not so luminous, and quitting the rich, and
weighty subjects, we have entertained you with, does speak of particular
persons only. Though it had nothing at all in it, but the names of some
faithful men, yet would it merit consideration. For if we take pleasure in
hearing, and learning the names of the Captains, the Officers, and the
Ministers of our ancient Kings, and even of strange Princes, who have been any
thing great, and illustrious in their times, as an Alexander, a Caesar, or such
others; how much more passion should we have for those, that had their share in
the fortune, and atchievments of St. Paul, and held some rank with him in the
house and service of CHRIST, our supreme and eternal Monarch? For I affirm, and
every reasonable person, that shall seriously consider the thing, will accord
with me, that the exploits of St. Paul and his associates, under the Name and
Ensign of JESUS CHRIST, are much greater, and more admirable, than all the
lofty deeds of the most renowned Conquerors. So that if the grandeur of a
matter do give us the curiosity to inform our selves of the names, and
qualities of those that intervened in it, this alone ought to be no little
satisfaction to us; even that we find, in this passage of St. Paul's Epistle,
the names of seven or eight of these the LORD's generous warriers, who coming
out of diverse quarters to rank themselves on each side of our great Apostle,
combated the enemy at Rome, (that is, in his strongest Hold,) and there, maugre
all his fury, planted the Empire, and the Trophies of their Master.

But beside the just and lawful contentment, that such a knowledge may give us,
this passage will also afford us diverse other very useful instructions; the
Spirit that guided this sacred writer, promoting not a word, but is full of
wisdom, And this reverent opinion we ought to have of all things contained in
the book of GOD. For as when in the shop of an intelligent and able Herbalift,
you see dry and withered simples, that have neither smell, nor taste, nor
color, you believe however, that they have some secret virtue, which lies
hidden under that poor and unpromising appearance; presuming, that they would
not else have been ever laid up in such a place. So when in the holy
Scriptures, you meet with some passage or other, that at first seems little
worthy of consideration; casting (if I may so speak) no smell, showing no
color, to affect or excite our perceptive faculty; make account that under
this so unattractive an outside, there is undoubtedly some spiritual utility
contained; for that JESUS, the sovereign Physician of souls, has laid up
nothing in this divine shop of his, which is superfluous, or without use. You
will by experience find it true, if you take the pains to examine attentively,
and (as our Savior speaks) to sound this text of the Apostles, which
containing only some recommendations and salutations, which are little
considerable in appearance, will nevertheless afford you diverse instructions,
very useful for the edification of your souls.

Now to ease you in this meditation, we will employ the present hour (by the
will of GOD) in discovering to you some of the remarkablest among them. And
that we may proceed in it with some order, we will handle the two parts of this
text distinctly, the one after the other. In the first, which comprehends the
first three verses, the Apostle recommends to the Colossians, two considerable
persons, whom he sent unto them, namely Tychicus and Onesimus. In the second,
which extends through all the rest of the Text as far as the twelfth verse of
the chapter, he presents them the salutations of certain faithful servants of
GOD that then sojourned at Rome, and were near him. Upon the first of these two
general heads, there instantly offers its self to our observation, the zeal and
affection of this holy man for his Master's flock, and withal, his wisdom and
spiritual prudence. He was prisoner at Rome, in the chains of Nero, uncertain
of the issue of his captivity; persecuted by the Jews, hated of the Heathen,
and for a surcharge of affliction, turmoiled by the malevolence and cruel
designs of some, that called themselves Christians. One would think, that in so
great and so confused, and terrible a combat, he should have minded himself
only; and that he were in an estate to receive the succors of other faithful
men, but not give them his. Not a man of us, but finding himself in a like
danger, would conceive himself dispensed with for taking to heart the
necessities of others, and believe he had just cause to gather up, and fix all
his cares on his own need. But this holy Minister of GOD, to whom a most ardent
charity did render the interests of his Master's sheep much more sensible than
his own, makes a quite different judgment in the case. Neither his irons, nor
his prison, neither the fury of the Jews, nor the cruelty of the heathen, nor
the inhumanity of false brethren, nor death, nor the sword, that hung
continually over his head, are able to put one moment out of his heart, 2 Cor.
11.28.
that care of the Churches which held him, as he very truly says elsewhere,
incessantly besieged from day to day, knowing then the trouble the Colossians
were in for him, and the attempts that false teachers made upon their says, he
contents not himself with writing this divine letter to them; that is, with
sending them in this paper a living and abundant source of consolation, and of
succor against the horror of persecutions, and the impostures of seducers; he
dispatcheth also two messengers unto them, to inform them exactly of all the
particularities of his imprisonment, to tell them by word of mouth diverse
things which could not be written; and to discourse upon, and explain those,
which the brevity of a letter had not permitted him to enlarge. For that such
was the cause of his sending them, himself does expressly declare. They shall
advertise you (says he) of all affairs here; and speaking of Tychicus, one of
them. He shall let you know (says he) all mine estate. For to this end have I
expressly sent him unto you. In the following words again, he intimates another
reason, that he might know (says he) your state. True it is, that there are
some manuscript Greek copies that read a little otherwise, namely, that ye
might know our state. [And verily it is thus the Apostle speaks of his sending
the same Tychicus to the Ephesians. I have sent him to you expressly (says he)
for this end that ye might know our state.] But it imports not much which of
these two ways we read the Apostles words. For there is fair probability, that
as the Colossians were in pain for him, so he was likewise in pain for them;
both because of the persecutions, which the faithful were then everywhere
subject to, and also for the trouble, which he understood that Church received
from some false teachers; so that to satisfy this common and reciprocal
desire, which the Colossians, and he had to receive certain and exact news of
one another, he sent Tychicus to them, who might inform them of his, and
understand theirs, to impart the same to him.

He adjoyneth the last and principal end in of sending Tychicus, that (says
he) he might comfort your hearts. For it was certainly the consolation of these
faithful people, that the Apostle sought. But (you will say) what consolation
could the report of St. Paul's affairs afford the Colossians, since Tychicus
left him in prison at Rome, that is, in the mouth of the Lion, as himself
speaks in another place? Dear Brethren, it is true, the Apostle did abide still
in that sad estate for that time, and it is true, this was it the Colossians
were in pain for. But yet these two messengers had many things to say unto
them, that were proper to mitigate their trouble, and to ease their pain;
first, that the Apostle was still alive, safe and sound, as Daniel otherwhile,
in the den of Lions; nay, that he was not without hope of being set at liberty.
Then again, and which is the principal, that is faith and piety, were so far
from being weakened by this rude tentation, that they were become more firm and
lively then ever, shining in this trial, as fine gold in the furnace; that
instead of being afflicted at it himself, he comforted others; the spirit of
GOD continually maintaining Christian joy and peace in his heart and this
tribulation, and conserving the same, fresh and full, as otherwhile the bush of
Moses in the midst of the fire. And lastly, that if his body was bound, yet the
Gospel was not so, the Apostle with an high and invincible courage, frankly
preaching in his irons, and changing by a Divine miraculousness, his prison
into a School of JESUS CHRIST; opening too, by the efficacy of his example, the
mouths of many brethren to preach the word boldly without fear; his whole
affliction serving by the providence of GOD, to a much greater advancement of
the Gospel, Phil. 1.12.
as himself says elsewhere. This relation, as you see, was very proper to
consolate the hearts of the Colossians; not to speak of the knowledge and
capacity of Tychicus in the things of the Kingdom of Heaven; which furnished
him abundantly, wherewith to do these faithful people this good office, in
representing to them the doctrine and the promises of our LORD and Savior; the
necessity and utility of the cross; 2 Cor. 4.17.
the life and the crowns to which it leads us; and that eternal weight of an
excellent glory, which this light and transient affliction works for us; and
the like intimations, of which the whole Gospel is full. For you may not
imagine that this Tychicus, and this Onesimus, whom he sent them, were simple
messengers, that had no other ability, then to make faithful report of what
they had seen and heard of St Paul's affairs. They were two excellent persons,
endowed with great gifts of GOD, and well instructed in the knowledge of him;
yea, as it is certain of the one, and very probable of the other, called to the
holy ministry. And it further heighthens the Apostles charitable affection
toward the Colossians, that he would deprive himself for their consolation of
the presence and assistance of two such persons, at a time, when they were so
sweet and so necessary to him.

But his prudence appears no less in this choice, then his affection and
goodness. First, more generally, in that he employed about this affair, persons
proper for the end, for which he sent them. And secondly, in particular, that
one of the two whom he chose, to wit, Onesimus, beside other qualities he had,
was a Colossian, and therefore a person that should have the more credit with
them, as their own countryman. It is true, that Epaphras, of whom he will
afterward speak, had the same quality. But it seems that a particular
consideration withheld the Apostle from employing him in this commission. Even
that he had already exercised the holy Ministry among the Colossians, and
preached that very Evangelical doctrine to them, which was now troubled by
false teachers as we understand by the first Chapter of this Epistle. He then
being interessed, and as it were a party in the quarrel, the Apostle does very
prudently, in employing other persons, namely Tychicus and Onesimus, that so
their faith and doctrine appearing conform to Epaphras's, the Colossians might
the more easily perceive that his was not particularly his own, but in truth
the LORD CHRIST's and his Apostles; and that, as the Scripture faith, in the
mouth of these two or three witnesses, the word might be established.

But the Apostle, to give them credit with the Colossians, and render their
Ministry fruitful to them, advertiseth them of the good and recommendable
qualities each of them. As for Tychicus, he calls him his beloved Brother,
and a faithful Minister, and Fellow Servants in the LORD; titles, as you see
very honorable. He qualifies him after the same manner, in the Epistle to the
Ephesians; to whom he employed him in the very same sort as he does here to the
Colossians. Whence it appears, that this holy man was one of those
extraordinary Ministers, which the Scripture of the New Testament does
particularly style Evangelists. These were as aids to the Apostles; assisted
them, followed them, and were diversely employed by them according to the
necessities of the Church, sometime in one place, sometime in another, without
being fixed to any particular flock, as ordinary Pastors are, and making no
longer stay any where, then the Apostles orders did require. Such a one, for
instance, was Titus, whom St. Paul left in Crete to finis the erection of the
Church, Tit. 1.5.
and afterward sent into Dalmatia to preach the Gospel there. 2 Timothy 4.10.
Such a one again was Timothy and Crescens, and many others. And truly the
charge the Apostles had, being of such a vast extent, as to embrace the whole
universe, it is evident, that it did of necessity require they should be
assisted by such Helpers and inferior Ministers, who might be employed in such
places, as they themselves could not go to, or tarry in.

Our adversaries, to give you this intimation by the way, do commit an error
in this matter, when they apply to Bishops, what they read in the New Testament
of this sort of Ministers. For it is true indeed, that the Evangelists were
superior unto the common and ordinary Pastors of each Church, and held the next
place to the Apostles, whose Lieutenants in a manner they were. But it is false,
that any such Ministers were, or were to be in the Church after the Apostles
decease. Their Ministry was extraordinary, and subsisted no longer then the
Apostleship did, for which properly it was instituted. And hence it plainly
appears, that the Bishops of the Roman communion can by no means pass for
Ministers of this order; since they have each of them their Title or Diocese,
to which they are fastened, and have no power to exercise their Ministry
elsewhere, whereas the Evangelists had no flock that was properly and
particularly assigned them; but were as general intendants, who by the Apostles
order, and according to the necessities of Churches, did transport themselves,
sometime to one, and sometime to another; unto countries and people very far
asunder; as you see by the example of Titus, who having been employed in
ordering the Churches of Crete, when that was done, came back to St. Paul;
whence he was, a long time after, sent into Dalmatia, a country (as all know)
very far distant from the Isle of Candie. Tychicus then was a Minister of this
rank, abiding near St. Paul's person, to receive and execute his orders, as you
see, both by the passage in hand, which shows us, that he sent him to the
Colossians to edify and comfort them; 2 Timothy 4.10. Ephesians. 6.22.
and by the Epistle to Timothy, and the Epistle to the Ephesians themselves,
where we read, that he sent him to Ephesus upon a like design; and by the
Epistle to Titus, Tit. 3.12.
whom he directs to dispatch Tychicus. And it should seem, he was consecrated
particularly to this Ministry, when he was named among those that were to
accompany St. Paul, in the voyage he made out of Greece into Asia through
Macedonia, Acts 20.6.
about the fifty third year of our LORD, (that is, three, or four years before
the date of the Epistle to the Colossians.

The praises which the Apostle here gives him, does show us, with what zeal,
with what care and courage he acquitted himself in this sacred ministration.
For he calls him, first, his beloved brother; declaring thereby, both his
Christianity, (for the faithful, you know, did all call one another, brethren)
and the particular affection he bore him, loving and tendering him, as an
excellent person, and one endowed with very amiable parts. He styles him, in
the second place, a faithful Minister. The latter of which words signifies his
office. He was not simply a Christian; he was a Minister in the House of GOD,
that is, an Evangelist, as we have showed you. The other expresses his
carriage, and good conscience in the discharge of his office. For how holy and
divine soever it be, it cannot avoid, the falling sometimes into ill hands, and
the adorning profane or negligent men, who do ill acquit themselves in it, and
dishonor it by the foul blots of their life or their doctrine. The Apostle
bears witness for Tychicus, that he is none of that unblest number, terming him
not only a Minister, but a faithful Minister: a commendation, that compriseth
the whole perfection of a true Minister; according to that, which the same
Apostle teaches us elsewhere. Let a man so account of us (says he) as
Ministers of CHRIST, 1 Cor. 4.1, 2.
and tewards of the Mysteries of GOD. Moreover it is required in stewards, that
each of them be found faithful. He that is faithful, does acquit himself in the
Ministry committed to him, trustily according to the will and order of CHRIST,
of whom he received it; which as you see, compriseth all the parts and
perfections thereof.

But here, as we proceed, it will not be impertinent to repel, with the
Authority of this phrase of the Apostles, as with a firm and fair buckler, an
accusation drawn up by those of Rome, who reproach us, that we give Pastors a
new name, and such a one as is unused in the language of the Church, while we
commonly call them Ministers, a name, as they pretend, pertaining only to
Deacons, who are Ministers, as every one knows, of an order inferior to that
of Pastors. Dear Brethren, would to GOD that in the disputes we have with those
of Rome, question were but of words! It would be easy for us to accomodate our
selves to their language; nor should we make any scruple to call the Pastors of
the Church, as they do, by the names of Priests and Bishops, which we confess
all the Ancients, and even the holy Apostles have used in this sense. It Is the
abuse and corruption of things, which has caused us to quit these words; and
seeing that the common speech of people had appropriated them unto new offices,
and such as were unknown to the Apostles, meaning by the word Priest, a
Sacrificer; and by that of Bishop, a Pontifor superior of Sacrificers, we have
left these names to them, with the things they signify among 'em, as things
utterly contrary to the institution of GOD: and that our Pastors might not be
confounded with theirs, as if we held them for Sacrificers, and Pontiffs;
instead of the names of Priest and Bishop, which the abuse of public speech
has corrupted, and swayed to this sense, we have called them Ministers, a
name, as every one sees, very modest, and most suitable to their Office, which
as to the whole of it, is nothing but a Ministry; and though, I acknowledge,
that this word, in Greek the very word Deacon, is often used to signify their
order, who have care of the Churches poor; yet this passage of the Apostle
plainly shows us, that it is not so peculiarly annexed to the Diaconat, but
that it may be employed to signify Pastors themselves: For its precisely the
term he makes to serve him here, for the expressing of that quality of Pastor,
or Evangelist, which Tichycus had, when he affirms him to be a faithful
Minister: not to alledg at present, that he uses the same word very frequently
otherwhere, to signify not only the Office of Preachers, but the Apostleship
it self, 1 Cor. 3.5. 2 Cor. 3.6. and 11.23.
the highest of all Ecclesiastic charges; as when he says, Who then is Paul,
and who is Apollos, but Ministers by whom you believed: and elsewhere he
styles them, Ministers of the New Testament, and Ministers of CHRIST.

But I return to Tychicus, of whom the Apostle says in the third place, that
he is his fellow servants in the LORD. Not, that he was an Apostle, as Paul
himself: but since himself in his Apostleship, and Tychicus in his ministry as
an Evangelist, served one and the same LORD, and were of the same Master's
house, referring all the dischargements of their, though different offices, to
His glory, and the good of His household, as their common end, and laboring,
though with unequal authority, in the same work, to wit, preaching of the
Gospel, and administration of the Sacraments, it is evident, that in this
respect, Tychieus was fellow servants with this great Apostle. His acknowledging
him here so to be, was a direct means to gain him full credit with the
Colossians: For if they did honor the Apostle, how could they despise a person
whom he owneth for his beloved Brother, for a faithful Minister of the Gospel,
and his fellow servants? Now by his thus honoring of Tychicus, you may see how
far from this Apostolical meekness and modesty some are, who boasting
themselves to be their successors, do tread other Ministers of the Church under
their feet, and so little think them their associates, or treat them according
to that quality, that they look on them as their vassals; giving out themselves
to be their Princes, their Kings, and Lords; and advancing themselves at an
almost infinite height, not only above each of them apart, but even the whole
assembly of them in a general Council: nay, above the whole sacred body of
JESUS CHRIST it self; that is, entirely all the Church, which they affirm to be
born their subject, and do entitle themselves Monarchs of, not forbearing to
put even greatest Princes and Emperors under the yoke of their domination, and
to exact of them, as a mark of lowest servitude, the kissing of their feet.

But this holy and admirable humility of the Apostle appears further still, in
his speaking, as he does of Onesimus, whom he sent with Tychicus unto the
Colossians. He is (says he) our faithful Brother, etc. For who, think you, was
this Onesimus, to whom he does so much honor, as to call him his faithful, and
beloved brother? Dear Brethren, it was a poor fugitive bond-servant, that is, a
person of the meanest and most despicable condition of any at that time; as St.
Paul himself gives us to understand, in the Epistle which he wrote in favor of
this at-length-happy fugitive, unto Philemon the Colossian his Master; where he
plainly intimates, that this poor man, stealing from his Master's house, had
fled into Italy, and got to the City of Rome for safety. But oh the admirable
providence of GOD, who knows how to carry on the salvation of His elect, by
ways that we cannot comprehend! the Apostle happening to be prisoner there, and
Onesimus led by his curiosity, or some other such occasion, having heard him,
was so affected at his preaching, as that of a Pagan, he became a Christian; of
a servant of Philemon, a freeman of JESUS CHRIST; and instead of that temporal
impunity for the crime committed against his Master, which he fought at Rome,
he there found the eternal remission of his sins, and the salvation of his
soul. This is that which St. Paul elsewhere means, when he says, that he begat
him in his bonds. Phil. 10.
Now the Apostle having showed him the fault he had committed in deserting his
Master, he resolves to return home to him, and voluntarily render up himself
unto his yoke again. And that Philemon might pardon his offense, he makes him
the bearer of a letter, which he writes him on this subject; a letter so full
of all the expressest testimonies of a tender and ardent affection, which may
be given, as does sufficiently prove, he did in truth account him, as he here
terms him, his beloved Brother.

But some of the ancient Writers of the Church do further intimate, that
Onesimus profited so well in the knowledge of GOD, and in piety, as
notwithstanding the meanness of his condition after the flesh, he was advanced
to the sacred ministry of the Gospel, and executed it in the Church of
Ephesus. And truly, the employment the Apostle gives him here, in reference to
this whole Church, and the company of Tychicus, whom he associates him with,
and the honorable title he gives him, stiling him, not only his beloved
brother (which every Christian is capable of) but moreover faithful, seems to
show, that he had some office; upon the account whereof, for his conscionable
acquitting himself in it, this testimonial of faithfulness is given him. And
herein, I conceive, the Apostle does also make a secret opposition, between the
good conscience with which he demeaned himself in this employment, and the
unfaithfulness he had afore-time showed to his Master, during the time of his
ignorance; if he has been otherwhile unfaithful, says he, he is now faithful;
after well-nigh the same manner, as the Apostle elsewhere, alluding to the word
Onesimus, which was his name, and in Greek signifies profitable, says of him to
Philemon his Master, He was in time past to thee unprofitable; Philem. 11.
but now profitable to thee, and to me. This is that, Dear Brethren, which the
first part of the Text does contain.

Come we now to the second; In it, the Apostle presents to the Colossians, the
salutations of three faithful persons, all the three jointly Ministers of the
Gospel, and by nation Jews, who were then at Rome, to serve, and assist, and
refresh him in his imprisonment; Aristarchus (says he) saluteth you, and so
the rest in order. Whence we may observe, first in general, what was the zeal,
and what the charity of those primitive Christians; that the hatred and rage of
the World was not able to keep them from rendering their devoirs and services to
the Confessors and Martyrs of JESUS CHRIST, even in Prisons; nor from hastening
to them out of places ever so far off, to succor and comfort them: it being
evident, that of the eight persons mentioned here, and in the following Text,
some came from Greece, others from Asia, and some again from Syria, and
Palestine; that is, many hundred leagues, to visit and serve St. Paul. And by
these Salutations, which for their part they send the Colossians, you see how
these holy and charitable souls were affectionate to flocks, as well as
Pastors, and those that were absent, as well as them that were present. In
fine, the Apostles vouchsafing to be as their Secretary on such an occasion,
shows us, that he approves these offices of civility, that is, salutations of
such as are present, and by Letter, of such as are absent. In truth, a
Christian, whose Charity, and unfeigned cordial love of men, is the principal
virtue, and as it were the soul, and one of the prime principles of his life,
ought to acquit himself sedulously in all due offices of humanity; and if there
be, in the deportments of other men, any thing humane, and praiseworthy, he
should practice it, and sanctify it to his LORDS use.

As for these three persons in particular, the Apostle gives each of them his
Elogium. The first is Aristarchus, a native of Thessalonica in Macedonia, Act.
19.20. and 27.19, 20, 27.
a person noted in the History of the Acts, where you see him all along
inseparably fastened to S. Paul; a companion in his travels and in his trials,
running the danger of his life with him, in the sedition at Ephesus: at his
departure thence, following him into Greece, into Macedonia, into Asia, and
Judea; and at last, embarking with him, when he was carried Prisoner to Rome.
For this cause the holy Apostle, in acknowledgment of so admirable a zeal,
makes him a sharer with him in his Crown, terming him a Captive, or Prisoner
with him: inasmuch as though those unjust Judges had not condemned him, yet he
took as great a part in the Captivity of St. Paul, as if sentence had been
given against his own person.

The second is Mark, whom he signalizeth by the honor he had to be Barnabas
his cousin german, one of the most excellent Disciples of our LORD, and that
labored in his work with greatest zeal and fervor, as you see in the History
of the Acts, and some of the Ancients have even attributed to him the divine
Epistle to the Hebrews. The glory of this holy man being very great in all the
Church of GOD, the Apostle conceived it a sufficient recommendation of Mark, to
say he was his Sisters Son. He adds only, concerning whom you have received
order. I am much of their mind, who understand these words, of some letter that
Barnabas had wrote them in recommendation of him. And thereunto the Apostle
adjoyns his own counsel to them, Acts 15.39.
saying, if he come unto you, receive him. Some conceive that he thus writes,
because of that ill understanding that sometime happened between him and Barnabas
on the occasion of Mark; to show now, that there was no relic of it in his
heart. However that be, it is certain, as we read in the Acts, that Mark
bewrayed a little weakness at the beginning, Acts 13.13.
quitting Paul and Barnabas in Pamphilia without any reason, amid their
conquests. But afterward, the Grace of GOD so mightily strengthened him: and so
eminently employed him in converting of Nations, that beside the memory of it,
which remains in all the monuments of antiquity; he has also drawn from the
pen of St. Paul, two or three very honorable testimonies; this here for one,
Phil. 24.
and another like it, in the Epistle to Philemon, where he mentions him among
his fellow-workers; and the most advantageous of all in the second to Timothy;
2 Timothy 4.11.
Take Mark (says he) and bring him with thee, for he is profitable to me for
the Ministry.

The third of those, whom the Apostle mentions here, is Jesus, called Justus.
It Is probable, that his true name was Jesus, and that Justus was but the name
which the Latins and Greeks gave him, calling him Justus instead of Jesus; it
being usual with them to alter foreign names in that manner, when they
pronounced them in their own dialects. We have, of this servant of GOD, no
other memorial at all. For though some conceive that it is the same Justus, of
whom speech is in the 18th. Chap. of the Acts, unto whose house St. Paul
retired at Corinth, when he saw the Jews resist his preaching; yet this seems
not possible, because this man was by extraction a Gentile, and uncircumcised,
though he had some knowledge, and fear of GOD, as appears by St. Luke's terming
him a religious man, or one that worshipped GOD; a character he ordinarily
gives to persons of this condition; as to Cornelius the Centurion, and diverse
others; whereas that Justus, who is in question here, was indeed a Jew, and
circumcised, as St. Paul shows, adding immediately, of him, and the two other
aforementioned, who are of the circumcision; and he praises them all three in
commune, saying, that they alone, (to wit, of their Nation,) were his
fellow-workers unto the kingdom of GOD, and protests, that they were a
consolation to him. A great and an illustrious testimonial given them; that
they labored with him in preaching the Gospel, for the advancement of the
kingdom of GOD, that is to say, for the edifying of the Church, which the
Scripture ordinarily calls the kingdom of Heaven, and in the same sense, the
kingdom of GOD. Now this is that that the Apostle says of these three servants
of the LORD.

It remains for a conclusion, that we intimate unto you briefly, what
edification you ought to draw from those particulars which we have noted in the
Apostles present Text. And first, by the pain the Col^ssians were in for St.
Paul, and by the care St. Paul takes for their consolation, you may see the
ardent and cordial affection which the flocks, and Ministers of CHRIST should
have for one another. Make your profit of it, ye the LORD's sheep, and tenderly
compassionate the labors, and the sufferings of your Pastors. Ye Pastors do
likewise, and prefer before all interests of your own, the edification, and
consolation of those sheep whom the great Shepherd has redeemed with his
blood. Then again, the love which these five faithful men here mentioned did
bear unto St. Paul, they keeping ever near him, and cheerfully and constantly
obeying his orders, shows us, with what fervor we should serve such as suffer
for the Gospel: and with what zeal we should inseparably adhere to the Apostles
of JESUS CHRIST, the Teachers, and Founders of the Church. For though their
persons be no longer here below, yet their doctrine is, and will remain here to
the end; and in this respect they are still in their sacred writings, sitting
as it were on twelve thrones, thence judging all the Israel of GOD.

Moreover, the Apostle's praising all the persons, he here speaks of, so
liberally as he does, may inform us with what candor we should acknowledge the
graces, which GOD has imparted to our brethren; diffusing the sweet savor of
their good name through the Church, and honoring their zeal, and their
fidelity with our testimonials, to their comfort, and the edification of their
neighbors. Far from us be envy, and malignity, and pride, passions of a base
alloy, and unworthy of a truly noble Christian disposition. Let not the graces
and dignity of Paul induce him to despise Onesimus; I mean, let not the
advantages of such as are greatest, cause them to disdain the least.

But consider we particularly the examples of each of those five faithful men,
and imitate them. For it is to this end that the holy Apostle has proposed
them, and thought meet to consecrate the memory of them in his divine and
immortal Epistles: not that he might oblige us to dedicate festivals to them,
or render them religious worship, or invocate them as our Mediators; away with
such a thought; (for all this appertains to GOD only.) The true honor we owe
them, is to serve GOD after their example; and conform our lives to theirs, and
draw the pourtraict of their high and holy virtues, on our dispositions and our
actions. Imitate we the fidelity of Tychicus; the repentance and faith of
Onesimus; the courage and the patience of Aristarchus; the laboriousness of
Marcus, and of Justus in the matters of the Kingdom of GOD. Let not meanness of
birth, or of condition; let not the greatness of sins discourage any. JESUS
CHRIST rejects neither the poor, nor the peccant that come to him with faith;
witness Onesimus, who though a bondsman, and fugitive, yet so effaced all this
ignominy, that he has praise from the mouth of the Apostle, and his name
engraven here in the temple of GOD, among the names of the most illustrious
Servants of His. If you have followed the LORD constantly and evenly, as
Tychicus and Aristarchus did, thank Him for the grace He has showed you, and
go on from good to better. If it has befaln you, as it did Mark, to slacken
sometime in the work of your heavenly calling, resume likewise, as he did, your
former vigor, and reduce your selves to that pass, as it may be said of you,
that you are useful for the LORD's service.

In general, Beloved Brethren, let us all be as these holy and happy persons
were, fellow-workers with the great Apostle unto the Kingdom of GOD; burning
with him in an holy zeal to glorify JESUS CHRIST; living with him in all
pureness and sanctity; employing with him, our tongues, our hands, and our
pens, for the converting of men, and edifying of the Church; and finally,
courageously suffering with him, when the LORD calls us thereto. It Is this
way, Christians, that we shall get to that heavenly Kingdom, in which St. Paul
is lodged after his combats, and there receive with him from the merciful hand
of our Father the glorious crown of immortality, which He on His great day,
will give to us, and to all those that shall have loved the appearing of His
Son; unto Whom, with Him, and the Holy Spirit, the only true GOD blessed for
ever, be honor, praise, and glory to ages of ages. Amen.

THE FORTY NINTH SERMON ON COLOSSIANS,
CHAP. IV. VER. XII, XIII, XIV, XV, XVI, XVII, XVIII. Verse XII. Epaphras, who
is one of you, a servant of CHRIST, saluteth you, striving always for you in
prayer, that ye might abide perfect, and complete in all the will of GOD.

XIII. For I bear him record, that he has a great zeal for you, and for them
who are of Laodicea, and for them of Hierapolis.

XIV. Luke the beloved Physician saluteth you and Demas also.

XV. Salute the brethren who are at Laodicea, and Nymphas, and the Church,
which is in his house.

XVI. And when this Epistle has been read among you, cause that it be also
read in the Church of the Laodiceans, and that you read also the Epistle from
Laodicea

XVII. And say to Archippus; take heed to the ministry, which thou have
received in the LORD, that thou fulfill it.

XVIII. The salutation by the own hand of me Paul. Remember my bonds. Grace be
with you. Amen.


DEAR Brethren; The LORD JESUS being upon the point to quit the earth, and
making as it were a declaration of His last will, charge His Disciples above
all things, to love one another with a sincere and ardent affection, like that
He bore us. This mutual love, He appoints to be the badge of our profession;
Joh. 13.35.
By this (says he) shall all men know, that ye are my Disciples, if ye love
one another. Accordingly you know, that His Spirit failed not to imprint this
Divine mark upon those first Christians, whom He formed in the City of
Jerusalem, by the Apostles preaching, Acts 4.32.
animated with the virtue of His heavenly fire. The whole multitude of them
(says the holy story) was of one heart, and of one soul; neither said any of
them, that ought of the things which he possessed, was his own; but they had
all things common. This union, and admirable correspondence continued a long
time among the faithful; and was observed by the Pagans with wonder; witness
he, who about two hundred years after the birth of our LORD, reproacheth
Christians, that they know one another by certain secret signs; and love,
almost before they are acquainted, and all of them call one another
indifferently, brethren, and sisters. Now, as error and passion do abuse the
best things, this poor ignorant takes their holy and divine concord for some
execrable conspiracy; and referrs the mystery of their amity unto infamous
commerces; whereas all their union grew from Heaven, and was founded upon
piety; and breathed nothing but honesty, and sanctity; nor did tend but to the
glory of GOD, and the supreme happiness of men. Beside the Apostles writings,
which exposed in public view, did plainly discover to the unpassionate, how
pure, and honest, and holy, the laws of their charity were; the manners, and
the lives, and actions of those primitive Christians, did also evidently
justify the same. There are left us, GOD be thanked, diverse excellent
informations in the books of the first antiquity, by which the marvels of the
charity, and mutual love of those holy men do plainly appear. And not to speak
of others, you have fair and illustrious marks of it, in this conclusion of St.
Paul's Epistle unto the Colossians, who shows us, that his prison neither
hindered diverse faithful men from joining themselves unto him in this
affliction, nor him, nor them again from minding absent Christians, and
charitably embracing the Churches of Colosse, and Laodicea, and Hierapolis. You
here see the love of Pastors to their flocks; the dear affection of flocks to
their Pastors; and the divine communication of Churches one with another. Psalm.
133.1.
If therefore it be a goood and pleasant thing (as the Psalmist sings) to see
brethren maintaining a due intercourse with each other; grudge not this hour,
My Beloved, which we yet oblige you to spend in the consideration of this Text,
having not been able to finish it entirely in our last action. Let this
admirable amity of the first Christians rejoice you; and give you an ardent
desire to imitate it. Have ye, for one another, sentiments and movings of
heart, like to theirs.

You have already heard how St. Paul, having advertised the faithful at
Colosse, that he sent Tychicus, and Onesimus unto them, to inform them of his
estate, does give them the recommendations of Aristarchus, and Mark, and Jesus.
He now adds those of Epaphras, and Luke, and Demas; and then his own to the
Church of Laodicea, and to a faithful man named Nymphas; with an order to
impart this his Epistle to them, and to advertise Archippus of his duty:
Whereupon he ends with his ordinary salutation, conjuring them to remember
his bonds, and recommending them to the grace of GOD. For the deducing of these
four points, by the assistance of GOD, in the same order, as they are couched
in the Text, we must first consider who these three persons were, whose
salutations the Apostle presents to the Colossians. The first of the three is
Epaphras; of whom he spoke before in very honorable terms, at the beginning of
this Epistle; where he styles him, Colos. 1.7, 8.
his dear fellow servant, and a faithful Minister of CHRIST, and gives him the
glory of having instructed the Colossians in the knowledge of the Gospel, and
of having taken the care to let him know the charity they had for him. Here he
qualifies him in like manner, a fervant of CHRIST; that is, a Minister of his,
and an Officer of His house in the work of the Gospel. Moreover, he informs us,
that this holy man was a Colossian; that is, was born in their City, or at
least made his ordinary abode there; Epaphras (says he) who is one of you, a
servant of CHRIST, saluteth you. Some learned men Grotius. Phil. 2.28.
are of opinion, that it is this same Pastor whom the Apostle calls
Epaphroditus, and of whom he says so much good, in the Epistle to the
Philippians. But I do not see, that this conjecture is either founded, or
followed by any of the ancients. I confess, that the name Epaphras, is a
contraction of Epaphroditus: and such a diminution is ordinary in the Greek,
and in the Latin tongue, in the proper names of men. But if it were one and the
same person; there is no reason why the Apostle should name him diversely in
these two Epistles, in the one contractedly, and with diminution; in the other
the name at length, and entire. Considering withal, that no part of what is
said in those two places concerning him, does oblige us to believe it was the
same man; but rather inferrs the contrary. For it seems, that Epaphroditus was
Pastor of the Church of Philippi in Macedonia; whereas Epaphras, of whom
question is here, was Pastor of Coloss in Phrygia; two Cities and Provinces
very different, and distanced from one another by much Land and Sea; the second
situate in Asia, and the former in Europe.

The Apostle contenteth not himself with telling the Colossians that Epaphras
saluteth them. Unto this testimony of his affection for them, he adds diverse
others, that he may gain him their hearts, and streiten the tie of amity, and
good correspondence more and more between this Pastor, and his Flock. He says
first, that he always striveth in prayer for them, that (says he) ye might
abide perfect and complete in all the will of GOD. Prayer is the best office
that we can perform to those we love. But Pastors particularly owe it to their
Flocks, not only in their Assemblies, where they serve for the mouth of the
company to present their requests, their vows, and their thanksgivings unto
GOD: but also in private, and even then, when they are absent upon some
occasion of importance for the good of the Church; as doubtless that was, which
at that time held Epaphras at Rome by St Paul's order. Though he was far from
their abode, he had them incessantly in mind; and eloignment hindering him from
rendering them his other devoirs, he assisted them with his prayers. The Apostle
signifies, both the assiduity of them, when he says, he prayed always; and the
fervency and earnestness of them, when he says, he strove or fought for them.
This word is admirable, and excellently represents the efficacy of his prayer.
Think not, Christian, that he that prays for you contributes nothing to your
welfare, and that his prayers are but words, and voices cast into the air. It Is
the best part of your battles; you have no succor more active, then the repose
of a man of GOD, who prays for you with faith and perseverance. It Is he, that
as Moses heretofore, standing on the mountain, and rapt up in spirit into the
heavenly sanctury, defeated Amalek, your spiritual enemies; and by the
uplifting of his hands, draws down the blessing of Heaven upon your arms. He
oftentimes even takes those rods out of the hand of GOD, which He is about to
display upon you; and courageously wrestling with Him, after Jacob's example,
quits Him not until he has obtained his demand. Such is the combat, that
Epaphras sought in the behalf of his Colossians, being night and day in prayer
for them.

But what is it, that he demanded of GOD for them? The Apostle shewsit us
expressly, when he says, he strove for them in prayer, that they might abide
perfect, and complete in all the will of GOD. He desired not for them the
riches, and honors, and contentments of the world, he usual passion of men;
slight and perishing goods: unprofitable, and oft-times even pernicious to
those who possess them. He prayed GOD to give them the best blessings:
perseverance in His love, and in His fear, and in the obeying of His will. For
it is this, that the Apostle's words do signify. He demanded, first, that they
might be perfect and complete in all the will of GOD; and secondly, that they
might abide firm in this perfection. By the will of GOD, he means those
things which GOD wills, which He has a liking to, and does command us in the
Gospel of His Son; in the same manner, as he elsewhere says, our hope, for the
things we hope to obtain; and the promise of GOD for the things He has
promised us. 1 These. 4.3.
He thus explains himself, when he says expressly in the first Epistle to the
Thessalonians, that the will of God is our sanctification; which as you see, is
no other, but that the thing which GOD wills, is, that we be holy. It Is that
will of GOD which elsewhere he calls good, and acceptable, and perfect; which
comprehends in it all the particulars of our duty; that is, in few words,
faith and piety toward GOD, and charity toward our neighbor. For this is
that which GOD wills; that which He ordains and commands all men in the
Gospel of His CHRIST; even that we believe in Him, embracing with a pure, and
thorough faith, the verities He has vouchsafed to 1. veal unto us, and chiefly
the promise of our salvation by the Cross of our LORD JESUS; and that in sequel
we serve Him religiously, renouncing all impiety; and love our neighbors,
living with them in all justice, temperance, and benignity. This, Brethren, is
that will of GOD, which the Apostle does intend; and observe, he says not
simply, in the will, but in all the will of GOD. For there are people, that
would be content to do some part of what GOD wills, provided they might be
dispensed with for the rest; as for example, to believe the truth which GOD
has revealed; but not do the good works. He has commanded; or to exercise
some of them, but utterly fail in others; as they, who live fair with men, but
remain in impiety, and in the profession of error; or those on the contrary,
who make profession of error; or those on the contrary, who make open
profession of the pure service of GOD; but spare not either the goods or honor
of their neighbors; or who absteining from one vice, do license themselves
unto others; are chaste, but covetous; or liberal, and beneficial to the poor,
but debauched, and incontinent. This partition is unjust, injurious unto GOD,
impossible in truth, and incompatible with the nature of the things themselves,
And it is to advertise us hereof, that the Apostle says here expressly, in all
the will of GOD; to the end no man might imagine it sufficient to embrace a
part only of what GOD wills. Epaphras desired therefore, that his Colossians
might be perfect, and complete in all this will of GOD; that is, (as we have
now explained it) in all the things that GOD wills; that He requires of us,
that He commands men to do; that they might be perfect in says, perfect in
piety, perfect in charity, and in all virtue and sanctity.

The two words, he expresses himself by, to wit, perfect and complete, do
signify well nigh one and the same thing; and the Scripture uses them
indifferently, to set sorth a being entire, and in one whom none of the parts
of piety and sanctification are wanting, Now this perfection, or integrity in
all the will of GOD, does comprehend two things: the one is, that we know it,
that we understand exactly all that GOD wills, all that He requires of us,
as He has revealed it in His word. The other is, that we pursue, and
effectively practice this will of His, which we do know. The first of these two
points, the Apostle recommends to us elsewhere; Ephesians. 5.17.
Be ye not unwise (says he,) but understanding what the will of the LORD is;
and elsewhere again he commands us to prove it. The necessity of the other
point, Romans 12.2.
our LORD JESUS CHRIST shows us, when He says in the Gospel according to St.
Matthew, Not every one that says unto me, LORD, LORD, shall enter into the
Kingdom of Heaven; but he that does the will of my Father, which is in Heaven.
Mat. 7.21.
I acknowledge, that while the believer is here below, there want many degrees,
both in his knowledge of the will of GOD, and in the obedience he renders Him,
of that ultimate and supreme perfection, which he shall one day attain unto in
Heaven, 1 Cor. 13.12.
according to the Apostle's assertion, in 1 Epist. to the Corinthians, that now
we see through a glass darkly, and know but in part: but then we shall see face
to face, and know as we are known. Yet this hinders not, but that setting this
comparison aside, that measure of faith and holiness, which the faithful do at
present attain unto, may be termed a perfection and compleatness; because it is
without hypocrisy, reaching to internals, and externals, and does include all
the parts of true piety and chastity, not one left out. And it is in this sense,
that the truly faithful are oft-times in Scripture called perfect and complete;
to wit, in reference to the state, and measure of the present life, for a
distinguishing of them, not only from profane and brutish men, who take up no
part of the will of GOD at all; but also from hypocrites and carnal Christians,
who consider but a part thereof, halting between two, and are thoroughly and
absolutely neither in CHRIST, nor of the world. Epaphras had reason to desire
this perfection for his Colossians; since that no one without it can inherit
everlasting life. And they, who dogmatize, that it is not universally necessary
for the obtaining of salvation, and that it is a matter of counsel, (as they
call it) not of command; they I say, are grievously mistaken, and do, by this
pernicious error, open a door of license unto wicked men, and furnish them
with pillows to sleep upon in mortal security.

For our parts, dear Brethren, follow we the prayer of Epaphras, and take good
heed, we never count that thing superfluous, or unnecessary, which he so
instantly begged of GOD for his flock and sheep. And knowing, that they shall
have no part in Heaven, whose righteousness does not exceed the righteousness
of the Scribes and Pharisees; and that JESUS CHRIST will receive in thither
none but them that have done the will of GOD His Father; let us apply our
selves with all our might ^o know it, and fulfill it. Let us give our selves no
rest, until by prayers and tears, and by continual labor and exercise in the
Gospel, we have attained to be perfect, and complete in all the will of GOD.
Yet it is not enough to attain hereto; we must abide and stand firm in it, as
the Apostle here says; persevere constantly to our last breath, in this brave
and blessed undertaking; neither the menaces, nor the caresses of the world;
neither the Sophisms of seducers, nor the scandals of false brethren, nor the
weaknesses of our own flesh, ever prevailing over us to make us vary. For you
know, that the crown of salvation is for them alone that persevere. It Is thus,
that Epaphras strove to obtain of GOD by his ardent, and assiduous prayers,
that the Colossians might abide perfect, and complete in all the will of GOD.

But because the Apostle knew how much it concerned this people, to be firmly
persuaded of the affection of their Pastor; that he might assure them fully of
it, he alleges to them the authority of his own testimony For (says he, I
bear him witness, that he has a great zeal, (that is, a very ardent affection)
for you and for them of Laodicea, and of Hierapolis. These were two Cities of
Phrygia, neighboring on Colosse, where the LORD JESUS had Churches that served
Him in the faith of His Gospel. And that of Laodicea is one of the seven, to
whom He caused to be written by St. John, those excellent Epistles, which are
read in the first Chapters of his Apocalypse. You see what care the Apostle
takes to set Epaphras right, in the Spirit of his flock. Whence you may judge,
how execrable is the rage or envy of those, who quite contrary to this holy
man, do, by their detractions and ill offices, endeavor to alienate or slacken
the inclination of Churches toward their Pastors, and in so doing, render
their ministry unprofitable to them. But, to proceed.

After the salutation of Epaphras, the Apostle presents them that of Luke, and
Demas. Luke the beloved Physician saluteth you (says he) and also Demas. It Is
the constant opinion from all antiquity, that the first of these two is the
same St. Luke, that wrote the third of our Gospels, and the Book of the Acts of
the Apostles; two of the most excellent pieces that we have in the Divine
writings of the New Testament. And verily, besides the name of Luke, his own
history, as seems to me, leads us to it. For himself relates, that he
embarked with St. Paul, when he was carried prisoner into Italy; and that he
came with him to Rome, as you may see in the two last Chapters of the Acts,
where he describes this voyage. Therefore being there with the Apostle, there
is all the probability in the World, that he is the person St. Paul speaks of in
this place; it being not found, that mention is made in Scripture of any other
faithful man of that name. He calls him Physician, because of his former
profession; as you see, that St. Matthew is sometimes termed a Publican,
because he e'rwhile was so, before his conversion. But that same heavenly call,
that had changed Matthew from a Publican into an Apostle; and afore-time, of a
keeper of sheep, made David a Pastor of Nations, wrought a like miracle in St.
Luke, and of a Physician to the body, made him a Physician of souls. His two
books show us, how able he was in this Divine art; and as often as you read
them at home, or hear them publicly here, where, because of their excellency,
they are both of them explained to you, make account, that they are a quantity
of wholesome medicines presented you, to be applied to your souls, as you have
need. I well know, that there are some modern Expositors, who referr what the
Apostle says here unto another Luke; but they produce no valuable reason: For
whereas they allege, that the Apostle would have adorned this person with some
more illustrious Elogie, if he had spoken of Luke the Evangelist, this is
extremely feeble. Is it not a very glorious qualifying of him, to call him his
well-beloved? It Is a great honor to have the love of so holy an Apostle, and
an assured testimony of piety and virtue. Withal, it is not always necessary
to accompany the names of illustrious persons, with all the Elogies they merit.
Surely the Apostle, in the Epistle to the Hebrews, naming Timothy, whose
praise, and great advantages in the work of the ministry, and in all virtue,
every one sufficiently knows, calls him simply, his brother Timothy.

The other, on whose behalf he salutes the Colossians, is Demas. In the Epistle
to Philemon, written at the same time with this, and in which he makes mention
or most of the persons here named; he places Demas, with Mark, and
Aristarchus, and St. Luke, among his fellow laborers; whence it appears, that
he was a Minister of the word of GOD; of the order of those who served for
helpers to the Apostles, and are styled Evangelists. But after he had for a
space ran well; after he had appeared with praise among the lights of the
Church; alas! he lost in the end this fair crown of glory. St. Paul, who
vouchsafed to give his name such an honorable rank in two places of his
Epistles, in a third, tells this lamentable story. Demas (says he) has
forsaken me, having loved this present world, 2 Timothy 4.10.
and is departed unto Thessalonica. From this doleful example, let us all
learn, Dear Brethren, and particularly, such of us, as GOD has called to the
holy Ministry, to stand on our guard, and to mortify in our selves worldly
lusts, as avarice, the love of life, and pleasures, ambition, and such like
passions, which ruined Demas. And if the Dragon cast down some of the stars,
that shined in the heaven of our Churches; if the flesh, and the earth, the
food, and the fullness of Egypt, and the false grandeurs of Chaldea, cause them
unworthily to quit the design, and the hopes of mystical Canaan, let us not be
scandalized at it. We are not better then the Apostles. If all the light of
their wisdom and miracles, could not keep Demas from becoming bankrupt of the
truth, we ought not to think it strange, if there happen to be among us, some
whom belly and vanity do precipitate into the like fault, notwithstanding the
clearness and evidence of our holy doctrine.

But it is time to pass into the second part of our Text; in which the Apostle
orders the Colossians three things; first, to salute those of Laodicea on his
behalf; secondly, to communicate this Epistle of his to them; and thirdly, to
advertise Archippus of his duty. Salute (says he) the brethren, that is, the
Christians, which are at Laodicea; and Nymphas, and the Church which is in his
house. This Nymphas dwelt either in the City of Laodicea it self, or in the
Country near it, as some, in my opinion, do without necessity suspect. The
Apostle names him in particular, because doubtless he was one of the most
considerable persons of the flock at Laodicea, and St. Paul's affirming, that
he had a Church in his house, does sufficiently testify the zeal of his piety.
This Church was not a place in his house, where the Assemblies for religious
exercises were, (for the Scripture never uses the word Church in this sense,
which is now common among Christians) but it is his household, and the persons
whereof it consisted, who all made profession of Christianity with him, and
were confirmed, and edified therein by his instructions and good examples.
Whence appears the vanity of the pretension of those at Rome, who acknowledge
no Church to be, but which braves it in the world, and carries with it the pomp
of multitude and prosperity. The Church of JESUS CHRIST is found, where ever He
is known and served, and adored according to His Gospel; within the enclosure
of the walls of an house; in the very caverns of mountains, and coverts of the
wilderness, whither the Holy Spirit expressly foretells us, that the Spouse of
the Lamb shall be sometimes constrained to retire.

The second order, which the Apostle gives the Colossians, is considerable.
When this Epistle (says he) has been read among you, cause that it be also
read in the Church of the Laodiceans; and read ye also the Epistle from
Laodicea. First, his willing, that this Epistle of his be publicly read in the
assemblies of these two Churches, does show us, that the Scriptures of GOD were
given us, to the end, all the people of CHRIST, Clerks and Laics, small and
great, should hear and read them, and not to be put into the hands of one
certain sort of persons only, as if this treasure did belong to none but them.
And hence appears the abuse of those, who read the Scriptures to their people,
but in a language they understand not; which is as bad, yea, in my opinion
worse, then if they read them not at all. For not to read them, is simply to
bereave the people of the profit they might make of them; whereas to read them
in an unknown tongue, is not only to deprive them of their edification; but
moreover to mock them, and no less offend GOD by perverting His word in such a
manner from its due the and end. What shall I say of their outrage, who accuse
these Divine books of ambiguity, of obscurity, of seeming contradictions and
errors? Who say, that the reading of them is dangerous, and more apt to
corrupt, and embroil the faithful, then to instruct or edify them. O holy
Apostle, why did thou put so dangerous a book into our hands? a book full of
thorns, and void of fruit? Why did thou order them to read it in their
assembly; to impart it unto neighboring Churches, and enjoin them to read it
also? Why did thou not fear the infecting the Spirits of thine innocent
Disciples? and the insnaring of them in some heresy by the darkness of thy
riddles? or the sowing of some disorder in their hearts, by the ambiguity of
thine expressions? Dear Brethren, the Apostle answers, that his Gospel is
clear; that it is not covered but to unstable spirits, and such as are engaged
in some evil passion; that this Epistle is not any seed of error, but a remedy
against seduction; a vessel, full, not of poisons, but of preservatives and
antidotes. But I perceive what the matter is. The Scriptures seem to these
Gentlemen, dangerous; because saying nothing of their Pope, nor of their Mass,
nor of the worship of their Saints, and Images, nor of their Purgatory, and
such other points; nay saying many things which are evidently contrary unto
them, they easily induce those that read them with respect, to believe, that
these doctrines have been invented by men, and were never taught by JESUS
CHRIST and His Apostles. This book troubles them, because they find not their
reckoning in it; it is obscure; because what they love, does not there appear.
It is ambiguous; because it pronounces nothing clearly or expressly for the
opinions, which they are resolved never to forsake.

Furthermore, this imparting of St. Paul's Epistle unto the Laodiceans, unto
which the Colossians were obliged by his order, shows us, that there ought to
be an holy and charitable commerce between the Churches of JESUS CHRIST, in
reference to spiritual things. That a Church, which has received any grace
from GOD which tends to edification, should not envy it to others, but
affectionately communicate unto them all that may serve for their instruction.
And this communion ought to have place particularly between neighboring
Churches, as those of Coloss and of Laodicea were. And it is upon this example,
and upon the reason on which it depends, that the uniting of the Churches of
the same Provinces, and resorts in the same Classes and Synods is founded; a
thing instituted and observed from the beginning of Christianity down to our
days; and still very profitably practiced, and kept up among us, by the
goodness of GOD.

This mutual communication of neighboring Churches appears yet further, in
that the Apostle orders the Colossians, in the third place, to read also the
letter from Laodicea, after their imparting to them his. When this Epistle
(says he) has been read among you, cause, that it be also read in the Church
of the Laodiceans; and read ye also that [which came, or was written] from
Laodicea. It is demanded, what this second Epistle, whereof he speaks, should
be. Many Theologues of the communion of Rome, do answer; that it was a letter
which St. Paul wrote to the faithful of Laodicea, at the same time he wrote
this to the Colossians; whence they conclude, that this piece being lost, as
well as diverse other writings of Prophets and Apostles, it cannot be pretended,
that the Canon of holy Writ is perfect, and does contain all things necessary
unto our salvation. Others again from thence infer, that it is the Church,
which gives the Scriptures the authority they have among Christians; since of
the Epistles of St. Paul, it has left this in particular out of the Canon of
Divine Books, and retained only those fourteen, which are in our hands. But
there is nothing found, nor solid in their arguing; which concludes ill, and
presupposes what is false. For suppose, the Apostle had written an Epistle to
the Laodiceans, and that it were lost, (as I would not avouch, that St. Paul
and his fellow-brethren the Apostles, never wrote any thing to any particular
person, or to any Church, but what is arrived down to us) suppose it, I say;
who told them, that this loss makes the Canon of our Scriptures defective? Who
told them that there was in that letter some Article of Faith necessary unto
our salvation, which is not found in the other parts of the Bible, we now have?
Again, who taught them thence to conclude, that it is the Church, who
authorizeth the Divine Books? I grant, she is the keeper and depositary of
them; as the Synagogue sometime was of the Books of the Old Testament,
according to the Apostle's saying that unto them were committed the Oracles of
GOD; and that it belongs to her charge to preserve them, and read them, and
recommend them to every one. But that it is the authority of her voice and
testimony, which gives them the price and value they have, either in themselves
or in reference to faithful souls; this, in my opinion, cannot be said without
outraging the Majesty of their Author; by making the divinity of the
instruments of His wisdom, to depend upon the fantasy of men. As the Romans
heretofore submitted the worship and divinity of their Gods, unto the Decrees
of their Senate. They were not Gods, except it so pleased men. If it were
certain, that the Apostle had written an Epistle to the Laodiceans, and put it
in the hands of the Church; it should be concluded, not that she has the power
to authorize what Divine Books she pleases; but rather that she has hugely
failed of her duty, in having so ill kept an heavenly jewel. But the worst yet
is, that all they talk about this pretended Epistle of St. Paul to the
Laodiceans, is a vain conceit, and has no other foundation, but their
imagination. I well know that in our Fathers days, Faber. Stapulensis.
a Learned man did publish one under that name, having found it in three or
four Libraries. But the piece is so gross, and so ridiculous, that it has been
rejected equally on all hands; as the work of an impostour, who abusing his
leisure, forged this trifle, and shamelesly fathered it upon St. Paul. Some of
the Ancients do also make mention of a Script, bearing the same name; whether
it were different from this, or did resemble it. But the Ancients, that speak
of it do all unanimously decry it, as an Apocryphal Book, and issued out of an
heretical Shop, and framed at pleasure after St. Paul's death. Tertuld. 5. c.
1^. contra Marcion.
And in truth one of the first Writers of the Latin Church does declare, that
a famous Heresiarch, named Marcion, had changed the Title of the Epistle of St
Paul to the Ephesians, and instead of this name, which it always bore in the
Church, impudently called it, the Epistle to the Laodiceans; and read we do,
Here Is. 43. conti^ Marcion.
in the Epistle to the Ephesians, those words, which Epiphanius reports, to
have been cited by Marcion, out of the Epistle to the Laodiceans. This has
given Gretius.
a certain Writer occasion to fancy that St. Paul indeed sent, and addressed
the same Epistle to the Laodiceans, which at the same time he wrote to the
Ephesians, these two Churches having had need of the same remedies; and that
its this Epistle the Apostle means in this place, willing the Colossians to
take a copy of it, and read it in their Assembly. All this would pass, if it
were at all grounded; but it is too much considence, or credulity, to think to
persuade it us, upon the credit of Marcion; the most impudent impostor, that
ever troubled the Church, and one that in particular, played with the Books of
the New Testament, contracting them, maiming them, and changing themat his
pleasure with an infernal license. Besides, this supposition accords not with
St. Paul's words. For he does not all say, as these persons pretend, that the
Epistle in question, was written to the Laodiceans. True it is, the Latin
Interpreter, has rendered it the Epistle of the Laodiceans: but this would
signify, as every one sees, that the Laodiceans had wrote it; and not that
they had received it, either from the Apostle, or from any other. Yet though
the Latin would suffer this rude gloss; it is clear, the original cannot be
made to bear it, without undertaking (as these new Doctors do, truly with
presumption enough) to change the words of it, which we find uniform in the
Greek Copies, and which the Ancients observed there, above twelve hundred years
ago. For they clearly import, as our Bibles have faithfully translated, and
represented, that this Epistle had been written or sent from Laodicea; so that
we must necessarily ununderstand them, with the ancient Greek Fathers, of an
Epistle written, not to the Laodiceans, but from their City.

Now the Apostle telling us no more of it, either here, or elsewhere; we need
not wonder, that such as have had the curiosity to enquire, what this letter
might be, have fallen upon different opinions, as in a matter both obscure, and
besides of no great necessity. Some of the Ancients say, that it is the first
Epistle of St. Paul to Timothy, written from Laodicea; as is expressly reported
by an old tradition, which is read still to this day at the end of that
Epistle, And the truth is, it cannot be denied, but this Epistle contains
diverse instructions fit to edify the Colossians, about the business of those
seducers, whom St. Paul here opposes; they dogmatised a discrimination of
days and meats; and this is there expressly condemned. And whereas it is
alleged against these Authors, that the Apostle had not been in the City of
Laodicea; by means whereof he could not have thence written any letters, either
to Timothy, or any other; they perhaps would answer with an Ancient Author,
Theodoret by name, that the History of the Acts assuring us St. Paul had
traversed Phrygia, it is not very probable, but that he passed through
Laodicea, the capital City of the Province. And whereas he says in the 2.
chap. to the Colossians, that he has a great conflict for them, and for those
at Laodicea, and for all such as had not seen his presence in the flesh; this
shows indeed, that the Apostle had care even of those of the faithful, whom he
had not seen; but not that they of Laidicea, or of Coloss were of the number;
and that the sense of these words is, he was in pain not only for them, whom he
had seen, and known; but even for the Christians he never saw. Yet because this
exposition may seem a little forced; it is better and more easy to stick to
the common opinion, followed by the greater part of Expositors both Ancient and
Modern; even that the Epistle from Laedicea here mentioned by the Apostle, was
a letter written by the Church of Laodicea to St. Paul; which letter he
desires the Colossians should read in their Assembly, because it contained
things which he judged helpful to their edification; perhaps concerning the
persons, or the errors, or the procedures of those very seducers, whom he
combateth in this Epistle. This, in my opinion, is that which may be said in
the matter with greatest probability.

There remains the third and last order he gives them; say to Archippus, Take
heed to the Ministry thou have received in the LORD, that thou fulfill it. We
learn from the Epistle to Philemon, that Archippus was a fellow-souldier of the
Apostle's, that is, a Minister of the holy Gospel. The meaning then is, that
the Church do advertise him on St. Paul's behalf, to mind both the quality of
that excellent Ministry, and the Authority, and Divinity of the LORD, in whose
name he had been called to it, that he might acquit himself worthily in it, and
diligently fulfill all the functions of it, leaving no part of them
unperformed. It is thought, that some negligence or other defect of this Pastor
might oblige the Apostle to cause this advise to be given him; But for my part,
I would not, without a more pressing reason, suspect such a thing of a person
whom the Apostle had so much honored, as to call him his fellowsouldier, in
the Epistle he wrote at the same time to Philemon: and should rather believe,
that Archippus having been newly received into this sacred charge, the Apostle
would encourage him by this advertisement to a good discharge of his duty in
it. However it were, you see, he gives the body of the Church a power to
address some remonstrances sometin^es to it is own Pastors. An evident sign,
that they are not the Masters and Lords of it, as those of Rome pretend, but
Ministers and Officers only.

In fine he adds for a conclusion. The salutation by the own hand of me Paul.
The rest of the Epistle had been dictated by the Apostle, and written by
another hand; He writes these, and the following words himself, with his own
hand; 1 These. 3.17.
and it was his ordinary use so to do, as he declares elsewhere, 2 These. 2.2.
to assure his letters by this mark against the fraud of falsifiers, who even
then impudently dispersed forged letters under his name; as himself in another
place intimates unto us. Yet before he shuts up, he conjures them, to remember
his bonds; as an excellent seal of the truth of his Gospel, and an irrefragable
testimony of the affection he bore to them, and to the rest of the Gentiles;
for whose sake he suffered these things; which consequently obliged them to
love him, and to pray the LORD ardently for him; and above all to imitate his
constancy, and his patience on the like occasions, if they should be called to
them. After this he gives them his blessing in these words, Grace be with you,
Amen. He means the Grace of GOD in JESUS CHRIST His Son our LORD: and it was
not possible to crown this divine Letter with a fairer, and a fitter close.

Bless we GOD, my Beloved Brethren, who has vouchsafed us the grace, to read,
and to explain it throughout, in these holy Assemblies; and pray Him that he
would please to continue the same liberty and tranquillity still unto us;
causing His word to fructify among us. At present let us particularly meditate
the remarkable Lessons, which this conclusion does contain, to the end we may
sedulously practice them, each of us according to our Vocation. Let Ministers
mind the advertisement given to Archippus; and imitate the example of Epaphras,
in loving cordially their flocks; in striving for them both by prayer, and by
word, and by deed; fulfilling their Ministry, and so demeaning themselves in
it, as may be worthy both of the excellency of the charge, and of the respect
and love they owe to the son of GOD, who has honored them with it. Let Flocks
have reverence and amity for their Pastors; and live an good intelligence with
their neighbors, as Coloss and La^dicea, mutually communicating all things
that tend to their common edification. Let the Epistles of St. Paul, and the
Books of his fellow-brethen, the Prophets and Apostles of the LORD, resound
eternally in our Assemblies. Let their Voice alone be there heard, and their
Doctrine alone received, and every tradition not marked with their zeal, be
banished thence. Let heads of Families imitate the zeal of Nymphas, so
conscionably forming their children, and their people unto piety; and so
regularly establishing the exercises of it among them, that it may be truly
said of them, they each have a Church in their house. And all of us together,
of what order or condition soever, let us study to be perfect and complete in
all the will of GOD; and persevere unto the end in this holy profession;
remembering also the bonds of St. Paul, and the sufferings of the faithful, by
which GOD has confirmed the truth of His Gospel; and so walk in the steps of
these blessed ones, enjoying the favors of GOD with thankfulness, and
undergoing his chastisements and trials with patience, that His grace may be
with us for ever, both in this world, and in the world to come. Amen.

FINIS.
Books to be Sold by Thomas Parkhurst, at the Bible and three Crowns in
Cheapside, near Mercers Chapel.
A Commentary on the Hebrews; By John Owen, D. D. Folio.

An Exposition of Temptation, on Mat. 4. verse 1. to the end of the Eleventh;
By Dr. Thomas Tailor, fol.

A Learned Commentary or Exposition on the first Chapter of the second Epistle
to the Corinthians; By Richard Sibbs, D. D. fol.

A practical Exposition on the third Chapter of the first Epistle of St. Paul
to the Corinthians, with the Godly Man's Choice, on Psalm. 4. verse. 6, 7, 8. By
Anthony Burgess, fol.

The dead Saint, speaking to Saints and Sinners living, in several Treatises.
The first on 2 Samuel 24.10. The second on Cant. 4.9. The third on John 1.50. The
fourth on Isa. 58.2. The fifth on Exodus 15.11. By Samuel Bolton, D. D. fol.

The view of the Holy Scriptures: By Thomas Broughton, fol.

Christianographia, or a Description of the Multitude, and sundry sorts of
Christians in the world, not subject to the Pope: By Ephesians. Pagit. Fol.

These Six Treatises next following, are written by Mr. George Swinnock. 1. The
Christian Man's Calling; or a Treatise of making Religion ones business, in
Religious Duties, Natural Actions, his Particular Vocation, his Family
Directions, and his own Recreation; to be read in Families for their
Instruction and Edification. The first Part. 2. Likewise a second Part; wherein
Christians are directed to perform their Duties, as Husbands and Wives, Parents
and Children, Masters and Servants, in the conditions of Prosperity and
Adversity. The second Part. 3. The third and last part of the Christian Man's
Calling, wherein the Christian is directed how to make Religion his business,
in his dealings with all Men, in the Choice of his Companions, in his carriage
in good Company, in bad Company, in solitariness, or when he is alone, on a
week day from morning to night, in visiting the sick on a Dying-bed; as also
the means how a Christian may do this, and some motives to it. 4. The Door of
Salvation opened, by the Key of Regeneration. 5. Heaven and Hell Epitomized:
And the true Christian Uncharacterized. 6. The Fading of the Flesh, and the
flourishing of Faith: Or, One cast for Eternity, with the only way to throw it
well: All these by George Swinnock, M. A. Quarto's.


A Learned Commentary on the fourth Chapter of the second Epistle of St. Paul
to the Corinthians to which is added, First, A Conference between Christ and
Mary. Second, the Spiritual Man's Aim. Third, Emanuel, or Miracle of Miracles;
By Richard Sibbs, D. D. 4to.

An Exposition on the five first Chapters of Ezekiel, with useful observations
thereupon; By Will. Greenhil, 4to.

The Gospel Covenant, or the Covenant of Grace opened; Preached in New England;
By Peter Bulkley, 4to.

Gods Holy Mind touching Matters Moral; which himself uttered in ten words, or
ten Commandments; Also an Exposition on the Lords Prayer; By Edward Elton, B.
D. 4to.

Fiery Jesuit, or an Historical Collection of the Rise, Increase, Doctrines,
and Deeds of the Jesuits. Exposed to view for the sake of London, 4to.

Horologiographia Optica; Dialling Universal and Particular, Speculative and
Practical; together with the Description of the Court of Arts, by a new Method;
By Silvanus Morgan, 4to.

Praxis Medicinae, or the Physicians Practice, wherein are contained all inward
diseases from the head to the foot; By Walter Bruel.

Regimen Sanitatis Salerni, or the School of Salerns Regiment of Health,
containing Directions and Instructions for the guide and Government of Man's
Life, 4to.

Heart-Treasure! Or a Treatise tending to fill and furnish the head and heart
of every Christian, with soul-inriching treasure of truths, graces, experiences
and comforts, to help him in Meditation, Conference, Religious Performances,
Spiritual Actions, Enduring Afflictions, and to fit him for all conditions,
that he may live holily, dye happily, and go to Heaven triumphantly. By O. H.
with an Epistle prefixed, by John Chester, Large Octavo.

Closet-prayer, a Christians Duty: The sure Mercies of David; Both by the same
Author.

The Conversion of a Sinner explained and applied from Ezekiel. 33.11.

The Day of Grace Discovered from Luke 19.41, 42.

Worthy walking pressed upon all those that have heard the Call of the Gospel:
All three by Nath. Vincent.

The Duty of Parents.

A Little Book for Little Children.

Method and Instruction for the Art of Divine Meditation: All three by Thomas
White.

The Child's delight, together with an English Grammar; By Tho. Lie.

The Life and Death of Dr. Sam. Winter.

The inseparable Union between Christ and a Believer, which death it self
cannot sever, or the Bond that can never be broken. Opened in a Sermon at the
Funeral of Mrs. Dorothy Freeborn. By Tho. Peck.

An Antitode against Quakerisme; By Stephen Scandret. 4to.

A Glimpse of Eternity; By A. Caley.

A practical Discourse of Prayer, wherein is handled the Nature and Duty of
Prayer; By Tho. Cobbet.

Of Quenching the Spirit, the evil of it in respect both of its causes and
effects, discovered; By Theophilus Polwheile.

Wells of Salvation opened, or Words whereby we may be saved: With advise to
young Men; By Tho. Vincent.

The re-building of London encouraged and improved in several Meditations; By
Samuel Rolls.

The sure way to Salvation: or a Treatise of the Saints Mystical Union with
Christ; wherein that great Mystery and Privilege is opened in the nature,
properties, and the necessities of it; By R. Steedman, M. A.

The greatest Loss, upon Matthew. 16.26. By James Livesey, Small Octavo.

Moses unvailed; By William Guild.

The Protestants Triumph, being an exact Answer to all the sophistical
Arguments of Papists; By Chapter Drelincourt.

A Defense against the fear of Death; By Zach. Crofton.

Gods Sovereignty displayed; By Will. Geering.

A sober Discourse concerning the interest of words in Prayer.

The Godly Man's Ark: or City of Refuge in the day of his distress, in five
Sermons, with Mrs. Moor's Evidences for Heaven; By Edm. Calamy.

The Almost Christian discovered: or the false Professor tried and cast; By Mr.
Mead.

Spiritual Wisdom improved against Temptation; By Mr. Mead.

1. A Divine Cordial.

2. The Doctrine of Repentance.

3. Heaven taken by Storm.

4. The Holy Eucharist: or, The Sacrament of the Lords Supper, briefly opened.

5. The mischief of Sin it brings a person Low: All five by Tho. Watson.

The True bounds of Christian Freedom: or, a Discourse showing the extents and
restraints of Christian Liberty, wherein the truth is settled, many errors
confuted; out of John 8. verse 36.

The Lords Day enlivened; or a Treatise of the Sabbath; By Philip Goodwin.

The sinfulness of Sin, and the Fullness of Christ, two Sermons; By W. Bridge.

A serious Exhortation to a Holy Life; By Tho. Wadsworth.

Comfortable Crumbs of Refreshment, by Prayers, Meditation, Consolation, and
Ejaculations; with a Confession of Faith, and sum of the Bible.

Aurifodina Linguae Gallicae, or the Golden Mine of the French Language opened;
By Edw. Costlin, Genesis

Four Centuries of Select Hymns, collected out of Scripture; By Will. Barton.

Sins Sinfulness; By Ralph Venning.

Sober Singularity; By R. Steedman.

The Parable of the great Supper; By John Crump of Maidstone in Kent.

The Christians daily Monitour; By Joseph Church.

A Memento to young men and old; By J. Maynard.

The History of Moderation, or the Life, Death, Resurrection of Moderation.

Nonesuch Wonder, in Martha Tailors Life, who has been supported above a year
without use of Meat or Drink.

FINIS.

