DAFFY's Original ELIXIR SALUTIS, Vindicated against all COUNTERFEITS, etc. OR,
An ADVERTISEMENT by me, ANTHONY DAFFY, of London, Citizen and Student in
PHYSIC,
By way of Vindication of my Famous and generally approved Cordial Drink,
(called ELIXIR SALUTIS) from the notoriously false suggestions of one Tho.
Witherden of Bear-steed in the County of Kent, Gent. (as pretended;) Jane
White, Robert Brook, Apothecary, and Edward Willet; all new upstart
Counterfeiters of my ELIXIR, and Ape-like Imitators of my long since Printed
Books and Directions, (some of them, nigh Verbatim, or word for word) and that
to the jeopardy of many good, (but misinformed) Peoples Healths, and Lives
too; as also, from the false pretentions of other more sneaking Cub-Quacks, not
yet lickt into form, but remaining Moon-blind brats, (still in Swadling-Clouts)
I mean the Numerous Crew of Libellous Pamphleteeirs, which are (if possible)
more dangerous Counterfeiters of my ELIXIR, than those before, or hereafter
named; who (as yet) have not Impudence enough to own the lies in their
Pamphlets, with their Names; Not (at present) to say any more concerning Hind,
Baynes, or Gosmore, (three other Egregious Counterfeiters of my Cordial Elixir)
whose Impostures and Deceipts I have (for the good and safety of the Public)
in a great measure already detected, and unmasked, as in sight of the Sun at
Noon.

IN order to the detection and unmasking of the four Juggling Impostures, (first
abovenamed) I take my self obliged (in discharge of my Duty toward God and
Man) to caution the Readers, or Patients, (as they tender their own ease, the
Cure of their Distempers, or their own Lives) seriously to weigh, and
impartialy to remark these Observations, following; wherein I do represent
nothing but what I can duly and sufficiently prove, (as diverse persons of known
Integrity and worth, in this City, and elsewhere, know to be true,) viz.

The said Thomas Witherden, (Page 1. of his Licencious Pamphlet) says, that
Providence put into his hands the Description and preparation of an Excellent
Liquour, which he now calls his true and perfect Elixir Salutis, (obtained of
an Eminent Person) and that he (resolving to make a narrow scrutiny into my
ELIXIR) traced me, 'till he Centred in the same Author with me; whereunto I the
said Anthony Daffy do answer, That of his Centring with me in the same Author
of my ELIXIR, there is no other proof, than that of his own iste dixit, or bare
say so: And what place that, (though the Word of a Gentleman, as himself also
says) will find in Impartial and Judicious Readers beliefs, (especially from a
person speaking for lucres sake, in his own case,) I leave to Judgment: And
further, I do in the presence of the Almighty searcher of hearts affirm, that
(many years since) I the said A. D. did by my own Experience and Reading, add a
considerable number of Ingredients unto that Receipt, for making ELIXIR, (then
tofore, by my worthy and honored Friend conferred upon me) and did also much
vary from the said Receipt, both in the Quantities and Qualities of those
Ingredients in the said Receipt specified: And I do further affirm, that
neither my said Friend, himself, (from whom, at first, I had the said Receipt)
or any other man (my self only excepted) either does, or at any time did know
all the Ingredients, (much less, their quantities) which I have (for many years
past) made use of (and do still use) in the preparing and making of my ELIXIR.

The said Mr. Witherden (page 2.) says, that (to pare of my gain,) he sells
his Drink, (certainly, more exactly prepared than mine, if he be not mistaken)
for 4s. the Pint; whereunto I the said A. D. do answer, that I know not what
Ingredients he uses, and how cheap they are, that he puts into his Drink, but
do find my own, a costly preparation, and so costly, that if my ELIXIR were to
be Sold at his Drinks price, the Vendors gain would upon the matter, equalize
my own, and without any consideration for my Skill, and my own, and Servants
great labor in preparing and making it: Besides, it is well known, that I
freely give away a great part of my gains by the Rich, unto the Poor: And I do
(with others, that are more acquainted with Mr. Witherden's Drink than my self)
rationaly conclude, that his Patients (if any in Nature) might (with far more
safety) give iiij s. for a Pint of Pump water, than pay him iiij d. for his
Elixir. There was with me this day, (being Saturday 6th June, 1674) a Gent. of
great Quality, for some of my Elixir, acquainting me, that he (dwelling in
Kent, as I take it) and having taken some of Mr. Witherden's Drink) does (not
without great cause) repent he ever meddled with it; and having taken a small
parcel thereof, comes often to me, saying he will keep close to my Elixir.

The said Mr. Witherden (in the 3. page of his Pamphlet) expresses himself in
these words, viz. That which is called the Elixir Salutis, that it is the same
with mine I affirm; And for the Truth thereof, I appeal to any Judicious
person, who will but try them both, and I will abide by his Impartial Censure,
etc. then breaks out into scurrilous Impertinencies, and Moccado ends of
Latin, which I the said A. D. (humbly conceive) might as well have been
omitted; and the Sense, Construction, and Orthography, better minded: See page
2. line 19. and other places of his Pamphlet; very much misbeseeming so learned
an Oracle as he would be deemed. Yet, as to Mr. Witherden's Affirmation
concerning his Elixir, I, the said A. D. shall not Controvert, (the person
affirmant being a Gent.) but shall (in some Cases) grant him: For indeed (here
at London) we well know, That the Balderdash stuff, foisted out by Most of the
Counterfeiters of my Elixir, is by themselves and others (as wise as they)
called the Elixir Salutis, and that by way of preheminency (no doubt) unto all
other: Yet, of such kinds of Balderdash liquours, the Judicious persons under
Londons Meridian (let those in the Country be as prodigal of their healths and
ease as they will) have reason enough about them, to let others make Trial,
before they venture; for that some foolhardy people have Tried away their
ease, others, their healths, and some their lives; (as is too well known.) Yet
concerning the weight and validity of the said Mr. Witherden's Proof by Appeal,
and his Promise threupon; (admitting his Rhetorique do prevail upon a Judicious
person to take his Drink, having taken my Elixir before; I, the said A. D. do
affirm that the said Promise is grounded upon Cautelous and Subterfugeous
terms, whereby he reserves a latitude to himself of Decrying, Excepting
against, and Exploding the Judgment of any person, as Partial, and Injudicious,
(if against his liquor) be the same person (in all Judicious unconcerned men's
estimations) never so judicious and unbiased, and skilful also in the Smells,
Tastes, and Tinctures of Drinks.

The said Mr. Witherden (the Latin Interpreter) in the 3. page of his Pamphlet,
vainly tells me of an old Proverb, Ne Suitor ultra Crepidam, to intimate unto
the World, that I have heretofore followed the Trade of a Shoo-maker, which
(...) News unto most Citizens (here) of any standing; And I am so far from
being ^sham'd of it, that it is a thing with me, not unfrequent, (when any
occasion presents) to acquaint some, (that I judge strangers to me) that I have
been formerly of that Profession or Trade: And it is in London very well known,
that (in those days,) I lived in as good repute, (paying scot and lot) and
spent as much in Housekeeping in one Year, as some of the Country Gent. may
afford to spend in two: And certainly, the said Mr. Witherden will fare better
than his Betters in Drink-dabling, if he do not (at the foot of the Account)
read himself a Cobbler, and one necessitous of a thread of the Charity of those
great Friends (he boasts of) wherewith to botch up his own Reputation: But to
return from that impertinent Digression, this Mr. Witherden has vainly drawn
me into; I would fain know from this learned Mr. Witherden; (for so he will
have himself deemed) fasque nefasque; that is, right or wrong; How much less
effectual did the late Dr. Trigg's having been a Shoo-maker, render his
Medicaments? or, admitting he had been a complete Gentleman, that is, by
Extraction, Education, and Possession; what Additament could his Gentility have
made to the virtual efficacy of his Medicine?

The said Mr. Witherden, in the 4. p. frumps me with crabbed words, picked from
others, Glorying that his own former Industry has freed him from any necessity
of Soaring with borrowed Wings: Whereto I, the said A. D. do answer, I am
altogether unconcerned whether he flys or lies, or whether those Wings, he
has, be his own, or borrowed: That matter concerns others in this City, more
than it does me, or (as I hope) ever shall: For my own part, I am not of any so
quick and volatile Spirit, or have I the custody of any Wings, either my own, or
borrowed; or the least skill in Soaring; therefore, were I in Debt, and my
Creditors neversomuch enraged against me; I must necessarily stand my Ground;
yet do I acknowledge, that (were I desirous of such a kind of Learning, as this
Gentleman says he has by his former Industry acquired) I would never read
over the voluminous Legends of Tom Thumb, or Ransack the College of Gotham for
a Tutor; since my knowledge has been so enriched with the Treasure of Mr.
Witherdens lofty lines; whom therefore I shall (by way of caution) humbly put
in mind of Ovids old Pentameter Verse upon Iccarus, viz. Iccarus Iccariis
nomina fecit aquis.

But whether will this Gentleman's wild Digression lead me? into the language of
the Beast? to swim with borrowed Bladders, out of the reach of our own Reason
and Understanding? We must know that poor London has neither of the Accademies
in her; no, the Country must enjoy them both; and therefore I will implore this
learned Country Gentleman Mr. T. W. to let me know (with as much speed, as the
matter requires haste) how nigh unto the White my following Guess at this
Verses meaning, comes, viz.

He that Soars so nigh the Sun, as to melt the Wax, that fastened his Wings, may
chance to craze his empty Sconce upon the Rock of Ignorance.
The said Jane White, she also has Dabled together, what she calls a Famous
and wonderful never-failing Cordial Drink of the World, and (wanting a Father
for this poor Brat) she (raking under the Toombs) lighted upon the ashes of a
long since deceased Doctor, whom she calls Dr. Bostock, she looking upon this
Doctor, as too civil to give her the lie, she tells him boldly (I cannot say to
the Teeth) that this her Brat is his, which (he not denying) it is taken for a
truth by some few here, but most generally believed in Vtopia, Gotham, and some
higher part of Bethlehem: Her Tables (round about the City) beginning thus,
Eximia praedico. Whether she has the Latin Tongue or not, I cannot conclude,
but you shall see her aptness and readiness to a worse Tongue, in her
licencious Pamphlet; where is stolen and bombasted in the sum and substance of
my the said Anthony Daffy's Books of my Elixirs Virtues and Directions for
taking it; The said Jane White from the bottom of the first page (of her Book)
forwards, lays a foundation, whereby to insinuate into strangers (especially
crazed ones) some color of reason to believe a Virtue in her Drink: Her own
words are these; For by good experience of my sad condition and others, for the
space of Twenty Years, I was driven from one Doctor, to another, but all they
could do, was not able to help me; and a few lines after, having told us of the
perfect health, she now enjoys, by the means (as she says) of her Drink, to
the great admiration of her self and all that formerly knew her: She speaks of
many that heard of her long languishing condition, unto which Narrative of the
said Mrs. White, concerning her own sad and long languishing condition; I, the
said Anthony Daffy, do answer, That I and my Wife have known the said Mrs.
White for above these 15 Years last, and been very conversant with her
Intimates all along, and I do say, that this her suggestion is (as I can
sufficiently prove it) most notoriously untrue: I would fain know of her the
names of any two out of those many (she talks of) that heard of her sad and
long languishing condition: This her Never failing Stuff, having been public
above 5 Months, and having (as the said Mrs. White alone, says,) immediately
in three Days given her much ease, and in one Months time become Master of that
her tedious Distemper, which she, nor any body else knows what it was, to the
admiration of all that knew her formerly; I would fain know, (if it had those
admirable effects upon her) how it comes to pass that this wonderful Never
failing Stuff jades all persons besides, that meddle with it; Mrs. White, I
tell you and all the World, that the appropriating, or misapplying of my
Elixirs known Virtues unto your Balderdash, can make the same no more like my
Elixir, or do it any more good than I should do my Dog by calling him Lion,
alas, the Dog would remain but a Cur still; and nere the sooner partake of the
Majesty, strength, or force of a Lion; yet (here) I would not be mistaken,
these I do not speak of as parallel Cases, but, by way of Allusion; for any man
to call his Dog, Lion, is an indifferent thing; but in your case lurks a lie,
with a Design (for lucres sake) to deceive.

The said Robert Brook, in his Printed sheet, (under the Apothe caries Arms)
speaks tumid big words of an Elixir Salutis, prepared by him, according to Art;
saying, he has tasted Hind's Drink, and my Elixir; and finds them (to the best
of his Judgment) one and the same; proceeding (as he presumes) from one
Fountainhead, (his Master) who, (having taken his Degree of Doctor in Physic
at Cambridge, and ad eundem gradum at Oxford,) may think it beneath him to
appear publicly in Print; further adding, that several of his Acquaintances
and Patients, that have taken Hind's Elixir, and his own; (finding them both
one) advised him to make it publicly known; though one of the said M. Brooks
his Patients, and near Neighbors, having tried his Drink, came lately, (if not
too late) to me the said A. D. for my Elixir, telling me, that the said Mr.
Brooks his Drink, (to speak in modest terms) did no wise answer expectation;
the said Brooks further adding, that he should be very improvident, to hide
such a precious Talent from the World; confesses openly to have taken the
substance of my Papers, as well, that of my Elixirs Virtues, as the other, of
my Directions.

This R. B. and too learned Apothecary, being (Narcissus-like) Ravished with
his own confident and high expectations, from the Golden-fleece of this his
Precious Talent, does (in affectation) talk like himself.

Now I, the said A. D. (instead of Answering him) shall only draw the Spirit of
his words, and spin them into a finer thread; that so the Reader (having a
Prospect thereof in Epitomie) may answer him for me. The Epitomie of R. B. his
own words is this, viz.

R. B. has prepared a Drink, called (by himself) Elixir Salutis, (to the Best
of his own Judgment) as good as my Elixir; proceeding, (as he presumes) from
the same Fountainhead with mine, (Dr. Nemo, of both Universities;) And his
nameless Acquaintance and Patients, that have taken Hind's, and his Drink,
finding them both one) advised him, to publish his Elixir; which is accordingly
done; And the same either is, or is not to be sold at Westminster-Hall-Gate, by
Mr. John Nest, Stationer, the Bottles sealed with R. B. and a great Cross, (I
think.)

How great pity is it, that this Ingenious Animal did not, in penning that his
learned piece, (especially, being under the Banner, and for the honor of his
Company) bethink himself of avoiding that grand Maxim, In generalibus versatur
dolus, the Gentleman is not ignorant of deceipts lurking under the thicket of
general terms.

Certainly this Stuff was never designed to find any belief or Credit in the
City of London, by any body, whose brains were any thing nigh codl'd; But
plainly appears to have been Calculated for the Meridian of the University of
Gotham; whereunto if this qualified and accomplished person, R. B. shall please
to repair; he (the Man) may (Nemine contradic^^^^) take his Degree of Doctor,
as well as his Master; Nay, (more than that, he may be Dr. Brook, that is
somebody.

In tender consideration and ^^^^ity of the great + that R. B. already finds in
the Provident and High (...) Emprovement of that his Glittering and Precious
Talent, by him published for the Worlds good: I, the said A. D. do (for his
re-Incouragement) freely grant him, that the best of his Judgment in
Drink-dabling, is altogether, as good, as that of his nameless Patients; And
further; That his Presumption concerning the Fountainhead of my Elixir, is
equivalent unto that Art of his, according whereunto, he prepared it; And that
his Never failing Cordial is as Authentic, as the best of his own Judgment,
or Hindes either.

The said Edward Willet also, has lately published a licencious Pamphlet,
entitled, Elixir Triphera Solutinae, or the Famous Never-failing Cordial,
Experienced (as himself says) by many, for cure of the Gout, Stone, etc. and
so goes on in an Apish Imitation of my, the said Anthony Daffy's sealed Books,
taking the sum and substance of my (long since published) Experiences, of my
Elixirs Virtues, and Directions also: And does (for lucres sake) misapply them
to that his Never-failing stuff, endeavoring thereby (what in him lies) to
bring contempt upon my Elixir Salutis; and to foist his own stuff upon
misinformed People, in liew of it; he says his stuff is sold for iij s. the
half Pint Bottle, sealed up, but mentions nothing of the Coat of Arms, or
Impression of the seal; It seems, he is void of fear of any man's changing, or
sophisticating it; but that matters not much.

Yet forasmuch as the Counterfeiters of my Original, sincere, and Famous Elixir
Salutis, do swarm so in every corner; and most discreet People being awakn'd,
and (not without good ground) very cautious what they receive into their
Bowels; I the said A. D. do affirm, that (if Mr. Willets Cordial be by many
Experienced such a Never-failing stuff, for the Cures, he talks of, he detracts
much from his own profit, and also from the good of the public, in not
mentioning (out of those pretended many) one, or two persons names and abodes,
that have so experienced the Never-failing Virtue of his Drink: If he Prints
again, I advise him not to forget it then, as wilfully as it is omitted now.

Yet another Counterfeiter of my Elixir Salutis, by the same name; This is so
young a Cub Quack, with its swaddling Clouts so close about it, and its Teeth
not come, that the Animal cannot tell you its name, sex, or place of abode, (if
any it has) It may be deemed a Monster, for (notwitstanding its Nonage) it
begins betimes, stealing (not only) the name of my Elixir, but the sum and
substance of my (the said A. Daffy's) sealed Book, (nigh verbatim), and great
part of my Directions also: But (being very provident) it does (in its
licencious Libel) chop up my sealed Books, and my Directions together, for
saving of Paper-charge; telling the world, that the Bottle is sealed with the
Half Moon and Ermins, and that its newfound Dibble dabble is for many years
experienced by diverse persons in and about this City, whose names it were too
tedious, there to insert: Note that this young Quack is not so courteous as
(with the rest, to let the world know, how its secret knack of Drink-dabling
was acquired; or whether it dropped out of the Clouds upon it, nay it is so
sullen, that it will not instance, by name, so much as one of those diverse
Persons (in its Libel mentioned) that have experienced the least good by that
its Famous Stuff, as it self tells you.

But this Animal (in a short time) finding the vain insufficiency of its said
former Libel; sets the same thing out again, in another Dress; the new ignorant
and nonsensical Libel is tied, (tail to tail) to the Scurvy-Grass-paper, which
as I am credibly informed) is also stolen from another Author: The nameless
Animal, now, (for so it still remains) bethinks it self of one of its omissions
in the former Libel; and in the new Libel, talks like an old Man (as it were)
saying, that the original of its Drink, was from Dr. Buttler, in King James's
days; and that this Doctor (at his death) left this Receipt in English to his
Kinsman, Dr. Trigg; forgetting to tell us by what line this Receipt descended
from Dr. Trigg upon it self, and how it knows it the same Receipt; yet the
matters not much.

The Table of this learned Animals conceipted Famous Cordial Drink, is Apishly
varnisht over, with this Golden Inscription, Elixir Salutis, Rightly prepared,
according to Art: And the poor Innocent thing, most unjustly hanged up to
rights upon Aldersgate; and that by great mistake, instead of its Author, at
Bethlehem-gate.

I presume that no persons, (well in their wits) will take into their Bowels
they know not what, from they know not whom; especially, when they cannot see
or hear of the Author that made it, or any one, that took it, and lived a Month
after.

Observe, That no one, of the 7 aforenamed Counterfeiters, of my Elixir, or the
last mentioned nameless one, (though all clothed and clogged with Impudence too
much) dares to nominate any one person, besides themselves in particular, if
such may themselves (speaking for their own gain, and in their own case in
particular) be believed; that has made any advantageous Experiment upon any of
their Drinks; which is indeed the cunningest and safest course, they could have
taken.

Courteous Reader; Thus much I have (as I ought in bounden Duty to God, the
public Good, my own, and my Elixirs known reputation) declared to the World,
for the prevention of further mischief by these Mercenaries and,
Counterfeiters, that do (for a piece of bread) seek to endanger, not only
Peoples Ease, but their Healths, and Lives too.

If (notwitstanding all this) any persons be inclined to meddle with any of
their Drinks; I have done my duty; let them use their liberty: they may, (as
well as other have done,) feel and sadly experience the weight of this caution*
Qui antea non cavet, post dolebit; that is, he that is not wary before, may be
sorrowful afterward, when too late; But to the Resolute, I matter it not at
all as concerning my self, and conclude with them, as before in another
Advertisement, viz. Qui vult decipi, decipiatur.

My Hours to be spoken with, are from Six to Twelve in the Forenoon, and from
One to Four the Afternoon, at my House in Prujeans-Court, in the Great
Old-Bailey, the Porched Hou^ fronting the Street.

With Allowance.


