DEPOSITIONS Taken the 22d. of October 1688. BEFORE THE PRIVY COUNCIL AND PEERS
of ENGLAND; Relating to the Birth of the (Then) PRINCE of WALES.

Published by His MAJESTY's Special Command.



[Price Six pence.]

AT The COVNCIL-CHAMBER IN WHITEHALL, Monday the 22d. of October, 1688.
THIS Day an extraordinary Council met, where were likewise present, by His
Majesty's Desire and Appointment, Her Majesty the Queen Dowager, and such of
the Peers of this Kingdom, both Spiritual and Temporal, as were in Town: And
also the Lord Mayor and Aldermen of the City of London, The Judges, and several
of Their Majesty's Council, Learned, hereafter named.

The King's most Excellent Majesty. Her Majesty the Queen Dowager, in a Chair
placed on the King's Right Hand. His R. H. Prince George of Denmark, Lord
Chancellor, Lord President, Lord Privy Seal, Duke of Hamilton, Lord
Chamberlain, Earl of Oxford, Earl of Hmntingdon, Earl of Peterborow, Earl of
Craven, Earl of Berkeley, Earl of Rochester, Earl of Murray, Lord A. B of
Canterbury, Duke of Norfolk, Duke of Grafton, Duke of Ormond, Duke of
Northumberland, Marquess of Haliyfax, Earl of Pembroke, Earl of Salisbury, Earl
of Clarendon, Earl of Cardigan, Earl of Ailesbury, Earl of Burlington, Earl of
Litchfield, Earl of Feversham, Earl of Nottingham, Earl of Middleton, Earl of
Melfort, Earl of Castlemain, Viscount Preston, Lord Bellasyse, Lord Godolphin,
Lord Dover, Mr. Chancellor of the Exchequer, Master of the Rolls, L. Chapter
Justice Herbert, Sir Thomas Strickland, Sir Nicolas Butler, Mr. Titus, Viscount
Newport, Viscount Weymouth, Bishop of London, Bishop of Winchester, Bishop of R
chester, Bishop of Chester, Bishop of St. David's, Lord North, Lord Chandois,
Lord Montague, Lord Herbert of Cherbury, Lord Vaughan Earl of Carberry, Lord
Colepepper, Lord Churchill, Lord Waldgrave,
The Lord Mayor and Aldermen of the City of London.
Sir Robert Wright, Lord Chief Justice of the King's Bench. Sir Thomas Powel,
Justices of the King's Bench. Sir Robert Baldock, Justices of the King's Bench.
Sir Thomas Street, Justices of the Common Pleas. Sir Edward Lutwich, Justices
of the Common Pleas. Sir Thomas Jennor, Justices of the Common Pleas. Sir
Richard Heath, Barons of the Exchequer. Sir Charles Ingleby, Barons of the
Exchequer. Sir John Rotheram, Barons of the Exchequer. Sir John Maynard, His
Majesty's Sergeants at Law. Sir John Holt, His Majesty's Sergeants at Law. Sir
Ambrose Philips, His Majesty's Sergeants at Law. Sir Thomas Powis, His
Majesty's Attorney General. Sir William Williams, His Majesty's
Solicitor-General, Sir James Butler. Mr. North, the Queen's Attorney. Mr.
Montague, the Queen's Solicitor. Sir Charles Porter.
To whom His Majesty spoke to this Effect.
My Lords,
I Have called you together, upon a very extraordinary Occasion; but
extraordinary Diseases must have extraordinary Remedies. The malicious
Endeavors of my Enemies have so poisoned the Minds of some of my Subjects,
That by the Reports I have from all Hands, I I have Reason to believe, That
very many do not think this Son with which God has blessed Me, to be Mine, but
a supposed Child. But I may say, that by particular Providence, scarce any
Prince was ever Born where there were so many Persons present.

I have taken this Time to have the Matter Heard and Examined here, Expecting
that the Prince of Orange, with the first Eastwardly Wind, will Invade this
Kingdom: And as I have often ventured My Life for the Nation before I came to
the Crown, so I think My Self more obliged to do the same, now I am KING; and
do intend to go in Person against him, whereby I may be exposed to Accidents,
and therefore I thought it necessary to have this now done, in Order to satisfy
the Minds of My Subjects, and to prevent this Kingdom's being engaged in Blood
and Confusion after my Death, defiring to do always what may contribute most to
the Ease and Quiet of my Subjects, which I have showed by Securing to them
their Liberty of Conscience, and the Enjoyment of their Properties, which I
will always preserve.

I have desired the Queen Dowager to give Her Self the Trouble to come hither,
to Declare what she knows of the Birth of My Son, and most of the Ladies,
Lords, and other Persons who were present, are ready here to Depose upon Oath
their Knowledge of this Matter.

Whereupon the Queen Dowager was pleased to say,
THat when the King sent for her to the Queen's Labor, she came as soon as she
could, and never stirred from her till she was Delivered of the Prince of Wales.

Catharina R.

And the following Depositions were all taken upon Oath.
Elizabeth Lady Marchioness of Powis Deposes,
THAT about the 29th of December last, the Queen was likely to miscarry;
whereupon she immediately went unto her, and offered Her some effectual
Remedies, which are made Use of on the like Occasion, which the Queen ordered
this Deponent to acquaint the Doctors with. The Day following the Queen Dowager
sent this Deponent to see how the Queen did, who replied, She had a pretty good
Night, and did think she had quickened, but would not be positive till she felt
it again; That after this the Deponent did frequently wait on the Queen in the
Morning, and did see her shift herself several Days, and generally saw the
Milk, and sometimes Wet upon her Smock. That sometime after, this Deponent went
into the Country, and came not up till a few Days before the Queen was brought
to Bed, and from the Time of this Deponent's Return she faw the Queen every Day
till she was brought to Bed, and was in the Room a Quarter of an Hour before,
and at the Time of her Delivery of the Prince by Mrs. Wilks Her Majesty's
Midwife, which this Deponent saw, and immediately went with the Prince, carried
by Mrs. Delabadie into the Queen's little Bedchamber, where she saw Sir Thomas
Witherly, sent for by the Midwife, who gave the Child Three Drops of something
which came into the World with him, which this Deponent saw dome: And this
Deponent does aver, this Prince to be the same Child which was then born, and
that she has never been from him one Day since.

Eliza. Powis.

Anne Countess of Arran Deposes,
THAT she went to the Queen from Whitehall to St. James's as soon as she heard
that Her Majesty was in Labor: When she came, she found the Queen in Bed,
complaining of little Pains, the Lady Sunderland, Lady Roscommon, Mrs. Labadie,
and the Midwife, were on that Side of the Bed where the Queen lay; and this
Deponent, with a great many others, stood on the other Side all the Time while
the Queen was delivered: As soon as Her Majesty was delivered, she said, O
Lord, I don't hear the Child cry; and immediately upon that, this Deponent did
hear it cry, and saw the Midwife take the Child out of the Bed, and give it to
Mrs. Labadie, who carried it into the little Bedchamber, where she, this
Deponent, followed her, and saw that it was a Son, and that likewise she, the
Deponent, has several Times seen Milk run out upon the Queen's Smock during
her being with Child.

A. Arran.

Penelope Countess of Peterborow Deposes.
THAT she was often with the Queen, while Her Majesty was last with Child, and
saw the Milk often upon Her Majesty's Smock, when she, the Deponent, took it
off from the Queen, and often saw Her Majesty's Belly, so as it could not be
otherwise, but that she was with Child. That the said Deponent stood by the
Bedside on the Tenth of June last in the Morning, while the Queen was
delivered of the Prince of Wales.

P. Peterborow.

Anne Countess of Sunderland, Deposes,
THAT June the Tenth 1688, being Trinity Sunday, the Deponent went to St.
James's Chapel at Eight of the Clock in the Morning, intending to receive the
Sacrament; but in the Beginning of the Communion Service, the Man who looks to
the Chapel came to the Deponent, and told her, she must come to the Queen, the
Deponent said, She would as soon as Prayers were done. In a very little Time
after, another Man came up to the Altar to the Deponent, and said, The Queen
was in Labor, and the Deponent must come to Her Majesty, who then went
directly to the Queens Bedchamber. As soon as the Deponent came in, Her
Majesty told her, this Deponent, she believed she was in Labor. By this Time
the Bed was warmed, and the Queen went into Bed, and the King came in. The
Queen asked the King, if he had sent for the Queen Dowager, he said he had sent
for every Body. The said Deponent stood at the Queen's Bolster, the Lady
Roscommon, Mrs. Delabadie, and the Midwife, on that Side of the Bed where the
Queen was delivered. After some lingering Pains, the Queen said, She feared she
should not be brought to Bed a good while; but enquiring of the Midwife, she
assured Her Majesty, That she wanted only one through Pain to bring the Child
into the World; upon which the Queen said, It is impossible, the Child lies so
high, and commanded this Deponent to lay her Hand on Her Majesty's Belly, to
feel how high the Child lay, which the Deponent did; but soon after a great
Pain came on at past Nine of the Clock, and the Queen was delivered, which the
Midwife by pulling the Deponent by the Coat, assured her was a Son, it being
the Sign, she told the Deponent she would give her, the Queen having charged
her not to let Her Majesty know presently, whether it was Son or Daughter. As
soon as the Midwife had given the Deponent the Sign, the Deponent made a Sign
to the King that it was a Son. When the Midwife had done her Office, she gave
the Child to Mrs. Delabadie, which was a Son, and she carried it into the
little Bedchamber.

A. Sunderland.

Isabella Countess of Roscommon, Deposes,
THAT on the Tenth of June last, she stood by the Lady Sunderland in the
Queen's Bedchamber, while the Queen was in Labor, and saw the Prince of
Wales, when he was taken out of the Bed by the Midwife.

I. Roscommon

Margaret Countess of Fingal, Deposes,
THAT she waited on the Queen Dowager her Mistress into the Queen's
Bedchamber, at St. James's, when the Queen was in Labor, and stood by the
Bed's Feet, when Her Majesty was delivered of the Prince. That the Deponent saw
the Prince carried away into another Room, and soon after followed, and saw him
in that Room.

Marg. Fingall.

Lady Sophia Bulkely, Deposes,
THAT she was sent for on Trinity Sunday last past, about Eight a Clock in the
Morning to go to St. James's; for the Man that came said, the Queen was in
Labor, and he, and others were sent to call every Body. That this Deponent
made as much haste as she could to rise and be dressed, but did not get to the
Queen's Bedchamber, until a little after Nine a Clock, and then this Deponent
found the Queen in her Bed, and the Queen Dowager there set upon a Stool, and
some of the Ladies about her. After this Deponent having staid a little while,
and thinking the Queen in no strong Pain, she, this Deponent, went out, and,
being next to the Room where the Queen's Linen was a Warming, heard a Noise,
and looked to see what was the Matter, and finding no Body there, this Deponent
ran and found the Lord Feversham in the Queen's little Bedchamber, who told
this Deponent the Child was just born; this Deponent ask't him, What is it? His
Lordship said he could not tell, so this Deponent ran on to the Queen's
Bedside, and heard the Queen say to the Midwife, Pray, Mrs Wilks, don't part
the Child (which signifies, don't cut the Navel-string, until the Afterbirth
is come away) And while the Queen was with Child, this Deponent has heard Her
Majesty command her Midwife not to do otherwise, it being counted much the
safest way; but to what the Queen said just then (to the best of this
Deponent's Remembrance) Mrs. Wilks replied, Pray Madam give me leave, for I
will do nothing, but what will be safe for Your Self and Child. The Queen
answered, Do then, and then cried, Where is the King gone; His Majesty came
immediately from the other Side of the Bed (from just having a Sight of the
Child) and answered the Queen, Here I am; the Queen said, why do ye leave me
now? The King kneeled on the Bed, on that side where the Deponent stood, and a
little after the Midwife said, All is now come safe away: Upon that the King
rose from the Bed and said, Pray, my Lords come and see the Child: The King
followed Mrs. Delabadie, and the Lords His Majesty, into the little
Bedchamber, where this Deponent followed also, and saw as well as they, That
it was a Prince, and that Mrs. Wilks was in the right to desire to part the
Child, for the Princes Face especially his Forehead was blackish being stunned,
as I have seen some other Children, when they have been just newly come into
the World; but God be thanked, in two Hours time that he was dressed and washed,
(which the Deponent staid by and saw done) the Prince looked very fresh and
well. This Deponent does further add, That all the while, the Queen was with
Child, this Deponent had the Honor to pay her Duty very often Mornings and
Nights, in waiting upon her Majesty in her Dressing Room and Bedchamber; and
for the last three or four Months, this Deponent has oftentimes seen the
Queen's Milk, as well as when this Deponent has had the Honor to put on her
Majesty's Smock.

S. Bulkeley.

Susanna Lady Bellasyse Deposes.
THAT on Trinity Sunday the 10th of June last, the Deponent's Servant seeing
the Queen Dowagers Coaches in St. James' at an unusual Hour, went and asked the
Occasion, and was told, the Queen was in Labor; whereupon he came into the
Deponent's Chamber, and awaked her; That the Queen having come to lodge at St.
James's but the Night before, they being in a great Hurry, forgot to call the
Deponent as her Majesty had ordered, That the Deponent made all the Haste she
codid into her Majesty's Bedchamber, and found the Queen in Bed, and Mrs.
Wilks her Majesty's Midwife, sitting by the Bedside, with her Hands in the
Queen's Bed: The Queen asked her, the said Midwife, what she thought, Mrs.
Wilks assured her Majesty, That at the next great Pain the Child would be born:
Whereupon the King ordered the Privy Counselors to be called in, That this
Deponent stood behind the Midwife's Chair, and immmediately after the Queen's
having another great Pain, the Prince was born, That this Deponent saw the
Child taken out of the Bed with the Navel-string hanging to its Belly, That
this Deponent opened the Receiver, and saw that it was a Son, and not hearing
the Child cry, and seeing it a little black, she was afraid it was in a
convulsion Fit.

S. Bellasyse.

Henrietta Lady Waldegrave Deposes,
THAT she was in the Queen's Bedchamber a quarter of an Hour before her
majesty was delivered, and standing by the Bedside she saw the Queen in Labor,
and heard her cry out very much.

Henrietta Wentworth.

Mrs. Mary Crane, one of the Gentlewomen of the Bedchamber to the Queen
Dowager, Deposes,
THAT she went with the Queen Dowager to the Queen's Labor on the 10th of June
last, and never stirred out of the Room till the Queen was delivered.

That this Deponent did not follow the Child, when it was first carried out of
the Room, but staid in the Bedchamber, and saw all that was to be seen after
the Birth of a Child, That she, the Deponent, then went to see the Prince, and
found him look ill, and immediately went to the King, and told his Majesty she
feared the Child was sick, That his Majesty went immediately to the Prince, and
came back and said it was a Mistake, the Child was very well.

Mary Crane.

Dame Isabella Wentworth, one of the Gentlewomen of the Bed-chansber to the
Queen, Deposes.
THAT she often saw the Milk of her Majesty's Breast upon her Smock, at which
the Queen was troubled, it being common Saying, that the Child would not live.
And that she, the Deponent, did once feet the Child stir in the Queen's Belly
while her Majesty was in Bed, and that she was present when the Child was born,
and stard till she heard it cry, and then went to fetch Vinegar for the Queen
to smell to; she, the Deponent, heard the Queea command the Midwife not to tell
her of what Sex it was, for fear of surprising her Majesty: When the Deponent
brought the Vinegar, she did desire to see the Child, Mrs. Delabadie having it
in her Arms. The Child looked black, whereupon the Deponent desired Doctor
Waldegrave to look to it, believing it was not well: That the Deponent saw the
Navel-string of the Child cut, and three Drops of the Blood, which came fresh
out, given to him for the convulsion Fits.

Isabella Wentworh.

Dame Kathatind Sayer, one of the Gentlewomen of the Bedchamber to the Queen
Dowager, Deposes,
THAT she waited on the Queen Dowager to the Queen's Labor, and was all the
Time by the Bedside, and stood there, till the Queen was delivered, and
followed the Child, when it was carried by Mrs. Delabadie to the little
Bedchamber, and took a warm Napkin and laid it on the child's Breast,
believing the Child was not well,

Katharine Sayer.

Dame Isabella Waldegrave, one of the Gentlewomen of the Bedchamber to the
Queen, Deposes,
THAT she was constantly with the Queen, when her Majesty was likely to
miscarry, and bad often seen Milk on her majesty's Breasts, and was with the
Queen at the Time of her Labor with the Prince and saw the Prince taken out of
the Bed, and went after Mrs. Delabadie with the Prince in her Arms into the
little Bed chamber, and was by when the Child was shown to the King that it was
a Son; and this Deponent took the After burden, and put it into a Basin of
Water, and carried it into the Queen's Closet.

Isabella Waldegrave.

Mrs. Margaret Dawson, one of the Gentlewomen of the Bedchamber to the Queen,
Deposes.
THAT on the 10th of June last, in the Morning, she was sent for by the Queen
out of St. James's Chapel, where she was at Prayers, and that coming up into
the Queen's Chamber, she found her sitting all alone upon a Stool by the
Beds-head, when the Queen said to her, this Deponent, she believed herself in
Labor, and bid her the Deponent, get the Iallate-bed, which stood in the next
Room, to be made ready quickly for her; but that Bed having never been aired,
the Deponent persuaded the Quen not to make use of it: After which the Queen
bid the Deponent make ready the Bed she came out of, which was done
accordingly. The Deponent further says, That she saw Fire carried into the
Queen's Room in a warming Pan to warm the Bed, after which the Queen went into
her bed, and that the Deponent stirred not from the Queen until her Majesty
was delivered of a Son. That she, this Deponent, well remembers, That on the
29th of December last, her Majesty was afraid of Miscarrying, which was about
the Time she quickened; and that after the Queen had gone 22 Weeks with Child,
her Majesty's Milk began to run, which she the Deponent often saw upon her
Smock, and that the 9th of May her Majesty apprehended Miscarrying again with a
Fright.

Margaret Dawson.

Mrs. Elizabeth Bromley, one of the Gentlewomen of the Bedchamber to the
Queen, Deposes,
THAT she was sick all Winter till a little before Easter laft, when she the
Deponent came into waiting: That from that Time till the Queen was brought to
bed, she the Deponent saw the Queen put on her Smock every Morning; by which
means she saw the Milk constantly fall out of her Majesty's Breasts, and
observed the Bigness of her Majesty's Belly, which could not be counterfeit:
That the Deponent came from Whitehall to the Queen's Labor to St. James's the
10 of June last, and remained in the Room till the Queen was Delivered and
afterward; but did not follow the Child till some time after, when she the De
pone went to see what colored Eyes he had.

Elizabeth Bromley.

Mrs. Pelegrina Turini, one of the Gentlewomen of the Bedchamber to the Queen,
Deposes,
THAT she constantly attended the Queen when she was last with child, and that
on the Tenth of June last she was in waiting on her Majesty, who called her on
the said Tenth of June in the Morning, and told her the Deponent she was in
Pain, and bid her send for the Midwife, her Ladies and Servants; after which
she the Deponent stayed with the Queen during her Labor, and until she was
Delivered of the Prince of Wales.

The Mark of Pelegrina [X] Turini.

Mrs. Anna Carey, One of the Gentlewomen of the Bedchamber to the Queen
Dowager, Deposes,
THAT she waited on the Queen Dowager from Somerset House to St. James's the
Day the Queen was brought to bed, and went into the Queen's Bedchamber, where
she this Deponent stayed till the Queen was Delivered, and saw the Prince asson
as he was born.

Anna Carey.

Mrs. Mary Anne Delabadie, Dry Nurse to the Prince, Deposes,
THAT she was with the Queen all the Time her Majesty was with child, and
dressed her every Day, and in all the nine Months, did not miss above six Days,
and that at several times by reason of Sickness.

That on Sunday-morning the Tenth of June last, she the Deponent was sent for
to the Queen, who was in Labor: That the Deponent came presently, and was with
the Queen all the Time of her Labor; and that kneeling down by the Midwife,
giving her Clothes for the Queen, the Midwife told this Deponent, that
immediately on the next Pain the Queen would be Delivered, which accordingly
she was. That this Deponent whispered to the Midwife, asking whether it was a
Girl; she answered, No. Whereupon the Midwife parted the Child, and put it into
the Recevoir that the Deponent had given her, and then delivered the Child to
the Deponent, and bid her go and carry it to the Fire, and take care of the
Navel; which this Deponent did, and the King and Council followed her: And the
King asked this Deponent what it was, who answered, what he desired; the King
replied, but let me see, whereupon the Deponent presently showed his Majesty
that it was a Son, and the Privy Counselors then present saw it one after
another, whereupon the Deponent sat with the Prince in her Lap, till the
Midwife had done with the Queen, then the Midwife came and took the Prince from
this Deponent, and asked for a Spoon, for to give it Three Drops of the Blood
of the Navel-string, which the Midwife cut off by the Advice of the Physicians,
who said, it was good against Fits, that the Deponent held the Spoon when the
Midwife dropped the Blood into it, and stirred it with a little black Cherry
Water, and then it was given to the Prince; that the Care of Him, in Quality of
dry Nurse, which she has hitherto done. And further Deposes, it to be the same
Child that was Born of the Queen. And that Mrs. Danvers, one of the Princess of
Denmark's Women, and formerly Nurse to the Lady Isabella, coming to see the
Prince, she told this Deponent, she was glad to see the same Marks upon his
Eye, as the Queen's former Children had.

Mary Anne Delabadie.

Ms. Judith Wilks Deposes,
THAT being the Queen's Midwife, she came often to her, especiallys when Her
Majesty was in any Danger of Miscarrying, and many Times felt the Child stir in
her Belly, and saw the Milk run out of Her Majesty's Breasts, that on Trinity
Sunday last, in the Morning, about Eight of the Clock, the Queen sent Mr.
White, Page of the Backstairs. to call her this Deponent, believing herself in
Labor, when the Deponent came, she found the Queen in great Pain and
Trembling; the Queen told her she feared it was her Labor, it being near the
Time of her first Reckoning, she the Deponent desired Her Majesty not to be
afraid, saying, She did not doubt that it was her full Time, and hoped Her
Majesty would have as good Labor as she always had; and whilst Her Majesty was
sitting Trembling, her Water broke, and immediately she sent for the King, he
being gone to his own Side, and let him know in what Condition she was, and
desired him to send for whom he pleased to be present. The Queen ordered this
Depondent to send for Mrs. Dawson, and the rest of her Women; Mrs. Dawson came
presently, and the Countess of Sunderland with her, and the Rest of the Women
also, that most of them saw her, this Depondent make the Bed fit for the Queen
to be delivered in, which, when it was ready, Her Majesty was put into, and
about Ten a Clock that Morning, the Queen was delivered of the Prince of WALES,
by her this Deponent's Assistance, and afterward, she the Deponent showed the
After-burthen to the Physicians, and before them, the Deponent cut the
Navel-string, and gave the Prince Three Drops of his Blood, to prevent
Convulsion Fits, according to their Order. And this Deponent further says,
That when the Child was born, it not crying, the Queen said, She thought it was
dead, this Deponent assured Her Majesty it was not, and desired leave to part
the Chiid from the After-burthen, which the Queen was unwilling to have done,
thinking it might be dangerous to herself; but the Deponent assuring Her
Majesty it would not, Her Majesty gave Consent, whereupon the Child presently
cried, and then the Deponeut gave it to Ms. Delabadie.

Judith Wilks.

Mrs. Elizabeth Pearse, Landress to the Queen, Deposes,
THAT about Nine a Clock, on the Tenth of June last, in the Morning, she came
into the Bedchamber, and heard the Queen cry out, being in great Pain, in
which she continued until her Delivery; after whieh, she the Deponent saw the
Prince of WALES given by the Midwife to Mrs. Delabadie, that immediately after,
the Deponent saw the Midwife hold up the After-burthen, showing it to the
Company, and then the Deponent fetched her Maids, and with them took away all
the foul Linen, hot as they came from the Queen, that for a Month after Her
Majesty's Lying-in, the Deponent well knows by the Washing of her Linen, that
the Queen was in the same Condition that all other Women use to be on the like
Occasion, and that some Time after her quickening, it appeared by her Smocks,
that Her Majesty had Milk in her Breasts, which continued until she was brought
to Bed, and afterward during the usual Time.

Elizabeth Pearse.

Frances Duchess of Richmond and Lennox, Deposes,
THAT she the Depouent was not at the Queen's Labor, because she did not know
it Time enough, but as soon as she did, she made all the Haste she could to
dress her, but the Queen was delivered before she the Deponent came, and that
at a Time when the Qeen apprehended she should Miscarry, and the Physicians
made Her Majesty keep her Bed for that Reason, the Deponent went one Evening to
wait upon Her Majesty, and as she stood by her Bedside Her Majesty said to
her, My Milk is now very troublesome, it runs out so much, the Deponent asked
the Queen if it used to do so, who answered, It used to run out a little, but
now the Fright I am in of Miscarrying, makes it run out very much, as you may
see, throwing down the Bed-clothes to the Middle of her Stomach, and showing
her Smock upon her Breast to the said Deponent, which was very wet with her
Milk.

F. Richmond and Lennox.

Charlotte Countess of Lichfield Deposes,
THAT she was not at the Queen's Labor, (being in Childbed herself) but that
she was almost constantly with the Queen, while she with Child, and has put on
her Smock, and seen the Milk run out of her Breast, and felt her Belly, so that
she is sure she could not be deceived, but that the Queen was with Child.

C. Litchfield.

Anne Countess of Marischal Deposes,
THAT she was several Times in the Queen's Bedchamber when she shifted
herself, and has seen her Smock stained with her Milk, that she was not at the
Queen's Labor, though sent to by one of her Ladies, being Sick of a Fever, but
does in her Conscience believe Her Majesty was with Child, both by her Belly
and her Milk.

A. Marischal.

George Lord Jeffreys, Lord Chancellor of England Deposes,
THAT he being sent for to St. James's on the Tenth of June last, by a
Messenger that left Word, the Queen was in Labor, soon after he, this Deponent
came to St. James's, and was sent for into the Queen's Bedchamber, and to the
best of his, the Deponent's Apprehension the Queen was in Labor, and had a
Pain or Two to the best of the Deponent's Remembrance, before the rest of the
Lords were called in. The Deponent stood all the Time at the Queen's Bedside,
and heard her cry out several Times as Women in Travel use to do, and at length
after a long Pain, it was by some of the Women on the other Side of the Bed,
said the Child was born. The Deponent heard the Queen say, she did not hear it
cry, the Deponent immediately asked the Lord President what it was, he
whispered that it was a Boy, which the Deponent understood he had hinted to him
by the Lady Sunderland. Immediately the Deponent saw a Gentlewoman, who he has
since heard her Name to be Mrs. Delabadie, carry the Child into another Room,
whither the Deponent followed, and saw the Child when she first opened it, and
saw it was black and reaking; so that it plainly seemed to this Deponent to
have been newly come from the Womb. The Deponent does therefore depose, he does
steadfastly believe the Queen was delivered of that Child that very Morning.

Jeffreys. C.

Robert Earl of Sunderland, Lord President of His Majesty's Privy Council, and
principal Secretary of State Deposes,
THAT on Sunday Morning the Tenth of June last, he was sent to, to come to St.
James's, the Queen being in Labor, the Deponent immediately went, and found
many of the Lords of Council there. After having been some Time in an outward
Room, first the Lord Chancellor, and then the rest of the Council were called
into the Queen's Bedchamber, where in a short Time Her Majesty was brought to
Bed, the Deponent saw Mrs. Delabadie carry the Child into the next Room,
whither the Deponent followed, with many more, and saw it was a Son, and had
the Marks of being new born.

Sunderland P.

Henry Lord Aruudel of Wardour, Lord Privy Seal, deposes,
THAT on the Tenth of June last, being Sunday, he had Notice given him that the
Queen was in Labor, whereupon the Deponent repaired to St. James's betwixt
Nine and Ten of the Clock in the Morning, where he found several Lords of the
Council, in a little Time after, they were all called into the Queen's
Bedchamber, in less than a Quarter of an Hour after she sell into the
Sharpness of her Labor her Cries were so Vehement, and especially the last,
that the Deponent could not forbid himself the being concerned for her great
Pain, which the Deponent expressing to the Lord Chancellor, he told the
Deponent it was a Sign her Majesty would the sooner he delivered, or Words to
that Purpose, which proved very true, for presently after she was so, the
Deponent heard a Whispering up and down that it was a Prince, for no Man was
permitted to speak it aloud, lest the sudden Knowledge of It might have
discomposed the Queen, the Deponent did not go in with some Lords when the
Child was carried into the next Room, which was the Occasion the Deponent did
not see him when he was uncovered and dressed.

Arundel C. P. C.

John Earl of Mulgrave, Lord Chamberlain of His Majest's Household says, it is
not to be expected one of his Sex should be able to give full Evidence in such
a Matter, but deposes,
THAt he was just at the Bed's Feet, and heard the Queen cry very much, then
the Deponent followed the Child into the other Room, and it seemed a little
black, the Deponent also saw it was a Boy.

Mulgrave.

William Earl of Craven deposes
THat he attending the King at St. James's, the Tenth of June last, in the
Morning, to receive the Word of His Majesty the King had Notice brought him,
that the Queen was upon the Point of falling into Labor, upon which the King
commanded this Deponent's Stay and Attendance, and after the Space of one Hour
and something more, this Deponent was with some other Lords of his Majesty's
Privy Council, called into the Queens' great Bedchamber to be present at her
Delivery, and as near as this Deponent can remember, the Queen made three
Groans or Squeeks, and at the last of Three, she was delivered of a Child; the
which was carried out into the little Bedchamber, and there by the Fire this
Deponent saw it cleansing. And this Deponent further says, That he took that
particular Mark of this Child, that he may safely aver, that the Prince of
Wales is that very Child that then was so brought out of the Queen's Great
Bedchamber, where this Deponent and others were present, as aforesaid, at Her
Majesty's Labor and Deliver.

Craven.

Lewis Earl of Feversham, Lord Chamberlain to Her Majesty the Queen Dowager,
Deposes.
THat being in Bed upon the 10th. of June, between 8 and 9 a Clock in the
Morning, Mr. Nicolas, one of His Majesty's Grooms of His Bedchamber, came into
this Deponent's Room, and told him, that the King had sent him to tell the
Queen Dowager, that the Queen was in Labout; and told him further, that the
Queen Dowager had given Order for Her Coach, as soon as she heard the News of
the Queen's Labor. The Deponent dressed himself with all Speed, and came to
wait upon the Queen Dowager, who was ready to go into here Coach, as she did;
the Deponent went into one of her Coaches, to wait upon Her Majesty as he used
to do, having the Honor to be Her Lord Chamberlain: We went to St. James's,
and then led Her Majesty into the Queen's Bedchamber, and finding the Queen in
Pain, the Deponent went into the next Room, where were several Lords of the
Privy Council, from whence the Deponent heard the Queen cry out several Times;
and a very little after, the Lords of the Council were called in, and the
Deponent followed them into the Bedchamber; and a very little after the Queen
cried louder, and then said, Pray do not tell me what it is yet. The Deponent
went out of the Room, to tell the News that the Queen was brought to Bed; and
when the Deponent came in agai, the News was, That it was a Prince; and
immediately the Deponent saw Ms. Delabadie, with the Child wrapped up in her
Hands, and in the Crowd; upon which the Deponent desired to make Room for the
Prince, and followed her into the little Bedchamber, where the Deponent saw
the Prince as a Child newly born, as he believed it.

Feversham.

Alexander Eorl of Murray, Deposes.
THat he came not to St. James's, till Half an Hour after the Queen was brought
to Bed, and only heard, That Her Majesty was brought to Bed of a Prince; which
the Deponent verily believes (as he is alive) She brought into the World that
very Morning, being the 10th. of June last, 1688.

Murray.

Charles Earl of Middleton, one of His Majesty's Principal Secretaries of
State, Deposes.
THat the 10th. of June last past betwixt 8 and 9 of the Clock in the Morning,
he had Notice, That the Queen's Majesty was in Labor; whereupon the Deponent
made what Haste he could to St. James's: The Deponent found the Earl of Craven
waiting at the Queen's Bedchamber Door toward the Drawing Room, which was
then shut: Just after the King opened it, and called the Earl of Craven and the
Deponent in: The Deponent asked His Majesty, How the Queen was? He was pleased
to answer the Deponent, You are a married Man, and so may know these Matters;
The Water is broke or come away, or to that Effect; and then bid the Deponent
go into the Dressing Room within the Bedchamber, where the Deponent found
several Persons of Quality: Above Half an Hour after (to the best of this
Deponent's Memory, all the Company in that Room were called into the
Bedchamber; The Deponent stood near the Bed's Feet, on the Left Side, where he
heard the Queen's Groans, and presently after several loud Skreeks; the last,
the Deponent remembers continued so long, that he then wondered how any Body
could hold their Breath so long: Presently after, the Deponent heard them say
the Queen was delivered; whereupon the Deponent stepped up to the Bedside, and
saw a Woman, he supposes the Midwife, kneeling at the other Side of the Bed,
who had her Hands and Arms within the Bed-clothes for a pretty while; then the
Deponent saw her spread a Cloth upon her Lap, and laid the End of it over the
Bed-clothes, and then fetch a Child (as the Deponent firmly believes, for he
could not then see it) out of the Bed into that Cloth, and give it to Ms.
Delabadie, who brought it round to the Side where the Deponent stood, and
carried it into a little Room, into which the Deponent immediately followed the
King, and saw her sit down by the Fire, and heard her say, It is a Boy; upon
which the King said, let me see it; whereupon she laid open the Cloth, and
showed all the Child, saying, There Is what you wish to see: The Deponent does
not charge his Memory with the very Words, but the Sense of what he heard. The
Deponent looked upon the Child at the same Time, which appeared to be very
foul. This Deponent desires Pardon if he does not know the proper Expression,
but hopes his Meaning is Plain.

Middleton.

John Earl of Melfort, Deposes.
THat on Sunday the 10th. of June last, betwixt 8 and 9 in the Morning, the
Deponent was informed, That the Queen was in Labor; the Deponent went to St.
James's, and waited in the Queen's Drawing Room, till some of the Gentlemen
told him he might go in; the Deponent scratched at the Door of the Bedchamber,
and finding no Answer, he ran down by the Garden Side, and came to the Queen's
Back-Stairs; and finding the Dressing Room Door open, the Deponent went in to
the Queen's Bedchamber, where he saw a great Number of Company, Lords and
Ladies standing about the Bed: The Deponent heard the Queen cry out in great
Pain, as Women use to do when they are near being brought to Bed; the Deponent
heard her complain, and a Woman's Voice, which the Deponent thought to be the
Midwife, telling her she would be quickly well, she would be brought to Bed
immediately; within a little, the Deponent heard the Ladies behind the Bed say
the Queen was brought to Bed, and the Queen cry out, The Child is dead, I do
not hear it cry; and immediately the Child cried: Within a little the Deponent
saw a Woman bring a Child from within the Bed; the Deponent looked so earnestly
at the Child, that he knew not what Woman it was: The Child was in the
Condition of a new born Child, lapt up in loose Clothes: The Deponent saw him
carried into the little Bedchamber, and went about by the Dressing Room, and
entered by the other Door into the Room where the Prince was, and saw him in the
Condition of a New born Child; and the Deponent, by the Oath he has taken,
believes him to be the Queen's Child.

Melfort.

Sidney Lord Godolphin, Lord Chamberlain to the Queen, Deposes,
THat he was called into the Queen's Bedchamber, with the rest of the Lords of
the Council, being one of the last; and the Queen Dowager being there, and
several Ladies, the Room was so full, That the Deponent could not get near the
Bed, but stood by the Chimney; There the Deponent heard the Queen cry out
several Times, as Women use to do that are in Labor; and the last Cry that the
Deponent heard, was much greater than the other: Immediately upon that, the
Deponent was called out of the Room, to give some Directions about the Lodgings
that were preparing for the Child, which were not ready: The Deponent made
Haste back again, but as he was coming, he met People running with the News,
that the Queen was delivered of a Son; whereupon the Deponent went into the
little Bedchamber, and saw the Child.

Godolphin.

Sir Stephen Fox Knight, Deposes.
THat on Sunday the 10th. of June last past, about 9 of the Clock, as he came
out of the Chapel at Whitehall, after the first Sermon, hearing that the Queen
was in Labor, he, the Deponent, made Haste to St. James's, because in waiting,
as an Officer of the green Cloth, to warn the several Servants below Stairs to
be in their Offices, that upon that Occasion there might not happen to be any
Thing wanting of Household Provisions and Necessaries under his, this Deponent's
Command; but first going up by the Back-Stairs into her Majesty's
Dressing Room; and being there with many others, he heard Her Majesty cry out
very loudly; whereupon this Deponent hastened to the Green-Cloth, and ordered the
several Servants to deliver out of their several Offices, whatsoever should be
called for; and as this Deponent was returning back to the Queen's said
Dressing Room, he was told a Prince was born: Upon which News, he, this
Deponent, went into the Queens little Bedchamber, and saw the young Child
before He was dressed.

Ste. Fox.

Lieut. Col. Edward Griffin, Deposes.
THat upon Sunday the 10th. of June last, he had the Honor to be in waiting
upon the King with the Stick, and between 8 and 9 in the Morning, this Deponent
was in the Queen's Dressing Room at St. James's, with several Lords of the
Council; and after some Time we were there, the King came out of the Queen's
Bedchamber, and called all the Lords in, and this Deponent went in along with
them, being in waiting; immediately after the said Lords and this Deponent were
in the Room, the Queen cried out exremely, and said, Oh, I die; you kill me,
you kill me: And the Midwife (as this Deponent believes) answered, This one
Pain, Madam, and 'twill be over; then presently Ms. Dawson made this Deponent
the Sign that the Child was born; then this Deponent heard the Queen say, Don't
tell me what it is yet; and Ms. Dawson came to this Deponent, and whispered him
in the Ear, It Is a Prince, but don't take Notice of it yet. Then Ms. Delabadie
brought away the Child from the Bedside, and carried it into the little
Bedchamber, and the King and the Lords of the Council went after her, but this
Deponent did not follow them.

Edward Griffin.

Sir Charles Scarburgh, First Physician to the King, Deposes,
THAT upon the Deponent's coming to visit her Majesty then lying at St.
James's, on Sunday the 10 of June 1688, as the Deponent went up the
Back-stairs, he heard the joyful Acclamation, that a Prince of Wales wsas born,
upon which the Deponent hastened presently into the little Bedchamber, where
the Deponent found Mrs. Delabadie just sitting down before the Fire, with the
new born Prince wrapped in the Mantles, lying in her Lap. Then passing to the
Queen in the next Bedchamber, the Deponent congratulated the happy Birth of
the Prince, and her Majesty's safe Delivery. The Queen was wearied and panting,
but otherwise in good Condition: Then the Midwife brought to the Deponent the
Afterbirth reeking warm, which Sir Thomas Witherley, with the Deponent,
examined, and found very sound and perfect. After a while, the Deponent
understood, that a Medicine was mentioned among the Ladies for a ceertain
Remedy against Convulsions: It was, some Drops of Blood from the Navel-string;
the Deponent consulted Sir Thomas Witherley and the other Physicians; and to
satisfy the Women, it was allowed of; there being, as was conceived, no Danger
in the Thing. Whereupon, the Midwife, with a small Knife stit the Navel-string
beyond the Ligature, from which came some Drops of fresh Blood, taken in a
Spoon, and given the Child, being mixed with a ittle Black Cherry-Water. Thus
much the Deponent has to say upon her Majesty's present Delivery.

Now for the Time of the Queen's Conception, she often told the Deponent and
others, That she had two Reckonings; one one, from Tuesday the 6th of Sept.
when the King returned from his Progress to the Queen then at Bath, and the
other from Thursday the 6th of October. when the Queen came to the King at
Windsor; but for some Reasons, the Queen rather reckoned from the Latter;
though afterward it proved just to agree with the Former. Moreover, her
Majesty, when, according to her Reckoning, she was gone with Child 12 Weeks,
said that she was quick, and perceived the Child to move; the Deponent returned
no Answer to the Queen, but privately told those about her, That in Truth, it
could not so be in to short a Time; yet the Queen was in the Right, only
mistook her Reckoning; for she was then full 16 Weeks gone with Child; about
which time she usually quickened with her former Children, and accordingly was
brought to bed on the 10th of June, 1688, nd within Three or four Days of full
forty Weeks.

Charles Scarburgh,

Sir Thomas Witherely, Second Physician to the King, Deposes.
THAT on Sunday the 10th of June, the Deponent was present in the Queen's
Bedchamber when the Prince of Wales was born; the Deponent saw Mrs. Delabadie
bring the Child from the Midwife, and carry him into the next Room, whither the
Deponent followed her, and saw the Child before he was cleaned; and having a
Command from the Queen, that there should be two Drops of the Blood of the
Aftere-burthen given the first Thing; We the said Deponent and the other
Physicians did take two drops of Blood from the Navel-string which remained
upon the Child, and gave it in a Spoonful of Black-cherry-water as the Queen
commanded. After this, the Deponent saw (as also did the other Physicians) the
After-burden entire.

Tho. Witherley.

Sir William Waldegrave, Knight. her Majesty's first Physician, Deposes.
THAT in the Progress of her Majesty's being with Child, the Deponent having
the Honor to wait upon her as usual; upon the 13th of February 1688, about 10
in the Morning, she told the Deponent, she had Milk in her Breasts, which dropped
out; it was then thought the 19th Week according to one Reckoning, but
according to another Reckoning, it was the One or two and twentieth Week: The
Deponent also affirms, That her Majesty took such adstringent Medicines,
during the most part of her being with Child, in order to avoid Miscarriage,
that if she had not been with Child, they must have been prejudicial to her
Health, and of dangetous consequence. Upon the 10th of June 1688, the Deponent
was called at his Lodging in Whitchall, to wait upon the Queen, being told, she
was in Labor, upon which, the Deponent immediately went to St. James's, and so
into the Queen's Bedchamber, and found her beginning her Labor, it being
about eight of the Clock in the Morning; the Deponent stirred not from thence,
but to get such Medicines as were fit for her Majesty, and then returned again,
and was in the Bedchamber when she cried out, and was delivered, The Deponent
followed Mrs. Delabadie, who took the Prince in her Arms so soon as he was
born, and carried him into the little Bedchamber, where the Deponent saw him
upon her Lap, and was by when he took two or three Drops of the Navel-string
fresh warm Blood, which was mixed with Black-cherry-water, then returned into
the great Bedchamber, where the Deponent saw the After-burthen fresh and warm.

William Waldegrave.

Dr. Robert Brady, one of His Majesty's Physicians in Ordinary, Deposes.
THAT a little before 10 of the Clock, in the Morning, on the 10th of June,
1688, the Deponent was in the Queen's little Bedchamber at St. James's, where
the Deponent saw the Prince of Wales in Mrs. Delabadie's Lap by the Fireside;
the Deponent desired to see the Linen and Blankets opened, in which he was
wrapped; which being done, the Deponent saw it was a Male Child, and the
Navel-string hanging down to, or below the virile Parts, with a Ligature upon
it, not far from the Body, but did not see any After-burden hanging at, or
joined to it, not being at the Birth: The Deponent asked how long he had been
born, the Standers-by told him, at three quarters of an Hour after Nine of the
Clock, the Queen was delivered.

Robeert Brady.

James St. Amand, their Majesty's Apothecary, Deposes,
THAT from the Beginning of November last, he has generally every Day, till
the 9th of June 1688, given by the Physicians Orders, restringent and
corroborating Medicines to the Queen's Majesty, That on the 10th of Juae he was
sent for in haste to come to St. James's to her Majesty, who, the Messenger
told him, was in Labor, That the Deponent then received a Note from the
Physicians for Medicines for her Majesty, which the Deponent was obliged to
stay and prepare, and so came not to St. James's till the Queen was delivered;
the Deponent meeting, just as he was going into the Bedchamber, Mrs. Delabadie
with the young Prince in her Arms, the King, and several of the Lords, soon
afteer following into the little Bedchamber, where the Deponent saw the Child
naked, before it was cleansed from the Impurities of the Birth; and also saw
the Navel-string cut and some Drops of fresh Blood received into a Spoon, which
she mingled with a little Black cherry water, and saw them given by the
Physicians Orders to the Child; and afterward going into the great
Bedchamber, where the Queen was delivered, he saw the After-burthen, etc.
fresh.

Ja. St. Amand.

After these Depositions were taken, His Majesty was pleased to acquaint the
Lords, That the Princess Anne of Denmark would have been present, but that she
being with Child, and having not lately stirred abroad, could not come so far
without Hazard: Adding further,
AND now, My Lords, although I did not question but every Person here present
was satisfied before in this Matter: Yet by what you have heard, you will be
better able to satisfy others. Besides, if I and the Queen could be thought so
wicked as to endeavor to impose a Child upon the Nation, you see how
impossible it would have been; neither could I my Self be imposed upon, having
constantly been with the Queen during her being with Child, and the whole time
of her Labor. And there is none of you but will easily believe Me, who have
suffered so much for Conscience sake, incapable of so great a Villainy, to the
prejudice of my own Children. And I thank God, that those that know Me, know
well that it is My Principle to do as I would be done by, for that is the Law
and the Prophets: And I would rather die a thousand Deaths, than do the least
Wrong to any of my Children.

His Majesty further said,
IF any of My Lords think it necessary the Queen should be sent for, it shall
be done. But their Lordships not thinking it necessary, Her Majesty was not
sent for.

IT IS Ordered this Day by His Majesty in Council, That the several Declarations
here before made by his Majesty, and by her Majesty the Queen Dowager, together
with the several Depositions here entered, be forthwith Enrolled in the Court of
Chancery. And the Lord Chancellor is Ordered to cause the same to be Enrolled
accordingly. IN Pursuance of which Order in Council, the Lord Chancellor on
Saturday the 27th Day of October following, in the High Court of Chancery (many
of the Nobility and Lords of His Majesty's most Honorable Privy Council being
there present) caused the aforesaid Order of Council and Declaration of His
Majesty, and likewise that of Her Majesty the Queen Dowager, to be openly and
distinctly Read in Court, and the same are Entered in the Words aforesaid, in
the Council Book. And the Lords and Ladies, and other Persons who made the
respective Depositions aforesaid, being present in Court, were Sworn again; and
having heard their several Depositions distinctly Read in the Words aforesaid,
and being severally Interrogated by the Court to the Truth thereof, they all
upon their Oaths affirmed their respective Depositions to be true: And did
likewise Depose, (except some few who came in late to the Council Chamber, or
some who stood at too great a Distance) That they heard His Majesty, and her
Majesty the Queen Dowager, make the several Declarations aforesaid, and that
the same, as they had been Read, were truly Entered, as they did believe, in the
Council Book, according to the Sense, Intent and Meaning of what His Majesty
the King, and Her Majesty the Queen Dowager did then declare. And forasmuch as
the Earl of Huntingdon and the Earl of Peterburrow, who were able to Depose to
the Matters aforesaid, had not been examined at the Council Board, but had
brought their several Depositions in Writing, which they delivered into Court;
the said Lord Chancellor, after the said Earls were severally Sworn, Ordered
their Depositions to be openly Read in the Words following.

UPON Trinity Sunday, Tenth of June 1688, I went to St. James's House about
Nine a-clock in the Morning, and followed my Lord Chancellor through the
Lodgings to the Dressing Room, next to the Queen's Bedchamber, where diverse
Lords of the Council were met, upon occasion of the Queen's being in Labor;
the King came several times into the Room, and amongst other things was pleased
to tell us, that the Queen came exactly according to her first Reckoning, which
was from the King's Return from his Progress to Bath, in September 1687 After
this the Counselors were ordered to come into the Bedchamber, and I stood on
that Side of the Bed that had the Curtains drawn open: I heard Her Majesty cry
out several times, I stayed in the Room during the Birth of the Prince of
Wales, I saw him carried in to the Little Bedchamber, whither the King, the
Lords, and my self in particular, did follow him.

Huntingdon.

I Had the Honor to be in the King's Chamber in the Morning, when Word was
brought him the Queen was not well, and followed him into the Dressing Room
next Her Majesty's Bedchamber, where I stayed till his Majesty called me to
come in, which was about the Beginning of her Pains. I confess, the Compassion
I had for her Majesty, hearing her Cries, made my Stay there very uneasy; one
of the last especially seemed to me so sharp, as it really forced me for a
little Time to stop my Ears with my Fingers, to avoid hearing more of the like;
when setting them at liberty, I heard no more, but perceived a sudden
Satisfaction in the Faces of the Assistants, several saying that the Queen was
Delivered; and soon thereupon I saw the Prince brought from about the Bed, and
carried into the Little Bedchamber, whither I went afterward, to behold him
more particularly, where I saw him as a Child newly Born.

Peterburrow.

AFter which the said Earls did severally, upon their Oaths, affirm their
Depositions to be true, as they had been Read, and that they were present in
Council, and heard His Majesty and Her Majesty the Queen Dowager make the
several Declarations aforesaid, and that the same were Entered in the Council
Book, as they did believe, according to the Effect, true Sense and Meaning of
what their Majesty's declared in Council: Whereupon his Majesty's Attorney
General moved the Court, that the said Declarations of His Majesty and of Her
Majesty, the Queen Dowager, and the several Depositions, and the Order of
Council should be Enrolled in the Petty-bag-office, and in the Office of
Enrolments in the Court of Chancery, for the safe Preservation and Custody of
them, which the Lord Chancellor Ordered accordingly.

EDINBURGH, The Ninth Day of November, 1688 Years. Present in Council.
The Earl of Perth, Lord H. Chancellor. The Lord Archbishop of St. Andrew's.
The Lord Archbishop of Glasgow. The Marq. of Athol. Lord Privy Seal. The Lord
Duke of Gordon. The Earl of Errol. The Earl of Cassils. The Earl of Linlithgow,
L. Justice General. The Earl of Dumferline. The Earl of Strathmore. The Earl of
Lauderdale. The Earl of Traquaire. The Earl of Belcarras. The Earl of
Broadalbine. The Lord Vis. Tarbat. The Lord Strathnaver. The Lord Maitland. The
Lord Duffus. The Lord Kinaird. The M. of Balmerinoch. The Lord P. of S. The
Lord Advocat. The Lord J. Clerk. The Lord Castlehill. The Lord Lochore. Sir
George Monro. The Lord of Nidry.

The proceeding Depositions concerning the Birth of HIs Royal Highness JAMES
Prince of Scotland and Wales, being transmitted to His Majesty's Privy Council
of this Kingdom by the Secretaries of State; and being solemnly read in
Council, were ordered to be forthwith printed and published. Extracted forth of
the Records of Privy Council, by me WILL. PATERSON, Cls. Sti. Concilii.


