THE LOVES OF SUNDRY PHILOSOPHERS And other Great Men.

Translated out of French.

SAVOY: Printed by T. N. for Henry Herringman at the Blew Anchor in the Lower
Walk of the New Exchange, and John Starkey at the Miter within Temple Bar. 1673.

THE LOVES OF Great Men. SOLON.
LOve is a close and cunning Insinuator, and finds such hidden and secret ways
of attempt, that no Wisdom or Austerity can be so secure; but whatever Maxims
fortify a Heart, there will till remain some weak and defenseless approaches,
at which, he will force an entrance.

Solon, that famous Athenian, the most renowned of the Seven Wisemen, and the
Lawgiver of his Country, in vain sought amongst his Laborious Employs, a
Sanctuary against Love: His continual cares for the Glory of Athens, his
Commands in War, and his Studies in Peace, could not protect him from the
assaults of this Passion. He derived his Pedigree from Codrus, one of the First
Kings of Attica: The endowments of his Mind, corresponded well with so
illustrious a descent, but Fortune contributed not to the support of its
splendour.

Euphorion, Father to this Hero, had been so bountiful of his goods, where he
observed them wanting, that he had scarce left sufficient for himself. Solon
who would have used the same liberality, had he been in his Fathers place,
would not now permit indigency to defraud him of the practice of it; he made
his Industry his Exchequer, and seeking among strangers what he could no longer
find at home, was so happy in his Voyages, and his Undertakings were all so
successful, that he returned to Athens with a greater Revenue then his Father
had consumed. Whatever Philosophers may think fit to tell us, Riches are the
main Pillars and Arches of Credit and Authority. Solon was scarce taken notice
of whilst Fortune seemed to frown; he was raised to the highest charges in the
Commonwealth, as soon as she began to smile. There was now an obstinate War
between the Athenians, and the People of Megara, about the Island Salamina,
both Cities pretended its dependence on them; the Athenians founded their right
on Tradition; Philaeus and Eurisaces, Sons of Ajax, being made Citizens of
Athens, had given the Island of Salamina to that Commonwealth, in token of
their acknowledgments. The Megarians were powerful in Men and Money: Power is
often a valuable title, and Salamina inclined to them. The Athenians feared
them, and believing it sweeter to live voluptuously within their Walls, then to
extend their Dominions at the expense of their Peace and Pleasure, required
that Salamina should be left to the Megarians. Pisistratus, one of the richest
Men amongst them, encouraged them in this resolution; he aspired to the
Sovereign Authority, and judged it would be easier to reduce to obedience,
People softened by Pleasures and Idleness, then Men grown warlike, and
accustomed to fights.

This Pisistratus had many great Talents to make himself be beloved, He was
young, handsome, and of a sweet and flattering Spirit. Plutarch affirms, he
wanted no recommendable quality, but that he could not confine himself to the
condition of a private Citizen. The young men and populacy, supported all his
designs; but Solon was supported by a power that never found any thing could
resist it: He had in his Travels sojourned some time in Salamina, and there
fell in love with Orgina, the Daughter of Amphicles, who then governed that
Island; but there was a clause in the Laws of Dracon the first Lawgiver among
the Athenians, forbidding any descended from the Royal Stock, to ally
themselves with any other but Athenians, or, at least, People reputed to belong
to Attica. Salamina must then be made one of the Members of Athens, to
Authorize the Love of Solon. He summons all his credit to the relief of his
Love, and if the faction of Pisistratus was more numerous, Solons had the more
Authority. It was concluded, Salamina should be reduced, and Solon was made
General in the expedition. He was happy in his Success, as to the concern of
his glory.

The Island was subdued, the Megarians who endeavored to defend it, cut in
pieces; but Orgina, the Charming Orgina, for whom the War was undertaken, could
not be found in the surrendered City; her Father had conveyed her thence some
days before he stood affected to the Megarians party, of which he had given too
evident proofs. He feared the resentment of the Conquerors, and not judging his
Strengths able to secure him by resistance, he had by the favor of a disguise,
stole out of Salamina, with no greater a train then his Daughter, and a young
Slave he loved.

All Solons Philosophy was now put to the test, to support him in this
accident, it made him seem unsensible of the Honors of his Victory, and his
secret Melancholy passing for Moderation; so charmed the Athenians, that they
offered him the title of King; they told him, That the Glory to obey so great a
Man, was preferrable to the Liberty they enjoyed. Solon accepted not their
offer, for besides that, he too well loved his Country to see it inslaved, he
could not live without Orgina; he saw not glories enough in a Crown to fix his
thoughts, whilst she was not there; and knowing likewise, how barren the
allurements of greatness are, he made that Oration so memorable to Posterity,
wherein, after having by a thousand thanks testified his acknowledgments to the
People of Athens for their good will, he made it evident he should declare
himself unworthy of the offer, if he should accept of the effect.

I Cannot suffer (said he) an Appeal from the decrees of Nature, she is wiser
then we; she brought me into the World, since you had shook off the yoke of
Dominion; had she thought me fit to be your King, she would have produced me in
a time when that title was in my Family, or have deduced that title to my
Father. What ever Libertines may say or practice, there is I know not what
incomprehensible intelligence that governs the World, and disposes every one in
the sphere proper for him, in which, he that has sound sense should content
himself. I am satisfied with the condition in which I am born, and shall
endeavor to die in it: For when the pomp and luster of Supreme Dignity solicit
my Ambition, do I not muster up all those Glories in refusing them: I am above
the highest degree, whilst it is submitted to my choice; and I have all the
Rights of Authority, whilst I am assured of your Obedience. The Submissions of
the People consist more in their Will, then Actions; whilst you will obey me,
and I need only command, I have all the advantages of Power, and only spare
my self the disgusts, and troubles of it.

This Magnanimity of Solon gained him an Authority among the Athenians, not at
all inferior to the title he had refused, they obeyed his Orders like the voice
of an Oracle. Pisistratus beheld his glory with envy, and as obstructive to his
ambitious designs; but it being a principal Policy of his to win the Athenians
by applause, he was one of the first to give Solon joy for the greatness of his
actions; he exhibited shows to the People as a token of his congratulation, and
made a magnificent Feast, where he exposed to view all his riches; a vanity
usual among the Ancients, and which made up an essential part of the Treat.
There was to be seen at this of Pisistratus, Vessels of Gold of an excessive
weight, very rich movables, and Stones of great price; among which, Solon
observed a Carbuncle of singular Beauty, which he knew to be the same he had
given to Orgina at his departure from Salamina. The sight of it moved him to
the Soul, he asked Pisistratus where he got that Carbuncle; Pisistratus smiled,
and replied, It was a Mystery he could not explain before so many Witnesses.
This answer troubled Solon so much, that he could scarce dissemble it, he was
impatient till the company were gone, that he might clear himself of the
perplexities of his mind, and pretending some private business to stay with
Pisistratus, he asked him, If he were one of those Witnesses, whom he thought
unfit to hear the explanation of his mystery. You of all the World, replied
Pisistratus; the mystery, in which I am concerned, is a Mystery of Love; Judge
then, Whether it ought to be trusted to a conformed Philosopher whose Soul
stands like a Rock against all the storms of Passion, and who is continually
Preaching its impossibility. I am none of those Philosophers you speak of, said
Solon, interrupting him, I reverence Wisdom, and would be truly wise, if I
could; but this Wisdom consists not in a brutish fierceness: Those who describe
her so, never knew her well; she was made for Man, and should be a sociable
Virtue. How? replied Pisistratus, If I tell you, that I am in love, and that
this Carbuncle is given as a token of my Mistresses kindness; will not my
Passion seem a weakness to you, or can you pardon my amor? It is possible,
replied Solon, whom this discourse troubled more and more, I may; there are
crimes carry their excuses with them. Love is indeed of it self a great
extravagance, but there may be a Mistress so perfect, that that Love may become
an effect of Reason. Pisistratus had no love for Solon, and believed him as
severe as he seemed to be; but it is hard for any lover to resist the occasion
of speaking of what they love; and he was so extremely delighted with the
thoughts, that so famed a Wiseman approved his Passion, that he could not
forbear crying out, Then a thousand thanks to love, that has made me become
the most reasonable of all Men; for never was there Woman so perfect as Orgina,
nor ever was the effect of that Reason made me love her; so powerful in any
Breast as in mine. That name of Orgina put all the Philosophy of Solon to a
stand. Do you call your Mistress Orgina, said he, interrupting him. Yes,
replied Pisistratus, that is the name of the person I adore: I have heard speak
of her at Salamina, said Solon. She is indeed of that Island, answered
Pisistratus, and Daughter to Amphicles, considerable both for her Birth and
Degree; her Father having been always inclineable to the part of the Megarians,
escaped out of Salamina, during the Siege, with intent to retire to Megara; but
was met by an Officer of the Athenian Army, who seeing him, followed by his
Daughter and a very fair young Slave, thought he might make considerable booty
by seizing them, he kept his prey very close fearing some sharers; and
returning to Athens, after the Army was dismissed, he sold me the prisoner, and
his two fair attendants. Had not Solon been accomptable to Posterity for the
title of Wiseman, that Age had given him, he had ill-recompenced Pisistratus
for the confidence wherewith he obliged him: But the quality of Philosopher is
a heavy burden for those who undertake to bear it. He was forced to keep a
guard upon his Senses, as upon his declared Enemies, and not daring to lift up
his eyes on Pisistratus, fearful least his countenance should betray him, he
asked him in a doubtful and trembling key, If he were as much beloved, as he
loved. I cannot guess I am hated, replied Pisistratus, with the briskness of a
successful Lover, and you may judge it by the Carbuncle which has been the
occasion of this converse. Orgina gave it me, telling me withal, That it was
the greatest token of Love could be given by the Daughter of Amphicles; and
that if I knew the secret contained in it, I would confess, that Orgina offered
an obliging Sacrifice, when she entrusted me with it.

This Relation so much increased Solon's trouble, that grown doubtful of his
power to master it, he thought it best to leave Pisistratus, and seeming to
satisfy himself by faintly telling him, That Salamina was become one of the
Members of Athens, and that he ought not to treat as a Slave, a Virgin whom his
Country had adopted, he bid him adieu, but in such a disorder, as was very
slenderly agreeable to the reputation he had gained. Being come to his house,
he found there Thales, surnamed the Milesian, one of the most famous Wisemen of
Greece, and particular friend to our Athenian. The Inhabitants of the Island of
Coos had sent him a Tripod of Gold, fished out of the Sea, near their Island,
which was pretended to have been cast in there by Helen, in her return from
Troy, and which by the Oracle of Pythia the Prophetess, was destined to the
wisest Man of all Greece. The modest Thales not believing himself worthy that
renown, resigned it to Solon; and now came to prepare him to receive the
present, intended to be made him next morning. Alas, cried Solon, when he
understood the occasion of his Friends journey, What a labyrinth is the Heart
of Man. None, dear Thales, can find out its Mazes and Windings, those who think
a Philosopher as perfect in the practice of Knowledge, as in his Precepts,
would soon quit that Error, if the Eyes were as certainly the Windows of the
Soul, as they are but the Mask. This Morality looks prettily from you, replied
Thales, in the glorious occasion that now courts you. I applaud my self for the
opinion I have conceived of your Wisdom; and I observe with much satisfaction,
it is not friendship has prepossessed me in your favor. Accept the Tripod,
dear Solon, for you only are worthy to receive it, nor can any other possess
it without usurpation. Thales and Solon had contracted so strict a friendship,
there could be no Vail or Hypocrisy between them. Solon had discovered to the
Milesian, the birth of a Daughter which he had in his youth, whose horoscope
had told him, She should be one day fatal to her Countries Liberty. It was by
Thales Counsel she was secretly brought up in one of the Isles of the Aegean
Sea, without knowing either her birth, or the misfortune threatened her. This
trust enjoined a farther, which Solon could not refuse, he discovered to his
friend the true state of his heart, and not hiding any circumstances of his
love, Judge, added he, if I deserve the mysterious Tripod, which the gods
destined for the wisest of Men, two or three violent Passions at once triumph
over my Soul; I love Orgina as much as I can love, and I hate Pisistratus as
much as I can hate. I am jealous and desperate, and in the extravagancies of my
fury, know not whether I should not be transported to act the same violencies
against what I love, as what I hate. Keep the Tripod, dear Thales, or make a
present of it to some one that is wiser then Solon. I know no one, replied
Thales, that more appears so; your Laws seem to have been dictated by the gods,
your conversation is learned and instructive, you are externally calm and
quiet, and have refused sovereign power, if you be not wise, who then is? Or,
on what foundation shall we make judgments of Men; If it be true, that your
Soul is the Whirligig of so many Passions, let us deplore, dear Solon, the
excess of humane frailty, which has spread it self into all Men equally,
appearance only making some difference between them. We can never teach true
Wisdom, we learn only the Art of feigning Anacharsis Byas, you, and I, we are
all subject to the same failings, and the gods can only boast perfection.
Concluding therefore, that the Tripod ought to be consecrated to some divinity,
they sent it to that Temple at Thebes, which the Thebans had lately built in
honor of Apollo, surnamed the Ismenian. Solon prevailed with Thales to stay
some days longer in Athens, to assist him in his extremities with his wise
Counsels. Whiles they were one day shut up together, and Thales diswading his
friends love by all the arguments his Philosophy could furnish him with, a
Letter was brought to Solon, left by an unknown person at his Gate, who refused
to stay for an answer. Solon opened it with a concern that Thales observed, and
he found these words.

I Have observed you, as I thought concerned for me, and I have had a belief,
that I often perceived in your eyes that passionate trouble, might well
convince you loved; and yet Solon, you now come often into the place where I
am, and pass many hours without letting your love betray me to you. Are you yet
Solon? Or can I forbear reproaching you with this calmness, without ceasing to
be the delicate

ORGINA.


Solon burst out into a cry of joy, at the reading of this Letter, and kissing
with an ecstasy the so beloved name of Orgina, put Thales into a strange
astonishment. Is it possible, said he to Solon, that that Wisdom so famous in
all Greece, and with which I believed, you so liberally supplied, should sink
under so weak an assault. Pray, my dear Thales, said Solon, embracing his
friend, trouble not my joy by such an unprofitable reflection. It is no more the
Solon celebrated through all Greece that now speaks to you; it is a sincere
friend who shows himself unmasked to his friend. You would find all men
different from what they appear, if you could see their hearts naked as I
discover mine to you: And besides, my dear Friend, What do you call true
Wisdom, if it be not the Art to make our selves happy? Can our felicity reside
in any other thing? And is it not the impressions we seek of joy or grief,
which create our pleasures, or our pains? Believe me Thales, let Men think of
us what they please, it is not their Opinion creates our happiness, it is the
natural motions of our own Souls. In vain would all Greece believe you happy,
if you believe it not your self, and others judgments of that happiness you
found not, would but increase your misery and sorrow. Ending these words, he
hasted to Pisistratus House resolved to see Orgina, if he could possibly, but
she was not there to be found. Pisistratus had surprised the Letter Carrier, as
he came to return an account of his Commission; and though the seeming
austerity of Solon might create a dead repose in his Rival, Pisistratus who was
born suspicious, believing he could not be too watchful of a treasure he feared
to lose, had carried away the young Orgina and her Slave, to a Countrey-house
of his, two days journey from Athens. This news afflicted Solon as much as can
be imagined, he observed two or three circumstances equally vexatious, he would
not for his life that his weakness should grow public. The sudden departure of
Pisistratus, and that just at the instant he received Orgina's Letter, made him
conjecture something of the truth; and if he were apprehensive of his glory, he
was no less of his love; he saw his Mistress carried away, and in the power of
a lover, whom he believed jealous, such a Man as Solon seldom fears without
seeking a remedy; and People who are in power ever mix the greatest Interests
with their own. He had begun the establishment of the Areopagites, a Counsel of
great authority in Athens, and whose Decrees have made it since famous; he
labored in the accomplishment of this Work, and declaring to the Assembly, that
he had notice, that some Athenians held some of the Inhabitants of Salamina in
a kind of slavery; he represented it as a thing ignoble, for Athens to permit,
that people by her adopted should be reduced to servitude. This Remonstrance
was thought just, a Decree was issued out against those which held any of the
Inhabitants of Salamina, commanding their release in three days, on pain of
death. Pisistratus being the only Man aimed at in this Decree, Solon took care
to give him the first notice.

In vain had they imposed the Penalty of Death on the Disobeyers, Pisistratus
would have suffered a thousand deaths, ere run the hazard of losing Orgina, he
secures himself with her in the Kingdom of Argos; and those who had Commission
from the Areopagites, to make him give obedience to the Decree, found only in
his House, the Slave of Amphicles. Solon grew even desperate at this new
misfortune. See now, said he, to Thales, how much all your boasted Wisdom
contributes to our Happiness, had it not been for that Reputation of wise Man,
I so little deserve, I would have forced my Mistress out of my Rivals Arms; she
was mine before he knew her, her Letter assures me, I have lost no right in
her; and I have a power in Athens, to which, that of Pisistratus must have been
constrained to yield: And yet because I pass for a wise Man, and must pay
wondrous Caution to that Title, I am robbed of Orgina, and my rival peaceably
possesses her. He would needs see Amphicles his Slave, to draw from her some
little satisfaction, she was brought to him, but, O Gods! What was his
astonishment, when he knew her for the same Orgina, he believed to be in the
Kingdom of Argos with Pisistratus; he wanted the charitable advice of his
friend Thales to withhold him from proclaiming the secrets of his Soul to all
the World. We are not now alone Solon, said the Milesian in his ear, recall that
Wisdom is ready to forsake you, and believe that Solon is too much obliged to
the opinions the Athenians have conceived of him, thus at once by his weakness
to convince them of Error. Solon strove hard to recollect himself, and appear
what he was thought, and receiving Orgina with that gravity, his heart approved
not, he got rid of the company in the most unconcerned manner he could; but
after he thought himself at liberty to return to himself, and love, and beheld,
after having believed his Orgina lost, himself alone with her, What said he
not? or, what did he not do? to pay his love those Rites Philosophy would have
robbed it of. The love of those who make Profession of Wisdom is much more
ardent then that of ordinary Lovers; it is not dispelled by any exterior
ceremony, but as it reserves it self inward and entire for great occasions, so
it ordinarily breaks forth to advantage. I know, said Solon to Orgina,
Pisistratus believed himself ascertained of your love; yet I know not whether
he had reason to believe it. But Orgina I conjure you tell me he had none. I
have so great a confidence in what you say, that your words should make me give
my very eyes the lie, therefore tell me, nothing may make me less happy; for
why should you declare your self guilty, when I will believe you innocent, if
you will but say you are so. I thank you Sir for your confidence, replied
Orgina, it is of all your qualities what I shall make the least use, a Mistress
should not be believed but upon unreproachable testimony, and a Love so
confiding, has a Face of Indifference; Believe me to be with Pisistratus in
Argos, till such time as you are well assured that he mistakes my Fathers Slave
for me, and that by the help of that disguise I am preserved wholly for Solon.
How cried Solon in an ecstasy, Is it your Slave then Pisistratus has carried
to Argos, and is it you he has always thought the Slave of Amphicles. Yes Sir,
replied Orgina, my Father made use of this precaution, the better to preserve
me in the dangers of our flight; he believed he might more easily conceal me as
a simple Slave, then as his Daughter; the person be chose to supply my place,
is young, handsome, and virtuous. Pisistratus easily believed her what she
appeared, and I thought it a just debt to the merit of that fair Maid, not to
hinder her Marriage with one of the chiefest Men of Athens; the adventure of
the Carbuncle was innocently contrived to give you notice of the place where I
was. But Sir, methinks you believe me very easily, the quiet and tranquillity of
your mind has gained head, since I have been out of your sight, you are neither
jealous nor suspicious. Can one be a Lover indeed, without these qualities.
Solon relieved Orgina from the fears of these nice apprehensions, by making to
her protestations, never learned in the Schools of Wisdom, and impatient to
hasten the hour of his happiness, by advancing the publication of those Laws,
might permit him to marry a Salaminian, he finished that great and painful
work: But to let Orgina see, that he dedicated not himself so absolutely to the
service of the State, but he still reserved his Heart to his Love; the same day
that he engraved his serious Laws and Policies on those Tables, whereon they
were to be presented to the People, he made particular ones for his Mistress of
which, see here some Articles.

The Laws of Love.
1.
WHo would a perfect Lovers title gain
Must bind his Love in a mysterious chain:
His Flames under a cloud must wear,
Jealous, least any trembling Air
Should to the vulgar Ears his Passion bear.
This is Loves seasoning: For he
Who would a curious Lover be,
Fears less a Rival, then Discovery.
2.
The nicest Lover often does find
A Happiness in his Extreme;
For Doubt and Caution make the Mind
Value, what else had been a Dream;
The greatest Goods have their Esteem
Not from themselves, but what we pay;
We to our Passions guide the way.
And the great Deity of Love does live,
Not by the wounds he makes, but by the leave we give.
3.
When all we wish crowns our Desires,
If Jealously but gently move,
It Is like a Fan to blow those Fires,
And seems a kind transport of Love.
But let that frenzy never gain the Field;
Nor by continuance grow so high,
That Reason cannot force it yield,
Or the least Oath make the Usurper fly.
4.
Th'unfledg'd Gallant at his first sight does swear
His Love eternal course shall hold,
Though tried experience tells those Vows are Air,
And that no hope can be more rash or bold.
Happy the Lover, whose kind Star
Thinks worthy of a Gift so rare,
But if its Influence prove retrograde,
Let not a sullen Grief your Breast invade:
For Stars you will like Women find,
Who are by Hum or false or kind,
Without consulting the fond Lovers mind.
5.
That Lover whose Desires unjustly tend,
And only to his Pleasures bend,
It Is fit should miss of his main end.
But they are Stages in our way,
And though they often a Heart betray,
Are pretty Baits, our Travails to allay.
6.
Sincerity in Love, I much esteem,
As of all Laws, the most supreme;
Yet for their Interest often, the wise
Must cloth the Truth in a disguise.
I like a dainty Lover would know all,
Yet like a Man of humane frailty sure,
Would not my own disease procure,
Nor headlong on Disquiet fall,
But rather Ignorance, then Despair endure.
As he finished this Gallantry, Thales entered his Chamber, I return to Miletum,
Solon, said he, I have sojourned but too long at Athens, you shall, I hope,
never see me more; and therefore before I depart, I thought fit to tell you
that your Daughter is lost, Pirates who were coursing for Booty about the
Aegaean Isles, hoping her beauty might make her prize considerable, took her
away, without ever since being heard of. I came hither to tell you this
misfortune, rather then to speak to you of the Tripod; but I found you so weak,
that I thought to attempt the reducing you to the Estate of Wisdom, before I
put you to this trial. I now find you are perverted for ever, and therefore I
do, what I hoped in vain to do more to the purpose another time. Solon was so
surprised at this news, and the manner in which his friend told it him, that he
had not the power to interrupt him; but having had time to compose himself
whilst he discoursed; Is it Thales, said he, that tells Solon one of the
greatest misfortunes could possibly happen to him, without appearing himself
concerned. I have been too much concerned for you, replied Thales, nor should
I, had I not been sensible of your misfortunes, have entertained converse with
a Man in love. I should have deserted you, when I found you deserted that
Wisdom first united us: That friendship I had for you, made me renounce my
severity for your relief; I have staid with you, have endured to hear you talk
of your Passion; and wretch, that I am, there wants but little that your
disease is become contagious. I looked the other day upon your Orgina, with an
intention, I never had for any thing but my Books: I cannot banish from my
memory the bewitching Idea that object left there, I find a kind of indulgence
for your weakness; it delights me as much as it terrified me before; and even
the confused vapors of Sleep, conspire to the breach of my quiet. Athens,
pernicious Athens, thou shall never see Thales more, the distemper he has
begun to contract in thee, cannot be cured, but by his flight.

And so finishing those words, Thales went out of the Closet, and without more
delay hired a passage for Miletum, not suffering the Prayers or Distress of
Solon, to stay him a minute longer. After this so unexpected parting, Solon
went to see Orgina, to acquaint her with what had happened to him. The Gods had
too much favored me, said he, inrestoring my Orgina to me. If they had likewise
preserved to me my Danghter, and my Friend, I should have forgot my self in
such height of Happiness; and some great misfortune was necessary to balance
the joy I had in your recovery. But, then let my dear Orgina, be all things to
me, since in finding her, I lose all things. Orgina received that obliging
request, as she ought to do it, she made new Protestations of Love and Fidelity
to Solon, she endeavored to apply comfort to those misfortunes he already
suffered under; and to gain from him the knowledge of those he feared for the
future, she heard him relate all the particulars of the Birth and Horoscope of
his Daughter; but when in one part of the story she heard him call his Daughter
Hypparete. Hypparete, Sir, said she with a nimble hastiness. Yes, replied
Solon, so was my Daughter called; and Sir ( continued Orgina) of what age, of
what stature, and what form of countenance, as near as you can guess was this
Hypparete. She is of middle stature, replied Solon, slender, fair complexioned,
bright haired, her nose aquiline, black-eyed, and particularly remarkable for a
Butterfly, Nature took pleasure to imprint on one of her hands, whence I took
the Etymology of that name of Hypparete, which I gave her. Ah Sir, replied
Orgina, seek not for Hypparete among Pirates, she is in the hands of one of
your own Citizens: It is that same Slave my Father bought some time before our
departure from Salamina, who passed for me during, the time of our Captivity;
and whom, Pisistratus, at present, keeps in the Kingdom of Argos. This news was
very unwelcome to Solon, he loved his Country, as may be judged by his own
refusing the Dominion over it, he knew the ambitious humor of Pisistratus, and
his flight from Athens having angered the Areopagites, they had issued a Decree
against his Body and Goods. This rigor furnished him with a pretense to
Enterprises, and the Fortune of Hypparete assured their success. Our Lawgiver
was so afflicted with the misfortunes his foresight denounced, that he could
not resolve to stay and be a witness to them; he banished himself willingly
from Athens, and took that long voyage through all the Realms of Greece, which
his advice to Craesus made so memorable. Those private Authors from whence I
extracted this Relation, have not told me whether Orgina followed Solon. I will
believe for the glory of the wise Man, that his Folly reached not so far; it is
enough that he loved, and that his love was the innocent cause of the
enthralment of his Country. I would likewise be persuaded that he married the
Daughter of Amphicles, but when we come to think his Mistress his Wife, we
cannot well think she staid behind at Athens. Solons Predictions had a full
effect, Pisistratus subjected his Country, and reigned peaceably the rest of
his days. Let us now search, if this same City, so famous among the Ancients,
and so fruitful in great Men, cannot furnish us with other Examples to employ
some pleasant hours.

The end of the Loves of Solon.
THE LOVES OF Great Men. SOCRATES.
It Is not of absolute necessity for that Man to be handsome, who defignes to
make Love. The best Descriptions the World has given us of Socrates contain
little answerable to the qualities of a Lover. He was neither of a Courtly
Humor, nor of taking Shape or Feature. He made Profession of an Austere
Philosophy, and yet for all this he was in Love: But, as Love knows how to
change his shape, and put on what disguise he pleases; it was not under his
ordinary figure he crept into the Soul of Socrates, but under the Image of
Virtue. Timandra a young Phrygian Lady, famous to Posterity for the adventures
we are about to relate, was Daughter to one of Socrates his Intimate Friends.
Some private reasons having obliged this Gentleman to frequent Athens, he dies,
and valuing Soorates his Friendship equal to himself, trusts to his care his
only Daughter, a charge which the Philosopher accepts with joy and generosity.
This Lady was very fair, and Socrates discerned in her such sparks of wit and
good nature as he hoped might be one day improved into hands of Wisdom: He
undertook to make her a Philosophical Woman; and, prudently judging that
converse with the World might obstruct his design, he committed Timandra to the
cares of Aglaonice the Astrologess, who, under the pretense of making her
Celestial Observations, lived in an extreme Solitude. Socrates charmed with
the good dispositions he found in the Soul of Timandra, would spend whole days
in forming her Manners after the Rules of Virtue: For what reason (would he say
to her) think you, the gods have made you be borne so accomplished? It Is
neither out of any singular love to your person, nor out of any hate to other
Women, made less perfect; but, it is to manifest in you the power of the
qualities of the Soul above those of the Body: had you had but an ordinary
Beauty, the assaults made on your Virtue would have been so feeble, your
Victory would not become an Example: but now, when in the fairest Lady of all
Greece there shall be observed a Soul impregnable against all the assaults of
Passion, a laudable disdain of perishable and transitory pleasures, and solid
love, for those can never wast; you will become a Living Axiom, which all the
Arguments of our Libertines shall not have the boldness to insult over. These
Arguments, which one would have thought should only have alarmed the Gallant,
gave yet the Alarm to Conjugal Love, and beat up a Charge to his Spouse Myrto,
Socrates Wife, who, for all her being Daughter to Aristides, Surnamed the Just,
was not her self the more so, observed some trouble in her Husband, when he saw
not Timandra, and discovering, he paid his Visits to that Lady when ever he
could get from her, conceived a furious Jealousy. This Woman seemed to have
been chosen out by Heaven to keep the Virtue of Socrates in breath. Never was
there Wife more untractable; and, because she had kept her honor untainted
under the shelter of little temptations, she became a merciless Tyrant,
exacting tributes of Patience from those least ought to pay it; She aspersed
Timandra with all the Titles her Jealousy could dictate: But Myrto, (said
Socrates to her) Is it from your own experience you judge so ill of the virtue
of your Sex? We should seldom suspect failings in others, of which our selves
are not, or have not a will to be guilty. Do you think the Gods have favored
you with a peculiar privilege? or whilst you would have them believed prodigal
of Chastity to you, is it to be presumed that they are niggards to all other
women? I know not what to answer to these Sophistryes (said Myrto interrupting
him) I read no Book but my Prayers, and would scarce be well pleased with any
other; but these frequent meetings and interviews between different Sexes are
neither lawful nor honest, there is always in them some mixtures of Criminal
designs; and, as one of your Scholars said well some days since, Men and
Women were only sent into the World to propagate. Your memory retains (said
Socrates very coldly) mighty pretty passages of my Scholars Lessons, I have no
design Timandra should grow so learned, and the Philosophy I teach her has
Precepts utterly opposite to those you are pleased to remember. See, see, what
a pretty excuse you have found (said his Wife interrupting him) Love never
wants pretenses; had you been a Painter you would have feigned to teach that
art to Timandra, now, being a Philosopher, you would by all means teach her to
Philosophize; but Socrates, those who would give Lessons of Modesty and Virtue,
make not choice of Scholars so young and so handsome. This Dispute was
interrupted by the coming in of Alcibiades, the bravest and most Courtly of all
the Graecians; whose inclinations, though unconformable with the severity of
Socrates, impeded not a strict friendship between them; The Philosopher made a
Sign to his Wife to be quiet when he perceived Alcibiades, whom he would not
have know Timandra: People so spritely and ingenious as this Illustrious
Athenian, often reap what Philosophy has sown; but Myrto, who was in a talking
humor, would not stop for all her Husbands Signs; she appealed to Alcibiades
whether her Suspicions were not just and reasonable; and, enflamed with
Socrates his oppositions and endeavors to hinder her being heard, exposed the
whole pretended intrigue of her Husband with the fair Phrygian as an
incontestable truth, when want of breath made her silently retire. Do you then
impose on us at this rate (said Alcibiades to his Friend) or can you think we
will be thus deceived? you are continually Preaching to us contempt of the
Passions, my Age and other Engagements can gain no indulgence from you; yet,
as if you spent your whole stock of Philosophy in Counsel to your Friends, you
remain your self unprovided. Do you believe an angry Woman (replied Socrates
coldly) these are visions of her Jealous Fancy, which have neither likelihood
nor foundation. How (said Alcibiades) is it not true then you have that
affection for this Timandra, at which your Wife appears so alarmed at. I
acknowledge (replied Socrates) I have delighted to Cultivate and improve an
excellent good Nature, which Chance offered to my Cares, and which all the
considerations of Friendship oblige me not to see lie fallow; And, this
excellent good Nature, (said Alcibiades, interrupting him) is seated in a fair
and youthful person; What is that Circumstance to our purpose (replied the
Philosopher in a somewhat an angry tone) or, What communication can there be
between the Beauty of a Woman, and the Soul of Socrates? Alcibiades was now
returned from his first Exile, and had had some experience in Love; I talked
like you (replied he) when I was admonished against the charms of Nemea; How!
would I say to my self, can Alcibiades, whom the chiefest Ladies of Athens are
proud to favor, and whom a great Queen did not disdain, love a Curtisan: I
will see her, and if my heart can find leisure to cast off nobler Passions,
Court her perhaps for some few hours; but, this light distraction cannot be
called Love, nor is Nemea of a quality considerable enough to give it me; this
was once my Song, and yet Socrates you know whither this Love hurried me, to
what Censure I exposed my self by it; and, into what dangers it led my
ambition. Your soul and mine are very different said Socrates, your Riches
continually solicit your delights; you are softened by pleasures irreparably
attending your degree, and finding your self always in a condition to attempt
relief, you may desire all things; for my part, the meanness of my fortunes
secure my rest and quiet; I regard Beauty but as an effect of Nature, which
teaches me the knowledge of its cause; and finding matter to exercise my Virtue
in that which debauches yours, from that wreck I learn to keep my self in the
Port. Alcibiades said many other things to the Philosopher to oblige him not to
have such steadfast confidence in his Philosophy, but he could not shake the
opinion Socrates had of its fortitude. Though he yielded Timandra to be worthy
of love, yet he would not grant Socrates to be capable of Loving. But, the
testimony he had given of the merit of the fair Phrigian stirred up a curiosity
in Alcibiades, to see if Socrates were as well skilled in his distinctions of
Beauty as Philosophy; he had observed by their discourse the Philosopher was
covetous of his Treasure, he believed if he would have a sight of it, it must
be by stealth, he therefore caused Socrates to be watched, to find out
Timandra's House; and, having discovered it, he Apparelled himself like a
Phrigian, and making choice of a day wherein he knew the Philosopher employed
in giving public Lessons to his Scholars, he presents himself at Timandra's
Gate, pretending himself a Phrigian, come to bring her News from her Country;
he spoke very well all Languages in use in his time; and, among other admirable
qualities which graced him, he had a most excellent way of acting all
disguises: But, Socrates had given such Orders at Aglaonice's, as were proof
against all occasions and all artifices. The Astrologess came in the place of
the Phrigian, and her person being illfavoured and displeasing, as Alcibiades
hoped to find it beautiful and charming, he retreated two or three paces at
sight of her, and much surprised, asked her, If she were Socrates his Scholar?
Yes, replied Aglaonice (who had reasons for that untruth) What have you to say
to me, or what are your affairs? Nay, nothing Madam; (replied Alcibiades very
coldly.) I had many things to say to Timandra when I came into this house, but
having forgot them all, have now nothing to say, but take my leave. Alcibiades
had a might winning way both in his carriage and converse, which subdued the
hearts o^ all that saw him. The Astrologess wa^ smitten as with an Arrow, and
unable to submit to the loss of an object so soo^ known dear to her: I see you
are some what startled (said she to the supposed Phrigian) you have doubtless
heard Me described fairer then you find me; but Sir (added she, presenting her
hand to Alcibiades) I will let you see with what kin^ of beauty the great
Socrates is affected; and at that word she led the Illustrious Athenian into a
Closet set out with Globes and Figures, and showing him a Scheam^ which lay on
the Table, See there (said she) what deserves more admiration the^ all the
frail Beauties Nature can show us (...) that Scheame contains the destiny of
sundry Empires; I read in the Stars all the happens memorable upon Earth; and,
have more knowledge of things to come then ordinary persons have of things
present: ^ alone have secured Socrates against the fea^ he had of the
Illustrious Alcibiades. D^ you then know Alcibiades (said the pretended
Phrigian interrupting her. (...) Aglaonice gave a disdainful smile at tha^
demand, and affecting a certain tone of a woman well satisfied with her skill;
Is there any thing in the world I would know, and do not (replied she) I
learned from Socrates the hour of Alcibiades 's Birth, and have Calculated his
Nativity; see there, said she, drawing it out from many other Papers, the
directions and revolutions, and by this I dare boast to know all that happens
to him as well as himself. How, said Alcibiades, interrupting her, Does your
knowledge teach event to his indifferent actions? I know even his indifferent
actions, replied Aglaonice, which includes all, not excepting any thing.

I did not believe, pursued Alcibiades smiling, that Astrology entered into the
search of trivial things; I know well there may be drawn from the influence of
the Stars a judgment upon the inclination and the temper; I will likewise
believe the life of Man may be subject to Revolutions, surprising enough to be
worth Heavens notice, but that you can tell what Alcibiades is doing this very
minute I speak is what you will hardly persuade me to.

You know not what I can do, said Aglaonice, People who judge things but in
gross, have only penetrated into a superficial knowledge of the Stars; I have
made my searches farther, and when I erect a Figure for any one, I can, if need
he, give an account of the very number of his words. Pray Madam, said the
supposed Phrygian, favor me with a proof of this rare knowledge in the person
of Alcibiades; I knew him in Phrigia, have an honor for him, and resolve to go
seek him when I go hence; I shall make proof of what you tell me, and it will
be no small conversion, if you can make me a Proselyte to Astroloty. Aglaonice
well pleased with the opportunity of keeping still with her the lovely
Phrigian, searches her Books, and after a long confronting of the Signs and
Planets, Are you discreet, said she, to the disguised Athenian? Yes, without
doubt, replied he; and, for your better assurance, one of the best Friends
Alcibiades ever had: He is then, said she, inclining her head to whisper it in
his ear, at present making Courtship to one of the fairest Ladies of Athens,
whom he loves, and by whom he is as ardently beloved: Alcibiades could not
forbear bursting out into Laughter at the result of this Observation, and the
Astrologess being half put out of countenance; I believe, said she, you doubt
of what I have told you: Pardon me, Madam, replied Alcibiades, you could not
hit any thing righter, I have such visible proofs of the certainty of your
Science, that I will go admonish Alcibiades to be more cautious for the future;
for, since all he does is so perfectly known, he ought to do nothing which he
fears should grow public. With this Irony Alcibiades took his leave, leaving
the Astrologess more taken with the Charms of the Phrygian, then he was ill
satisfied with the ugliness of the false Timandra; he had gone but few steps
from thence when he was met by Socrates: That Philosopher made his public
Lessons very short, having more pleasing private ones to give elsewhere; he
cast a sower look at his Friend when he saw him disguised in that manner, and
not doubting but Love had a part in the Metamorphosis, he was preparing to make
him one of those Remonstrances wherewith he used to Declaime against
Voluptuousness: But Alcibiades preventing him; I guess all you would say, dear
Socrates, said he, I confess I am in an error, and that you have reason to
upbraid me, but I am punished enough by my own curiosity, and by the
displeasure it gave me, I shall never hereafter be so vain, and if I could have
suspected you of so gross a discernement, your Timandra had not cost me the
trouble of a disguise. At that word he parted, not being in humor to hear
Socrates his Morallo. And, the Philosopher, more troubled at what he had heard,
then at all the accidents of his life, hastened the small remainder of his way
to Aglaonice's, whom asking for at entrance, and understanding she was in the
Garden, he posts to her to upbraid her negligence. You have promised me (said
he chasing) that you would not let Timandra be seen by any other Man in the
world; It was agreed you should receive the Compliments, addressed to her, that
we might better order all our Measures for the defeating the Snares and
Stratagems of the Curious, and yet Aglaonice, you whom I believed a woman of
extraordinary trust, and to whose charge I have committed the person in whom I
had placed all my happiness, betray this confidence, and your Promise, in
favor of Alcibiades. I, cried out the Astrologess, I let Alcibiades see
Timandra; From whom have you this false Story? It Is too much a truth, replied
Socrates, I have it from Alcibiades own mouth, whom I met not ten steps off,
disguised like a Phrigian, and, who told me, he came from Timandra. If it were
Alcibiades, continued Aglaonice, came to ask for Timandra in the Phrigian
habit, forbear to trouble your self, 'twas I received his Visit, and it is me he
takes for your young Phrigian: Whereupon she related to him all the passages of
the interview between her and the supposed Phrigian, making him almost break
his Spleen with Laughing at the fallacies of her Science, and the surprise
wherein she represented Alcibiades. Timandra's Closet windows answered directly
to the place where this Conversation was held, so that she lost not one word of
it; and, discontented with the Captivity of her Condition, designs a revenge
by undeceiving Alcibiades; To this purpose she Bribes one of Aglaonice's
Household Servants, and entrusting him with a Letter for the Illustrious
Athenian, makes him promise to deliver it to his own hand. The Porter, who
understood well what he had to do, and feared not a liberal payment for the
delivery of a Letter from so fair a Lady to the gallant and magnificent
Alcibiades, chose the hour he judged most convenient to acquit himself of his
Commission, but was unhappily prevented by a former Messenger, who had put
Alcibiades into a scurvy disorder of mind.

Aglaonice, who, according to the Mode of ignorant Astrologers, found still in
the Stars what pleased her self, rather then what they denounced, was persuaded
that Alcibiades Ascendant and her own Leer'd at one another with a kind of
Sympathetical Aspect; she would have Sworn by the faith of her Observations
that he was necessitated by an overruling influence to love her; and,
believing she ought to press forward so happy a destiny, by some kind
exhortations she had entrusted an Apprentice in Astrology, who daily came to
honor her with his meaner offerings, to give Alcibiades in the behalf of the
young Phrigian Lady, the following Epistle.

LETTER.
CAn you yet doubt my skill? and, is it not true that Alcibiades was making
Love, when I saw him disguised under the habit of a Phrygian? Those Masquerades
are the appendixes of Gallantry, and finding one half of my predictions so
true, I dare promise my self that I shall soon see the rest accomplished.


Understanding People receive as injuries Sacrifices, they judge unworthy of
them, and the designs of Women have this proper to them, ever to produce an
effect contrary to what they promised themselves. Alcibiades returned this
answer by the same Messenger.

ANSWER.
YOu have so near a converse with Heaven, that Men are unworthy to have any
with you. My Soul is too much inclined to Pleasure, and my Heart so devoted to
the satisfaction of my Senses; I am not worthy of you, most knowing Timandra;
and you profane your rare Merit, in abafing your self to the Sensual

ALCIBIADES.


An hour after the Messenger of Aglaonice was dispatched, Timandra's came to
present her Letter, and demand the like expedition. Alcibiades believed it was
a second Epistle of the Nature of the first, he had too many pleasant intrigues
upon his hands, to spare time for a commerce so nauseous and troublesome. You
may tell Timandra, said he, refusing to receive the Letter she sent him, that I
guess what her Letter contains, and that my engagements with Socrates permit me
not to have any with her; and therefore I desire her to forbear these
kindnesses for ever. These terrible words being brought to Timandra, she
received with such an anger mixed with shame, as made her easily resolve on the
Silence imposed. But Aglaonice not so easily offended, and whose skill promised
her more happy success in her enterprise, would not be repulsed for one
difficulty; she assassinated Alcibiades with Astrological menaces, he could
never come home without finding some note or other from the false Timandra;
they were strewed upon his Table, and in his Closet, as if they had been his
daily Agenda, he resolved to stop this current. He was naturally kind and
civil, and willing to avoid all occasions of rudeness toward a Sex he adored;
but these frequent Messages from a Woman, might prejudice him in some other
affairs, he writ to the Astrologess in terms admitted no Answer; and that she
might not feign the miscarriage of his Letter he entrusted his Nurse with the
delivery. She was a very notable Woman, called Amicla, and a Lacedemonian; but
the Austerities of Sparta, could not secure her from some flyings out of Blood
and Temper. She takes out of Alcibiades's Closet Petrified Plants, several Sea
Animals dried, and becoming a Merchant of this sort of traffic, she goes and
asks at Trimandra's Gate, if they would buy any of her Curiosities. The fair
Phrygian was alone contrary to her Custom, Socrates was retired for some days
to a house out of Athens, where he prepared himself to maintain a public
dispute, and Aglaonice weakened with the watchings, and agonies of Love, did
that day keep her bed, Timandra would needs see Amycla's rarities, and she set
them forth with all the terms and tattle requisite in the person, she played,
and following the Phrygian to a Window, where she was looking on a petrified
Fruit, slipping the Letter into her hand, See there Madam, said she, the rarest
piece of all my Shop, Alcibiades sends it you. The Phrygian blushed at that
name, and opening her hand, that she might not receive what was offered her.
You may tell Alcibiades, said she to the counterfeit Merchant, that I guess
what the Letter contains, and that my engagements with Socrates permit me not
to have any with him. At which words she stepped into her Closet, leaving the
poor Nurse much afflicted at the ill success of her negotiation, she returns
forthwith to Alcibiades. Your business goes ill Sir, said she, I presented your
Letter with all the cunning you could expect from me, but Timandra would not
receive it; she sends you word, that she guesses what it contains, and that her
engagements with Socrates permit her not to have any with you. Alcibiades burst
out with laughing at the repetition of the same words, he remembered to have
sent formerly to her. How! cried he, and am I become displeasing even to
Timandra, Destiny is my friend, and I ow it a Sacrifice of Thanks; Lord Sir,
cried Amycla, much surprised, I thought I brought your deaths wound, when I
told you that a person of such Heavenly Beauty would not receive your
addresses. Amycla had art, and would droll very pleasantly, and Alcibiades
often delighted to hear her, he believed she had a mind now to divert him as
she used. Indeed, says he ironically, Timandra is a very Heavenly Beauty, that
staring ghastly air which in her Face, discovers the disorders of her Mind;
that ill shaped Carcass; that constrained Conversation; and that leaness
brought upon her by her Chimerical Studies, are all moving Reasons of Despair
in a Man not beloved. What say you of leanness, ill shape, or ghastly
Countenance, said Amycla interrupting him, I could find no such thing in the
young Timandra, she is as beautiful in Countenance, as well shaped in Body; her
Ways and Manners are obliging; nor know I a Beauty in Athens can be justly
compared to her. Alcibiades could not reconcile this report with what his eyes
had seen; and therefore conjures his Nurse to be serious, and unravel the
Intrigue. Amycla returns to Timandra, and feigning to have lost something,
desires to speak with her, to know if she had found it. Timandra mistrusting
some new Message from Alcibiades, which her anger for the old repulse, would
not now let her receive, goes into Aglaonices's Chamber, to give Audience to
Amycla. Alcibibiades's Nurse found in the Astrologess, what he believed to have
found in the Phrygian, and running presently to tell him the truth, threw him
into a Melancholy not easily represented; his Natural admiration for fair
Ladies amounted even to Idolatry, and he could not without despair, consider he
had given such a one occasion to be angry with him, he implores the assistance
of Amycla: She advices him to return some shows of love to Aglaonice, thereby
to get opportunity of seeing Timandra, and undertaking to manage the affair,
goes forthwith from him to Aglaonice; and tells her the indifference practiced
and affected by Alcibiades, was but a cunning to make trial of the kindness she
professed, which her perseverance having confirmed, he was ready to be at her
service; that he knew well the Stars presided in affairs of Love, and that
submitting without murmur to their influence, she might dispose of his destiny,
as its absolute Mistress. Aglaonice was transported with joy at this complement
of Amyclaes; she requirted the happy news with the gift of a rich Ring from her
Finger; and the absence of Socrates giving him fair opportunity to make his
visits; Alcibiades grew so familiar in that house, that no hours were
interdicted him, he cunningly drew from the Astrologess an assurance, that she
writ not that Letter he had refused to read, and both from thence, and from
what Timandra had said to Amycla, concluded, That it was the Phrygian had writ
it, he was raging mad to see her, and to know her commands. But it was almost
impossible to compass his desire, Aglaonice's diligence, and the indignation
wherewith the Phrygian was prepossessed, made fruitless all his designs.

This ill success made him almost desperate, Amycla gave him descriptions of
Timandra, which inflamed his curiosity, and the most moderate desires become
violent when they meet with opposition. Alcibiades had thoughts to banish all
he ought to Socrates friendship, by forcing a sight of the Phrygian Lady, since
he could not fairly find a way to obtain it; but the fear to disoblige her,
whom he already loved before he knew her, withheld him, he bethought himself at
length of an Artifice had less noise in it, and which succeeded happily.
Socrates was almost upon return to Athens, Alcibiades pretended to have
promised the Philosopher not to go to Aglaonice's, and seemingly betrayed as
much fear to be surprised by the coming of Socrates, as reluctance to be
deprived of the conversation of Aglaonice, to accommodate all it was agreed to
meet privately in a Grove, about a mile distant from Athens, which was called
the Academy. In this place Philosophical Conferences were held, and it took its
Etymology from Academes, a Greek Hero born in that place; but since the name
has been given to all places where Virtue is publicly exercised. The
Conditions being concluded with Aglaonice, the time to put them in execution
came, Alcibiades made show that Socrates was returned, and by Letter conjured
the Astrologess to keep her word. She needed not much summoning, she recommends
herself to Love and the Stars, and placing this amorous assignation among the
favorable Constellations hyes her to the Academy at the hour appointed.
Alcibiades who had placed his Sentinels at Timandra's door, to know when he was
delivered of his Argus, was no sooner advertised that Aglaonice was gone, but
he hastens to make advantage of the opportunity: The Servants would have
observed Socrates Order, and hindered Alcibiades from going up to Timandra's
Lodgings; but Love had made him a Hector, he threatened with death the first
that opposed his passage and coming to the Phrygians Chamber, surprised her as
much with his sight, as himself was enamored with hers. How, Madam, (said he,
retreating two or three paces) is it from you I have refused to receive a
Letter? Is it to you I have committed the first rudeness that ever I was guilty
of toward your sex, and was it against you I conceived so continual an
Aversion? Ah Madam, added he, in a passionate accent, What can my heart do, to
atone the offense of its blindness? Can all the Love and Service it has
prepared for you, ever be capable to blot out its crime? I found by your
discourse, that you are Alcibiades (replied Timandra, in a kind of troubled
accent) the esteem I always had for your reputation, was never so mortified by
my anger, but it is revived by your presence. But Sir, from whence come you?
Cannot all the fair Ladies in Athens satisfy your curiosity, without searching
out her whom Socrates forbids you the sight of: Speak not of Socrates, I
beseech you Madam, said Alcibiades interrupting her; If he love you, he is no
longer dear enough to me to merit so much reservedness, as that I should
forbear it; and if he loves you not, he is unjust to deprive me of you sight.
He loves me not, replied Timandra, or at least, if he loves me, it is more then
either of us know. But Sir, he is passionately in love with Virtue, he has
endeavored to communicate to me that Illustrious Passion; but he fears a merit
like yours will be able to destroy all his Precepts.

Retire therefore Sir, and leave all my Soul to the Wisdom, to which Socrates
has devoted it. I feel already, I know not what disorder in speaking to you,
which grows incompatible with that constancy and firmness, he has so long
Preached. You affect me with some thing, I can neither suppress nor define.
Pray then Sir withdraw your sight and Socrates Rules, can never agree together.
Alcibiades was transported with Love and Joy at this innocent Confession.
Forget (said he to Timandra) Precepts condemned by Nature, and which Heaven
testified to have disapproved, when it produced you so fair: It becomes
Socrates who has only the Beauty of the Soul in his dividend to renounce the
pleasures of the Senses. He spares himself great vexations, when he prevents
the troublesome consequences might accrue from his want of Charm. But you fair
Timandra, who are made to be adored by all that approach you, reverse the
orders of Heaven, when you bury your Talents in a retreat, makes them useless.
That which Socrates has told me, said the fair Phrygian, interrupting him, was
much more judicious then what you tell me; and yet Sir, by what fate I know
not, I begin to find all his knowledge too feeble to persuade me, whilst your
words pierce even into my very heart, they have already settled a secret
intelligence with the Motions of my Soul, and make my Sense revolt against my
Reason: Yet once more Sir retire, your sight becomes pernicious to me, and if
you have not some pity on my Philosophy, three or four years study will fall
under the first assaults of your presence.

Whilst things passed thus at Timandra's other accidents, no less singular
happened at the Academy. Aglaonice was come as she had promised, but in going she
had lost the note that contained the Order of the Assignation, which was found
by one of Socrates servants, who carried it to his Master. Socrates soon knew
Alcibiades hand, and the house where he was, not being far from the Academy, he
was resolved to give an interruption to the meeting. He often did these
displeasures to Alcibiades, he loved him tenderly, and he knew that his
inclinations to love, were often hurtful to his affairs. He got rid of Myrto,
who was come that day from Athens to fetch him back, and coming without any
attendance to the Philosophers Grove, he found the Astrologess beginning to
grumble at the Stars, that Alcibiades was so long a coming, she believed her
cause of grief was ceased when she perceived Socrates. It was dark, and the
Philosopher, who would not show himself, till it were to purpose, slipped among
the Trees, Aglaonice follows his track, coughing twice or thrice to discover
her self, and seeing that signal ineffective, Alcibiades, said she to Socrates,
in a tone which her vexation changed from her usual voice, is it for trial of
me that you fly me thus. The Philosopher ashamed at the impudence of this
unknown Lady, stopped to reproach her for it. Aglaonice perceiving he staid, and
as she thought for her, run to him with open Arms but was suddenly stopped by a
Woman, who rushing from behind a Tree, thrust her self between her, and him,
she took for Alcibiades. This Woman was Myrto, who finding her Husband absent,
and learning at his Country House, that he was gone to the Academy, had
followed him at a distance to pry into his actions, and see what she could
discover. When she had this Reason by the Action of Aglaonice, to believe it
was an Amorous Rendezvous: And is it thus Socrates, said she, you prepare to
dispute for Wisdom against its opposers, must there be an intrigue of Gallantry
to dispose your Soul to the defense of Virtue; and do you employ that time you
feign to dedicate to the study of Philosophy, in making your self unworthy the
name of a Philosopher. The name of Socrates informing Aglaonice of her mistake,
she was thinking of a prudent reatreat, when Plato, the beloved Scholar of
Socrates, appeared to hinder her; he had lost some Notes, which he much valued,
and came to see if they might not be let fall in the Academy, whether he
remembered to have brought them, and because it was dark, he had brought a Torch
in his hand: That light discovered the Astrologess before she could escape. It
is not easy to imagine the Philosophers surprise at this apparition. How,
cried he, is it you Aglaonice who have made an assignation with Alcibiades. The
disorder the Astrologess was in, joined with the words she had uttered, assured
Socrates of a truth, she had not the power to confess; the Philosopher soon
dived into the secret of this intrigue. Alcibiades was too dainty to court a
Creature of Aglaonices make. Socrates remembered what he had said coming from
her house in the Phrygian habit. Aglaonice, feeble Aglaonice, said he sighing,
thou destroy'st in a moment the precautions of many years. At these words he
runs toward Timandra's; that quarter of Athens wherein stood the Astrologesses
house, was not very far from the Academy, Myrto followed him for some paces,
continuing her clamors; but he vouchsafed not a word to appease her, nay,
scarcely did he perceive his Wife speak, so strongly had his suspicions seized
his spirit. He found Alcibiades still with Timandra, he was so charmed with the
sight of her, that neither policy in him, nor prayers from her, could make him
consent to leave it. There is Tyranny in what you have done, said Socrates, in
an angry manner, You snatch from me a secret I would have kept, and without
respect to that friendship should be so dear to you, refuse me the first
compliance I ever exacted from yours. It Is not that friendship Socrates makes
you thus hot, said Alcibiades, interrupting him, your anger would have been
better moderated, had it had so easy a cause; but Socrates you love Timandra,
I ever mistrusted it, the disorder wherein now you appear, confirms all my
suspicions. It was most certain, as Socrates had protested to the prying
Alcibiades, that he did not believe he loved Timandra, he had that confidence
in his wisdom, gave him not leisure to examine himself on this point; but his
friends reproach forcing him to a sudden review of himself, he found his
precaution was strong Jealousy, and examining the dreadful fears he had had,
least Timandra should love or be beloved, he found out that nothing but love
could create such violent apprehensions, he let himself fall into a Chair, more
concerned with what he began to discover then a criminal at the reading his
sentence, and looking on Alcibiades with an anger mixed with kindness, which at
the same time drew Compassion and Jealousy from his friend. What have I done
to you Alcibiades, said he, thus to stir up in my Breast, thoughts I knew not
of, and which prove most cruel, because they can be no longer unknown? I have
loved you better, then you have loved your self; I have hazarded my life, my
credit, and the esteem of all Athens, to maintain your interests; I have
opposed your weaknesses and frailties, with all my power, and when I could not
master them, have concealed them. Ungrateful Alcibiades, why should you
discover mine? If I love not Timandra, you injure my reputation in accusing me,
and if I love her, as I begin to fear I do, you transgress against friendship,
by exposing your self to the hazard of being my Rival. Withdraw your self from
this danger Alcibiades, and whether you regard me as a Philosopher, who would
preserve his Scholar exempt from Passion; or whether you regard me as a
faithful friend, who merits some compliance. Withdraw your self, and see
Timandra no more. I esteem your Philosophy too much, said Alcibiades,
interrupting him, to do it this injustice; it is fit it should triumph over
those desires have the boldness to contend with it. Stand out then Socrates,
and stand out with success, you will sully the glory of your life, if you leave
Posterity to believe, that the voluptuous Alcibiades had gained over himself,
what you dare not enterprise on yours.

Socrates was not pleased with these Reasonings, he would have sacrificed all
his reputation of Wisdom to the privilege of loving Timandra without
disturbance; but Alcibiades keeping firm to his Proposition, Socrates was
constrained to submit, Alcibiades loved Timandra, and Timandra loved him. These
Precepts of Wisdom so carefully instilled, and which, a long habitude seemed to
have made impregnable against all Protestations and Assiduities, yielded at the
first assaults of Alcibiades. 'Twas for this Timandra he died some time after,
as the Historian of his life tell us, and if I may believe my satirical
memories, it was the displeasure that Socrates conceived at this adventure,
made him meet death with such constancy. The Astrologess was fain to call the
Stars to her defense, for the Heart they had made her hope for, but when we are
reduced to make use of such Cautions, we find often the Stars but very ill
security. I will leave her to consult her Books about their deceit, and pass to
the Loves of some great Captains which may ease my style of that preciseness it
has been forced to, by the Philosophers in these two first Histories.

The end of the Loves of Socrates.
THE LOVES OF Great Men. JVLIVS CAESAR.
IF neither Wisdom nor Philosophy could secure Solon nor Socrates from the
assaults of Love, Ambition and Glory have as weakly defended the heart of
Julius Caesar; he was a Lover before he was a Conqueror, and we may behold him
likewise in the midst of his most illustrious Conquests, not forgetful of the
Rites of Love. He was yet but Quaestor, and had only exerciz'd his courage
against the Cilician Pirates, when he Married Pompeia Sister to Pompey the
Great.

In those times as well as now a days, the Marriages of Great People were
rather Politic then Sympathetical unions; Pompeia privately loved Publius
Claudius, and Caesar had a violent inclination for Murcia, who was afterward
the Wife of Pompey. The necessity Caesar stood in of Pompey's support, deterred
him from Crossing his Suite to Murcia, and the same reason made him seek his
Alliance: He Married the Sister of that great Man the same day that Pompey
Married Caesar's Mistress: Love, which had not so easily complied with the
conjuncture, but to triumph in the progress, would not let Hymen rob him of his
Rites. Caesar loves Murcia no less now she is Pompeys Wife, then he had done
before she was so: Nor did Claudius believe himself more unhappy for seeing
Pompeia in the Arms of Caesar, want of opportunity only made some little
change in their fortunes. Pompey was a Man of Authority, necessary to Caesar's
Ambition; he durst not let him suspect he went to wait on him only to Court
his Wife, and therefore restrained himself to stricter Laws of correspondence
then the nearness of Relation might have allowed, so that 'twas only by his
eyes that Murcia could guess the continuance of his Love. Pompeia was committed
to the governance of Aurelia Caesar's Mother, one of the severest Matrons Rome
ever produced; she never suffered her Daughter-in-Law out of her sight but when
she trusted her to the care of her Son; Claudius could hardly in public steal
a wink; and, if Albra, Pompeia's waiting woman, and consident of the intrigue,
had not solac'd the desires of this Lover with some kind Messages, he had been
constrained to renounce his Love or his Life.

Things stood in this manner when Caesar was chosen Praetor; and, during the
year of his Praetorship the Consuls being absent from Rome, at his House was to
be kept the Feast of the Good Goddess; that Feast was signalized among the
Roman Dames: and, on the day it was to be Solemnized, the Ladies of Quality
assembled at the Consuls, or in his absence at the Praetors House, where they
passed the night in Feasts and Dances; and, were it not for some private
Ceremonies, to which it was not seemly to admit Men; or, that they feared some
escapes of joy repugnant to the Roman Austerity, it was made death for any Man
to be found at that Feast: Caesar, whose Soul was incapable of fear, he knew
that improbable attempts oftenest escape with impunity, and resolved to make
use of this occasion; There was a Closet in the Alcove of Pompeia's Bed, which
answered by a private pair of Stairs to a back door, which was very seldom
opened; Caesar took the Key of this door, and resolving to slip by this way
into his Wives Chamber, he writ to Murcia, that feigning her self undispos'd at
the Feast, she should desire to repose her self some few Moments on Pompeia's
Bed: Murcia, who loved Caesar, and well weighed the hazard of his enterprise,
withstood his resolution with all her power; but Caesar accusing the faintness
of her Love, that Reproach overcame all other considerations. Caesar left his
house at the usual time appointed, he Supt at Pompeys to prevent all suspicion,
he went thence to Cato's, whither he knew his Brother-in-Law would not
accompany him, because Cato and he were at Enmity; he came to Cicero's, and
went to two or three places more, that several persons might affirm they had
seen him; and then coming to his private door, when he judged it time, he goes
without noise, and without being discovered to Pompeia's Closet; scarce was he
got in but he heard some body Cough on his Wives Bed, he softly opens the door,
and gently approaching the Bed side, Is it you, said he, as softly as possible
he could; Yes, was it answered, (with a voice as low as he had spoke) It is I;
It is a long time I have expected you, and I begun to believe you would break
your word: Caesar disposed himself to repair his neglect, when he heard the
Chamber door open, he hastily throws himself back into the Closet; and, whether
the conversation of those on the Bed were indeed very long, or that Caesar's
impatience made him think it so; most certain it is he never thought time more
tedious. That wicked quarter of an hour being ended, Caesar distinguishes the
voice of his Wife, who making great excuses of not being able to stay longer,
took leave, and shut the door after her; he then nimbly comes out of his hole,
and embracing the Lady on the Bed with a fervor equal to his love: Murcia, my
dear Murcia, said he, Is it possible that I have the liberty to confirm with
my Tongue what my eyes have so often protested to you. The Lady snatching out
of Caesar's arms, and throwing her self down from the Bed, sought for the door
to save her self: Caesar believed it some sudden compunction of Conscience come
in an evil hour to disturb his Joy, he felt for the Fugitives arms, and having
graspt one of them, From whence comes this confusion, says he, embracing her
afresh? How have I made my self unworthy of the obliging impatience you
expressed at my first arrival? Do not discompose your self by these endeavors
to escape me, added he, finding that this Murcia strugled to get loose from
him, It Is in your pleasure to dispose both of your destiny and mine, for you
have an absolute power over Caesar. At that name of Caesar, Murcia, or at least
the party he took for her, used redoubled endeavors to escape, and that with
so much vehemence, that Caesar for fear of hurting her was fain to let her go;
Do, said he, all that your cruelty can inspire you with, and if you are not
satisfied with throwing into despair a man that adored you, call the Ladies of
the Feast, and deliver me to the rigor of the Laws, I shall without the least
murmur consent to my Death; your procedure having made my life so hateful,
that, did I not hope to lose it by suffering my self to be surprised here, I
had already taken it away. Caesar had scarce ended this discourse when Albra
entered the Chamber; she gave a shrieke at the sight of her Master, and would
have fled back; Stay Albra (said he) with a commanding voice, let me save the
reputation of what I love, and dispose afterward of Caesar's life as thou will:
With these words he took a Wax-light out of Albra's hand, and, returning to the
Closet, resolved to retire as he came; the person escaped from him was got
there before him, and Caesar was much surpised to find it to be young Claudius
the Lover of Pompeia, disguised under the habit of a Woman, he looked wistly at
him more then once before he believed his own eyes, till Claudius judging, the
more he considered him the better he must know him; It Is I, Caesar (said he)
you are not deceived, you see it is not you only whom love has prevailed with to
seek an advantage from the Feast. How (said Caesar, interrupting him) Was it
you whom Pompeia came to find when you were laid upon the Bed? and, Was it to
give you such full and free entertainment I retreated so quietly into the
Closet? You may be deceived in the voice of the Woman that spoke to me, replied
Claudius; But Caesar, I can take no other for Murcia, you have too often and
too plainly named her, and that secret is of counterpoise enough, to exact from
you an oblation of your suspicions, if you can destroy me by revealing me, you
run the same danger in being revealed; and, if it be true that I love, you love
likewise; and whilst you know not the object of my love, but by conjecture, you
have declared in express terms, that you love Pompey's Wife. Caesar, whose
reason followed Claudius's word for word, and whose ambition had no less a
concern then his love, in the concealing his intrigue with Murcia,
apprehending it might be both the loss of his Mistress, and ruin of his
designs, if he suffered his resentments to take place, used all his endeavors
to suppress them; and, giving the Light he held to his wives Gallant Go, march,
said he, and boast if thou dare, that thou have done Caesar the greatest
injury he can receive, and that he has not the courage to revenge it; Thou
may now talk whatever thou will, the discretion I owe to my Love submits it
self to all Censures. Claudius went down the Privy-staires, which were the same
Albra had brought him in by; but, one of Aurelia's Women being by chance in the
Court near the foot of those Stairs seeing Claudius put out his light, as soon
as he espied her, began to have some suspicion of the truth; She stopped the
disguised Lover, demanding what he was, and whether he went; the confused
answer he gave, and the fullness of his voice made him known for a man. Aurelia
had notice of the accident, she caused the Ceremony to cease, and sending for
Officers commanded Claudius to be delivered over to the Censor. Caesar then
appeared, pretending to be run into the noise, and the fear he was in to be
impeached in the Criminals Examination, obliging him to take him out of the
hands of his Mother, he caused him to be carried to Cato's, whose very near
Kinsman he was. Aurelia could by no means approve this excess of Mercy: You
know not, said she to her Son, what kind of Man you save from the rigor of the
Laws, he is your Wives Gallant: I have a long time taken notice that wherever
they meet, they have observed each other with a discomposure betraying too much
love, and 'twas without doubt by her order he came hither disguised in that
manner: for, Pompey's Wife finding her self indisposed, and having desired a
moments repose on Pompeia's Bed, she receiving the request with so an
unbecoming a manner, that I was forced to lead Murcia to mine. I found not your
Wife there when I returned into the Assenibly; I caused Albra to search her,
and having asked her why she had so left the Feast, she told me that she had a
little business in her Chamber; but I Will assure you she lied not, she had
indeed great business there.

Of all this Discourse Caefar was ignorant of that part only which concerned
Murcia, the rest he knew from the original. In the mean time Claudius was at
Cato's, who sharply reproved his boldness; Caesar could not have chose for him
a better retreat: Cato loved the young Man as wild as he was, and Servilia,
Cato's Sister, was the trustee of all his Secrets, she had a long time been in
Love with Caesar without finding a way to make him sensible; this disdain had
converted her love into an anger equivalent to a violent hate, and as well to
find occasions to exercise it, as to revenge her self on him that slighted her;
She encouraged Claudius in his passion for Pompeia, 'twas she had put him in
his Woman's disguise, and inspired that rashness into him to convey himself into
Caesar's house. Now, that by the report of what had passed, she understood
'twas a Rival defended Julius his heart against her approaches; she gave loose
reins to all the fury, and all the Jealousy a Woman's breast was capable of
conceiving: Nor was Caesar less tormented within, though the causes of his
trouble were different; his Spirit was fierce and delicate, he could not think
of the affront he had received without such violent indignation as reached
almost to Madness: But, that rage being balanced with what he ought to the
honor of Murcia, and the necessity he stood in of Pompey's friendship, he run
from thought to thought, and from desperate resolutions to the most pacifick
deliberations, and not knowing precisely what to determine on, concluded
himself the most miserable man living: He past the rest of the night walking in
a disconsolate manner in his Chamber, and as soon as it was day he went to
Pompey to make Complaint of his Sisters demeanor. Pompey would not excuse her,
but knowing nothing more of her Crime then that Claudius was found disguised
like a Woman at the feast of the Good Goddess; he was of the mind she could not
therefore merit all those reproaches wherewith Caesar calumniated her; he
therefore urged him to say, whether he had any secret light touching that
business which the rest of the World knew not? No, said Caesar, in a perplexed
manner, but it is not enough for the delicacy of my humor, that the Wife of
Caesar be free from crime, I would have her be so from Suspicion. Pompey used
all his endeavors to appease Caesar's anger; he told him, That in accidents of
this nature, Husbands ought to themselves the best part of their tranquillity,
that nothing should be believed but what was seen: And Caesar (continued he) we
should in discretion see as little as we can; What advantage gain you in taking
away your Wives Reputation? the wrong you do her recoils on your self; and if
you drive on the business to a divorce of her, it is an even lay, you take
another less honest then she. Chance governs in all Marriages, and Women should
be chosen blindfold.

After these Learned Sentences they went together toward the Senate, they met
Cato by the way. Though Pompey and he were enemies, yet they forbore not, on
occasion, to talk together. Cato joined himself to the two Brothers in Law, and
they proceeded all three together to the Senate; whither, as they entered,
Caesar was accosted by an unknown person, who delivered him a Letter, and
whispered him in the ear, That a fair Lady sent it. He believed it came from
Murcia, and the presence of Pompey made him blush. Cato who always distrusted
his ambitious humor, and who was besides naturally suspicious, asked him what
that Letter was. It Is nothing, replied Caesar, in somewhat a discomposed
manner, You seem to me too much condemned, replied Cato, on so light a cause;
that Letter certainly contains some attempts against the Commonwealth, and I
summon you in your Countries behalf to deliver it to be shown to the Senate.
You are very troublesome with your distrusts Cato, replied Caesar. I swear to
you by all our Houshold-Gods, this Letter contains only Family business,
wherein Rome is not at all concerned. You may speak truth, answered Cato
hastily; but Caesar you here receive a Letter visibly discomposes you, and you
refuse to show it, when you are pressed to it. What have you so secret to treat
of, which Rome may not know? She entrusts you with all her designs, enterprises
nothing without consulting you; and her glory, and her safety, are committed to
your discretion.

This dispute grew hotter, and Cato and Caesar beginning to utter offensive
words, the Senate would know the difference. If Cato did calumniate Caesar, it
were fit he should make him reparation, and if he spoke truth, it was of
importance to examine the matter: It was therefore thought convenient to see
the Letter in question, and Pompey was nominated examiner of it. Caesar who
could not have any one he more suspected, knowing Cato for a Wiseman, and
Pompey's Enemy; and choosing rather to trust his discretion, then any other,
gave him the Letter, which occasioned the dispute; and declaring his intentions
to be so pure, he doubted not his very accusers. He in generous terms, exhorted
Cato to make no ill use of the secret he now extorted from him. Cato retired to
a Window to read the Letter privately, and opening it found what follows.

WHy should you expose your self to so many dangers to see what you love, there
are Pleasures destined for you to be had on easier terms, if you would please
to taste them; nor need you be forced to make troublesome Discoveries, nor
attempt any thing hazardous to arrive at them; for what mark of Love or
Kindness, may you not, if you will, obtain from

SERVILIA.


Cato was distracted to find there his Sisters name, and giving some injurious
words to the Praetor, which History sets down in express terms, he flung out of
the Senate in such a huff, that his very countenance was changed. Caesar was
more surprised at the second sally, then he had been at the first, and
following Cato to recover his Letter, he went along demanding of him, if he
considered well what he did, and for what Reason he took so much interest in
the concerns of his enemies. Cato would answer to none of these questions, but
getting him home with a have outstript Caesar's, he goes to add new fuel to
Servilia's indignation. Caesar much troubled for the hard fate of his Letter,
and willing by any means to retreive it, bethought himself of Cato's sister to
aid him in this extremity, he knew that she vehemently loved him; and though he
were become unworthy of that love, by his neglect of it, yet he had learnt,
that the most violent anger of that kind is blown away at the first appearance
of a returning Heart. He writes to Servilia, protests that love reduced him to
his duty; and making a light apology for what was past, conjures her now to
give him the opportunity of extending his Passion. Cato had given such orders
at home, this Letter could not be delivered, as it was addressed, it was in
short intercepted, and Caesar's dissembling, passing with Cato for a
perseverance in offending him, he resolved to revenge the injury, by letting
Pompey know the wrong Caesar did his Sister. The union of these two Brother in
Laws had for a long time been an eyefore to Cato, and he had secretly sought
occasions to reconcile himself to Pompey, and to convince him of Caesar's
ambition, he now sends for his friend Munatius, and instructing him what he had
to do, he gave him the two Letters on which he grounded his accusation. This
Munatius must surely be of a very insinuating spirit, for he it was who had
persuaded Cato to lend his Wife for some years to Hortensius, and to take her
again when Hortensius was weary of her. He goes to Pompey, and aggravating
Caesar's ingratitude, who after having been admitted into so illustrious an
Alliance, had made himself unworthy of it by his dissoyalty to Pompeia. I know,
added he, you love not Cato, and I perceive you could scarce forbear laughing
at the humorous part he played yesterday in the Senate. Your factions are
different, and in the interests you have to support you, are so frequently of
opposite judgments, none can conclude you other then enemies. But Sir, this
sort of hatred, though it may destroy Society, should not hinder your esteem
for Cato, whilst I am sure Cato preserves his for the Great Pompey. He is
justly incensed against Caesar, you ought to contribute to his satisfaction,
and besides those Reasons of Equity which are in common among all generous
enemies, there are many particular ones to induce you to stop the course of
this intrigue. Caesar has espoused your Sister, the faults he commits by breach
of conjugal Faith, are of ill example to her, and perhaps the story of the good
Goddess, was but the reprizal of an offended Wife.

Pompey received Munatius advice, like one designed advantage by it, and
assured him he would employ his credit with Caesar, to interrupt his commerce
with Servilia; but in his Soul, he designed nothing less then this Tyranny: He
was a good and an easy Friend, who entered not into his Friends secrets farther
then they desired, and only required from their friendship, a compliance
without constraint, he goes into his Wives Chamber, and tells her with much
breaking forth into laughter, what Munatius had told him. Murcia found not the
story so pleasant as it appeared to her Husband, she often changed color,
during its rehearsal; and reading Caesar's Letter with a grief, appeared to
Pompey somewhat serious. Why, said he, do not you think it admirable that Cato,
the wise Cato, should draw a vexation upon himself, so little designed him? Had
you seen with what perverseness he forced Caesar to show him Servilia 's
Letter, you could not read its contents without laughing as much as I do. The
adventure is indeed something extraordinary, replied Murcia; and if Caesar had
not been concerned in it. I should have found pleasure enough to see Gato's
mistrust so punished; but I have so much interest in what touches the Husband
of your Sister, that I cannot without grief inform my self of the treason
wherewith these Letters convince him. This kind of Treason wrongs not the
reputation of a Gentleman, replied Pompey, on the contrary it establishes and
adds to it; their worth is judged of by the quality of their love; and the
Sister of Cato being eminent both for Birth and Beauty, an intrigue with her
cannot be dishonorable to the Gallant. Aurelia may prophecy some misfortune to
her Son, if she hears he violates conjugal faith, and Pompeia may revenge her
self by some disobedience; but these accidents a part (which as you can well
judge) are not the most troublesome of our life) I would give Caesar as fair
Joy for this conquest, as I would for that of the Gauls.

Caesar came in as Pompey finished this discourse, Murcia fearing she should
not be able to master her Passion, in the presence of a Lover, she now believed
false, retired into her Closet; and Pompey who was in a humor to be merry,
putting on a grave countenance, which he had much a do to counterfeit. I
thought, (says he to his Brother in Law) I had made my friendship so valuable
to you, that you would not publicly have renounced it, as you have done: Had
none but I known the wrong you do our family, perhaps my love had been great
enough to have concealed your fault; but to make Cato a witness of it, and that
I must hear from my enemies, the injuries you do our Alliance, is a thing,
Caesar, I could not expect from you, and what surpusses the most detestable
ingratitude. Caesar explaining of Murcia, what Pompey said to him of Servilia,
changed color at every word, his fury to have been betrayed by Cato, the
despair wherein he represented Murcia in his mind, and the consusion he was in
to find himself deserving the reproaches of Pompey, brought a color in his
face mixed with shame and anger, that even changed the figure of his
countenance. Pompey whose anger was counterfeit, and who knew nothing of what
was in Caesar's Heart, had much ado to forbear laughing, he turned his head
another way to spin out the Comedy; and complaining of Caesar's silence, as a
contempt that aggravated his fault, he made him resolve on a sincere Confession
of his offense, and to ask pardon for what was yet only in design.

To take things in the utmost severity (said he) the first steps toward an
amorous Commerce, are somewhat uneasy to dainty minds, and so far I may be
criminal toward you; for I acknowledge our friendship required me to be
scrupulous even to Letters; but Pompey I loved before friendship imposed on me
the Law of not loving, my love followed not our alliance, on the contrary our
alliance has put a bridle on my love; and that which the consideration I had
for you, has confined within the limits of Innocent favor, had, without doubt,
made farther progress, had not respect to you extinguished my flames for
Murcia. Murcia, who from the Closet into which she was retired, heard all was
said in the Chamber, when her name was pronounced, briskly sallies forth. Say
Servilia, Caesar, (cried she) your Tongue mistakes your Heart, it is from the
Sister of Cato you received a Letter some days since, as you went to the
Senate, and not from the Wife of Pompey; and pray Sir take heed what you say
for the future, and commit no more such mistakes. There needed no more to recall
Caesar into the right way of playing his game; Was it not Servilia, that I
named, says he, without seeming to be moved. No, said Murcia, in an angry
manner, 'twas my name you pronounced, I ask your Pardon, Madam, continued
Caesar, the presence of Pompey caused that mistake: But Madam, you are too well
known to your Husband to be alarmed at that undue application. Your Virtue is
signalised, and this Letter, said he, taking that Pompey held out of his hands,
is an easy rectifier of all; with that he opened Servilia's Letter, and by it
understanding part of the truth, said all that a bold and wary Lover could do
to draw himself out of the briars: But Pompey's spirit was too searching to
have the change put upon him with such ease, he was dull and melancholy the
rest of that day, and at night recalling to mind Murcia's trouble at the
reading Caesar's Letter, the confusion of his Gallant at Pompey's first words,
and his wives retiring, he drew thence two or three conjectures as just as they
were grievous; he resolved to see Servilia, to be by her enlightened in the
obscure sense of her Letter. Aurelia who had some Alliance with Cato, would not
engage in the animosity of Pompey, but had entertained a civil commerce,
between her house and Servilia's. Pompey goes next morning to visit his Sister,
and making a politic pretense to authorize a secret conference with Servilia,
he engages his Sister, to oblige her to come to some place, where he might
privately speak with her. I would draw from her some light touching a design of
Cato 's, important to my interests, said he, and of which, I believe his Sister
has some knowledge. Pompeia without examining whether Pompey spoke truth or
dissembled, caused one of Caesar's People to be called, and sent him to tell
Servilia, she desired her company in a Garden Pompey had upon the Tiber, where
there were many wonderful close Alloys of great convenience. Servilia was at
present there with Caesar, who by agreement with Murcia, endeavored to manage
her, and judging this Garden of Pompey's less exposed then any other place, to
the surprises of Cato, had chosen those walks for the interview. One of
Servilia's Women, who had received Caesar's Message to her Mistress, seeing one
of the Praetors people return, imagined him sent to hasten Servilia. My
Mistress is gone, said she, she is at Pompey 's Garden, at this very time, thou
have nothing to do but return, and might have spared thy pains. The Man
returned to Pompeia with this Answer, it might have removed the suspicions of
Pompey, seeing so direct an appearance of intrigue with Servilia, which
discharged Murcia from the concern. But this good Man's jealousy was now grown
to that excess, nothing could gain belief from him, but what his senses
demonstrated, he comes with all have to the Garden, and informing himself from
the Gardners where those he sought were, expressly forbid the giving any notice
of his arrival. Caesar and Servilia were under a Bower, covered with Roses and
Jessamines, made after the model of the Walks at Capua. Pompey slipped himself
behind the thick Hedges, and getting softly within reach of their voices, he
heard Caesar say to Servilia. You may easily judge, that if I had had any
suspicion of the truth, I would never have given your Letter to Cato; it was my
part only to conceal it from his sight, and Pompey was named by the Senate to
read it. But who could ever have thought your goodness, was proof against all
my ingratitudes; and that after so great an indifference, never merited by you,
you should yet vouchsafe to remember Caesar. I complain not of your
indiscretion, said Servilia, I loved with so much affection, I was not ashamed
my love should be known; when a Passion is extreme, it slights vain decencies,
and they love weakly whose discretion overrules their desires. Tell it in open
Senate, that Servilia loves you, I consent; but then make your self worthy of
that love, by sacrificing to it your Passion for Murcia. I have told you
already, said Caesar, interrupting her, that I loved Murcia, even before I knew
what love was; this impression on my first inclinations, cannot be effaced. I
must love Murcia as long as my heart is capable of loving; but what I ow to
Pompey, restrains my Passion in such narrow bounds, (...) not all incompatible
with a more (...) gallantry. Call you then narrow bounds, said Servilia,
interrupting, those discourses your mistake dispensed with the night of the
Feast of the Good Goddess, in those amorous minutes, Did you at all remember
Pompey? And if Claudius had been Murcia, could your consideration for her
Husband, have suppressed those ecstasies of Love, were expressed with so much
violence. Claudius aggravates things, replied Caesar, the Ideas remaining to
him of his conversation with Pompeia, makes him give a Character to mine, very
far beyond the truth. Ah Caesar, said Servilia, interrupting, If what you said
to Claudius, believing him Murcia, had not been convincing, you would not have
sacrificed your resentments to the necessity you stood in of the discretion of
that young man. 'Twas not the fear of death made you so peaceable, your courage
is above such effeminate apprehensions; and besides the assurance you had, your
Wives Gallant was disguised in your house, had furnished you with a pretense to
have been hid there; but you spoke in such binding terms, that it was a just
debt to sacrifice all to the repair of your imprudence. Well then, said Caesar,
whom Claudius's indiscretion had (...) to an exceeding anger. It must be (...)
you will have it so, that I do love Pompey 's Wife; and that I have expressed
this love in terms, I feared should be revealed. If you love me Servilia, as
you would persuade me, you ow some regard to what you believe I love. You
change color at this discourse, and the moderation I request, is doubtless not
palatable to your jealousy; but Servilia, Caesar 's Soul is not to be stormed
by ordinary approaches, all you are in vain one of the fairest persons in Rome;
if I find not wherewith to charm my Reason, I shall regard you only with the
indifferency of those fair objects which please the sight without moving the
Heart: Would you have me love you, as much as you suspect I love Pompey 's
Wife; you must sacrifice to me all your anger against Murcia: Conceal what you
know of the intrigue, and oblige Claudius to the same secrecy. Are you capable
of doing this for Caesar? yes Caesar, replied Servilia, briskly, I am capable;
Claudius shall never speak more of it, and I will hold my tongue, but
recompense my discretion with some marks of complacency, either feigned or
true: I can do any thing for Caesar, whilst I am satisfied he loves me, but can
answer for nothing when you neglect or abuse my kindness. Sp^^e a fruitless
discretion, cried the secret witness to this discourse, Pompey knows all you
would conceal; and if you aggravate the heart of Caesar, it shall not be at the
expense of Pompey 's ignorance.

The voice of Murcia's Husband, which Caesar soon knew, threw him into a
miserable confusion, he remained unmovable on the Bank where he sat, and
Servilia, judging of the love he bore her Rival, by the perplexity the
consideration wrought, conceived a malign joy at the adventure which she could
not dissemble. You know too much not to know all, said she to Pompey, who now
entered the Bower. It Is true Caesar loves Murcia, and according to all
appearance is not hated; but Sir, among people so intimate, as Caesar and you,
there should nothing be reserved. You are maliciously disposed, said Caesar,
interrupting her, you know in your own Soul, Murcia has reserved to her Husband
alone, all essential things; and I swear to you Pompey, by all that is most
Sacred in Heaven and Earth, and as a Man that makes Profession of Honor, That I
never obtained any Grace from your Wife, might alarm a Rational Man. I may have
had some pretense to hope it, but whether it were Chance crossed me, or the
address and management of Murcia, that hope never had effect. I will believe
you Caesar, replied Pompey very coldly, but as it is not enough for you that
Pompeia be exempt from crime, unless she be from suspicion; so it is too little
for me, though Murcia continue chaste, if she can conceive a thought of not
being so. Caesar took Pompey at the rebound, as he had done him before, he
rehearsed all those judicious Sentences he had cited to him on the disguise of
Claudius; but Counsels of what nature soever they be, lose their efficacy with
those that gave them, when they pass through a third Mouth. Pompey repudiated
Murcia, and Caesar to revenge himself of Pompeys rigor repudiated Pompeia. This
disunion became public, Caesar and Pompey were divided with it: Cato made
advantage of their contentions, as he had proposed, and reconciling himself
with Pompey, became afterward one of the most obstinate Enemies to Caesar.
Murcia's Gallant, mad that his good intentions had such ill success, revenged
the Caprichios of Fortune on the indiscreet Claudius, he exasperated Cicero
against him, who accused him in the Senate, and freely prosecuted his
profanation of the feast. This accusation forced Claudius to withdraw from
Rome; and Caesar not content with this voluntary exile, had in all likelihood
pursued his vengeance to his ruin, had not his voyage among the Gauls, and the
Victories he there gained, diverted his dire resolutions.

He had many gallant intrigues, during the ten years, that War continued: Love
followed him among Strangers, and forsook him not even in the Field of Battle,
he found Beauties among the Gauls, as perfect as those of Italy, he loved on
the Banks of the Rhine, and love left him not when he passed that River, he
judged the English Ladies worthy the reputation they have gained in the whole
World. He dedicated some time to the delights of Capua, like another Hannibal,
and his adventures with Cleopatra, are famous in all History; but the life of
Caesar is fertile enough in such adventures, to afford several Relations. Let
us stop here, and find a second Hero in Rome, as we have found a Second Sage in
Athens.

The End of the Loves of Julius Caesar.
THE LOVES OF Great Men. CATO of VTICA.
WHen coldness between Friends destroy not their Esteem, the Reconciliation
that follows makes their Friendship the more fervent. Cato and Pompeys first
love proceeded only from a knowledge they had of each others Merit, which
constrained them to a good will; and though that by some politic reasons were
lulled asleep, yet when things were reaccomodated, it became between these two
great Men a solid and violent Friendship, not expiring but with their lives:
They were together in the same Garden where Pompey overheard the Discourse
between Caesar and Servilia, and the sight of the Bower where it was held
calling into Pompeys mind the troubles he felt during that entertainment.

What a strange kind of Madness, ( said he to Cato) is that point of honor a
Husband places in his Wives Chastity! Why should the glory of a man depend on a
Caprichio, of which he is not Master? When a General flies out of terror of
his Enemy it is a personal remissness, and it is fit that he who commits the
fault should suffer the disgrace; but when my Wife acts a Gallantry, I
contribute neither by Connivance nor Counsel, and yet the whole shame of the
Action lights on my head. Who told you so ( said Cato, interrupting him) I
perceive not that an honest man is lest esteemed by reasonable People, because
his Wife is non exactly tender of that we call honor in her Sex. I am sure he
ought not to be, replied Pompey, but yet Custom gives Authority to this
injustice, and the title given to a Husband whose Wife is unchaste, is one of
the greatest Ignominies can be thrown on him. Hold, hold, said Cato,
interruping him, and shaking his head, I esteem my self not a rush the less for
having seen Martia in Hortenfius his Arms, and would take her again when
forsaken by her Lover as the relict of one of my best friends, if at least I
found any benefit by doing it. This is not the sort of moderation that
surprises me, replied Pompey, Martia should not be looked upon by you as a
disloyal Woman, you surrendered her to Hortensius by contract in form of Law,
and were forced to make use of all the power you had over her, to oblige her to
ratify your Gift. All things in this life wear two faces, Pompey, ( replied
Cato) and they show to the good or bad but just as the prudence of man knows
how to hold the light to them; Listen to what I never told any but Munatius,
and judge of the sincerity of my return in friendship to you, by the secret
wherewith I shall entrust you.

Martin is (as you well know Sir) perhaps one of the fairest persons of the
world; I loved her dearly; and thought she loved me as well: The charms of her
Soul had preserved, and gave new life in my heart to those flames which
Marriage usually extinguishes; I found Martia more worthy of love when I
absolutely and perfectly knew her, then when decency and good manners concealed
a part of her merit; and, if the words of a Woman may have any credit with a
well-grounded understanding, Martia acknowledged to have found in me all I
discovered in her: I am in the exterior severe, but this severity is only in
appearance; I am in private sociable, and love divertisement like other men;
and Martia used to tell me, I proved a more loving Husband then she durst hope
for when I was but her Lover, she would often say, that that Cato which
permitted himself to be seen by his familiar friends, was not that Cato showed
himself to the Senate and Commonwealth, and methought she spoke truth. I
justified her opinion with all the complacencies a wife could expect from the
best of Husbands; and those who are persuaded they deserve any ones kindness,
easily believe they possess it: I had an absolute confidence in Martia's faith,
she might have betrayed me before my own eyes without fear of conviction, she
perceived without doubt this advantage, and would not let it lie fallow.
Hortensius is a handsome Man, his riches vast, which make his expense easy,
and Women naturally weak are sooner taken with glittering then solidity:
Hortensius was captived by Martia's beauty, and Martia yielded her self to
Hortensius gayety; dispense with me from telling you how they did declare their
thoughts, I have not entered into so nice a deduction of the Story: Martia has
betrayed me, she is at present the Wife of Hortensius; great things always
presuppose the less, and when effects speak, a discourse of the ways is
needless. Hortensius got admission into my House by becoming a feigned servant
to my younger Sister Portia, being a person both of great honor and as great
riches, his propositions were easily listened to, but Drusus Livius our Uncle,
under whom we had all been bred, and whom we respect as a Father, is a Man
infinitely scrupulous in the Customs of his times, and would never consent to
marry Portia the younger before Servilia her elder Sister; you know Servilia,
and many other persons know her as well as you, and that Matches for Maids of
her humor are rare to be found out. Hortensius was therefore forced to prepare
himself for patience; He at first made it mighty difficult, but has since
acknowledged to Munatius that it was a difficulty he foresaw, and for the
reason of which alone he chose to ask Portia rather then Servilia. The
intentions of this supposed Lover appeared to us as sincere as they were false,
we endeavored to support his patient expectation with a very strait
familiarity, he had the same liberty in my house and my Uncles as if he had
been my own brother, and he continually seemed to behave himself more and more
worthy of the love he professed to my Sister; My Wife grew not at all Jealous
of him, she had so well made up conditions of accord with her Lover in that
point, that whatever was done for Portia was placed to the account of Martia;
but, it happened not so, nor was she so just with him in the case of Lucia
Daughter of Drusus; she there looked upon as seeds of Love, what was indeed but
a simple Civility; and these suspicions troubling and disturbing her humor,
which was naturally somewhat imperious, she writ to Hortensius in these terms.

I Believe I deserve to be beloved, Hortensius, and that opinion makes me
easily believe you do love me: I have done no less for you. These dispositions
of our hearts may as you perhaps think raise some trouble in mine at the sight
of your inconstancy; but Hortensius, expect not that glory: I shall behold your
change with as much tranquillity as scorn, and it is by that effect of my courage
I design to make you know what you lose when you lose.

She was doubtless about to write the Name of Martia, but I gave her not time;
I had been at the house Drusus had built in the Marches of Ancona, and had once
designed to spend some time there, but an oppressing Melancholy making me
apprehend something had happened to Martia, that fear made me post home to rid
me of the Suspicion of it, and taking upon me the humor of Gallant, that I
might surprise my Wife with my arrival, I had forbid my People giving her
notice; I surprised her indeed as I designed, but alas not with such a
surprise as my blind passion flattered; she turned her head as I entered into
the Chamber, and I observed a strange kind of trouble in her face, I paid her
as much respect as I should have done reproach, taking for a sign of love what
proceeded from another principle: I cannot remember I ever carressed her with
more obliging kindnesses then at this return. She might have hid the Letter she
had writ if she would; the joy of seeing again my Martia so transported me,
that I neither observed what she was doing, nor should not have taken notice of
whatever she had pleased to do; but, whether she imagined me more
quick-sighted, or whether being one of the most witty Women in the World, she
apprehended cunning was never better concealed then under the cloak of
Ingenuity. I was, said she to me smiling, in a pleasant employ when you just
entered, I was writing a Love Letter. I smiled in a careless confident way at
this discourse, which was soon observed by my Wife, I see you believe me not,
continued she, but read what is in that Paper and you will perceive I tell no
untruth: I was so prevented by Martia 's wisdom, that I was not at all moved
by this Letter, but as it was, and had been my divertisement to draw new
assurances of the happiness I thought I enjoyed; I feigned some amazement at
it, and asked Martia what that Letter signified? she took a Pen, without giving
me an answer, and setting down the name of Portia where hers should have stood,
See there, said she, showing it me, the resolution of the Riddle, I went
yesterday into your Sisters Closet, when she was not there, a Letter dictated
much after this rate lay on the Table, I read it, and found the Contents so
singular, that I endeavored to preserve it in my memory to show you at your
coming home; but added she, seeing me begin to look serious, do not disclose my
theft lest you make me fall out with Portia. I will not speak of this Letter to
my Sister, replied I, there is nothing in it but is authorized both by Drufus
orders and my own, but I will advise Hortensius to be more Regular in his
conduct, his suite to Portia has gone now too far not to have its full effect,
and if it be true that he has given her any just cause of complaint, I shall
not be satisfied with those excuses wherewith such lightnesses are ordinarily
colored. Martia told me it was not convenient for me to concern my self in
this business; that it was a little quarrel between Lovers which Love would
conclude upon the first interview. I vallue not Love at all, said I
interrupting her, Hortensius passion for my Sister is an affair too serious to
be mixed with the revolutions of Gallants intrigues: And thereupon whatever
Martia could say to stop me, I went directly to seek Hortensius, he was walking
alone near the Tribunal for Orations. Hortensius, said I, with a composed
countenance, they seldom go unpunished who make sport of Men of my rank; I
never solicited you to love Portia, the propositions were made by your self;
and, without too much boasting my race and my authority, Drusus believed he
honored you in accepting you for his Nephew; and yet I am informed that you
treat of this affair as a trifle, and intend to make a matter of sport of the
engagement of your word with the Sister of Cato.

I ( said Hortensius, not a little discomposed) I make a trifle of my
Engagements with your family? Pray Sir, from whom have you advice carries so
little sense with it? From Portia her self (replied I) and, to show you I say
nothing without foundation, read this Letter, and judge if I am informed of
your deportment herein. Hortensius changed color, surpised as I believe, to
receive from my hand a Love-Letter from my Wife.

The Person that gave you this Letter, said he, turning a little his head, has
a mind to create mirth to himself at your expense, it comes not from Portia. I
know it, (said I) but its being in Martia's hand changes nothing of the thing,
it is sufficient that Letter is coppied from one, you have, or should have
received this morning from my Sister.

Had I known then what I have since, Hortensius his very looks would have told
me what he thought whilst I thus discoursed; but, at that present, I attributed
all his changes of countenance to his confusion.

You alarm your self without reason, (said he) I have not in my nature such
lightness as I am suspected with; I love nothing but what I have loved, and
what I shall love till I die: this is an assurance of which I conjure you to
become my security, and that you may without scruple do me that service, I call
all the gods to witness I speak truth, and may they punish me in your sight if
I do not.

I did what he desired without thinking I did it, and relating faithfully all
this discourse to Martia, gave her fresh assurances of the love and constancy
of her Gallant: I remember there escaped her from time to time little
effluctions of joy, which she could scarce restrain within the limits of a
smile, but I made no reflection on them. She took upon her to relate to Porcia
what had passed between Hortensius and me; and, when I offered to ease her of
that recital, she persuaded it would not be convenient for me to concern my
self in that commerce: Preserve your countenance of authority with your
Sisters, said she, you know not what need there may be of it; it is not fit to
become too familiar with persons we would pretend to a right of Commanding;
and, if you will be advised by me, I will tell Portia that you are ignorant of the
liberty she assumes of writing to Hortensius, and make her apprehensive of your
knowledge of it. I approved Martia's Counsel, and praised it, because I thought
it Judicious. You then returned from your Asiatick Victories, and the great
actions you had done in that part of the World, having made a triumph a debt to
you, you yet thought you ought some recompense to the applause of the People.
You showed them a fight of wild Beasts, Martia could not be present at this
Spectacle, she had got a slip which confined her to her bed, and my Sisters
seldom appearing in public but in her company, staid likewise with her. I
know not whether her jealousy were renewed by some new complacencies of
Hortensius for Lucia; or, if finding me so perfect in the part I had played
upon her Letter, she thought it pleasant to make me play it over again: But she
told me that very morning of the spectacle, that she suspected Lucia was become
the object of Hortensius new inclinations, that she had observed some favorable
glances pass between them; and adding, it was fit to be searched into, and not
suffer him to be in treaty at once, with my Sister, and my Cousin, she engaged
me to observe that day the carriage of her lover; she had reason to be well
satisfied with my report of it. The Officers who appoint the Seats in the
Amphitheatres, had placed Hortensius in the number of the young Men of our
Family, part of which he was already reputed, and side by side with Lucia, he
loudly demanded another Seat; but not obtaining it from the Officers, who show
but little tractableness on these occasions, he affected an indifference with
Lucia almost amounting to incivility, she spoke to him twice or thrice, and he
answered her without looking at her, I observed more plainly how he shunned
giving her his hand to help her down from the Amphitheatre.

I brought this good news to Martia, and not content to have done such a
service for her Gallant to her, the next morning I did the like for her to him,
I found him at Cicero's, whom I went to pay a visit to, on the marriage of his
Daughter with Lentulus, I took him aside. The Sacrifice, said I, you yesterday
offered to Portia, will not be lost to you, I observed all your coldness to
Lucia, and have desired Martia to acquaint your Mistress with it. Hortensius
looked at me in a way that has since explained to me what I then knew not. You
must not be concerned at my observance, continued I, I was a secret Spy upon
you, Martia had for my Sisters sake enjoined me to take some heed to your
actions, I have given her a good account, and am confident, you will perceive
it the first discourse you have with Portia. Hortensius could not contain
himself to see me so excessive a Wittal, but burst out into a violent laughter,
till perceiving I began to look grave upon it, and by my countenance approved
not the sally. I ask your pardon (said he in retiring) I know the respects
ought to be had to your wisdom; but it is so pleasant to me, to hear what I now
hear from you, that my weak Sense could not restrain it self at this
circumstance. I heard afterward, that he went directly from Cicero's to my
House, and let me beg you to represent to your self, the Scene he had there to
play with Martia on the score of my confidence.

This intrigue lasted all the time of my Voyage to Cyprus, and would have
lasted still for ought I know, if the danger into which I was thrown some days
after my return, had not furnished me with an occasion to open my eyes. You may
remember well, that thinking my self obliged to favor Domitian, my particular
friend, and now Portia's Husband, I undertook to have him preferred before you
to the Consulate. I brought him to the Field of Mars, where you know the
election is made, and carried on his interests with so much heat, that your
party began a disturbance, a tumult arose, and I was in danger of my life, I
received a wound with an Arrow in my right arm; I perceived not my self hurt,
during the heat of the conflict, but our faction yielding under the power of
yours; and being constrained to save my self by those little by-ways that abut
upon the Campus Martius, I there began to feel the smart I remembered Martia's
Nurse lived near that place, and into her House I went to bind up my wound; the
Woman grew pale at sight of me, which I thought might proceed from her, being
frightened at sight of my Blood. This is nothing my good friend, said I, give me
only a piece of Linen to make me a Roller: The little house wherein this
Woman dwelt, contained only a very small Hall where I was, and another Room
wherein she lay, and kept her Chests. Alas Sir, said she, half distracted, I
have not a Rag to give you, all I have is in that little Room you see, of which
my Husband has carried out the Key. I told her she must send for a Smith, she
said there was none thereabouts: I bled vehemently, and began to find my self
grow weak, I endeavored to break open the door, which not being very strong,
was no hard matter to do; but I had no more need of any Linen to stanch my
Blood. What I beheld at the opening that door, seized me with such a Palsy,
you might have cut all my Veins, and not let out a drop. There was my disloyal
Martia shut up with Hortensius; the confusion the sight of me wrought in them,
appeared to me a guilty distraction. I saw enough for any Husband that loved
his Wife, and I believed I saw more then I did. Ah Pompey it is in vain that
love of our selves makes us aspire to the Philosophical insensibility; which
lifts up the Wise Man above all Accidents; Men are but Men, and what ever care
they take to raise themselves above Nature, the first movers will still keep
their course. I fell into a seat that stood by chance behind me, and sometimes
looking on Hortensius, sometimes on Martia, I sought in their eyes that which
would have made me mad to find, and persuading my self of my misfortune,
without being willing to believe it, I forced my self to think that a Dream,
which the impression of my grief, assured me, was too much a truth.

Martia, not able to endure my sight, went out without having power to speak
one word, Hortensius followed her example, and my Fury increasing, as my
surprise grew less, I was about to run into the utmost extremities, if
Munatius, who followed me at some distance, had not come in to the releif of my
decaying Prudence; he found me so changed, that he believed me more wounded
then I was, he set himself to comfort me, but kindly repulsing him with my
hand, I conjured him not to think of my wound, and told him it was become the
least of my miseries. He attributed this Despair, to the ill success of my
undertaking, and composing his countenance to gravity began to up braid me with
weakness.

How, said he, can the election of one Consul for another, put Cato into such a
dumps? What is become of his so much boasted Courage? Return to your self Cato,
and remember you are accomptable to Posterity, for the esteem which Rome has
given you. I acknowledge, replied I feebly, that it is an Election puts me into
the despair you find me, but alas it is not that of a new Consul. At that word
I grew senceless, but Munatius forgetting no offices of a true friend, to give
me what assistance was necessary, I soon recovered. My Wound was dressed, for it
seems Martia was run out only to fetch a Surgeon; and Munatius having sent
for a Litter, they carried me home, Martia followed me at a distance, bathed in
her tears for what had happened to her. The People looked upon them as proceeding
from an effect of conjugal Love, though they had a quite contrary cause, and
praising her for what merited eternal blame, 'twas from this action she gained
that reputation of Virtue with which Rome has favored her. She durst not see me
neither that day, nor many following, but entrusted Munatius with
Justification. She protested that Hortensius was in the House without being
sent for, and if she swore truth, she was not resolved to speak to him, when
she had seen him, but only to break off all commerce for the future. She
acknowledged she had been sensible of his merits, and declared likewise to
Munatius all I have told you of the secret of the intrigue; but she protested
that sensibility had still been kept within the bounds of desire, without ever
coming to act. I should possibly have become less severe in time (added she)
had I given my self over to the inclinations of my heart, that secreet esteem
which I dispensed with, had gained more power then I perceived or thought of;
and it was to reduce it to its duty that I was forbidding Hortensius my sight,
when Cato surprised us together, swear on my part, That all our discource
tended to this prohibition; and if the sincerity you may have observed in the
Confessions I make you, deserve any trust with you, procure me the favor of
Cato, and be assured he shall never have cause to repent it.

Munatius acquitted himself faithfully of the Commission he had received, he
endeavored to justify what was past, and forgot nothing to make me hope better
for the future; but both his Zeal and his Eloquence were fruitless. I had loved
Martia too well to be reclaimed from a suspicion that he had betrayed me; I
would repudiate her, and had been hurried to some more memorable revenge had I
been governed by my own thoughts: For I imagined in these occasions, my fury
was to take its dimentions from my love, and that the life of Martia was the
only fit sacrifice to the Passion I had for her. Munatius who was not of my
mind, opposed my Severity with all the Reasons he could allege.

The Evil, Cato, said he, which you complain of, is not an evil in effect, it is
only a Chimera founded upon your imagination. Hortensius was as much beloved
by your Wife before your Voyage to Cyprus, as he is at present. If that Man's
happiness were to be regarded by you as a real evil, you would have felt the
rigor of it more then, than now; yet you then thought to enjoy a perfect
happiness, and now account your self the most unfortunate of all Men. Are your
Wives merits at all angmented? Are the Laws of Marriage changed? In short, What
is happened should disturb your mind more now, then at that time? I know now my
misfortunes, and I could wish to be ignorant of them, answered I very sadly.

You see then, continued Munatius, that your grief is only a fancy, you are
wounded now at this time I speak to you; 'twould be in vain to conceal your
Wound from you; you see it, you feel it, and it is that we may call a true
grief; but to give that name to a thing you have born several years without
being sensible of it; believe me, Cato is to subvert all Rules of Philosophy. I
could no longer hear these Arguments, Martia had betrayed me, and I would be
revenged, and whatever withstood my vengeance, seemed contrary to Reason.
Munatius bethought himself of a secret to reclaim my understanding, he feigned
to submit to my obstinacy; and proposing to me the Marriage of Hortensius with
Martia, as a punishment of their crime, persuaded me I might better revenge my
self this way then any other. The jealousy of Husbands never breaks forth,
says he, but to their shame and disparagement, their violence aggravates their
grief, and their fury ill trained in the art of satisfaction, serves only to
adorn that triumph it would prevent; let not Hortensius have the glory to pass
in Rome for the favored Gallant of Cato's Wife, the opinion had of Man's
happiness, is often more essential then happiness it self. Why should you
procure it for your rival? Rather make him share the danger to which he has
exposed you, he deserves at best no better then Cato. Martia will doubtless
treat him as she has treated you, or were he so happy to escape it, he will at
least feel the discontent to imagine you despise Martia, since you quit her to
him; that very thought will lessen his happiness. It Is small satisfaction to
the vanity of mankind, to be themselves persuaded of the value of what they
possess: If all the world think it not precious, and your seeming indifference
creating a real disgust in the heart of this new Husband; he will be the
revenger of Martia's disloyalty, whilst she revenges you on Hortensius
rashness, I surrendered to these Reasons, and Munatius undertaking the
management of it, that so singular Marriage which Antiquity has no example for;
and which, I believe will be as rare in times to come, was concluded in the
manner I have told you.

I signed to my Wives Contract, Hortensius received her from my hand, as if she
had been my Daughter; and they lived as peaceably together, as if I had been
dead, or Martia never the Wife of Cato.

And would you take this Wife again, cried Pompey, when Cato had finished his
story, I would neither take her, nor any other; if I could dispense with it,
replied Cato. But suppose I were necessitated to marry, and that Martia would
return to me, she has given me such prejudice against all her Sex, that I
believe all Women equally unperfect; and if misfortune on misfortune must come,
that we are prepared for, is more supportable then that surprises us. I know
not, replied Pompey, interrupting him, Whether the jealousy of Lovers be more
violent then that of Husbands? But Flora found not me so tractable as Martia is
like to find you. Pray, said Cato, since we are upon the recital of these
secret intrigues, let me hear the sum of that story.

Flora was but a Curtizan, but by her beauty became so famous, that her love to
you is none of the least presents you have received from your good Fortune; and
the secret of your breach with her, has come to the knowledge of so few, that I
shall be highly obliged if you entrust me with it.

I care not for falling into that Discourse, replied Pompey, it is not for
Flora's advantage; and though it is true, she was but a Curtizan, yet I once so
dearly loved her, I still preserve a respect for her; but it is fit I sacrifice
something to the desires of Cato, nor shall it ever be said I refused the first
mark of friendship demanded after our reconciliation.

It Is difficult to define, that Love agrees with my Nature, it has all the
violencies of debauchery, and yet has ever been restrained within the bounds of
Virtue. It Is a conjugal tie must put a stop to my Heart; and where other Men's
desires enter into their Tomb, and are buried, mine receive Spring and Life. I
showed such overflowings of Passion to Antistia, my first Wife, That People of
my Age reproached me with it, as an extremity of weakness. I had been no less
kind to Sylla's Daughter, had I had time to have perceived I was her Husband;
and the disloyal Martia will assure all the World, that it was not any coldness
or indifference of mine inspired her with the design of betraying me. Such a
particular inclination agreed not with the title of Curtizan, which we cannot
dispense with the giving to Flora; but could I at that time have foreseen, she
would ever have deserved it, she should never have been the Mistress of Pompey;
but she tendered her self to my hcart in such honest appearances, that they
overcame all scruples.

I was one day with Caecilius Metellus, in the Temple of Castor and Pollux,
which was then to be dedicated, and to take care of its adorning, Metellus had
Commission from the Senate; he discharged his trust with as much care as
magnificence, and that I might be a witness of it, he had then carried me into
the Temple: I there beheld many Pictures of an exquisite perfection, and among
the rest, one of the Conception of the Twins, where Leda was represented so
fair, it was impossible to look on her, and not envy the divine Swan that
enjoyed her. The Painter who drew this piece, said I to Metellus, had his fancy
very excellent, and extraordinary; it were to be wished Nature were as perfect
in her Lineaments, we should not then see so many ill faces as we daily do.
Nature deserves all the praises you give the Painter, replied Metellus, that
face of Leda's is taken from a young Roman, whose Beauty far exceeds that
representation you there see.

Is it possible, cried I, that there can be a Woman in Rome, as fair as that
painting, and she not be as famous as the Capitol, and other Singularities of
the City?

The young Flora whom this Picture represents, answered Metellus, is of so mean
a Birth, that she has been as it were buried in that obscurity, she is only
the daughter of a Mechanic; and if he had not formerly wrought in my House,
Flora had been as unknown to me as to all other people of quality; but Pompey,
that low Birth has not despoiled Flora of a great Soul: It Is a small matter to
see this Portraict, and to know that it flatters not the Original. I will tell
you, to perfect her description, that I have loved this Maid for above two
years, and that there are no marks of Love capable to beget a sense of it, in
persons of her Character and Condition, which she has not received of me. I
load her with presents, I maintain the whole Family, and would enrich it for
ever, if Flora would but comply with my desires; but imperious as she is, she
disdains all my offers, and stands more on her Beauty, then I can, either on my
Birth or Quality. She believes she should honor me in accepting me for her
Husband, if my Passion could carry me to that extravagance.

Flora entered the Temple as Metellus ended his Discourse, she came to sit for
some touches of a Picture wherein Clytemnestra was represented under some of
her Features.

I protest I was dazzled with the Beauty of the Maid, and if I may say it, she
thought me not unworthy to be considered, she blushed as soon as her eyes met
with mine, she looked earnestly at me when I feigned to look off her, and she
seemed troubled to turn away, when I surprised her with a glance. I praised her
Beauty exceedingly, and I told Metellus he had administered a necessary
preservative, when he had told me of her cruelty; she bravely defended her self
from that quality, and told Metellus in a pretty scornful way, that of ten the
title of Cruelty was given to what was but a result of right Reason; and at the
pronouncing that word, turning her eyes toward me, methought I read in them a
destiny happier for me then that of Metellus. You know well such favorable
encour agements are seldom neglected I caused Flora be followed to learn her
dwelling, and on the morrow pretended some necessary business to employ her
Father in, and made use of the Occasion to speak with her.

I was at this time a Widower, having buried Sylla's Daughter, and not yet fallen
in league with Murcia, so that I looked upon an intrigue with Flora to be the
most pleasing amusement of my mind I could find out. Sympathy had prepared me
the way, I need but speak to be listened to, and I fancy, had I kept silence, I
had been entreated to break it. Facility generally disgusts delicated nice
Minds, but it produces a contrary effect, when a Lover regards it as a miracle
of Love. That of Flora had this Character. What Metellus had told me of the
Virtue of this Maid, what I daily discovered of the Reputation she had gained;
and more then all that, somewhat of a sincere pressing forward of my heart, and
fully discovering to me that of my Mistress, persuaded me that all the love in
her was new, and that no Star in the World but Pompey's, could have had that
influence.

You may judge by what I have told you, of the discourse I had with Metellus,
he could be no long time without perceiving my good Fortune; he had a mind to
be cleared in his suspicions, and Flora thinking her Love an Honor, never took
the pains to disguise it to my Rival.

Yes Metellus, said she, I love Pompey, one main circumstance would be wanting
to my happiness, if you should not know his; and my heart would be an offering
unworthy so great a Man, should it not be accompanied with a sacrifice of your
desires.

This Declaration making Metellus observe as much Disdain in it as Ingenuity,
transported his Jealousy almost to a Fury; I was forced to use all my credit
and authority to rescue Flora's family from the effects of his anger, and had
he not died about that time, he had possibly done by stratagem, what he could
not do by open force. His death leaving me in a peaceable possession of the
fair and loving Flora, I cannot say I ever passed more happy time, then the
first five or six Months of this intrigue; but there is no happiness lasting
here below, and Man would forget the end for which he was born, if the
Providence of the Wise God did not mix his pleasures with some pain. Geminius,
the Companion of my Studies, and Comrade of my Travels, and whom next Flora I
loved more then all the World, became unhappily in love with this fair Maid, I
concealed from him none of the secrets of my Soul, he knew my Love, and
representing to himself the despair into which I should fall, if I should find
my self betrayed by Flora, used incredible endeavors to suppress this powerful
inclination. The Combats of the Soul are more dangerous to a sensible Man, then
the most Bloody Battles. Geminius fell grievously sick, I stirred not from his
Bedside, and Flora who could forbear my sight no more then I hers, spent whole
days with me in this sick Man's Chamber. Our love was violent, and scarce
contained it self before suspected witnesses, but we constrained it not before
our best Friends.

I was still speaking kind and feeling things to Flora, and she answered me in
terms every way as touching, our eyes made a continual commerce of eloquent
glances, and the most indifferent things were advanced to profit by our
laborious Passion, every thing turning into an occasion of expressing the
warmth of our desires. Judge into what condition we put the passionate and
discreet Geminius; he was brought to that extremity, that the Physicians gave
him over; and when he felt his death approaching he declared to me the cause of
it. The Friendship I had for Geminius, could not be balanced by any thing, but
my love to Flora, were I to have parted with my life to save my friends, I
should have given it without reflection; but when I understood Flora was the
concern, I asked time to resolve; resolve nothing Pompey said the dying
Geminius, I discovered not my grief to find a remedy; I am too happy to die for
that I love best in the World, and though your generosity would contribute to
my recovery, I know it depends not on you, your happiness is so great, it
dazles you, and you see but a part of it. I am (since so Destiny pleases) more
clear sighted, I have observed particulars in the love of Flora, that destroy
the confidence I could have in your friendship. Live happy, and let me die
miserable, and give not that increase to my torments to let them cost you one
sorrowful reflection.

This discourse pronounced by an expiring Man, and one I so dearly loved,
touched me to the very Soul, I thought I ought to my friends life, at least, a
seeming willingness to contribute to his cure; and presuming enough on Flora's
constancy to believe she would preserve her self wholly to me in despite of
myself, I assured Geminius that if he could gain her love, I would look on his
happiness without a murmur: I have not faith enough in the fictions of the
Poets, to believe this assurance restored Geminius life, but his disease being
come to the Christ's, certain it is, that from that day we observed his
amendment. I resolved to assist it by my absence, and as well to convince him
of my sincerity, as to avoid the reproaches of Flora, I went to spend some time
at the Countreyhouse, whether Sylla was retired, after having laid down the
Dictatorship.

I writ every day to Flora, Letters full of that Love possessed my Soul. I had
not engaged never to love her more, but only promised she should love my
friend if she could. Wretch that she was, she could but do it too much; Love is
no mighty task to one of that Sex.

Geminius Painted my slight compliance with such lively colors, that at my
return to Rome, I learned from Flora's own Mouth her infidelity. How, cried I,
can it be true, that you, loved Pompey with so much fervency, and cease to love
him with so much ease? Who has told you I have ceased to love you, replied
Flora? Do you give the title of change to that sacrifice you constrained? Is it
because I have restored you a Friend, whose loss had made you desperate, that
you accuse me with want of love? Alas, I expected a thousand thanks for my
cheerful obedience, 'twas a thousand tortures to me to yield to it; and I made
use of all the powers of my kindness to resolve upon, what you reproach for a
decay of Passion.

Ah Flora, said I, how cruel is your obedience to me? How much more would you
have obliged me, had I found you less submissive.

Flora asked pardon for her error, and swore to me, she would stop the career
of it, and doubtless would have done as the said: That deadly grief she
expressed at our separation, hath-fully persuaded me Geminius destroyed me with
my own Weapon, and that Flora believed she pleased me in betraying me; but the
remembrance of that inconstancy has given me disgusts, I could never vanquish.

Flora forbore to see my Rival any more, she felt a remorse for her credulity,
which almost cost her her life. I loved her a long time after our rupture, and
her memory is yet grateful to me; but Cato, I was born nice and delicate, and
in my mind true love is incompatible of partnership.

Night rather then want of Matter, broke off the converse of these two
Ilustrious Romans. I shall find out a way to renew it hereafter, but it is good
to make use of the leisure of contriving it; and leaving these two reconciled
Enemies to their quiet rest, endeavor after their example, to enjoy some time
of repose.

The End of the Discourse of Cato and Pompey.
THE LOVES OF Great Men. D'ANDELOT.
DUring the Progress to Bayonne, the King had given leave to the Duke D'Aumale
to hunt in the Forest of Fontainbleau, and to kill the Wild Boar. In one of
these Chaces, the Duchess D'Aumale, Natural Daughter to King Henry the Second,
and Diana of Poictiers, coming near to the Enclosure they had made, a Wild Boar
broke the Toyls, and frighting her Horse, he ran clear away with her toward
the left hand, D'Andelots Horse frighted at the same accident, followed Madam
D'Aumales; her Husband was a good way off, with Prince Patien, and Madam
L'Admirale de Brion; two other Ladies who were near the Duchess, cried out,
that weak assistance being all they could give her, none daring to venture
their skill in riding at her rate, except Madam de Brion, who pursued her on
full speed. The cry came soon to the Duke, who hearing how his Ladies Horse was
frightened, had not been concerned for her, had he not at the same time heard
that D'Andelots with a like fright, took the same way with the Dutchesses, he
rid then with all speed to overtake them. D'Andelot who could not guide his
Horse, letting him run wherever he pleased, heard a noise beside him, and saw
Madam D'Aumale coming up very near him, but in a moment she was passed him, and
he lost sight of her, by reason of a small Coppice was before him, which the
way dividing in two, he was forced to enter, and there saw Madam D'Aumale fallen.
That sight made him strive hard again to stop his Horse, but since he could
not, he threw himself down to take care of her, whom he feared was hurt; she
was almost stunded, and in that disorder discovered some part of her fair body.
There is scarce that Love and Constancy in the World, can resist against so
many Beauties, and though possibly this minutes sight, changed not utterly the
object of D'Andelots love, yet so pleasing an adventure made him at least very
sensible; but care of the Duchess made him soon forego the pleasure he reaped
with his eyes. He was come to her, and had just taken her in his arms to lift
her up, when the Duke and Madam de Brion arrived; yet he gave not over his
officious employ, and the asking her, whether she was hurt. The Duchess
thought her self alone with him, and was reaching her lips to his, but he
turned his head the other way; a refusal she would have looked upon, as a rude
injury to her Love and Beauty, had not she sooner perceived what was the cause
of a Modesty Men are seldom guilty of. But what a sight was this for a jealous
Husband, who was both suspicious of his Wives humor, and feared her Gallants
worth; nor in reason had Madam de Brion less cause of grief, suffice it both
felt what was hard to be expressed even by themselves; nor were Madam D'Aumale,
nor D'Andelot, without their share of jealousy and trouble; and whilst they
could not utter what they thought, their thoughts were the more oppressive.

Madam D'Aumale having a little hurt on her hand and knee, was in her Coach
carried back to Fountainbleau; but her hurts being slight, the Men waited not
on her, but returned to the sport, and took their Darts to assail the Wild
Boars. D'Andelots Horse being wounded by one of the largest, he was forced to
alight, and assail him on foot. The Duke D'Aumale had a care of him, though he
was both his Wives Gallant, and the Dangerous Rival that robbed him of Madam de
Brions Heart, and coming up to the Boar, lanced his Dart at the same time that
D'Andelot plunged his in the Boars shoulder, his throw was unlucky, wounding
D'Andelot in the hand, as it passed into the Boars Flanck, who immediately
fell. This unhappy accident much added to the Duke D'Aumale's trouble, though
chance and misfortune contributed more to D'Andelots wound then he, which yet
was not so great, but he returned on horsback to Fountainbleau.

The Marshal de Montmorency, Governor of Paris, who was his near Kinsman and
Brother-in-law, to the Duke D'Aumale, having heard what had happened at this
Chase, came to visit the Duchess and D'Andelot. The Marshal was a mighty
amorous Gallant Person, who always loved more then one; and his inconstancies
were authorized by his being one of the handsomest Men of his time; he knew
there was a Treaty of Love between D'Andelot, and Madam de Brion, in which
Madam D'Aumale seemed to have some concern. The pain of his Wounds, being in
eight days allayed, he was obliged to comply with the Marshals pressing
entreaties and yield to his friendships, who being desirous to know his story,
he thus began it.

His story of the Loves of the Lady Admirale De Brion and D'Andelot.
THe Siege of Orleans having wasted much time, and forces of the Kings Army,
Queen Catherine endeavored a Peace: The Conference of the Isle aux Boeufs being
ended, leave was as you know granted to the Prince of Conde, who together with
the Constable, had been taken at Dreux, to come to Orleans with the more
freedom to confer with the friends of their party. The Princess of Conde came
likewise thither from S. Mesmin, and brought with her the Admiral de Brion. War
had diverted my mind from Love, and if I may say it without vanity, I had no
leisure to entertain any thoughts of that Passion; but now he took his time,
and surprised me at Orleans at the sight of Madam de Brion. I spent there one
part of the day in confulting with the Prince of Conde and Saint Cire, about
the best ways of preserving the power of our party, and in the evening failed
not to wait on the Princess, where I enjoyed the pleasure of an indifferent and
serious converse, which was somewhat hard to advance; but which I begun to
desire might become more satisfactory.

Madam de Brion had not yet perceived in me what I desired she should, her
unconcerned and indifferent carriage made me fearful of success, but love
emboldned me. It may be, I put too much trust in him; but when we find we must
love, and are sure to love well, what is it we are not inclined to hope from so
fair a Passion.

I was one day with her, when an Italian Painter brought some Pictures to sell;
he happened to be in the City when the Siege was laid to it, and was forced to
stay there till it was drawn off, having heard of the arrival of the Prince and
Princess; he had showed them some Picture which they had bought, and being
informed that Madam de Brion loved them, he brought what he had left to her
Lodgings.

The Painter spoke French so ill, he could scarce be understood. I earnestly
viewed one of his Pictures, which Madam de Brion observing, and finding
something in it both curious and pleasant, asked me if I knew the story.

The ingenious Fable you there see discribed Madam, said I, is taken out of the
Works of the famous Tasso. Armida the Enchantress having received many cruel
affronts from Rinaldo before she knew him, was resolved on revenge; she
advances toward the Christian Camp, discovers, approaches, and in short,
enters it under pretense of craving aid from Godfrey the General. Rinaldo, who
till then, had never thought of love, could not restrain his eyes from wandering
on hers, his heart sob'd and was troubled, and began to feel for Armida, what
it had never felt before. How glad was he when she made choice of him in the
occasion she pretended to have to make use of valor? Though Armida was learned
in all Magic Sciences, and knew well the virtues and power of all Simples,
Characters, and Words; yet her greatest charm and strongest enchantment lay in
her Beauty; which Tasso tells us, was so commanding, that the whole Camp would
have followed her. But Rinaldo gains the preference, because she only asked
for him. Armida having now got her enemy into her hands, buries her revenge in
looking on him: Love banished indignation, and Rinaldo was too brave and too
much inamored to prove ungrateful to so kind and fair a person. Armida builds
an enchanted Palace, and in the Gardens of that Palace which you there see
represented, these two lovers forgot every thing else to enjoy all the
pleasures of love. Take notice, Madam, of that young Lady, seated on the Banks
of a Fountain, proceeded I, showing her by her eyes, by her air, by her
features, you cannot judge her other then Armida; and that lovely handsome Man,
cannot be other then Rinaldo.

The Painter, who doubtless sought in the whole story, some what might appear
most pleasing, could find nothing more proper then this to represent, which he
has done with so much art, that it is impossible to behold Armida so full of
love and beauty, and Rinaldo so handsome and so passionate without desiring to
be in love.

I observed the Admiral was pleased with harkening to me, and it highly
contented me to see her buy the Picture. The Princess just in the nick came to
take her out to walk, and I Will promise you this was the first time ever her
sight had grieved me; the Picture had given me the opportunity to enter on some
discourse of my love, which I had determined not to lose, but now was
constrained.

Going thence I met with Saint Cire, who told me the Prince would speak with
me. I hastened to him, but found 'twas no state affair he had to communicate;
you know him, and know he is very inclineable to love, and hard to forego it,
once entered into. Mademoiselle de Bourlemont whom you have seen near the
Princess, had smitten him ere he was aware, the letting her know it, was a
thing wherein the Prince was obliged to observe much Caution: Yet he had so
well ordered the affair that he had spoke, and the Lady had not believed it
dangerous to hearken to him; nay more, she appeared jealous, as if she could
have wished the Princes love no straggler.

This was in short what he had to communicate, having drawn me to a Window that
none else might hear, he told me he had chosen me for his confident, and
encouraging me thereby to a freedom, I declared to him my concern for Madam de
Brion, he promised me, and I assured him of a reciprocal assistance in his love.

Hereupon we went into the walks to wait on the Princess and the Admiral, who
as soon as we came up to her, it is tedious being here said she to me, cannot
you invent some pleasing divertisement to drive away melancholy. I have it at
hand Madam, said I, what can be more pleasant then to talk of love, you have
nothing here to divert it, and I find my heart inclineable to treat of it with
none but you. Where did you learn to talk thus, said she, smiling; who has
taught you to look so on me, Madam, replied I, in a jovial manner, but was much
afflicted I could say no more, for Bourlemont and another of the Princess Women
coming up to us, interrupted us, and I could not find a minutes opportunity all
that Evening to continue what I had begun.

Bourlemont who took notice with what delight I observed Madam de Brion, softly
in my ear, asked me, if I were in love; as much as the Prince is with you,
replied I, so that the rest might not hear: She would needs know what I meant
by that, and I explained it to her, she blushed, and seemed coy, as if she
desired not his kindness; but I judged the contrary, and told my observations
to the Prince, who requited them with giving me such an account of his
Negotiations with the Admiral, that I began to believe my attempts not
impossible.

Soon after the Duke D'Aumale came to Orleans to treat on the Kings behalf, as
you very well know about the Restitution of some places, which the Prince could
hardly consent to. The Duchess was with him, whose arrival, turned the whole
Town into pleasure and divertisement, and many days were spent in Feasts and
Balls.

That day the Duchess coming was first known, I happened to be with Madam de
Brion, we were at first talking of a thousand indifferent things; but in the
end, I changed the discourse, endeavoring to improve those few minutes my good
Fortune gave me. The Admiral answered very wittily to all I said of my Passion;
but I sought a return of love, and was little satisfied with those reperties. I
observed the melancholy and seriousness, with which I discoursed, caused some
joy in her, and I loved her too well to rob her of that pleasure. I guessed,
Madam, said I, that love would rejoice you, and you would not believe me; but
if you would now frankly declare your thoughts, I am sure they must agree with
mine.

I Will swear your company does divertise me, replied she, and I cannot but laugh
at your design of Courtship; but you must understand I have a kind of stubborn
heart, that neither knows love, nor desires to know it: I Will awaken that desire
in it, Madam, replied I, and will assure you, on Loyes behalf, he takes it very
ill you should treat me so cruelly. Take heed of quarrelling with him, he is a
powerful enemy, who infallibly revenges himself on his despisers. To let you
see I don't fear him, replied she, I Will wager with you, he never overcomes me:
Do not lay any wagers, answered I, for you will be sure to lose.

She would not take my advice, and we concluded to agree on the wager, when
Fontpertuis came in, and was chosen judge, if any difference happened between
us, she is a Kinswoman of hers whom you have often seen with her, and who had a
great power over her. We had much ado to agree what our wager should be, I
would have had hers to have been some favors, but that was not her design; yet
having represented to her, that she run no hazard, being as she affirmed, she
was sure to win, she consented in the end, to engage to admit my utmost
service, and I consented never to see her more, and to quit the Princes party,
if I lost. What will not men in love promise? I gave her my word, and she
assured me hers; two Months was the time allowed for trial, at the end of
which, Fontpertuis was to give judgment which had won: I took my leave of her,
with telling her, that I was resolved to neglect nothing to gain her; she
answered, that she already accounted me of the Kings party, and I you Madam,
said I, of loves.

I came thence well satisfied with what I had said, and what I had done, and my
joy made the Prince suspect me more happy then he. I endeavored to persuade him
the contrary, who easily believed me, but I told him nothing of the wager. You
cannot imagine, said he to me, how lovely Bourlemont appears to me, I fancy I
shall ever love her. All say so, said I, when they begin to be in love; and
there is a pretty delight in saying and thinking our love shall never end; but
afterward when its fervency begins decay, and the kindness decreases without
knowing a reason for it. Believe me, we return to our selves, and to our wonted
tempers and yours, being to be inconstant; so soon as you are satisfied, we
shall hear no more from you, that Madam Bourlemont is fair, or that you shall
love for ever. Its very true, answered he, I love change, and finding it
delightful, cannot think of confining my self. Believe me, D'Andelot there are
pleasures in inconstancy, and it is a mighty satisfaction, to make love in a
great many places at once, and to find answers suitable to our desires.

I left the Prince in this opinion, in which I could not resolve to imitate him.

That Evening the Duke and Duchess D'Aumale arrived, there was a Ball at the
Princes, where I received, without thinking of it, some favorable glances from
Madam D'Aumale. I desired not hers, but Madam de Brions, whom the Duke
entertained, and me thought I observed in his addresses to her, something of
the courtship of a Man in love. He was a Rival might well be feared, the
Admiral hearkened to him, and my jealousy made me discover a thousand things
distracted me. The Duchess came to take me out to dance, and I left her not
all that Evening. Madam de Brion observed what I did, I perceived it, but I
forbore not discoursing with the Duchess.

On the morrow the Duke came to visit the Admiral, I happened to be there, and
having observed her more nearly then at the Ball, began to suspect her already
in a condition to make me lose my wager, the loss was considerable, and many
reasons obliged me to prevent it.

Mean time the Prince prosecuted his love with Bourlemont, and his endeavors
were not successless, he had the satisfaction to know she did not hate him; he
let me know his happiness, and not trusting to any other the secret of his
Passion, gave me a Letter for her, but I lost it, and it unhappily fell into
Madam de Brions hands, who not knowing my Character, thought after having read
the following Lines I had deserted her for the Duchess.

You unjustly accuse me with loving the Admiral, have a better opinion of your
own Beauty, and my Faith, and think not I can love by halves. It Is possible I
may have given occasion for your suspicions by those enterviews you have seen
between us; but believe me, they were not all on the score of love, and when
their causes shall be known, you will repent you: Injustice and I shall have
the satisfaction not to have any cause to reproach you.

Though at the sight of this, she dissembled a joy and content, I found
afterward she had much ado to restrain her grief and anguish.

The Duchess loved her very well, and that she might have the more of her
company, she left her Lodgings, and went to sojourn at Madam D'Aumales, during
her stay at Orleans.

The first night she went to lie there, there happened a tumult in the City.
One of the Duke D'Aumales servants quarrelled with a Citizen, who was wholly
interessed for the party, and called him Rebel: He could not endure that
injury, and the servant was very scurvily treated, other servants came in to
his aid, and the Neighbors to the Citizens. The quarrel grew general, and the
Citizens in great numbers pressed even to the Dukes Gates, and entered them,
and their animosity made it be feared they would force in that tumultuous
manner through all the Lodgings. The Duke D'Aumale being with the Prince, had
news of the commotion, and having told it me, I made haste and came just at the
instant they had past the Court, and were breaking open the Duchess Chamber, I
appeased the multitude, and at my name the door was opened, and I took the
Duchess, and conveyed her out by a convenient postern.

I knew not that the Admiral had that night changed Lodings, nor did the
Duchess tell me so, till I had put her in a place of security. Saint Cire,
whom I had made stay at the Dukes Lodgings to complete the appeasing of the
tumult, took care of the Admiral, and I returning immediately to see if I were
obeyed, was surprised to see Madam de Brion coming out with Saint Cire, who was
conducting her to the Princesses, I excused my self, not knowing her to have
been at the Dutchesses, she received my excuse very coldly, yet upbraided me
not, but civilly dispensed with my attending her.

The Prince understanding from Bourlemont, I had not given her his Letter,
asked me, what I had done with it; I told him how I had lost it, and sought in
vain for it, in all places where I had been. Bourlemont was mighty angry at my
neglect, fearing his privacies with the Prince might take air by it; but I
satisfied her by telling her, none could suspect to whom it was writ, being
without superscription; and the hand was so well counterfeited, 'twould rather
be taken for mine, then the Princes.

All which was but too true, and that resemblance but too much justified, when
the Admirale saw in the Duchess hands Verses, she had prayed me to give her,
and which I had writ.

For my part, I who suspected not Madam De Brions thoughts, employed all my
cares to incline her affection: The Duke managed the same design, and I often
feared with better success then my self.

Though the Duchess was still extremely favorable to me, yet I constrained my
self not to perceive what she would have me see; how easy had been my passage
unto her Heart, had I had a design to enter it. All Prince Portiau's Merit had
vanished for me, and I plainly saw it must be my fault if I were not beloved by
one of the fairest Persons of the world, but I could not consent to it, whilst
my Love to the Admirale withstood it, and I chose rather to be constant and
unhappy with her, then dearly beloved elsewhere.

My mind told me, these thoughts ought to hope for some reward, if they were
but known, but there was nothing beheld in me but Treason and Inconstancy, and
that was a strange kind of way to gain Love from any Person.

They were playing one night at the Princesses, the Admirale was only looking
on, and I thought it a convenient time to speak to her, and having drawn her
out of the hearing of the company, I begin to apprehend, said I, that you will
not love me, and that I shall lose my wager, but Madam, is not the Duke
D'Aumale the causer? that reproach drew on hers, and she appeared to me full of
anger and jealousy, and yet in the mixture I could discern some Love; you will
supply that loss with Madam D'Aumale, said she, and her Beauty will make good
all you can lose by me, Ah Madam, it is only your heart I am ambitious of,
replied I, and though I cannot obtain it with all my sufferings, I will never
give you the pleasure to call me unfaithful. You have fully done it already,
answered she with a disdainful smile, but you deserve not I should complain of
you; that would be a mark of esteem, and I have only scorn for you: I besought
her to no purpose, to explain why she treated me thus. She returned to see them
play, and I withdrew, satisfied to know a part of her thoughts, but terribly
afflicted at the reproach she made me.

The Duke D'Aumale having finished his Treaty with the Prince, returned to
Court. The Duchess at departure, seeing me sad and melancholy, attributed it
to her self, and obliged her thoughts with an opinion I was concerned for her.
The Admirale thought as she did, and continued for some time that she stayed at
Orleans to shun my company and scorn me.

The Constable being brought back to the City, the Prince and Princess went
thence together with Madam de Brion. She would not have seen me, but I would
wait on her on the way; I expected at least some indifferent regards, but I had
not so much as that small content, and believed my self unhappy. Fontpertuis
perceiving my grief, made me assign to hope, and I answered her by other signs.

My Brother the Admiral was come to Orleans one day before the Princes
departure, he was dissatisfied with the Treaty, and would have had it broke,
but the Prince could not consent.

Soon after, Peace being concluded, I heard that Madam de Brion was at one of
her Lord ships, within two Leagues of my House at Tanley; having no business of
consequence at Court, I went down under pretense of building a Lodge after the
Italian mode, and to that end some days before me, sent down and Architect had
undertook it.

As soon as I had reached Tanlay, all my thoughts were employed how to see the
Admirale; I knew her fair, and loved her, and would purchase her love at what
rate soever. I acquainted Fontpertuis by Letter of my design to see Madam de
Brion, she returned me answer, 'twas not yet time, and that the Admirale was
very angry at me, but mentioned not the occasion; but withal told me, that she
was going for eight days to visit an Aunt of hers; whither, if I would take the
pains to come, I might know the cause of all.

As soon as I could learn Fontpertuis was come to her Aunts, I went to her
House, which was but three Leagues distant from mine. I have already told you,
Fontpertuis was a kinswoman of Madam de Brions, and that she entrusted her with
all her secrets, yet certain it is, the Admirale knew not that I had writ to
her, or that she had answered me, or appointed me to see her.

She made me a very civil and courteous reception, and at her sight I was more
rejoiced then I had been since the absence of Madam de Brion; she told me from
whence the anger proceeded, and that its original was from the suspicions she
had, I was in love with Madam D'Aumale, which were confirmed by a Letter she
accused me to have writ to her; 'twas not hard to pacify my self on the whole
to Fontpertuis: did it, she believed me, and assured me I was not hated.

The assurance made me hope I must be beloved; she was to be judge, the time
drew nigh that our wager was to be decided; I trusted neither so much to my
love, nor the kindness the Admirale might conceive for me, as to neglect the
care of making my judge favorable: there lay all my thoughts, after having
taken leave of Fontpertuis and his Aunt.

My Household affairs, Unseasonable visits, and Letters from the Prince and
Admirale, which I was obliged to answer, kept me two days from seeing
Fontpertuis. You may have observed she is taking enough, has Wit and pleasant
Converse, and I stood in need of her Credit. As soon as I came she complained
of my neglect in not seeing her all that time; her manner of looking and
talking with me made me suspect her heart was smitten: I resolved to make
Trial, and found my self not deceived, she was indeed in love, I told her what
I thought, she confessed it, blushing, and casting down her Eyes. In this
conjuncture, I forgot the Love and Faith I owed the Admirale, and greedily
snatching the opportunity offered, had the pleasure to seduce my Judge.

In four other visits I paid her, I had the like entertainment; I confirmed her
good intentions toward me, and doubted not of her giving sentence on my side,
if the Admirale would be determined by her judgment; yet sometimes I feared
lest Fontpertuis had too much love, which might forbid her suffering me to be
happy, and engage her for the Duke D'Aumale, who since his departure from
Orleans, had put all those things in practice, carried any likelihood of
contributing to his desires; but she satisfied me with so much sweetness and
kindness, that I had no farther trouble then the expectation of the hour of
judgment.

She took leave of her Aunt, and returned to Madam de Brion, counselling me to
come thither, without asking her permission, and I was too much in love to
neglect her counsel; I followed her next morning, and without telling the
Servants who I was, asked for Fontpertuis, who was brought to me; she told me
the Admirale was in an Arbor in the Garden; I requested her to show me the
place, she was my guide, and showing me the Arbor, left me within some few
steps of it.

I presently went into the Arbor, and there beheld Madam de Brion asleep on a
Bed of Sods. Had I till then been unsensible, this sight would have made me
love: The sweet composure and loveliness of her Neck, which all appeared,
strangely moved and tickled me, a pleasant ecstasy spread it self through my
whole body, and I was wrapped up into transports and desires that appeared to me
almost like a third Heaven, to which I found all my inclinations so ready to
bend, 'twas only one way possible for me to find a happiness beyond it, for
still I but looked and durst do no more, till love made me a little bolder; and
what had I not done if she had not waked? she was surprised to see me, and see
her self alone with me. How D'Andelot, said she, you that are so obliged to me,
how can you forget that I requested you no more to see me. Alas Madam, said I,
who would not forget it when Love Commands it? At this she rose up, and
Fontpertuis coming in, I continued talking after that rate, not doubting but my
discourse was more acceptable, then it would have been persuaded.

You see Madam, said I, an unhappy Man, who comes only to know, by what
justice you have condemned him to such sufferings? do you set no value on his
Love and Faith, and must he hope nothing from his perseverance? Pardon me
Madam, if I call you ungrateful; you deserve that Title, added I sighing,
though once I thought I should never have cause to call you so. Your
perfidiousness, replied she, has smothered all I found lovely in you, I have
observed your crime at large, but you have given me so little leave to discern
your passion, that I have happily suppressed the Commencements of mine. Ah
Madam, said I, interrupting her, that victory you will gain over your self,
will cost me dear; it is hard for me to be accused of Treason, by what I love
more then all the world, and judge but how it must afflict me, I cannot make
you sensible that Love deserves any thing! At this I asked her what was my
crime, she fairly told me, and 'twas as easy for me to justify my self by
showing many other Letters in the same Character which the Prince had writ to
me; she began to listen, and in short, was so well convinced, that I overthrew
all the unjust suspicions she had conceived against me; our discourse ended in
her gracing with an apparent joy, the finding me loving and constant, and I
studied to six her imaginations upon the consent I received from her sight and
goodness, and left her not till I bore off all that Hope could promise.

Fontpertuis had indeed great care to oblige me, and seconded earnestly the
persuasions of my innocence. I saw very well what thanks she expected, and she
deserved them, but poor soul, was cheated for want of time and opportunity.

Soon after my return to Tanlay, the Duke and Duchess of Aumale came thither;
the sight of my Rival troubled me as much as the Dutchesses; I understood
presently, that the Duke could not pass by without seeing the Admirale, and
those desires made him submit to persuade the Duchess to pass by Taulay, which
found in her a readier compliance, out of hopes her Beauty and address might at
last vanquish the indifference I had showed toward her: They stayed two days
at my house, where I entertained them with all the divertisements a Country
House could afford in the best season of the year; since 'twas impossible for
me to avoid conversing with the Duchess: she took her time when the Duke was
otherwise employed; I found in her discourse so much love would have ravished
me, had it come from the Admirale; what would not I have given to have heard
her say half those kind things the Duchess did? You are pensive D'Andelot,
said she to me, jogging me by the Arm, and take no care to answer me: I turned
my self toward her, sighing, without thinking of it; what would you have me
answer Madam, said I? recollecting my self, you cannot but think as well as I,
how little I deserve the respect you give me: I could not have thought, replied
she, there was a Man in the world so cruel, or who had so great a value of
himself as to slight the entreaties of one of my birth, but you have made me
believe there are such, and I find it so great a torment, as nothing can
counterpoyse, unless you change your thoughts. Ah Madam, cried I, interrupting
her, why cannot I love you; or why may not I lay open to you the secrets of a
heart, I cannot give you; for if I should divide it, 'twould give you continual
cause of complaint, and me no satisfaction: No, no, said she, I will have no
divided heart, and had much rather it should be all Madam de Brion's, then I
have but a part.

One of the Admirales Gentlemen came to interrupt us, his message was to
compliment the Duchess on her arrival, and to desire her to come and spend
some few days in her House; she was somewhat at a stand what to answer, when
the Duke who came up to us, took the word out of her mouth, and promised on the
morrow to come wait upon her; I perceived her discontent at the Dukes haste to
leave Tanlay, but now she must submit, and I had too much interest to accompany
her, to omit it.

The Duke and Duchess had Lodgings appointed them, looking out upon a Terrace
of Orange Trees (as most of the rest do) the Duchess lay in one Chamber, and
the Duke in another by the side of it.

At Madam de Brions we received the news of the preparations made to besiege
Havre de grace, the English Forces were much feared, the Prince was in League
with them, during the War, and it was feared upon a breach, they would send him
considerable relief. Orders being brought to me for the march of the Infantry,
I dispatched them to all places whither they were to be distributed, and I made
ready my Equipage, to be in eight days at Soissons, where the Rendezvous was
appointed.

The Duke D'Aumale was much affected at the sight of Madam de Brion, and I was
as much pleased to know I was beloved. The Duchess easily spied out my joy,
and all I could do to conceal my happiness, was of no proof against her
jealousy, which formed things bigger then they were.

The two months the Admirale and I had taken for the decision of our wager
were now expired within four days; I put her in mind of it, she only blushed,
and answered nothing, but her silence was a Million, my Love understood it very
well. I was diligent to secure my Judges favor by that complaisance a faithful
Lover should only give to the Person he loved; but Interest changes maxims of
Love and that obliged me to treat thus with Fontpertuis, to whom my kindness
was but policy.

There were sent from Paris to Madam de Brion, two China Gowns excellently
stained with little Antic Figures, which appeared the more admirable, because
Europe had seen so few of them. She gave the finest to Madam D'Aumale, who
seeing the Admirale, wore hers, put it on the same day. That Evening, as we
were all in the Garden, and that walking in the Serene, gave us a delight, the
heats of the day had robbed us of. I coming near to Fontpertuis, be sure to
meet me, said she, on the Orange Terrace, I have somewhat to say to you in
behalf of -- I made her a sign to speak lower, Madam d'Aumale being by us.

The Duke, Amorous, Zealous, and withal ill treated, talked of love with the
Admirale. Will you be always cruel Madam, said he, and never pity what I
suffer; you will find much more sweetness in that amorous conversation, I so
sincerely propose then in that indifference hinders, and by its niceness,
obstructs the enjoyments of those pleasures love would confer, but Madam
d'Andelot loves you, and can you be so insensible as you appear? These words
smote her but after having stood mute a while, Should I permit you, said she,
to search my heart, you would find little there, conributing to your desires;
your love should be applied to the Duchess only, she is one of the most
charming persons of the World, and I will never be upbraided to have bred a
disunion between you.

He would have replied, but the Admirale unwilling to hear any more, called
Madam D'Aumale who was still talking as fast of love to me, as I was assuring
her, that if she knew me well, she would soon be convinced I did not deserve
her kindness.

The Duke D'Aumale closing continually with Madam de Brion, it was impossible
for me to have any talk with her; but my eyes spoke what my tongue could not,
and hers answered me, so that I enjoyed not only the content to know I was
understood, but that my sufferings were shared in.

The Haut Boys and Flutes I had brought playing us some tunes, we stayed till
night being pretty well spent, Supper was brought into a Pleasure-House in the
Garden, and having afterward taken some few turns about the Alleys, all
withdrew to rest, but I to expect the good hour Fontpertuis had assigned me.
All the obliging signs and glances Madam de Brion had given me, made me believe
she would hasten my felicity, and that Fonpertuis had order to be the
intelligencer.

I came therefore to the appointed Terrace, the night was as cloudy as lovers
would desire. I gingerly marched on toward the Admirales Lodgings, and as well
as night would give me leave; methought I perceived a Woman come out, I
advanced, and she came toward me. I thought I knew her by her China Gown, and
her stature, but methought much more by her desires and mine, that were so
pressing, they made her understand I would speak with her, and she had the
goodness to hear them at the Foot of an Organge Tree adjoining to an Arbor.

On a sudden I heard a noise on the Terrace, and saw the Duke D'Aumale passing
swiftly by, we imprudently staid in the place where we were, and he perceived
us, and sighing, withdrew. I was half distracted at this adventure, but much
more when I discerned I was not with Madam de Brion, but the Duchess. I
perceive by your surprise, said she, you thought your self happier then you are.

At that a door opened, and out came Fontpertuis, but I had said so much to the
Duchess I had not a word to say to her, who strangely reproached me for that
silence she did not expect.

The Duchess withdrew by the Terrace, over which she came, and retired into
her Chamber, much confused to think on what might happen on the morrow, not
knowing what to resolve, nor how to bear the reproaches she expected from the
Duke.

He had other thoughts then to suspect it was she that I entertained so kindly
on the Terrace, he was as well as I deceived by the likeness of the Gowns, and
believed it was Madam de Brion with his Rival. It was that sight troubled him,
and he rose as soon as it was day, impatiently waiting the Admirales rising,
she stirred not till it was late, and he attributed her sleeping so long, to
her last nights watching on the Terrace, which ranged all along the Lodgings;
and therefore it was an easy matter for the Duke, the Duchess, Fontpertuis,
and me, to meet.

The Duchess had heard what Fontpertuis said to me in the Garden, and studied
to inhanse all the sweetness of that rendezvous, and had her desire. The Duke
thinking the Duchess asleep, softly passed her Chamber, and having observed
some kind glances, and perhaps more imprudent signs pass between the Admirale
and me, which bespake a great Union of Heart, his jealousy urged him to spy,
whether I went not into Madam de Brions Chamber, who having watched longer then
I thought, went to Bed only at break of day, and rose not till an hour before
Dinner.

As soon as she was up, she asked for me, and hearing I was with the Duchess,
was coming directly to her Chamber, when the Duke coming out, desired a moments
audience. She was irresolute at first, but at last consented. You are only
ungrateful to me Madam, said he, and I must be the unhappy witness of an action
of love represented last night on the Terrace, between D'Andelot and you.
Though Madam de Brion was not disposed to mirth, what the Duke said seemed to
her so full of raillery, she could not forbear laughing; that action madded
him, and he had rather have heard her rave and be angry, then have beheld so
injurious a scorn. He could not apprehend the meaning of it, and I believe had
he known it, would have excused himself from acquainting the Admirale with what
had happened.

But her laughter being all the answer, the Duke could with all his complaints
and reproaches obtain, she comes into the Duchess Chamber, who asks her the
cause of her mirth; but Madam de Brion could not truly tell it her. She found
her intelligence false, as to my being there, for I was before gone out into
the Garden, where I began to muse of the cruel consequences might arise from
that adventure to my love, if the Admirale knew it. Alas, she but too well
knew all the circumstances, for having heard a noise upon the Terrace, she had
stepped into her Closet, whence she saw the Duchess, and soon after knew me, and
saw my infidelity at large. Till no longer able to endure the sight, she
withdrew to her Bed, but the remembrance of what she had seen, so afflicted
her, she could not sleep a wink, such strange thoughts it possessed her with.

One came in the morning to tell me, the Duke desired me to come to his
Chamber, but it was the Duchess would speak with me. I imagined it was her
love had formed this deceit, and would have retired, but she withheld me. Had I
believed, said she, to me, that the gift I have made you of my heart, would
have only been the parent of such an indifference, I should have struggled
hard ere I had given way to it; what has love done to you, to make you so
little sensible of his favors received from me? Have you so soon forgot how
kind and endearing they were? Must I first send for you? Or should you have
first begged my sight, unless you think me so unworthy that I am bound always
to be the wooer? Though you love the Admirale, you still seem lovely to me, and
you shall always find me with the same amorous intentions, you thought so
happily to find upon the Terrace. The Duchess desires were very violent as you
may perceive, but I willing to preserve all mine for Madam de Brion, whose
wager I would gladly win, was content with the reservedness, and moderation to
which they were restrained, whilst solicited by a person so beautiful and fair.
She was forced to break off her complaints against my unconcernment, by the
Dukes entrance, who found us alone. And I began as well as the Duchess to fear
some eruel effects of his resentments for the offense we had committed; but he
not knowing it, our fears were soon blown over.

I met Fontpertuis in the Garden, walking with one of Madam D'Aumales Women, I
perceived she was angry with me. I knew well that I deserved not to be loved by
Madam de Brion, I had neither given sufficient testimonies of love, nor done
all I ought to arrive at such happiness; but all my hopes lay in the
inclination and kindness of my Judge, who now avoided my sight.

The Admirale who was filled with anger and disdain, looked now no more on me
with the accustomed sweetness; that change made me sensible she knew all passed
upon the Terrace, and I was fully convinced of it, when from on one of her
Gentlewomen I received this Letter.

I Write to the most ungrateful Man living. Examine the perfidiousness of your
heart, and you will soon find, it is to you this Letter is addressed. How happy
had mine been, had it never had thoughts for you? But what has it done; you
should affront it with so much cruelty: That heart which thought only of you,
and was decreed only for you? But of what use are these feeble complaints and
reproaches? You have affronted me, and it is a sin to forgive you: Yet could I
find the least doubt of your infidelity, my grief would be allayed, and I
should not be reduced to the doleful constraint of never more seeing that Man I
have so much loved. But alas, I saw your disloyalty, nor could ever Man be
more guilty then you. You cannot now say you love, nor have any pretense to
justify your self; therefore begone immediately, and fly from the pretense of
that unhappy Woman, can no longer endure your presence.

After having read it, I entreated her that brought it to carry an Answer, but
she excused her self as being forbid.

All her rage fell not upon me, Fontpertuis had her share, she had seen her on
the Terrace with me, and that place looked suspiciously at such a time of
night: She took unkindly all that Fontpertuis could allege to her, believing
she had betrayed her, in favor of the Duchess.

I knew not what to think, nor what to resolve in this accident, the securest
way had been to speak to the Admirale, but she blasted all opportunities. That
therefore being impossible without displeasing her, I chose rather to be gone,
and by that observance of her commands, make her sensible I still wore her
Chains.

But I did not that till I had spoke with Fontpertuis, showed her the Letter
the Admirale had writ, and given her one in return of it: Which done, I took
Horse for Tanlay, where after I had stayed two days, I went to the Rendezvous
at Soissons. I lay under great vexations after my departure, though I heard my
Letter had driven away most part of her suspicions. At first she was unwilling
to see it, but Fontpertuis having opened it, Madam de Brion read these words in
it.

I Am not so guilty as you think me Madam, Love brought me not where you saw
me, nor thought I to find what I met with. Though my absence from you, makes me
unhappy enough, my condition is much more to be lamented for the distraction
caused by your belief of my infidelity. I am unwilling, were it possible, to
accuse you of any thing: But why should you not ascertain your suspicions? Why
should you break off a love in its infant sweetness? No, you never loved me,
since you could do thus. Farewell Madam, I shall never lose the remembrance of
having displeased you, yet I do love you, never ceased loving you, and have
that inward satisfaction to know that I must for ever love you.

She could not read this Letter without being touched at the very Soul.
Fontpertuis perceived it, and we having before any departure agreed upon a
correspondence, she sent me word what effects my Letter wrought on Madam de
Brions heart.

The Duchess dreamed not of my so sudden departure; she was now almost
convinced, I had no intent to answer her kindness, since I had neglected taking
leave of her.

The Duke and Duchess went next morning for Paris, where having stayed some
time, the Duke attended the King toward the Siege of Havre de Grace, whether
the Queen Mother likewise coming, was waited on by Madam D'Aumale.

You went every morning to Fecamp to give an account to the King what had
passed that night at the Siege. I seldom followed you for fear of seeing the
Duchess, least the Admirale might have cause of complaint; but one day I could
not excuse my not going, the Constable sending me. My Commission being
performed, I was just upon return when Madam D'Aumale having heard of my being
at Feeamp, under pretense of inquiring news from her Husband, made very heavy
complaints of me. I very quietly heard them, and could not yet answer in the
manner she desired. Prince Portian came luckily to take me off, and I returned
to the Camp. This Prince had formerly great pretenses on her heart, and it was
thought he was beloved, he was still in love; but now his cares and kindnesses
were not valued at a rush, I was the darling that could make no returns.

Madam de Brion being come some time before to Maule, informing her self of the
particulars of the Siege, understood that Madam D'Aumale went with the Queen;
her jealousy revived her love, she feared the losing me. Fontpertuis gave me
intelligence of all the Admirales thoughts, and I found my self less unhappy
then I thought. The same day that I assailed the Watchtower, which I made my
self master of, I received a Letter from the Admirale which spoke these words.

MY Anger and Resentment cannot hold out against my love, I have nothing more
to upbraid you with; and could I but see you, I should think I had nothing more
to desire. But is not this too kind to you? Or do you deserve this goodness?
Were it not more just in me to hate you, pursuing the Counsels your
unfaithfulness gives me? But alas, when I am apt to yield to that, the secret
intelligences you have in spite of me, preserved in my heart, blast all these
thoughts. Yet you could not expect these expressions, and therefore must think
them very kind. But I demand an equivalent reprisal, and will not be refused
it, tell me not that your honor and glory oppose it, I will be preferred before
both; for all should be renounced at the command of her you love. Dismiss your
self then from the Siege, what you lose on the score of glory, you shall
retrieve from the pleasures of a passion, I will make happy. If you obey me
not, never see me more, and suffer me to believe you prefer the sight of Madam
D'Aumale before mine.

Never was Man in a greater plunge then I, I could not imagine which way to
steer. Love offered me pleasant and pretty things, but I could not consent to
blemish my reputation by quitting the Siege. Saint-Cire was the first perceived
the trouble I was in; since I always used his advice, I held it unfit to
conceal from him the cause, who upon first hearing it, told, there needs no
consultation, on this matter. You must not stir, nor can your going off, be any
way justified. Stay but till the Siege be ended, and then in the name of God,
go see Madam de Brion as long as you will, and in the mean time take no heed of
a Woman's jealousy or anger. Your Ladies will find out a return of kindness,
when once their lover pleases them, and your peace will easier be made there
then here, whatever Articles she have against you. Saint-Cire was a true
friend, and reason counseled me to follow his advice, but love would not
listen to it.

The Treaty with the Town, which began about two hours after, eased me of my
trouble, and made me determine to depart at the beginning of the night, taking
along with me, only one Gentleman. I got to Madam de Brions on the morrow,
having rid that long way post, and on the Wings of Love. Never did I find in my
self so great a disposition to joy and content. I was going to see the only
person in the World I loved best, and I was sure to find her heart full of a
violent Passion which I had begot there. I would not suffer her to be told I
was come; but choosing rather to surprise her myself, went directly up to her
Lodgings, and into her Chamber which I found open. But is it to be believed,
what I there saw? Madam de Brion in the arms of a Man, and Madam de Brions, as
I thought, kissing him very lovingly. She perceived me, and came running
toward me with an obliging air, the joy in her face displaying nothing but
pleasure; but what I had seen making me contemn all she could offer me.
Disloyal Lady, said I, what would you have with me? How wretched am I to have
bin the witness of what I have seen. She held me by one arm, but not able to
listen to her, nor see her longer, I snatched away from her, mounted again my
Horse, and taking the road toward Havre, returned to the Camp.

My melancholy was too great to be concealed. 'Twas thought to proceed,
because the English had not addressed themselves to treat with me, when my
Battery was nearer advanced then any other, but the true cause was never guest
at, and you your self were deceived as well as others. What lamentable
reflections did I make on my adventure, no cruel thought nor just suspicion but
represented to me Madam de Brions crime, and made me judge my self the most
unhappy Man living, because I still loved her guilty as she was. Sometimes my
Anger gained the day against my Love, but in few minutes, my Love again
vanquished my Anger: yet I would listen to no justification she writ to me, but
I sent back her Letters without opening them, and made her judge by all my
proceedings that I broke off all Commerce; the time for giving judgment on our
wager, was above a month expired, I was content to have lost, but it madded me
to lose by the treason of a Person I so well loved.

The Siege ended, the King you know went to Roen to be declared Major, and
thither came the Admirale, whom I took no notice of, amongst all the Feasts,
Rejoycings and Delights. Madam D'Aumale continued her endeavors to seduce a
Heart I designed to keep at rest, since the Person to whom I had given it, so
ill treated it, in a time when I least deserved her rigor. I withstood her
kindnesses best, by the care I took to shun her; that was enough to tell her I
could not love, but my indifference increased her passion. Madam de Brion,
could not without jealousy behold all the Duchess did to engage me, she would
not yet lose me, and at last found out the secret to make me return. She nicked
the time to a hair, for I was just ready to comply with Madam D'Aumale's love,
and one day more had put me quite out of her reach.

Fontpertuis whom she had instructed what to say to me, talked a long time with
me at the Ball; at first I had refused to hear her, believing her an accomplice
in the Admirales infidelity, but at length my anger abated, and she made me
consent to come and see her on the morrow.

Madam D'Aumale who was still in hopes her Beauty would at last affect me,
seeing the discourse held between me and Fontpertuis, feared something was
contriving contrary to her desires, and therefore came to interrupt us, but my
resolution was taken, and having promised to see the Admirale, what ever kind
or endearing things the Duchess could say, drew from me no other answer then a
sigh. She began to complain of my filence, and I know not how I should have
justified it, had not Prince Portian come up to my relief, he left Madam
D'Aumale no more that evening, and the company breaking up, I retired, not yet
dreaming which way the Admirale would justify her self. She had made
Fontpertuis say a thousand things to me, not at all relating to the infidelity
I accused her of. I thought only to see her to make a trial, whether there
were yet in my heart any love remaining for her.

On the morrow I forgot not the hour appointed. I was brought to her chamber by
Fontpertuis, and I found her to have dismissed all other business only to
entertain me; she appeared wonderful handsome, and every look had a charm, and
so much was I bewitched with her Air, Action, and Carriage, that I had nothing
more to desire to make me happy, but only to be persuaded of her innocence, and
now we were alone. What? you will forsake me then, said she, and can you thus
easily resolve to relinquish a passion begun with so much Eagerness, Fervency
and Delight. Alas Madam, said I, you snatch it from me by the uncertainty
wherein you leave me of your Faith: and I restore it you, said she, by an
assurance I never betrayed you. You cannot say so much to me; the Beauty and
Kindness of Madam D'Aumale have made you forget what was due to my Love, even
in a time when I loved you, told you so, and that you were sensible of it, and
this in my own house, and in my own fight. What Treasons have you not been
guilty of to me? yet I forgave you, writ to you, you come and have scarce seen
me, but you rudely leave me without giving me time to convince you, of the
injustice of your suspicions; since my arrival, you have never come nigh me,
have searce been heard pronounce my name, nay have shunned the very sight of me.
Go, you cannot love me, ungrateful Man that you are: as she ended these words,
I saw a Man coming in by the Closet door with his sword drawn. I knew not at
first what to think of it, but turning toward the Admirale, I could hear her
cry out, See there that dangerous Rival robs you of my heart; if you still love
me, you will defend your self against him. I was sat with one of my Arms thrown
over the back of the Chair, and in that posture surveyed this Man, whose fury
had methought little terror in it; at length I thought it to be Fontpertuis
disguised, and it was she indeed, who, as Madam de Brion told me, I had under
the same Masque taken for a beloved Rival, when I came from the Siege of Havre
to see her.

My suspicions being thus blown over, 'twas now my part to clear those the
Admirale had against me. What had passed on the Terrace of Orange Trees, she
could scarce forget; but now I was in love, and was loved again. it proved no
hard matter to justify my self; we renewed again a fair correspondence, and
Fontpertuis persuaded us 'twas the best way to banish all complaints, and let
old suspicions give place to Love. We had no small Interest to believe her, and
we did so.

She then proposed, giving judgment who had won the wager. At that I looked on
Madam de Brion, and perceived she blushed, and stood silent. I drew a good Omen
from her blushes, and no longer doubted, but my happiness was near. I begged her
to consent to Judgment, she turned only her Eyes toward me and sighed. That
answer had a charm passed sweetly unto my soul, and made me feel an
unexpressible delight. Fontpertuis knowing the favorable thoughts the Admirale
had for me, asked both her and me, if we would stand to her judgment. Yes,
yes, we will stand to it, said I, judge us. Madam Brion cried out, it was not
fair I should answer for her, without consulting her mind, and would have
withstood the sentence, but I entreated her so well, that she was appeased.
Whereupon Fontpertuis, putting on the Looks and Formality of a grave Judge,
with Sternness and Authority, pronounced in this manner.

I ordain that Madam de Brion pay you the forfeit of the wager, said she to me,
and if she fail, I condemn her never to love you more. It Is an unjust sentence,
and I appeal, said the Admirale; and to whom Madam, said I, can you appeal? who
will judge with more equity then Madam Fontpertuis? I know not, answered she,
but Love possibly will judge better. You may try then, said Fontpertuis,
interrupting her, but I me of the mind his judgment will not much differ from
mine, at which she was going out of the chamber, the Admirale would have staid
her, but at last acepted her pretense of going to change her Habit.

Madam de Brion durst not now come near me, Shame, Love, and Modesty made her
Blush, Sigh, and cast down her Eyes; I stepped to her, and reaching out my hand,
she gave me hers, and looking up kindly at me; my Eyes spoke to her, and she
understood them, and I had no reason to be displeased at the answer she
returned me. I took notice she had some Flowers in her bosom, I snatched at
them, and with a little resistance got them; she told me I should not keep
them, and I was willing to return them to the place whence I took them.

What should I say any more for, we were both in love, and well satisfied with
one another, and our contents increased before we ended this interview. It
lasted three hours, and Fontpertuis at her return, soon perceived Love had
given judgment in a manner different from other Judges, since neither one
party nor the other complained.

The next was yet a happier day for me, and those which followed more. It Is
hard to pass from great sufferings to extreme joy, without being discovered.
The Duke D'Aumale, who observed all my actions, sooner believed my joy to
proceed from my re-accommodation with the Admirale; my good fortune doubled,
her jealousy, and made him become more melancholy and hateful. And though the
Duchess took kindly whatever Prince Portian talked to her of Love, yet she
could not forbear loving me more then I was willing; the content she observed
in Madam de Brion, and my diligence to attend and wait on her wherever she
went, produced the same effects in her, my joy had done in the Duke; but I
troubled not my self to take notice of their disgusts, or if sometimes I did,
'twas only to take pleasure in them.

One evening coming out of the Old Palace, I met Madam D'Aumale in the Queens
Antichamber. I would have avoided her but could not, she urged there all she
could, and made use of all the obliging ways imaginable, to make me unfaithful,
but I answered her like a constant man, and I retired as soon as I could,
though not till Madam de Brion, who came by chance into that room, perceived
our parley; she grew a little jealous of it, but I soon appeased her, by
promising never more to talk with the Duchess.

Mean time Fontpertuis had not forgot the sweetness of our conversation at her
Aunts; she had done me great service, and thought she deserved some kindness. I
saw her every time I went to the Admirales; I had an esteem for her, she was
our Confident, and I was pleased with her, but she was not satisfied with my
indifference; one day thinking to find Madam de Brion in her chamber, I met
there none but Fontpertuis. Her joy at sight of me made me guess her thoughts,
and I was returning to seek out the Admirale, when she stopped me in a manner
that begged my stay, whither would you go, said she? you know not where to find
Madam de Brion, and why do you fly me? I was once thought worthy of a little
Love; what has changed me? I have advantagiously served you in your passion,
and do not now desire you should love me for kindness sake, only love me a
little for gratitude.

Whatever Fontpertuis could urge, I continued faithful, my refusal tormented
her, I could observe some signs of her anger and vexation, yet they wrought no
effect on me, and I went off blameless.

There had for some days before great preparations been made for Running at the
Ring. it is so small time since you cannot have forgot what passed at it, and
that I won one of the Rewards, which was a Picture-Case richly set with
Diamonds; I destined it for Madam de Brion, who at first thought it not
convenient to take it, but at length I made her resolve to accept it. I had
left it at my Lodgings, and would have sent for it, but she would not let me,
telling me I might leave it with Fontpertuis, who would give it her at her
return from the Queen: I went and brought it to Fontpertuis, who employed it to
bring about a Treason, has since cost me a thousand sighs, and is still the
cause of those torments; I cannot better describe to you then by telling you, I
am now as much deserving pity, as I was worthy envy when I was beloved.

Fontpertuis having got the Picture-Case, went to Madam D'Aumales, whom she saw
but seldom; yet she had the cunning so to close in with her, that speaking of
his Beauty and her Wit, she passed from their Praises to the Glory that Man
would possess, should be beloved by her till such time as the Duchess could no
longer forbear discovering she loved me; that I engrossed all the thoughts of
her soul, and yet made no return of one, because I was in love with Madam de
Brion.

Fontpertuis had the knack to prevail so well over the Duchess judgment, that
she made her believe, I no longer loved the Admirale, and that doubtless if she
made but the least show of a desire of being beloved, I would make an amorous
return to her, utterly disingaged from the charms of her Rival.

We easily believe what pleases us, Madam D'Aumale resolved to write to me, and
Fontpertuis undertook to give me her Letter. Madam de Brion being returned from
the Old Palace, asked if I had given her the Picture-Case; Fontpertuis made
answer she had not seen me, the Admirale wondered at my neglect, but said
nothing of it.

On the morrow Fontpertuis gave me notice to come at the beginning of the night
to Madam D'Aumales, where Madam de Brion would be at play, I believed her,
promised to go, and at the hour appointed, came thither: Going in, I met a
servant of Madam D'Aumales, who told me her Mistress was gone forth, but that
Madam de Brion and Fontpertuis were in her chamber, I went up and met
Fontpertuis, who received me with such a smiling countenance, as I could not
suspect of any Artifice or Deceit. I asked her where Madam de Brion was, she
told me in Madam D'Aumales little Chamber, she was on a sudden troubled with a
little Headache, and was lain down on the Bed. I went in, the Chamber was dark,
and I had my mind full of the Image of what I loved, and perceived not the
Treason practiced against me, but committed one my self against the Admirale,
and knew it not; was ever such perfidiousness heard of, or could any Man be
made more unhappy? You Are very much to be pitied indeed, said the Marshal of
Montmorency, laughing to have obtained such a favor from one of the finest
Women of a Kingdom. I know not the Man would not have been glad to have
supplied your place, as scrupulous as you are to account the greatest of
pleasures for an unsupportable torment. When one is in love, replied D'Andelot,
we value not the finest Women, but think only of those we love, and yet
methinks, said the Marshal, you digested very well your kindnesses to
Fontpertuis, and are not so regularly faithful as you would have us believe.
It Is true, replied D'Andelot, that I have not observed that maxim with her,
but I was to work her to my designs, and could I better engage her to my
interests, then by engaging her love. But pray proceed, said the Marshal,
interrupting him, to tell us what you did in the little Chamber. I knew,
continued he, Madam D'Aumale by her voice, I sighed for grief at the deceit put
upon me, and was about to be gone, when Fontpertuis brought in Lights, and I
saw not Madam de Brion, but was alone with the Duchess, so many Beauties, of
which I might dispose at pleasure, made my heart utterly unfaithful; and upon
trial, I found that there is sometimes as much pleasure in Infidelity, as in a
true and constant Passion. I renewed again and again my Disloyalties to the
Admirale, and my Treason began to grow familiar to me, when there had like to
have happened a scurvy accident.

The Duke D'Aumale came home, and wanted but little to surprise us; Fontpertuis
came running in afrighted and had scarce the time to say, He followed her. I
hid my self behind the Bed, had I gone into the Chimney, as I was once thinking
to do, I had perished either with the fire or smoke; for the Duke coming in
pale and heavy, and his looks enough declaring him distempered, called for some
fire, believing a fit of an Ague was seizing on him. I knew not possibly how to
get out; and Madam D'Aumale seemed to be in more trouble then I. Each of us
were deliberating what was the best course to be taken, when it pleased my evil
destiny to bring in Madam de Brion, who having heard I was at the Dutchesses,
came either to know the truth, or to surprise me in the very Act of Treason
against her love. She met with Fontpertuis, and asking what her business was
there, she replied, I come, says she, to satisfy my self, about some
suspicions I have of D'Andelot, I am afraid he abuses your love; he has been a
whole hour together alone with the Duchess, and is at present hid behind the
Bed.

The Admirale upon this came in full of anger against her lover, and unable to
endure the cruel injury, she believed she had received, the Duchess began
shrewdly to apprehend her rage and resentment. Fontpertuis having carried her
treachery thus far, went home to the Admirales, and left the persons concerned
in no little trouble and perplexity, brought on them by her cunning and
artifice.

The Duke whose Feavor augmented, not able to keep up any longer, retired into
his Chamber, and went to Bed. Scarce was he gone out, but the Admirale
maliciously told the Duchess she was somewhat ill, and throwing her self upon
the Bed, pretending to have a pain at heart, she leaned her head toward my
side, and drawing the Curtain, gave me such fierce looks as spoke a thousand
things to me, without uttering a word; when on a sudden, her first dissembled
grief, became a true one, and I perceived her swound away.

At that fight, without premeditating what might happen, I gave so grievous a
shout, that almost all the house came into the Chamber, I came out from behind
the Bed, and endeavored to assist her what I could. My sight had much
contributed to her swouning, but the Picture Case which Fontpertuis had without
my knowledge, given on my behalf to the Duchess, was that completed it; Madam
D'Aumale chanced to have that Case in her Pocket, and it was fallen upon the Bed.
The Admirale by chance laid her hand upon it, and looking to see what it was,
knew it, and presently imagined, that either I had given it the Duchess, or
that it was dropped out of my Pocket, whilst I was tumbling with her on the Bed.

The Duke returns to the Chamber, my sight amazes him, and being jealous of
both, he knew not which to reproach, his Wife, or the Admirale, who was long
before she recovered out of her swound. I took her by one of her hands, spoke
to her; she at last opened her eyes, and seeing me, turned them toward the
Duke, on whom, she kept them a good while fixed. The Duke could not imagine what
to make of this adventure, there was a secret in Madam de Brions distemper,
which he would have given any thing in the World to discover.

The Picture Case which he knew, partly satisfied his desire, and he thence
apprehended the cause of the Admirales sudden grief, and the Duchess
confusion; yet he could not clear all the doubts his heart mustered up,
touching his Honor and his Love; neither by it, nor by the convincing knowledge
he had of his Duchess love for me, and his amorance, I enjoyed all the
Admirales affection, not able therefore to stay there any longer, he retired
into his Chamber.

The Admirale restrained her Passion, and gave me not a reproaching word, but
she ordered me to be gone with all the authority of a commanding Mistress.
Madam D'Aumales eyes requested my stay, and seemed to entreat they might be
preferred before Madam de Brions, but Love gained the day over Infidelity. I
repented my crime, and went away more in love with the Admirale, then I had
ever been before.

Soon after I was gone, she retired to her Lodgings, not without easing some of
her fury on Madam D'Aumale; who not caring at what rate she gained my love, was
little troubled at the discontent of her rival. Fontpertuis glad at this
success, added new Treasons to them, by telling Madam de Brion I had given the
Picture Case to the Duchess: That our correspondence was settled, and that I
had received a Letter from Madam D'Aumale; which she had cunningly, and without
suspicion got from me.

All these apparent Truths, such exact Reasons of Suspicions, and the
Imaginations Fontpertuis inspired into the Admirale, made her resolve never to
love me more, but to abandon me to my inconstancy, and leave me master of the
Duchess heart, which I could not accept. I was guilty, but still I loved, I
would fain have been pardoned, and endeavored all I could, to deserve that
pardon by a sincere and lasting repentance, which I had the better hopes of,
because I believed the Admirale could not refuse it to that love and tenderness
she once had for me.

We were in this condition when the King left Rouen. I have done all I could
since to regain the Admirales good will, but cannot effect it. The Progress of
the Court to Bayonne, not requiring my attendance, I stayed at Paris, and
knowing that the Duke and Duchess D'Aumale, the Admirale, de Brion, and Prince
Portian, went to Fontainbleau. I am come hither either to disturb their
content, or with hopes so firmly to establish my self in the kindness and
affection of the Admirale, that nothing may hereafter ruin me. But I have yet
been deceived in my hopes; Madam D'Aumale still loves me, and dispises Prince
Portian who loves her so well. The Duke continues my rival, I am fearful least
he should be happy, and the Admirale adds to my fear, by the obliging manner in
which she treats the Duke; and I am the more unhappy, because I cannot renounce
my love, nor ever hope to incline Madam de Brion to be touched with what I
suffer, or to restore me to the same place I once possessed in her heart.

Your condition is not so bad as you think, said the Marshal de Moutmorency to
D'Andelot, I know the very thoughts of the Admirales Soul, and am confident she
preserves very kind ones for you, but you must deserve them. What would you
have me do to be happy, said D'Andelot. Me thinks it is no hard task, replied
the Marshal, and were it my case, I would surprise the Admirale in her Chamber,
cast my self at her feet, acknowledge my crime, refer my self to her for
punishment, join sighs and tears to my repentance, promise never more to see
Madam D'Aumale, and in short, not part from her, till I were as much beloved as
I loved.

D'Andelot took the Marshal's counsel (who was a notable man in affairs of
love, and whose story shall follow D'Andelots) he surprised the Admirale, he
sighed, he repented, till his grief made her relent; and that soon turned into
love, and that love became as kind, as passionate, and as happy as ever it had
been before.

The Duchess D'Aumale was quite disconsolate, to have thus utterly lost all
hopes of D'Andelot, Prince Portian underrook to comfort her; but he succeeded
not at first, but since Love and Patience overcome the greatest difficulties,
it need not be wondered at, if they vanquish those which would oppose their
Felicity.

The End of D'Andelot.
THE LOVES OF Great Men. BVSSY D'AMBOYSE.
THe Battle of Jarnac was fought under the Reign of Charles the IX., the Prince
of Conde, chief of the Hugonots, lost there his life, Admiral Chatillon rallied
the ruins of the broken Army, and put his Brother D'Andelot into Cognac, who
by his valor made Monsieurs Victory fruitless. 'Twas in this Field Bussy
D'Amboyse began to give such large assurances of what he one day would be, that
Monsieur, though he loved him not, had the Generosity to praise him at the head
of the whole Army.

War had its time to revenge Hate and sustain Authority; and Love must have his
to create Pleasures for those who had the happiness to reach them, and Pains
and Sufferings for who were destined to be miserable.

Three months after this Battle, Bussy conceived a design of gaining an esteem
in the heart of the Widow to the Marshal de St. Andre, the number of her Lovers
was great, he had reason to think his Rivals dangerous, but Bussy feared
nothing from Mankind, and hoped all things from his Merit and his Love.

'Twas with the Duke of Guise and Ligneroles, the favorite of Monsieur, that
he was to dispute the heart of the Lady Mareshalle; There were many other
Rivals, but these two were the most considerable.

Bussy tries all imaginable ways to please, he makes addresses to the Lady
Mareshale, he observes she delights in them, he continues them, he becomes both
pleasing and necessary, and makes himself be desired; his Rivals believed they
had reason to be jealous of him, and he took little care to persuade them the
contrary.

He durst not speak for a long time of his Love, but at last ashamed of her
silence, he breaks it. He goes into the Lady Mareshales Chamber, at a time she
would not be seen. Mr. Lover, who let you in? said she, with a severe cast of
her Eye; return immediately: He feared he had displeased her, that fear was
obliging to the Lady, she perceived it, and recalled him, who was withdrawing,
not expecting this return; I came to tell you Madam, said he, that I am in
love, you have put it into my heart, which all others might have attempted in
vain; I comply with delight to all it inspires, it is very tender, and what will
not you lose by being unsensible? but Madam, I see you are angry, continued he,
perceiving she turned her Eyes toward him, in a manner forbidding despair.

The Mareshale was angry with her self, that she had cast so kind a glance at
Bussy. Never see me more, said she, I cannot endure you; Take away my Love, and
I consent, said he, interrupting her, I have nothing to give you, nor nothing
to take away, replied she, but once more I forbid you my sight. Bussy goes
forth just at the same time that Ligneroles was told she was not to be seen; he
believed Bussy happy, and that belief increased his grief without diminishing
his Love. The Duke of Guise, jealous and impatient, and who found no pleasure
in loving alone, prays the Lady Mareshale to bear him company, but her heart
beginning to be engaged, received coldly the Dukes proposition.

Ligneroles was the handsomest, and best proportioned Man in all the Court; yet
his Love making no progress, he would at least give some trouble to his Rivals,
he entreats Monsieur to feign to love the Mareshale. Bussy who had preserved
some intelligence with Chareauneuf, let her know that she was about to lose
Monsieurs heart, if she found not a quick way to withhold it. As Soon as she saw
Monsieur, she fills his Ears with reproaches and complaints, he justifies his
Love and Fidelity, and promises no more to see the Mareshale.

Bussy durst not go near her, and Ligneroles sharply repaid the jealousy he
had given him.

The Court was at Paris but preparing for a Progress to Blois, where the Peace
lately made with the Hugonots, was to be Signed, and the Marriage Treated
between Madame, and the King of Navarre.

The Duke of Guise and Ligneroles knowing that she would not go this progress,
pressed the obtaining some favorable answer, but she declared for neither,
there was only observed in her, more civility toward the Duke, and more
complaisance for Ligneroles; the Dukes Melancholy rejoiced Bussy, but
Ligneroles joy made him almost despair.

The King was two days at St. Germains with Monsieur and a very small number of
Courtiers. Ligneroles entertaining the King, was so indiscreet to let fall some
words, made him suspect that the secret of the Marriage of Madam with the King
of Navarre, was not unknown to him; Monsieur kept nothing from him, and
therefore he thought it was not to be doubted but he had discovered all the
design. The King, who knew best the Art of dissembling of any Prince in the
world, cunningly interrupts him, by asking whither it was true that he loved
the Lady Mareshale, as much as some would persuade him, Ligneroles acknowledged
that he did Love, but was not beloved. The King being in Bed, caused Monsieur
to be called, with whom he grew so angry that he made him consent to the
destruction of Ligneroles, and promise that he would not speak to him of it,
but nothing can be kept concealed from what we love; the King returns to Paris,
Monsieur goes to visit Chasteauneuf, she perceives his sadness, he suffered her
Solicit a long time before he let her know the cause, and knowing it, she
condoled, and became partner in his grief without acquainting Ligneroles.

The King gave a Ball at the Louvre, the Mareshale takes out Ligneroles to
dance. Bussy believed her carriage not indifferent toward him, and that which
doubled his grief and his jealousy, was, that she never so much as cast her
Eyes on himself.

He comes to Chasteauneuf who had something to say to him, the Mareshale knew
he had loved her, she feared lest Love should be renewed between them, and
Chasteauneuf perhaps found an easiness in it, to which Bussy agreed not.

His heart no longer able to bear the Mareshales disdain, which he believed was
caused by her kindness to Ligneroles, he resolved to challenge him.

The friendship of Bussy with Grillon was begun some few days before, for he
not enduring to live without Love in so gallant a Court, found Madam Bonneval
the most proper to beget it in him; she was a very well made person, but her
Manners were more engaging then her Beauty; Grillon follows her in all places,
she perceives it, but forbids him not to follow her. What would you have with
me Grillon? said she, one evening in the Queens Closet; All that should be
given to those love well, Madam answered he; the King who overheard it, began
to laugh; Madam de Bonnevall was vexed, and Grillon somewhat abashed: from that
day forward, she was very rigorous to him; he complained to Bussy, who was
beloved without knowing it. He promises to serve him with Madam Bonneval, and
without any longer delaying the effects of his promise, that very day he goes
to her, and finding her alone; Who knows not, says he, that you are lovely, and
that your Eyes have the infallible secret of enchanting Hearts? but I was
ignorant till now, that to so many Excellencies and so many Beauties are joined
such strange cruelties, and that the pleasure of seeing you has for its certain
consequence such mighty sufferings, It Is that I come to complain of, continued
he, (looking on her with an Eye full of Love without any design) but I have
some counsel to give you, will you receive it? continue I beseech you, the
chains of those which adore you, 'twill be no great favor done them; it is so
great a misery to be disdained, that it becomes natural to wish for happiness:
Speak Madam, he was about to say, and give some joy to the unhappy Grillon,
when Madame and Chasteauneuf came in, Bussy conceiving he could not now
continue the entertainment he had begun, went and found out Grillon, and gave
him an account of what he had said.

Madam de Bonneval believed not at all that it was on Grillons part she had
heard those loving words, but on his own; she was resolved to have kindly
answered Bussy; had not Madame come in. He was the Man of all the world she
most desired to engage; she loved him, and she believed her self Beautiful
enough to create Love in him. This easily persuaded her not to doubt, but it
was the design of his heart, and not being capable of a cruel thought toward
him, and moreover being persuaded it might produce a good effect, to spare him
any farther trouble, She sent him this Note next Morning.

LOve me, and tell me so, what should hinder you? And to let you see I am more
lovely then you think, look here what Chains I command you to carry.

This Note was without superscription, and enclosed a Bracelet of Hair of
admirable weaving. Bussy rejoiced he had so well succeeded in his amorous
Embassy, as much as he would have grieved, had he known the tender goodness of
Madam de Bonneval, was addressed to himself, and not to Grillon; who was much
affected, when Bussy gave him both the one and the other, he applied to himself
all the sweetness was in that Note, and received the Bracelet as a favor, so
much more worthy, because less expected: Esteeming himself happy, by an
adventure had made him despair, had he known the truth of it. But how should he
come to learn it, if Madam de Bonneval without appearing, furprised at so ill
tuned an accident, does put on so cunning a disguise that Grillon cannot know
her thoughts; yet she cannot digest the affront, it is a touch too sensible for
Ladies, and they never pardon the slighting of their Beauty.

Let Bussy serve for example, Madam de Bonneval stifles all the love she had
for him, and only meditates revenge; she alters not her behavior toward him,
but endeavors to discover the cause of his refusal. What is often said of love
is true, it cannot be long kept secret. Madam de Bonneval lets nothing escape
may serve toward the revenge as she designs. She interprets and comments upon
the Actions, the Looks, the Words of Bussy, and draws thence Suspicions, which
become Truths, and tell her he is in love. One day she was with the Lady
Mareshale, when Bussy comes there, but his carriage seemed so unconcerned, that
none but Madam Bonneval could have divined his thoughts. Not able long to
contain, he throws on the Mareshale such amorous glances, that Madam Bonneval
perceived them, though he durst not sigh so loud as to be heard: She discovered
love in the eyes of Bussy, and was enraged, it was not all for her; by all
these signs, she knew he was deeply entangled. And the more ingenuously to
advance her revenge, she doubles her appearances of Friendship, and under the
false resemblances of a complacent sincerity, which she affected, successfully
labors to create confidences with the Mareshale.

Bussy had designed to sight Ligneroles on the first occasion presented; on the
morrow one brake forth, the King would speak with him, he loved him, and
doubted not a good issue of any dangerous design, if entrusted to him. The King
comes into his Closet, where he was told he attended, and proposed the killing
of Ligneroles. Can you have any esteem for me Sir, answered Bussy, and make
choice of me to rid you of Ligneroles by unhandsome ways. Ah Bussy, said the
King, what will not any Man undertake to revenge himself of a beloved Rival,
and to sustain the Interest of his King, when he finds in his own Courage a
security for the execution, and that his Sovereign abbets the action. But what
ever the King could say, or promise, he could not make Bussy consent to his
desires. In this desperate affair, he becomes the friend of Ligneroles, and
chooses rather to expose himself to the Kings anger, by representing the merits
of his Rival, and the services he might one day render him, then to oblige his
revenge at the expense of his honor and reputation. The King appeared, ill
satisfied with Bussy's generous thoughts; but in his Soul approved what he
seemed to condemn; yet forbidding him upon pain of death, once to pronounce the
Proposition he had made him, Bussy answers nothing and withdraws.

Madam de Bonneval who had grown into great confidences with the Mareshale,
(though not such secret ones as la Hermit, who was one of her attendants)
tells her that one of her people had seen Bussy go to Chateauneuf's, but she
drew false conjectures from this visit. Chateauneuf had sent for Bussy to come
to her Lodgings, to tell him the design the King had to destroy Ligneroles,
believing he knew it not. She loved Bussy, and the love he had for the
Mareshale, hindered him from answering her love. She believed Ligneroles was
beloved, and that by preserving his life, Bussy might lose the hopes of ever
affecting the Lady Mareshale, and then she flattered her self he might return
to her. Directed by such prudent policy, she told him the cause of Ligneroles
disgrace, as she had learnt it from Monsieur, representing to him, that it was
more glorious to overcome a Rival by generous procedure, and by advertising him
his destruction was designed, then to triumph over his evil Fortune, by
concealing from him, that the Kings most cruel resentments were ready to fall
upon him. Bussy hears all Chateauneuf would say on this subject, without
promising any thing, save only to be secret in his having learnt it of her. He
perceived by her carriage, that she desired an entertainment like to those they
had had together in the time they loved; but that time was passed, love had
disposed of Bussy's heart, in favor of the Mareshale; and though Chateauneuf
were one of the fairest persons of France, and employed now all her charms
which had formerly seemed so alluring; and let him now hear a thousand
flattering and pleasant things, he still remained constant, and parted from her
without giving the least reason to be reproached, as to his love.

Understanding that Ligneroles was in the Garden of the Hostel of Soissons, he
goes thither; and after having drawn him off some paces from the Mareshale, who
was with Queen Catherine of Medices: I was resolved yesterday to kill you as a
Rival, whose happiness made me despair, said Bussy to him, to day I would
endeavor to preserve you as an honest, but unhappy Man, who have, doubtless,
neither deserved death by the (...) maxims of State, nor the particular hate
of the King. I should have received you as an enemy fit to be feared, answered
Ligneroles, but I dread you more with the merit wherewith now you appear, and
if possible, I would ow you nothing. In vain I examine and search my self, in
what point I can be guilty. You are not innocent, replied Bussy, since you have
let the King perceive you were not ignorant, that the marriage of Madame, and
the King of Navarre, was only an ingenuous pretext, the more fecurely to ruin
the Hugonots. The silence and confusion of Ligneroles accused him, and he had
now no hopes but in Monsieurs Protection, he could not believe himself forsaken
by him, but Bussy assured him of it. My crime is, having spoken, says he, at
length, but I had rather die, then doubt of Monsieurs friendship, he knows not
my destruction is resolved; for he who never kept secret from me, would not
have concealed a design against my life.

Whatever Bussy could allege, he would not take the advice he gave him not to
go this progress, nor take the ways to secure himself he offered.

Ligneroles spoke after this of the Lady Mareshale. The esteem I have for you,
said he, hinders me from concealing the estate wherein my love, and services
have put me with her, I love her and she knows it, I have sighed, I have
complained, and all the fruit I have gathered from all this, is the pleasure to
see my self hopeless; you, believed there were strong ties of kindness between
us, and it was my interest not to disabuse you, she wanted one of the family to
keep up her affairs with Monsieur. I was capable of serving her, and you took
for love, that assiduity she permitted me, rather to give her an account of my
Negations, then to give me marks of her goodness. Ah Bussy, must I tell it you,
continued Ligneroles, for you only is reserved the happiness to affect her
Soul, and she sees you not, only for fear of loving you too much. That fear
should be a glory and pleasure to you, Proceeded he, sighing, what would not I
do to inspire the like? But you would be unfortunate, if such a thing were,
which is, what I cannot desire at such a price after that you have now done.
Are you so generous, replied Bussy, to tell your Rival in good earnest, that he
is not hated? I am unhappy enough to be pitied, for not being loved, said
Ligneroles, interrupting, and that I am in danger of losing my life, and need
not be suspected to want sincerity toward the Man I esteem most of all the
World.

The Mareshale who observed them, feared their Discourse might end in a
quarrel, but her apprehensions changed subject, when she beheld them embrace.

Her suspicions of Bussy increased, she was jealous of Chateauneuf: Their
confidences at the Ball, and the impressions of his visiting her, much
perplexed her mind; and besides that, he parted from Ligneroles more like a
Friend then a Rival. What then, had she not reason to fear? Ladies would lose
nothing; they believe the number of their lovers is a mark of their merit, and
an increase of their reputation. I say not the Mareshale had these thoughts,
but she could not look upon the semblances of his change, but as an injury in
his judgment. She concluded by their actions they were become Friends, and that
Bussy had yielded to Ligneroles; all the pretentions he had on her heart, she
seemed to have more scorn for Bussy, and more fierceness for Lignetoles, when
they met the Queen, who soon after went to the Louvre, and the Mareshale with
her.

These Rivals went together from the Hostel de Soissons. Ligneroles was
assaulted by four unknown men, who cried out to Bussy, they would have only
the life of Ligneroles; but all the answer he gave, was to let them know, it
was hard to take that from a man he defended. Ligneroles opposed his courage to
his enemies numbers, and conjured Bussy to let him perish alone, and not run
the hazard of losing his life, either by these Assasines, or by the anger of
the King, who would not want advice of the assistance he gave him: Bussy
impatiently endured what Ligneroles said, and parry'd most part of the thrusts
made at him. The Duke of Guise chancing, at this moment, to pass by, took their
part; the four men yielded to the courage and constancy of the Duke, Bussy and
Ligneroles; they fled in disorder, some of them wounded, and one of them was
taken by Bussy's servants, whom Ligneroles, let go against the Dukes mind, not
doubting, but from him, might be learned the first authors of this attempt. But
Bussy and Ligneroles who judged it, commanded by the King, drew off the Duke
from those suspicions he might have had, by feigning a Family quarrel which
they would revenge. This assassinate made a great noise, and Monsieur talked
public, That he made Ligneroles case his own, but in private he said
otherwise: He knew from whence the blow came, and D^gua who was beginning to
enter into his favor, and who was gained by the King, had made him approve the
design conceived for the killing Ligneroles at his coming out of the Gardens of
Soissons.

The King who was violent in the first eruptions of his anger, was about to
command mand the arresting of Bussy for assisting Ligneroles, and whom he
believed had betrayed his secret; but the esteem he had for him, banished this
design of revenge.

The Duke of Guise had no share in the Kings resentments, not being at all
faulty: Bussy came that Evening to the Louvre, and saw the King, who received
him with many praises for the action he had done, though he did not approve it;
but he undershood dissimulation. On the morrow, Bussy sent to request of the
Lady Mareshale, he might have the honor to kiss her hands, he had never spoke
to her since she had forbid him seeing her. She was full of anger, and of
shame, and could not prevail over her heart, to bring it to that indifference
she desired, which hindered her agreement to Bussy's request.

Just as her answer was brought to him, Ligneroles came into his Chamber,
understood it, and assured him he would omit nothing possible for him to do, to
procure him an enterview with the Mareshale. It is hard to be obliged for such
a kindness to a Rival, but Bussy was constrained to it. Ligneroles was still of
the same mind not to retire from Court; and Bussy argued hard against a
resolution, which had no other foundation then Monsieurs Friendship, on which
he had much less reason to conside, then on a provident and quick withdrawing,
which was the only way to fecure him. Ligneroles came to the Mareshale, and at
first pleaded in vain on Bussy's behalf, but at last she consented to see him.
She after asked him, who were those had assaulted him; he would not tell her
the secret, but he told her that without Bussy's assistance he had been in very
great danger, and that the Duke of Guise had likewise defended him.

It was agreed between them, that Bussy should come after Supper, and that on
condition he brought him, which he did. She was beginning to be undrest, and
desired him to be present at their entertainment, to deprive Bussy of the
happiness, he might find in seeing and discoursing her alone, which Bussy
feared, but Ligneroles who would not be genenous by halfs, civilly retired, and
by his retreat left him full liberty to see, speak, and he heard. She went for
a moment into the Alcove to change her shift, whilst Bussy staid looking on a
Picture of a Mignon love which endeavored to climb to the top of a Rock, he
drew a Pencil out of his Pocket to write, I shall drrive, when the Mareshale
gave a great shriek, and came running almost naked into his arms. Such a sight
would certainly affect one indifferent, what then could be Bussy's thoughts who
was in love. He stopped her, asking the cause of her sright, and endeavoring to
reassure her; but he perceived she swounded, and was in condition to create
ecstasies of love: So that Bussy sucked in pleasures at his eyes, their
employment was to him obliging and charming, and they showed him curious
things; it is impossible to express the sweet and tender motions of his Soul,
love only can do it; but love is discreet, and tells not all it feels.
L'Hermite who was as fraid as her Lady, was fled to call other Maids to her
assistance, whilst Bussy endeavored to bring her to her self.

They entered readily into the Chamber, followed by Ligneroles, who being got
only to the Stairs foot, ran back in have to know the reason of the noise he
heard. How was he surprised, How astonished, And how afflicted, all at once, to
see the Mareshale in the arms of one she loved? What jealous thoughts did not
this sight inspire him with? He believed himself unhappy, but, what thought he
not of the happiness of his Rival? Yet those thoughts gave place to others more
sad and grievous, when he perceived that all Bussy's trouble proceeded from the
Mareshales swounding. They put her in Bed, and soon after she opened her eyes,
and her fright being allayed, Ligneroles and he withdrew. The Mareshale had as
was well known a strong natural antipathy against Spiders, of which she could
tell no cause; she then saw one on the Hanging and saved her self wherever she
could, and L'Hermite sharing in her Mistress fright, fled as I said before.

On the morrow Bussy returned with design to see her, but the shame and
confussion wherein she was to be seen, in a condition so contrary to Modesty,
made her resolve to refuse a pleasure, she would gladly have received, under
pretense of not being well recovered from her fright.

He divined one part of her thoughts, but unwilling to be a second time obliged
to Ligneroles, and trusting in Neufville, he gave him Commission to let the
Mareshale know he had some important business to discourse with her. Neufville
did it, but not being happy in serving his Friend, he in vain attempted to
persuade her, she ought to hear what Bussy had to say to her.

In the mean time Bussy was to be pitied, he had not only the pangs of his
love, and the cruelties of the Mareshale to groan under, but must likewise
endure all that grief caused by Ligneroles his misfortune.

The Duke of Guise assisted by the Counsels of Madam de Bonneval who he had
formerly loved, and who was still his friend, neglected nothing he thought
might make him be beloved. This Prince was young, brave, ambitious, and
handsome, every way lovely and deserving; but to what end were all these great
qualities, whilst he was not beloved; and yet made all his happiness consist in
the being so.

But in a Conference he had, his love changes object; it was with his Uncle,
the Cardinal of Lorrain, who having already broke off the Match between Madame,
and the King of Portugal, would do the like with the King of Navarre, and by
his credit with Queen Katherine of Medices, marry her to his Nephew. The love
he had for the Mareshale, withstood this great Fortune, but the interest of his
family, and his ambition made him comply with what was desired. He began
therefore in more steady manner, to fix his thoughts on Madame, and considering
her as the daughter of a great King, and whose Wit and Beauty might pleasantly
revenge him of the rigors of his Mistress, he steered all his love and cares
toward her. This change surprised Madam de Bonneval, and afflicted not at all
the Mareshale.

Grillons Constancy was yet unhappy, Madam de Bonneval was perplexed and
melancholy, she had laid designs which she could not execute, and Grillon must
suffer for it. He was impatient, and would have love immediately returned for
love, and the refusing him with any sharpness, the recompense he requested, was
enough to make him believe there was none to give. Sometimes anger and
suspicion tempted him to inconstancy, but when he thought to love no longer,
one glance of Madam de Bonnevals recalled him to his Chains.

She thought on nothing but revenge on Bussy, for being in love with the
Mareshale. She knew almost all passed in her heart, her inclination for Bussy
was no secret to her, but she strove to lessen it by her malice and counsels,
and by the cunning she had to possess her with the thoughts of his love to
Chateauneuf. In sum, she made her so ashamed of her thoughts, that the
Mareshale could not have kept them alive, had she not been strongly
prepossessed with the worth and honesty of Bussy.

Ligneroles had only some shows of Monsieurs favor, Dugua had the substance,
whose subtle spirit, raised so many quarrels, and caused so many disorders.
Yet so cunningly was his disgrace concealed, that he could never discover,
whether he had consented to his death; the same signs of trust and friendship
still appeared, but all those signs were only kept up like false lights to
deceive him.

Bussy not able to disabuse him, together with Grillon, very rarely left him.

Beauty, good Men, Birth, and love in Monsieur, could not banish from
Chateauneuf the Passion she had for Bussy, she envied the Mareshales happiness,
and the difficulty she foresaw, would be found in depriving her of her lover,
strongly increased her desire.

Neufville not having succeeded with the Mareshale, Bussy resolved himself to
speak to her, and his attempt was happy. She was ready to go forth, but her
confusion was so great at the sight of Bussy, that she would have drawn back
into her Closet; but he placing himself before her in a Suppliant, and
respectful posture; Stay Madam, said he, I come not to speak of my love, but of
Ligneroles. You know him, continued he, seeing she stayed to hear him, and you
know he loves you. A little of your pity would be a great allay of those cruel
sufferings his Passion torments him with, and I shall be happy in obtaining
what I request for him. The Mareshale blushed with anger at this discourse of
Bussyes, not doubting but he had given over loving her, but willing to conceal
her concernment. You shall not obtain what you pretend from me, replied she, I
find I have no disposition to do good, and Ligneroles is to be pitied, if he
accounts upon any favorable thoughts. I have none, my heart is submitted to
whatever I will, and I fear not its betraying the interests of my glory, to
take part with those of my love: Madam, replied he, Treason is easily pardoned
when we find a sweetness in being betrayed; and since you will find a great
deal in this crime; if your heart commit it, you will, without doubt, be
induced to pardon the fault, by the pleasure you will receive, in loving, and
being beloved. Remember then Ligneroles, Madam, he is unhappy without deserving
it; he has a tender and violent Passion, which he cannot communicate to what he
loves, besides his destruction is resolved. I come to tell you of it, who
should have been the minister of the Kings revenge, he would have obliged me to
have killed him; and Monsieur has resigned him to those cruel Reasons of State,
may possibly produce effects dismal to all France; it is not from him I speak
this, he is ignorant I pressed to a sight of you; nor durst I have done it for
myself, but I thought I could not neglect serving him, without leaving my self
liable to just reproach; he had already been lost without the assistance the
Duke of Guise gave him. Say without yours, said the Mareshale, interrupting
him, and fear not I shall value you too much: That which you tell me, surprises
me not without cause, and I should hardly believe all you have said, were I not
well persuaded of your sincerity; but what can I do for Ligneroles? I have not
any power; you have an absolute one over his heart, replied Bussy, and the
Commands of a Person beloved may gain from him, what neither the Counsels nor
Prayers of a friend can hitherto do. Employ your Beauty to oblige him not to go
this progress, and let him know, he has now no part in Monsieur, and that his
death is unavoidable, if he withdraw not from Court. This Madam is all that I
have to say, can you now complain of me, or are you at all troubled to have
heard me? She was about to answer when Ligneroles entered, from whom she
concealed not the least circumstance of what had been said to her. My destiny's
very strange, said Ligneroles, to find more succor from a Rival, then from the
friendship of a Man I have so long served, or from the heart of a Mistress I
have so dearly loved. No Madam, I deserve not your love, one alone is worthy of
it, if any can be, his thoughts are so Noble and Virtuous, his Love so
excelling, his Heart so great, he possesses all qualities required in a true
brave Man, and all that the most delicate Lady can desire in a Lover; Therefore
love Bussy, continued he sighing. Hold, said Bussy, interrupting, your
indiscretion ought to be reproved.

The Mareshale could not enough admire the Character of these two Lovers; Bussy
refused to rid himself of Ligneroles; it was as much as his life was worth to
let escape the secret entrusted him by the King, he believed it not important,
not enough to make Honor its sacrifice, he advised Ligneroles of the designs
against him, and defended him after that against those the King sent to take
away his life. He speaks of the Love of Ligneroles, and not only endeavors to
serve him as a friend, but essays to make him be beloved.

Ligneroles soul yields not in greatness to Bussy's, he declares himself
unworthy of his concern for him, praises his Rival, and pronounces him alone
worthy of Love. The Mareshale seeing Bussy about to withdraw; stay, said she,
and be witness, I will spare nothing to save Ligneroles, but all her goodness
proved in vain, he let her know he would rather choose to die out of too much
confidence in Monsieurs friendship, then secretly accuse him by his flight of
having consented to his death. Bussy joined his Counsels and Reasons to the
Mareshales, but he remained firm in his reselution of going the progress. The
next day the King hunted with the Queen, Madume, and several other Ladies, all
on horseback. After having for some time chaced an Hare, which the Dogs eat,
the King had a desire to take some Conies with a Ferret; saying, He would kill
all came out of their Buries. These woods were observed by the Hugenots, and
Politicians, and they drew judicious conjectures from his humor, which might
have served to secure them against those cruelties acted soon after upon them,
but they suffered themselves to be deceived by Sovereign Faith, by the cunning
of Katherine de Medices, and by the Honors and Dignities they received.

At this Chase the Duke of Guise was still near Madume, taking the same course
to win Love from her as he had done with the Mareshale, Bussy carefully
observed all the Duke did, to whom the Queen had made a sign to come speak
with her, just at the same time that Madame having taken notice of Bussy's
curiosity, called to him to know the reason.

In the last Assembly at the Louvre Madam, said he, I observed that the Duke of
Guise always had his Eyes turned toward you, and seeing nothing so perfect and
accomplished as he, I wished he might fall in love, for I thought you alone a
worthy object of his passion. I had those thoughts when you took him out to
dance, I observed his joy when he received your hand, and the blushes that
seized you. In sum, Madame, I employed so well my Eyes, that I could not
doubt but you might one day love. I know not but I might be deceived, but it
seemed to me, as if the day approached; this is what I observed, Madame, when
you took notice of my hearkening to you.

She begun to laugh at what he had said; you fetch your conjectures a great way
off, said she, but I have too much esteem for you, to leave you in an opinion
that I will ever dispose my heart to the Duke of Guise. To whom then that is
worthy of it, can you give it, replied he, if you refuse it to him? To Bussy,
interrupted she, inclining her self toward him, when he shall cease to love
the Mareshale. Ending these words, she rid off, leaving him confused, and not
knowing what to think; how many reflections did he make on this adventure. He
believed Madame had a mind to divertise herself with him, rather then hoped,
she had any design of inspiring him with the boldness of making love to her.

The Chase ended, all returned to Paris. In the way, Bussy and Ligneroles
complimented the Duke of Guise, that the Beauties of Madame had delivered them
from so dangerous a Rival. He received with a good Grace, what they said on
that point, not utterly disowning his love to her, and yet not seeming too much
affected to have it believed.

Madam de Bonneval was at this hunting, and would fain have persuaded the
Mareshale, that Bussy had held some amorous Propositions with Madame, but she
began to give less Faith to what ever she attempted to say against him. He was
grown powerful in her heart, his merit, his generous thoughts, and above all
the love which had touched her, had made him gain a place in the tendrest
receptacle of her Soul, from whence it was very hard to snatch him.

Bussy was ignorant what his happiness was, and despaired of being beloved. A
great delight which surprises us, when we least suspect it, is that brings most
sweetness with it. Bussy made this pleasant trial, he could not think himself
happy, but how joyful was he when he could not doubt it.

The Court prepared to depart next morning, and the Courtiers took leave of
those Ladies did not go the progress. Bussy intended not to take his of the
Mareshale, fearing to offend her by his sight, and by this respectful and
prudent carriage, he light upon the secret of making himself be desired not to
go without seeing her, he thought not to find her at Madam de Bonnevals
Lodgings, whom he believed his friend, and therefore would not omit waiting on
her, having employed the time he thought necessary in this visit, he rose up to
be gone. How will Bussy part then without seeing me? said the Mareshale to him;
he answered, that before he durst not, but now he took what she had said for a
Command.

He failed not to attend the Mareshale about two hours after her going from
Madam de Bonneval, who the better to deceive him, had at his going out, assured
him of her friendship in a manner, that appeared so full of fair Faith, that he
went away well persuaded he had not a better friend then she, and that without
doubt she would be serviceable to him in his Love.

Bussy was so quick-sighted as to have observed that the Mareshale began
happily to purge away her errors of indifference, and with such sweet
reflections, and such kind thoughts he came to her; his Looks were full of
Languishing and Submissiveness, and his Words full of Love and Eloquence. He
spoke at first of what he felt, of the torments absence would create, and of
his fears to be hated. The Mareshale answered to all this, or rather her
passion answered for her. In the sequel of the discourse she made some
complaints, but they were obliging ones; should you permit me, said she, to
have the least occasion to reproach you? Could you go without seeing what you
love, is it thus you would persuade your passion? or do you know how to love?
better then you Madam, replied he, you dare not stand the trial, for then you
would find all the knowledge is on my side, and therefore you would save your
self that shame; she blushed at this answer, and asked if he went with the King.
No Madam, you have affronted me, said he, and being resolved to be revenged, I
am not now for the progress: and what revenge can you take of me, replied she?
as I can acknowledge Benefits, so I am sensible of Injuries, and let me advise
you that it is dangerous making me your Enemy. Whatever you can say Madam, said
Bussy, interrupting her, my resolution is fixed, and without fearing your
threats, I must attempt to make you love me; this enterprise will displease
you, and then I at least shall have the delight to have given you some
vexation. Revenge your self every day thus upon me, replied she, I shall know
how to give affront for affront, and then I shall have the pleasure of not
having yielded to you in resentment. This discourse gave much relief to Bussy,
who was before in great disquiet, out of the uncertainty he was in of the
Mareshales thoughts for him, but never found Lover more kind ones, nor greater
hopes of happiness, when l'Hermit came to give notice that the Duke of Guise
entered.

His new passion could scarce subsist, his heart leaned toward what he had so
much loved, and all the glory of Madames Beauty could not lessen his grief,
that he could not bend the Mareshales heart. He came to make the last Trial of
overcoming it, but Bussy having already done it, and having Desert and Love
enough to preserve his Conquest, the Duke understood from the Mareshale, he was
past hope.

Madam de Bonneval having given him the occasion by her arrival, he took leave.
Chateauneuf came with her, with design either to break off the conversation of
Bussy with the Mareshale, or to be a witness of all that passed, but she came
too late, and Bussy retired, unwilling to beget a jealousy in his Mistress, or
hopes in Chateauneuf; Grillon, and Ligneroles went home with him to supper.
After they were gone, he began to think of his happiness, and how blessed a
thing it was to be well-beloved; his heart had not been accustomed to such
delight, nor could he relish it with moderation, but coming afterward to
examine closer what his good fortune was, he found something wanting, which he
reserved till the morrow, to desire his Mistress to perfect.

The Court was to lie at Estampes, he feigned to begone, and understanding the
Mareshale was in her chamber, he was brought in by L'Hermite.

What come you hither for? said she, at his entrance, I believed you already
gone; and was preparing to rail at you: he was about to answer when one came in
to tell her, that Madam de Bonneval and the Duke of Guise desired to see her.
Bussy desired the Mareshale he might be hid, because he was believed to be
gone, and being found there, they would suspect he had a great intelligence
with her. L'Hermite undertook that care, who thrust him into a Closet near the
Mareshales Bed, whilst she went to meet them, lest they should perceive Bussy
was with her. She masked her surprise at their arrival, by feigning a great
Headache; Madam de Bonneval proposed remedies for it, but she refused them, and
her friend divined not those would have done it. Perhaps she had desired not to
be interrupted. Bussy was in a flame of Love, and in a fair road, and I doubt
not but he would have stood in it. Madam de Bonneval and the Duke of Guise,
apprehending the grief less then it was, endeavored to be persuaded, made their
visit very long. Love has its impatiencies, judge those of Bussy. Hearing
easily all that was said in the chamber; he overheard Madam de Bonneval ask the
Mareshale what was a clock, for she must be gone at ten, and reaching to a
sounding Watch that hung in the Closet, he made it strike that hour. The
Mareshale who knew her Watch went right, easily conceived Bussy had put it
forward. In short, Madam de Bonneval and the Duke went and left them a full
liberty of entertainment.

After having given some Orders to L'Hermite, she opened the Closet door, and
Bussy came into her chamber, when immediately a great noise was heard below,
and word brought there was fire, and that the Flames increased: she would have
seen her House burn, and her Household Stuff, well known to be the most
Magnificent of the Kingdom, consumed without the least trouble, but the fear
she was in of Bussy's danger, cruelly afflicted her; and notwithstanding the
arrival of Ligneroles, she would go into the Closet where L'Hermite had once
more hid him, when the Flames that issued from the door made her believe her
Lover was consumed. What a loss at the point of being happy, and recompensing
Bussy for all his Labor and his Love! she swounded, and none but L'Hermite at
present knew the cause. Ligneroles, who was to part next morning, passing by
that Street, saw the neighbors run toward her House, and understanding the
cause, comes directly to her Apartment, where the Fire first took; One whole
wing of her House was burnt, in despite of all help could be brought. The
Mareshale revived from her swound, and he withdrew, the Servants had repaired
as much as possible the strange disorder caused by the Fire, but the Mareshales
Lodgings being quite burnt, they were forced to make ready for her another
Chamber. L'Hermite caused the ruins of the Closet and Chamber to be searched
for Bussy's Body, but all in vain. The Mareshale sad and desperate, Commanding
her to take a Torch, would go her self, to see if she could not discover the
unhappy remains of a Man she had so dearly loved; but passing out of her
Chamber, she rejoiced to find him alive; he told her, that perceiving the Fire
took hold of the Closet, he chose rather to leap into the Garden, then expose
himself to what might have been talked, had he been seen pass through the
Chamber, which he could hardly have that way avoided. That being concealed by
the darkness, he waited a time to get away undiscerned, but when he thought he
had found the opportunity, feared to be discovered by Ligneroles domestiques,
hindered him, and made him return back, that the Fire being quelled and nigh far
spent, not knowing how to get out of the House, he sought for L'Hermites
Chamber, when now he met her. Bussy saw her all in Tears, her Hair in disorder,
and only in her Nightgown, but in that negligence she discovered great
Beauties, which still inflamed his desires.

Madam de Bonneval, who knew not the accident till it was late, returned to the
Mareshale as soon as she heard it. L'Hermite brought Bussy into a Wardrobe
belonging to her chamber, and which on the other side, had a door into a
Gallery of Pictures, and put him into a great Press, lest Madam de Bonneval
should see him. She condoled with the Mareshale for her loss, and judging she
would have but an ill night of it in that Chamber, pressed her to go lodge with
her. This proposition pleased not Bussy who hearkened to it, and he feared her
acceptance of the offer, had she had his thoughts she had staid, but not able
to withstand the urgent entreaties of Madam Bonneval, she consented, and after
having whispered something to L'Hermite, goes into the Wardrobe, telling Madam
Bonneval she would immediately return: and L'Hermite who by her Mistress order,
gave light but by halfs, being ready to open the Press, saw him just by her;
deserve what I have done for you by a kind and faithful passion; I love you, as
you may perceive, said she to him, kissing him, and I beg you would not be
gone. He was so surprised at the sight and action of the Mareshale, that he
could not rise, he only took one of her hands, and squeezing it between his,
sighed. Madam de Bonneval at the same time was coming toward the Wardrobe, but
L'Hermite feigning to light better, lifting up the Candle, put it out against
the door, she run presently to take another, which was on the Chamber-Table,
and the Mareshale fearing lest Madam de Bonneval should discover Bussy, came to
meet her just at the time the Candle was put out, and led her back to her
chamber; L'Hermite bringing another lighted one. In short, she went to lodge
with Madam de Bonneval, leaving charge to L'Hermite to be careful that Bussy
might go out unperceived, which she performed. As Soon as he was gone thence, he
caused Horses to be brought, parted from Paris, and by six aclock in the
morning o'retook the Court at Estampes. The Mareshales surprise at his
departure, was so much the greater, because she believed she had explained her
thoughts to him in so kind a manner, as could not deserve this Ingratitude. How
cruelly was she angry at her self, for having been so yielding; she resolved to
love him no more, but Love soon made her know, he is not so easily rid off, and
that he is a sort of guost not to be driven when one will, from that Heart he
has once taken possession of.

She asks L'Hermite, if Bussy had said nothing to her when he went, and
understood he had said nothing, but seemed melancholy, and she guest it
happened by reason of Madam de Bonnevals coming, and that not having expected
her going to lodge with her, he could not undergo so cruel a disappointment,
without being extremely afflicted.

I told you that Bussy left Neufville his trusty friend at Paris, he was to
believe in Madam de Bonneval, and to agree with her in what manner they might
best serve him with his Mistress in his absence, whom though Bussy had offended
in the tendrest part of her soul, far from imitating his proceedings; she
continued to love him, and forgot not the least duty of a kind and faithful
Lover. Madam de Bonneval knew nothing of Bussys being hid in the Closet and
Wardrobe, but there are secrets Love keeps only for its self.

She now begins to put in practice the ingenious design she had contrived to
ruin the correspondence between the Mareshale and him.

Neufville was a Man proper for her design, he was young, handsome, and
discreet, but he had a Heart of Wax, and by that she believed she might revenge
the scorn she thought Bussy had put upon her, when he gave Grillon that Letter
and Bracelet she had sent only to himself. The Mareshale who would not give
occasion to suspect the reasons she had to complain of him, told them, that she
remembered him with delight, and that his absence much more troubled her, then
ever any Persons did. Some true friends gave this account to Bussy, but
Neufvilles Love contradicted it as well as the Treason of Madam de Bonneval,
who observing Neufvilles joy when he saw the Mareshale, and his Heaviness when
he parted from her, conceived it easy to make him a Lover, if already he were
not. What is in your mind, said she to him, one day, that you do not love;
look upon the Mareshale, there is nothing so beautiful, you are an accomplished
Person, and have desert enough, and why should you be ungrateful to your self;
she told him so many other fine things, that he suffered himself to be seduced,
and it must be added, that the sweet and obliging carriage of the Mareshale
completed his loss by deceiving him: thus he became unfaithful to his friend,
but Love was his excuse, and when he undertakes a justification, we are
constrained to grant pardon to the most guilty.

Neufville then forgot all that he ought to the esteem and friendship of Bussy,
believing that his passion ought to see nothing beyond its own satisfaction.

Ligneroles who stayed a day after his Rival, overtook not the Court till they
came to Orleans, where a Feavor seized Chateauneuf. Its accesses not having
been violent, Monsieur resolved to go as far as Blois, but the next day the
distemper doubling, she was constrained to stay.

Whilst Love is forming these cruel vexations for Bussy, Madam de Bonneval
entrusts the Mareshale with the whole secret of her commerce with Grillon. Love
had some difficulty to enter her Heart that way, but at last he found a
passage; her anger against Bussy assisted, and the diligence and constancy of
Grillon completed the rest. How stand things, said the Mareshale to her; does
he know you love him? I think he has no reason to doubt it, answered Madam de
Bonneval, I have writ to him, in a manner sufficiently explaining my thoughts,
and as we seldom forget things done for what we love, I believe I remember that
Letter to be thus.

YOu are very pressing, and I have occasion enough to complain of you: I might
justly load you with a thousand reproaches, but I cannot; content your self to
know that you are not forbid guessing, whether I love or hate you: Put your
self in a condition to deserve the first, by your Love and Faithfulness, and I
promise to secure you from all pains, may accompany the latter.

What was Grillons answer, said the Mareshale; shall not I know whither he writ
kindly: you are about to be judge of it, said she, drawing a Letter from her
Pocket, where she read,

SInce happy Lovers are never content, you cannot wonder if I complain, who am
not so. It Is the property of Love still to be asking, and I have never yet
received so much from him, that I can think he deserves thanks for his
Presents. But if he resolve to make me any, let them come by your hands, all I
can receive elsewhere, will bring little satisfaction, and without your
goodness, I cannot but be unhappy, would you have me so?

No, doubtless he shall not be so, if his happiness depends on me, pursued she,
returning again her Letter, his Desert and Love have made a great progress in
my Heart, and if I continue in this mind, I am persuaded there will be many
other Lovers more to be pitied then he; what do we signify if we love not,
without Love there is no solid Pleasure, and without that of what use is Life?
we are soon tired with the constraints of severity, and by that we may find how
cruel the Laws are to us, reducing us to extract our shame from the same Center
whence Men draw subjects of Esteem and Glory; but do you know what we ought to
do? raise our selves above these sorts of Laws, and Love, since nature has
given us Hearts tender and sensible: That Sage-Mother would not have let us be
born with such strong inclinations of loving, unless she had designed us to
requite with Love Men's Love to us? let us then follow the bent of our own
Hearts, and believe that that Virtue which has so many pains and troubles for
its guard, is only an endowment which Women unprovided of allurements of the
Body, or charms of the Mind have maliciously invented, to revenge the Scorn
Nature has thrown on them, but we who have thanks to return to her, may tread
in more pleasant paths, and since Love is accounted one of the greatest
Virtues, is it not so always to do virtuously, so follow what it inspires.

This is, doubtless, most singular Morality, said the Mareshale, but who is it
will begin the practice of it; there have some been found in all times, replied
Madam de Bonneval, and you and I should do very prudently in following these
Maxims.

'Twas thus, she concluded, the discovery of her passion. The same day that the
King arrived at Blois, where the Articles of the Treaty of Peace were at last
decided, by which the Hugonots obtained the greatest part of their desires. The
Marriage of the King of Navarre was likewise agreed on, and a Courier sent to
Jane D'Albret, Queen of Navarre, to advertise her of it, and to press her
coming to Blois, whither the Court was only come for the easier accommodating
the affairs of that Marriage and the Peace.

Monsieur went every other day to see Chateauneuf at Orleans; her Feavor having
left her, she was carried back to Paris by direction of the Physicians.

Bussy and Ligneroles led a sad life at Blois, and the destiny of the happiest
was so averse, that he believed himself most to be pitied and lamented. They
were one evening in the Garden, but apart. Grillon was with Bussy, to whom he
was showing a Letter he had received from Madam de Bonneval. Ligneroles who
walked alone, and was somewhat near them, seeing a Letter in Bussy's hands,
believed it came from the Mareshale; If I could hate you, said he, drawing
toward him, I should not be so unhappy, and perhaps the pleasure of revenging
my self on a Rival that triumphs over me, would help me to support with less
grief, the cruelties of the Mareshale. There was, said Bussy, but one way,
wherein I desired to be Master; I hoped all from my Love, and from her I love,
but you have deprived me of the only good, could make me happy, by telling me
my happiness makes you despair; you that are loved, you that know it, and to
whom it has not only been told in my presence, but you have likewise received a
favor which was only due to my love; alas, it is of that cruel favor I
complain, replied Ligneroles, I am sensible it was designed for you, I was not
used to be so treated, and had I had my choice, should rather have been content
with usual and known rigors, then a moments kindness received from chance, and
not from the heart of the Mareshale. Hitherto, said Bussy, interrupting, we
have lived rather like Friends then Rivals, let us continue to do so; Grillon
is not to be suspected, we may freely speak our thoughts before him. To show
you I approve what you say, replied Ligneroles, I am about to tell you that not
being able to resolve on my departure without having some privacy with the
Mareshale, I went to kiss her hands that evening the fire took in her Lodgins.
That accident so affrighted her, that she swounded, but I suspected not the
true cause of it, till an hour after, I made a show of being gone, and hid my
self. L'Hermite came to search among the ruins of the Chamber, and I thought I
heard her name you. I guessed it not impossible, but you might be stayed at
Paris, and in the Lady Mareshales house, though you were believed to be gone.
Alas, I was but too certain of it, some time after I saw come forth the
Mareshale with L'Hermite, who told her there was no doubt to be made but you
perished in the Flames of the Closet; her Tears affected me, and I was just
about to discover my self when you appeared, and seeking a place to hide my
self, turned back into a Chamber, and sat me down near a Press. What could I
think of your return, and of the kindness of the Mareshale, when she came up to
me? Ah Ligneroles, said Bussy, interrupting him, tell me not that I wish I had
never known: then he related to him all had happened with her; and perceiving
his thughts concerning Grillons Letter, prayed him to show the Character, but
Ligneroles would not see it, Bussy having assured him, that it was not from the
Mareshale; having thus cleared their suspicions, they parted with such
expressions of Esteem and Friendship, that Grillon was amazed to think how
Rivals could live in such good intelligence, but these were no common Men.

'Twas now Bathing-time. Bussy who was prescribed it, went every night; so did
the King and most part of the Court. He scarce knew how to swim, but trusting
to his little cunning, ventured out of his depth, and the stream carried him
away; he strove against it, and endeavored to regain the shore, but all his
striving was in vain; in the end he grew weaker and weaker, breath and motion
failed him, and he was ready to sink to the bottom, when a Man swimming with
skill and strength, dived so luckily after him, that in a moment he rose again
holding Bussy. Every one cried out as soon as they perceived the danger, but
'twas Ligneroles outstript all that would have saved him, and repaid Bussy the
succor he had once given him. He was carried home, having scarce any sense, and
'twas Grillon told him how Ligneroles had saved him; he came to him soon after,
and what they said, was worthy of what they had done the one for the other. The
Court had then resolved to depart within two days for Borgueil, though Bussy
was not in a condition to go within those two days, yet he would have followed
it, but Ligneroles and Grillon opposed it.

His Grief was not so great to hinder the thinking of his Love; The Mareshale
was innocent, he had offended her in coming away against her Orders, and
without telling the cause, and had neither writ to Madam de Bonneval, nor to
Neufville, he resolved to go as soon as he was recovered, and repair his fault
with so much service, that she should lose the memory of it.

With his hopes in a short time to see the Mareshale, there grew up a
melancholy he could not suppress; Ligneroles was the cause of it, his Merits,
his generous Thoughts, and the greatness of his Soul; all troubled him; not
that he had not a Rival he might hate, but that he had a friend, whom he was
not in a condition to serve and make happy. These sad thoughts were his
entertainers one morning, when Grillon came back to Blois, and told him,
Ligneroles was killed as he was Hunting, and that within five hundred paces of
the King. The grief he conceived at his death is not to be imagined; he would
have risen, and returned to the Court, made open complaints, and thrown out
reproaches and threats, but what would they have done? are the Great obliged to
give an account of their actions? or agrees it not with their interest and
authority to punish Pride and Insolence? The King would doubtless have
chastis'd this in Bussy, had he had the boldness to speak, but Grillons good
Counsels hindered his going, and on the morrow he went with him toward Paris.

Madam de Bonneval made use of Bussy's absence, she omitted no occasion of
blaming his carriage and forgetfulness. The Mareshale for the most part heard
her, but without answering her, and made her judge by her manner of acting,
that she was kind and constant; her cunning becoming fruitless on the
Mareshales part, she attempted to succeed by Neufvilles, who assisted but two
much with his love; all being fittingly disposed for the design by her
contrived, she sends an express to Grillon with Letters which he received at
Orleans, after Ligneroles death was known at Paris; at which the Mareshale was
very lively afflicted, but had the satisfaction to know that she could not
alone grieve his death, whom all the world lamented.

Bussy received a Letter by Grillon from Madam de Bonneval, which gave him
notice of the infidelity of the Mareshale.

After he had made Grillon read it, what shall I do, said he? this unlooked for
misfortune over-whelms me, and in the condition I am, I know not what to
resolve.

Grillon seemed at first as troubled as he, but at length counseled him to
make have to Paris, and above all things convince himself of the matter. Bussy
approved Grillons advice, and sent back the Express empty: Being come to Paris,
Madam de Bonneval, who was content with Grillons love, received him like a
lover she bated not, and he appeared not unworthy her reception. However,
though she gave him a thousand testimonies of her trust and kindness, yet she
never let him know either her anger or design of revenge on Bussy; she spoke of
him with esteem, she seemed earnest to serve him, and it was she had advised
him of his Mistress treason. We are less sensible of any affront, then that
committed against our love. That offense is most cruel, and he that receives it
without deserving it, has strange griefs to undergo. In the midst of all these
perplexities his love still subsisted; and the inclinations of his heart told
him sufficiently, that he must still love, though he knew himself forsaken.
Then thinking of his unknown Rival, who had snatched from him what had cost him
so much to seek after, fain would he have found out who this happy man should
be, but would never have guest Neufville, whom he believed his friend, tell he
was disabused the next morning, when Madam de Bonneval made Grillon tell him,
she desired to speak with him. He came at the hour appointed, and without
stopping at the unnecessary circumstances of this interview, I will only tell
you, that she hid Bussy, and that soon after Neufville entered, he had a Black
Satin Suit, Embroidered with Silk of the same, and between space and space
might be seen double L L in Embroidery of Pearls. Bussy at first sight, guest
not what those Cifers meant, but he soon found out they were the Mareshales,
who was of the House of Lustrac. She was not long ere she came, and Madam de
Bonneval, feigning to order her head tire at the Glass, Bussy overheard the
Mareshale say to Neufville, I fear least you undertake to please me, you must
succeed in it; your manners are so obliging, you are so ingenuous and
complaisant, and have so much estimable merit, that I fear I cannot resist it.
Change your procedure, it is too winning, and know that I will not be affected.
These words were pronounced by a delicate mouth, and the fairest eyes in the
World glanced favorably on Neufville, and Bussy believed all this due only to
his love. Have no care nor complaisance for me, continued she, nor prefer me
before all other Ladies, nor shall I be so weak to love you for it. How happy
was Neufville? And how desperate grew Bussy? He was in the mind to come forth
and upbraid the perfidiousness of his Friend and Mistress; but knowing that it
is love always makes reproaches and complaints, he withdrew, without hearing
out the remainder of their discourse, which he believed he could not quietly
listen to. The Mareshale knew not of his return, no more then did Neufville.

About twenty paces from the Mareshales, Bussy met Chateauneuf, who desirous to
know some news from the Court, and to tell him that Neufville was his Rival,
carried him to the Tuilleries, whither he had designed to go. Whilst he walked
two turns with her, he gave her an account of all she desired to know, and told
her so respectively, that he would never love, that she had not the power to
complain of a Man she could not hate. In vain would she have dissuaded him from
loving the Mareshale, he remained constant, though he thought himself not
obliged to do so.

As soon as Neufville was parted from Madam de Bonnevals House, the Mareshale
and she came to the Tuilleries; they discerned Chateauneuf at a great distance,
and the nigher they drew, the more Madam de Bonneval obliged the Mareshale to
observe, that the man was with her did much resemble Bussy. She granted the
resemblance, but could hardly believe she saw him, till Bussy and Chateauneuf
turned toward them; the Mareshale blushed at the sight of her lover, he passed
by her with much respect, and could not forbear looking after her; but he spoke
not, and continued his walk with Chateauneuf.

Madam de Bonneval whose design was to increase the Mareshales grief, put her
in mind how she would not believe her, when she had formerly told her Bussy
loved Chateauneuf. Ungrateful Man, said she to her, do you see in what manner
he treats you; after all this, can you love him? to be in Paris without seeing
you, and publicly sacrifice your love at the feet of your Rival. Alas, said
she, I feel all you can instill into me, but let me suffer and complain, I have
no need of your Counsels, and will only follow the dictates of my own heart.
Bussy at his return home, told Grillon all he had seen and heard at Madam de
Bonnevals.

So great a cause of despair in so constant a Passion, the Treason of the
Mareshale, and the death of Ligneroles, infinitely perplexed him, and created
sufferings he could hardly undergo; sometimes he was resolved to love no more,
but to seek in a quiet Retreat, the Remedy of so many Griefs. Grillon told him,
that was to yield the Mareshale to Neufville, and that he ought to make her
return, either for glory or for loves sake, but he was too incensed to follow
this advice.

Some days after, the Court arrived at Paris with the Queen of Navarre, who
joined it at what time it was at Bloys.

The ties of Friendship and Interest which had formerly been between the late
King of Navarre, and the Mareshale de St. Andre had made her have a great
esteem for his Person after his death; she had preserved for the Mareshale, the
same thoughts she had had for her Husband, she Commanded her to see her often,
and had no cause to blame her neglects, for that she seldom was from that
Queen, but shared in all her divertisements and all her pleasures.

Queen Catherine of Medices mortally hated her; she knew that Jean of Albret
had remonstrated to the King of Navarre, that he might be chosen Head of that
Faction divided France, if he knew how to make use of the occasion of taking
the Authority into his hands. If this counsel had been executed with as much
boldness as was given with judgment, Catherine de Medices had been no longer
Mistrifs of affairs; she could not live without ruling; but the King of Navarre
being too moderate, and suffering himself to be carried away with the passion
he had for Mademoiselle de Roy, who was gained by Catherine de Medices, he
yielded to her what he could not keep. This was the true foundation of that
hate, ended not but with the death of Jean of Albret.

Bussy was gone to Chantilly to visit the Duke of Montmorency, then returned
from England, whither he had been sent to hinder Queen Elizabeth from giving
assistance to the Hugonots, by proposing a Match with the Duke D'Alanzon Bussy
staid there two days, during which came the Queen of Navarre, under pretense of
seeing his fine House, but indeed to engage him in the interests of the King of
Navarre, the better to oppose the hatred and Authority of Katherine, who in the
ruins of the greatest Men of the Kingdom would not spare the Montmorency's,
whom she ever hated, both because of their uprightness, and because they would
not abase themselves, to depend directly on her power.

The Duke civilly received the Queen of Navarre, but would not enter into any
Treaty with her, though some forbore not afterward to give other
interpretations to the conference he had with this Queen; and had not he
prudently remained at Chantilly during the King of Navarr's Wedding, he had
been possibly enveloped on that dismal St. Bartholomews day, which cost France
so much blood.

The Duke treated her with all the Magnificence she could expect from a great
King. The Mareshale was with her, still fair, but Languishing and negligent of
her self. Catherine de Medices not able to suffer the Imperious humor, the
Spirit, the Courage, and the Constancy of Jeane d'Albret, and her hatred making
her take cruel resolutions, she soon after put them in execution.

Bussy's Merits were well known, though he had not yet that great repute he
afterward gained; There were then few men of France had so much Wit, Valor,
or good Mien as he: The Duke de Montmorency presented him to the Queen, she
received him so kindly that he was compelled to stay at Chantilly, though he
were resolved to return to Paris; besides the entreaties of the Duke, and the
sight of his Mistress abating his desire of going so soon, he the easier
consented to stay.

There was in Chantilly a Hall and a Closet of Arms, whither the Constable
Anne de Montmorency had caused to be brought from all Europe, what could most
worthily embellish them with what ever was rich or rare. Above all these things
was in esteem a Scimitar set with Diamonds and Emeralds, which the Grand Signor
Soliman had sent him, together with a Hanger or Dagger all adorned with Rubies;
The Queen, curious to see all the several Rooms and Magnificent Furniture which
adorned them, passed into this Hall of Arms, and thence into the Closet, where
she was showed that Dagger, thought beyond all vallue, both for the Stones
which enriched it, and for its workmanship, which added to its beauty and
Ornament.

After it had been in the Queens and some other hands, the Mareshale would see
it, and having sufficiently admired it, Bussy not being far from her, having
observed his stand, she went toward him, and drawing out the Dagger, and
setting it with a threatening look to his breast, To what use, said she, ought
this to be destined: To pierce the most faithless of all hearts, said he,
taking the point and turning it toward the Mareshale: This Answer surprised
her, and she expected not such a reproach, who could not believe she deserved
it. Ah Bussy (replied she in a doleful accent) there was never a more faithless
-- then yours, Madam (said he, interrupting her) They were entering into a
Discourse had not been soon finished, but the Queen going out of the Closet
called the Mareshale who accompanied her Madam de Bonneval was not at
Chantilly; the Mareshale had entreated her to go, and Grillon had desired her
to stay at Paris; thus the Friend was refused, and the Lover had his request.
Was not this very just? they could never before converse with so much Love as
they had a desire to do. Grillon now passed one part of the day with her, the
Lady was tender, in short, they said a thousand things were never told. This
entertainment being on their own private account, and they being discreet
Lovers, all that passed could never be known; but, it may be judged they
treated of nothing less then indifferency, and the curious have observed that
they received often these Entertainments, and that if Love had not been mixed
with them, they had not taken so much delight in talking without witnesses.

Was not Madam de Bonneval too happy? she was beloved by one of the honestest
men of France; she had by her cunning betrayed her Friend, made Bussy unhappy
in stead of doing him Services as she had promised; she fears not the
penalties, treason and perfidiousness deserve; she triumphs over the
misfortunes of the Mareshale and Bussy, and when she is with Grillon forgets
all the World, the better to think of her Love.

The Mareshale and Bussy found often at Chantilly opportunities of talking; but
the Mareshales fierceness, and Bussyes shame and anger to be forsaken, hindered
them from uttering what they even died with a desire of speaking. Thus each had
their grief and affliction. Bussy, that to find the Mareshale more lovely,
since he believed her false; The Mareshale, to observe in Bussy a sadness which
had very much changed his countenance.

The Queen of Navarre returned on the morrow to Paris, but Bussy staid yet one
day with the Duke of Montmorency, after which he returned to Court: he became
every day more and more in Love, and the beauty of the Mareshale made him
forget the infidelity he thought her guilty of.

Madam de Bonneval continued still seeing the Lady Mareshale, that is to say
deceiving her. L'Hermite told her judgment, but it was not well received, and
she was silent. Bussy seldom saw Madam de Bonneval, she complained to Grillon
that he might tell him, but he had no more an inclination toward her; he
looked upon her as the cause of her misfortune without suspecting her Treason,
and he could have wished never to have heard the person he loved pronounce
words in favor of another; but, the thing was done, he had seen, he had heard,
Can he any longer doubt?

So many causes of sorrow in a passion so tenderly preserved, tormented him
beyond a power of enduring; so that he was often in the mind to quit utterly
his love, and silently retreat from the World.

The Soul of the Mareshale was tossed with no less violent storms, she was loath
to lose Bussy, and she gave sufficient assurances of it one evening that she
found him at the Queen of Navarr's. She was resolved to know if he yet loved
her, and made use of an ingenuous feigned device to discover his thoughts. Will
Bussy refuse to serve me (said she.) I should (said he) but I cannot, I have
loved you too well. Ah it is not that which I desire, (replied she interrupting
him) come to me to morrow and you shall know what I have to say. She had time
to say no more by reason of the arrival of Madam, who beginning to fancy some
interest in Bussy, observed nicely all his actions. On the morrow going toward
the Mareshales, he passed by Madam de Bonnevals, where he saw Neufville enter;
L'Hermite had order to make Bussy stay, she told him his Mistress dined at
Madam de Bonnevals, and that she would return immediately.

He was about to go and surprise the Mareshale and Neufville, and to load them
with a thousand reproaches; but L'Hermite who understood the most part of his
melancholy hindered his going out: In short, the Mareshale soon returned, she
would not see Neufville, but had left him in the hands of Madam de Bonneval,
who too officiously pressed her to hear what he would say.

Being then alone in her Chamber with Bussy; Though all treaty of love be for
ever ended between us (said she) yet I have so great an esteem for you as to
ask your Counsel, Will you give it me? Bussy promised it, and she proceeded
thus. Since I have lost all hopes of being beloved by you, I think it may be
permitted me to engage in another violent passion which may last all my life,
my heart whispers me in favor of Neufville, he is worthy of love, he loves me,
What do you counsel me? To hearken to all that your heart dictates Madam
(replied Bussy) and to give your self wholly to Neufville. But if I love him
(replied she) if I have given him marks of it, and if I do all I can to
persuade him that no one can be more beloved than I do him, Will you have no
regret for what you lose. What matter whether I am unhappy or desperate
(replied he) you may love, you may be happy, and you may have the pleasure
never more to remember Bussy: follow, follow your own thoughts Madam, and never
think of those cruel torments you make me undergo. Ah Ungrateful Man, (said the
Mareshale) Will you forsake me then? you that have made me so sensible, Can you
Counsel me to give my self to another? You have done it already (said Bussy,
interrupting her and sighing) and I have known but too well how dearly you love
Neufville. Is it possible that you can upbraid me in the least (replied she)
you who went hence for the progress in despite of that kindness of mine to
request your stay? Ah Ligneroles (cried Bussy) How happy were you at that time,
and how did I envy the delights you then enjoyed? He told the Mareshale in what
manner she had been deceived, she blushed at what she understood from Bussy, and
the confusion she appeared in made her yet seem fairer.

In sum, he told her he could no longer doubt her being false, that he saw her
at Madam Bonnevals with Neufville, and heard her say to him a thousand kind and
obliging things. The Mareshale fell a Laughing at this discourse, Bussy grew
angry, and would have been gone, when Neufville entered the room, whatever
L'Hermite could do to hinder him, and though the Mareshale had forbid his
entrance; He looked pale, and grief and repentance seemed lively represented in
his Countenance: Having demanded only the favor of Audience from the Mareshale
and Bussy, it was granted him, and he spoke thus. Had I not been assisted and
pressed forward to become so guilty, I had never betrayed either the trust or
friendship of Bussy, or have dared to prosecute my Love; but, Madam, will you
believe me, 'twas Madam de Bonneval who counseled me to love you, and to tell
you so, thence had my crime its spring; your enchanting carriage, your charming
features, and in short all your Beauties brought it into a Stream. The
Mareshale who had a respect for Madam de Bonneval, could scarce believe this
perfidiousness; but Bussy having pulled out of his pocket a Letter which she had
writ for his return, she could no longer be doubtful of her treason, after
having read her words.

REturn. Bussy, the Mareshales constancy stands in need of you: Her heart is
assaulted in one of its most sensible places, I know it, and know she cannot
visit. You have a Rival thought too lovely, his sight in one moment destroys
all that ought to be reserved for your passion. How unhappy are men to have so
much Love for ungrateful Women.

She well knew the Character to be Madam de Bonnevals, and withal remembering
how she had still endeavored to divert her from loving Bussy, she began to
search the cause.

Will you tell me the truth (said she to him) Did Madam de Bonneval never love
you? possibly some refusal you made of her heart, has made her attempt revenge
on yours. I know nothing certainly Madam (said he, after having thought a
little while on what she had said) but I have some suspicions you may possibly
help me to give some light to. He then began to tell her of the request Grillon
had made to him, to serve him with Madam de Bonneval, in what manner it was
performed, and the interruption given by Madame and Chateaneuf; and, that on
the morrow she sent the Note and the hair Bracelet, which he carried to
Grillon. There needs no more said the Mareshale: The cause of Bonnevals hate is
plain, she applied to your self what you said for Grillon, and Grillon
doubtless received a favor designed for you: In the end, she would justify
her self, concerning those thousand kind things Bussy had heard her say to
Neufville, assuring them to be caused by Madam de Bonnevals artifice, and that
she had engaged her to speak so to Neufville, to discover if he were truly in
Love with her, by counselling, that if it were so, to command his absence, that
Bussy might have no cause of complaint at his return. He understood as well as
the Mareshale that he had unhappily contributed to make the Treason succeed,
and that Madam de Bonneval had managed all things so well, that any other as
well as he would have believed her the most unfaithful woman living. Neufville
hearkened, and could not but be amazed to hear how far Madam de Bonneval had
carried her lies and treachery, when the Mareshale prayed him to let Bussy know
how she had finished that Discourse, of which as he had told her, he had heard
the beginning. Imagine (said he) what pleasure I had to hear such kind and
charming words pronounced in my favor, for, Who had ever the like said to
them? I hoped, and I dare say I believed I was beloved; but, How great was my
despair? when, after having acknowledged I was in Love. Ungrateful and most
perfidious man that you are (said she) going away from me; Is it thus that you
serve, Bussy? Love will not permit me, Madam (said I) and I obey his commands.
Let me never see you more (said she interrupting me) It begets a horror in me
to behold such unworthy proceedings in a man of Honor. At these words she
turned to reproach Madam de Bonneval, and I withdrew in confusion and despair.
After this cruel adventure Madam, (proceeded Neufville) Repentance for having
offended you, and done so great an injury to Bussyes friendship, threw me into
such deep affliction, that could I but tell one part of it, you would possibly
have the generosity to pardon me. I came to Madam Bonnevals with intent to beg
it, you avoided seeing or speaking with me, and I am come hither to tell you
all this. It Is my fault (said Bussy, interrupting him) I ought not to have
requested you to take care of my concerns. I might easily have understood it,
because what I feel in seeing you Madam (said he, turning toward her with a
look full of love and kindness) must be likewise felt by others; Could
Neufville answer otherwise then he did, when you spoke so kindly, let us forget
his fault, and lament his misfortune; for my part I will never spy out in him
any other qualities than those of a Friend, without ever remembering that he has
been my rival, and that he may yet be so. The Mareshale yielded to what Bussy
had declared; his mind forgave Neufville, and permitted him to visit her: At
this, one came for him from the Queen of Navarre, to whom Byron gave a Treat at
the Arsenal. And Bussy and Neufville went together to the Louvre, and sometime
after to the Arsenal, where Madam de Bonneval saw plainly that the Mareshale
had discovered her Treacheries, as well by a biting reproach she made her as by
the good intelligence she observed between Bussy and Neufville.

She easily allayed this misfortune with Grillons love, and that remedy seeming
to her very sweet and very pleasant, she took good care to apply it.

Bussy was now free from all Melancholy, Trouble and Rivalship: He was in
Love, he was Beloved; What could he more desire? One great delight he yet
wanted, which his Love made him hope for, and which he resolved to obtain. On
the other side, the Mareshale had retrieved her Lover, she loved him, and those
that Love can refuse nothing.

During the Collation they spoke a thousand things by looks, which their hearts
understood; but, this is not enough for true Lovers, there are yet greater
pleasures; they had both the same impatience and the same desires, and they
were both persuaded they should find an infinite joy in their first
Entertainment, and that then they should find a recompense for the so many
griefs they had endured by Suspicions, Absence, Anger, and supposed
Infidelities: They wanted but opportunity to make them happy; but, this happy
opportunity came, and 'twas Love that brought it.

'Twas about this time Madame was to marry the King of Navarre, and nothing
wanted but the arrival of a dispensation to complete the affair. The Duke of
Guise loved her, but she answered not his Love again, and Bussy was beloved
without loving. He still received some favorable glance from that Princess;
she blushed when ever she saw him, and he observed she delighted to converse
with him. He knew himself in love, and doubted not her capable to be one day as
much, he often shunned her glances, and as often avoided her presence. Those
that love truly, act thus, They are neither pleased, nor desire any person but
that they love. And 'twas this made Bussy design to surprise the Marashale in
her chamber, without letting her have notice. She was in a charming negligence,
Bussy saw her, and Bussy was in love, and alone. Whence comes it, said she,
That I have such a kindness on my Spirit, and that all the motions of my Heart
are so favorable to you? It Is because you love me Madam, replied he, and that
you could not see me have so much love without following me in so fair a path.
There is your question decided, proceeded he, casting at her glances full of
Love and Eloquence, which so well express what the Tongue is not able to utter.

But I have another more amorous question to ask you, it is for your Wits, your
Heart, and your Experience to resolve such difficulties, and the decision you
shall give, is so important, that on it depends our happiness.

Bussy's Question to the Lady Mareshale.

That which I would know from you, Madam, is; Whether Love, that ingenious
Artificer of the most voluptuous Delights, has nothing beyond Looks and Words.
Some Pleasures and Transports which may confirm the Thoughts I am in, that it
consists not only in the Sight and Discourse.

The Mareshale blushed at the question he would have her decide, but when her
blushing and confusion were suppressed by what she inwardly felt, she made this
answer.

Beyond Looks and Words to use your own terms, I find a confused mixture of
impressment, Pleasure and Love. It is made up of all these -- I know not well
how to decide your question, proceeded she; My Heart never learnt, what it has
now told you: but I had it from a friend of mine, to whom all the delicacy of
this passion was a familiar Virtue, and not from my self, who am less knowing
and experienced then she.

Madam, said Bussy, interrupting her, Since your self know not whether the
decision you have made, be just, let us essay by a sweet Trial of our desires
to find out a truth we cannot doubt of: he ended these words with a kiss, she
made at first some resistance, with design only to inflame his desires; but in
the end, fearing to offend his kindness, she attempted to give Bussy an amorous
and ready revenge for his kisses, and that she might not appear ungrateful, she
returned them with usury, and neither the one nor the other would have the last
kiss. The Mareshales Eyes were more sweet and languishing then usual, and
seemed to invite Bussy to treat of the most endearing mysteries of Love, In
this very moment her chastity began to yield to the violences of her Lovers
passion, but alas! can any one believe the cruel destiny of this amiable
Person. Her Face was on a sudden painted with a Mortal color, Bussy perceived
it, and called L'Hermite to her assistance, but all remedies could be applied
were in vain, she died within an hour after in Bussy's Arms. Her death was
diversely spoken of, but when within three days after happened that of the Queen
of Navarre, the perfumed Florentine Gloves were suspected, and in the clearing
those suspicions, it was found that the Queen of Navarre had given a pair of
those Gloves to the Mareshale. In so dismal an adventure Bussy could not leave
the Body of the Mareshale, he lamented in so feeling a manner, that his sorrow
seemed almost as grievous as the death of the Mareshale. He had lost the
fairest Person in France, just at the point of being happy, his despair was
violent and lasting, but yet he died not; what he did we may hereafter tell you.

FINIS.

