THE DESIRES OF THE COMMISSIONERS for the weekly Loan to HIS Majesty's Horse
in the County of OXFORD, PRESENTED TO HIS MAJESTY IN THE BEHALF OF the County.
Whereupon it is Ordered by His MAjESTY, and commanded to be Printed, both for
the information of the Officers and Soldiers of the Army, and Inhabitants of
the County aforesaid.

Printed by His Majesty's Command At OXFORD, February 9. By LEONARD LICHFIELD,
Printer to the University. 1643.

The DESIRES of the COMMISSIONERS For the weekly Loan to His MAJESTY'S Horse
in the County of Oxford, etc.
THe pay to each Regiment being proportioned, so many Towns (lying together)
may be assigned to each, as by the sums already laid upon each Town in the
Loan of 1200l per week, the Money may be raised to every Regiment.

2 That the petty Constables make Assessements, and publish them to the
Jnhabitants, and then return a Copy of the Assessement to the Officer in chief
of the Quarter they are off, and make them only in the names of the parties in
present occupation of the land, with a distinction of places, whereby the
Officer may know how to make Distress in case of refusal.

3 That the Commissioners for the County may have power to regulate and alter
Assessements upon complaint made to them, and that the Army submit to such
alteration of Assessements as come unto them figned under three of the
Commissioners hands.

4 That the petty Constables collect the Money, and bring the same to any place
of the Division they are off, but not further, as the Officer in chief shall
appoint.

5 That when the Constables return, that they cannot levy the Money from the
parties upon demand, then only it shall be lawful for the chief Officer of
the Quarter to distrain, or to send an Inferior Officer with Soldiers to levy
it, which he or they are to perform, by calling the petty Constable, or his
deputy to show them the place Taxed, whereupon only, or upon the parties goods
in an other place of that Manor, they are to distrain, or if in case they
distrain otherwise, or in any other then as aforesaid, that such Distress
shall be accounted in them as unlawful Plundering, and the Officers and
Soldiers be proceeded against by a Court of War, as for Plundering those in
due Obedience to His Majesty, who pay duly all Contribution to His Majesty's
use.

6 That when a distress is to be, no more Goods and Chattles shall be taken,
then (as near as may be) can be esteemed a double value of the Money Taxed upon
the place, and that distress not put to sale until three days be expired,
after the Distress taken, and likewise being first appraised by two sufficient
men of the parish: and if the Distress do exceed the double value of the Tax,
by reason of a fitter is not to be had, then the over plus to be left in the
Constables hands to be returned to the owner.

7 Where more Troopers are Quartered upon any person, exceeding the weekly
charge of his Contribution, and the Soldiers pay not that over plus, it shall
be lawful for the Constable of the place to make payment to the party forth of
the money to be collected by him in his liberties, and such money is to be
allowed him by the Officer in chief of the Quarter upon the Constables Account
to be next made to the said Officer.

8 Where Lands be unstockt, and the Loan not paid, it shall be lawful for the
Officer in Chief of the Quarter to make his best of the whole, till due order
be taken for payment by the owner of the land, and if it be wood-lands there,
it may be lawful to sell, to the double value of the Tax weekly, of the
Under-woods, (not meddling at all with Timber) until due payment be made by the
owners.

9 That the Commissioners in the first order named continue their meetings as
formerly appointed, to hear and determine all controversies arising upon
Assessements, and to transmit the complaints and greivances of the Country to
the Court of War which are occasioned by the Soldiers; and if the Court of
War shall not give due remedy, That the Commissioners may repair to His Majesty
and the Council of War, for further redress against both Court of War and
Troops offending.

10 That a Court of war be named and required to sit upon the same days as the
Commissioners do, as aforesaid.

11 That His Majesty's Horse be quartered, if it may be, in Market Towns, and
Towns of Thorough-fare, where are convenience of Stabling and Victualing
houses, as places most convenient, and for the more ease of the Farmer leaving
convenient stabling and lodgeing in Inns for entertainment of Travelers.

12 That these Articles be Printed and published in all Churches, and so many
Copies printed as each Town and Constable in the County, and every Officer may
have one or more for his information.

13 That if any damages acrue by the Soldiers within their Quarters,
reparations may be made according to his Majesty's Agreement to that effect, as
formerly, and if that be not then sufficient to the parties loss and damage
arising from the Soldiers, That the effect of so much may be supplied forth of
the moneys raised upon delinquents Estates in the County.

Lastly, that all Commodities shall be taken and paid for, and all Billetting
be taken and paid for according to the rates and prizes formerly in the printed
Books of Agreement by His Majesty, for the Information of the County in that
case, set forth by Commissioners. Given at Our Court at Oxford, this Eight day
of February, in the Nineteenth year of Our Reign. 1643.

FINIS.

