The Deplorable Condition of the Assignees of sundry Goldsmiths, Entitled by
the Letters Patent of King Charles the Second, to Annual Sums out of the
Hereditary Revenue of Excise.
WHEREAS his said Majesty being Indebted to Sir Robert Vyner, Edward Backwell,
Esquire and others, Goldsmiths, near Thirteen hundred thousand Pounds, which he
stopped in the Exchequer, in lieu thereof and to Enable them to pay their
Debts, in April 1677. by his said Majesty's Letters Patent were Granted to the
said Goldsmiths, respectively, Rents, or Annual Sums, after the Rate of Six
Pounds per Cent. per Annum, to be paid Quarterly out of the Hereditary Revenue
of Excise for ever, unless Payments should be made of the Principal Money and
the Arrears of such Annual Sums.

The said Letters Patent were Printed by Order of his said Majesty in Council,
for information of the said Goldsmiths Creditors; and by the said Patents were
Granted, Directed and Appointed, that Tallies struck for the said Quarterly
Payments, should be preserable before any other Warrant, Order, or Direction of
any after Date, excepting necessary Sums for Management of the said Revenue,
and 12209 l. 15 s. 4 d. per Anum to the then Queen Consort, also 24000 l. to
the then Duke of York.

The House of Peers were pleased on the 10th of July 1678. to pass a Bill for
confirming the said Letters Patent, but that Session soon ending, the said
Bill was not Read in the House of Commons.

All which Encouraged many of the Creditors of the said Goldsmiths to deliver
up their other Securities, and to take Assignments under the said Letters
Patents of the said Annual Sums for what was due to them, and for the said Sums
Tallies were struck in the said King's Reign, for Five years and a half, and no
more; and by reason of slow Payments thereof, some of the Proprietors by Course
of Law recovered their Money on the said Tallies. Whereupon the Lords
Commissioners of the Treasury, by their Letters to the Officers of the
Exchequer, did forbid their striking more Tallies, without their particular
Directions; which caused one of the Proprietors to bring his Petition before
the Barons of the Exchequer; but before their giving Judgment, his said Majesty
died, and his said Suit abated.

In the Reign of K. James II. the said Letters Patent were so well approved
of, that Tallies were struck for three Quarterly Payments of the Arrears
remaining in the former Reign, and the Lord Treasurer, and after, the Lords
Commissioners of the Treasury, by their several Letters also forbid the
Officers striking Tallies without their particular Directions, whereby Payments
were made to and for Lady Day, 1683. and no longer, and the Proprietors durst
not then hazard their Title to the Censure of the Judges.

(...)

[1697]


