THE DEVIL and BROKER OR A CHARACTER OF A PAWN BROKER IN A MERRY DIALOGUE.

With their manifold frauds and deceits discovered.

With allowance

Roger L'Estrange.



LONDON, Printed for J. C. 1677.

A DIALOGUE BETWEEN A PAWN-BROKER AND A COUNTRY-BUMKIN.
A Certain North-Country-Man by name John Plugg, supposing himself to be a man
of excellent parts, resolves to spend no more of his precious time in his own
Country, but intends to see the Metropolis of England, (of which he had heard
much fame) not doubting but that his superabounding wit would make room for his
entertainment, and as soon as he had got out of sight of his Habitation, he
supposes himself to be a mighty Traveller indeed, and after some time spent in
this long and most dangerous Journey, he escapes safe to London, which place he
thinks (if possible) is Heaven upon Earth, and thereupon swears he will never
return into his own Country more, and now he considers which way he might
dispose of himself according to his merit, his blood being enflamed for an
honorable employment and not willing to undervalue his parts, he resolves to
turn Merchant, but when he understands that he must cross the Sea or else could
not be on that employment, swears he will avoid drowning in the salt-waters, and
unless he could sail and traffic on dry ground it is no trade for him, but
afterward meeting with a man of an excellent function by Trade a Pawn-broker
(forsooth) now they begin to discourse the matter roundly, how, and which way a
man of parts might advance himself. The Pawn-broker tells John Plugg that if he
will take his advice, and give him but a small sum of money (not exceeding
twenty Pounds) he would make him free of the best Trade in London, and that he
would put him into a way and make him understand the whole matter in a short
time: this fancy tickled John's brayns till they itched again with desire to
begin the trade, well, they agree in the matter, and now John is no bawble to
be played withal.

John Plugg, Tell me what my trade must be, a Pawn-broker, a Pawn-broker, and
what is that? you must tell me how Is It come to be Master of Arts in that Trade.


Pawn. Well, have but a little patience and I Will make you to understand (if
you will be but diligent) how to cheat both friend and foe, young and old, rich
and poor, and that completely too, you must receive and resett all manner of
goods that are brought to you, and if they are worth five Pounds you must say
that they are not worth forty shillings, and that you will not lend above
thirty on them, and if they do not believe you, then you must swear stoutly
that what you have said is true.


John, Is It warrant you the first Northern Oath which Is It swear will crack one
of your London Dale boords of an inch thick.


Pawn. I confess it will be worst with you at first, for after you have bin a
little while at the Trade, you will learn to say and swear any thing, for we of
that Trade are as ready at it as a Vintners Boy is at filling a glass of Wine,
and for every Pound which you lend out you must have sixpence a Month which is
thirty Pounds per annum, interest in the Hundred.


John, what no more?


Pawn, Now I love you for that very saying.


John, well is this all?


Pawn, No, this is but, the plain dealing part in our Trade, when you take in
any Goods, you must have something for entering their names, and if they fetch
them away the next day, you must be paid a months Interest. -- But with what
Goods must I deal withal?


Pawn, With all sorts, both with Men's clothes and Women's clothes, with Bed and
with Boulster, with Pot and with Pan and every thing.


Jobn, And may I not wear the clothes when I have them in my keeping.


Pawn, Yes and let them out too,


John, That Is well, then Is It quickly have a new Suit, and I will tell you how I
will wear them, I Will have a three cornered cap, and being that I am a wise man
and a good Scholar, for I have learnt my horn-book over and over again, and
for ought I know Is It be taken for a Lord Judge, and I Will have a ledder Doublet,
a black Coat, a blue pair of Breeches and a yellow pare of Stockings and who
can tell what Trade I am on then, and I will have a pair of ruffles, and a
great pair of sleeves, and a Presbyterian band, and then if I should meet with
Old-Nick in a corner, he would never suspect me to be a Pawn-broker; so now I
am ready for my Shop, I am a complete person without doubt.


Pawn, No. but hold, you have not half learnt your Trade yet.


John. why, what is wanting now?


Pawn, you must be of a strong constitution, and whett your tongue well before
you begin, that it may cut out a hundred double Oaths before it be taken off
the edge, for you must swear with the Knight of the Post, lie with the petty
fogging Solicitor, and pretend with the quack Doctor.


John, These are hard words but is it tell you what I can do, I can pretend as
much honest as any man and perform as little, and I can swear a hundred oaths
in half a quarter of an hour, and for lying let me alone.


Pawn, Well now I see you will quickly be fit for our Trade,


John, but how'st I do for a Shop, that will be large enough? for a little Shop
will not hold a large Conscience, I mean such a Conscience as Pawn-brokers
have, and this Trade will make it to retch like a leadder sack when it is
filled with good Ale, well Is It be promoting the trade daily, and in a short
time I am shure to be Lord Mayor, but pray you Mr. Broker may I not say and do
what I will in my own Shop.


Pawn, Yes I tell you you may say and do any thing what you please, for you
cannot offend the Law, nor wrong your Conscience in this Trade, for we observe
neither.


John, I believe you have told me the truth now, and for that very cause I
doubt not but a blessing will lie at your Threshold, if you can but open the
door and let it in, -- and now honest John begins his Trade he is ready to
uncase every body that passes by saying, what do you lack? will you pawn your
doublet or your breeches? at last comes a Countryman whose name is Slash, with
a suit of clothes to pawn, John fingers him into the Shop, and strikes a
bargain with him presently, and no sooner is slash gone out of the Shop, but
John begins to unsheath, puts on slash his clothes and views himself in a
Looking-glass, and after he had admired himself, swears that the tailor was a
rare workman without doubt or else he could never have made a suit so fit for
his body and never took measure of him, and now he drives on the trade briskly,
but shortly after comes slash to redeem his clothes, John says


Sir I have been very careful of your clothes, insomuch that they were never
out of my sight, nor day off my back since I had them, and therefore I hope
you will give me something more then ordinary for my great care. --


Slash, Sir I Will have you before a Justice to make me satisfaction for the
wrong you have done me. --


John cots'owns have me before a Justice, I care not for that for you cannot
trouble me for it is part of my Trade, I have my liberty to get what I can any
way. -- John Plugg is taken before a Justice.


John, what has your Lord Justice to say to me? --


Justice, What Trade are you of?


John, and please your Lord Justice I am an honest Trade.


Justice, But what Trade is it?


John, Your Lordship needs not question me any further for I never could lie in
my life, but to affirm my words to be true I will tell you, and I am sure that
my Trade will vouch for my honesty, I am a Pawn-broker.


Justice, well I find now that you are not only a liar but an absolute cheat
and an extortioner too,


John no and please your Lord Justice I am not, for I take but thirty Pounds
per annum interest in the hundred and some small gains besides.


Justice, but what say you did you wear this man's clothes when they were in
your keeping?


John, Yes yes, and please your Lord Justiceship, that I did all the while I
had them in my --


Justice Then it seems you are an absolute cheat indeed and deserve little
better then hanging,


John, O no, and please your Lord Justice to let me speak for my self and Is It
come well enough off I warrant you, your Lordship cannot trouble me that I am
sure of, for I can neither offend the Law nor my own Conscience in this Trade,
and I am made free (to get gains any way) by the act of palm brokers
Parliament, and would your Lord Justice have me to rebel and break lawl and
customs which have been so long kept and observed but besides that slash wore
my money, and why should not I wear his clothes: and now pray you my Lord
Justice let me go about my business what have you to say to me now? I knew that
I should come of bravely at last,


Justice, Nay but hold Sir, you are not to come of so bravely as you suppose,
you have done with your tale, but I have not done with you yet,


John, Why what would your Lordship do with me if you might have your will?


Justice, Nay Sir I will have my will and I Will send you to Bridewell,


John, And what is that and please your Lord? Justice, a place to whip and beat
you. O no good my Lord Justice, do not send me there, for I do not love to be
beaten, Good my Lord Justice all these rogues Broakers thither and let me
escape for this fact that I have committed is nothing amongst their greater
Knaveries. O this Rogue Broker has spoiled a man of brave worth: the Justice
seeing the poor man in such earnest, pardons him, away he goes toward his own
Country with a perplexed mind to think that this Trade was come to this in so
short a time, he prays for the Justice, but curses the Broaker and swears
that he will never come to London more.


What Tradesman is like to this
That cares not a straw,
What ever he does
he fears not the Law,
Made free by Parliament
not in Westminster Hall
But of Pawn-Broakers chief of cheats all.
Now unknown Trade fare thee well,
Thy Shop with poor men is esteemed Hell.

FINIS

