A most worthy SPEECH Of the truly Honorable and worthy Member of the House of
COMMONS, Sir Edward Deering Knight and Baronet.

Spoken in Parliament.

Concerning the Lyturgy of the Church of England, and for a National Synod.

LONDON, Printed for John Frank, and are to be sold at his shop under the
Kings head at Chancery-lanes end in Fleet Street, 1642.

Sir Edward Deering's SPEECH in Parliament, concerning the Liturgy of the
Church of England, and a National Synod.
Master Speaker,
THe Question is, whether this clause concerning some pretended erroneous
passages in our Liturgy shall be laid by or not.

I am of opinion to decline them here, but not to bury them in perpetual
silence.

In this period, you give us (in general terms) a promise of a National
Synod: I do still wish the presence of it; It being (to my understanding) the
only proper cure and remedy for all our Church distractions.

The promised Synod is too far off; let me have better assurance than a
promise, which that I may obtain, I will be bold to give you reasons to induce
that Assembly, and speed it also.

M. Speaker, Much has been said, and something attempted to be done, to
regulate the exterior part of Religion: but Sir, we bleed inwardly; much
endeavor has been to amend the deformed forms, and to new govern the
government.

Yet Sir, this is but the leaves of good Religion; fit (I confess)
notwithstanding to be taken care of, for beauty and ornament: Nay some leaves
are fit and necessary to be preserved for shadows and for shelter to the
blossoms and the fruit.

The fruit of all is a good life, which you must never expect to see unless
the blossoms be pure and good; that is, unless your Doctrine be sound and
true.

Sir, I speak it with full grief of heart, whilst we are thus long pruning and
composing of the leaves, or rather whilst some would pluck all leaves away, our
blossoms are blasted, and whilst we sit here in cure of Government and
Ceremonies, we are poisoned in our Doctrinals: And on whose door will the
guilt and sin of all this lie.

Qui non vetat peccare cum potest, jubet. Senec. It is true that this mischief
grows not by our consent, and yet I know not by what unhappy fate, there is at
present such an all-daring liberty, such a lewd licensiousnesse for venting all
men's several senses (senseless senses) in Religion, as never was in any age,
in any Nation, until thi^ present Parliament was met together.

Sir, It belongs to us to take hee^, that our countenancing (the countenance of
this Honorable House) be not prostituted to sinister ends by bold offenders:
If it be in our power to give a remedy, a timely and a seasonable remedy to
these dangerous evils, and if we (being also put in mind) shall neglect to
do it, we pluck their sins on our own heads.

Alienum qui fert scelus, facit suum. Seneca. Shall I be bold to give you a
very few instances? one for a hundred, wherewith our Pulpits and our Presses
do groan.

1 Mr. Speaker, There is a certain newborn, unseen, ignorant, dangerous,
desperate way of independency: Are we Sir, for this Independency? Nay Sir, are
we for the elder brother of it, the Presbyteriall form? I have not yet heard
any one Gentleman within these walls stand up and assert his thoughts here for
either of these ways: And yet Sir, we are made the Patrons, and Protectors of
these so different, so repugnant innovations, witness the several dedications
to us.

Nay, both these ways, together with the Episcopal, come rushing in upon us,
every one pretending a forehead of Divinity.

1 Episcopacy says it is by Divine right, and certainly Sir, it comes much
nearer to its claim than any other.

2 Presbytery, that says it is by Divine right.

3 Nay, this illegittimate thing, this newborn Independency, that dares to
say it is by Divine right also.

Thus the Church of England (not long since the glory of the reformed Religion)
is miserably torn and distracted; whither shall we turn for cure?

2 Another instance; If I would deal with a Papist, to reduce him, he
answers, (I have been answered so already) To what Religion would you persuade
me? what is the Religion you profess? your 39 Articles, they are contested
against; your public solemn Liturgy that is detested; and, which is more
than both these, the three essential, proper, and only marks of a true Church,
they are protested against: what Religion would you persuade me to? where may I
find and know, and see, and read the Religion you profess? I beseech you Sir,
help me an answer to this Papist.

Nay Sir, the Papist herein has assistance even amongst our selves, and does
get the tongues of some men, whose hearts are far from them: For at one of
our Committees I heard it publicly asserted by one of that Committee, that
some of our Articles do contain some things contrary to holy Scripture.

3 Mr. Speaker, Sunday is a Sabbath: Sunday is no Sabbath: both true, both
untrue in their several acceptations, and the knot (I think) too hard for our
teeth. Shall I give you an easier instance.

4 Some say it is lawful to kneel at receiving the elements of our holy
Communion: others plead it as expedient: some do press it as necessary: and
there wants not others who abhor it as idolatrous. And Sir, I am confident
you cannot so state this easy Question to pass amongst us, but that there
will be many Contradicentes.

5 The second Epistle of St Peter is now newly denied to be the Apostles; our
Creed, the holy Apostles Creed, is now disputed, denied, inverted, and exploded
by some who would be thought the best Christians amongst us: I startled with
wonder and with anger, to hear a bold mechanic tell me that my Creed is not
my Creed: he wondered at my wonder, and said, I hope your Worship is too wise to
believe that which you call your Creed.

O Deus bone, in quae tempora reservati nos! Policarp. Thus (...). Arist. One
absurdity leads in a thousand. And when you are down the hill of error, there
is no bottom but in hell, and that is bottomless too.

6 Sir, shall I be bold to give one (and but one) instance more? Much clamor
now there is against our public Lyturgy, though hallowed with the blood of
some of the first composers of it. And surely Sir, some parts of it may be very
well corrected; but the clamors now go very high, Impudence or ignorance is
now grown so frontlesse, that it is lowdly expected by many, that you should
utterly abrogate all forms of public worship: extirpation of Episcopacy,
that hope is already swallowed; and now some men are as greedy for the
abolishing of the Liturgy; that so the Church of England in her public
prayers, nay her offerture, may be as a babbler at all adventures: A brainlesse,
stupid, and an ignorant conceit of some.

Mr Speaker, The wisdom of this House will (I am confident) never sink so low,
never fall into such a delinquency of Judgment an^ piety: when you do, I shall
humbly submit my self unto the stake and faggot, (I mean) for certainly Sir,
I shall then be a Parliament Heretic.

Thus much for a taste of that whereof there is too much abroad: For the
divisions of Reuben, there are great things of that abroad.

Sir, Thus are we engaged, enclosed in points of Divinity, and with the favor
of that Gentleman who did last time discuss it, I must again propound my
doubtful Quere to be resolved by the wisdom of this House; Whether we be
Idonei and competentes Judices, in doctrinall resolutions? In my opinion we are
not: Let us maintain the Doctrine established in the Church of England; it
will be neither safety nor wisdom for us to determine new.

Sir, I do again repeat and avow my former words, and do confidently
affirm, that it was never seen not known in any Age, in any Nation
throughout the world, that a set of Laymen, Gentlemen, Soldiers, Lawyers of
both gowns, Physicians, Merchants, Citizens, all Professions admitted, or at
least admittable, but the Professors of Religion alone excluded, than we should
determine upon Doctrine Divinity.

Shall the Clergy hold different Doctrine from us or shall our determination
bind them also? They are a considerable body in the Kingdom. They are herein
surely as much concerned as we, and ought not to be bound up unheard and
unpartied.

Further Sir, if Clergymen amongst us be thought fit for no other than for
Spiritual emploiment, how shall we answer it to God and a good conscience, if
we shut them out of that which we our selves pretend to be their only and
their proper work.

Mr. Speaker, We cannot brag of an unerring Spirit: Infallibility is no more
tied to your chair, than to the Popes. And if I may speak truth, as I love
truth with clearness, and with plainness, I do here ingenuously profess
unto you, that I shall not acquiesse, and sit down upon the Doctrinall
resolutions of this House, unless it be where my own genius does lead and
prompt me to the same conclusions.

Mr. Speaker, We are here convened by his Majesty's writ to treat Super arduis
negotiis Regni and Ecclesiae, I beseech you let us not turn Negotia Ecclesiae
into Dogmata fidei: There is a great difference in objecto between the Agends
and the Credends of a Christian: let us so take care to settle the Government,
that we do not unsettle the doctrines.

The short close of all with a motion, is but this: We are poisoned in many
points of Doctrine, and I know no Antidote, no Recipe for cure but one: A well
chosen and a well tempered National Synod, and Gods blessing thereon: This may
cure us, and without this (in my poor opinion) England is like to turn it
self into a great Amsterdam, and unless this Council be very speedy, the
Disease will be above the Cure.

Therefore that we may have a full fruition of what is here but promisde, I do
humbly move that you will command forth the Bill for a National Synod, to be
read the next morning. I saw the Bill above five months since in the hand of a
worthy Member of this House; if that Bill be not to be had, then my humble
motion is (as formerly) that you would name a Committee to draw up another.

This being once resolved, I would then desire that all motions of Religion
(this about the Liturgy especially) may be transferred thither; and you will
find it to be the way of peace and unity amongst us here.

FINIS.

