A Guyland, alias GAYLAND, the Present Usurper of the kingdom of FEZ*



A DESCRIPTION OF TANGIER, The Country and People adjoining.

WITH An Account of the Person and Government OF GAYLAND, The present Usurper
of the Kingdom of FEZ; And a short Narrative of the Proceedings of the English
in those Parts.

Whereunto is added, The Copy of a Letter from the King of FEZ to the King of
ENGLAND, for Assistance against his Rebellious Subjects; And another from
GAYLAND to his Sacred Majesty CHARLES the Second.

With diverse Letters and Passages worthy of Note, Translated from the Spanish
into English, And Published by Authority.

London, Printed for Samuel Speed, at the Rainbow in Fleet Street, near the
Inner Temple-Gate. 1664.

(...) of Africa and America, where an Acre of Ground is a Barony, and a Rood
a Duchy, as yiedling that Wealth with a few weeks pains, that cannot be (...)
for (...) Ages Industry.

3. Because this place, and the Country round about, is like to be that
Renowned Scoene of Action, which will render us considerable in this last Age
to the world. The French do intend to make themselves famous for seeking out a
convenient footing in this Country: no doubt but we shall be so, for keeping
ours. It is a pleasure to go over his Majesty's Dominions at home, in Cambden,
Speed, etc. O what satisfaction is it then to go along with his Acquists, and
travel with his Conquests abroad! to see how carefully he provides for Trade;
how providently he secures the Sea; how zealously he promotes our interest and
honor.

Here you will see,

First, the situation, improvement, strength and advantages of Tangier, that
has within 100 years cost 20 millions of money, and the lives of one million
of men.

Secondly, the nature of the Country round about it.

Thirdly, the Government of it; together with its ancient Kings before this
late Usurpation; and their Correspondence, Embassies and Letters to the Kings
of England.

Fourthly, the present Usurpation by Gayland: whereunto is added, a Discourse
of his Person, Government, Revenue, Discipline and Policy.

Fifthly, the Transactions between him and the Earl of Tiveot in Barbary, and
his Sacred Majesty in England; where are the Letters that passed between them
concerning Peace and Accommodation. And

Sixthly, here is the humor and temper of those people with whom we have to do
there; together with their Customs and Manners.

There have been whole Volumes written of this Place; as, 1. That of Hanno a
MS. that was preserved for no less then 1400 years, and an hundred years ago
printed by the Noble Stephanus. 2. That of Alcazar, kept now in the Tower of
Tetuan. And, 3. That of Leo Affricanus, written by him as he traveled that
Country in the Hegeira 953, and in the year of our Lord 1528, and translated
into English by Mr. Robert Pary of Cambridge, in the year 1600. And, 4. That of
Abaf^i vel Mammuled, whereof there are but two Copies now in the World; one is
kept by the Governor of Morocco, and the other by the Grand Seignior; it being
death for any Man to take a Map of that Country without their leave. But I have
not observed so much satisfaction within so narrow a compass, so many
particulars in so little a Volume, in my life; especially considering that the
Book is an outlandish one, and the Author a Spanyard; then whom none go a
greater way about, either to do what they say, or to say what they see.

You are to take notice, that the Geography and History are Translated by one
hand, and the Letters by another; but both very exactly compared with the
Original, and transmitted to the world upon the Faith and Honor of very
ingenious persons.

Here is in the Original an exact Account of the whole Kingdom, as to all the
remarkable particulars in it: but we thought fit only to take its general
Delineations, together with its chief Ports and Towns, and the places nearest
Tangier, as most peculiarly concerning us, whether as we possess that place, or
trade that way.

I will add no more, but that I must needs think that we are very happy now
adays, since Printing is so much improved, that the meanest person need bestow
no more pains then a few hours reading to take that view of the world which
has cost others many years traveling: And that my Lord Rutherford Earl of
Tiveot communicated to a To Sir G. R.
Friend of his a little before his going over the last time, his Design of
either publishing a new Description of that Country, or Translating this, or
completing Leo Affricanus. We can do no more then perform the second, wishing
heartily that so knowing, so observing, and so publick-spirited a Person had
lived to have done the first.

A DESCRIPTION OF TANGIER.
TANGIER or Tangis, is one of the greatest and the very antientest City in Fez.
Great its now; thrice as great, say the most skilful Surveyors it has been; so
ancient, that we find it was built by those Canaanites fled from the face of
Josuah; there being an Inscription left, and two Pillars, whereon it is
engraven to this purpose; Nos fugimus a facie Josuae praedonis filii Nave: that
is to say, We here are the Inhabitants of the Land of Canaan, that fled before
the face of Josuah the Son of Nun.

We have heard much of Hercules his Pillars, but here one of them is to be
seen, on a Hill within seven Miles of the place, as the other is over against
it in Spain: for here Hercules is reported to have slain the Giant Anteus, that
the oftener he fell, the oftener he rose again, and could never be Conquered as
long as he could touch his Mother Earth.

So considerable is this place, that Claudius and other brave Romans, drew here
many Legions that they lost before the place; which they at last gained, and
gave a new Name, viz. Julia T^aducta; yet in spite of that Fa^e that devolved
the World upon that great City, t is Corner of it returned at once to its old
Liberty, and ancient Name, that it retains unto this day. When the Romans could
do no good, the ingenuous Portuguez guessing there was a shorter Cut that way
than that which they knew formerly to the Indies, and yet that that Cut could
not be securely passed without an interest and hold in that Country; Vasquez
Gama attempts the Expedition 1497. and with so much success, that he found the
Streights of Gibralta, but lived not either to instruct or encourage others to
make use of, or improve his noble discovery. Yet he found the Continent large,
the Sea Towns strong, the Inhabitants numerous; and breaking in to some Sea
Ports, spoiled them until he came to the Atlantique, where he dyed.

None could second him but a Prince, and Henry Duke of Visco does it as far as
his Estate or Credit goes; he consults the experience of all the Sea
Commanders, sends for the Astronomers and Navigators, peruseth all the
Cosmography that was then in the World; he sets out, and is tossed along the
waters, until he finds a Promontory, or an Head of Land, hanging out to the
Sea; this he called presently, The Cape of Good Hope: yet he fails, at once the
Love and Grief of that Coast. Jo. the 2d. seconds him, and under the Conduct of
Degola 1500. gets in to the Princes Island, takes Angola, I mean the City so
called, and with the assistance of Bartholomew Diaz gets in to Quilon,
Mosambique, and Melinde, with the King of the last whereof he made a League,
and with his help and direction found Port Caliculo, and that way to the
East Indies; but he dies too, and his Enterprise with him. A Vasquez had the
honor to begin this discovery, and a Vasquez has the honor likewise to
complete it. He therefore, Almeda, and Albu-quierque, finding their way clear
to the Indies, but not safe through the Streights as long as those Moors
Possessed the Maritime Forts, they destroy Hamar, ruin Bazre, take Arzilla,
and after much expense of Blood and Treasure under Alphonso the 5th. win
Tangier; hard it was to win this Town which was the very strength of Fez. the
Mistress of the Sea, the Key of the Inland-Countrey, the Sanctuary of all
Malcontents and Enemies. Sometimes we have 60000, sometimes 80000, sometimes
an 10000, yea sometimes 200000 before it; Besides the noblest Volunteers. Once
there the two Kings of Morocco and Fez. the Princes of Ezhagger, Asgarre, Benj.
Jessen, Alcazaer, 3000 Nobles, 6000 well Horsed Gentry, all in Gold and Silver;
and that we may see the Christians Care was not less to keep, than the Infidels
were to regain it. Sebastian King of Portugal draws out 80000 Foot, 20000
Horse, to which Stukely a Prince at least in Conceit, who had 6000 men given
him to reduce Ireland to the obedience of the Pope, and the King of Spain, and
was Created by his Holiness to that purpose, no less than Marquess of Lempster,
Earl of Weaford, Lord Rosse added his Fortunes, and in one day all four
Princes, viz. Sebastian, Stukely, Mahomet, and Abdemelech, fell therewith no
less than 126000 men.

Upon Sebastians death, the Spaniards had the place, with the Kingdom of
Portugal, until the Revolt 1640. when this City, with that Kingdom, returned
to its wonted obedience.

Tangier, say the Inhabitants, was by Seddei the Son of Had, compassed about
with walls of Brass, and the roofs of them covered with Gold; for the building
whereof, he exacted great tributes of the Cities of the World, believe it who
can.

Its distance from the Streights of Gibralter is 30 miles, and from the City of
Fez. 150. it has been always a Civil, Famous, and well-peopled Town, and
very stately and sumptuously built, the Field thereto belonging not very
Fertile, or apt for health; howbeit not far off are certain valleys
continually watered with Fountains, which furnish the said City with all sorts
of Fruits in abundance: without the City also grows certain Vines albeit upon a
sandy soil.

The Country was well inhabited until such time as Arzilla was surprised by
the Portugals; for then the Inhabitants being dismayed with Rumors of Wars,
took up their bag and baggage and fled unto Fez. Whereupon the King of
Portugal his Deputy at Arzilla sent one of his Captains thither, who kept it
so long under the obedience of the King, till the King of Fez. sent one of his
Kinsmen also to defend a Region of great Importance near unto the Mountains of
Gum^ra, being Enemy to the Christians.

Twenty five years before the Portugal King wan this City, he sent forth an
Armada against it, hoping that the City being destitute of aid, while the King
of Fez. was in Wars against the Rebels of Mecnase, would soon yield it self;
But contrary to the Portugals Expectation, the Fessan King concluding a sudden
Truce with them of Mecnase, sent his Counselor with an Army, who encountering
the Portugals, made a great Slaughter of them, and among the rest slew their
General, whom he caused to be carried in a Case or Sack unto new Fez. and there
to be set upon an high place where all men might behold him.

Afterward the King of Portugal sent a new supply, who suddenly assailing the
City in the night, were most of them slain, and the residue enforced to flee;
But that which the Portugal King could not bring to pass with those two
Armadas, he achieved at length (as is aforesaid) with small Forces, and little
disadvantage*

In my time Mahomet King of Fez. left no means unattempted for the recovery of
this City; but so great always was the valor of the Portugals, that he had
ever ill success. These things were done in the Hegeira 917. which was in the
year of our Lord 1508.

Some 12 miles from Tangier was Casor and Ezzagor, in an open and pleasant
place, over against the Coast of Granada, but surprised by the Portugez; And
notwithstanding many attempts by the King of Fez, what with money (which is the
first offer they always make) and what with men to recover it, it is utterly
lost and ruined.

Within 13 mile of Tangier is Tettuan, called so from Tet teguin, or one Eye,
because of the one Eyed Woman that had the command over it, under the Goths;
fourscore and fifteen years. It was desolate after the Portugals first
Invasion, until it was rebuilt by Almandaly, who fortified it with a Wall and a
Ditch, from whence he cruelly molested Septa, Casor and Tangier, upon the
Coasts whereof he made daily Incursions This Tow a likewise is Good Port.
and Inroads, putting all Christians he took to work in his Forts by Day, and
lie in Sackcloath and Fetters within the deepest Dungeon in the Night.

Some 40 miles off is Arzitta a fair Town, between which and Tangier if that
correspondence could be kept which was designed by Pedro Navarro, the Trade and
Government of that place would lie at our mercy, the Portugals having showed us
an example how we might surprise their Forts, as they did that of Narangia, by
a stratagem 1486. take their Isles, as they did Getria with a Fleet 1463.
demolish their Cities, as they did Bafra and Homari.

Round about Tangier are the wild but fruitful Mountains Chebal, Rahina,
Beni-how, Beni-Chestev, whither the Moors fled and seated themselves since the
Portugez took Tangia or Tangier, from whence they made such Invasions even into
those Mountains, that the Infidels were hardly able to live there; till of late
by the neglect of the Portugez they have been able to build Forts and strong
holds in those high places, from whence they infest us at pleasure, having two
advantages, whereof the first is their Warlikeness, and the second their Woods.

1. This place stands very convenient to secure and advance the Indian commerce
as far as those places where there are more riches than were ever yet
discovered unto the World.

2. It commands the Barbarians within, who could never look the Portugez in the
Face til of late. 2. And all Nations without, who must ask its leave to pass to
and fro the Streights, to the great Treasury of the World: The Authority of
that Town well managed, may make the Masters of it Arbitrators of the Interest
of Europe.

3. It may be a Free Port, or a kind of a Sound, to which all Nations on this
side the Line may be glad to have addressed themselves.

4. It will be a great relief and security to our Merchants in their long
Voyages to the Indies.

5. In that place there may be bred as in a Seminary, such Soldiers and others
as may be inured to the temper and way of that Country, and therefore may be in
a capacity to carry on our Interest in those Coasts as far as Justice and
honor will give way, yea and we may draw thence a Regiment or two of
Veteranes, upon any occasion at home. No man knows but themselves, what
advantage the Hollanders enjoy, and the French promise themselves from one or
two Towns upon any of these Coasts.

The Christians had another excellent Harbor upon the Mediterranian, called
Bedis, or Velles de Gumern, which Ferdenand King of Castile took, by shutting
it up, with two Forts that commanded it, and kept it two years, until it was
betrayed by a false treacherous Spaniard (who slew the Governor, because he
had taken his Wife from him) into the Moors possession, and all the Christians
were slain, not a man escaping, save only the Spanish Traitor, who, in regard
of his Treason, was greatly rewarded both by the Governor of Bedis, and also
by the King of Fez. Anno 1520.

True, it is a wild kind of Harbor, lying open to the Sea, without any
windings or high-land-shelter; so that let the wind blow from what Compass it
will, the Ships riding there are exposed to the sury of it; and upon the
dragging of an Anchor, Wracks do commonly follow upon the adjoining Strand; but
that is to be remedied by a Moll, such as that in Weymouth, of two Furlongs
Compass; that may be raised by the Shore, some twenty yards high, within which
the Ships may ride safe and quiet.

The Lawful Government of this Country by Kings.
THE Xeriff of Fez, whose Dominion reaches from Capo Boiudor to Tangier, N. S.
and from the Atlantique to the River Melvia; the fairest, fruitfullest, best
inhabited, and most civil Port of all Africa; and likewise the most
trafickable, as well in reference to the passage that way to the Indies, as to
the Commodities there afforded: has continued his Government from the year
1508. to this day, after this manner.

A subtle, learned and ambitious Mahumetan, Benumotto, 1508. boasting his
descent from Mahomet, laid a Design in Numidia, where he lived, to possess
Mauritania, Tingitania, while the Moors and Portuguez were at Variance: To this
end, he sent his three Sons on Pilgrimage to Mella and Medina, that returning
thence with a great Fame for their Religion, the people might reverence them,
as they did, when they went up and down as men ravished with Contemplation,
always crying Ala! Ala! The cunning Father sends them to the King of Fez,
where they had no sooner got into esteem, than they desired to display their
Banners against the Christians. The Kings Brother smelt the Design, and asked
the Xeriff; If these holy men conquered the Christians, who should conquer them?

But their pretended holiness carried it, first for a Commission from the King,
and then for a whole multitude of men, that followed the devout men, giving
them a Tenth of their Estate for the Cause: With these men they poisoned the
King of Morocco, set up Xeriffo, and his Son; who, with the assistance of the
Christian Renegadoes, overran the whole Country; whereof 1. Amet, 1542. 2.
Mahomet, 1549. 3. Abdalla, 1557. 4. Abdalla, 1572. 5. Mahomet the Second, who
was murdered, 1590. 6. Hamet Abdalla, 1599. 7. Maly Shecti, 1603. 8. Sidon,
who rebelled against him, 1607. 9. Hamet Abdall, 1623. against whom a Hermit
stirred up the people. 10. Misil Tira, 1628. who writ to King CHARLES the First
of glorious memory, for assistance against the Rebels, to this purpose.

A Letter from the King of Fez and Morocco, to the King of England.
WHen these Letters are so happy as to come to thy Renowned Majesty's pure
hands, I wish the Spirit of the Righteous God may direct thy mind, to consider,
that Regal Majesty is given men, to reward the good, and punish the bad: for we
are the Servants of the Creator, to do good to the World, that it may bless us:
for we are like those Celestial Bodies, that have our Reverence for our
Beneficence; which I speak not as if I would instruct thee, whose mind is so
clear, and whose apprehension is so quick, that thou art one of the great Gods
greatest Viceroy that is in Europe,

There are a Company of Rebels and Pirates, that molest thy People, and are
too hard for me; if thou will assist me, and right thy self against them, thou will be as glorious as the Sun, and thy Name shall perfume all Ages, who shall
sing thy Virtue equal to thy Power.

Thy God is a Lion of the Tribe of Juda, and a Prince of Peace; One that seeks
Peace through War: Thy Father was a Peacemaker, by his Power, as well as his
Counsel. Thy God increase thine happiness, and thy days.

Fez 1131. Hegerin 1633:

10. Myralla Shin, 1642. who was judged to death in that fatal year 1648. 11.
Mahomet A^dalla, against whom Aguiland, or Gayland, has managed a Rebellion to
this day, after this manner.

First, Finding the People under a very great discontent, because of the
Christian Invasions on the one hand, and their own Kings Oppressions on the
other; Particularly,

1. Because there was an Order, That every man that married a Wife, should
bring her to Court, and there offer her Virginity to the In^idells Lust.

2. Because there was a License to drink Wine, contrary to Mahomet's Law.

3, Because the King being weak, was about to Treat with the Christians, about
building of Forts in those Countries, contrary to the Fundamentalls of their
Religion.

He stirs up the Puritan Mahumetans, I mean the Zealots of that way, whereof he
was one himself, (for as Cromwell was a Preacher, so is Gayland a Priest) to go
up and down, and propnesie of Woes, Lamentations, and Desolation; some of which
Zealots pretended a familiarity with Mahomet, that is, as our good people
canted it, Communion with God. Then it was taught, That the Law was corrupted;
That Mahomet would come and reform it. To this cry were added discourses of
humane Liberty and Slavery. This was helped with a Dearth 1656. The alteration
of some old Customs 1657. The advancement of unworthy Persons, and the
admission of strangers the same year. To help forward the Design, Jealousy is
raised between the King and the Nobility, who now 1658. hold their Meetings,
settle their Correspondence, (and so many overthrown Estates, as there were so
many Votes for Troubles) New Revelations are broached, and while the Kingdom is
in a hurly burly, an Invasion is continued. The King is left so dest^^ure, that
he cannot help himself: These discontented Forlornes offer him their service,
his necessity accepts it; they tie him up, and gain to themselves the Military
Power. Now one General is set up, and when he falls anon another; Gayland
showing not himself, but as an eminent Soldier, without whom the Kingdom could
not subsist. He foments the former Jealousies, prolongeth the War, frustrateth
all Treaties, until at last there were two Parties in the Army, one for Peace,
another for War. Now was his time to gratify the Warriors, to caress the
Soldiers, to whom his Valor and Conduct had endeared him. Here is the Case in
short, the Army must stand by him, or be disbanded; hereupon they choose him
General, he modelleth them. At last they Remonstrate, That the King must be
laid aside, as who had betrayed his Country to Foreigners. Yet he kept this
close until he overcame the Enemy, shut up the Christians in their Garrison;
and then he turned upon his own Masters, cut off some of his Senate for ill
advising; and at last shut him up, as at this hour, within a strong City. Sure
there was an evil Star, this last Age that looked upon the World; That all Men,
of all Religions, were unanimously disposed to Innovate, Reform, (as we call
it) and Disturb the World.

A Description of the Person and Government of Gayland, the present Usurper of
the Kingdom of Fez.
THis Gayland, since his success, has his Pedigree derived from Mahomet, as
Cromwell had his from the Welsh Kings. His Person looks handsomer than his
Condition; his Look is fat and plain, but his Nature close and reserved. He is
plump, yet melancholy; valiant, yet sly; boisterous, yet of few words;
watchful, and lustful; careful, and intemperate; a contradiction in Nature.
Although he has a sadness, and a heaviness by Nature, that becomes a Priest:
yet he has gained a complaizance by Art, that becomes a Prince. He has two
Qualities that may do any thing; 1. Perfidiousness, and 2. Cruelty. When he
swears most solemnly, then you may be sure he lies; so treacherous he is: and
when fawns most basely, then you must look for mischief; so bloody he is. You
shall have him 8. times a day at his Devotion, and as many with his Concubines,
whom he never touches after sixteen; having his Ministers of pleasure to
anoint him, and his Ladies to that purpose: So prodigions is their Lust there,
that they take pleasure in haughtiness, when they cannot be naught themselves.
You may be preferred and poisoned there in a day: to speak cunningly, to act
daringly, to have many strong Relations, a great Estate, or one handsome Wife,
is reason enough to send a man into another world.

Gaylands Calling is a Butcher, and a Priest; for they have all Trades there.
He is settling a new way of Religion, which he calls, The Ancient One: His
Council are all Tradesmen, that understand business very well; and his Judges
the like: His Brethren are his Favorites, who yet are Gelded, and so not
dangerous. He has little or no strength at Sea, only his tampering underhand
with them of Tunis and Tripoli. He has divided the Country among his
Followers, who must be true to him, or they will not be so to themselves; the
old and loyal possessors being transplanted. When he is courted to a Peace, he
says, It is in uain for him to think of Peace, until he has made himself
terrible. His Ports are strong; his Speech always dubious, and knowingly
entangled. His Interest obliging him to a reserve; for he dares neither clearly
own his thoughts, nor totally disclaim them; the one way endangering his
Design, the other his Person: so that the skill of his Port lies in this,
neither to be mistaken by his Friends, nor understood by his Enemies. By this
middle course, he gains time to remove Obstacles, and ripen Occasions, which
to improve and follow is his peculiar Talent. He is a Slave to his Ambition,
and knows no other measure of good and bad, but as things stand in this or
that relation to his end. Honor, Faith, and Conscience, weighing nothing in
that Country, further than they subserve to Interest.

He is one that will hazard very little, if either Money or Wiles may do his
work. He has his Renegadoes, from whom he has learned all his skill in
Fortifications and Guns.

Gaylands Revenue.
HE receives from his Tributary Vassals, the Tenths and First Fruits of their
Corn and Cattle. For the First Fruits, he takes no more than one for twenty,
and the whole being above twenty; and demands no more than two, though it
amount to an hundred. For every days Tilth of Ground, he has a Ducket and a
quarter, and so much likewise for every House; as also, he has after the same
rate of every Person above fifteen years old, Male or Female, and when need
requires a greater sum. And to the end that the people may the more
cheerfully pay that which is imposed upon them, he always demands half as much
more as he is to receive.

Most true it is, that on the Mountains there inhabit certain fierce and
untamed People, who, by reason of the steep, craggy, and inexpugnable situation
of their Country, cannot be forced to Tributes; that which is gotten of them is
the Tenth of their Corn and Fruits; only that they may be permitted to have
recourse in the Plains.

Besides these Revenues, the King has the Tolls and Customs of Fez, and of
other Cities; for at the entering of their Goods, the natural Citizen pays two
in the hundred, and the Stranger ten.

Amongst many other things, he has the Revenues of Mills, which yield him
little less than half a Royal of Plate, for every Hanega of Corn that is ground
in Fez; where (as I told you) there are four hundred Mills. The Moschea of
Caruven had fourscore thousand Ducats of Rent: The Colleges and Hospitalls of
Fez had also many thousands: All which the King has at this present.

And further, He is Heir to all the Alcaydes, and them that have Pension of
him; and at their Death he possesses their Horses, Armor, Garments, and all
their Goods. Howbeit, if the Deceased leave any Sons apt for the service of the
Wars, he grants them their Fathers Provision: but if they be but young, he
brings up the Male Children to years of service, and the Daughters till they
be Married. And therefore, that he may have Interest in the Goods of Rich men,
he bestows upon them some Government, or Charge, with Provision: Wherefore,
for fear of Confiscation after death, every one coveteth to hide his wealth, or
to remove far from the Court, and the Kings sight: For which cause, the City of
Fez comes far short of her ancient glory.

Besides, His Revenues have been augmented of late years by mighty sums of
Gold, which he fetches from Tombuto and Gago, in the Land of Negros; which
Gold (according to the report of Fame) may yearly amount to three Millions of
Ducats.

His Forces, and Military Strength.
HE has not any Fortresses of great importance, but only upon the Sea Coast,
as Cabo de Guer, Larache, and Tetuan: For as the Turks and Persians do, so he
places the strength of his Estate in Armed men; but especially in Horse. And
for this Cause he stands not much upon his Artillery; although he has very
great store (which his Predecessors took from the Portugalls, and others) in
Fez, Morocco, Tarodant, and in the aforesaid Ports; causing also more to be
Cast when need requires; for he wants not Masters of Europe in this Science.
He has a House of Munition in Morocco, where they make ordinarily Six and
forty Quintalls of Powder every Month; as likewise Calivers, and Steel Bows.

His Forces are, First, Of two thousand seven hundred Horse, and two thousand
Harquibuziers.

The second is, of a Royal Squadron of six thousand Gentlemen, being all of
noble Parentage, and of great account. These men are mounted upon excellent
horses, with Furniture and Arms; for variety of Colors, most beautiful; and
for Riches of Ornament, beyond measure estimable; for every thing about them
shines with Gold, Silver, Pearls, Jewels, and whatsoever else may please the
eye, or satisfy the curiosity of beholders. These men, besides all sorts of
Provision for their Family, receive further in Wages, from seventy to an
hundred Ounces of Silver a man.

The third sort of Forces which he has, consists of his Timarioth: For he
grants to all his Sons, and Brothers, and other Persons of Account and
Authority among the People of Africa, or to the Princes of the Arabians, the
benefit of great Lordships and Tenures for sustentation of his Cavalry; and the
Archiades themselves till the Fields, and afterward reap Rice, Oil, Barley,
Butter, Sheep, Hens, and Money, and distribute the same monthly to the
Soldiers, according to the several qualities of their Persons. They also give
them Cloth, Linen, and Silk to apparel themselves, Arms of Offense and
Defense, and Horses, with which they serve in the Wars, and if they dye, or be
killed, they allow them other. Every one of these Leaders contendeth to bring
his People into the Field well ordered. Besides this, They have between four
and twenty and thirty Ounces of Silver wages every year.

His fourth Military Forces are the Arabians, who live continually in their
Avari, (for so they call their Habitations, each one of them consisting of an
hundred or two hundred Pavilions) governed by diverse Alchiades, to the end they
may be ready in time of need. These serve on horseback; but they are rather to
be accounted Thieves, than true Soldiers.

His fifth kind of Forces Military, are somewhat like unto the trained
Soldiers of Christian Princes; and among these, the Inhabitants of Cities and
Villages of the Kingdom, and of the Mountains are enrolled, whom the King makes
very little account of, and very seldom puts Arms into their hands, for fear
of Insurrections and Rebellions, except in the Wars against the Christians, for
then he cannot conveniently forbid them: For it being written in their Law,
That If a Moor kill a Christian, or is slain by him, he goes directly into
Paradise: Men, Women, and those of every Age and Degree, run to the Wars hand
before head, that at least they may there be slain, and by this means gain
Heaven.

200000. Men he brought against Tituan 1659. Yet he cannot long continue a War;
yea, not above 3. Months, because his Forces living on that Provision which he
has daily coming in, as well for Sustenance, as for Apparel; and not being
able to have all this conducted thither, where the War requires, it follows
of necessity, that in short time they must return home for their Maintenance.

We want nothing but Men, and those men nothing but the Apprehension of that
infinite Treasure we might have in Mandinga, Aethiopia, Congo, Angola, Pratua,
Toroa, Monomolapa, etc. If we could but bring this man to terms.

His Men march not all in Company, but the respective Commanders set forth two
hours one after another, every one having its Ambuscado and Stratagem, not in
any strict Order of Rank and File. Ye though their Discipline is not exact,
their Order is so without confusion and violence. All the Commanders have their
Wives and Boys attending them well guarded. Their hoarse Drums serve to deafen
the Ears, and confound the Senses to any other Clamor, with some Brass Dishes,
and wind Instruments, to noise the Varnes, carried by Fellows on horseback, a
little before every Company; whose Horses are very swift, it being a shame
there to lose a Drum.. His Weapon is Bow and Arrow, an Iron Pole, a Shrene, a
Petronel, a Harque-buz, Scemiter; all over armed like a Porcupine.

They Eat and Lie in one Blanket, tying their horses bridle to their arms
while they graze.

When they come toward an Enemy, they march very exactly and silently, not a
man, upon pain of death, daring to break the Order.

When they are near an Engagement, the Horse encompass their Foot in the Rear,
in form of a Half Moon or Crescent; those Horse have order not to meddle with
the Enemy, but only to drive and necessitate the Foot upon them, till they have
peirced through their Batalia, if possible; and if they chance to recoyl, to
hold them to the Slaughter, till they have wearied and dulled the Enemies
Swords; and then the Reserve and they together fall in with fresh fury and
vigor: and this serves for all advantages of Military Policy, to quicken his
multitudes through despair to high and gallant services.

He chooses rather to tire out a Town, than storm it; then as soon as he has
raised his Battery, and made a kind of breast-work, with some Mounts in it, to
overlook the place, he makes his approaches in spite of the Bullet, and
fills up the Trenches with Bodies, if he cannot do it with other matter; and
when once a breach is made, its either a Soldiers death in honor, or a Dogs
in the Camp, for any to retreat. Their Patience and Resolution making up their
defect of Skill and Art.

Gaylands Court.
HE has one chief Counselor, to whom he gives a third part of his Revenue,
of whom he has taken a secret Oath, to establish his Son after him. To him he
adds a Secretary, a Treasurer, a Steward, the Captain of his Guard, and the
Governors of the respective Cities under his Command. Next them are his
Deputies, or Major Generals, who have their Provinces on condition they have
in readiness on any occasion 200. Horse a man. After these are his Collectors
of Tribute; and next them the Commanders of Forts, to awe the Country to the
payment of that Tribute.

He has likewise a Troop of Light Horse, who have nothing but their Diet, save
what they can plunder; and Apparel once a year: whose Horses are attended by
Christian Slaves, in Shackles, carried about on Camells. To these we may add
his Purveyors, his Grooms of the Stable, his Granators, and their Notaries. He
keeps 500. Horse ready to execute any of his Offices, Decrees, and expedite
their service.

He has the Keeper of his Seal, who over-looks all others, and is as it were
Lord high Controllor. He is attended always in pubick with 1200. Horse and
Foot. His Armies are led by Ensign-Bearers, who are always such as understand
best all Passages, Fords, etc. The Cities are bound at their own Charge to send
the Magicians to the Wars.

He has one, like a Master of Ceremonies, that sits at his Feast, ordering
every man to sit down in order, and speak in his turn. His Concubines are all
white, but the Women he will have Children by must be black.

He goes very plain, and fears nothing more than gathering of Taxes, the
burden whereof their Law has mittigated, and the people cannot endure.

When he goes abroad, there is notice given to all his Relations, and
Servants, who attend at his Gate or Tent, and march thence according to the
Harbingers direction in order. 1. The Standard. 2. the Drums. 3. the Master of
the Horse. 4. the Pensioners and Guards. 5. the Officers of State. Then the
Sword, the Shield, and the Cross-Bow; and at last Gayland and his Favorite,
with the Footmen; one whereof, the first carries his Stirrups, the other his
Partizan, the 3. the Covering of his Saddle, the 4. the Halter for his Horse,
and the 5. his curious Pantofle; after him come his Eunuchs, his Harquebuziers,
and Light Horse; of all which he is the plainest man.

When he lies in the Field (as all those Kings do most part of the year, to
keep their Subjects quiet) his Tent is four square like a Castle, in the midst
of his Noble-mens, that make a Town, made of Cloth, with glistering Spheres a
top, and then the Soldiers made of Goats-skins. In the midst of all are his
Kitchen and Pantrey; next these Pavilions are the Artificers, the Merchants,
and other Followers Tents: Next them the Stables, and round them the Foot,
about them the Horse, and the Light Horse of the outside. You would think his
Tent is inacessible, yet are they sometimes so careless and sleepy, that
Enemies have been known to come within a Furlong of his Royal Pavilion.
Barbarism, with all its care, has not the art to secure it self.

Gaylands Policies.
1. HE has a standing Army, enriched with the Spoils of the King and Country;
that will be undone, if it returns either to a Peace, or any thing that may
threaten a Restitution.

2. Most of the Officers of this Army, are related to himself, by Kindred, or
Alliance.

3. All the old Nobility, are either cut off, or kept under.

4. All the Grievances that the People have lain under these forty years, are
ordered to be brought to him in Tables, and he has the honor to redress them.

5. Every Body has access to him himself; Provided, that they come with no
Mantle, or Sleeves, or with their Breasts opened.

6. He keeps his Revells and Gamballs, wherewith he takes the Country People
three times a Year, as Running, Hunting, etc.

7. He employeth so many rigid Officers over the respective Provinces, as may
exasperate them, and then he offers those Exactors a Sacrifice to the Vulgar
Fury; gaining thereby, together with their Rigor, the Reputation of Mildness
and Moderation.

8. The Army knows not one day where it must be the next; so marching it up
and down at once, to keep the Country from rising, and his Followers from
settling to any Combinatior or Confaederacy.

9. Besies that, they are of so many Nations and Interests, that they can
hardly ever close to any Particular Design against his General one.

10. He has an excellent way of Droll, whereby he at once pleases and
discovers the common Humor.

11. He lays out as much Money as he can in Slaves and Renegadoes, to whom he
is beholding for all his Skill and Conduct.

12. He has wrought upon the Necessities of those about his Master the King,
that there is not any Order passes him, whereof he has not Advertisment,
before ever it comes to be put in Execution.

13. He has got in likewise with the two last Viziers, and him that now
governs, by Money; whereof none has so little use as the Turk, and yet none
more Covetous.

14. It is as usual as can be with him to send in his own very Soldiers and
Ingineers with Provision, in the habit of Country Fellows to the very Walls of
Tangier to descry in what posture things stand, and where he may make his most
successful attempts.

15. To countenance his own Usurpations, he has appointed 200 Priests and
Soldiers to regulate both the Religion and Law of the place; both which he
intends to publish, with certain new Interpretations delivered, as he pretends,
to two holy Priests at Tituar, who are now under ground for two years,
discoursing with Mahomet, and shall get up after the two years end with two
Trumpets, to reform the World. Lord! That there can be no Treason, even in
Africa without Inspiration.

16. There is now a design set on foot to draw the poor Country that has been
harassed with these late divisions, and are ready to embrace any settlement,
rather than the late Disorders, to press him to take upon himself the
Sovereignty, as the most likely means to heal the breaches (that we may borrow
our modern Elegancies) and lay aside the unhappy Xeriff as the grand obstacle
of the peace and settlement. (Goodly, goodly! sure the Phanatique Spirit has
possesled them, and they that turn the world upside down are gone thither also.

17. He is upon settling a Company, to traffic upon the same terms that the
Europeans do; at whose Charge he intends such a Navy may be Equipped, as may
give Law to the Streights, with the Grand Seigniours leave.

18. He does intend to bring in some ambitious Christian Prince, with whose
Interest he intends to check all other Pretenders.

19. He cannot endure any man that speaks cunningly and subtlely; insomuch,
that it is the way of his Creatures, to make their Addresses in clear Terms,
when Canting Parts are Treason against Tyrants.

20. His special Cronies are the Zealous and Enthusiastic Ecclesiastics, with
whose grave Countenances he gains a great Reverence to all his proceedings.

21. He keeps up a constant Faction in his Camp between his chief Officers,
whereby they watch one another so closely, that they cannot do any thing to his
prejudice, for fear of one another mutual inspection and observation. Divide
and Impera is got now beyond Italy.

22. He trains up the Moors to so much Discipline, that they shall march 20000.
together, with that order and silence, for forty Mile, that they cannot be
discovered; yea, there is not a word spoken in the Camp for two days together
sometimes, except in his own Tent: And what is more remarkable, 2. or 3000. of
them shall lodge themselves in the Fernes, and among the rising Grounds, so
that you may ride through those very Grounds, and not discover a man, Nay, bear
up your belief a little longer, while I tell you, that 10000. of them shall
hide themselves in the Sand, so as that you may go over them, and not discover
them.

23. He arms his choice men very well, that they may survive his Encounters to
a considerable Skill, Experience and Considence; which if his men were cut off
in every occasion, fresh-water-Souldiers are not capable of: And besides, being
so armed, he orders them not to Charge until they come within Execution of
the Enemy, which they will do manfully, bearing up against his Charges to his
very face.

The Proceedings of the English at Tangier, since they possessed it, and were
opposed by the Usurper Gayland.
AMong the many great Benefits we proposed to our selves by our Alliance with
Portugal, this is not the least, that we might enjoy a secure and free Trade in
Africa and America, those Treasures of the Universe: In order to which end, we
had in the year 1661. the ancient City of Tangier delivered to us; a place
where we might in our Traffic that way, both refresh, and secure our selves,
and give Law to others: And no sooner was it delivered to us, than the Right
Honorable the Earl of Peterborough, Listed 1000. Foot, and 300. Horse; the
last in Southwark, the first in Black Heath, to possess and secure it. His
Officers were, Captain Levet, Captain Mordant, Captain Blake, Captain Anesley,
Captain Belletore, Captain Clerk, Captain Fairborn, Captain Colls, Captain Car,
Captain Nerve, Major Johnson, and Lieutenant Colonel Sir James Snith.

And as his Lordship prepared himself for the Government of it from hence, so
the Right Honorable the Earl of Sandwich, went thither October in the same
year; where he found strong Fortifications, many fair Gardens, and so well
situated, that no Ship can pass in or out of the Streights, but Ships as ride
there may see and speak with them; and that the Portuguez were very civil to
the English, and made great expressions of their welcome: And thereupon, in
December following, the aforesaid Honorable Lord addressed himself for his
Charge, I mean the Command of Tangier, which we found situated strongly on the
side of a Hill, having one Gate only to the water side, and Land-ward four
Gates, one within the other; and a great many good brass Canons were mounted on
the Walls of it; and in the middle of it we saw a Fountain of Water, that
continually runs with a very full stream, that conveyeth it self under the
Town.

December 9. 1661. The English and Irish Forces were embarked in several
Vessels, according to my Lord Rutherfords order, from Dunkirk to Tangier; never
any Soldiers were shipped to foreign service more willingly, never any carried
more resolutely; the number 3200. old Soldiers; the Commanders, Col.
Fitz-Gerard, Col. Farrel, Sir Robert Horley, L. C: Kingwell, Major Fiernes,
Captain Summers, Captain Flord, Captain Herbert, Captain Emerson, Captain
Brooks: No sooner was my Lord upon the place, than he settled a very fair
Correspondence with the Portuguez and Moors there, upon the old Portugal terms,
until he could be able to procure himself better; so that we had the
Accommodations of that Place upon as good Conditions as we could wish: In the
mean time our works went on, our Soldiers were inured to the Country, we were
better acquainted with the humor and interest of the People; and in a word,
had exacter Observation of our Advantages, in order to a further settlement.

April 11. 1663. The Moors had a Design of drawing upon Tangier, whereof his
Excellency having Intelligence by the Arabian Spies he employed to that
purpose, drew up a Regiment of Foot, and a Troop of Horse; but being not
willing to spend any of his own men upon the Barbarians, he sent out some Moors
who had heretofore revolted, and come in, and have been many ways useful and
serviceable to us; who accordingly being horsed, encountered with a Party of the
Enemy, in the sight of the Town, and wounded the Shots Son, one of the
principal Persons of the Country, of which wounds he is since dead, and his
loss is much lamented by the Infidels. In revenge whereof, as we conjecture,
five days after a considerable Party came within our Trench, and one of their
chief Captains was killed by our Artillery. These little Braveries prejudice
them more than they can annoy us, who can look on until the Country is harassed
and ruined with Poverty, Hunger and Sickness. The Moors will be necessitated in
all probability ere long to a better Compliance with Tangier; already many of
them did run over to us with Horses and Cattle; so that fresh Provisions were
no varieties; and upon the whole matter our condition was much another thing
than it was when we first settled there; Health, Plenty, Trade, Security, and
good Government, having put us into a very settled Condition; and his Excellency
the Lord Peterborough, having so well and happily settled all the Concernments,
to the honor and advantage of his Majesty, then ready, by his Majesty's grace
and favor, to return into England, and put the City into his Successors hands,
having paid off all Arrears, and filled up all Stores and Ammunitions. And as
an Argument of our Prosperity, we had very good Correspondenee with Algier,
together with a resolution to continue in Amity with us; they of Sallee
likewise desire a good understanding with us: Tangier rendering England much
more considerable to Algier, than it would be, were this Garrison in other
hands. The Works were strengthened by the same Noble Lord; the Garrison
enlarged; the Quarters were disposed; the Rate of Victuals was settled; the
Guards were ordered, and 5. Mile round clearly gained.

But the Earl of Tiveot arriving, there began a little stone Redoubt, which we
perfected without any opposition from the Enemy, also we made Entrenchments and
Lines of Communication from place to place, insomuch that a great deal of
ground was left free to us, to feed our Cattle in safety.

Thursday the 4th. of June we began another Redoubt on the top of the hill,
which overlooketh the Town to the very Ports thereof; at the same time we made
Retrenchments beyond the hill that we might not be surprised, nor our works
molested. Gayland hearing of the consequence of this Redoubt, and of our daily
Retrenching, assembled his Army consisting of 4000 Horse, and 20000 Foot, and
Encamps within a league of the Town: Two fugitives one after another brought us
news that he resolved to attaque our works.

Upon Sunday morning we divided our Retrenchments into three Posts: whereof
Col. Fitz-Gerard and his Regiment, was to maintain that near the Sea on the
East: Col. Norwood, with half the Governors Regiments the middle Post, wherein
lay the new great Redoubt: L. C. Knightley, with the other half of the said
Regiment, where the little Redoubts were on the right hand: Col. Bridges with
the Horse in the midst of all, to give succor as need should require, and
repel the Enemy if they entered our works: Col. Alsop the Town Major still
visiting the posts; The outmost lines of all for favoring the workmen being
divided into three posts, commanded one by a Lieutenant and 30 men, another by
an Ensign and 18 men, and the third by a Sergeant and 12. We made a six Pounder
Gun to be carried to the outmost line at the Sergeants post, and gave order
that after all, the Garrison should be in readiness, and at the shooting of the
said Gun, should take arms; which was accordingly executed at 12 a Clock at
night; and after the Gun was brought off, all those outer Lines were sown with
Chaustraps, Cultrips or stories, whereof we brought over 36000. and the avenues
with Sowgards or hollis, wherein was put Powder as in a Mine, and Laden above
with Stones, Grenades and Swedes feathers were put into those farther posts.

Sunday the 14 precisely at twelve a clock in the day, whenall the Officers
were retired to dinner, the ordinary Guards in the Retrenchments, appeared in
an instant Gaylands forces, who had long attaqued our outmost Lines, (the
Lieutenant, Ensign and Sergeants Posts) with three Regiments of Red and White
Colors, Black Colors, and one of a sort of Violet Color, seconded by a
Regiment of Horse. Our Soldiers surprised and amazed, abandoned their Posts,
and left the Powder in the Sowguards, with some Grenades, to the Enemy, who
pursued with incredible vigor the Soldiers toward the Town. Mean time the
great Body of Foot attaqued the great Redoubt, and showed more than ordinary
resolution in standing firm before our Grenades and fire. In the Fort was
Commander, by his turn, Major Ridgert with some forty men; and to his succor
came Lieutenant-Col. Chun Voluntier, and Captain Giles a Lieutenant in the
Governors Regiment, and several others Reformed Officers: which Major and
Officers defended themselves most gallantly, killing about 40 of the Moors. The
Chaustraps that were sown about all the Lines, and the Redoubt in particular,
were of wonderful use and effect: for the barefooted Moors, when they were
pricked in the feet by them, sitting down to pick them out, were pricked
behind. Many both of Foot and Horse were so hurt. Mean time, the Colonel and
Lieutenant-Colonels, with the Officers, commanded in case of Alarm to maintain
the three Posts; as also Col. Bridges with his Horse marched out, repulsed most
gallantly the Enemy, took in all their Posts again; and in the end the Enemy
retired in great have and disorder. They lost, as near as we can conjecture by
taking off the dead, (for they never leave any bodies behind them, if possible)
above 100 in all, 14 being left within our Lines, which they could not carry
off, and several others in the fields; Colonel Norwood with all imaginable
gallantry going to the outer point before the Redoubt, and Captain Needham with
him. The said Captain did kill a Moor for his part, and for his pains was shot
himself through the arm in the flesh only. We lost 14 killed in the field, and
twenty hurt with Horse: and we suppose we had more of our men hurt from our
inner Line and Walls, than by the Enemy.

It is reported by the Portuguez and Jews, that he had never lost so many men
at any time. They are men of order and resolution, and have most excellent
Firearms and Lances.

I had forgot to tell you, that when the Horse charged us, he that did command
them was clothed in Crimson Velvet; who being killed, they went all off
immediately: which makes us suspect he was of eminent quality.

After this Encounter, an Express was sent to complement Gayland; who returned
the Answer enclosed by one of his own domestics, who confesses that our Crows
feet or Chaustraps did their Foot great harm, and that they have lost many men.

The Earl of Tiveots Letter to Gayland. Written in Spanish.
THe King my Master having honored me with the Command of this place, I did
not look for less courtesy than your Excellency used with my Predecessor,
giving me the welcome: but on the contrary, your Excellency stole from me the
hour of eating, in which visits are usually received. Notwithstanding what is
passed, if your Excellency does incline to a better correspondence, be it in
peace or war, you shall not find me less disposed or provided, though it be at
the same hour. Valuing my self upon the Laws of Soldiery, I shall bury the
dead bodies you left behind you: but if your Excellency desire to bury them
your self, after you manner, you may send for them. God keep your Excellency
the many years that I desire.

Tangier, June 14.

Gaylands Letter to the Earl of Tiveot. Written in Spanish. Signed above in
Arabic Letters.
I Received your Excellencies of the 14 current, in which you seem to complain,
that I did not bid you welcome: whereas on the Contrary it belongs to me to do
so; Persons of your quality being accustomed in these parts to give notice of
their arrival, and not to dispose of any thing, as your Excellency has done in
my Lands. Notwithstanding, I gave order to my Subjects, that, the occasion
presenting it self, they should give good quarter to your Excellencies, as they
did with the Sentinel which they took the other day, whom I charged them to use
well. As to the Correspondence, it is well known how punctal I am in it; of
which you may be informed. I did not expect less from your Excellencies
courtesy, than you have used to the dead; for which I am insinitely obliged to
you. God keep your Excellency many years, as I desire.

Postscript.
If your Excellency please to send any person or persons from you, you may do
it; and this shall secure him, which goes with my servant.




The Earl of Tiveots Reply.
I Received your Excellencies of the 15 current, the same Evening by the hands
of your Servant, who carries this back to you. To which I answer, That if there
has been any omission on my part, as to the accustomed Civility of th^se
Countries, it was a sin of ignorance, for which your Excellency has
sufficiently chastised. I am beholden to you for the good quarter which your
Excellency commanded to be given to the Soldiers your men took the other day:
if my good fortune gives me the same occasion, I will pay it with Interest. As
to what concerns the Peace and good Correspondence between the King my Master
and your Excellency, there only wants a good disposition on your part, as it
has been treated formerly with my Predecessor: to which if your Excellency
enclines, signifying it to me, I will send persons to effect it on my behalf.
God k^^p your Excellency many and happy years.

From Tangier, June 16. 1663.

Notwithstanding these Complements, Gayland attempted a new Work of ours with
10000. Men: but the most vigilant and excellent Governor had so warily
supplied the defects of that place, by planting great Gun to annoy the
Assailants; that, though the assault was very sharp, the Enemy was beaten off,
and that with the loss of 900. men; which entertainment they liked so ill, that
the Army was drawn off: And thereupon the said Governor, as happy to improve
Advantages, as resolute to gain them, sent a Letter to Gayland, to let him
know, That his Master, the King of Great Britain, as he wanted neither
Resolution nor Ability to manage his just Right in that Garrison: so he was so
great a Friend to Peace, that he would be ready to entertain a better
Correspondency with his Excellency: Which seconded with the Defeat, (then only
you oblige the unworthy, when you can awe them) prevailed so much upon the
Usurper, that he sent Messengers for a Treaty, which had so fair a progress,
that both Parties came to an Agreement. Indeed so ill was Gaylands success, so
great our progress in Fortifications; such convenience we had for fresh Air,
and fresh Victuals, that we were in a plight (if it had been thought fit to
have sent Sir John Lawson, to do as much by Sea, as we could do by Land; to
shut up the Havens and Towns of Sallee and Tituan, and batter A^sella to the
ground. Every day put us in a better state, both of freedom and security,
having by our late Treaty gained a six Months Peace, which did exceedingly
conduce to our settlement. At our first arrival, a Flux troubled us, but within
six Months our temper agreed exceedingly well with the temper of the Climate.

August 24. 1663. The Vigilance, Courage and Conduct of the Earl of Tiveot,
moved Gayland (in his own Expression) to require a Peace; which, although
concluded but for six Months, was by him desired for seven Years: After which
time the English Forts are finished, and this Advice waited upon his
Excellence, who was then embarquing for England.

At that time, the Design of the Mould, intended for the safety and advantage
of Shipping, was in a good forwardness of persection, the Passage of the Stone
being out out of the Rocks, and way made for a Gunpowder blow, and
undermining. There was a new Key made, 30 yards foundation laid, and 3 yards
raised above water; and well they might for no Place in the World afforded
either better Materials, or those more conveniently disposed for the
perfecting of such a Work, which the Moors call, and others shall find, The Key
of the World: Indeed, they that understand the World, and themselves very well,
look upon this Place with great hopes of the Reputation and Advantage it may
one day bring to the English Nation.

August 26. 1663. The Moors kept their Peace made with the English very
punctually, whom they treated, when they went down into their Countries (which
is rich, and well inhabited) with great Civility. The Earl of Tiveot was much
esteemed for his Valor, and well beloved for his Candor and Humanity;
insomuch, as the very Moors term him a Good Man. (and indeed, he was a Person
of exact honor and integrity) The Place was healthy, and the situation
pleasant, and Provisions of sorts in such abundance, that a man can scarce live
cheaper any where.

But about this time we began our Mould, and found it very hard to blow up the
Rocks under water, to make way for our Boats and Engines, which otherwise
cannot bring Stone, but with difficulty, at the top of high water: but in a
month, way was made for our Engines to weigh our Stones, and in six weeks time
we laid 30. yards of Foundation, and raised that two yards high: It should seem
we are better at this work than any other, this being better work than any in
the Straight.

But that we might not only secure our selves, but oblige our Neighbors; we
sent Supplies, with a great deal of hazard, to the Saint and Fall; a Favor he
acknowledged so great, that he has promised, when ever it is in his power, he
will not be backward in requital. And now Gayland Complements his Sacred
Majesty in Spanish, to this purpose.

A Letter from Gayland to His Sacred Majesty Charles the Second, King of
England.
Sacred Royal Majesty,
HAving been advertised by his Excellency the Earl of Tiveot, of his sudden
occasion to visit these Parts; I could not forbear this Address in respect of
the Peace, and good Intelligence we have lately affected in Your Majesty's
Name. And having found his Excellency a Cavalier of great Valor and Honor,
and of so noble a Mind; I could not choose but desire to Correspond with him by
my Letters, to signify my Inclination of Compliance in all things that concern
the Service of Your Majesty; and which formerly I have forborne to do, for want
of so fit a Juncture to enable me.

I hope from the Divine savor, that this Peace will be attended with many
considerable Augmentations in order to Your Majesty's Service, the effecting of
which good Work being justly attributed (with no small prais^s) to the Prudence
of his Excellency; I beseech Your Majesty to command him speedily back, that we
may perfect all things with him so greatly to be loved and esteemed.

If in any parts of our Dominions there is any thing that offers it self for
Your Majesty's Service, the signification of Your Commands shall be esteemed
the greatest favor that can be expressed.

God keep your Majesty, and give You all manner of felicity.


And the Governor of Morocco to the King of Portugal, thus.

The Copy of a Letter from the King of Tetuan, Governor of Morocco to the King
of Portugal
Sancta Crux, June 27. 1663.
HIgh and Mighty, Don Alfonso, King of Roman Christians and of Portugal, thanks
be to God that we are obliged to give account, and none is free from that duty,
and therefore we give him the praise unto him due, and this praise is for the
daily favor we receive from him.

By Order of the Servant of our Lord God on high, to whom I submit all my
affairs, who is called Abdelazir 4 Mahomet, Grandson of Aly; This our writing
in the name of God our Lord. To your Majesty the King of Portugal, Catholic
D. Alfonso, whom God bless, and after that we give thanks to God for having
made us Moors, and Participate unto your Majesty, how much we esteem the favor
which you have done to my Servants, who arrived in a little English Vessel safe
in the Haven of Sancta Crux, together with the good news which I received from
the King Maly Mahomet, to whom your Majesty was generously pleased to give his
liberty, and I for my part, cannot but he very thankful, and do offer my self
and my Subjects with all that which from this Kingdom may be necessary, to your
Majesty without any fail: and your Majesty, whom God bless, may out of hand
make trial thereof. And I do give my Word, and so this Letter goes signed by my
hand and seal, and from hence forward will celebrate the Peace between me and
your Majesty with these undernamed conditions which are.

That all the Portugal Nation, and their contractions, may go, and come, enter,
and come out feeely, into, or from any of my Havens, by Sea or Land, with all
security; and in case they meet in the Sea with the Turk, or any other
Shipping, of whatsoever Nation it be, coming out of any of my Seaport Towns,
they shall receive no damage. And also if any of your Majesty's Vessels chance
to have bad weather at their Fishing, they may retire into this Haven: wherein,
(although they meet with any Shipping, either Turks, or Spaniards, or any
Nation whatsoever Enemies to your Majesty) you Majesty's Shipping or Men shall
be in no danger; and as for the Wheat and Horses which shall be necessary for
your Majesty, all shall be punctually and with speed given to your Majesty,
whereof your Majesty may make present trial, sending Ships, Goods, Money, and
Vessels, for the Wheat and Horses, and One that understands Our Language, whom
your Majesty may send in the Company of Maly Mahomet who is there, to whom your
Majesty was generally pleased to give his Liberty, for at his arrival here, he
is to be King of Morocco, where they expect him each hour, and the Kingdom has
no other Heir by Maly Mahomet, and I engage for him, that he will perform his
word in whatsoever he promises to your Majesty, wherein he shall not fail as
in duty bound, and is natural to him to do it: so waiting for Maly Mahomet, and
for all your Majesty's Orders, which I shall always observe, and (...) as your
Majestics loving Subject and Servant to God, who may bless your Majesty, give
you long life, and happy, and defend you from your Enemies.

Your Majesty's Friend, Cide Abdelazi, Son of Mahomet, Grandson of Aly.


Hereupon we had free Trade with the Moors, they daily bringing their Camels,
laden with Hides and Skins, which is their chief Commodity; and in return they
get Money, and other Provision: This Place being the great Market for those
things that come from Algier to Tituan, and from thence hither; especially when
a square of 30. yards toward a Molle was brought a yard above the water mark:
That new experiment of Maste-floates promoting our Design exceedingly.

Indeed, so forward were we in February, that Gayland began to be jealous of
us, and therefore there are several Debates between him and his Excellency, the
Earl of Tiveot, whether a War or Peace. Free he would have us to the
Fortification of those Redoubts nearest the Town; but as for those further off,
as the Hollanders answer the Ambassadors that come to them, saying, It may be
so, we will consider: So said he, He would take 14. days time to think of it.
And they have a Saying amongst them, the meaning whereof I understand not; 13.
days make a wise man.

But from Debate it comes to Action; the Moor comes on with Horse and Foot to
hinder the Enlargement of our Quarters, as it concerned him, but was beaten
off; and, what is a shame in that Country, left one of his Horse Colors behind
him: Neither is he more in earnest than we, for we banish all the Jews out of
Town, and go on a pace with the Works, without any further Attempt or
Interruption; only when the Lord Governor declared, he could entertain no
Peace, without some more Liberty allowed, and secured in the Country: Gayland
advised with his Mushrome Grandees, his Lords of the other House; and after
mature deliberation, he sent word by two of his principal Officers, and his
Secretary, which was to this Effect; That, having consulted all his Savois and
Rabbis upon the Point, it appeared, That they were bound by a Law not to
suffer Christians to Fortify in Africa; but if his Excellency accepted of
Quarters, as in the Portuguez time, they were willing to give them. To which my
Lord replied; That, He must either have Peace with those Terms aforesaid, or
War without them.

And the very next week his Lordship commenced a new Redoubt upon the utmost
Live; against which Work, what Stratagems! what Ambuscadoes! what Surprises!
while we were so confident, that one writes to England thus.

We expected Gaylands whole Army any time these seven days; if he stays but
two days longer, he must come to our terms, and suffer this Place to be
comfortable to the Garrison, and the Inhabitants: Or, which is more, let him
come when he will, we question not, but we shall maintain our Ground in spite
of his heart: We have good Lines to defend; and better Men certainly are not in
the World: To which must be added; That we have a Governor, under whose
Conduct (with Gods ordinary Providence) we can fear nothing.

But ah! humane Confidence! he was an excellent man, but a man still; for the
next News you heard, was; That the Earl of Tiveot, designing to cut ways and
passages in an adjoining Wood, that was as great annoyance to Tangier, as it
was a shelter to the Moors; and having in vain sent out Scouts, who were
suffered to graze their Horses in the midst of the Enemies, who lay
undiscovered, behind those rising Grounds, in Fernes, and thick Grass; fell
into an Ambuscado of the whole Infidel Army, where he sold his life at a dear
rate; a life indeed invaluable but that there are many such lives comprehended
in his SaCRed Majesty's large and universal Care; which has that influence
even upon this distant Place; that, notwithstanding Gaylands attempts upon it
several times since that miscarriage, not only secures, but advances it to as
much Reputation as ever it enjoyed since it was in the Christians hands. How
many Millions would the French give for such a place? who are now to seek for a
footing in those Coasts.

The Soil is proper for any Grain, or Trees, and asks nothing but dressing to
be admirable. There is no need of carrying Provision thither, as to other
Plantations, for the support of the Colonies; the abundance of things there
being so great, that the Country produces enough for its self, and to spare.
The Waters are excellent; the Fruits delicious, and and without Hyperbole; the
Place may be improved into a Paradise: Over and above this, there are Golden
Mines, in such plenty, that in great falls of Rain, and ravages of Water, the
Veins of Gold discovered themselves, all along the Coast, and upon the
Mountains. The Inhabitants are of a Disposition tractable enough, and with good
words, are ready and willing to be employed in any service; being a People
humble, and obedient, and of a very good humor. The Country is shared among
diverse petty Pretenders, who are still making war one upon the other; and from
whose Disagreement we might easily take a rise to an absolute establishment of
our selves among them. Beyond this Place the Trading lies open without
difficulty into India; and more commodiously yet to the Country of Aethiopia,
where Commerce is scarce understood, and where are the richest Gold Mines upon
the face of the Earth. In a word, there is not any where a fitter Place for a
general Magazine of all Commodities to be brought from those Parts into Europe,
than is this Place; from whence we may carry the business of Commerce and
Discovery further than any have yet done before us. Besides that, the Place is
of so gentle a Climate, that what clothes serve us here in the spring, may
serve us there all the year; and having within its self whatsoever may
honestly, by way of Commerce, serve either to the pleasure, plenty, or
necessities of humane life.

Add to this, that lying in a middle way, it secures us from the danger and
loss o^ long and tedious Voyages backwards and forwards, which we were tired
with before this acquists; which is as good a breathing place as can be, with
all Conveniences about us, to refresh our men, and follow our course at
pleasure: whereas others meet no relief between India and home commonly at 7.
months Voyage; for want of which, they are so miserably harassed with the
Journey, that a long time it takes them to recover it.

And over and above all this, when others are come as far as Tangier, they dare
not pass the Channel without our leave, which they may be made either to fight,
or pay for.

Again, this opens an honest way of livelihood to those English men, whose
Necessities have debauched them to unable and shifting ways of living; this
relieveth the Poor, that must either beg or starve; employeth those whose
languishing Industry is as good as lost, because not exercised: And brings back
that sincere and quiet way of Dealing, which is now lost among a lazy sort of
men, that have nothing to do but to be troublesome.

What Natural Impressions and Motions the Air of Africa is subject unto, and
what Effects ensue thereupon.
THroughout the greatest part of Barbary stormy and cold Weather begin commonly
about the midst of October. In December and January the Cold grows somewhat
more sharp in all places, howbeit this happens in the Morning only, and that
very gently and remisly. In February the Weather is somewhat mitigated, but
very unconstant. In March the North and West Winds usually blow, which adorns
the Trees with Blossoms. In April Cherries are commonly ripe, and all fruits
attain to their proper form and shape. In the midst of May they gather their
Figs; and in Mid -June their Grapes are ripe in many places: In which Month and
July their Pears, sweet Quinces, and their Damascens attain unto sufficient
Ripeness. Their Figs of Autumn may be gathered in August, howbeit they never
have so great plenty of Figs and Peaches as in September. By the midst of
August they usually dry their Grapes in the Sun, whereof they make Reisons,
which if they cannot finish in September, by reason of unseasonable Weather, of
their Grapes as then ungathered they use to make Wine and Must. In the midst of
October they take in their Hay, and gather their Pomegranets and Quinces. In
November they gather their Olives, beating them off their Boughs with certain
long Poles, by reason of the tallness of their Trees, which no Ladder can
reach. They have three Months in the Spring always temperate. They begin their
Spring on the fifteenth day of February, accounting the eighteenth of May the
end thereof, all which time they have most pleasant Weather, But if from the
five and twentieth of April, to the fifth of May, they have no Rain fall, they
take it as a sign of ill Luck, which wa^er they call Naisau, that is, Water
blessed of God, and some store it up in Vessels, most religiously keeping it as
an holy thing. Their Summer lasts till the sixteenth of August, all which
time they have most hot and clear weather; Except perhaps some showers of Rain
fall in July and August, which do so infect the Air; the great Plagues and
Pestilent Fevers fall thereupon, which are almost always mortal. Their Autum
they reckon from the 17 of August to the 16 of November, having commonly in the
Months of August and September not such extreme heats as before. Howbeit all
the time between the 15 of August and the 15 of September is called by them,
The Furnace of the whole Year; for it brings Figgs, Quinces, and such kind of
Fruit to their full Maturity. From the 15 of November begin their Winter; and
as soon as Winter comes they begin to till the Ground, which lies in the
Plains; but in the Mountains they go to plough in October. The People here are
most certainly persuaded, that every year contains 40 extreme not days,
beginning upon the twelfth of June: and again, so many days extreme cold,
beginning from the twelfth of December. Their Equinoxies are upon the 16 of
March, and the 16 of September: and their Solstice on the 16 of June, and the
16 of December: These Rules they most stri^ctly observe (though they know not a
Letter in the Book) in Husbandry, and Navigation; which together with the
Houses of the Planets, are the first Lessons they teach their Children; as also
the great Book in 3 Volumes, called, The Book of Husbandry. They reckon Trine
by the Moon; and allow 354 Nights to the Year, viz. 30 Nights in each of the
first six Months, and 26 in each of the last six. They are undone if it rains
not 12 days in the year, viz. the six first of April, and the six last of
September. They live till threescore, as lustily as we do at thirty, and then
they droop suddenly, scarce any of them exceeding seventy; the failing of their
Teeth and Eyes fore-running their deaths; the reason whereof may be their
excessive inclination to Venery, for which purpose they tolerate hundreds of
Stews in Fez: they being so impudent, that they will continue in the very Act
of Uncleanness, though twenty should come and see them, therefore they are ^ald
at 26 commonly; and many of them dye of the French Pox: a Disease that came
thither with the Jews that were banished Castile; with whose Wives the Moors
lay, and were infected: A Disease, they say, that if you go but into Numidia,
the very Air of the Place Cures you of: As the Armenian Earth does of the
Plague here.

The Qualities of these People, Good and Bad.
THey are Religious to a Superstition, so far, the day they Pray (and they are
very often at their Churches or Masks) they spit, nor touch their privy
parts. Their dexterity and skill in Mathematiques and Mechaniques is
extraordinary: Very Faithful they are, but Cunning, No People so Lustful, and
none so Jealous; Familiarity with one of their Wives is Death. Give Place to
thy Elders, is a great Rule amongst them. When ever they discourse of Love, the
Youth are to withdraw.

But with these Virtues, they have their Vices too, being very needy and
covetous; very proud and wrathful; very implacable and revengeful. So Clownish
they are, that they will scarce hear you: yet so credulous, that they will
believe you, say what you will. Abounding so much with Choler, they speak
always angry and loud; and you will never walk the Streets, but you will meet
with a Squabble. Desperate they are in their Undertakings: Careless they are of
their Time; which they spend in Hunting, or War, or Theft. Thus have I
described as well their Vices as their Virtues; though I am indebted to this
Country for my Birth, and most part of my Education.

Now to deliver somewhat concerning the estates of these Christians: They are
called by some Cofti, or Coptitae, and by others, Christians from the Girdle
upward: for albeit they be baptized, as we are, yet do they circumcise
themselves like to the Jews: so as a man may say, their Christianity comes no
lower than the girdle-stead. But that which is worse, they have for 1000 years
followed the heresy of Eutiches, which allows but of one Nature in Christ:
by which heresy they also separate and dismember themselves, from the Union of
the Church of Europe. The occasion of this separation and schism, was the
Ephesine Council, assembled by Dioscorus in defense of Eutiches, who was now
condemned by the Calcedon Council by six hundred and thirty Fathers congregated
together, by the authority of Leo the first. For the Cofti fearing, that to
attribute two natures unto Christ, might be all one, as if they had assigned
him two hypostases or persons, to avoid the heresy of the Nestoreans, they
became Eutichians. They say their Divine Service in the Chaldean, oftentimes
repeating Alleluja. They read the Gospel first in Chaldean, and then in
Arabic. When the Priest says Pax vobis, the youngest among them lays his
hand upon all the people that are present. After Consecration, they give a
simple piece of Bread to the standers by: a Ceremony used also in Greece. They
exercise their Function in the Church of Saint Mark, amidst the ruins of
Alexandria, and in that of Suez, upon the Red Sea: They obey the Patriarck of
Alexandria, and affirm themselves to be of the Faith of Prete Ianni, In our
days two Popes have attemptted to reduce them to the Union of the Romish
Church, Pius the Fourth, and Gregory the Thirteenth; whose Letter they received
with reverence, laying them upon their heads before they opened them.

A DESCRIPTION OF The KINGDOM of FEZ.
THe World we know is divided into four parts; Asia, Europe, Africa and
America: the place under present consideration lies in Africa.

Africa is bounded on the East by the Red Sea, and the famous Bay of Arabia;
on the West, with the Atlantic Sea, which divides it from America; on the
North it is parted by the Mediterranean from Europe; and on the South with the
Ethiopian Sea, from that place which Geographers call Terra Australis
incognita; altogether bounded by the Sea, but that there is an Isthmus, or a
Neck of Land, (of threescore, faith Dr. Heylin; threescore and nine, says Leo
Affricanus; but fifty and four, says Munster; and seventy four miles, says
Atlas) between it and Asia: over which Neck Cleopatra would have drawn her
Ships when her dear Anthony was defeated, and adventured her self to an unknown
Coast to escape Caesar's success and fortune, had not her Minions company
invited her to her own Egypt, to put a period to that Rant and Frolic
wherewith Fate and Fortune played with, and exercised that Age of the World.

The form of Africa, says Leo, is a Pyramide reversed; the Basis whereof,
which reaches from Tangier, and the Straight of Gibraltar, to the foresaid
Isthmus, and is in length 1918 Italian miles; the Cone narrow, but 4155 miles
in length; that is to say, in plain English, that part of the world is 1920
miles abroad toward us, and runs up narrower and narrower 4156 miles the
further it goes from us. Asia is less then America, Africa then Asia, Europe
then Africa; that course cloth has good measure.

Touching the temper of the Air, which depends most an end upon the position
and aspect of the Heaven; we guess that since the Equator, (I mean that Line
that is supposed to divide the Heavens into two equal parts) crosses over the
middle of this Country, therefore it was, by those of old, (that had no more
Geography then they drew up by aim in their Studies, and concluded from some of
their own uncertain Speculations and conjectural Principles) judged to lie
under the most Torrid Zone, and so for the most part unhabitable: whereas a few
more years experience, travel and observation, has manifested most part of
this Country habitable and temperate; the cool of the Nights allaying the heat
of the Days: for there the mists, dews, and showers of the one, refresh the
scorches and parches of the other; as indeed that vicissitude of Sun and Moon
was designed by the Almighty, (who disposed all things in number, weight and
measure, according to the eternal counsel of his will) to keep this world in an
equal temper, not overheated with the fever of the Torrid, nor overcooled with
the ague of the Frigid Zone.

The best Description extant of this Coast that the Ancients had, was that
great Soldier and exact Observator Hannoes Journal, a great while locked in
his Punick Tongue, until that great Restorer of Learning at once bestowed upon
it the pains of a Translation into the Greek Tongue, and the charge of an
Impression at Basil, 1526.

Africa is divided into, 1. Egypt, 2. Numidia, 3. Lybia, 4. Terra Nigritorum,
5. Ethiopia, Superior and Inferior; with the Islands adjoining to these
respective parts. The subject of this Discourse lies in Barbary.

Barbary lies Eastward toward Cyrenaica; Westward, toward the Atlantic Sea;
Northward, upon the Mediterranean, toward the Streights of Gibraltar, and the
Atlantic; and Southward, toward Atlas, Spain and Numidia.

It is called Barbary but lately by the Saracens, either, as the more ancient
Authors will have it, from the word Barbar, which among those people signifies
Murmur or Grumbling, because the Language of that place is like the condition
of it, discontented: Or from Bar, (as our modern Writers assert it) a Desert in
that Viz. The Punick.
Language, intimating the desolateness of the place before their replenishing
or peopling of it.

It is in length from the Atlantic to the Streights, fifteen hundred miles;
and in breadth from Mount Atlas to the Mediterranean, an hundred in the Inland
Countries; but outwardly toward the Streights, three hundred.

This Barbary is divided into four parts by most Geographers; but it is well
known by those that travel to consist of six parts, viz. Cus or Chus, Hea,
Hascora, Duccala, Morocco and Fez.

The first, is a long piece of barren ground, of one hundred and almost eighty
Italian miles.

The second coasts along as may miles upon the Atlantic to the very mouth of
the Streights: It Is sixty German miles long, and fifty English miles broad;
Mountainous, but well inhabited; Hilly, but plentiful with all manner of
necessaries; the highest places there, being as well peopled as our Valleys
here.

The third is large, but wild and Mountainous; useless rather from its
inhabitants carelessness, then its own nature.

The fourth is eminent for nothing but that great Temple or Mosche made all of
VVhale-bones.

The fifth, Morocco, the Inhabitants whereof are called Moors from (...),
which in the Greek signisieth black or obscure, and denotes either their
Complexion, which is Tawny, and inclining to black; or their Condition, as who
are bafe in their Original, and not very honorable in their present state.

Morocco has on the East of it Maloa; on the West from Tremison, the
Atlantic Ocean; on the South, Atlas; and on the North, Fez. It has its chief
denomination from the chief City of it, Morocco: it has large Cities well
inhabited and as well fortified; whereof one contained Anno 1659, (when there
went out an Enrolment from the Xeriff or chief Governor to Tax every Family by
the Poll) 150000 Families, 486 Mosches or Churches: on the Tower of the
chiefest whereof, or the Mother Church, as they call it, there was a Globe that
weighed 800 pound in Gold, and was valued at 1300000 Ducats. The Country is
like Ireland, rich and fertile, and wants only skilful and laborious
inhabitants, that may improve it to that rich advantage it is capable of; that
Country coming up, as all Travelers aver, to our Saviors proportion of
increase, some times and places thirty fold, some fifty, some sixty, and some
and hundred.

The Air is much after the temper of England, but that there is a South Wind
that ever and anon blows and brings along with it an extraordinary and a very
hurtful heat, like that at Scanderoon, did not an Eastern blast bring with it
four times a year, (viz. about the middle of July, the latter end of August,
the beginning of March, and most part of May, as extraordinary cold that
balanceth the former excess to a temper exceeding pleasant and healthful;
insomuch as it was observed by Mr. Tevillian, (that traveiled Morocco anno
1633. when King Charles the first of glorious memory, upon the humble Request
of the King of Fez, sent 15 ships to assist him in the Conquest of the Pirates
of Sala, who were too hard for him; and to his great grief, poor man, infested
all Europe and Asia that were concerned in the Eastern Trade) that never any
English, Welsh, or Scotch, that were cast upon those coasts, died before they
were an hundred years old: nor any French or Irish that lived there a
twelvemonth for some years together, until Art helped Nature; and they
understanding the temperature of the Climate, and their own constitution, were
taught those Rules and Prescriptions that corrected the first, and assisted the
second.

Of the eleven Mountains of Barbary, four are fallen to the share of this part
of it; 1. Thanebes, 2. Gous, 3. Phocra, 4. Usaletto: from which spring up those
pleasant and wholesome streams, that run like so many Veins of Blood, turning
and winding through this uneven Ground, dispensing their Refreshments and
Verdure on all sides, with equal kindness to Men, to Beasts, to the Grass and
Corn.

But Morocco and Fez are as it were all one, as well in the state and condition
of the Country, as in the Government.

Come we then at last to Fez, wherein lies Tangier, the place we have in our
Eye.

Fez has on the South of it Morocco, which is no other then the other half of
it: on the North, the Mediterranean; on the East, Malon and Tremeson; on the
West, the Atlantic. It is thought by that excellent Surveyor Maurus, to be as
big as Toledo, that is almost twice as big as England, and something over.

The Ground is very uneven and unequal; no Hills higher then its Mountains, no
Wilderness wider and looser then its Deserts; no Parks more woody than its
Forests; no Valleys more Pleasant and Profitable than its Champaigns, which
what they want in length and breadth, they gain in depth; as if Nature had
heaped one Acre upon two, in the matchless fertility thereof: Our Age, barren
of Belief, affords not Faith so easily to the Story, as this Land afforded Food
to their ten hundred thousand men, Anno 1569, when an hundred thousand fell at
the famous Battle before Tangier.

The Soil of the Country of Armagh in Ireland is so rank of it self, that if
any compost or artificial improvement be added unto it, it turns barren (says
my ingenious Author) out of fullenness and indignation, that men should suspect
the native fruitfulness thereof; and Fat upon Fat is false Heraldry in
Husbandry: An English man once dunged two Acres of this Country toward Gosel,
and it is barren to this day, and called by the Inhabitants in the Punick, Erapi
vosci Dos; Gods curse upon Europe.

Ships, when sailing, are generally conceived to have one moiety of them
invisible under Water; and some Countries in like manner are counted to have
their Wealth equally within the Earth, and without it: But the proportion holds
not exactly in Fez, whose visible Wealth far transcendeth her concealed
Substance. And yet we find some Minerals therein of considerable use and
value: As,

1. Brass and Iron, so plentifully, that though they have not the Blessing of
Asher, Thy shoes shall be iron and brass, yet have they so competent a store
of it, that she is no Gentlewoman there, that has not her twenty great Iron
Rings about her.

2. Salt, without which no Meat is savoury to Man, no Sacrifice acceptable to
God: Abimelech sowed Sechem and Abdamelech Gasel with Salt. There are two sorts
of Salt; 1. Fossilis, dug; 2. Coctilis, boiled: both here plentifully, the
first about Hea, the last about Heahem, and in Lakes near Fez, where they set
no Salt on their Tables, but every one takes a little in his hand.

3. Glass; whereof the best in the World (says the great Historian of Nature)
is found on the River Belus, and the next to that, (says Solinus) in Hevalous,
or as they call it now, Hebal.

4. Marble; the great Ornament of their Cities and Temples.

5. Precious Stones in abundance, no doubt near Arzilla, as we may guess by
those few found there by chance, by Vasquez in his second Expedition.

6. Curious medicinal Waters, arising from the sulphurious spring of Mount
Anaba.

7. For Gold and Silver: though to avoid the Invasions of other Nations, they
say with St. Peter, Silver and Gold have I none; yet no doubt if the European
Industry possessed the place of the Affrican sloth, it would find the Indies
in its way thither: for Fez the chief City of this Region has its name from
that Gold that is supposed to lie a breeding in the very Bowels of it: But the
upper fruitfulness of the Soil makes them the more negligent in digging into
the bowels thereof; as those need not play beneath board, who have all the Game
in their own hands: For this Country has plenty,

1. Of Oyl-Olive; so called, to difference it from Seed or Train-Oyl: hereof
there are three kinds, or rather degrees: whereof, 1. the coursest makes
lamps, which they burn in their Mosques, Temples and great Palaces, Day and
Night: 2. A middle sort for fineness, used for Meat or rather Sallad, with
their cold Herbs, and colder Pap: 3. The finest, compounded with Spices, for
Ointment for Kings, Priests and Ladies, at their more solemn occasions of Pomp
and State, of Piety and Devotion, and of Pleasure and Entertainment. Three
Carrects of Oil was one of the designed Presents to the Renowned King CHARLES
the First, 1634, by Abdalla, that were lost in the Mediterranean, where Oil it
self sunk.

2. Honey: This is their Sugar, as Salt is their Pepper; whence it was called
by the Ancients Terra Melliflua: the Canaanites here (for you shall hear anon
how they fled hither from the face of Joshua) as well as in their own Country,
enjoying a Land that flowed with Honey: the Gentile part whereof use Honey
after the Persian manner in their Sacrifices; which Grotius says Lev. 2. 11.
Vid. Critic. Sacra, in loc.
is the reason why Honey was forbidden in the Jewish Oblations. And to this
Honey belongs Wax, wherewith they dress their Leather, the best here, if you
will believe Valtolin, that famous Shoemaker and Traveller, whose Shoes were
surely made of running Leather.

3. Fruits. The biggest and most plentiful that ever I read of: As,

1. Dates: whereof there is this tradition amongst them, That a Date-Tree
over-shadowed an Olive Tree, and that Olive Tree a Fig Tree, and that Fig Tree
a Pomegranate, and that Pomegranate a Vine. 2. Almonds. 3. Nuts. 4. Figs. 5.
Pomegranates. 6. Pears. 7. Spices. 8. Cherries. 9. Plums and Apples. Of which
they made their most considerable Presents, whereof good store were sent at
several times to the Earls of Peterburrough and Tiveot, from that excellent
Rebel Gayland, who wants nothing of a complete man, as Cromwell did not, but
that he has not common Honesty.

4. Barley: It was the Humility of Christ, it is the necessity of the Fezians,
to eat Barley-Loaves.

5. Vines: so good, that notwithstanding the strict Laws of Mahomet, to which
they are most subject, the inhabitants cannot but request their King to allow,
and the King cannot but grant them a liberty to drink Wine; especially at
Ezhaggen, some fifteen Leagues off of Tangier; where it is a part of the
City-Charter, That they may drink Wine on Mundays, Tuesdays, Thursdays and
Sundays. Yet as great as good; so that what is prophesied of Judah, may be true
here, That they may bind their foals to the Vine, and their asses colts to the
choice Vine, though Vines with us are tied to other Trees for their support;
and that a Grape there in many places is as big as a Plum with us.

6. Wood: so that round Tangier the Country seemed formerly a continued Grove
of sweet Firs, shady Palms, strong Oaks, close Cypress, etc. and where Trees
are wanting, there Grass and Ferns look like thick Coppices, so high, that a
whole Army may be lodged Horse and Foot in a field, and not discerned; as they
did to our sorrow, in the late action on the third of May, 1664.

These are their Vegetables: Their Beasts are,

1. Goats: whose flesh is good Meat, as their skins make good Leather, and
their Fleeces good Chamlets.

2. Their Diet is so plain, that they have very few Cattle for meat, but many
for show and service; as 1. Lions, so tame, that they will gather stones up and
down the streets in Fez, and hurt none; and his Highness Prince Rupert has one
of my Lord Rutherford's bestowing, that will lie upon his Bed as quietly as any
Lamb. 2. Elephants. 3. Dragons. 4. Leopards. 5. Horses, the handsomest, the
strongest and swiftest in the World: A Barbary Horse, is a Proverb.

I had almost forgot that Balm or Balsome, whereof the first Plants, Josephus
says, (Antiq. l. 8.) the Queen of Sheba brought from this place to Judea. This
Balsome is twofold:

1. Xylo-Balsamum, the Parent, being the shrub out of which it proceeded.

2. Opo-Balsamum, being the Daughter, which trickled like tears from the
former: Useful, 1. for the Healthful, making a most odoriferous and pleasant
perfume: 2. For the Sick, being sovereign and medicinal: 3. For the Dead, being
an admirable preservative against corruption.

To Balm I add what is more necessary, as well as more common, I mean Water:
They think we Northern People are drowned with a Dropsy; and we suspect they
of the South are on fire with a Feavour: This is a Land like Judea, (as it is
described Deuteronomy. 8. 7.) A land of brooks of waters, of fountains and depths,
that spring out of valleys and hills: (...), says Strabo, A well-watered
Country.

Object. But you will say, Our Englishmen talk of Mountains and Hills.


Answ. Such fruitful Hills as make the Land insensibly larger in extent, though
no whit less in increase: some Cattle, as Goats, some Fruits, as Vines, thrive
never better than on these Mountains, or on the side of these Hills: (...),
Grassie and fair fruitful Hills; which as they afford a plentiful Prospect, so
they conduce much to make the Cities impregnable that are built among them.


Object. They talk of Deserts too.


Answ. Indeed the word Desert sounds hideously in an English Ear, and frights
our Fancies with the apparitions of a place full of dismal shades, salvage
Beasts, and doleful Desolation; whereas among these People it imports no more
than a woody Retiredness from public Habitation; most of them in extent not
exceeding our great Parks in England, and more alluring with the pleasure of
privacy, than affrighting with the sadness of Solitariness.


SECT. II.
TOuching the Inhabitants of this place, we are to understand, That when the
Isles of the Gentiles were divided among the Sons of Noah, this Coast fell to
the lot of Mizraim and Phut, the sons of Cham, who first inhabited it upon the
dispersion; but thinly, until upon Joshua's approach, the Canaanites fled
hither from the face of Joshua, and built Tangier, as will appear more
particularly in the description of that place.

Of those Canaanites there were seven People, whereof six came hither: As,

1. The Hittites, those sons of Anak, so formidable to their Foes, that some
conceive them named from Hittah, to scare or frighten, such the terrible
impressions of them upon their Enemies!

2. The Gergashites, whom the Hierusalem-Talmud makes to dwell near Cinnereth,
on the East of Jordan, whence they stole (faith my Author) into Egypt.

3. The Canaanites, particularly so called, that dwelt by the sea and coast of
Jordan.

4. The Cadmonites, or Easterlings.

5. The Amorites.

6. The Arvadites.

These men possessed the place until the Phoenicians and most remote Punicks
dispossessed them; and they, until the Saracens turned them out of doors.

1. Here are placed the Cynocephali, that have heads like Dogs, snouts like
Swine, and ears like Horses.

2. Here are the Sciapodes; that have such a broad foot, and but one, that they
cover their heads from the heat of the Sun, and the violence of the showrs, by
lifting this up over them.

3. Here are the Gumnosophantes that go naked, and fear nothing more then a
clothed man; being ignorant of the use of Weapons, and one being able without
a miracle to chase 1000 of them.

4. Here are the Blemmiae, men that walk as St. Dyonis did from Paris to
Rheimes, without heads, having their eyes and mouths in their breasts.

5. Here are the Egipans, that have only the bodies of men, sometimes made up
of the necks and heads of Horses, Mules, Asses, etc. And,

6. That this part of Africa may have its share in that saying, Semper aliquid
Africa portat novi, Africa is always teeming with some new Monster. The other
day not far from Tangier, was to be seen a Child with an Eagles Bill, Claws,
and Feathers too, which was understood to bode some alteration in that
Government: whereupon the King and his Friends bestirred themselves against
Gayland, and he gathered up all his forces against us; breaking the League with
us, and upon no terms admitting the Forts we designed in those parts to enlarge
our quarters.

But the People that we converse with, are as other men, save that they are of
a duskish Complexion, and something inclining to black. Their Stature tall and
slender, having much of the Arabians in them. Their Nature subtle, sly, close,
and reaching. Their Disposition active for War and Horsemanship, otherwise
there is not an idler people under the Cope of Heaven: the simplest of them
shall dwell with you a twelvemonth, and you know no more of his mind then the
first day you saw him; and he shall give as exact an account of your Actions,
Inclinations and Designs, as any man living. They are very proud and
ambitious; and shall do more for an Obeisance, then they will sometimes for a
Town; and buy a Feather for their Cap at a higher rate, then they will a Suit
of Clothes to their backs.

They are as light as the Feathers they wear, and as unconstant as their
Interest; never trusted by the Spaniard or Portugez, but when they had Swords
in their hands. Neither are they more wily themselves, then jealous of others;
especially in the case of their Women, whose feature is comely, whose skin is
delicately soft, whose complexion is blackish, and the darker the more amiable;
whose Ornaments are sumptuous only to please their Husbands, and keep at home;
it being death to stir abroad without leave, and a Keeper. Distrust is the
nature there of every particular man, and the policy of all; whereby they keep
strangers from that acquaintance with their advantages and disadvantages, which
otherwise they might have. No peace is to be had with them without an Hostage,
no kindness without a security; it being a saying amongst them, as some think,
received by tradition from their Ancestors the Canaanites, Remember Ai, and
distrust.

Hence they pretend it is one of the Laws of Mahomet, (as they alleged it to
the Earl of Tiveot) That they should not suffer either the Christians or the
Europeans to build any Forts in their Country.

So cautious and wary are they, that you can hardly wrong them; and so
implacable if you do, that they will never forgive you. Remember this (said
Gayland's Brother of a little Brush given them) two years hence: as much as to
say, We will never forget or forgive. They are too ignoble to be Masters of
that honorable quality of Passing by Offenses.

And as they are themselves irreconcilable, (it is the Heathens Character, and
it is a true one; Without understanding, Covenant-breakers, without natural
affection, implacable, unmerciful) so they judge others too: If once the Moore
offends, he will never trust you; once angry, he thinks, and ever so: his own
unkindness makes him as much your enemy out of caution, as yours can make him
out of Passion.

A stately Gate is that which they observe most in themselves, and that which
they take most notice of, and tender most respect to in others. The Moore loves
and fears a Man; therefore the tallest and most personable men were employed to
treat with that Barbarian, who was more guided with his eyes then his ears;
with what he saw, then what he heard; in a word, Appearances then Reasons.

And yet so much Reason are they Masters of, that (though their shifts, tricks
and unconstancy argue them men of a little reach, those being only the little
ways and escapes of men that have not a solid wisdom to look round about them,
and carry on things handsomely) they say when pressed to an Affair of a sudden,
Stay a little, we must think what we shall do next year.

Though their Gate seem Majestic when they strut and walk, yet none more low
and despicable when they sit, even in greatest state: for when our General and
Governor was to meet Gayland and his Nobility, we found them all upon the
ground upon their Carpets, sitting cross-legged like Tailors.

Their Garments are as sumptuous as their Gate majestic: for though the poorer
sort wear raw Hides, I mean Goatskins, Leather, Hair-cloth, Sackcloth, and
other course Vestinents; yet we seldom meet them out of their fine Linen,
their Silk, their Scarlet, and their Cloth of Gold. Of all Colors, they, as
the Jews, delight in white, as the emblem of purity, cheerfulness, knowledge
and victory. No work are they more taken with, then with Washing: but their
most solemn Color is Black, and their most Royal and Noble one is Blew; the
true and natural Dying whereof, is lost in all the world but in that place.
Their Scarlet and Crimson is worn by the Nobility; and their Purple, which is
but the Gaudiness of Red, allayed with the Gravity of Blew, is with them as
with us, Royal.

Next their skin they wear Linen (as most cleanly, soft and wholesome, but dyed
in Violet) loose, and at night lie in the same. Next this, their Coat, which
comes down to their feet, as modest and grave; and about that a Girdle, which
is also their Purse. Fringe is a great Ornament among their Priests. Over this
a Mantle, which is among the poorer sort their Coat by day, and by night their
Coverlet. As soon as they are born, they are Coated; and when Striplings, the
Coat is Party-colored; when Men, the Coat becomes a Cloak; when in the Field,
he has a Coat of Maile tucked on with a Military Girdle, his Bow and Arrow,
his Sword, his Buckler, his Pike, and of late his Gun too; to all this the
Ancients add his Staff: all their Turbants or Mithraes of: pleyted Linen or
Callico, in the manner of a Pyramide on their heads, and their Sandals on their
feet, which had Soles, but no upper Leather, save only the Ligaments whereby
they were tied to the Instep and cross of the feet. Hence their frequent
Washings in those parts, not only to cool them, but chiefly to clear them from
the Gravel, and cleanse them from the dirt, which those Casements of their
Sandals let in: but for fear of foul weather, they have their Shoes carried
after them, as the Jews had; whence the expression, whose shoes I am not
worthy to bear.

Their Women are veiled, and as I told you kept in, but nobly apparelled with
Garments wrought with Needle Work, or very curiously woven; adorned with their
Earrings, Bracelets, Frontlets, Mufflers: and if they chance to go abroad, Oh
how they stretch out their necks! how they walk and mince as they go! how they
paint their eyes and eyebrows, and gild their nails!

Thus are they attired; a man would now know how they are disposed. Very idle I
told you they are; and what usually follows upon that, very quarrelsome:
nothing more usual among them then deadly feuds; 1000 against ^000; one Tribe
as it were against another; which nothing can compose but a foreign Enemy,
against whom their very hatred unites them more effectually then their love
could do among themselves. Yet I must say this for them, Though they are the
worst Enemies, yet they are very good Friends, i. e. very civil: for let a
stranger travel amongst them, and come into town, they will throw Dice who
shall entertain him. If the Pilgrim says be will to his Inn, thither they
flock to him with their gifts and their presents: if he is not provided, then
say they, This man's house is yours. Their reason for it they will give you;
Abraham entertained strangers, and thereby angels unawares: we are so journers
as all our fathers were.

You would ask, What is their Religion? what is their Language?

I answer: For their Religion in the uttermost parts of it, it is Heathenish;
and all that we ever observed them do, was crossing their foreheads, kissing
their hands, bowing their heads to the Sun, and once a year offering a Kid,
once a month meeting at their Groves: for these Heathens think it not fit to
circumscribe any thing that has the name of a god within any compass, but that
Heaven they say he dwells in.

But most of them are Turks; and though that Country has been most famous of
old for the Studies of Mathematics and Philosophy, those great Philosophers,
Avicenna, Averroes; those ingenious Poets, Terrence, Apuleias; those holy
Fathers, Cyprian, Tertullian, Lactantius, Victor, Fulgentius; and as famous for
the excellent Library in Fez, wherein there were 4000 Volumes of History, 2000
of Philosophy, 3000 of Astronomy, Geography, and other Mathematics, that were
more worth then all the Libraries in the world, which that Tyrant, made up of
ignorance and fury, Maleche Shegge, destroyed all but two Books; whereof the
one was an ancient Book of the Mysteries of Mahomets Religion and Government,
and the other the State of Europe: yet now is it but the seat of Barbarism, and
the habitation of gross ignorance in every thing but, as you may read more
anon, in Mechanics.

The Bishop of Dunkelden thanked God he knew not a Letter either in the Old
Testament or the New, but that he had his Proless and Ladies Psalter by heart.
The very Priest here pretends to no more skill then so much Chyrurgery as may
serve him to circumcise a Child, and so much Divinity as may serve him to read
his Alcoran or Testament. It was dangerous to understand Greek, and Heresy to
profess Hebrew in this Land some two hundred years ago: it may cost a man his
life there to be wise above the age; for that they call conjuring against the
King. But Cities are the Maps of Countries, and Metropolis of Kingdoms: as
therefore he who would look into the nature of England, had best take a Survey
of London; so he that would be satisfied about this Kingdom, needs no more but
look into Fez and Tituan, whose Descriptions follow.

Of the Cities FEZ and TITUAN.
Of the Innes and Mills of Fez.
THe Innes of this City are three stories high, and contain an hundred and
twenty or more Chambers a piece, and are almost unparallelled for greatness of
Buildings. Herein also are Mills in four hundred places at least; every Mill
stands in a large Room, upon some strong Pillar or Post, like unto our
Horse-Mills.

A Description of the Occupations, the Shops, and the Market.
EAch Trade and Occupation has a peculiar place allotted thereto; the
principal whereof, are next unto the great Temple. Then follow the Butchers
Shambles; next, the Course-cloath-market; afterward, the Shops of them that
scowre Armours; next unto them, the Fishmongers; then follow them that make
hard Reed-Coops, and Cages for Fowls. Then the Shops of them that sell liquid
Soap, the Shops of them that sell Meal, albeit they are diversely dispersed
throughout the whole City. Next are Seed-grain-sellers; next to them, are the
ten Shops that sell straw; then the Markers, where thread and hemp use to be
sold. Next to the smoaky Place in the West part, (which stretches from the
Temple to that Gate that leads unto Mecnase) their habitations directly stand
that make Leather-tankards to draw water out of Wells. Unto these adjoyn such
as make Wicker Vessels; next to them are the Tailors shops; then the
Leather-shield-makers; then the twenty shops of the Laundresses or Washers.
Next unto them are those that make trees for Sadles, who dwell likewise in
great number Eastward, right in the way by the College founded by King
Abuhinam. Next unto them are those that work Stirrops, Spurs and Bridles. From
thence you may go into the streets of Sadlers; then follow the long shops of
them that make Pikes and Lances: all the which shops begin at the great
Temple. Next stands a Rock or Mound, having two Walks thereupon; the one
whereof leads to the Eastgate, and the other to one of the Kings Palaces.

The Station or Burse of Merchants.
THis Burse being walled round about, has twelve Gates, and before every Gate
an Iron Chain; which Burse is divided into twelve several Wards or Parts: two
whereof are allotted unto such shooe-makers as make shoes only for Noblemen
and Gentlemen: two also to Silk-merchants or Haberdashers that sell Ribbons,
Garters, Scarffs, and such other like Ornaments. Then follow those that make
Women's Girdles of course Wool. Next unto these, are such as sell VVoollen and
Linen-cloth brought out of Europe. Then may you come to them that sell Mats,
Matresses, Cushions, and other things made of Leather. Next adjoyneth the
Customers Office. Next of all dwell the Tailors, then the Linen-Drapers, who
are accounted the richest Merchants in all Fez. Next are VVoollen Garments to
be sold. Last of all is that place where they sell wrought shirts, towels, and
other embroydered works; as also, where Carpets, Beds and Blankets are to be
sold.

The aforesaid Burse or Station of Merchants was in times past called Caesaria,
according to the Name of that renowned Conqueror Julius Caesar: the reason
whereof some affirm to be, because all the Cities of Barbary in those days were
first subject to the Romans, and then to the Goths.

Next unto the said Burse, on the North-side, in a straight Lane, stand an
hundred and fifty Grocers and Apothecaries shops, which are fortified on both
sides with strong Gates. The Physicians houses adjoyn for the most part unto
the Apothecaries. Then the Artificers that make Combs of Box and other Wood.
Eastward of the Apothecaries dwell the Needle-makers. Then follow those that
turn Ivory. Unto them adjoyn such as sell Meal, Soap and Brooms; whereof some
are dispersed in other places of the City. Amongst the Cotten-Merchants are
certain that sell Ornaments for Tents and Beds. Next of all stand the Fowlers.
Then come you to the shops of those that sell Cords and Ropes of Hemp; and then
to such as make high Cork-slippers for Noblemen and Gentlemen to walk the
streets in when it is fowl weather. Unto these adjoyn the ten shops of Spanish
Moors, which make Cross-Bows; as also those that make Brooms of a certain wild
Palm Tree. Next unto them are Smiths that make Nayls, and Coopers that make
certain great Vessels in form of a Bucket, having Corn-measures to sell also.
Then follow Wool-Chapmen; then Langols or Wyth-makers. Next of all are the
Braziers; then such as make Weights and Measures; and those likewise that make
Instruments to card Wool or Flax. At length you descend into a long street,
where men of diverse Occupations dwell together; and here the West part of the
City ends, which in times past was a City by its self, and was built after
the City on the West Side of the River.

A description of the second part of Fez.
THe second part of Fez is situated Eastward, and is beautified with most
stately Palaces, Temples, Houses and Colleges; albeit there are not so many
Trades and Occupations as in the part before described, yet are there many,
especially of the meaner sort; but notwithstanding here are thirty shops of
Grocers: Here also are more then six hundred clear Fountains, walled round
about, and most charily kept; every one of which is severally conveyed by
certain Pipes unto each House, Temple, College and Hospital.

The South part of East -Fez is almost half destitute of Inhabitants; howbeit
the Gardens abound with Fruits and Flowers of all sorts. Westward, that is,
toward the Kings Palace, stands a Castle built by a King of the Lutune
Family, resembling in bigness a whole Town; within this Castle stands a Noble
Temple and a certain great Prison for Captives, supported with many Pillars. By
this Castle runs a certain River very commodious for the Governor.

Of the Magistrates, the Administration of Justice, and of the Apparel used in
Fez.
IN Fez there are four sorts of Magistrates; one of the Canon Law, the other of
the Civil Law, the third of Marriages and Divorcements, the next an Advocate to
whom they appeal.

A Malefactor they proceed against by leading him naked about the streets with
an iron chain about his neck, after he has received an hundred or two hundred
stripes before the Governor, a Sergeant going along and declaring his faults;
and at length is carried into prison back again.

Sometimes many Prisoners are thus chained together, for each of which the
Governor receives one Duckat, and one fourth part; and likewise he demands
certain duties at their first entrance into the Goal: and amongst his other
living, he gathers out of a Mountain seven thousand Ducats of yearly
Revenues, so that (when occasion serves) he is to find the King of Fez three
hundred Horses, and to give them their pay.

The Canon-Lawyers live according to Mahomet's Law, only by their reading of
Lectures and Priesthood.

In this City are four Sergeants, who receive for stipend some fee of every
Malefactor that they lead about in chains. That one only that gathers
Customs and Tributes about the City, daily pays to the Kings use thirty
Ducats.

Very strict are they that nothing comes into the City by any means, before
some Tribute be paid; which is paid double of him that is caught in a deceit.
The set order or proportion of their Ducats is to pay two Ducats for the
worth of a hundred; for Onyx-stones one fourth part; but for Wood, Corn, Oxen
and Hens, they give nothing at all: Though at the entrance into the City they
pay nothing for Rams, yet at the shambles they give two Liardos a piece, and to
the Governor of the shambles one: which Governor with his two men, is careful
to see that the Bread be weight; if not, the Baker is led about with contempt,
and beaten with cudgels.

Decently and civilly attired they are, wearing in the Springtime Garments
made of outlandish cloth; over which shirts, they wear a narrow and
half-sleev'd Cassock or Jacket, whereupon they wear a certain wide Garment
close before on the Breast. They wear thin Caps covered with a certain Skarff,
which being twice wreathed about their head, hangs by a knot. They wear
neither Hose nor Breeches; but in the Springtime when they ride a Journey,
they put on Boots. The poorer sort have only a Cassock, with a Mantle over
that, and a course Cap; the Doctors and Gentlemen in a wide-sleev'd Garment;
the common sort in a kind of a course white cloth: And so all according to
their state and ability.

The Inhabitants of Fez eat thrice a day, but nastily and filthily; their
Tables low and dirty, their fingers their spoons and knives, the ground their
seats: they never drink before they have done eating, and then a good draught
of cold water.

The manner of solemnizing Marriages.
THe Bride and Bridegroom go together to Church, accompanied with their Parents
and Kinsfolks, and two Witnesses of the Covenants and Dowry; which being done,
the present Guests are invited to two Banquets; the one on the Bridegroom's
cost, the other upon the Bride's Fathers, who though he promises but thirty
Ducats only for a Dowry, yet will he sometimes bestow every way two or three
hundred Ducats besides, which is accounted a point of Liberality. The
Bridegroom causes his Bride to be carried home in a Cage eight square,
accompanied with his Parents and Kinsfolks, with Music and Torches, the
Bridegrooms Kinsfolk going before, and the Bride following after, and going
unto the great Marketplace; and passing by the Temple, his Father-in-law takes
his leave of the Bridegroom: The Father, Brother, Uncle of the Bride lead her
unto the Chamber Door, and there deliver her with one consent unto the Mother
of the Bridegroom, who as soon as she is entered, touches her foot with his;
and forthwith they depart unto a several Room by themselves, where she is
deflowred, and the purity of her Virginity before that time, is declared with a
Napkin stained in blood, carried in hand about, which if she be not found, the
Marriage is frustrated, and she with great disgrace turned home to her Parents.

But at a complete Marriage there are three Banquets; the one for men, the
other for women, the third seven days after for all her Friends. Furthermore,
At the Bridegrooms Fathers there are two Feasts; the one the night before,
which is spent in Music and Dancing; the other the day after, at her brave
dressing by a company of Women.

These and many more Ceremonies do they use at a Maids Marriage, but a Widows
is concluded with less a do. They make also great Feasts and Jollities at the
circumcision of their Males, which is upon the seventh day after their Birth;
but at the Birth of a Daughter, they show not so much alacrity.

Of their Rites observed upon Festival Days, and their manner of Mourning for
their Dead.
UPon Christmas they eat Sallet of diverse herbs, and seethed Pulse. Upon
New-years-day the children go with Masks and Vizards on their faces, to the
houses of Gentlemen and Merchants, singing Carols and Songs, having Fruits
given them. On St. John Baptist's they make great fires of Straw. When their
Children's Teeth begin to grow, they make another feast called Dentilla. And in
many things they imitate Rome and other places. The women at the death of their
friends assemble together in a company of their own Sex, and put on most vile
sackcloth and ashes, and sing a Funeral-Song to the commendation of the party
deceased, and at the end of every verse, utter hideous outcries and
lamentations; all which continue seven days, at the end of which, they cease
mourning forty days, and then begin to torment themselves in like manner for
three days together; which Obsequies are observed by the baser sort of people,
but the better sort behave themselves more modestly: At this time all the
Widow's friends come to comfort her, and send diverse kinds of meats unto her:
for in the mourning House they may dress no meat at all, till the Dead be
carried forth: And the woman that loses her Husband, Father or Brother, never
goes forth with the Funeral.

A description of the Grammar-Schools in Fez.
THere are almost two hundred Schools in Fez, every one of which is in fashion
like a great Hall. The Schoolmasters teach their Children to write our or a
certain great Table: Every day they expound a Sentence of the Alcoran, and
firmly commit it to memory; which they do right well in the space of seven
years: Then read they unto their Scholars some part of Orthography, which, and
the other parts of Grammar, is more exactly taught in the Colleges, then in
these trivial Schools. Their Schoolmasters have a very small stipend; but when
their Boys have learned some part of the Alcoran, they present certain Gifts
unto their Master, according to each ones ability. So soon as any Boy has
perfectly learned the whole Alcoran, his Father inviteth all his Sons
School-fellows to a great Banquet; and his Son in costly Apparel rides through
the Street upon a gallant Horse; all which, the Governor of the Royal Citadel
is bound to lend him: the rest of his School-fellows being mounted likewise on
horseback, accompany him to the Banqueting House, singing diverse Songs to the
praise of God and Mahomet: Then are they brought to a most sumptuous Banquet,
whereat all the Kinsfolks of the aforesaid Boys Father are usually present,
every one of whom bestows upon the Schoolmaster some small Gift, and the
Boys Father gives him a new Suit of Apparel. The said Scholars likewise use to
celebrate a Feast upon the Birthday of Mahomet, and then their Fathers are
bound to send each one of them a Torch unto the School, which every Boy
carries in his hand; which being lighted betimes in the Morning, burn till
Sunrise; in the mean while, certain Singers resound the Praises of Mahomet;
and as soon as the Sun is up, all their solemnity cease. The Schoolmasters
sell the remnant of the Wax upon the Torches for an hundred Ducats, and
sometimes for more. They are Free-Schools, in which, as also in the Colleges,
they have two days of Recreation every Week.

Of the Fortune Tellers, the Conjurers, Inchanters and Juglers in Fez.
SOme of them use Geomantical Figures, others pour a little Oil into Water, and
there show several shapes, of whom they ask such questions as the Party would
be satisfied in. A third sort are women that lie with Devils, which pretend to
speak within them: These lie with one another, yea, and with other young women,
until some wiser than some beat the Devil out with a Cudgel. Another kind are
the Conjurers that make Circles, and turn out Devils by the Magic Rule called
Zairagia: First, they draw many lesser Circles within the compass of a greater:
in the first they make a Cross, in the four corners of it they set down the
four Quarters of the World, and at the end of each Cross the Poles, and about
the Circumference they paint the four Elements; then they divide the same
Circle into four parts, and every one of those four parts into seven, each part
being distinguished by great Arabian characters, every Element contaming twenty
eight characters: in the third circle they set down the seven Planets, in the
fourth the twelve Signs, in the fifth the twelve Latin Names of the Month, in
the sixth the twenty eight hours of the Moon, in the seventh the three hundred
sixty five days of the Year, and about the middle thereof, the four Winds: Then
take they one only character or letter of the Question asked, multiplying the
same by all the particulars aforementioned, and the sum total they divide after
a certain manner, placing it in some room according to the quality of the
character, and as the Element requires wherein the said character is found,
without a figure: all which being done, they mark that figure which seems to
agree with the aforesaid number or sum produced, wherewith they proceed as they
did with the former, till they have found twenty eight characters, whereof they
make a word that resolves the question demanded; this Word or Speech they make
a Verse of, which is an infallible answer to the question propounded. These
circles I have seen at King Abulunan's College at Fez, where I saw likewise
these Cabalists imprisoned by the Mohammedan Inquisitors, who allow not that
Art, as derogatory to the Great GOD that knows Secrets.

Besides these Juglers, there are here a Sect of People who say they are sent
from Heaven to beget an holy Seed in the Earth; under which pretense they abuse
the fairest Women in the Country, even tiring themselves with lust,
endeavoring to lie with half a dozen or half a score a piece in a night;
saying they carry about them the ninety nine Virtues that are contained in the
Name of GOD.

Another Sect there is, that pretend they are sent of GOD to dig for Gold: for
which purpose they ransack Ditches, Graves, Kennels: Right Gold-finders!

Here are a third sort that deal in Sulphur and Alchymy, who dispute every week
in a great Temple, how they may turn all things to Gold; of whom the learned
Geber and Mugainbi have given the World an account.

In the Summer you shall have Towns full of Charmers, with their Scroles, their
Drums, their Pipes, their Apes and their Citterns.

At the same time you may observe their Gentlemen strut and keep their distance
from the commonalty, and their Doctors and Judges keeping as far from them.

From eleven of clock to three you will not meet with a man in his shorts; they
are all run to Taverns and B^wdy-houses.

In every Town there is a Lazer-house, the Governor whereof is to take care of
all the Lepers in the Town.

Their Burying-places are certain Fields bought for that purpose, where they
lay over every Grave two Stones, one at the head, and another at the feet of
the Party deceased; their Kings being buried in Palaces.

Hereabout are Gardens of ten or twenty miles in length, through which they
derive small Veins of the River, from some of which they carry away 15000
cart-loads twice a year.

Here no Mohammedan is suffered to be a Goldsmith or a Coyner; for they say,
That is an Employment good enough for a Jew.

Of their Beasts.
1. THe first is the Elephant, plentiful in the Land of the Negroes, and taken
by the Inhabitants thus: They make a round hedge of Boughs and Rafts, leaving a
space round on the one side of them, and likewise a door standing upon the
plain ground, which may be lift up with Ropes, wherewith they can easily stop
the said open place or passage: the Elephant coming to take his rest under the
shady boughs, enters the hedge or enclosure, where the Hunters by drawing the
said Rope, and fastening the door, imprison him.

2. The second is Girapha, headed like a Camel, eared like an Ox, and footed
like a Horse.

3. Their Camels and Dromedaries, their strength, treasure and pleasure:
wherefore if you ask how rich a man is? they will say, he has so many Camels:
they are watered but once in five days, and can go without water or provender
fifteen. When they are tired they will not go for beating, but with singing
such songs as they are pleased with. The swiftest of them will carry you an
hundred miles a day, and the slowest but eight. They teach them to dance thus:
They take a young Camel, and put him for half an hour together into a place
like a Bath-stove prepared for the same purpose, the floor whereof is hot with
fire: then play they without upon a Drum; whereat the Camel, not so much in
regard of the noise, as of the hot pavement that offends his feet, lifts up
one leg after another in the manner of a Dance; and having been accustomed to
this exercise for the space of a year and ten months, they then present him to
the public view of the people; whenas hearing the noise of a Drum, and
remembering the time when he trod upon the hot floor, he presently falls a
dancing and leaping: and so Use being turned into a kind of Nature, he
perpetually observes the same custom.

4. The fourth is the Barbary-horse, brought up in the wild desert, and broken
by Arabians since Ishmael's time. The trial of these Horses is the overtaking
of a Beast called Lant or Ostrich; which if he can do, he is worth 1000
Ducats. Used they are for Hunting, fed with Camels milk, and never rid while
in Pasture.

5. The next sort of Beasts is, 1. The white Ox, called Dant or Lant, of whose
skin they make sheilds. 2. Adimaim, like a Ram in every thing but his long
Asses cars, of whose wool they make Coverlets, as of their Milk Butter and
Cheese; whose tayls, as do the Barbary Rams, weigh some ten, some twenty pound
apiece: all the fat of them is in their tail. 3. The Lion, who the hotter the
Country is, the fiercer; especially toward Springtime, and their time of
coupling, when nothing is spared by them but a woman that shows her
privy-parts; at the sight whereof they cry, cast their eyes to the ground, and
depart. 4. The spotted Leopard, that never kills any thing but when toyled by
Hunters into an extremity: whosoever lets a Leopard escape his Toil, must
feast all the Hunters of that Province. 5. The Dabuh, that is brought out of
his Den with singing.

6. The Civer-Cat, whose excrement, which is nothing but their sweat, they
gather thus thrice a day: they keep the young ones with milk, bran, and flesh
in cages and grates; and first they drive them up and down the Grate till they
sweat, and then they take the said sweat from under their flanks, their
shoulders, their necks and their tayls: which excrement of sweat is only
called Civet.

7. The Apes and Coneys run up and down in companies, one of them always
watching the husbandmans coming.

8. The Crocodile that goes on four legs like a Lizzard, not above a cubit and
an half high; its tail is full of knots; it lurks about the banks of a River,
craftily laying wait for men and beasts that come the same way; about whom
suddenly it winds its tail, draws them into the water, and devoureth them.
In eating they move the upper Jaw only, their nether Jaw being joined unto
their breast bone. I saw them running and gaping on the banks-side, and little
Birds flying in and out of their mouths; which sometimes they would catch when
they had eaten up the worms in their jaws, but that a little prick upon the
Birds head so galleth them that they must let it go.

9. The Hydra, against whose poison there is no remedy but the cutting off the
infected part.

10. The Dab, a creature like a Lizzard that cannot endure water, and revived
when dead by fire.

11. The Guoral, whose head and tail they say is poison, and whose body they
eat as good meat.

12. The Camelion, like a Lizzard, save that it has a Mouses tail, nourished
with air, roasted in Sunbeams; at which it gapes, and changes its color with
its place.

13. The silly Ostrich that seedeth on Iron, and forgets her great Eggs of
eleven or twelve pounds apiece in the sand.

14. The Locusts, that fly in such swarms that they intercept the Sunbeams.

15. The Monster begot between the Male-Eagle and the She-Wolf, that has a
Serpents tail and skin, a Wolfs feet, a Dragons beak and wing, that lives 300
years they say.

Fruits.
AS for their Fruits, besides what we formerly mentioned, they have,

1. Euphorbium, an herb like the wild Thistle, upon the branches whereof grow
fruits like Cucumbers, 20 or 30 upon each; which when ripe, are pricked for
their slimy Juyces, which the people put in Bladders, and dry.

2. Maus, or Musa, growing on a small tree, which bears large leaves of a
cubit long, big as a Cucumber, sweet as a Musmillion: they (...) it was the
fruit forbidden our first Parents in Paradise, because the leaves are fit to
cover the nakedness.

3. Terfez, a Root like Mushroom, growing in hot grounds, but of a cooling
virtue, as lushious as Sugar; and being boiled in water and milk, is a great
dainty in Sela.

4. The Ettalche, an high and thorny tree, bearing leaves like the Juniper, and
sweating a Gum like Mastick: the only Remedy there against the French Pox.

5. The Root Tauzorghent, an inch whereof perfumes a house three years, and is
sold in one place for half a Duckat, and in another for 100 Ducats.

6. The Root Addad, that kills a man in an hour with the smell of it: a Present
the good Women send sometimes to their beloved Husbands.

7. The Root Turnag, which they take to strengthen men: upon which if a Maid
make water, she loses her Virginity; yea, and swells too, they say.

FINIS.

