A DESCRIPTION OF THE ACADEMY OF THE Athenian Virtuosi: WITH A DISCOURSE held
there in Vindication of Mr. Dryden's Conquest of Granada; Against the Author of
the Censure of the ROTA.

Tibi cor limante Minerva
Acrius, and tenues finxerunt pectus Athenae.
Ne valeam, si non multo sapit altius istud,
Quod cum panticibus laxis, and cum pede grandi,
Et rubro pulmone vetus, nasisque timendum,
Omnia crudelis lanius per compita portat.
Mart. LONDON, Printed for Maurice Atkins. 1673.

A DESCRIPTION OF THE ACADEMY OF THE Athenian Virtuosi, WITH A Discourse held
there in Vindication of Mr. Dryden's Conquest of Granada; Against the Author of
the Censure of the ROTA.
NO sooner does any person merit the bewitching name of a good Author, but he
has the happiness to meet with envy; yet every one who will not spare the
perishing paper deserves not this title, though he cares his Reader with those
flattering Epithets of gentle, and candid, since even the Stationer sometimes
circumvents your good opinion with the same appellatives. But such an Author
who seems to command his fame rather than receive it from the world, he like
moral virtue (which is placed between two opposites of excess and defect) shall
be sure to find a Parallel opposition from two sorts of vicious Critics. I may
justly style them so, the one a poor dwindled Critic, who is in that defect of
wit and judgment, that his endeavor is only to be thought to have a small
portion, by the detracting of them in another. The other is in that excess of
conceit that he cannot forbear to discover by his own vanity his judgment to
be illegitimate. Now no place abounds with more witty writers, and worse judges
than this City of London, whilst true Critics are more moderate, being
conscious of those peccadilloes, that every Writer as man must be subject to.
They know that expert Homer sometimes may be took napping; therefore they
willingly allow Poets with Painters to rove in a large field of fancy, often
repeating, -- hanc veniam petimusque damusque vicissim,
and as wise men think themselves generally too green to ^all on and Criticize,
remembering that Maxim of Longinus, a better judge sure than any of these dare
ever aspire to be, (...)


(...), that Criticisme must be the deliberation of much experience. But these
bastard Critics without any examination convict any Author and presently
suspend him: but who gave them this authority? I am sure they were never
qualified for the place by Nature, or by Art; how then can any one expect the
least justice from them, when their Justice only holds a sword in her hands
without any scales, and may be accounted blind from her ignorance, and not from
impartiality? Since then I am to speak to the Athenian Virtuosi, I hope it may
be lawful to borrow two Greek words which will more emphatically denote them.
There be some that damn a book (...), that is, not interpreting or
understanding the Author, and these in our English tongue are called Fopps,
Persons whose judgment lies always in the ear never in the brain, who hear
what others say, and then speak like them: they are just like an Echo, a
reiterating voice, and nothing else: as Poets are painted licking up what old
Homer let fall, so these lap up the Critical vomit which another has ejected.
What judgment can they give of a book whose palate is solely Critical, and they
were never at any time styled judges, unless when with the cusp of their tongue
they could determine of the virtue or vice of a glass of Burgundy, and as one
said well when he forbad any one to read his book with prejudice, or after
dinner, these very persons, for these two reasons since their heads are always
filled with prejudice, and the fumes of a full stomach, by all sober men are
thought unfit to be of a Jury.

The other sort are (...), or as they are called by others (...), persons which
do not only interpret badly, which they do, but also do it wilfully. I can
only fancy them a sort of vermin with very little eyes, but many teeth, and
nails, who though they cannot do much harm, by reason of their weakness, yet
strive to make up that want with their malice. These creatures for the most
part live by gnawing of books, and never leave nibling, till they can make some
hole to discover some imperfection, whilst they deface the book of its native
beauties, and expose those faults which themselves have made. Thus having
showed you the malignity of these animals, being inclined by a strong habit to
inhumanity, they are like butchers, not to be permitted to sit upon the life
and death of an Author. Such as these who think themselves Critics, but are
not so, have endeavored to traduce the writings of Mr. Dryden, when true
Critics, if they would, are ashamed to decry them, whilst others that are more
modest than to be pretenders, justly admire them. As for my self, I never had
the satisfaction of his acquaintance, which frees me from the suspicion of an
officious vindication, yet I do know him, though far better in his Plays, and
what has been my misfortune to want in the society of the father, has been some
way made up in the ingenious and pleasant company of the children.

Some weeks ago there came out the Censure of the Rota on Mr. Dryden's
Conquest of Granada, which I lightly read over, for it deserved little
consideration. Indeed I was surpised at the indiscretion of the Author to
venture his poor thinn Offspring to seek its Fortune in cold winter weather,
but especially in such a dangerous time, when there was great need of wast
Paper. Alas, how could he help his weak book, though it made sad moan, crying
out Deferor in vicum vendentem thus and odores.
Poor Author he imagined no harm, he only made use of the Saturnalia, as
servants used to do, make bold with his betters, and so forth. Thus much I did
then argue for his simplicity, finding him to be so obliging to Mr. Dryden as
to pick excellencies out of his Play, on purpose to affront him, that many
Readers believed, it designed by one of his best friends for a complement to
show the world, that if any one attempted to wound his honor, the Archers
vanity did not so much lie in abusing his time to split an hair, as to hit a
thing out of his reach.

The Author of the Rota -- and est mihi saepe vocandus
Ad parts,
has showed in his censure so little conversation with Greek and Latin, nay
English Poets, as I shall prove by and by, that it is disputed by some, whether
it was simplicity or madness provoked him to paint himself in colors so
ridiculous. In all reason Mr. Dryden will give me little thanks, since the
goodness of an ominous cause may lose much of its luster by the badness of the
Orator; yet let Mr. Dryden look on with some diversion, since he would not be
himself should he seem at the least concerned, whilst his laurel which he
deservedly wears has sufficient virtue to defend it self from the bruta fulmina
of any loose tongue.

Now give me leave to tell you, that having read the Censure, I had a great
desire to find out the place where this Cabal sat: so one day meeting with one
of my acquaintance, I asked him if he had read such a Pamphlet, he told me, he
had lost so much time as to read it, and if I would go with him he would bring
me to their Academy which was a large room in a Coffee-house kept for them,
where thrice a week they met retired from company, but of late since the
Printing of the Censure, they find none so hardy as to Answerer it, they have
admitted a free access, with design, I believe, that they telling the threats
of the Virtuosi, and with what severity the answer is sure to be handled, might
deterr the Writer from any further proceeding, and make him consult his safety
in the throwing away of his pen* I very gladly embraced this news, and bid him
lead the way. We came soon to the place, and somewhat too soon, for the
Athenian Virtuosi, to give them their beloved title, were not yet come, and the
doorkeeper said he durst not let any in, before the Virtuosi came, lest the
room should be crowded, and several curiosities by handling be misplaced; but I
knew what the Fellow drove at, so gently tickling him in the hand, he let us
in, where we proved him a liar, by finding some company expecting, and one man
with a goose-quill in his ear very busily marshalling books, paper, and pens:
Asking one of the company who he was, I was answered he was Secretary to the
Society; a worthy employment, thought I; and without doubt a worthy person; I
presently made my address to him, desiring to know how long it would be before
the Athenian Virtuosi met? The clean beast, after much chewing of the cud,
answered, it would be Thirty minutes. I admired at the periphrasis of the
Secretary of the Critics, but I l^ft him, fearing to disgust the man, having
more mind to view the Academy. The first thing I beheld, was o'r the chimney
instead of a chimney-peice a Label held up in the beakes of two Owls, and in
it these words written, The Coffee-Academy of the Athenian Virtuosi instituted
by Apollo for the advancement of Gazet-Philosophy, Mercurie's Diurnals, etc.
and underneath these words written, (...).


Having read the Label I told my Friend the design of the Owls was very
natural, because they were birds sacred to Minerva, and the Virtuosi went under
the notion of Athenians; but that their Academy should be under the patronage
of Apollo, I thought was not regular to the traditions of poetry, nor any way
agreeing with history; and I wondered that these Critics in poetry should be so
over-seen. My Friend told me he admired at the absurdity, but who must judge
the Critics? He proceeded with the belief, that those were not Owls, but two
of the Virtuosi, since they resembled the nature of those birds, being afraid
to come abroad and spy faults fairly by the light of reason, lest they should
be peckt at by every puny writer, and prosecuted with all the scorn, and
derision imaginable, but love to flutter about in the dark, and make a noise in
the twilight of prejudice. I then asked him, why the Academy thought it fit, to
place it self in a Coffee-house, since it was instituted by Apollo; it had been
more agreeable to have been in a Tavern; O, said he, that may be for many
reasons, first, as well to hinder expenses, as to vindicate the sober
inclinations of the persons; since they intended to tax the manners of a poet
as well as his writings, it was convenient at least to be hypocrites, and to
disguise their own; and Coffee being esteemed by its admirers a suppresser of
fumes, and a great friend to the memory, they might be so simple to hope, it
would put idaeas into their heads, that were never there before: he added that
they were inventing a drink for their own use of Hellebore, and other
ingredients, which will so refine their gross conceptions, that at length they
should be rendered so acute as to make faults in the writings of any man. Or
perhaps another reason is for the better divulging the fame of the Virtuosi,
since persons of all qualities from all parts resorted to such places. I told
him that could be no great reason, for they might hire a poor fellow for a
small matter who would soon call the multitude together with a trumpet, or they
might steal the Tablet from the Scriveners shops, wherein is written, The
Office of Intelligence, and hang it at their street door, where when any poet
shall come in he may be certified whether any longer he shall have fame or no
fame, whether that shall live or die alter death, whether poetry should be to
him a rich wife or a poor wife, or whether he should have many children by her,
and all this, without the help of judicial Astrology: And I further told him, I
should rather call this place a Lottery than an Academy, since that was more
usual in a Coffee-house, and a good poet in this place might draw twenty blanks
before one prize; and I wished that speaking of false wit, as well as false
news, had been liable to the punishment of the proclamation. Having
paraphrased a little upon this inscription, we looked about, and beheld that on
one side of the room were set up the heads of many Grammarians, and Critics,
and on the other side the heads of Greek and Latin and some English poets,
amongst whom I wondered at these mighty three, Hopkins, Sternhold, and Wild, D
D, but I was soon pacified when I found Chaerilus amongst the Greeks, and
Bathyllus amongst the Latins; and why should any good Author repine, that he is
excluded, may not the Virtuosi set up whom they please, may they not set up
their own heads, nay upon poles, if they please, in their own room? But I asked
my Friend why Dr. Wild wore a different wreath from all the rest, when every
one else had one of Bays, he had one of Herrings? My Friend told me he heard
the reason of a Gentleman that was here the other night. The Author of the
Censure of the Rota, you must know, is very intimate with Dr. Wild, and was
with him eating of Herrings, when his Spouse run out with a herrings tail
bobbing in her mouth, to receive the Letter from the Post which brought the
joyful news of his Majesty's toleration. Now this Academy being instituted,
and several poets heads being to be set up, a Letter was dispatched to Dr. Wild
to invite him to be Prolocutor to the Virtuosi, (since it is well known, he
writes as maliciously and as poorly as any of them) but in the close they asked
him, since 'twas the honor the Academy intended him, whether his head should
be set amongst the Critics, or the Poets, (and indeed he might very well be
either) he returned them great thanks for the great honor they designed him,
but as for that weighty place to be Prolocutor, he begged some time to consider
on it: As to the other favor of being set up, either as Poet or Critic, he
told them plainly, he was ambitious of both, and did not much care if his head
was divided, and half set amongst the Poets, and half amongst the Critics; but
on second thoughts, he referred all to their better judgments, with this
proviso, if they should set him amongst the Poets, he might wear a wreath of
Herrings, since they always brought him good luck, when he had any thing to do
with them, wondering why Will. Lilly could never find good omens hoarded up for
him in the house of Pisces. So in fine he kissed their hands with this
resolution, that he did not doubt but they would become him better than his
Bays. For this reason you see him thus adorned, and I was told last night that
the Academy finds him more pliant than ever, and are in great hopes of
obtaining that malicious person to strengthen their party. Since he hates
innocent ceremonies, and beauty in the Church, why may he not abhor them in
any thing? Having wearyed our eyes with these objects, we turned about, and at
the end of the room were three presses, without any books in them, with Optimi
written upon the first, Mediocres upon the second, and Mali upon the third,
which presses I soon imagined to be the Thecae for books, as they were esteemed
of by the Virtuosi. I laughing asked my Friend which he thought the worst (with
leave from the Critics) either Mediocres, or Mali? But he told me it were
better to let this paradox alone now, and pass on, lest we should be prevented
by their coming. So walking up the room we found whole rows of teeth, and many
nails sowed upon cloth, and pinned to the hanging; and looking more
earnestly, I perceived that most of them were such as we call dogs teeth. I
could not imagine at present that these were meant to make good my simile, I
applied to them; nor did I think that the Virtuosi were Toothdrawers. Yet they
would be glad that their adversaries teeth and nails were drawn, for even then
a lion would be an innocent beast. But a little further we beheld many engines
of torture: here indeed was the scene of death, here was one book suspended,
another torn upon a tenterhook, a third dead from a stab received from a cruel
Penknife; drawing nearer I found them all belonging to Mr. Dryden. Here lay
Almanzor stretched upon the rack, that pain might force out words far distant
from his thoughts; here the Maiden Queen lay deflowered, and there the Indian
Emperor was defaced which the scratches of a barbarous style. Whilst my Friend
and I were finding a name fit to decry these most unjust proceedings, we heard
the door unlock, and the doorkeeper cry out, Make room there for Aristarchus,
Scribonius, and Opilius, make room I say for Hyginus, Palaemon, and Orbilius. I
was amazed at these thundering names, considering whether or no, the Academy
de^ign'd this for an exemplary distich; at last I remembered these were great
Critics, and Grammarians, and that Orbilius was Horace's Schoolmaster, and
had whipped him often for not learning his lesson in old Livius Andronicus,
wherefore he was styled by him Plagosus. Now thought I, these Virtuosi imitate
the Popes, As they assume the gentle names of Innocent, Clement, and Pius, when
they are bloody, unmerciful, and irreligious, so these wear the names of great
Grammarians, whilst they all deserve with naked posteriors to tremble under the
falling rod of the fierce Orbilius. They had scarce placed themselves, when
more came in, but were Anonymous, 'twas no matter, I could tell who and what
they were, by this gleek of circumstances, the shrug, the shaking of the head,
and tossing back the peruke with indignation: they had just reached the table,
when the doorkeeper with a great deal of breath cried out, Make room for
Cassus the Author of the Censure of the Rota; bless me, said I to my Friend,
why is he called Cassus? Why, said he, I will tell you, he affects that name
being delighted with the story of a certain poet called Cassus, who writ so
much, that his very papers sufficed to burn him when he was dead; he has vowed
to scribble so much if he lives. Alas, he values not the quality, so there be
quantity, he is resolved to keep his vow, and to write any thing against any
body: he has many general Pamphlets ready, that as soon as any new book is out
with a little alteration, whip he carries them to the bookseller, he is a
perfect Stubbist, who though he must for ever despair to have those parts, and
that learning, yet has attained to that likeness in his will to contradict
every one. I smiled at the strangeness of his humor, and whilst he was held in
some serious discourse, by one as he was coming on, I wondered at the elocution
of his gestures, he would so knit his brows, and work the muscles of his
mouth. I assured my self he was in labor, and used that midwifery to bring his
imaginations to the birth: when he was delivered, he was a great enemy to the
man's buttons, and would so stare in his face, forcing him to a smile, which he
took for approbation, when the poor man did it only to be rid of him. Being sat
down he bid the Secretary bring the teeth and the nails; at this I concluded
that these Critics really used them in biting, and tearing other men's works;
and I was confirmed in this opinion, when I perceived every one busy, but most
of all Cassus, setting some of the sharpest of them into his upper jaw, where I
presume he had lately broke some of them out in meddling with some piece of Mr.
Dryden's Conquest of Granada, that proved too hard for his teeth. Now every one
having fitted himself with tusks, and talons, Aristarchus rose up, and made a
short speech. It was an Encomium upon the Virtuosi, and the happiness of this
age, wherein such judicious persons had taken the great trouble, for the
benefit of mankind, to give each Poet that desert which their examination
should allow him. After this Scribonius told them, that Mr. Dryden derided
their Censure, and held the Virtuosi in that contempt, as if they were not;
Does he so, says Cassus, does Almanzor despise those that would reclaim his
rage? I would Mr. Dryden were here, or any of his admirers to speak for him*
Secretary, bring hither his Conquest of Granada, and there I could show him
innumerable Errataes; whith that he opened the Play, and scratching the leaves
very carelessly, cried out, here is a fault, and there is a fault, where is there
not a fault, if we will make them so, dares he, or any one deny it? At this
dull impertinency, I could not forbear smiling; which Cassus perceiving, asked
me, if I would be so bold as to defend him? I told him, if he would draw up Mr.
Dryden's faults under some heads that I might make my plea, I would endeavor
to take off his objections. Why then, said he, if you have perpended my
Censure, as I cogitate you have, you may there animadvert, that the Author
Scholastically prosecutes Mr. Dryden dupliciter. Primo* for the irrationality
of the transcendentality of his Idaea's. Secundo, for his superbosity, in
prostrating the fame of defunct, and breathing Authors. I was so startled to
hear Cassus alter his style, that turning about to ask what tongue he spoke in,
my Friend imagining my surprise told me in my ear, that Cassus was a great
Term-driver, and had two ways of speaking, the one more moderate, as I had
heard, and this last was in use, when he would stupify a shopkeeper, confound a
chambermaid, or puzzle his antagonist. Having now considered the meaning, I
told him, if I might obtain a patient ear, I would make some answer. At this,
Cassus called for his breast plate, on which was writ, The Author of the
Censure of the Rota: is served both for pride and for defense, I wish he would
wear it always in the streets, for then if he should chance to lose his way,
he would never be lost, but be sent home by a Bedle safe to the Academy. Having
armed himself, Eja age, said he, if you will act in any Hypothesis
dissentaneous to this famous Circle, I my self provocate to a contrary
ratiocination, and Cassi gratia the Virtuosi will give you auscultation. After
I had blowed my nose, I thus began. Your first objection (O Virtuosi Athenian)
is in the language of Cassus against the irrationality of the transcendentality
of Mr. Dryden's Idaeas, which for my countrymens take, I thus faithfully render
into English, against the unreasonable extravagance of Mr. Dryden's
conceptions, which ye have strove with much labor to find in his Conquest of
Granada: so whilst I am defending that, I shall all the while vindicate an
Heroic Poem, which must be by showing you, what the Masters of Poetry esteem
to be its latitude, in what consists its grandeur, and what renders it
incapable of that title. As for its latitude, I must lay down before you the
definition of its subject, which is Heroic virtue. By Aristotle it is called
divine, not because it was peculiar to the Gods, but when a man was endued with
this virtue, it elevated him above mankind, and as much as humane nature could
bear, it rendered him like a Deity; therefore it is defined by the best
Moralists, a habit of mind not attained by humane industry, but inspired from
above, to undergo great actions with an irresistible violence, and a most happy
success, which other mortals were not able to perform. Without doubt Mr. Dryden
made his Almanzor after this original, making him to do things above nature
though not against it, placing in his soul humanity and fierceness mingled
together, and him in a sphere rather nearer the Hero of Homer, than of Scudery.
Not so much a Greek as to imitate Achilles in his ferity, nor so Frenchified as
to admire the stupidity of Oroondates in weeping at the feet of his Mistress.
Since Mr. Dryden in this description has followed the precepts of Philosophy,
all unprejudiced Men with reason must speak for Almanzor, that with Achilles
Mr. Dryden has rendered him invulnerable, unless his detractors by wounding him
in the heel, will discover as much their fear as their baseness. I think there
is no need to urge this clear point any further, but to pass on and to tell
you, in what consists its grandeur. It is placed by all in a lofty style, and
in the rapture of a Poet. Look up (O Athenian Virtuosi) and see my witnesses! O
Homer do thou hear this illiterate Censure, Nec labra moves, cum mittere vocem
Debueras, vel marmoreus vel aheneus?


Were ye but acquainted with him he would tell ye, that he makes his Achilles
speak (...) winged words. Ask but Pindar, he will assure you that he never
adorns his Heroes but he must let fly expressions, which which he calls Olymp.
9. (...) arrows, which do in another place (...) make a noise. Surely if we
had not lost his paeans, his dithyrambicks, or his trag^^dies, we should have
found in them far bolder flights. Yet the generous Thebans thought his numbers
only lofty, never extravagant. The divinity of such well built lines crowned
him even whilst he lived, and saved his house when he was dead. This mighty
spirit of Poetry is admired in Alcaeus, and styled by Dion. Halicarnasseus in
as mighty words, (...).


Consider the mighty spirit of Alcaeus, what sweetness there is even in its
terror. This is that which Virgil aims at, when he says, -- Paulo majora
canamus.


And Lucan when he says, Surgat mihi carminis ordo.


This is that which Horace names sermon. 10. lib. 1. Forte epos, a strong Heroic
verse. For this, Martial praises Virgil calling him Cothurnatus, and his
Heroic Poem lib. 5. Grande opus.

Iuvenal describes such a Poet with the title of egregius, and with Sat. 7.
qualem nequeo monstrare, and sentio tantum,


He knew not how to express him, this made him fancy Virgil like a fury, and
tells us that if he had been poor, -- caderent omnes a crinibus hydri.


'Twas in this the critic Longinus said Iuvenal excelled (...) a pompous
expression,

And this is that which the judicious Greeks called (...) with a resolution,
and not superficially.

My last design is to lay before you what renders an Heroic Poem incapable of
its title.

Pindar will tell you Olymp. 9. that if he would delineate an Hero, he must
abstain from (...), from words that are flat and creeping upon the earth.

Virgil says in his sixth Eclog, that Apollo admonished him in his ear as
unfit to sing of Kings and battles, having used himself in his Pastorals to a
humble verse, -- Pastorem Tityre pingues


Pascere oportet oves, deductum dicere carmen. Horace is then exalted when he
speaks Nil parvum, aut humili modo. lib. 3. Ode 25.


And in his Art Poetica laughs at that Poet for not continuing his heroic
Poem with the same gallantry; and for his offense brands him with, Quid dignum
tanto feret hic promissor hiatu?
Iuvenal allows a flat verse no better name than Carmen triviale. Sat. 7.


And Martial hates it, calling it carmen supinum. lib. 2. and presently after,
Mollem debilitate Galliambon.


A languid verse fit only for the mouth of Cybele's effeminate Priests.

Sure what the Epigrammatist thinks unfit for himself, an Heroic Poet must be
ashamed to use.

These few Testimonies out of a crowd, I have produced to complement the
Academy, but if I have spoke in an unknown tongue I wish I had been better
informed of your ignorance, that I might not have given my self the trouble.
Therefore to speak to your capacities, I will bring all these witnesses in one,
I mean the immortal Cowley, than whom none knew better to make or judge a Poem.
In praising of Sr. Wm. Davenants Gondibert, he seems to characterize Mr.
Dryden's Conquest of Granada.

Thy mortals do their Gods excel,
Taught by thy Muse to fight, and love so well.
So God-like Poets do past things rehearse,
Not change, but heighten Nature, by their verse.
Thus I have with hasty touches drawn out the masculine beauty of an Heroic
Poem; now if this censured play of Mr. Dryden's be of it self exact and true,
if it is framed by the rules of art, and keeps it self strict to the laws and
canons of ancient Poets, as many of his envious enemies acknowledge, if you
tear off the title page, and represent it without any relation to him, then
this impertinent Censure without any violence will of it self fall to the
ground, being supported by so weak a foundation as prejudice. When Critics
shall be found to be like foolish Parishioners, who in themselves commend what
they hear, until they look up, then they mislike the man, and by their
consequence the Sermon. Thus the Conquest of Granada, as Conquest of Granada,
is a very good play, but as made by Mr. Dryden fit to be exploded, when all
Poets from Homer down to Ben, were esteemed good, if their Judges could ascribe
to them Ciceroes commendation; Pro Archia Poeta mentis viribus excitari, and
quasi divino quodam spiritu afflari.) But Mr. Dryden because he goes by his own
name, must not have the essence of a Poet, that is fiction, nay he must lose
the portion of a son, and with quiet render up, or else those goodly fields of
fancy, the uninterrupted inheritance of his forefathers must be confiscated
because he has offended this Committee. His Muse must turn Quaker, or else be
accounted light, she must have nothing to do with that goodly pride of figures,
conceits, raptures, and sentences, without which gaudy retinue Mr. Cowley's
Muse never took the air.

I know the sons of the Poets have far less revenues, than their forefathers
enjoyed. The Greek Poets besides the other five, had a whole dialect
appropriated to themselves, they might sound out (...) without offense. This
made Martial complain in his time, that they could not renew the same lease,
but had lost many of their privileges; yet it was very well with them, if we
consider the inconveniences of their children, whilst the barbarous Critics
of these times are so whimseycal, and so unjust, as to allow some their own
freedoms, and some none. If Mr. Dryden upon necessity uses Enallage numeri
when Greek and Latin commanded it, and English Poets very often make use of it,
since the idiom of our tongue will bear it in prose, but better in verse, it is
put down for an unpardonable enormity. I will forbear quotations to prove this
known point, lest I prove my self Pedantick, and you more absurd.

If Mr. Dryden, as Persius styles it, librat in Antithetis, that is, use a
seeming contradiction, which in all poets is and must be esteemed wit, shall
nevertheless wilfully be damned by this Academy, as in your Censure.

Thus in the triumphs of soft peace I reign,
And from my walls, defy the powers of Spain.
O the stupidity of the Virtuosi! it would puzzle any one to imagine what they
aim at here: these Critics sure have picked them out for some default, so
that I am forced to imagine this.

Pray observe this kind of excellency in two of the best Poets, Virg. 11.
speaking of Camilla.

Orsilochum fugiens, magnumque agitata per orbem
Eludit gyro interior, sequiturque sequentem.
Mr. Cowley in his Dav. lib. 1. speaking of writing, and as it were prophesying
what this Academy, and Cassus especially intends to do; And with her spurious
brood loads now the press,
Laborious effects of idleness.


I will add no more, though these great Poets delight much in them, yet be it
spoken to your folly, that it is your unhappiness to light upon an accurate
verse to vilify your selves, not him, and since it is drawn out, may it be
applied to you all, that there were more hopes of Triumphs by peace, than by
this unsuccessful war.

If Mr. Dryden applies an happy Epithete it is traduced, as in these excellent
verses, speaking of Almanzor, A gloomy smile arose
From his bent brows, and still the more he heard,
A more severe, and sullen joy appeared*
which I am certain is in imitation of Virgil, where fierce Mezentius stands,
Olli subridens, mixta Mezentius ira,
which Mr. Cowley renders finely, with half a smile, and half a frown,
or as it is in Claudian IV Cons. Honorii. -- Torva voluptas
Frontis,
and in many places of this Poet; but I shall hasten. If Mr. Dryden makes his
verse run musically, or fills it with an argument, it is called tick-tack, as
thus: Know that as Selin was not won by thee,
Neither will I, by Selins daughter be.
Would you your hand in Selins blood embrue,
Kill him unarmed, who armed shunned killing you.
whilst you are ignorant he imitates Ovids humor in these neat numbers, Met.
lib. 10. Ex omnibus unum
El^ge Myrrha virum, dum non sit in omnibus unus;
and again in his 9. lib. Quam been Caune tuo poteram nurus esse parenti,
Quam been Caune meo, poter as gener esse parenti;
and in his Epistles, O Jove digna viro, ni Jove nata fores.


The Original is esteemed by all good judges, and why do you condemn the true
copy, but because you are bad? If Mr. Dryden heightens the sense with a simile,
it is not like to pass, when all Poets ever use it, and an Heroic proclaims
with Pindar Olymp. XI. he cannot be without it. (...)
(...)
That in such cases as these, men must use the descriptions of winds, and
waters etc. if they do labor to bring their work to a good effect. If Mr.
Dryden illustrates his Poems, with spirits and immaterial beings, this cannot
disgust any one, but the Sadduces of the age, who believe they have none, since
as a Poet he may lawfully make use of them: for what Heroic Poet is there
either Greek or Latin, that does not introduce very often (...): yet as a
philosopher he will be defended by the Pythagorical, and Platonical opinion,
which held these regions of the air under the concave of the Moon to be
inhabited by Demons. If Mr. Dryden keeps the signification of words within
their limits, you will venture to call him vagabond, though you declare your
selves absolutely unacquainted with authors, or grammar, as in this fragment of
a verse, Thou treadst the abyss of light.


You assert here that abyss is so inconsistent with light, that it is scarce
bright enough for its shadow, whilst by proving the contrary let the world
judge, if the darkness of your understanding, does not advantage the luster of
Mr. Dryden's glory. Abyss properly signifies extreme deep waters, quasi (...)
an Ionick word for (...). This Favorinus and Hesychius, this Minshaeus and
Vossius with others, account the truest etymology of the word, yet with
Calepine grant, that it may be usurped, as it is by the Greeks, for an epithete
to signify any thing that is endless, which is proved by several Synonymous
expressions of Scripture, and from St. Chrysostom who calls infinite labors
(...).

This shall suffice O Cassus to prove thy ignorance, and little familiarity
with classick authors, whilst this discovers thy malice, in making Porphyrius
an Hermaphrodite by this verse, And Daughter, I will will give him you, for
wife:
Where as you please Porphyrius by misplacing the notional comma is either a
man or a woman.

Thus like the Devil you aequivocate in your oracles, but at last like him you
are found a liar. I would willingly leave off defending Mr. Dryden, when he
needs it not, was he not impeached with such animosity, for his strange
flights, and that it may not be lawful for him to mount lest his wings be
clipped, whilst Horace tells judicious Mecaenas, he is turned into a Swan, and
mounts and leaves these things blow. Whilst Virgil is sweetly Hyberbolical in
many places, but especially in his description of Camilla, lib. 7. Illa vel
intactae segetis per summa volaret
Gramina, nec teneras cursu laesisset aristas.
Vel mare per medium fluctu suspensa tumenti
Ferret iter, celeres nec tingeret aequore plantas.
And Claudian Raptu Proser. lib. 2. says that Pluto's horses ran, Torrentius
amne
Hyberno, tortaque ruunt pernicius hasta;
Quantum non jaculum Parthi, non impetus Austri,
Non leve sollicitae mentis discurrit acumen.


I will mention but one verse more of this Poet (though he is very luxuriant)
in the end of the first book speaking of the same horses, Aegra soporatis
spumant oblivia linguis.
Which I would beg the Academy if it can to translate hansomely into English.
Yet Julius Scaliger gives this censure of him. Foelix in eo calor, temperatum
judicium, dictio candida, numeri non affectati. I have the rather taken these
Testimonies because as Virgil followed Homer, so Mr. Cowley has thought it fit
to imitate them all, Horace in his Ecstasy, Virgil and Claudian in his
description of Asahel, Asahel Swifter than the Northern wind,
Scarce could the nimble motions of his mind
Outgoe his feet; so strangely would be run,
That Time it self perceived not what was done.
Often over the lawns, and meadows would he pass
His weight unknown, and harmless to the grass;
Often over the Sands, and hollow dust would trace
Yet no one Ato^ne trouble, or deface.


I am in have, and will forget Seneca's, Tragedies, historical Lucan and
Statius, because Mr. Dryden is said to borrow many things from him, lest I
should seem to produce him a witness for himself; let me only bring up the rear
of my witnesses with one Testimony more of the much admired Mr. Cowley in his
Pindarick called the Muse, he tells her, Whatever God did say
Is all thy plain, and smooth uninterrupted way.
Nay even beyond his works thy voiages are known,
Thou have thousand worlds too of thine own.
Thou speak great Queen, in the same style as He,
And a new world leaps forth when thou say, let it be.


Sure he is more fit to set the bounds of Poetry than you, since all allow a
Poet the same, what he allows to Mercury, wings at head, and heel. The Poet is
permitted by all to be Commune profundis
Et super is numen, qui fas per limen utrumque
Solus habet, geminoque facit commerica mundo.


Now who are ye (O Athenian Virtuosi) that dare set these narrow limits? must
the Poet like Alexander repine there are no more worlds but this of yours to
move in, where he shall soon lose his feet for want of exercise? If Mr. Dryden
passes your little Rubicon, must he be proclaimed an enemy by this Senate, must
his verses be like Pliny's Acephali, or rather resemble his judges, all feet,
and excrement, and no head? I will stop here, ye have proved your selves, I
will not make you any more riduculous, only appealing to you whether or no this
Academy does not represent an Hobbian state of nature, in presuming to have as
great a share in wit and judgment as others.

I am at last come to my second objection, which is Mr. Dryden's superbosity in
prostrating the same of defunct, and breathing Authors, which I shall thus
translate, Mr. Dryden's pride in contemning dead, and living Authors. To which
I shall not speak much, because I am so great a stranger to him, therefore I
can only produce his own words to vindicate their Master, and if he wrongs them
no more in his thoughts than in his writings he may safely plead Not guilty. In
his Essays and prefaces, as he pays veneration to the dead, so he pays
submission to the living: though he cannot admire any of them blindly. And it
is so unjust a calumny to urge that he labors to pluck leaves from the Baies
of Ben. Johnson, when he adds to them by stiling him incomparable, one to be
admired for many excellencies. In his preface to Maximin, he does not pretend
any thing of his own to be correct, but submits his faults to the mercy of the
Reader, being as little apt to defend his own errors, as to find those of
others. In his defense of his Epilogue, he ascribes to dead Authors their just
praises in those things where they have excelled us; and in those where we
contend with them for pre-eminence, he acknowledges the advantage to the age,
and not to wit. There might be produced many places which do strongly pronounce
his judicious modesty: if he discovers any faults in other Poets, it is because
his are too severly handled by others, and the reason why he does disturb the
dead, is only that they would rise, and plead for him, as he professes in his
Epilogue to the Conquest of Granada.

It Is not to brand them that their faults are shown,
But by their errors to excuse his own.
If in the fever of his writing he has discovered any passion, the
impertinency of the age is to be blamed for troubling him, otherwise he is more
to be esteemed for his judgment than censured for his heat. If he tells us that
Johnson writ by art, Shakespeare by nature; that Beaumont had judgment,
Fletcher wit, that Cowley was copious, Denham lofty, Waller smooth, he cannot
be thought malicious, since he admires them, but rather skillful that he knows
how to value them.

Mr. Dryden shall answer in Horace's words, when he had offended many in
meddling with Lucilius, Tu nihil in magno doctu^ reprendis Home^^?
Nil comis tragici mutat Lucilius Atti?
Non ridet versus Enni gravitate minores,
Quum de se loquitur, non ut majore repren^is?


Martial makes a distich on Homer, for patching up his verses with (...),
thought his was done grinning, yet any one may give his censure of another, so
it produces nothing out candor, and judgment, as Persius gives his opinion of
Horace, Omne vafer vitium ridenti Flaccus amico
Tangit, and admissus circum praecordia ludit,
Callidus excusso populum suspendere naso.


But not like you (O Athenian Virtuosi) make (...) where there are none. If the
Fopps of the age are stung, that they kick up dirt, no person can blame Mr.
Dryden for lashing them, since it would grieve any one, nay it would raise the
choler of any ingenious man to that degree against then, when such will be so
inconsiderate, nay so absurd, to censure a Poet, whilst they themselves cannot
write, and perhaps not read, with commendation. This stirred up many ancient
Poets, and what Poet ever escaped such sinful examiners? It vexed Martial, that
at last he told them his verses were bad, yet he challenged them to mend them,
Haec mala sunt, sed tu non meliora facis.


After this manner Mr. Dryden has provoked the miserable jury of this age, but
much hansomer, You blame those faults, which you want wit to make.


Mr. Dryden having rebated the edge of all objections that can be brought to
defend your assertion, it would appear very inconsistent with modesty to
allege his arguments for my own; since he has found so good, and I can find no
better, and it is to himself he must give the thanks, that he stands armed
cap-a-pee. I will no longer give my humanity the trouble, in reclaiming, if it
were possible, your folly; but only acquaint you that Mr. Dryden salutes you in
a Semistanza of your much honored Hopkins.

From all the sins that I have done,
Lord quit me out of hand:
And make me not a scorn to fools,
That nothing understand.
At this Cassus started up, and told me, I was saucy, not in observing that
decorum, which the gravity of the place required. After some whispering the
doorkeeper was commanded to clear the room, and to take special notice of me,
that I might be let no more into the Academy, with the assurance that I should
upon occasion be severely dealt with for this rudeness. My Friend and I
departed much pleased with this scene of mirth: at his lodging we found a
hypocritical pamphlet aginst Mr. Dryden left by his bookseller; after a short
view I perceived the needy Author played the plagiary, having transcribed all
those objections from Cassus, which Cassus had borrowed from the Rehearsal,
whence it is easy to gather, that it is difficult to find fault with Mr. Dryden,
when his enemies are forced to tautologize. Indeed the Burlesque way of writing
is the most hopeful to abuse a good Author, since the fantastic dress tickles
the Reader, and makes him laugh whether he will or no; and that the good old
Axiom would hold here, corruption optimi fit pessima. My Friend told me he was
sorry we must part so soon, having appointed to meet some persons hard by,
amongst whom he expected Mr. Dryden, promising me to find some other time, (if
I thought it fit) to descant upon that book before us, and to divertise me with
some beloved fancies of Cassus. At this I took my leave, desiring him to take
his Horace with him, and to turn to sermon. 10. lib. 1. where Mr. Dryden might
read these verses out of his intimate acquaintance.

Men' moveat cimex Pantilius? aut crucier quod
Vellicet absentem Demetrius? aut quod ineptus
Fannius Hermogenis laedat conviva Tigelli?
Plotius, and Varius, Mecaenas, Virgiliusque,
Valgius, and probet haec Octavius optimus, atque
Fuscus, and haec utinam Viscorum laudet uterque.
FINIS.
A Postscript.
TWO things may here be inquired after, why Mr. Dryden is defended, since the
unsavory breath which proceeds from the fore-door of those windy Critics, is
to be regarded no more than that of the backdoor, since they are both doomed
to the same date, to live for a moment and then to expire; but if he is
defended, why so late, when delay will argue heaviness, or fear; indeed I
neither bit my nails nor scratched my head for this, nor will I conceit my
Antagonist, like Hercules, a conqueror in his cradle, but rather, one of those
Lapwing-writers, who venture to run with the shell on their backs, the
conscience of which rashness has always so much deterred me, that this which
was drawn up long ago for my own diversion, should have slept in quiet, if the
compliance to some had not been a motive to the contrary. Yet in this skirmish,
I hope his presumption may be sufficient to keep me from despair.

Errata.
Page 7. line 2. for Answerer, read answer, line 5. for answer, read Answerer.
p. 17. line 16. r. provocate you, line 19. r. Athenian Virtuosi. p. 28. l. 8.
for blow, r. below.


