A Description of the Ceremonial Proceedings at the Coronation of their Most
Sacred Majesty's, King WILLIAM III. and Queen MARY II. Who were Crowned at
Westminster-Abby, on Thursday the 11th. of April, 1689.
depiction of the coronation procession of King William III and Queen Mary II,
indicating order of procession

ON Thursday the 11th. of April, between Nine or Ten in the morning, the King
and Queen took water from the Privy Stairs at White Hall, and landed at the
Parliament Stairs, from whence he went up to the Princes Lodgings; where after
he had Reposed himself, he was arrayed in Royal Robes of Crimson velvet furred
with Ermine, by which time the Nobility, ^eing come together Robed themselves
in the Lords House and Painted Chamber.

The Judges also with those of the long Robe, the Knights of the Bath (then in
their Robes of Purple Satin lined with Taffaty) and Gentlemen of the Privy
Chamber, met in the Court of Requests, and being drawn down in
Westminster Hall, where this great Solemnity (ordered by the Officer at Arms)
began. The Nobi^ity, in their proper Habits carrying their Coronets in their
Hands, proceeded according to their several dignities and degrees, before their
Majesty's up to the Throne of State, which was raised at the West end of the
Hall, placing themselves upon each side thereof.

The King being set in a rich Chair under a Glorious Canopy of State, the
Master of the Jewel House, presented the Sword of State, as also the Sword
called Curtan^ and two other Swords to the Lord High Constable who took and
delivered them to the Lord high Chamberlain, and laid them upon the Table
before the King and Queen, in the like manner the Spurs. Immediately after, the
Dean and ^rebends of Westminster, by whom the Regalia had been brought in
Procession from the Abbey to Westminster Hall, being vested in rich Copes and
Scarlet-Gowns.

Who passing thus through the Hall, and making their due Reverences in their
pla^^s and toward the upper end, the Quirers and Officers at Arms falling off
each side, the Dean and Prebends ascended the Steps, at the top where Garter
Principle King of Arms standing, conducted them to the Table, placed before the
Throne where they having made their last Reverence, the Dean first presented
the Crown, which was by the Lord high Constable, and Lord Great Chamberlain,
set upon the Table, who likewise received from the Prebends the Regalia, which
they carried and laid them also by the Crown.

Then the Lord Great Chamberlain presenting the Regalia severally to the King
and Queen, their Majesty's disposed of them to the Noblemen which carried them
in ^he Proceeding.

All things being thus prepared about 12 of the Clock the proceeding began,
from the Hall into the Palace Yard, through the Gate House, along the great
San^u^ry, to the West end of the Abbey, upon Blew Cloth, which was spread upon
the ^^^^nd from the Throne in Westminster Hall, to the great steps in the
Church.

The Proceeding to the Coronation was in this following Order.
Their Majesty's Herb-woman, with eight Attendants, walked two and two strowing
Sweet-herbs and Flowers. Then followed 1 DRums four, two Abreast. 2 Drum
Major. 3 Trumpets four Abreast. 4 Sergeant Trumpeter. 5 Six Clerks in
Chancery. 6 Chaplains having Dignities. 7 Sheriffs and Aldermen of London. 8
Masters in Chancery 9 Solicitor and Attorney General. 10 Esquires of the Body.
11 Gentlemen of the Privy Chamber. 12 Barons of the Exchequer. 13 Justices of
both Benches. 14 Lord Chief Baron. 15 Lord Chief Justice of the Com. Pleas 16
Masters of the Rolls. 17 Lord Chief Justice of the Kings Bench. 18 Children of
the Choir of Westminster. 19 Sergeant of the Vestry. 20 Sergeant Porter. 21
Children of the Chapel. 22 Choir of Westminster. 23 Gentlemen of the Kings
Chapel. 24 Sub-Dean of the Kings Chapel. 25 Prebendaries of Westminster. 26
The Master of the Jewel-House. 27 Privy Counselors of England, not Pears. 28
Two Pursivants of Arms. 29 Baronesses two Abreast in their Robes. 30 Barons in
their Robes. 31 Bishops, 32 Two Pursivants of Arms. 33 Vicscountesses two
Abreast, in their To. 34 Viscounts in their Robes. 35 Two Heralds. 36
Countesses two Abreast in their Robes. 37 Earls in their Robes. 38 Two
Heralds. 39 Marchionesses in their Robes. 40 Marquesses in their Robes. 41 Two
Heralds. 42 Dutchesses two Abreast. 43 Dukes in their Robes. 44 Two Provincial
Kings of Arms. 45 The Lord Privy Seal 46 The Lord Archbishop of York. 47 The
Lord President of the Council. 48 Prince GEORGE of Denmark. 49 Two Persons
representing the Dukes of Aquitain and Normandy. 50 Saint Edwards Staff carried
by the Earl of Manchester 51 The Golden Spurs by the Lord Gray of Ruthen. 52
The Queens Scepter with the Cross by the Earl of Clarey. 53 The Kings Scepter
with the Cross, by the Earl of Northampton. 54 The third Sword by the Earl of
Pemb. 55 Curtana, by the Earl of Shrewsbury. 56 The Pointed Sword by the Earl
of Der. 57 The Lord Mayor of London. 58 Garter Principal King of Arms. 59 Sir
Thomas Duppa. 60 The Lord Great Chamberlain in his Robes. 61 The Earl Marshal
of England. 62 The Sword of State carried by the Earl of Oxford. 63 The High
Constable with his Staff. 64 The Queens Scepter with the Dove carried by the
Earl of Bedford. 65 The Kings Scepter with the Dove by the Earl of Rutland. 66
The Queens Orb, by the D. of Bolton 67 The Kings Orb, by the Duke of Grafton.
68 The Queens Crown by the Duke of Some 69 The Kings Crown, by the Lord High
Steward. 70 The Paten, by the Lord Bp. of St. Asaph. 71 The Bible, by the Lord
Bishop of Lon. 72 The Chalice, by the Lord Bishop of Rochester.
The Canopy born by 16 Barons of the Cinque Ports over the KING and QUEEN.
Supporter to the KING, the Lord Bishop of Winchester. The KING in Crimson
Velvet Robes, a Cap on his Head Fur'd with Ermine, His Great Collar and George,
His Majesty's Train born by several Lords. The QUEEN in Crimson Velvet Robes,
on Her Head a Circlet of Gold, Her Majesty's Train born by two Ladies of Honor
assisted by several other Ladies. Supporter to the QUEEN the Lord Bishop of
Bristol A Lady of the Bedchamber. A Gentleman of the Bedchamber. Two of the
QUEENS Women. Two Grooms of the Bedchamber. Captain of the Yeomen of the
Guard.
Captain of His Majesty's Guard. Captain of the Gentlemen Pensioners, Lord
Lovelace. Ensign and Lieutenant of the Yeomen of the Guard.


Thus their Majesty's in their Royal Robes, the King with a Velvet Cap, and the
Queen a Circlet of Gold on her Head: The Nobility in Robes of Crimson Velvet,
with their Caps and Coronets in their Hands; with others who formed the
Proceeding in suitable Robes and Habit did walk a Foot on Blew Cloth, from
Westminster Hall, to the Quire, and thence to St. Peter's Church, which when
they had entered, the Nobility and Ladies placed themselves on each side of
their Majestres Throne, it being all laid with Cloth of Gold, and the Seats
for the Nobility were all Matted and covered with Crimson Tammering; and on the
North-side of the Abbey were seated the House of Commons, facing the Throne;
their Seats were all Matted and lined with Green Baies, and a place in the
middle of the Lowermost Seat for the Speaker; all being placed, Their Majesty's
Ascended the Throne and (after their performing their private Devotions at the
East end thereof) They seated themselves in their Chairs of State, then
followed the Recognition; and after an Anthem, Their Majesty's went to the
Altar, and made their first Oblation; and the Lords who carried the Regalia,
presented them at the Altar, to be there laid down. Then the Litany being Sung,
(by two Bishops) Dr. Burnet, Bishop of Salisbury, began his Sermon, 2 Samuel 23.
3, 4. The God of Israel said, the Rock of Israel spoke to me, He that rules
over men must be just, ruling in the fear of God: And be shall be as the light
of the morning, when the Sun rises, even a morning without clouds; as the
tender grass springing out of the earth by clear shining after rain. And having
ended, the King and Queen took the Oath; and Veni Creator being Sung, and the
King and Queen Disrobed of their Mantles and Surcoats, were Anointed and
Invested with all the Sacred Habits in King Edward's Chair. No sooner were
their Majesty's Crowned by the Bishop of London. assisted by several other
Bishops, (which was about Five of the Clock in the Afternoon) but immediately
the People Shouted, the Great Guns were Discharged, and the Peers did put on
their Coronets. The King and Queen thus benig Crowned, and Invested with the
Ring and Scepter, they made their second Oblation. Then Te deum being Sung,
they Ascended the Throne, where the said Bishops did their Homage: During which
time, the Steward of the Household threw about the Medals.

Thus Their Majesty's being Inthroned, after an Anthem Sung, the Archbishop
ended with the Benediction, and Their Majesty's went in State to St. Edwards
Chapel, where the King being divested of St. Edwards Robes, and arrayed in his
Royal Robes of Purple Velvet, the whole Compamy (except the church of
Westminster) returned to Westminster Hall; Their Majesty's and all the Nobility
wearing Their Coronets on their Heads; and being entered into the Hall, were
Conducted to their several Tables to Dinner: with the usual Ceremony, the Lord
High Steward betwixt the Lord High Constable and the Earl Marshal Riding in
before it, on Horseback; and before the second Course was served up,' the Kings
Champion, in complete Armor, accompanied with the Lord High Constable and Earl
Marshal, all on Horseback, performed the usual Ceremony of the Challenge; after
which the Officers of Arms Proclaimed His Majestes Style in Latin French and
English, after the accustomed Manner. Dinner being over, Their Majesty's
retired to White Hall, and all the Nobility and others Departed.

Licensed according to Order.

London Printed by George Croom at the Blue-Ball in Thames Street, near
Baynard's-Castle, 1689.


