A Description of the Ceremonial Proceedings at the Coronation of their Most
Illustrious, Serene, and Sacred Majesty's; King JAMES II. and his Royal Consort
Queen MARY, Who where Crowned at Westminster-Abby, on Thursday the 23th. of
April, 1685.


UPon the 23th. of April, being St. George's day between 9 or 10 in the
morning, the King and Queen took water from the Privy Stairs at White Hall, and
landed at the Parliament Stairs, from whence he went up to the Princes
Lodgings; where, after he had reposed himself he was arrayed in Royal Robes of
Crimson velvet surr'd with Ermine, by which time the Nobility, being come
together Robed themselves in the Lords House and Painted Chamber.

The Judges also with those of the long Robe, the Knights of the Bath (then in
their Robes of Purpel Satin lined with (...) Taffaty) and Gentlemen of the
Privy Chamber, met in the Court of Requests, and being drawn down into
Westminster Hall, where this great solemnity (ordered by the Officers at Arms)
began. The Nobilty, in their proper habits carrying their Coronets in their
hands proceeded according to their several dignities and degrees, before His
Majesty up to his Throne of State, which was raised at the West end of the
Hall, placing themselves upon each side thereof.

The King being set in a rich Chair under a Glorious Cloth of state, the Master
of the Jewel House presented the Sword of State, as also the Sword called
Curtana, and two other Swords, to the Lord high Constable who took and
delivered them to the Lord high Chamberlain and he laid them upon the Table
before the King, and in the like manner the Spurs. Immediately after, the Dean
and Prebends of Westminster, by whom the Regalia had been brought in Procession
from the Abbey to Westminster Hall, being vested in rich Copes, came up from the
lower end thereof in manner following. First the Sergeant of the Vestry in a
Scarlet Mantle. The Children of the Kings Chapel in Scarlet Mantles. Then the
Quire of Westminster in Surplices. The Gentlemen of the Kings Chapel in
Scarlet Mantles. The Pursuivants, Heraids and Provincial Kings of Arms. Then
the Bishop carrying (...) Edwards Crown. And after him five of the Prebends of
that Church. The first carrying the Scepter with the Cross. The second the
Scepter with the Dove. The third the Orb with the Cross. The fourth King
Edwards Staff. The fifth the Chalice and Curtana.


Who passing thus through the Hall, and making their (...) Reverence's in three
places, and toward the upper end, (...) Quires and Officers at Arms falling
off each side, the can and Prebends ascended the Steps at the top whereof ^rter
Principal King of Arms standing, conducted them (...) the Table placed before
the Throne, where they having made their last Reverence, the Dean first
presented the Crown, which was by the Lord high Constable, and Lord Great
Chamberlain, set upon the Table, who likewise received from the Prebends the
Regalia, which they carried, and said them also by the Crown.

Then the Lord Great Chamberlain presenting the Regalia severally to the King
His Majesty (...) of them to the Noble Men which carried them in the Proceeding
The Queens Ivory red to the Ear of Dorset The Queens Scepter to the Earl of
Rut^nd. The Queens Crown to the Duke of Beaufort. Saint Edwards Staff to the
Earl of Ailsbury. The Spurs to the Lord de Gray. The Scepter with the Cross to
the Earl of Peterborow. The Third Sword to the Earl Pembro^^ The (...) Quires
to the Earl (...) bearing Curta^^ or the (...) Sword. The Sword of State to the
Earl of Oxford. St. Edwards Crown to the Duke of Ormond. The Orb with the
Cross, to the Duke of Somerset. The Scepter with the Dove to the Duke of
Albemarle.


All things being thus prepared about 11 a Clock the proceeding began, from the
Hall into the Palace Yard, through the Gate House along the great Sanctuary to
the West end of the Abbey, upon Blew Cloth, which was spread upon the ground
from the Throne in Westminster Hall, to the great steps in the Church.

The proceeding to the CORONATION was in this following Order. First 4 Drums,
16 Trumpets, 6 Clerks of Chancery, Chaplains, having Dignities Aldermen of
London, Master in Chancery, The King's Sergeants at Law The King's Solicitor,
The Kings Attorney, The Kings 2 Ancient Serg. Esquires of the Body, Masters of
Request, Gentlemen of the Privy Cha. Counsel at Law, Barons of the Exchequer,
Judges of both Benches, Lord Chief Baron, Lord Chief Justice of the
Common Pleas. Masters of the Rolls, Lord Chief Justice of the King's Bench.
Children of the Chapel. The Choir of Westminster. Gentlemen of the Chapel,
Prebends of Westminster, Master of the Jewel-House. Knights Privy-Councillors.
2 Pursivants of Arms. Baronesses in their Order, Barons in their Order, Bishops
in their Order, 2 Pursivants of Arms Vice-Countesses in their Order Vicounts in
their Order. 2 Heralds of Arms. Countesses in their Order, Earls in their
Order, 2 Heralds of Arms. Marchtonesses in their Order.


THE ROYAL TRANSIT.
WHen Time (in Triumph did make way
To JAMES His Coronation Day,
His Queen first (like an Angel) came
Attended with her Anagram
O lesser Lights, which scarce drew Nigh,
For 'cl^p^ing of her Majesty.
The Day at first which gave her Birth,
Gave likewise vent unto her Worth.
And Time and Fortune both did pley
The Tropic of Hyperbole.
She was so Proper and Complete,
That (as she walked along the Street)
Her Gate made all Beholders Gaze,
And pay a Tribute to her Praise:
She was the Kingdoms comely Bride,
Decked with the Church on every side:
So Handsome, that all other Ladies,
(Her Subsequents seemed but her Shaddows:
Her Beauty with her bright Array
Did antedate the Flowers in May;
Yet all the Splendour of her Face
Was but the Rays of inward Grace,
Tho Via Lactea did unclose
The Scarlet Sky within a Rose.
Then Juno (with her Jealous Eyes)
Looked through her Spangled Canopies;
And sent her waiting Maid to try
What Goddess strove for Deity,
The Moon Rose from her Watery Bed
With Laces, Rings, and Pendants; clad
In Robes, as she had been to Sway
The Glorious Scepter of the Day;
And tripping (when she changed her Gown)
She to the Horizon came down,
And Dazzled, peeped with half her Eye
Out through the Window of her Sky;
Thinking (to borrow to her Night)
The Beams that darted from her Light;
But when she found that every Day
MARIA did her M. pay,
Bright Cynthia did the Triumph Bless,
And praised her by Periphrasis:
Exhorting all her neighbor Stars
Not to molest her Reign with Jarrs.
Then (in the twinkling of an Eye)
She filled the Orb of Majesty.
And yet the Plenelunium-bless
Made no strange Metamorphosis.
And then the English Peers passed by,
(As Beams before His Majesty)
And Admiration thus did Gaze
'Twixt James his Crown and Charles's Bays;
The Dancing Spheers turned round to see
What caused such great Solemnity:
And Jove came Thundering through Air,
To see if Archimed was there;
And Orion was put to Chase,
By the Successful Pleiades,
Who kindly came and did commence
A sweet Successful Influence.
I lent mine Ear, and heard them Sing
A Simphonia to the King:
And every Fish from Shrimp to Whales
Danced Jiggs, and played them with their Tails
Then Sagittarius Bent his Bow
To work the Scorpion's Overthrow;
And Leo with his cruel Paw
Did keep the other Signs in Awe;
But none so welcome to the Eye
As was Latona's Gemini.
The Aspests (with their frowning Faces)
Do borrow Vails from Virgin-Graces,
Which they have set before their Eyes,
To Laugh at Men that is Weather-wise.
The (...) of the Royal Arms,
Did seast beholders with their Charms.
The Harp did Play, the Lions Dance,
And snuff'd the Garland grew in France;
The Sun his Chariot did prepare,
With Ruf^s, Wig and Powdered Hair;
And (Capering from the Barbers Pole)
Made all Inferior Lights pay Tole:
At twelve a Clock he cleared the Skies
To see another Phoebus Rise.
Then James the wonder of the Eye,
(Whose Looks were decked with Majesty)
In the Horizon did appear,
With Jo Pa^ans, drawing near;
And 'scended up (without a Cloud)
The Crown of Englands Altitude.
Marquesses in their Order, 2 Haralds of Arms. Dutchesses in their Order. Dukes
in their Order. 2 Provincial King of Arms. The Lord Privy Seal. The Lord
President of the Co. The Lord Treasurer. The Lord Archbishop of Yo. The Lord
Keeper. The Lord Archbishop of Ca. Two Persons representing the Dukes of
Aquitain and Normandy. The Queens Vice Chamberlain 2 Gentlemen-ushers. The
Queens Ivory Rod. The Queens Scepter. The Queens Crown.
The QUEEN
Assisted by the Bishop of London, and Winchester, under a Canopy, born by 16
Barons of the Cinque Ports. The Queens Train born up by the Young Duchess of
Norfolk, assisted by Four Earls Daughters, 2 Ladies of the Bed-Cham. 2 Women of
the Bed Chamber. St. Edward's Staff. The Spurs. St. Edward's Scepter. The Third
Sword. Curtana, or Pointless Sword. Garter, Principal King of Arms.
Gentleman-usher of the Black Rod. The Lord Mayor of London, The Lord Great
Chamberlain The Lord High Constable. The Sword of State. The Duke of Norfolk,
Lord Earl Marshall of England. St. Edwards Crown. The Orb with the Cross. The
Scepter with the Dove. The Chalices.
The KING
Assisted by the Bishop of Durham and Bath under the Canopy, born by 16 Barons
of the Cinque Ports. His Majesty's Train, born by 4 Earls Eldest Sons, assisted
by the Master of the Robes. The Duke of Northumberland Captain of the
Horse-guards The Earl of Huntington, Captain of the Band of Gentlemen
Pensioners. The Vicount Grandison Captain of the Yeomen. The Lord Churchil,
Gentlemen of the Bedchamber. 2 Grooms of the Bedchamber The Captain of the
Horse-Guards in waiting. Captain of the Pensioners. The Yeomen of the Guard
closing the Proceeding.
Thus their Majesty's in their Royal Robes, the King with a Velvet Cap, and the
Queen a Circle of Gold on her Head: The Nobility in Robes of Crimson Velvet,
with their Cap and Coronets in their Hands; with others who formed the
Proceeding in suitable Robes and Habit did walk a Foot on Blue-Cloth, from the
Throne in Westminster Hall, to the Theater in the Quire, and thence to St.
Peter's Church, which when they had entered, and all present being duly Placed
Their Majesty's Ascended the Throne and (after their performing their private
Devotians at the East end thereof) They seated themselves in their Chairs of
State, then followed the Recognition; and after an Anthem Their Majesty's went
to the Altar, and made Their first Oblation; and the Lords who carried the
Regalia, presented them at the Altar, to be there laid down. Then the Litany
being Sung, (by two Bishops) the Bishop of Ely began the Sermon: which ended,
the King took the accustomed Oath; and Veni Creator being Sung and the King
disrobed of his Mantle and Surcoat, was Anointed and Invested with all the
Sacred Habits in King Edwards Chair. No sooner was the Crown set on the King's
Head, (about three of the Clock in the Afternoon) but immediately the People
Shouted, the Great Guns were Discharged, and the Peers did put on their
Coronets. The King thus being Crowned, and Invested with the Ring and Scepter,
He made His second Oblation; and being again Seated in King Edward's Chair, He
Vouchsafed to Kiss the Archbishops; then Te deum being Sung. He Ascended the
Throne, where the said Bishops did their Homage and Kissed His Cheek, the
Temporal Lords having done the same in like manner touched His Crown, during
which time, the Steward of the Household threw about the Medals. Then
afterward the Queen being Crowned, in like manner the Ladies did put on their
Coronets: And Her Majesty having Received the Scepter and Ivory Rod, was
conducted to her Ti^ne.

Thus Their Majesty's being Inthroned, after an Anthem Sung, the Archbishop
ended with the Benediction, and Their Majesty's went in State to St. Edwards
Chapel where the King being divested of St. Edwards Robes, and arrayed in his
Royal Robes of Purple-Velvet, the whole Company (except the Church of
Westminster) returned to Westminster Hall; Their Majesty's and all the Nobility
wearing Their Coronets on their Heads; and being entered into the Hall, were
Conducted to their several Tables to Dinner: The first Course for Their
Majesty's Table was served up with the usual Ceremony, the Lord High Steward
betwixt The Lord High Constable and the Earl Marshal Riding in before it, on
Horseback; and before the second Course was served up, Sir Charles Dymoke the
Kings Champion, in complete Armor, accompanied with the Lord High Constable,
and Earl Marshall, all on Horseback, performed the usual Ceremony of the
Challenge; after which the Officers of Arms Proclaimed His Majesty's Style in
Latin, French and English, after the accustomed Manner. Their Majesty's retired
to White Hall, and all the Nobility and others Departed.

Published by Authority.

London, Printed by G. Croom, at the Blue-Ball In Thames Street, over against
Baynard's Castle. 1685.


