RENATVS DESCARTES EXCELLENT COMPENDIUM OF MUSIC: WITH Necessary and
Judicious ANIMADVERSIONS Thereupon.

By a Person of HONOR.



London, Printed by Thomas Harper, for Humphrey Moseley, and are to be sold at
his Shop at the Sign of the Princes Arms in S. Paul's Churchyard, and by
Thomas Heath in Coven Garden. 1653.

THE STATIONER To the Ingenious READER, etc.
SIR:
NO sooner can your Eye have taken in the Title of this thin Volume, which I
have, in some latitude of Assistance, Midwiv'd into this our English World; but
you shall most willingly confess it to be as well a sufficient Justification
to my Industry and Cost, as a full Elogie to it self: The AVTHOR thereof,
being one of the fairest Flowers in that Garland of the Mathematics, wherewith
this Century being meritoriously adorned, may, without breach of Modesty, take
the right hand of Antiquity, and stand as well the Wonder, as Envy of
Posterity: and so gratefully acknowledged by all, whose Studies and Ingenuity
have qualified them with Judgment enough to profound the sense of his Geometry
and Algebra. And its SVBJECT so universally Grateful; that I dare say, you
have not, in all your Readings, met with the Name of any Person, except only
Tacitus the Emperor, who was so rude and harsh of Disposition, as to dislike
the Melody of Numbers.

Concerning the AVTHOR, therefore, the most your self can judge me fit to say,
is only this; that the most becoming Tribute I can pay unto his Noble Memory,
is a silent Veneration: it being almost of Necessity, that a Panegyric on Him
from my unequal Pen, be interpreted a kind of implicit Diminution; since it
must suppose the Height of His Merit to be commensurable by the Digits of so
slender a of Capacity; and few will admit Him for a Competent Doxologist, who
is, by incomputable distances, below a due Apprehension of the Excellences of
his Subject.

And, as for the SVBJECT likewise, wherewith the Rational Soul of Man is so
Pathetically, and by a kind of occult Magnetisme, Affected, that even the most
Rigid and Barbarous have ever Confessed it to be the most potent Charm either to
Excite, or Compose the most vehement Passions thereof; as Homer ingeniously
intimates in his Figment, that it was the Custom of the Gods, to pacify their
Civil Dissentions with the Harmony of Music, and that the Rough spirited
Achilles, with the soft Concordant Echoes of his own Harp, used to Calm the
tumultuous aestuation of his Choler; and as all Poets unanimously intend, in
that they have made the Magic of Sirens to consist only in the sweet Accents
and Melotheticall Modulation of their Voices: Concerning this, I say, it would
sound a mere Pleonasme for me, here, to Commend it by any other Argument, but
this unfrequent one. That the Sage and Upright Ancients had Music in so high
Estimation, as that, when they would fully Characterise a Learned and Sapient
Person, they called him only (...), a Musician: and, if his long Study of
Humanity and the Liberal Sciences had raised Him to Eminency; they only went
two Notes higher, and in the superlative degree styled Him (...), as if to be
well skilled in the Concordant and Discordant Proportions of Numbers, were the
most perfect Diapason of Virtue and Knowledge. Thus much, besides the express
Records of Plutarch and Diogenes Laertius, may be naturally inferred from
hence; that even the best of our Modern Grammarians, and Philologers derive
the word Music, as also the Muses, from the Greek Verb, (...), that
signifies to Explore with desire: and this, upon no slender Reason; insomuch as
the Key that opens the difficult Locks of all Arts and Sciences, must be an
ardent Desire of Disquisition. The same also may be easily Collected from this
Consideration; that to a Complete Musician (please you, to understand Him to be
such, as has not only Nibbled at, but swallowed the whole Theory of Music; i.
e. having profoundly speculated the Pythagorean Scheme of the various Sounds
arising from various Hammers, beaten on an Anvill, respective to their
different Weights, does clearly and distinctly understand as well the
Arithmetical, as Geomtrical Proportions of Consonances, and Dissonances: for,
it is not the mere Practical Organist, that can deserve that Noble Attribute)
is required a more then superficial insight into all kinds of Humane Learning.
For, He must be a Physiologist; that He may demonstrate the Creation, Nature,
Proprieties, and Effects of a Natural Sound. A Philologer, to inquire into the
first Invention, Institution, and succeding Propagation of an Artificial Sound,
or Music. An Arithmetician, to be able to explain the Causes of Motions
Harmonical, by Numbers, and declare the Mysteries of the new Algebraical
Music. A Geometrician; to evince, in great variety, the Original of Intervalls
Consono-dissonant, by the Geometrical, Algebraical, Mechanical Division of a
Monochord. A Poet; to conform his Thoughts, and Words to the Laws of praecise
Numbers, and distinguish the Euphonie of Vowells and Syllables. A Mechanique;
to know the exquisite Structure or Fabric of all Musical Instruments, Wind,
Stringed, or Tympanous alias Pulsatile. A Metallist; to explore the different
Contemperations of Barytonous and Oxytonous, or Grave and Acute toned Metalls,
in order to the Casting of tuneable Bells, for Chimes, etc. An Anatomist; to
satisfy concerning the Manner, and Organs of the Sense of Hearing. A
Melothetick; to lay down a demonstrative method for the Composing, or Setting
of all Tunes, and Airs. And, lastly, He must be so far a Magician, as to
excite Wonder, with reducing into Practice the Thaumaturgical, or admirable
Secrets of Music: I mean, the Sympathies and Antipathies betwixt Consounds
and Dissounds; the Medicomagical Virtues of Harmonious Notes (instanced in the
Cure of Saul's Melancholy fitts, and of the prodigious Venom of the Tarantula,
etc.) the Creation of Echoes, whether Monophone, or Polyphone, i. e. single or
Multiplied, together with the Figures of Buildings, and arched Rocks, near
Rivers, Dales, or Woods, requisite to the multiplied Reverberations of Sounds;
the Artifice of Otocoustick Tubes, or Auriculary Meanders, for the
strengthening, continuation, and remote transvection of weak sounds, and the
mitigation of strong; the Model of Autophonous, or speaking Statues; and,
finally, the Cryptological Music, whereby the secret Conceptions of the mind
may be, by the Language of inarticulate Sounds, communicated to a Friend, at
good distance.

These Considerations praemised; All that can remain to me, as the proper
Argument of this Praeface, is to advertise you, in a word, (1) That the many
and gross Defects observed in the Latin Impression, especialy in the Figures,
and Diagramms, wherein the Evidence of each respective Demonstration ought to
have consisted; was a principal Occasion to this my English one: which I may
justly affirm to be so Accurate, some few Litteral Oversights of the Press
only excepted, that the Excellent Descartes, had He lived to see it, would
have acknowledged the Translator for a greater Friend to his Honor, then that
raw Disciple of his, who having unfaithfully transcribed the Original, and
divulged his own faulty Copy; has often given occasion not only to the
Enemies, but also some of the Defendants of his Masters Learned Industry, to
suppose, that in this particular Treatise, He write some things more then
Himself clearly understood. And (2) that the Author of the concise, but
weighty ANIMADVERSIONS subsequent, long laboring his Thoughts in the strict
Examination of the Apodictical Verity of Descartes, Fundamentals, in this
Compendium; most happily lighted on the Discovery of a New Hypothesis,
demonstratively sufficient to the full and easy Solution of all the Phoenomena
in Music: a Summary whereof, I do here, as well to prepare, as endear your
Attention, praesent you.

All Consonances, and other Musical Intervalls do arise

According to Descartes Principles, from an Arithmetical Division of the
Chord, i. e. by Dichotomising the space of an Eighth, etc. as an Eighth from a
Bipartition of the whole Line.

According to others, and the most Judicious Writers on this Subject (such are
Mersennus, Lib. de Instrum. Harmonic. i. propos. 15 and Kircherus, in Artis
magn. Consoni and Dissoni Lib. 4.) from the Division of an Eighth
Geometrically, i. e. into twelve equal Semitones, by eleven mean Proportionals.

But, according to the New Supposition excogitated by the profound Author of
these Animadversions; from the Division of the whole Chord into Extreme and
Mean Ration, and of the Mean Ration, according to this Analogy, Viz.

As the Number of Parts in the First Term,
to the Number of Parts in the Third:
So the Number of Rations between the First and Second,
to the Number of Rations between the Second and Third.
Which Novell Invention alone, is more then enough, on the one side, to give
the Capable part of Scholars a grateful Relish of the Inventors extraordinary
Abilities in the Noblest Member, or Heart of Learning the Mathematics: so
also, on the other, to promise an advantageous Compensation of so small an
expense of Oil, as is required to the comprehensive perusal (not to take
notice of the contemptible Price) of these few Sheets. In the Confidence
whereof, it is fit I surrender you to the pleasant Lecture and Enjoyment of the
Book it self.

A Compendium of Music.
CHAPTER I.
THe OBJECT of this Art is a Sound.

The END; to delight, and move various Affections in us. For Songs may be made
doleful and delightful at once: nor is it strange that two diverse effects
should result from this one cause, since thus Elegiographers and Tragoedians
please their Auditors so much the more, by how much the more grief they excite
in them.

The MEANS conducing to this End, or the Affections of a Sound are chiefly two;
viz. the Differences thereof in the reason of Duration or Time, and in the
reason of its intension or modification into Acute or Grave; for concerning the
quality of a Sound, from what body and how it may proceed more grateful, is
the Argument of Physiologists.

This only thing seems to render the voice of Man the most grateful of all
other sounds; that it holds the greatest conformity to our spirits. Thus also
is the voice of a Friend more grateful then of an Enemy, from a sympathy and
dispathy of Affections: by the same reason, perhaps, that it is conceived that
a Drum headed with a Sheeps skin yields no sound, though stricken, if another
Drum headed with a Wolfs skin be beaten upon in the same Room.

CHAP. II.
Praeconsiderables.
1. EAch Sense is capable of some Delectation.

2. To this Delectation is required a certain proportion of the object to the
sense. Hence comes it, (for instance) that the noise of Thunder, and the report
of Guns are not convenient to Music: because they offend the Ear, as the too
great splendour of the Sun does destroy the sight.

3. The Object must be such, as that it fall not upon the Sense with too great
Difficulty and Confusion. Hence comes it, (for instance) that any Figure
exceedingly implicate, though exactly regular, such is the Mother in the
Astrolabe, is not so pleasant to the Aspect, as another consisting of lines
more equal; such as is in the same Net: the reason whereof is, because the
sense does more fully satisfy it self in the one, then in the other, wherein
are many things which it does not perceive sufficiently distinct.

4. That Object is more easily perceived by the sense,

5. The parts of an Object are said to be less different each from other,
when they mutually hold the

6. That proportion ought to be Arithmeticall, not Geometrical. The reason
whereof is, because, in that, there are not so many things advertible, since the
Differences are every where equal: and therefore the sense suffers not so much
labor and defatigation, that it may distinctly perceive all things occurring
therein [3]: For 2 ^ Arithmeticall; so that it may advert in the part AB two
parts, [5], whereof three [6]

7. Among Objects of the sense, that is not most grateful to the Mind, which
is most easily perceived by the sense; nor that, on the contrary, which is with
the most difficulty apprehended: but that which is perceived not so easily, as
that that natural desire, whereby the senses are carried toward their proper
Objects, is not thereby totally fulfilled; nor yet so hardly, as that the sense
is thereby tired.

8. Finally, it is to be observed, that Variety, is most grateful in all
things. These Propositions conceded, let us consider the first Affection of a
Sound.

CHAP. III.
Of Number, or Time to be observed in Sounds.
TIme, in Sounds, ought to consist of equal Parts; because such are the most
easily of all others perceived by the sense, (according to the fourth
Praeconsiderable:) or of Parts which are in a double or triple proportion, nor
is there any further progression allowable; because such are of all others the
most easily distinguished by the ear, (according to the fifth and sixth
Praeconsiderables.) For, if the measures were more unequal, the Hearing could
not apprehend their differences without labor and trouble, as experience
witnesses: For, if against one note we should place (for instance) five equal
ones; it could not be sung without extreme difficulty.

You object, that four Notes may be placed against one, or eight; and therefore
a farther progression may be made to these Numbers. We answer, that these
Numbers are not the first among themselves, and therefore do not generate new
proportions; but only multiply a double: which is constant from hence, that
they cannot be set unless combinated, nor can we set such

But thus, ^ where the last seconds are the half part of the first, and so
there is only a double proportion multiplied.

From these two kinds of proportions in Time, there arise two kinds of Measures
in Music: namely by a Division into Three in time, or into Two. But, this
Division is noted by a percussion, or stroke, as they call it; which is
ordained to assist our Imagination, that so we may the more easily perceive all
the members of the Tune, and be delighted with the proportion, which ought to
be in them. Now, this proportion is most frequently kept in the members of the
Tune, in order to the helping of our Imagination, so that while we yet hear
the last of the time, we may remember what was in the first, and what was in
the rest of the Tune. Which is effected, if the whole Tune be composed of 8, or
16, or 32, or 64, etc. members: so that all Divisions may proceed from a double
proportion. For then, when we have heard the Two first members, we apprehend
them as one, while yet we conjoyne the Third member with the First, so that
the proportion becomes triple: afterward, when we have heard the Fourth, we
conjoyn it with the Third, and so apprehend it as one and the same. Then we
again conjoyn the Two First with the Two Last, and so apprehend those Four
together as One. And thus does our Imagination proceed even to the end: where
at length it conceives the whole Tune, as one entire thing composed of many
equal members.

Few have understood, how this Measure can be exhibited to the ears without a
percussion, or stroke, in Music, very diminute and of many voices. This we say
is effected only by a certain intension of the Spirit or breath, in Vocal
Music; or of the Touch, in Instrumental: so as from the beginning of each
stroke, the sound is emitted more distinctly. Which all Singers naturally
observe, and those who play on Instruments; principally in Tunes, at whose
numbers we are wont to dance and leap: for, this Rule is there kept, that we
may distinguish every stroke of the Music, with a single motion of our bodies;
to the doing of which we are also naturally impelled by Music. For certain it
is, that a sound does concusse, or shake all circumjacent bodies, as is
exemplified in Thunder, and the ringing of Bells; the reason whereof is to be
referred to the disquisition of Physiology. But, insomuch as the Hoti is
confessed by all men, and that the sound is emitted more strongly, and distinctly
in the beginning of each Measure, as we have formerly hinted: we may well
affirm, that that sound does more smartly and violently concusse or agitate our
Spirits, by which we are excited to motion; as also by consequence, that Beasts
may dance to number, or keep time with their Feet, if they be taught and
accustomed thereto; because to this, nothing more is required, then only a mere
natural Impetus, or pleasant violence.

Now, concerning those various Affections, or Passions, which Music, by its
various Measures can excite in us; we say, in the General, that a slow measure
does excite in us gentle, and sluggish motions, such as a kind of Languor,
Sadness, Fear, Pride, and other heavy, and dull Passions: and a more nimble
and swift measure does, proportionately, excite more nimble and sprightly
Passions, such as Joy, Anger, Courage, etc. The same may be also said of the
double kind of percussion, viz. that a Quadrate, or such as is perpetually
resolved into equals, is slower and duller, then a Tertiate, or such as does
consist of Three equal parts. The reason whereof is, because this does more
possess and employ the sense, inasmuch as therein are more (namely 3) members
to be adverted, while in the other are only 2. but a more exact and ample
disquisition of this rare secret, does depend upon the exquisite cognition of
the Motions of the Mind; of which this place is incapable.

However, we shall not omit, that so great is the force of Time in Music, as
that it alone can of it self adfer a certain Delectation; as is experimented
in that Military Instrument, the Drum, wherein nothing else is required then
merely measure of Time; which therefore (I conceive) cannot there be composed
of only 2, or 3 Parts, but also of 5, or perhaps 7 others. For since in such an
Instrument the sense has nothing else to take notice of, but bare Time:
therefore in Time may be the greater Diversity, that so it may the more
exercise and employ the sense.

CHAP. IV.
Of the Diversity of Sounds, concerning Acute and Grave.
THis may be considered chiefly in three manners, or ways; either in sounds
which are emitted at once and together from diverse bodies; or in those which
are emitted successively from the same voice; or lastly, in those which are
emitted successively from diverse voices, or sonorous bodies. From the first
manner, arise Consonancies: from the second, Degrees: from the third,
Dissonancies, which come nearer to Consonancies. Where it is manifest that in
Consonancies the Diversity of Sounds ought to be less, than in Degrees;
because that would more tire, and disgust the Hearing in sounds, which are
together emitted, then in those that are emitted successively. The same also,
in proportion, may be affirmed concerning the Difference of Degrees from such
Dissonancies, as are tolerated in relation.

CHAP. V.
Of Consonancies.
FIrst, we are to observe, that an Unison is no Consonance; because therein is
no Difference of Sounds, as to Acute and Grave: but that it bears the same
relation to Consonances, that Unity does to Numbers.

Secondly, that of two Terms, required in Consonances, that which is the more
Grave, is far the more Potent, and does in a manner contain the other Term in
it self: as is manifest in the Nerves of a Lute, of which when any one is
percussed, those strings, which are an One sound bears the same respect to
another sound, that one string bears to another string: but in every string
that is greater, all the other strings, that are less, are comprehended;
though every string that is longer, does not comprehend all the others, that
are shorter: and therefore also in every Graver Sound, all others more Acute are
comprehended; but not, on the contrary, in every Acuter Sound are the more
Grave comprehended: whence it is evident, that the more Acute Termis to be
found by the Division of the more Grave. Which Division that it ought to be
Arithmeticall, i. e. into equal parts, is consequent from what was before
observed in the sixth Praeconsiderable.

Let, therefore, AB be the more Grave Term, in which if I would find the Acuter
Term of all the first Consonances, I must divide it by the first of all
Numbers, viz. by 2, as is done in C; and then AC, AB, are distant each from
other, the first of all the Consonances, which is called an Eighth and
Diapason. Further, would I have other Consonances, which immediately follow the
first; I must divide AB into three equal parts; and then I shall have not only
one Acute Term, but two, viz. AD, and AE, from which there will arise two
Consonances of the same kind, viz. a Twelfth, and a Fifth. Again, I can
subdivide the line AB into 4, or 5, or 6 parts, but no further; because such is
the imbecility of the Ears, as that they cannot distinguish, without so much
labor as must drown the pleasure, any more Differences of Sounds [9].

Here we are required to note, that from the first Division does arise only one
Consonance: from the second, two: from the third, three: as this Table
demonstrateth [10].

First Figure.
Eighth Twelfth Fifth Fifteenth 2/4 Eighth Fourth Seve^teenth Major Tenth Major
Sixth Major Ditone Nineteenth 2/6 Twelfth 3/6 Eighth 4/6 Fifth Third Minor

Here we have not set down all Consonances that are; in regard, that, to our
more facile Invention of the rest, requisite it is that we first treat

CHAP. VI.
Of an Eighth.
THat this is the first of all Consonances, and that which is the most easily,
perceived by the Hearing after an Unison; is manifest from the Premises, and
also comprobated by experiment in Pipes: which, when blown with a breath
stronger than ordinary, instantly yield a sound more Acute one Eighth. Nor is
there any reason, why that sound should immediately arise to an Eighth, rather
then to a Fifth, or any other Note; unless because an Eighth is the first of
all Consonances, and that which is the least different from an Unison. From
whence, we conceive, it does also follow, that no sound can be heard, but it
seems in some sort to resound in the ear more Acute an Eighth: and that this is
also the cause, why in a Lute to the greater strings, which give Graver sounds,
other smaller strings more Acute one Eighth are consociated, which are always
percussed at the same instant, and so effect that the Graver sounds are heard
more distinctly. Whence it is manifest, that no sound which shall be consonant
to one Term of an Eighth, can be dissonant to any other Term of the same Eighth.

A second thing to be observed concerning an Eighth, is this; that it is the
greatest of all Consonancies, that is, that all other Consonancies are
contained therein; or composed [11] thereof, and of others which are contained
AB, divided into three equal parts, of which AC, AB, are distant by one
Twelfth: we say, that Twelfth is composed of an Eighth, and the residue
thereof, viz. AC, AD, which is an EighthS; and AD, AB, which is a Fifth: and so
it falls out in the rest. Whence it comes, that one Eighth does not so multiply
the numbers of proportion if it compose others, as all others do; and is
therefore the only Consonance which is capable of Gemination, or Doubling. For,
if it be Geminated, it makes only 4

From this it naturally follows; that of all Consonancies, of what kind soever,
there are but three Species: one is Simple: another Compound of a Simple and an
Eighth: a third composed of a simple and 2. Eighths. Nor can any other Species
be added, which is composed of 3 Eighths, and another simple Consonance;
because these are the extreme limits, nor is there any progression beyond three
Eighths; since then the numbers of Proportions would be multiplied excessively.
From whence is deduced a general Catalogue of all Consonances whatever, which
is here presented in the following Table.

Second Figure.
Eighth Simple Consonances. First Compound Consonances. Second Compound
Consonances. Fifths Ditones Fourths 3/16 Sixths majors 3/10 3/20 Thirds minors
5/12 5/24 Sixths minors 5/16 5/32

Here have we added the Sixth Minor, which we had not observed in the precedent
Chapter; in regard it may be educed from what has been said of an Eighth, from
which if a Ditone be cut off, the remainder will

Whereas we even now affirmed, that all Consonances

First, it is most certain, that that Division of an Eighth, from which all
Consonances arise, ought to be Arithmeticall, or into equal parts: now what
that is, which ought to be divided, is evident in the string AB, which is
distant from AC, the part CB; but the sound AB, differs from the sound AC, an
Eighth: therefore will the space of an Eighth be the part CB. That ther^^^e is
it, which ought to be divided into two equals, that the whole Eighth may be
divided, which D [20]. From which Division, that we may understand what
Consonance is properly, and per se generated; we are to consider that AB, which
is the more grave Term, is divided in D, not in order to it self, for then it
would have been divided in C, as was done before: nor, as the Case stands now,
is an Unison divided, but an Octave, which consists of two Terms, and therefore
when the more Grave Term is divided, that Division is made in order to another
more Acute. Whence it comes that the Consonance properly arising from the
Division, is between the Terms AC, AD, which is a Fifth; not betwixt AD, AB,
which is a Fourth: because the part DB, is only the residue, and generates a
Consonance by accident; from hence, that sound which makes a Consonance with
one Term of an Eighth, ought also to make a Consonance with the other.

Again, the space CB being divided in D, I might by the same reason divide CD
in E [21]; from whence a CE be further divided; yet if that were done, viz. in
F [22],

Nor let any think it imaginary, what we say, that only a Fifth and a Ditone
are generated from the Division of an Eighth properly, and all other
Consonances by Accident; for Experience teaches the same in the strings of a
Lute or other Instrument, whereof if one be stroke, the force of that sound
will strike all the other strings which shall be more Acute in any kind of
Fifth or Ditone: but in the others which are distant a Fourth, or other
Consonance, the same shall not happen. Which force of Consonances must
undoubtedly arise from hence, either from their Perfection, or Imperfection,
insomuch as these are first Consonances of themselves, but all others are only
by Accident, because they necessarily flow from others.

But let us enquire, whether that be true, which we formerly said, Viz. That
all Simple Consonances are comprehended in an Eighth: this we shall easily
justify, if we shall turn CB, the half of AB, which contains an Eighth, into
a Circle; so that the point B may be joined to the point C. Then let the Circle
be divided in D and E, as it was divided in CB: and the reason why all the
Consonances ought so to be found out, is because no sound can be consonant to
one Term of an Eighth, but it must also be consonant to the other Term of the
same, as we have already proved. From whence it comes, that if in the
subsequent Figure one part of the Circle make a Consonance; the residue must
also eontain some Consonance.

Third Figure.



From this Figure it is demonstrated how rightly an Eighth is named Diapasson,
because it comprehends in it self all the intervalls of other Consonances.
Here we have exhibited only Simple Consonances; where if we would find out also
Compound ones, all we are to do is only to add, to the intervalls above
described, one or two whole Circles; and then it will appear that an Eighth
does compose all Consonances.

From what has praeceded, we collect that all Consonances may be referred to
Three Kinds; for (1) either they arise from the first Division of an Unison,
such are those which are called Eighths, which make the First Genus: or (2)
they arise from the Division of an Eighth into two equal parts, such are
Fifths and Fourths, which we may therefore call Consonances of the Second
Division: or (3) they arise from the Division of a Fifth, which are Consonances
of the Third and last kind. We again divide them into such Consonances as arise
from those Divisions per se; and those which arise per Accidens; and that there
are only three per se [24], we have formerly said, which may be confirmed from
the First Figure, in which we extracted the Consonances from the Numbers
themselves: For therein we are to take notice, that there are only three
sonorous Numbers, 2, 3, and 5 per Accidens and in a transvers line, 4 generates
a Fourth, and 6 a Third lesser; where we are to observe by the By, that in the
Number 4, a Fourth is immediately generated from an Eighth, and is in a manner
a certain Monster, or difficient and imperfect Product of an Eighth [26].

CHAP. VII.
Of a Fifth.
THis, of all Consonances, is the most grateful, and acceptable to the Ear;
and, for that reason, it is the prime and ruling Consonance in all Tunes; as
also from it do the Modes [27] proceed, as follows Praeconsiderable: for since,
as it is manifest from what has preceded, whether we extract the perfection of
Consonances from Division, or from Numbers [28]; there can properly be found
only three Ditone, nor so languid as a Diapasson, but the most pleasant of all
others. Further, from the Second Figure it appears, that there are three kinds
of a Fifth [29], where the Twelfth possesses the mean place, Delectation.

If it be objected, that, in some cases, an Eighth may be set alone in Music,
without any Variety; as, for Example, when two voices sing the same Tune, one
more acute than the other in an Eighth: but the same does not evene in a Fifth;
and therefore it follows, that an Eighth ought to be accounted the most
grateful of all Consonances, rather than a Fifth.

We answer, that, from this Instance, our Assertion is rather confirmed, than
infirmed; for the reason, why an Eighth may be so set, is, because it
comprehends an Unison in it self, and so those two voices resound in the ear
as one; which happens not in a Fifth, whose Terms are more different among
themselves, and therefore possess, and exercise the Hearing more fully; from
whence a certain weariness and loathing would arise forthwith, if it were set
alone, and without Variety in Tunes. This may be exemplified thus; we should be
sooner weary if we were constantly fed with Sugar, and Sweat-meats, than if
with bread alone; which every man will allow not, in any proportion, comparable
for sweetness and blandishment of the palate, to Sugar.

CHAP. VIII.
Of a Fourth.
THis, of all Consonances, is the most unhappy; nor is it ever used in Tunes,
unless by Accident, and with the assistance of others: not that it is more
imperfect than a Third Minor, or a Sixth, but that it approaches the nature of
a Fifth so nearly, that the grace of this is drowned in the sweetness of that.
To the understanding of which, we are to note, that a Fifth is never heard in
Music, but that, in some sort, an acuter Fourth is withal advertised; which
follows from let AC be in distance form DB oFi (...) dna the resonance thereof,
more Acute by an Eighth, be OF; and certainly that will be distant from DB, by
one Fourth: whence it comes, that it may be called the shadow of a Fifth, which
perpetually accompanies it; and thence also it is evident, why a Fourth cannot
be set in Tunes, primarily, and per se, i. e. betwixt a Basse and another part.
For when we said, that other Consonances were necessary in Music, only in
order to the variation of a Fifth; certainly, it is evident, that a Fourth
would be useless, in regard it cannot vary a Fifth: which appears from hence;
that, if it were set in a more Grave part, it would always resound more Acute
than a Fifth, where the Hearing would soon perceive that it is deturbed from
its proper place to an inferior one, and so a Fourth would be most harsh and
unpleasant thereto, as if only the shadow were presented instead of the body,
or the Image objected instead of the Thing it self.

CHAP. IX.
Of a Ditone, a Third Minor, and Sixths.
THat a Ditone is, by many degrees, more perfect than a Fourth, is manifest
from the Premises; to which, nevertheless, we shall add this; that the
Perfection of any Consonance is not to be desumded precisely, from the same,
while it is Simple; but also from all the Compounds thereof: the reason whereof
is, that it can never be heard alone so jejune and empty, but the resonance of
this composed is also heard together with it; since that, in an Unisont, he
resonance of a more Acute Eighth is contained, we have formerly evicted. Now,
that a Ditone, so considered, does consist of lesser Second Figure: wherein we,
therefore, placed a Ditone before a Fourth, insomuch as we endeavored, in that
Figure, to place all Consonances according to the order of Perfection.

But here we are obliged to explain, why the third Genus of a Ditone is the
most perfect, and makes, in the strings of a Lute, a Tremulation perceptible
even by the sight; rather than the First, or Second Genus: which we conceive to
proceed from hence; that this Third does consist in a multiplied Proportion,
but the First in a super-particular, the Second in a multiplied and
superparticular, First Figure, we thus demonstrate.

Let the Line AB be distant from CD, in the Third Genus of a Ditone, howsoever
men shall imagine the sound to be perceived by the Hearing; certain it is that
it is more easy to distinguish what is the proportion For Example, between AB
and CD, than between CF and CD; beeause it will first be known directly by
the application of the sound AB, to the parts of the sound CD, viz. Ce, of, fg,
etc. nor will there be any residue in the end: which falls not alike in the
proportion of the sound Cf, to CD; for if Cf be applied to fh, there will be
the residue hD, by the reflection of which we ought to know what is the
proportion between Cf and CD, which is more difficult or tedious. By the same
way will it be conceived, if any say that a sound does strike the ears with
many percussions or verberations, and that by so much the more swiftly, by how
much the more acute the sound is; for then, that the sound AB may arrive at the
requisite Uniformity with the sound CD, it ought to strike the ears with only
five touches or verberations, while CD strikes only once: but the sound Cf will
not so soon return to an Unisonance, for that cannot be done but after the
second stroke of the sound CD, as is described in the superior Demonstration.
The same will also be explained, however we conceive the sound to be heard.

A Third Minor arises from a Ditone, as a Fourth from a Fifth [33], and is
therefore more imperfect than a Fourth, as a Ditone, is than a Fifth. Nor is it
therefore to be excluded Music, since it is not only not useless, but even
necessary, in order to the variation of a Fifth. For, since an Eighth is
always heard in an Unison, it cannot adfer this variety; nor a Ditone alone,
(for there can be no variety unless betwixt Two, at least:) therefore is a
Third Minor associated thereto, to the end that such Tunes, wherein Ditones are
more frequent, may be distinct from such as have a Third Minor very often
iterated in them.

A Sixth Major proceeds from a Ditone, and by the same reason participateth the
nature thereof, as a Tenth

A Sixth Minor proceeds from a Third Minor, in the

Here the Series of Consonances would Exact from us a Discourse concerning
their various Virtues, as to the excitement of Passions: but a more exact
Disquisition of this, may be collected from the Praecedents; and it exceeds the
limits of a Compendium. For, so various are they, and upon so light
circumstances supported; that, a whole Volume would not suffice to perfect
their Theory. This, therefore, shall we only say, that the chiefest Variety
does arise from these four last; whereof a Ditone and Sixth Major are more
grateful, more sprightfull, and exhilarating than a Third and Sixth Minor; as
has been observed by Practical Musicions, and may be easily deduced from
hence, that a Third Minor is generated from a Ditone only by Accident, but a
Sixth Major per se, because it is no other but a Ditone Compound.

CHAP. X.
Of Degrees, or Tones Musical.
FOr two causes chiefly are Degrees required in Music; (1) That by their
assistance a Transition may be made from one Consonance to another, which
cannot, so conveniently, be effected by Consonances themselves with Variety,
the most grateful thing in Music: (2) That all that space, which the sound
runs over, may be so divided into certain intervals, as that the Tune may
always pass through them more commodiously than through Consonances.

If we consider them in the first capacity; there can be only Four kinds of
Degrees, and no more: For then they ought to be desumed from the inequality,
found between Consonances, and all Consonances are distant

A to B, ^ be a Fifth; and from A to C, be a Sixth Minor; and, of necessity,
from B to C will be that difference, which is betwixt a Fifth and a ^ Sixth
Minor, viz. 1/169 as is evident DE be a Fifth, and let each Term be moved by
contrary motions, so that a Third Minor may be created; if DF be an intervall,
which does not arise from the inequality of a Fourth to a Fifth, F cannot, by
relation, be consonant to E; but if yea, then it can: and so likewise in the
rest, as may soon be experimented. Here observe, that as concerning that
Relation, we said it ought to be consonant so much as possible: for always it
cannot be, as will appear in the succeeding Discourse.

But if we consider them in the second Capacity; namely, how these Degrees
may, and ought to be ordained in the whole intervall of sounds, that by them
one solitary voice may be immediately elevated, or depressed; then, among the
Tones already found out, those Degrees shall only be accounted Legitimate, into
which the Consonances are immediately divided. To the manifestation of this,
we are to advert, that every intervall of sounds is divided into Eighths,
whereof one can by no means differ from another, and therefore that it is
sufficient, if the space of one Eighth be so divided as that all the Degrees
may be obtained: as also, that that Eighth is already divided into a Ditone, a
Third minor, and a Fourth [39], all which evidently follow

Hence also is it manifest, that Degrees cannot divide a whole Eighth, unless
they divide a Ditone, a Third minor, and a Fourth; which is thus done. A Ditone
is divided into a Tone major, and a Tone minor [40]; minor is divided into a
Tone major, and a Semitone majus [41]; a Fourth, into a Third minor, and also
minor [42], which Third is again divided into a major, and a Semitone majus
[43]; and so the whole Eighth does consist of three Tones major, two Tones
minor, and two Semitones majora; as is manifest to him who seriously and
exactly perpends their Scheme. And here we have only three Kinds of Degrees;
for a Semitone minus is excluded, because it does not immediately divide
Consonances, but only a Tone minor. As for Example, if it be said that a Ditone
does consist of major, and both Semitones [44] (for both Semitones minor [45]):
but wherefore, will you say, is not that Degree also admitted, which resulteth
from the Division of another, and divides Consonances only Mediately, not
immediately? our Answer is, that the Voice cannot run through so many various
Divisions, and at the same instant be consonant with an other different voice,
unless with extreme Difficulty, as is open to Experiment: besides, a Semitone
minus major [46], with which it would create a most unpleasant Dissonance; for
consist

That to the Creation of an Acute sound, is required a more forcible emission
of the breath, or spirit in vocal Music; or a stronger percussion of the
strings in isntrumental; than is required to the Creation of a Grave: which is
experimented in the strings of a Lute, which yield a sound by so much the more
Acute, by how much the more they are distended; as also from hence, that by a
greater force, the Aer is divided into lesser parts, from which the more Acute
sound must of necessity be generated: and from hence it is a direct
Consequence, that by how much the more Acute a sound is, by so much the more
strongly does it strike the ears. From this animadversion, I conceive, a true
and chief reason may be rendered, wherefore Degrees were invented; viz. least,
if the voice should run through the Terms of Consonances alone, there would
be among them too great a disproportion in the reason of intension, which
would inevitably tire both the Auditors and Singers. For Example, ^ would I
ascend from A to B, because the sound B will strike the ears far stronger, than
the sound A, lest that Disproportion should be incommodious, the Term C is set
in the middle, by which we may, as by a Degree, more easily, and without that
inequall contention of the breath, ascend to B. From which it is manifest, that
Degrees are nothing elss but a certain medium, interposed between the Terms
of Consonances, for the moderation of their inequality; and that of themselves
they have not sweetness enough to satisfy the ears, but are only considerable
and useful in order to Consonances; so that while the Voice runs through one
Degree, it leaves the Hearing unsatisfied, until it shall have arrived at a
Second; which, for that respect, ought, together with the former Degree, to
constitute a Consonance: and this is sufficient to solve the praecedent
Objection. Moreover, this also is the reason, why, in a Voice, successively
Degrees are admitted, rather than Ninths or Sevenths, (which arise from
Degrees,) or others which do consist of less Numbers than Degrees; namely,
because intervals of this sort do not divide the least Consonances, nor can
they therefore moderate that inequality, which is betwixt their Terms. More,
concerning the invention of Degrees, (which arise from the Division of a Ditone
into two parts, as a Ditone does from the Division of a Fifth,) might be
superadded; and many things from thence be deduced, which concern their sundry
Perfections: But it would require more room than a Compendium can afford, and a
good Understanding may infer as much, from what has praeceded concerning
Consonances.

More requisite it is, that, in the present, we speak of the Method or Order,
in which those Degrees are to be constituted in the whole space of an Eighth;
now this Order ought to be such, as that a Semitone majus, major [48]; as minor
[49], with which this does compose a Ditone; and the Semitone a Third minor,
according minor; that this may be obtained without Fraction, it major [51]: Now
because it contains only three, therefore is it necessary, that, in some
place, we use a certain Fraction, which may be the difference betwixt a Tone
major and a Tone minor, which we nominate a Schism [52]; or also between a Tone
major and a Semitone majus, which contains minus with a Schism [53]: to the
end, that by the help of these Fractions the same Tone major may, after a
sort, be made moveable, and so perform the office of two Tones; which is
easily preceptible in the Figures here delineated, where we have turned the
whole space of an Eighth into a Circle, after the same manner, as in the end of
the Sixth Chapter.

And truly in either of these Figures, every intervall designeth one Degree,
except Two: viz. a Schism in the First, and a Semitone minus with a Schism in
the Second: which Two are in some sort moveable, so that they may be referred
successively to both Degrees immediately annexed unto it.



Now, manifest it is from these Figures, (1) That, in the First Figure, there
can be no ascension by Degrees from 288 [54] to 405, unless we emit the middle
viz. that with both it make a Third minor, and the difference is so small
betwixt 480 and 486, that the mobility of that Term, which is constituted from
both, does not strike the Hearing with a Dissonance perceptible.

(2) In the Second Figure, after the same reason, we cannot ascend from the
Term 480 to 324, by Degrees; unless we so express the middle Term, as that,
if it respect 480, it may seem 384; if it respect 324, it may be 405, that so,
with both, it may make a Ditone. But because betwixt 384 and 405, the
difference is so great, that no voice can be so tempered of them, as that if it
hold a Consonance with one of the extremes, but it will appear exceedingly
Dissonant from the other: therefore is another way to be sought, by which (the
most of all others) this so great an incommodity may be, if not totally
removed, yet at least greatly diminished. Now this can be no other way, but
what is found and described in the Superior Figure, viz. by the use of a
Schism: by this means, if we would go through the Term 405. We will remove
the Term G, by one Schism, that it may be 486, no more 480: and if we would
go through 384, we will change the Term D, and 320 shall be in the place of
324, and so shall be distant, by a Third minor, from 384.

From these considerations it is evident, that all the spaces, through which
one voice solitary may be moved, are contained in the First Figure: for, when
the incommodity of the Second Figure is corrected, then

Evident it is also, that that Order of Tones, which practical Musicians call
the Hand, does contain all the Modes, by which Degrees may be ordained; for,
that they are comprehended in the two praecedent Figures, is formely proved:
and that Hand of Practical Musicians does contain all the Terms of each
Precedent Figure, as is easily discerned in the following Figure, in which we
have turned that Hand, into a Circle, that so it might the better be referred
to the Superior Figures. Yet, to the understanding of this Figure, we are to
signify, that it begins from the Term F, where, for that cause, we have
applied the greatest number, that thence it might be collected that that Term
is of all the Grave [56].

Figure the Sixth.



That it ought to be so, is inferred from hence; that we can begin Divisions
from only two places of the whole Eighth: so that therein either two Tones may
be set in the first place, and, after one Semitone, three Tones consequent in
the last place; or, on the contrary, three Tones in the first place, and only
two in the last. And the Term F represents both those two places together.
For, if from thence we go by b, only two Tones, are in the first place: but if
by, there will be three: Therefore.

First, then it is manifest from this Figure, and the second precedent, that
only Five Spaces are contained in a whole Eighth, by which the voice can
naturally proceed, i. e. without any Fraction, or moveable Term, which was to
be found out by Art, that it might proceed further. Whence it came, that those
five intervalls should be attributed to a Natural Voice, and six only Voices
were found out to express them; viz. ut, re, mi, fa, sol, la.

Secondly, that from ut to re, is always a Tone minor; from re to mi, a Tone
major; from mi to fa, always a Semitone majus; from fa to sol, always a Tone
major; and lastly from sol to la, a Tone minor.

Thirdly, that there can be only two Kinds of an Artificial Voice, viz. b and:
because the space betwixt A and C, which is not divided in the Natural voice,
can only be divided by two Modes; so as that a Semitone be set in the first
place, or the second.

Fourthly, for what reason these Notes, ut, re, mi, fa, sol, la, are again
repeated in those Artificial Voices: for Example, for, when we ascend from A
to b, insomuch as there are not other Notes, but mi and fa, to signify a
Semitone majus; it thence follows, that in A, mi is to be set; and in b, fa;
and so in other places in order. Nor can you say, it had been more convenient
to have invented other Notes; for they would have been superfluous, since they
must have designed the same in tervalls, which are designed by those Notes in a
Natural voice; besides they would have been incommodious, because so great a
multitude of Notes must have exceedingly troubled Musicians, as well in
setting, as singing of Tunes.

And lastly, how changes may be made from one voice to another, viz. by Terms
common to two voices: as also, that these voices are mutually distant by b
Flat, is of all the most Grave, because it begins from the Term F, which we
have formerly proved to be the first; and therefore it is called b Flat or
Soft, in respect that by how much any Tone is the more Grave, by so much is it
the more soft and remiss. For to the emission thereof is required the less
spirit, or breath, as we have more then once intimated. And a Natural voice
is and ought to be a mean, nor could it rightly be called Natural, if the
voice were to be elevated, or depressed beyond Mediocrity, in the expression
thereof. Finally, the voice, is called a Quadrate, or Sharp, because it is the
most Acute, and the opposite to b Soft or Flat; as also, because it divides an
Eighth into a Tritone and a Fifth false [58], b Soft.

Some perhaps will object, that this Hand is not sufficient to comprehend all
the Changes of Degrees; for, as in it is shown, how freely we may deflect from
a Natural voice, either to b Soft, or to; so also ought other collateral
Orders to be designed therein, such as are set in the Sequent Figure; that so
it might have been free for us also to deflect from b Soft, to the Natural
voice, or to the other part; and so from. Which is confirmed from hence, that
Musicians in Practice frequently use such intervals, which they explicate
either by Diesis, or by b Soft, which they therefore remove from its proper
Seat.



To this we return, that by this means might be made a progress, usque ad
infinitum: but, in that Hand, ought to be expressed the Changes of only one
Tune; and that those are contained within three Orders, is demonstrated from
hence, that in every Order only six Terms are contained, of which two are
changed, when a change is made to the following Order, and so there remain
therein only Four Terms of those, which were in the former; but if a
Transition be again made to a Third Order, then will two Degrees of the four
precedent ones be changed, and so there will remain only two of those which
were in the former Order, which would lastly be taken away in the fourth Order,
if the progress should be continued unto it, as is visible in the Figure:
whence it is most evident that the Tune would not be the same it was in the
beginning, since therein would remain no Term unchanged. And what is added
concerning the use of Dieses; I say, that they do not constitute whole Orders,
as b Soft, or, but consist only in one Term, which they elevate (as I
conceive) by one Semitone minus, all the other Terms of the Tune remaining
unchanged; now the manner how, and the reason why this is done, I do not at
present so well remember, as to be able sufficiently to explain; nor why, when
only one Note is elevated above la, a b Soft is usually affixed unto it: which
I think may easily be deduced from Practice, if the Numbers of those Degrees,
in which they are used, and of voices, which with them make Consonances, be
subducted; and the matter I judge well worthy a serious Meditation.

Finally, here it may be objected, that six voices. ut, re, mi, fa, sol, la,
are superfluous, and only Four may suffice; since there are only three diverse
intervall^ by which way that any Musical Tune can be sung, I deny not. But
because there is great difference betwixt the Terms Grave and Acute; and a
Grave Term, as is formerly noted, is much the chiefest: therefore is it better
and more commodious to use diverse Notes, than the same toward an Acute part,
and toward a Grave part.

This place requires us to explain the Practice of these Degrees, how Musical
parts are constituted of them, and by what reason ordinary Music composed by
practical hands may be accommodated to what of the Theory has been premised;
that so all Consonances and other its intervalls may be exactly calculated. In
order to our effecting of this, we are to know, that Practitioners describe
Music between five lines, to which others also are added, if the Tones of the
Tune be further extended; and that these Lines are distant each from other,
two Degrees, and therefore that betwixt two of them, one other is always to
be understood, which is omitted for brevity and commodity sake. Again, since
all the Lines are equally distant each from other, but signify unequal
spaces: therefore are Two Marks invented, b and, one whereof is set in that
chord, which represents the Term B fa, mi. Further, because one Tune does
frequently consist of many parts, which parts are seperately described; it is
not yet known, from those Marks, b and, which of these many parts is superior,
and which inferior: and therefore are there three other Marks found out. *, *,
*, the order b and, might be visible; nor can those Tunes, which are to be sung
by one, be described by the other, unless all the Tones of these be removed by
a Fourth or Fifth, from their proper Seat, so that where stands the Term F ut
fa, there is to be set C sol ut fa.



Further than this we are not to go, for these ought to be the Terms, since
they divide three Eights, within which all Consonances are included, to which
the Practice of Musicians does accord, for they hardly ever exceed this space.

SUPERIUS. TENOR.

CONTRA TENOR. BASSUS.



Now the use of these Numbers is, to teach what proportion all the Notes hold
among themselves, such as are contained in all the parts of one Tune: for the
sounds of these Notes hold the same proportion one to another, as the numbers
apposed on the same Chords. So as if the string be divided into 540 equal
parts, and the sound thereof represent the most Grave Term F: 480 parts of the
same string will yield the sound of the Term G; and so consequently.

And here we have ordered 4 degrees of Parts, that it might appear, how much
they ought to be distant each from other; not that the Cliffs *, *, and * are
not often set in other places, which is done according to the variety of
Degrees, which are run over from each part: but because this Mode seems to be
the most Natural, and is the most frequent.

Again, here have we set Numbers only in the Natural Chords, and so long as
they are not removed from their proper seat; but if Dieses be found in some
notes, or b, or, which may remove them from their proper seats: then are those
to be explicated by other Numbers, whose quantity is to be desumed from other
Notes of other Parts, with which these kinds of Dieses make a Consonance.

CHAP. XI.
Of Dissonances.
ALL other Intervalls, except those of which we have now spoken, are called
Dissonances; but we will treat of those only, which are necessarily found in
the newly explicated order of Tones, so as they cannot but be made use of and
applied.

Of these there are three kinds [61]: (1) some are generated major and minor,
which we have denominated a Schism: and (3) others from the Difference, which
is between a Tone major, and a Semitone majus [62].

In the First Genus, are contained Sevenths and Ninths, or Sixteenths, which
are only Ninths compounded, as Ninths are nothing else but Degrees compounded
of an Eighth, and Sevenths nothing but the residue of an Eighth, from which one
Degree is detracted; whence it is manifest, that there are three diverse Ninths,
and three Sevenths, because there are three kinds of Degrees; and all these
consist betwixt these Numbers A
Ninth maxim 4/9 Ninth major 9/2^ Ninth minor 15/32
A
Seventh major 8/15 Seventh minor 9/5 Seventh minim 9/16


Among Ninths, two are majors, which arise from two Tones, the First from a
major, the Second from a minor, for the distinction of which we have noted one
Ninth maxim: on the contrary there are two Sevenths minors, for the same
reason, and therefore we have called one Seventh minim.

Now, that these Dissonances cannot be avoided in sounds successively emitted,
among diverse parts is most clear: yet happily any one may enquire, why they ought
not to be admitted in a voice successive of the same part equally with Degrees,
since it is evident that some of them are explicated in lesser Numbers than the
Degrees themselves, and therefore may seem to be more the more intension of
the spirit or breath, by how much the more Acute it is, and therefore Degrees
were invented, that they might be Means, betwixt the Terms of Consonances,
and that by them we might the more easily ascend from the Grave Term of any
Consonance to the Acute of the same, or vice versa, descend from the Acute to
the Graye Term: which cannot be performed by Sevenths or Ninths, as is evident
from hence, that the Terms of these are more distant each from other, than the
Terms of Consonances are, and therefore they would be emitted with a greater
inequality of Contention.

In the Second Genus of Dissonances do consist a Third minor, and a Fifth
Deficient by one Schism; as also a Fourth, and a Sixth major increased by one
Schism. For since (necessarily) there is one moveable Term by the intervall
of a Schism, in the whole Series of Degrees; it cannot be avoided, but that,
from thence, such Dissonances in relation, i. e. in voce successive emissa a
diversis vocibus, will be generated: And that more then these now named cannot
arise from thence, may be proved by induction [66]. These consist in these
Numbers A
Third minor defective -- 27/32 Fifth defective by one Schism -- 27/40 Fourth
increased by one Schism -- 20/27 Sixth major increased by a Schism -- 48/81
16/27
A
Third minor defective by a Schism G ad b. 480, 405. ad D. 384, 324.
Fifth defective by one Schism G ad D. 480, 324.
Fourth increased by one Schism D ad G. 324, 240.
Sixth major increased by a Schism b ad G. 405, 240. D ad. 324, 192.



But so great are these Numbers, that such intervalls cannot be tolerated of
themselves; but, as we have formerly noted, because the intervall of a Schism
is so small, as it can hardly be discerned by the ears, therefore do they
borrow sweetness of those Consonances, to which they are nearest. Nor do the
Terms of Consonances so consist in indivisibili, as that if one of them be a
little changed, all the sweetness of the Consonance must instantly be lost:
and this can only be the reason, why Dissonances of this Second Genus may be,
in a voice successive of the same part, admitted in place of Consonances, from
which they are divided.

In the Third Genus are contained, a Tritone, and a Fifth false; for in this, a
Semitone majus is accounted for a Tone major; but in a Tritone, the Contrary:
and they Tritone 32/45. Fifth false 45/64
Or thus [70]: A
Tritone F ad. 540, 384. b ad E. 405, 288.
Fifth false ad F. 384, 270* E ad b. 288, 202 vel 576, 405.



Which Numbers are also too great to explicate any intervall which may not be
ingrate to the ears; nor have they any Consonances very near, from which they
may borrow sweetness, as the Praecedent ones have. Hence comes it, that these
last Dissonances ought to be avoided in relation; at least, when slow and soft
Music is made, and not diminute; for in very diminute Music and such as is
sung swiftly, the hearing is too much employed to take notice of the defects of
such Dissonances: which defect is much more evident from hence, that they are
near to a Fifth, with which the Hearing therefore compares them, and, from the
precipuous sweetness of this, does the more clearly discern the imperfection
of those.

Here we shall end our explication of all the Affections of a Sound; having
first only taken notice, in order to the probation of what we formerly said,
that all the Variety of sounds, as to Grave and Acute, does arise in Music
only from these Numbers 2, 3, and 5. we say that all numbers, by which as well
Degrees, as Dissonances are explicated, are composed of those three, and by
them, division being made, may at length be resolved even to an unity.

CHAP. XII.
Of the reason of composing.
FRom the Premises it follows, that we may, without any great error or
soloecism, compose Music, if we observe these 3 axioms.

1. That all sounds which are emitted together, may be distant each from other,
in any Consonance, except a Fourth, which lowest ought not to be heard, i.e.
against a Basse.

2. That the same voice be moved successively, only by Degrees, or Consonances.

3. Lastly, That we admit not a Tritone, or Fifth false, no not so much as in
relation.

But, for the greater Elegancy and Concinnity, we are to note these following
Rules.

1. That we begin from some one of the most perfect Consonances; for, so is
raised a greater attention, than if some jejune and frigid Consonance led up
the Van: or else, most gratefully, from a pause or silence of one voice; for
when, immediately upon the silence of one voice, which began the Tune, another
unexpected one First invades the ears, the novelty thereof does by a kind of
potent charm, conjure us to attention. Now, concerning a Pause we have been
hitherto silent, because of it self a Pause is nothing, but only induces a
certain novity and variety, while the voice, which was silent, does again
begin to sing.

2. That two Eights, or two Fifths never immediately succeed each other. The
reason why that is prohibited more expressly in these Consonances than in
others, is because these are the most perfect, and therefore when one of them
is heard, then is the Hearing therewith fully satisfied, and unless the
attention be presently removed from that to another Consonance, it is wholly
occupied by the pleasantness thereof, so that it can little regard the
variety, and the (in some sort) frigid Symphony of the Tune; which happens not
in Thirds and other Consonances, no though they be reiterated, for in all
others the attention is still kept up, and a desire increased of expecting a
more perfect Consonance.

3. That so much as possible, the parts go on in contrary motions, in order to
the greater variety: for then both the motion of every voice is distinguished
from the adverse voice, and Consonances are distinguished from other
Consonances near them. Also that all the voices be moved oftener by Degrees,
than by leaps.

4 That, when we would advance from any less perfect to a more perfect
Consonance, we always deflect to one that is near, rather than to one that is
remote; for example, from a Sixth major to an Eighth, from a Sixth minor to a
Fifth, etc. understanding the same also of an Unison and the most perfect
Consonances. Now, the reason why this method is to be observed in progression
from imperfect to perfect Consonances, rather than e contra, from perfect to
imperfect; is, because, when we hear an imperfect Consonance, the ears are
induced to expect a more perfect one, wherein they may receive more
satisfaction, and to this expectation are they carried by a certain natural
violence: and therefore ought a more vicine, than a remote Consonance rather to
be set, that being what the Hearing desires. But, on the contrary, when a
perfect Consonance is heard, we expect no imperfect one. Yet this Rule is
subject to frequent variation, nor can we now call to mind, from what to what
Consonances in particular, and by what motions we ought to pervene: all these
depend on experience, and the practice of Musicians; which being known, we
conceive it no difficulty to deduce the reasons and proportions of all from
this our Theory of Music: and I have formerly deduced many of them, but my
peregrinations have worn them out of both my Papers and Memory.

5. That, in the end or close of each Tune, the ears be so fully satisfied, as
they expect no more, but perceive the Tune to be perfect: which is most
conveniently effected by some Orders of Tones always ending in a most perfect
Consonance, which Orders Musicians call Cadences, all the Species of which
Cadences have been copiously enumerated by Zarlinus. Who has General Tables
or Schemes also, wherein are described what Consonances in particular ought to
succeed each other through a whole Tune; of all which he has given some
reasons, but we believe that more and more plausible ones, may be deduced from
our Fundaments.

6. And lastly, that the whole Tune together, and every voice seperately be
included within certain limits, which are called Modes, of which anon.

All these Rules are to be exactly observed in the Counter-poynt of only two,
or more voices; but not in a Diminute, nor any way varied: for in Tunes very
Diminute, and (as they call them) Figurate, many of them are remitted. Which
that we briefly explicate, we are concerned first to treat of the four Parts,
or Voices used in Tunes; for though in some are found more, in some fewer
Symphonies: yet that seems to be the most perfect and most usual Symphony,
which is composed of four Voices.

The First and most Grave of all these Voices, is that which Musicians call
Bassus. This is the chief, and ought principally to fill the ears, because all
other Voices carry the chiefest respect to the Basse, the reason whereof we
have formerly declared. Now, this Voice is wont to move on not only by
Degrees, but also per Saltus; the reason is, because they were invented to ease
that trouble, which would arise from the inequality of the Terms of one
Consonance, if one should immediately be expressed upon the neck of another;
since the more Acute does strike the ear much more forcibly than the Grave.
For this trouble is less in a Basse, than in other parts; in respect that it
is the most Grave, and therefore requires less strength of the spirit or
breath to its effusion, than any other. Besides, since all other Voices hold a
respect to the Basse, as the principal; it ought to strike the ears more
sensibly, that it may be heard more distinctly: which is effected, when it
moves on per Saltus, i. e. by the Terms of lesser Consonances immediately,
rather than when it moves on by Degrees.

The Second, being the next to the Basse, they call Tenor; this being also, in
its kind, the chiefest, because it contains the Subject of the whole
Modulation, and is comparatively the Nerve, which extended through the body of
the Tune, does sustain and conjoyn all the rest of its Members. And therefore
it is wont, so much as possible, to move on by Degrees; that so its parts may
be the more united, and the Notes of it may be the more easily distinguished
from the Notes of other Voices.

To the Tenor is opposed the Contra-tenor; nor is it used in Music for any
other reason but because, by progressing to contrary motions it may occasion
Variety, and so Delight. It is wont, as the Basse to move on by leaps; but not
for the same reasons: for this is done only for convenience and variety; for it
consists between two voices, which move on by Degrees. Practisers so compose
their Tunes sometimes, that they descend below a Tenor; but this is of small
moment, nor does it seem at any time to adfer any novity, unless in imitation,
consequence, and the like artificial counter-poynts.

Superius is the most Acute voice, and is opposed to Bassu, so that by contrary
motions they frequently occur each to other. This voice ought chiefly to incede
by Degrees; because, since it is most Acute, the difference of Terms in this
would cause greater trouble and difficulty, if those Terms, which it would
successively emit, were at too great distance each from other. And it is wont
to be moved the swiftest of all others in Diminute Music: as the Counter-Basse
most slowly: the reasons whereof are deduceable from our precedent discourse;
for a more remiss sound strikes the Ears more slowly, and therefore the
Hearing cannot endure so swift a mutation therein, in respect it would not have
leisure to hear all the single Tones distinctly.

These things thus explained, we are not to omit, that in these Tunes
Dissonances are frequently used instead of Consonances; which is effected two
ways, viz. by Diminution, or Syncope.

1. Diminution is when against one Note of one part, are set 2. or 4. or more
in another; in which this order ought to be kept, that the First make a
Consonance with a Note of another part, but the Second, if it be only one
Degree distant from the former, may make a Dissonance, and also be, by a
Tritone, or Fifth falls, distant from another part, because then it seems there
set only by accident: and as a way, by which we may come from a First Note to
a Third, with which that First Note ought to make a Consonance, as also does
the Note of the opposite part. But, if that Second Note incede per Saltus, i.
e. be distant by the intervall of one Consonance from the First; then ought it
to make a Consonance also with the opposite part: for the former reason
cease. But then a Third Note may make a Dissonance if it be moved by Degrees;
of which let this be an Example.

Superius. Syncoaep. ^

A Syncopa is, when the end of one Note in one voice is heard at the same time
with the beginning of one other Note of an adverss part; as may be seen in
the Example set, where the last time of the Note B, is dissonant with the
beginning of the Note C, which is therefore brought in, because there is yet
remaining in the ears the reeordation of the Note A, with which it made a
Consonance; and so B bears it self to C, only as a Relative voice, in which
the Dissonances are carried through: yea, the Variety of these does cause, that
the Consonances, among which they are set, are heard more distinctly, and also
excite the more constant attention. For, when the Dissonance B C is heard, the
expectation of the ear is increased, and the judgment of the sweetness of
the Symphony somewhat suspended, until the Tune shall arrive at the Note D, in
which it more satisfies the Hearing; and yet more perfectly in the Note E, with
which, after the end of the Note D, has kept up the attention, the Note F,
instantly supervenient does make an exquisite Consonance,

Moreover, we are to observe, that the Hearing is more satisfied in the end by
a Eighth, than by a Fifth, and best of all by an Unison; not because a Fifth is
not grateful to the ear, as to the reason of Consonance: but because in the
end we are to regard Quiet, which is found greater in those sounds, betwixt
which is less difference, or none at all, as in a Unison. Now this Quiet, or
Cadence is delectable not only in the end: but also in the middle the avoidance
of this Cadence introduces no small delight; namely, when one part seems
willing to quiesce, and another proceeds on. And this is a kind of Figure in
Music, such as are Rhetorical Figures in Oration, of which sort are
Consequence, Imitation, etc. which are effected, when either two parts
successively, i. e. at diverse times, sing wholly the same, or a quite Contrary,
which at last they are wont to do. And truly this, in certain parts of a
Tune, does sometimes much advantage Music; but as for those artificial
Counter-poynts, as they call them; in such Composures where that Artifice is
observed perpetually from the beginning to the end: we conceive, they may
belong not more to Music, than Acrosticks, or retrograde Verses to Poefie,
which was invented to charm the mind into respective passions, as well as
Music.

CHAP. XIII.
Of Modes.
FRequent it is among Practitioners to treat of these Modes, and what they are,
all well know; therefore would it be superfluous here to insist thereon: we
shall observe only, that they have their original from hence, that an Eighth
is not divided into equal Degrees, for one while a Tone, another while a
Semitone is found therein: and besides, from a Fifth, because that of all
others is most acceptable to the ear, and every Tune seems to be composed
for the sake of this alone: for an Eighth can be divided into Degrees,

In every Mode, are three principal Terms, from which all Tunes ought to be
begun, and most chiefly minors, and in places more or less principal, are
found, from which almost all the variety of Music does arise, as has been
formerly proved. Again, as much may be said of Degrees themselves; for a Tone
major is the First, and comes nearest to Consonances, and is per se generated
from the per Accidens [78], from which and the like, many things concerning the
nature of Moods might be deduced, if a Compendium would permit. And here it
should follow, that we should discourse of all the motions of the mind, which
may be excited by Music, and in a singular Treatise show, by what Degrees,
Consonances, Times, etc. those motions ought to be excited: but I should be
unconstant to my purpose of writing an Epitome.

I now discover Land, hasten a shore, and omit many things for brevity, many
by oblivion, but more by ignorance. However, I suffer this issue of my brain,
so inform, and lately brought forth rude as a Bears Cub, to venture abroad into
your presence: that it may remain as a Monument of our Familiarity, and a most
certain memorial of my love of you: yet, if you please, upon this condition,
that, being confined to the secrecy of your Closet, it be not exposed to the
Judicature of others, who may not (as I trust you will) avert their benevolous
eyes from the maimed, and defective parts of this Exercise, upon those others,
in which I deny not but I have expressed some Lineaments of my Ingenie to the
life; nor would they know that this Compendium was composed for your sake
alone, by one who could not obtain Privacy in an an Army, nor leisure in a
Throng of other Cares and Affairs.

CONTENTS.
CHAP.
I. INtroduction. II. Praeconsiderables. III. Of the Number, or Time to be
observed in Musical sounds. IV. Of the Diversity of Sounds; concerning an
Acute and Grave. V. Of Consonances. VI. Of an Eighth. VII. Of a Fifth. VIII. Of
a Fourth. IX. Of a Ditone, a Third minor, and a Sixth major, and minor. X. Of
Degrees, or Tones Musical. XI. Of Dissonances. XII. Of the Reason of
Composing. XIII. Of Modes, alias Moods.
FINIS.
ANIMADVERSIONS UPON THE Musick-Compendium OF RENAT. DESCARTES.



LONDON, Printed by Thomas Harper, for Humphrey Moseley, and are to be sold at
his Shop at the Sign of the Princes Arms in S. Paul's Churchyard. 1653.

Animadversions upon the Musick-Compendium of R. Descartes.
In these Subsequent Animadversions, brevitatis gratia,
1* Characterize Root, or Side thus: Addition, or more + Subduction, or less
- Aequalitie = Aggregate, or Sum Z Excess, or Difference Xx Lower, or Graver
Lower, or Graver Term Higher, or Acuter Higher, or Acuter Term * Ration
Aequality of Ration, or proportional Continued Proportion Multiplyer, or
multiplied by * Divisor, or divided by * Product * Quotient * Potestas
{potestas} Logarithme {logarithm}

And, distinctionis causa, I denominate the first Note or Term of any
Consonance, or other Musical Intervall, an Unison; and the other, according to
its difference, in sound, from the former.

[1] Audible Differences are as visible Rations: For Sounds cannot be
distinguished, or their Differences known otherwise than by their mutual
habitude, understand me as thus: The Sounds of strings are according to their
Rations, not visible Differences: for Example as these three Chords have a --
1. Unison. b -- -- 2. Eighth c -- -- -- -- 4 Fifteenth.
an equality of Rations: (for a. b b. c.) so their Sounds (an Unison, Eight,
and Fifteenth) have an equality of Differences. (For 1+7x = 8, and 8+7x = 15.)
And as these d -- -- 2. Unison. e -- -- g -- 3. Fifth. f -- -- -- g -- 4 Eighth
three Chords have an inequality of Rations: (though an equality of Differences
visible; for d+gx = e, and e+gx = f.) so their Sounds (an Unison, Fifth, and
Eighth) have an inequality of Differences audible. For as the Ration of d to e,
is: (and is a Fifth, by Fig. first, p. 10.) so the difference of an Unison and
a Fifth is a Fifth. (1+4x = 5.) and as of e to f is: (and is a Fourth by Fig.
first, p. 10.) so the difference of a Fifth and an Eighth is a Fourth. (5+3x =
8.) And (therefore) Sounds, thus numbered, are as it were imperfect (because not
equally distant) audible Indices or Logarithms of their Chords. Here the Reader
may observe that for the Difference of an Eighth, I have added only seven; of a
Fifth, four; and of a Fourth, three: and the reason is, because the exclusive
account is always one less than the inclusive, as is made visible Animad. 8.

[2] Viz. Arithmeticall. Whereof on strings are two sorts; one audible, the
other visible; but, as to their measure, the Last only is properly called
Arithmeticall; the first Rational, or Geometrical.

[3] Note there are in Sounds two Proportions, and Progressions, as well as in
Lines and Numbers; viz. the Arithmeticall, as Second, Third, and Fourth: for
2-1 = 3-2 = 1x: and the Geometrical, as Second, Third, and Fifth: for 1. 2 2.
4. And note also, as was said before Animad. First: That when Strings are
audibly in an Arithmeticall proportion, or progression, they then are visibly
in a Geometrical; whence I infer that Chords, as to Sounds; ought to be
Geometrically divided, not Arithmetically; because, so divided, the sense of
hearing has not so much to advertise; the audible Differences being always
equal, etc. whereof more, after Anim. 78, P. 1.

[4] 8 = 2. 828+, therefore is a b = 0. 828+ b c = 1. 172-


[5] Viz. 0.8.

[6] Viz. 1.2.

[7] The Notes, or Marks of Time, in Music are thus Named, a Formed, Valued.
Large -- * 8 Long -- * 4 Brief -- * 2 Semibriefe -- * 1 Minim -- * * Crotchet
-- * * Quaver -- * * Semiquaver -- * * 1/16

But note these Marks are found otherwise valued sometimes; as when a Large
does comprehend three Longs, a Long three Briefes, etc. according to their
several Moods; or Moods, Times, and Prolations: For satisfaction wherein, as
in all things else practical in Music, not necessary to be known, as to the
understanding of this Compendium, the Reader is referred to Harmonicon
Mersenni, Musurgia Kercheri, Morleys Introduction, etc.

[8] That is, is Four or Seven Notes higher: For the Fifth is the Fourth from
the First, and the Eight is the Seventh, etc. The knowledge of which Notes,
together with all other Consonances, and Musical Intervalls (some few
excepted, not now in use,) may be, without difficulty, obtained by inspection
on the first Figure following.

Whereof the Space from the Bridge to the Natt, is understood to be divided
into 540, or 10.000 equal parts: the Number of which parts (accounting from
the Bridge) to each actual division of the four Chords, or Strings, numbered
at the Bridge 1, 2, 3, 4; is to be found on the Right hand. The first (B 0)
presents you all the Intervalls under an Eighth; and their proportions, names,
and differences by parallel entrance thence toward the Right hand. and is thus
to be read: viz. B 0 [540, or 10.000], is to B1 [518.4, or 9.600], as 25, to
24: as an Unison, to its Acuter Semitone minus: B 0 [540, or 10.000]. B2
[506.25, or 9.375] 16.15 Unison. Sem. major: B21 [270, or 5.000]. B20 [281.25,
or 5.208 1/^] 24.25 Unison. Sem. minor: B21 [270, or 5.000]. B19 [288, or 5.333
] 15.16 Unison. Semit. major: The Habitude, or Proportion of B1, to B2; or of
B2, to B1: or the difference of a Semitone minor, and major; or of a Seventh
major, and Semi-Eighth; is a Diesis minor, etc. Hence it appears that B 0, if
struck, when stopped at 1, does sound a Semitone minor more acute, than it does,
if struck, when unstop'd or open: and that a Semitone minor (as 01) is equal
to 1/25; of the x, and is subtracted from it; and 1/24 of the *x, and is added
to it. And the like (mutati^ mutandis) in all the Rest.

The Second Chord (VF) is divided according to b flat: the Third (LF) according
to shape: both, from F to F, as in the Scale, P. 41. And the Fourth (WA,) as
these, and the like Instruments, are usually fretted.

Thus having all the Intervalls under an Eighth, those above are easily known:
for they are all compounded either of one, or more Eighths only; as the
Fifteenth, Two and twentieth, Nine and twentieth, etc. or else of one, or more
Eighths, and some one of these. And (therefore) as B 0 was divided, to make the
first seven Notes after, or above the Unison, so is B 21 understood be divided,
to make the seven next after, or above the Diapason, etc. ad infinitum.

540 or 10.000 is to as to as an Unison, to its acuter 518.4 9.600 25 24
Semitone minor; or Diesis major 506.25 9.375 16 15 Semitone major; or Degree
minor 486 9.000 10 9 Tone or second minor; or degree major 480 8.888 8/9 9 8
Tone or second major; or degree maxim 455.625 8.437 32 27 Third minor --
Schism 450 8.333 6 5 Third minor; or Semiditone 432 8.000 5 4 Third major; or
Ditone 405 7.500 4 3 Fourth, or Tessaron 400 7.407 11/27 27 20 Fourth + Schism
384 7.111 1/9 65 32 Tritore 379.6875 7.031 64 45 Semififth 364.5 6.750 40 27
Fifth-Schisme 360 6.666 3 2 Fifth; or Diapente 337.5 6.250 8 5 Sixth minor; or
diapente + Semit major 324 6.000 5 3 Sixth major; or diapente + Tone minor 520
5.925 25/27 27 16 Diapente + Tone major 303.75 5.625 16 9 Seventh minim; or
Diavason-Tone major 300 5.555 5/9 9 5 Seventh minor; or Diapason-Tone minor 288
5.333 15 8 Seventh major; or Diapason-Semitone maj. 281.25 5.208 48 25
Semi-eighth 270 or 5000 is to 2 1 Eighth, or Diapason 1 2 Eighth, or Diapason
25 48 Semi-Eighth Semitone minor,cr Diesis major, or Chromatica. 8 15 Seventh
major Diesis minor, or Enharmonica. as 128. to 125, 5 9 Seventh minor Semitone
minor. 9 16 Seventh minime Schism i.e. as 81 to 80. as 80. to 81. 16 27 Fifth
+ Second major Semitone, or Limma Pythag. as 243 to 256.. 3 5 Sixth major
Schism, or Comma majus 5 8 Sixth minor Semitone minor. 2 3 Fifth Semitone
major. 27 40 Fifth-Schisme Schism. 45 64 Semififth Semitone minor. 52 45
Tritone Comma minus i.e. as 2048. to 3025. 20 27 Fourth + Schism Semitone
minor. 3 4 Fourth Schism. 4 5 Third Major Semitone mayor. 5 6 Third minor
Semitone minor 27 52 Third minor -- Schism Schism. Semitone med. as 135.128..
8 9 Tone major Semitone pythag. as. 256 to 243.. 9 10 Second minor Schism 15
16 Semitone major Semitone minor. Semit max. as 27 to 25. 24 25 Semitone minor
Dines minor. as to as an Vnisone, to its graver, Semitone minor.

540 A 10.000 540 A 10.000 540 A 10.000 510.3 B 9.450 509.7 B 9.439 509.2 B
9.429 482.2 C 8.929 481.1 C 8.909 480.1 C 8.891 455.7 D 8.438 454.1 D 8.409
452.7 D 8.384 430.6 E 7.974 428.6 E 7.957 426.9 E 7.905 406.9 F 7.535 404.5 F
7.492 402.5 F 7.454 405.9 7.517 384.5 G 7.120 381.8 G 7.071 379.6 G 7.029 363.3
H 6.728 360.4 H 6.674 357.9 H 6.628 343.3 I 6.358 340.2 I 6.300 337.5 I 6.250
339.3 6.283 324.4 K 6.008 321.1 K 5.946 318.2 K 5.893 306.6 L 5.677 303.1 L
5.612 300.1 L 5.557 289.7 M 5.365 286.1 M 5.297 282.9 M 5.240 273.7 N 5.069
270. N 5.000 266.8 N 4.941 269.1 4.984 258.7 O 4.790 251.6 O 4.659 244.5 P
4.527 237.2 P 4.393 231.0 Q 4.278 223.7 Q 4.142 218.3 R 4.042 206.3 S 3.820

[9] Yett, in his Second figure p. 13, ye Author set's down some Consonances
with greater Differences; and page. 14. he dichotomiseth A. B in to eight parts
for the Consonances, as into 16 for both Tones.

[10] But more clearly this fig: following, where the Space* AB is actually and
distinctly divided into 2, 3, 4, 5, etc* aequall parts.

[11] All Harmonicall Compositions are performed by Aditio^ of their Rations,
and Divisions by Subduction: viz.

Addition, by a Multiplication of the like Terms, or Collaterally thus =:

Substraction by a Multiplication of the unlike Terms, or obliquely thus X:

For Example. ^ as is visible from the divisions on the four Chordes adjoining.

[12.] As may be seen in Fig. An. 10.

[13] That is, the double of the lesser Term, with the greater, gives the
excess thereof above an Eighth, viz. if the Intervall exceeds not a
Fifteenth: but if they be further distant than a Fifteenth, yet not exceeding a
Two and twentieth, than two Eights is to be added to the lesser Term; i. e. it
must be multiplied by four: etc.

[14.] See the division of AB into 3: An. 10. Aritbmetically thus: -= X.

[15.] Viz. for the graver Term. See the division of AB into 4. An. 10.

[16.] For + = 4/9.

[17.] Viz. p. 9. And may be made out from the division of AB into six An. 10,
if according to the method of our Author, p. 17, we convert one half
thereof, viz. from 6 to 3 (which contains the space of an Eighth) into the
Circle following; so that the point at 6 be joined to the point at 3, and the
Circle be divided into three equally (as is 6, 3) at 4 and 5.

[18.] As -= X.

[19.] Or composed of one, or more Eights only, or together with some one that
is contained therein. p. 11.

[20.] As, in Fig. 1, An. 8, is the Eighth on the Chorde B 0; viz. 0 21 at 8.

[21.] As, on the same Chorde, is 8 21 at 14.

[22.] As, on the same Chorde, is 14 21 at 17.

[23.] It should have been only the Semitone major; for the Semitone minor is
not to be found without an other Subdivision.

[24.] Viz. An Eighth; from the first division of AB, p. 14: a Fifth; from the
Second: and a Ditone from the Third.

[25.] 2 gives the Eight; 3 the Fifth; and 5 the Third major: see also AB An.
10.

[26.] Here ends the Former Tract, as it is called, p. 27, l. 25.

[27.] Whereof p. 55.

[28.] By Numbers; as in the first Fig. 10. by Division; as of the line AB, p.
14.

[29.] Viz. the Eighth, Fifth, and Ditone as (...).

[30.] Viz. p. 11.

[31.] For both the compounded Ditones, as well as the simple, are to be found
on a Chorde understood to consist of but five equal parts; whereas the first
compound Fourth requires 8, and the Second 16; as in the Second Fig. p. 13.

[32.] Proportion is called Multiplex; when the greater Term contains the
lesser exactly twice, or oftener: Superparticular; when the greater contains
the lesser once, and one certain part thereof: and Multiplex-superparticular;
when the greater does contain the lesser twice or oftener, and (besides) one
certain part thereof.

[33.] For, as an Eighth, divided equally into two parts, does constitute
properly a Fifth, and by accident a Fourth; so that Fifth divided into two
equal parts, constituteth properly a Ditone, and by accident a Third minor:
see AB Animad. 10.

[34.] For a Ditone + Fourth = Sixth major; a Ditone + an Eighth = Tenth major;
and a Ditone + Fifteenth = Seventeenth major. See Fig. 1, p. 10, at Numbers 4
and 5; and the division of AB into 5 Fig. An. 10.

[35.] For a Third minor + a Fourth = Sixth minor. 1 + =.

[36.] Viz. of the Graver Term. See Fig. AB An. 10.

[37.] Note, that in every Musical Systeme, (whereof there are two sorts; the
greater of Ten parallel Lines, and the lesser of Five:) every Line is the seat
of one Note, and every intervall of another, and therefore C is a Note higher
than B, and G lower than E. See p. 40.

[38.] For - = 15/16 i. e. 1/16 of the Graver Term.

[39.] Viz. p. 14, where CB, the space of an Eight, is divided into CE a
Ditone; ED a Third minor; and DB a Fourth.

[40.] Viz. by dividing CE p. 14, equally into Two, at F: or DG, Fig. An. 10.
at F: or 14 21 of the Chorde B 0, Fig. 1, An. 8, at 17.

[41.] By dividing EG, Fig. An. 10, at F: or 8 14 of the Chorde B 0, Fig. 1,
An. 8, at 11.

[42.] By dividing GI, Fig. An. 10, at H; or EH at G: or 0 8 of the Chord B 0,
Fig. 1, An. 8, at 6.

[43.] As 0 6, Fig. 1, An. 8, at 2.

[44.] As DG = DE, + OF, + FG; Fig. An. 10: or 14 21, = 14 15, + 15 17, + 17
21; of the Chorde B 0 Fig. 1, An. 8.

[45.] As DE, + OF = DF; Fig. An. 10: or 14 15, + 15 17, = 14 17; of the Chorde
B 0 Fig. 1, An. 8.

[46.] As 14 15, with 11 14; of the Chorde B 0 Fig. 1, An. 8.

[47.] 64. 75 324. 379.6875 6.000. 7. 031 1/4. 8 24/25 + 8/9 = 64/75. See Fig.
1, An. 8.

[48.] Because a Semitone majus makes no Consonance with the other two.

[49.] Because a Tone major makes a Third, with either.

[50.] Viz. p. 27.

[51.] For otherwise a major Semitone, and minor Tone must fall together, as
may be seen in this following Figure; where the space of an Eighth is turned
into a Circle, and divided first, as was CB p. 14, at D and E; and then
subdivided as p. 27.



[52.] Others do call it a Comma majus, See Fig. 1, An. 8.

[53.] And is called Semitonium medium, as Fig. 1, An. 8.

[54.] Or rather 576; because it is the Gravest Term, in this instance: as also
according to the division of an Eighth, p. 14, and 27. See Fig. An. 51.

Note that an Eighth, divided first into three equal parts, by the division of
the whole string into six, as p. 1^; and those three then subdivided, as p. 28;
does give the Degrees in the same Order: as is to be seen by the following
Figure, compared with the former An. 51; this only beginning a Fourth from the
other, or the other a Fifth from this.



[55.] Only it seems as moved upon its Center, till the Schism comes to be
between 324 and 320, as this Figure does demonstrate; which differs not from
the last (An. 54): only in this the Schism does stand divided from the major
Tone (the Intervall between 320, and 360) in that other.

[56.] Here the Author recedeth from his former division of an Eighth, only
by removing the Graver Term from E to F: as is to be seen by these two spaces
of an Eighth. The first divided as CB, p. 14, at D and E: the Second as CI,
Fig. An. 10, at DG. with both which this does accord; E, not F, being made the
Gravest Term.

[57.] For from F (the First Term of the Voice in b flat ascending) to (C the
first in the Voice Natural is a Fifth; as also from hence to G, where the
Voice in Sharp begins.

[58.] For (B Sharp) is a Tritone more Acute than (F being so accounted): and
a false, or Semi-Fifth than the *. But placing the Graver Term at E; then is, a
Fifth more Acute than the Graver Term; and a Fourth more Grave than the Acuter
Term: and b flat a Semi-Fifth than, and a Tritone than *. See Fig. p. 35.

[59.] Viz. p. 34. For * is F: * is C: and * is G.

[60.] Viz. Musical spaces, i. e. to every Tone the greater, and to every
Semitone the lesser Intervall.

[61.] As appears by this Figure following. Tone ma. Third mi. major Fourth
Fifth Sixth Seventh Ninth Sem. ma. Third major major maxim Tone ma. minor mi.
Third Trirono ma. major Fifth Sem. ma. Third Sixth Tone ma. minor Fourth minor
Seventh mi. Third minor minim Ninth Semi. ma. Schism Fifth -- major Tone ma.
Third Fourth Schism Sixth mi. major major ma. Third Fourth + Semit. ma. minor +
Fifth Schism Seventh Tone ma. Schism minor mi. Semit. ma. Fourth Sixth Tone ma.
Fifth major Ninth mi. minor ma. Fourth Seventh Sem. ma. Fifth tall, Sixth minim
Tone ma. or Semififth. minor mi. Sem. ma. Tone ma. Fifth Seventh Ninth mi.
sixth major maxim ma. major Sem ma.

[62.] Viz. 128/135 Semitonium medium, as before An. 53.

[63.] For + 8/9 = 4/9; + 9/10 = 9/20; + 15/16 = 15/32: 1 - 15/16 = 8/15; -
9/10 = 5/9; - 8/9 = 9/16* 1 8 1 5

[64.] See p. 22.

[65.] Viz. p. 28.

[66.] See Figure An. 61.

1 16 1 40 1 40 1 16

[67.]For - 80/81 = 27/32; 5/3; - 80/81 = 27/40: 3/4 + 80/81 = 20/27; + 80/81 =
16/27.

2 27 1 27 1 27 1 27

Tone ma. mi Sem. ma. Sixth Seventh Tone ma. minor minor mi. Ninth ma. major
Sem. ma. Tone ma. mi. Seventh Sem. ma. minim. Tone ma. mi. ma. Sem. ma. Ninth
Tone ma. maxim mi. Sem. ma. Tone ma. mi. ma. Sem. ma. Ninth Tone ma. minor mi.
Sem. ma. Tone ma. mi. ma. Sem. ma.

[68.] 480. 405 384. 324 32. 27. 480. 324 40. 27. 324. 240 27. 20. 405. 240
324. 192 27. 16.

1 32 1 64

[69.] For + 128/135 = 32/45: - 128/135 = 45/64. 1 45 1 45

[70.] 540. 384 405. 288 45. 32. 384. 270 288. 202. 5 576. 405 64. 45.

[71.] viz. the first compound Eighth, i. e. a Fifteenth.

[72.] Viz. without altering the order of Succession, p. 30, and 41.

Otherwise, of Eighths considered only as consisting of three major Tones, two
minor Tones, and two major Semitones; there are 210 several sorts, or Moods;
and may be found, by the Laws of Combination, as in this Table following; where
note a is put for a major Tone; b for a minor Tone, and c for a major Semitone.

a a a b b c c c b c c b c b b c c b c b b b a b c c c b c c b b a c c 10 c a c
c a c a b c c b b a c c a c a b b a c a b b c c b 20 c b b b a b c c b b a c c
a c a b b a c a b b b a b b a 30 b a a b c c c b c c b b a c c c a c c a c a b
c c b b a c c a 40 c a b c b a b a a c c c a c c a c a a c c a c a a c a a b c
c b 50 b a c c a c a b b a b a a c c a c a a c a a b b a b a a 60 c a a b b c c
b c b b b a b c c b b a c c a c a b b a c a b b 70 b a b b a b a a b c c b b a
c c a c a b b a b a a c c a 80 c a a c a a b b a b a a c a a b b b a b b a b a
a b b a b a a 90 b a a a b c c c b c c b b a c c c a c c a c a b c c b b a c c
a 100 c a b b a b a a c c c a c c a c a a c c a c a a c a a b c c b 110 b a c c
a c a b b a b a a c c a c a a c a a b b a b a a 120 b a a a c c c a c c a c a a
c c a c a a c a a a c c a c a a c a a a 130 c a a a b c c b b a c c a c a b b a
b a a c c a c a a c a a b 140 b a b a a b a a a c c a c a a c a a a c a a a b b
a b a a b a a a 150 c a a a b b c c b c b b b a b c c b b a c c a c a b b a c a
b b 160 b a b b a b a a b c c b b a c c a c a b b a b a a c c a 170 c a a c a a
b b a b a a c a a b b b a b b a b a a b b a b a a 180 b a a a b c c b b a c c a
c a b b a b a a c c a c a a c a a b 190 b a b a a b a a a c c a c a a c a a a c
a a a b b a b a a b a a a 200 c a a a b b b a b b a b a a b b a b a a b a a a b
b a b a a b a a a 210

After the same Method, there are found twelve Fifths, and six Fourths, as
follows.

Fifths
a a b c 1 b a a c 7 c b c a b a c c a a c a c a a b c a b b a b a 6 b a a 12

Fourths
a b c 1 c b 2 b a c 3 c a 4 c a b 5 b a 6

And therefore of Eighths divided into Fourths and Fifths, there are seventy
and two several Moods: and thus of Fifths, divided into Thirds, there are
eight Species: etc.

[73.] Viz. both Arithmetically, as 234, the Fifth before the Fourth; and
Harmonically, as 346, the Fourth before the Fifth, ascending.

[74.] Viz. from B to B, Arithmetically; and from: E to E, Harmonically, in b
flat: or from F to F, Arithmetically; and from B to B, Harmonically, in (B
sharp) p. 41.

[75.] Viz. from E to E, in b flat; or from B to B, in p. 41.

[76.] Viz. from F to F, A to A^ to B, and E to E, in b flat; or from C to C, E
to E, F to F, and B to B, in p. 41.

[77.] Viz. the two Extremes, and the middle Term.

78.] See p. 18 and 30.

1. Now considering (as was said An. 1 and 3) that not the visible proportion
of Chords or Strings, but the audible proportion of their Sounds only is
considerable in Music; and that, by the Sense of Hearing, we do judge of
Sounds according to the Geometrical, not Arithmeticall Proportion, or
proportional Division of the Strings, that give them: I conceive it was
rightly inferred An. 3, that Chordes, as to Sounds, ought to be divided
according to a Geometrical, not Arithmeticall Progression; by force of the
same Reason (adequated to the Sense of Hearing) which our Author gave for the
contrary opinion in his sixth Preconsiderable. It therefore remains that I
here show what Division it is I mean, and how it may be performed.

2. First then let the Chord AZ, Fig. 2, An. 8, be divided at S, into Extreme
and Mean Ration; by 30. 6. Elem. Euclid. or by Prob. 1, c. 19, Clavis
Mathematicae; which done, let AS, the Mean Proportional, be divided into 17
equal Semitones, by 16 mean Proportionals; by the Latter Table of Potestates
Chap. 12. of Mr. Oughtreds Clavis Mathem. or rather (the other way, in this
case, being very laborious) Chap. 17. Arithmeticae Logarithmicae H. Briggij.

3. I performed it thus.

AZ = B

AS = A

Therefore ZS = B-A

B-A. A A. B.

Aq = Bq-BA

Aq + BA = Bq

Aq+BA+ Bq = Bq+ Bq

A+B=: Bq+ Bq:

A=: Bq+ B:- B

B = 10

Bq = 100

Bq = 25

Bq+ Bq = 125

: Bq+ Bq: = 11.18033,98875 -

B = 5

A = 6.18033,98875-

B-A = 3.81966,01125+

B = 10.00000,00000 {logarithm} 1,00000,00000

B-A = 3.81966,01125 {logarithm} 0,58202,47162

X 0,41797,52838.

* 17

* 0,02458,67814= 1. 058+

{logarithm} B-A 0,58202,47162 = ZS 3.820-

* +ZS 0,60661,14976 ZR 4.042+

ZR 0,63119,82790 ZQ 4.78-

ZQ 0,65578,50604 ZP 4.527-

ZP 0,68037,18418 ZO 4.790+

* +ZO 0,70495,86232 = ZN 5.069+

ZN 0,72954,54046 ZM 5.365-

ZM 0,75413,21860 ZL 5.677+

ZL 0,77871,89674 ZK 6.008-

ZK 0,80330,57488 ZI 6.358-

ZI 0,82789,25302 ZH 6.728+

ZH 0,85247,93116 ZG 7.120-

ZG 0,87706,60930 ZF 7.535-

ZF 0,90165,28744 ZE 7.974-

ZE 0,92623,96558 ZD 8.438+

ZD 0,95082,64372 ZC 8.929+

ZC 0,97541,32186 ZB 9.450-

ZB 1,00000,00000 ZA 10.000

4. Into Extreme and mean Ration; that the parts and whole may be ZS. SA SA.
ZA.

5. Into Seventeen equal Semitones; because (the Ear not well distinguishing
smaller Intervalls) this Number does best admit of the subsequent Divisions,
proportional to their Extremes; whence the Consonances do naturally arise,
according to this Analogy, viz. As the number of parts in the First Term, is
to the number of parts in the Third; so the number of Rations between the First
and Second, to the number of Rations between the Second and Third. And may be
worked by either of the following Rules.

In Natural Numbers.
First Rule. ^ = Second Term.
Second Rule. ^ = Second Term.
In Artificial Numbers, or Logarithmes.
First Rule. ^ = Second Term.
Second Rule, ^ = Second Term.
Note ^
6. For, from this Division, of the Intervall of an Eleventh (i. e. the Mean
Proportional AS); arises an Eighth, and a Fourth: of an Eighth; a Sixth
minor, and a Third major: and of a Sixth minor; a Third minor, and a Fourth,
and these compounded give the rest.

ZS. ZA 5 Semit. 12. fere.

ZN. ZA 4. 8. fere.

ZI. ZA 3. 5. fere.

Third minor = 3 Semitones.

Third major = 4 Semitones.

Fourth = 5. This Proportion or Progression, from its excellency and composion,
I call Ratio-harmonicall.


Fifth = 7.

Sixth minor = 8.

Sixth major = 9.

Eighth = 12.

7. It may be objected that the of ZS to ZA is 2. 61803398875-, that is as 5
to 13+; and therefore SA ought rather to have been divided into 18
proportional parts, by 17 Mean Proportionalls: whereof 5 = Intervall of a
Fourth; and 13 = Space of an Eighth.

8. To which I answer, that SA is understood to be divided into 13. 8196601125
+ Proportional parts: (because the of ZS to ZA, viz. 2.61803398875 -, is as
3.81966,01125 + to 10.00000,00000.) whereof the space of an Eighth contains
10.00000,00000; and of a Fourth 3.81966,01125 +. etc. And may be easily found
(by Logarithmes) working, according to the Second Rule, Par. Fifth, thus.

AZ = 10.00000,00000 {logarithm} 1,00000,00000.

ZS = 3.81966,01125 {logarithm} 0,58202,47162.

0,41797,52838,00000000000.

13.8196601125

0,30244,97566.

0,69755,02434. = ZN, 4.98368,11082.

AZ = 10.00000,00000 {logarithm} 1,00000,00000.

ZN = 4.98368,11082 {logarithm} 0,69755,02434.

0,30244,97566,00000000000.

14.9836811082

0,20185,27720.

0,79814,72280. = ZI, 6.28271,31146

ZA = 10.00000,00000 {logarithm} 1,00000,00000.

ZI = 6.28271,31146 {logarithm} 0,79814,72280.

0,20185,27720,00000000000.

16.2827131146

0,12396,75296.

0,87603,24704. = ZF, 7.51679,09302

9. But this exactness is not requisite, since the Sense of Hearing is not so
perfect, as to confine the Consonanees to so precise a Measure; (see p. 46.)
and therefore, seeing that SA divided into 17 Proportional Spaces, does give
(without any Fraction, or sensible difference,) all the simple Consonances; and
that 38.1966+ / 100.0000 = 4.7745+ / 12.5000 that is, without Fraction, 5/12;
as because, if SA be divided into 18 Proportional Intervalls, NA (containing
13 of them) cannot be divided at I without a Fraction, much less again at F,
I made 17 * Par. 3. with which the common Division does not ill accord; for so
many Semitones are contained in an Eleventh.

10. Thus then having resolved that the Proportion of ZS to ZA is, as to the
practick, exactly enough accounted as 5 to 12: It must follow, by force of the
preceding Rules Par. 5. that (1) the Product of 3.81966,01125 Multiplied by the
Seventeenth Root of the Fifth Potestas of 2.61803398875; or (2) the Quotient of
10.00000,00000 Divided by the Seventeenth Root of the Twelfth Potestas, of
2.61803398875 = ZN. And by Logarithmes as follows.

AZ = 10.00000,00000 {logarithm} 1,00000,00000

ZS = 3.81966,01125 {logarithm} 0,58202,47162

X 0,41797,52838 0,41797,52838

* 5 18

* 208987,64190 5,01570,34056

* 17 17

* 0,12293,39070 0,29504,13768

{logarithm} * 0,58202,47162 1,00000,00000

Z 0,70495,86232 X 0,70495,86232

the Logarithme of (ZN) 5.069+. differing from the former, Par. 8, about the
Intervall of a Schism, or Comma majus, no preceptible Dissonance, as p. 33.

11. Then ZN being to ZA, as 1 to 2 fere; therefore, by the Seeond Rule in
Logarithmes, Par. 5.

{logarithm} ZA 1,00000,00000

ZN 0,70495,86232

0,29504,13768

2

0,59008,27536

3

0,19669,42512

1,00000,00000

0,80330,57488 {logarithm} ZI, 6.358-

12. Lastly ZI and ZA being as 3 to 5 fere; therefore

{logarithm} ZA 1,00000,00000

ZI 0,80330,57488

0,19669,42512

5

0,98347,12560

8

0,12293,39070

1,00000,00000

0,87706,60930 {logarithm} ZF, 7535-

13. With what has been here said, if the Reader please to be satisfied at
present; I shall, when, if ever, I have (God mercifully assisting) labored
through my tedious Troubles and Distractions, endeavor his better compensation
with an entire and particular Tract, according to this new Theory. (And hence
too shall show how Astrologers may deduce their Aspects; with more, I presume,
of satisfaction, than from any other hitherto discovered to them. And perhaps
with somewhat else more worthy the Reader's pains, and mine.) If not; I here
further present him the two following Divisions of a Chord, and will so leave
him to seek it there, or where else he pleases.

14. The One (approved by many Excellent Mathematicians; See Mersennus Lib. 1.
de Instrumentis Harmonicis, Prop. 15.) is the Division of ZA, Fig. 3, An. 8,
first into two equal parts at N; and then of NA into twelve equal Semitones,
by eleven Mean Proportionalls, according to this Table following. In Species,
Numbers Surde, ZN E =. ZN. 5. 000 ZM 12 AEcccq. cccc 488281250*000000000000,000
000000000,000000000000 ZL 6 AEcq. cc 31250000000,000000,000000 ZK 4 AEc. qq
1250 0000,0000,0000 ZI 3 AEq. c 250.000,000,000 ZH 12 AcqEcqq. cccc
7812500000*000000000000,000 000000000*000000000000 ZG AE. 50.0000,00 ZF 12
AcqqEcq. cccc 31250000000.000000000000,00 0000000000,000000000000 ZE 3 AqE. c
500.000,000,000 ZD 4 AcE. qq 5000.0000,0000 0000 ZC 6 AcqE. cc
500000*000000,000000,000000 ZB 12 AcccqE. cccc 500000000000*000000000000,0
00000000000,000000000000 ZA A =. ZA. 10.000 Logarithmes, Numb. D. ZN
0,69897,00043. 5.000 ZM 0,72405,58372.3 5.297+ ZL 0,74914,16702.2 5.612+ ZK
0,77422,75032.1 5.946+ ZI 0,79931,33362. 6.300- ZH 0,82439,91691.3 6.674+ ZG
0,84948,50021.2 7^07^+ ZF 0,87457,08351.1 7.492- ZE 0,89965,66681. 7.937+ ZD
0,92474,25010.3 8.409- ZC 0,94982,83340.2 8909- ZB 0,97491,41670.1 9439- ZA
1,00000,00000. 10.000

15. The Other is the Division of ZA, Fig. 4, An. 8, Harmonically at Q: and of
QA into 15 equal Semitones.

The manner thus.

ZA = B

ZQ = A

Therefore QA = B-A

A. B B-2A.A. B = 10.

Aq = Bq-2BA Bq = 100.

Bq = Aq+2BA 2Bq = 200.

2Bq = Aq+2BA+Bq:2Bq: = 14.1421+

:2B: = A+B A = 4.1421+

:2Bq:-B = A B-A = 5.8579-

B = 10.000 {logarithm} 1,00000,00.

A = 4.142+ {logarithm} 0,61722,48.

X 0,38277,52.

* 15.

* 0,02551, 83 7/15 = 1.061-

{logarithm} A 0,61722,48.= ZQ 4.142+

* +ZQ 0,64274, 31. 7 ZP 4.393-

ZP 0,66826,14.14 ZO 4.659-

ZO 0,69377.98.6 ZN 4.941-

ZN 0,71929.81.13 ZM 5.240-

ZM 0,74481,65.5 ZL 5.557-

ZL 0,77033,48.12 ZK 5.893-

ZK 0,79585,32.4 ZI 6.250-

ZI 0,82137,15.11 ZH 6.628-

ZH 0,84688,99.3 ZG 7.029-

ZG 0,87240,82.10 ZF 7.454+

ZF 0,89792,66.2 ZE 7.905+

ZE 0,92344,49.9 ZD 8.384-



* + ZD 0,94896,33.1 ZC 8.891 +

ZC 0,97448,16.8 ZB 9.429 +

ZB 1,00000,00. ZA 10.000

16. And lastly, that the Reader may, with the less trouble, compare these
several Divisions each with other; I have both reduced our Authors Numbers to
these, and these to his. See Fig. 1, 2, 3, and 4. An. 8.

FINIS.
These Errors Amend thus.
P. L. 3 16,[5] [5], 7 24 Consonancies Consonances 25 26 8 6 11 25 26 12 1 24
Hexathordon minus, Hexachordon minus, 17 Eight Eighth 2 Diapasson Diapason 19
13 18 30 an Eighth [26]. [26] an Eighth [26]. 21 1 o Fi dne a Fifth, and 22 6
desumded desumed 23 6 For Example, 7 than between than, for Example, between
25 10 Musicions Musicians 34 8 Musicians 44 13 9/5 5/9 30 observed, that a
voice [65]. does observed [65], that a voice does 53 19 Syncoa. p Syncopa. 54
30 a Eighth, an Eighth. 55 3 a Unison. an Unison. 65 22 x 23 x * 69 18 Eights
Eighths 71 2 14 Eight Eighth. 73 2 71 16 Former Tract, Superior Tractate, 19
Fig. 10 Fig. p. 10. 75 6 13; and those three then subdivided, as p. 283 10; and
those three then subdivideds as p. 27. 78 7 5/3 84 8 A to AB to B, A to A, B to
B, 85 3 Chap. Cap.


