The Deponents.
THE Mighty Monarch of this British Isle,
Disturbed to hear his Subjects prate and smile,
That he is so Content to own a Son,
for to Inherit the Imperial Throne,
To please his Q. and put by both his own.
But finding England not so Credulous,
And Clear-ey'd O -- ge more suspect than us,
By Instigation of the Q. and P.
He Summons all together as you see,
And there Declares his own sufficiency.
He says his Subjects minds so poisoned are,
They Will not believe God blessed him with an Heir:
But to convince them they are in the wrong,
In comes the Swearers, and Depose as long
A Narrative, as perjured O -- es could do;
What these Depose unquestionably's true,
Our King says so, who dare say other now?
There Is Lords, Knights, Ladys, Squires, Quacks, and all
The Papal Locust, that Infect White Hall:
They Swear, what King would have, to gain their ends,
Since he is a Prince that never forgets his Friends.
But Witness Bishops, for your Loyalty
He makes you great, he did bestow on ye,
To Keep you safe, his strongest, greatest Fort;
While ye were there, the Tower was the Court.
All fled from James, to you for blessing came;
Imprisonment Immortalized your Name:
Bishops of Englands Church are Men of Fame.
And since his dire Designs in Law have failed,
He seems to smile: You are to Council called,
To hear the Worthy, Loyal Swearers Swear,
That at the Birth of Wales's Prince they were.
And first begins Old England's barren Q. Q. D -- ger.

That at her Sisters Labor was not seen
Till all was past, yet for the Holy Cause,
She Will do what e're she can to blind the Laws
Of England, and does there Declare, and say,
She hastened to the Q. that very Day,
And never stirred till this Great Prince was born,
For the Nations Glory, but he proves their scorn;
Except of these that on him daily wait,
Whose Loyal Love is only to be great.
Next comes Old P -- is, who a Story feigns,
Of Riff Rass stuff, to fill the peoples brains,
Of what she saw, and knew about the thing;
And in a modest circumstance does bring
Of something, which into the World he brought,
And by the Doctors gave him, as she thought.
Now as a Governess she tends His Grace,
And would not for all Heaven quit her place;
So sweet a Babe, so sine a Hopeful Lad,
The forward'st Son the Father ever had.
Then A -- ns Countess with her Oath comes in,
That at the Princes Birth her self had been,
And how she heard complainings from the Q.
Of little pains, and then the Child was seen:
But, Oh! He did not cry; the Q. baul'd out
For fear 'twas Dead, but Granny cleared the doubt.
And further Honor this great Lady had;
She saw Smock spoiled with Milk, (the sign was bad)
And P -- gh could not be beguiled,
Knowing the Fathers strength, (at thought she smiled)
She saw Queens smock, and swears she was with Child.
While pious S -- nd to Chapel went
On purpose to Receive the Sacrament;
Devotion was so great, she Disobeyed
Her Majesty: and said, When she had prayed
She Would wait on her: But hearing that the Prince
Was hastening to the World, this, this pretense
Soon brought our Saint-like Lady quick from thence;
And from her bended knees flew to the Q -- n,
And there saw all the sight was to be seen.
The Bed was warmed, and into it she went,
And asked the K. if for the Guests he would sent,
And lingering pain she had, and seemed to fear
'Twould not be born, till all the Fools were there;
But by her Midwife was assured, one pain
Would bring the Prince into the Word amain.
But Faithless Q -- n! The Child did lie so high,
She Would not believe but Judith told a lie;
And such an Honor to this Deponent granted,
It Is hardly more by the Pope for to be Sainted.
R -- mon swears she stood by S -- land,
Near the Q -- ns Bed, just by the Midwifes hand,
And saw His Highn^^s taken out of Bed,
Fit for a Crown to adorn his Princely Head.
F -- gall deposed, that in the Q -- ns distress
She stood at the Beds Feet, just by M -- ss,
And saw the Prince into the World did come,
And by D -- die carried from the Room.
Then painted B -- ley early in the morn
Came to St. James's, to see His Highness born;
With all the have the could she up did rise,
Soon Dressed, she came by Nine a Clock precise,
And found her Majesty was in the Bed,
And groaning dismally, she further said,
Cried to the Midwife, Do not the Child part?
Old Granny craved her leave: With all her Heart,
She granted what the Beldam did desire,
And certain it is there was no Danger nigh her:
Crying, Oh King, where are you fled?
He said, Im'e Kneeling, Madam, on your bed.
This plain Deponent bellows bawdy forth
To be exposed both East, West, South and North,
Without e're fear or shame; bars Modesty,
For to outface the World with such a lie.
Then Pocky B -- sis the next comes in,
And says she saw the Cast of Charles's Queen;
And hearing that the Q -- n in Labor was,
She hurried in without a call or pass.
With this Excuse (she knew she was forgot)
Where she talks bawdy, shows impudence, what not?
Expose her self in Print to show her Love;
Exalted by the King, and one above:
She Will lie and swear, forswear, to prop the Cause,
That baffles Englands sound and wholesome Laws.
Then Lady W -- grave who was there before
This Royal Babe was launched from the shore,
And heard Her Majesty cry out full sore.
Then C -- ne and sottish Went -- th say the same,
With S -- yer, Wald -- ve, D -- son, that they came
And saw this wonder which the World will not own,
And blames their little Faith; to think this Son
Is Spurious, and not in truth proceeding,
From Majesty, when they all saw him Bleeding;
Nay, gave him of his Blood (squeezed from the string,)
That did the Royal Babe into the World bring.
Then Br -- ley, T -- ni, and Nan C -- ry too,
Swear they saw all the work that was to do,
And more by half is Swon, than they will prove true.
Then comes De -- die the great Nurse,
Who with the Q -- n is all in all in trust;
And swears that Dan -- rs, Maid to Princess Ann,
Was joy'd to see this little Royal Man,
With former mark on Eye, which used to be
On all Q. Marys Royal progeny;
J -- es seemed to doubt that which before he knew,
And feared this Treacherous Nurse not told him true:
But he must peep and see the Royal Elf,
And joy'd as if he would got him his own self.
For Mrs. W -- ks, who doubts but she would say,
She brought the Prince that very day;
And told the K -- g, the trembling Q -- n did fear
'Twould be hard labor (tho no Child was there:)
Explains most impudently those concerns,
That follow Women when they cast their barns;
And what cares she the Heretics she will blind,
And then we fear the K -- g will prove most kind;
To all those wretches which swear to his mind.
Then comes the Washer Woman Mrs. P -- ce,
Who says that to the Q -- n she is Laundress;
And there declares a story of Hot-Linnen,
That used to come just from Childbearing Women
Rich -- nd and Li -- d, and brave Ma -- all,
Tho not at Labor, they believe it all;
And fain would be believed, if these Tools
By swearing falsely, could make us such Fools:
They give such Demonstrations, that do lie
As much aside, as they do modesty.
Then comes great G -- ge of England, Chanceour,
Who was with Expedition called to the Labor:
The Q -- n cried out as Women used to do,
And he believes the P -- ce is real too,
But not so certain, nor it is feared so true
As he wears Horns, that were by M -- fort made,
Them and his noise makes all the Fools afraid;
Tongue runs at random, and Horns pushes those
That are so learned His Lordship to Oppose:
He fears to act no wretched Villainies,
He dreads no torments for inventing Lies,
For he of Heaven is sure when c're he dies;
Thanks to the care of fond indulgent Wife,
To make atonement for his wicked Life;
Damns her own Soul, Whores with all she could,
To allay the impetuous sallcys of her Blood.
Lord P -- dent comes next, that is now cashiered,
For only speaking of the truth it is feared;
Yet he for to be great again at Court,
Would be forsworn tho he his damned for it.
Then A -- del of W -- dour Privy Seal,
Was so concerned that he Her pains did feel;
And it is believed this tender hearted Man,
Did feel as much as Majesty did then;
He showed indeed concerned to mighty W -- m,
Who knew too much to have concern for him.
But satisfied the Fool it would be past,
And wondered much her pain so long did last.
Then comes my Lord All-Pride with Modesty,
And seems unwilling to affirm a lie;
With stately gesture he did himself Excuse,
But setting hand to paper cannot refuse.
Then Foolish C -- n comes and does depose,
A mark he has, that he the Prince well knows;
If It be his Lordships Mark, he never must rule,
For Europe knows that he is marked for a Fool.
Then in comes F -- sham, that haughty Beau,
And tells a tale of den and dat and how?
Tho he is no more believed than all the rest,
Only poor Man he fain would do his best;
And be rewarded as when come from West.
Earl of M -- ray, that Alexander Great,
Believes it was the K -- g that did the feat;
And that this Son is true, and not a Cheat.
Then M -- ton and M -- ford both explained,
The business which they from the K -- g had gained;
As knowing men His Majesty did trust,
His consorts Secrets, hoping they would he just:
To His Endeared Son our mighty Prince,
That as he thought would hide his impotence:
G -- n too, with considence pretends,
It is true Born, but it is for his own Ends.
And F-x a story tells of God knows what,
To Fool the Nation's all he would be at;
He keeps in Favor with his Princely grace,
He Fawns and Flatters for to keep his place:
Then famous Sca -- ugh and Vi -- ly,
^ith W -- ve, B -- die, and A -- nd do lie;
And bring their circumstances to convince
The World that it is a real High Born Prince;
Thus they stick out at nothing that will do
The Nation wrong, and bring to England woe.
Base mercenary Slaves, for a Kings smile
Would Spurious Issue rear, and us beguile;
That fawn on him and more observe a nod,
Than scar the vengeance of an angry God:
And on the turn of the the times would all fly back,
And let His Highness Interest go to wrack.
Two Depositions more to Council sent,
Ashamed to appear to farther the intent
Of Popish principles, and perjuries;
None but the Devil could invent such lies.
Then after this the King himself declares,
He don't design with England to make Wars;
But he such aggravations has of late,
That he must needs be angry with the State:
A Specious Prologue, he concludes with all;
But ah, the Protestants he vows shall fall
A Sacrifice to Rome, and His Revenge;
Then Soldiers fear not Fools, but scorn to Cringe;
Be refolute and stout, and scorn to sell
Your Souls to Rome, but send the Pope to Hell.
FINIS.

