THE Deplorable State AND CONDITION Of the POOR French Protestants
COMMISERATED, And humbly Represented to all Princes and People Of the TRUE
Reformed Church; With Reasons for a Protestant League.

LONDON: Printed for Richard Janeway in Queens-Head-Alley in Paternoster Row,
MDCLXXXI.

The Deplorable State and Condition of the Poor French Protestants
Commiserated, etc.
NO sooner have these Popish Hornets, their Priests, been Expelled and Fired out
of any Kingdom or Country, but like the fallen Angels, They use all means and
endeavors to recover again their lost Dominions; and accordingly leave no
expedient unattempted, whereby they might draw over the most Powerful Princes
to their Party: With the Emperor, the King of Spain, and others of weak
Judgments, they make a Religious account only, and the Promotion of the
Catholic Cause, to be a sufficient ground for their assistance, or at least to
prevent their interruption of those more Vigorous Princes, who help to carry on
their Designs: With the French King, and others of more refined Politics,
abandoning all motives of Religion, they use the Perswasives of some temporal.
Interest, engaging to assist him in the Design of his Universal Monarchy; if he
will as mutually promote their Universal Hierarchy and the extirpation of
Heresy; Thus, as the Jesuits have given him many Tastes of their services in a
Politic way: So now they think it high time that his most Christian Majesty
should present them with some Testimony of his Zeal for the Church service: And
as in order to his Universal Monarchy, they have divided the English with
Plots, bred Jealousies between the States and Prince of Orange, by the
Lovaisten Faction, exasperated and divided the Emperor and Princes of the
Empire one against another, and Betrayed the Counsels of all other Courts to
the French; So now in requital for all these Eminent State-services, His
Majesty (though Impartial to all Religious in His Judgment) yet on a Politic
score, has thus begun the Extirpation of Heresy, by this Barbarous Invasion
of the Lives of some, but Fortunes and Children of all his most Loyal (though
Protestant) Subjects. From hence it more plainly appears, that the Plot for
Introducing Popery into England, was but one small part of their Designs, who
undoubtedly intended an Universal Extirpation of the Protestant Religion out of
all parts of the World: Wherefore this is the time that all Protestant Princes
and States ought Firmly and Unanimously to League and Confederate with the same
zeal against the Papists and their false Religion, as They do against the
Protestants and the true Worship of God; Whereto we are obliged, both by the
Law of God, Law of Nature, and Law of Nations; as appears by many Presidents,
as well Sacred as Profane, which I shall here produce in behalf of these
distressed and miserable People, who by this Jesuitical Hector of France, are
reduced even to the extremity of Want and Misery, expecting every hour in the
Night to be Alarmed with another St. Bartholomew's Massacre; who like Herod
Butchering the Innocents, may serve to Warn all other Protestant Subjects what
quarter they are like to meet with under a Popish King.

There are many Princes, who hoping to advance their own ends, and encroach on
others Rights, will rightly embrace the part of the afflicted, and proclaim the
Lawfulness of it; but the hope of gain is the certain and only aim of their
procecedings: Thus the Romans, Alexander the great, and diverse others,
pretending to suppress Tyrants, have oftentimes enlarged their own Territories.
It is not long since Henry the second of France made Wars upon the Emperor
Charles the first, under Color of defending and delivering the Protestant
Princes. As also Henry the eighth King of England, was in like manner ready to
assist the Germans, if the Emperor Charles should molest them. But if there be
some appearance of Danger, and little expectance of Profit, then it is that
most Princes dispute the Lawfulness of the Action. And as the former cover
their Ambition and Avarice with the evil of Charity and Piety: So on the
contrary, do the others call their fear and Cowardice, Integrity and Justice.
Therefore without leaning either to the one side or the other, let us
Impartially examine those rules in such cases which Piety and Justice trace us
out in matter of Religion.

First, All accord in this, That there is one only Church, whereof Jesus Christ
is the Head; the members whereof are so united and conjoined together, that if
the least of them be offended or wronged, they all participate both in Harm and
Sorrow, as throughout the Holy Scripture plainly appears. Wherefore the Church
is compared to a Body: Now it many tims happens that the Body is not only
overthrown by a Wound in the Arm, or Thigh, but also sometimes endangered and
killed even by a small hurt in the little Finger; Vainly therefore does any Man
boast of the safe custody of his Body, if he suffers that to be Dismembered and
Pulled in pieces, which he might have preserved whole and entire. The Church
also is compared to an Edifice: on which side soever the Building is
undermined, it often happens that the whole tumbles down; and on what Rafter or
piece of Timber soever the Flame takes hold, it endangers the whole House of
Burning; He must needs be therefore very ridiculous, who should defer to quench
the Fire which had seized on his Housetop, because he dwells most in the
Celler. Again, the Church is resembled to a Ship, which as it Sails together,
so does it Sink together: insomuch that in a tempest, those who be in the
Fore-castle, or in the Keel, are no more secure, then those who remain at the
Stearn or on the Lower Deck; they both venture in one Bottom. This being
granted, questionless, whosoever has not a fellow-feeling in Commiserating the
Trouble, Danger, and Distress of the Church, is no Member of that Body, nor
Domestic in the Family of Jesus Christ, nor has any place in the Ark of the
Covenant of Grace. He who has any sense of Religion in his heart, ought no
more to doubt, whether he be obliged to aid the afflicted Members of the
Church, than whether he would be assisting to himself in the like distress: for
the Union of the Church Unites us all into one Body, and therefore every one in
his calling must be ready to assist the Needy.

Now as this Church is one, so is she recommended and given in charge to all
Christian Princes in general, and to every one of them in particular: for in as
much as it was dangerous to leave the care to one alone, and the Unity of it
would not by any means permit that she should be divided into pieces, and every
portion assigned unto one particular: God has Committed it all entire to
particulars, and all the parts of it to all in general, not only to preserve
and defend it, but also to amplify and increase it as much as might be:
insomuch, that if a Prince who has undertaken the care of a portion of the
Church, (as that of Germany, and Holland.) does notwithstanding neglect and
forsake another part that is oppressed, and which he might succor; He
doubtless abandons the Church, Christ having but one only Spouse, which the
Prince is so bound to preserve and defend, that she be not violated or
corrupted in any part, if it be possible. And in the same manner as every
private Person is bound by his Humble and Ardent Prayers to God, to desire the
Restoring of the Church: So likewise are the Magistrates tied diligently to
procure the same with the utmost of that Power and Means which God has put
into their Hands. Now it were ridiculous and worthy of Punishment in the Church
wardens, who had care only of some small part of the Church, and suffered all
the rest to be spoiled with Rain and Water: In like manner, all Christian Kings
when they receive the Sword on the day of their Coronation, solemnly Swear, to
maintain the Universal Church, and the Ceremony then used does fully express
it; for holding the Sword in their hands, they turning to the East, West,
North, and South, Brandish it, to the end that it may be known, that no part of
the World is excepted. And that this was accordingly the Practice of Ancient
Princes, we have their Examples to instruct us.

In the time of Ezechias King of Juda, 2 Chro. 30.
the Kingdom of Israel had been a long time before in Subjection to the
Assyrians, to wit, ever since the King Osea's time: And therefore if the Church
of Juda only, and not the whole Universal Church had been committed to the
Custody of Ezechias: and if in the preservation of the Church the same course
were to be held, as in the dividing of Lands, or imposing of Tributes, then
questionless Ezechias would have contained himself within his own Limits,
especially when the Exhorbitant Power of the Assyrians Lorded it every where.
Now we read that he sent express Messengers throughout Israel, to wit, to the
Subjects of the King of Assyria, to invite them to come to Jerusalem to
celebrate the Paschal Feast: and moreover he assisted the faithful Israelites
of the Tribes of Ephraim and Manasses, and others the Subjects of the
Assyrians, to ruin the High Places which were in their Quarters.

We read also that the good King Josias expelled Idolatry, not only out of his
own Kingdom, but also even out of the Kingdom of Israel, 2 Kin. 22. 2 Chro. 22.
and 35.
which was then wholly in subjection to the King of Assyria. And no wonder is
it, for where the Glory of God and Kingdom of Christ are in question, certainly
no Bounds or Limits should there confine the zeal and fervent Affection of
Pious and Godly Princes. Though the Opposition be great, and power of the
Opposers greater, yet the more they fear God, the less will they fear Men.
These generous Examples of the aforesaid Godly Princes have since been imitated
by sundry Christian Kings, by whose means the Church (which was heretofore
restrained within the narrow Limits of Palestine,) has since been dilated
throughout most part of the Universe. Constantine and Licinius Governed the
Empire together, one in the East, the other in the West, they were Associates
of equal Power and Authority; Nevertheless, for as much as Licinius does every
where Banish, Torment, and put to Death the Christians under pretense of
Religion: Constantine makes War against him, and by force compels him to give
free Toleration of Religion to the Christians; and because afterward he broke
his Faith, and relapsed into his former Cruelties against them: Constantine
caused him to be Apprehended and put to Death in the City of Thessalonica.
Which Pious Action of this Emperors was with so great an Applause Celebrated
by the Divines of those times, that they suppose that saying of Isaiah to be
meant by him, that Kings should be Pastors and Nursing Fathers of the Church.
Again, after Constantines Death, the Roman Empire was divided equally between
his Sons, without any Priority or Advantage one more than the other. Constance
the Younger favored the Orthordex Christians, and Constantius the Elder
inclined to the Arrians; for which reason he Banished the Learned Athanasius
from Alexandria, as being the greatest professed Adversary of the Arrians.
Here, if any Consideration in matter of Conscience were absolutely requisite,
it would certainly be amongst Brethren. But nevertheless, Constance threatens
to wage War on his Brother, if he restore not Athanasius; and had undoubtedly
performed it, if Constantius had not readily Complied with his desire. Now, if
he proceeded so far for the Restoration of one single Bishop: had there not
been much more reason for him to have assisted a great part of the People, if
they should have implored his Aid against the Tyranny of Wicked Princes, who
refuse them to exercise the only True Worship of God? Sozom. lib. 7. Chapter 18.
In like manner, at the Persuasion of Atticus the Bishop, Theodosius made War
upon Cosroes King of Persia, to force him to deliver the Christians of his
Kingdom from Persecution, although they were but particular and private
Persons: which certainly those most Just Princes, who instituted so many worthy
Laws, and had so great a regard to Justice, would never have done, if by so
doing they had conceived any thing were Usurped on another Man's right, or the
Law of Nations violated. But to what end were so many Expeditions undertaken by
Christian Princes, into the Holy Land against the Sarracens? Wherefore were
demanded and raised so many of those Saladine Tenths? To what purpose were so
many Confederacies made, and Croysadoes Proclaimed against the Turks, if it
were not lawful for Christian Princes, yea those farthest remote, to deliver
the Church of God from the Oppression of Tyrants, and to free Captive
Christians from under the Yoke of Bondage? What were the Motives that led them
to those Wars? And what were the Reasons that urged them to undergo those
Dangers, but only their care of the Church Union? Christ Summoned every Man
from all parts to undertake the defense thereof. All Men are bound to repel
Common dangers, with a joint and Common Opposition: which has a natural
Consent and Relation with what we now treat of: For if this were lawful in them
against Mahomet, and not only lawful, but that the backward and Negligenti were
ever made liable to all Infamous contempts, and the forward Undertakers always
recompensed with all Honorable respect and reward, according to the merit of
their Virtues: Wherefore not now against the Enemy to Peace and Righteousness?
If it be a lawful War to fight against the Greeks, when they Assail our Troy;
wherefore is it unlawful to pursue and prevent that Incendiary Lewis the
Fourteenth, who has set all the European World in a Flame, for no other reason
but pour sa Gloire? Do we pray God to abate a Pestilence, and to take away a
Famine? why should we not in the same manner Pray against that Prince who is
sent instead of both; Who has destroyed more Men than either the one or the
other, nay then both together? And why may we not as well fly to our Force and
Arms for the one, as to our Drugs and Physic for the other? Finally, If it
has been esteemed an Heroical Act, to deliver Christians from Corporal
servitude, (for the Turks compel none in point of Religion,) why is it not a
thing much more noble, to Infranchise and set at Liberty these distressed and
virtuous French Protestants, from the Chains and Tyranny of Popery; which as it
is most Foppish in its Doctrine, so is it most Bloody in its Teneuts.

Now these examples of so many Religious Princes, might well have the directive
power of Law. Nevertheless, let us hear what God himself Pronounces in many
places of his Word, by the Mouth of his Prophets, against those who advance not
the Building up of his Church, or who make no reckoning of her afflictions. The
Gadites, the Rubenites, and half Tribe of Manasses, Numb. 32, Josh. 4.12. Deu.
3 20.
desire of Moses, That he would allot them their Portion on the other side of
Jordan. Moses grants their request, but with this Proviso and Condition: That
they should not only assist their other Brethren the Israelites to Conquer the
Land of Canaan, but also that they should March the first, and serve as
Vant-guard to the rest, because they had their Portions first set them forth;
And if they fail to perform this duty, he with an Anathema, destines them to
Destruction, and compares them to those who were adjudged Rebels at
Cadizbarnea. And what? (said he,) Your Brethren Fight, and you in the mean
while rest quiet at home? No, on the contrary, You also shall pass Jordan, and
not return into your Houses, before the Lord has first driven his Enemies out
from before his face, and given place to your Brethren as well as you, then
shall you be Innocent before the Lord and his People Israel. By this he shows,
that those whom God first blessed with so great a benefit, if they help not
their Brethren, and make not themselves sharers in their Travels, Companions in
their Labors, and Leaders in their Dangers, must questionless expect an heavy
Judgment to fall upon them.

Likewise, when under the Conduct of Debora, the Nephtalites and Zabulonites
took Arms against the Tyrant Jabin: Judges 5.
and that in the mean while the Rubenites who should have been first in the
field, took their ease, and played on their Pipes, whilst their Flocks and
Herds fed at liberty: The Gadites held themselves secure with the Rampire of
the River: The Danites gloried in their Naval Force; And, to be brief, Ashur
was confident in the difficult Access of their Mountains: Then the Spirt of the
Lord speaking by the Prophetess, does condemn them all in these terms, Curse ye
Meroz, (said the Angel of the Lord, Jud. 5.23.
) curse ye bitterly the Inhabitants thereof: because they came not to the help
of the Lord, to the help of the Lord against the mighty: But blessed above
Woman shall Jael the Wife of Heber the Kenito be, who though she might have
alleged her Husbands Alliance with the Canaanites, did notwithstanding kill
Sisera the General of the Enemies Army. And therefore Vriah spoke Reilgiously
and like a true Patriarch when he said, 2 Sa. 11.11
The Ark of the Lord, and Israel, and Judah, abide in Tents, and my Lord Joab,
and the servants of my Lord are Encamped in the open Field; Shall I then go
into my house, to Eat, Drink, and lie with my Wife? As thou live, and as thy
Soul lives, I will not do this thing. But on the contrary, impious and wicked
were the Princes of Israel, who supposing themselves secure by the craggy
Mountains of Samaria, and strong Fortifications of Sion, took liberty to lose
themselves in Luxurious Feasts, loose delights, Amos 6.
Drinking Delicious Wines, and Sleeping in Perfumed Beds of Ivory, in the mean
time despising poor Joseph, to wit, the Lords Flock, tormented, and miserably
vexed on all sides, not having any Compassion on their affliction. Jud. 8.12.
The Lord God has sworn by himself, says the Lord God of Hosts, I abhor the
Excellency of Jacob, and hate his Palaces: Therefore will I deliver up the
City, with all that is therein; and those that wallow thus in pleasure, shall
be the first that shall go into Captivity. Wickedly therefore did those
Ephraimites, who instead of Congratulating and Applauding the famous Victories
of Gideon and Jeptha, did envy and traduce them, whom notwithstanding they had
forsaken in dangers.

As much may be said of the Israelites, who seeing David overcome the
difficulty of his Affairs, and remain a peaceable King, say aloud, 2 Samuel 5.2.
We are thy Flesh and thy Bones: But some years after, seeing him again
Embroiled in Troubles, cried out, We have no part in David, 2 Sa. 20.1.
neither have we Inheritance in the son of Jesse. Let us rank also with these,
all those Christians in Name only, who will communicate at the Holy Table, and
yet refuse to Participate of the Cup of affliction with their Brethren; who
look for salvation in the Church, yet care not for the safety and preservation
of the said Church, and the Members thereof; Briefly, who adore one and the
same God the Father, acknowledge and avow themselves of the same Household of
Faith, and profess to be one and the same Body in Jesus Christ, and yet
notwithstanding, yield no succor nor assistance to their Savior afflicted in
his Members. What revenge do you think will God inflict on such Impiety? Moses
compares those who abandon their Brethren to the Rebels of Cadesbarnea: Now
none of those by the Decree of the Almighty, Numb. 32.
entered into the land of Canaan: Let not such then pretend to any interest in
the Heavenly Canaan, who will not Succor Christ when he is Crucified, and
suffering a thousand times a day in his Members, as it were begging their Alms
from door to door. The Son of God with his own mouth condemns them to
everlasting Fire, that when he was hungry, gave him no Meat, when he was
thirsty, gave him no Drink, when he was a stranger, Lodged him not; naked, and
Clothed him not; sick and in Prison, yet Visited him not. Wherefore let those
expect punishment without end, who lend a deaf Ear to the Complaints and Groans
of our Savior Jesus Christ, suffering all these things daily in his Church;
Although otherwise they may appear both to themselves and others to be good
Christians, yet shall their condition be much more Miserable then that of many
Infidels: For why, were they only the Jews, or Scribes and Pharisees that
persecuted Christ? or were they Ethnicks and Turks which thus persecute,
torment, and Crucify him? No certainly, the Jews hold him an Impostor, the
Ethnicks a Malefactor, the Turks an Infidel; Insomuch as if we consider the
Intention of these Men, (as the censuring of all offenses ought to have
principal Relation thereunto,) we cannot conclude that it is properly Christ
that they persecute with such hatred, but rather some Criminal Person, whom in
their opinion deserves this usage: Whereas they do truly and more properly
persecute and Crucify afresh Christ Jesus, who professing to acknowledge him
for the Messiah, God and Redeemer of the World, do yet notwithstanding fail to
free him from Persecution and Vexation in his Members, when it is in their
power to do it. Briefly, He who omits to deliver his Neighbor from the hands
of the Murderer, when it is in his power to do it, is little less guilty of the
Murder before God, then the Murderer himself: Qui non prohibet cum potest,
Jubet. Nay, I may say farther, that these deserters of their Brethren in their
time of Danger and Distress, are more obnoxious and guilty, than the Tyrants
themselves that Persecute them: for it is much more wicked and worthy of
greater punishment to kill an honest Man that is Innocent and fearing God, (as
those who consent with them in their Faith must of necessity know their true
profession to be,) then to kill a Thief, Impostor, or Heretic; (as those who
persecute the true Christian Protestants do commonly believe them to be,) It is
a greater offense to strive with God then Man; Finally, it is a far greater
Crime perfidiously to betray, then ignorantly to off end. The same may also be
said of them who refuse to assist the true Servants of God, when oppressed by
Tyranny for Religion's sake: We ought to love our Neighbors as our selves; and
therefore an Israelite is not only bound to deliver an Israelite from the hands
of Thieves, if it be in his power, but every Stranger also; yea, though
unknown, if he will rightly discharge his duty: Neither let him dispute,
whether it be lawful to defend another, who believes he may justly defend
himself; for it is more just and generous (if we rightly consider it) to
deliver from danger and outrage another than ones self; seeing that what is
done for pure Charity, is more commendable and praiseworthy, then that which
is done out of self ends, desire of Revenge, or any other transport of Passion:
in revenging our own wrongs, we never keep a mean, whereas in other men's
(though much greater) the most intemperate will easily observe moderation;
Furthermore, the Heathens themselves may teach us what Humane Society, and what
the Law of Nature requires of us in this case; when Cicero says, Ciceron. lib.
^. 3 Offic.
Natura ipsa praescribit, ut homo homini, etc. That Nature being the common
Mother of Mankind prescribes and ordains, that every Man endeavors and
procures the good of another whatsoever he be, only because he is a Man:
Otherwise all bonds of society, yea, and Mankind it self must needs go to ruin:
Therefore, as Justice is built on these two Bases, or Pillars; first, that none
be wronged; and secondly, that good be done to all if it be possible; So also
are there two sorts of Injustice; the first, in those who offer injury to their
Neighbors: And the Second, in those who when they have means to deliver the
oppressed, do notwithstanding suffer them to sink under the burden of their
wrongs; Peradventure you will say, I fear in aiding the one, I shall do wrong
to the other: But he that lays his hand on his heart, will find it is somewhat
else, and not Justice that withholds him from their assistance. For as Cicero
in another place observes, Either thou will not make the wr^ng doer thine
Enemy, or not take pains, or not be at so much charge, or else negligence,
sloth, or hindering of thine own occasions, or the cr^ssing thy other designs,
takes thee off from the defense of those, whom otherwise thou art bound to
relieve. Now in saying thou only attendest thine own affairs, fearing to wrong
another, thou fallest into another kind of injustice, for thou abandonest
humane Society, in that thou will not afford any relief either of mind, body or
goods, for the necessary Preservation thereof. The Heathen Philosophers and
Politicians have Written more divinely hereof, than many of our modern
Christians. From hence also it proceeds, that the Roman Law ordains punishment
to that Neighbor who will not deliver the Slave from the Outrageous fury of
his Master. Amongst the Egyptians, if any man had seen another assaulted and
distressed by Thieves and Robbers, Diod. Si. cul. lib. 2. Chapter 2.
and did not according to his power presently assist him, he was adjudged
worthy of death, if at least he discovered or delivered not the Delinquents
into the hands of the Magistrate: If he were remiss in performing this duty,
for the first Mulct, he was to receive a certain number of blows on his Body,
and to fast three days together. Likewise much upon the same reason is grounded
that Law of this Nation, which amerces that Hundred where a Robbery or Murder
is committed, and no care taken to apprehend the Offenders. Now, if the
Neighbor be so firmly obliged (even by Heathen Laws) to succor his distressed
Neighbor, though unknown to him, when he is assaulted by Thieves: shall it not
be much more lawful for a Christian Prince to assist, not Slaves against an
Imperious Master, or Children against a furious Father; but pious Protestant
Subjects, against an Idolatrous Tyrant? And if he carelessly or wilfully omit
this duty; Theucid. lib. 1.
deserves he not himself to be esteemed an Offender, as well as the other a
Robber, who neglected to assist his Neighbor in that danger? Thucydides (lib.
1.) upon this subject writes, That these are not only Tyrants who make other
men Slaves, but much more those who having means to suppress and prevent such
oppression, take no care to perform it. A Tyrant is in some measure compelled
to hold a straight hand over those whom by violence and Tyranny he has
reduced; And to secure the Ills that he has done by doing greater, because as
Tiberius said, He holds the Wolf by the Ear* whom he can neither hold without
pain and force, nor yet let go without Danger and Death. But he who with a
negligent and idle regard looks on the outragiousness of a Tyrant, and the
Massacring of Innocents, whom he might have preserved, like the Barbarous
spectators of the Roman Sword-players, is so much more guilty than the Tyrant
himself, by how much the Cruel and Homicidious directors and appointers of
those Bloody Sports, were more obnoxious than the poor and constrained Actors
themselves. If any object, that it is against reason and equity to meddle with
another concerns, Pompon. de Regi. Jur. Leg.
I answer (...) did the Old Man in Terence; I am a Man, and I believe that all
duties of humanity are fit and convenient for me: If others seeking to cover
their Negligence and Baseness, allege that Bounds and Jurisdictions are
distinguished one from another, and that it is not Lawful to thrust ones Sickle
into another Harvest* Neither am I also of that opinion, that it is Lawful
upon any such presence to encraoch upon another Jurisdiction or Right or upon
that occasion to Vsurp another Country, as many have taken such shadows to
do, Ci^er. 2. Offic.
I would not (I say) that after the manner of those Arbitrators whom Cicero
speaks of, thou Adjudge the things in controversy to thy self; I require only,
that you repress the Prince who invades the Kingdom of Christ, that you take
out the Serpents Sting, that you raise up a Church that lies grovelling on the
Ground as it were at her last Gasp, that you stretch forth your hand of
Compassion to an Afflicted People, and that you so discharge your self of this
duty, that all men may see your principal end was the Public benefit of Humane
society, and not any private advantage of your own, which must ever give place
to Public Interests.

Briefly, to Epitomize what has been formerly said: If a Prince outragiously
surpass the bounds of Piety and Justice, a Neighboring Prince may Justly and
Religiously leave his own Country, not to Invade and Vsurp another, but to
contain the other within the Limits of Justice and Equity; Nay he is obliged in
Honor and Conscience so to do. If a Prince Tyranize over the People, a
Neighour Prince ought to yield succor as freely and willingly to the People,
as he would do to the King his Brother, if the People mutinied against him: If
Porsenna brought Tarquinius Superbus back to Rome; much more justly might
Constantine, requested by the Senate and Roman People, expel Maxentius the
Tyrant from Rome. The commendation due to this sort of Courtesy has wrought
so strange effects in the Hearts of many Princes, that some have received their
professed Enemies; And others have fallen out with their dearest friends, rather
than Restore a Prince being fled unto them for succor, when he was demanded at
their Hands; Some have been offerred great Rewards which have been offered for
the Restitution of such Exiles as lived within their Territories, others have
entertained them with large yearly Pensions, and presently aided them for the
recovery of their Kingdoms; Some have given them whole Cities to dwell in, and
others have been so forward in relieving such as implored their help, that they
have lost their onw Kingdoms in defending them. But as the case now stands,
nothing, can be a greater Security to us, than a League defensive against the
growing power of the Papist; Du Hailian lib. 24
Vis unitafortior.

In the Histories of France it is written, that Charles the seventh having upon
some displeasure conceived against the Dauphin, (who was his eldest Son,)
banished him out of his Realm, and commanded that none of his Subjects harbor
or receive him: The Duke of Burgundy (who was then Vassal to the French King,
and mortal enemy to the Dauphin,) did nevertheless, not only receive him, but
also gave him leave to choose what Castle, Hold, or City of his soever he
pleased to dwell in, and sent presently Ambassadors to his Father to make his
excuse for receiving him.

Piero Mexias, Vid. de Hen. 3.
in his Book of the Lives of the Roman Emperors, reports, That the Emperor
Henry the third, (when as Peter King of Hungary was for his evil Government
driven out of his Kingdom by the Rebellion of his own Subjects,) did not only
receive and entertain him, but also restored him again to his own Kingdom;
although the same Peter not long before had favored the Duke of Bohemia, who
Rebelled against the said Emperor.

David distrusting the protection of God flies to Achib King of Goth, 2. Kings.
who gives him Siglag to dwell in; And Jeroboam flying unto Shisack King of
Egypt was honorably received of him, and maintained there like a Prince, till
Rehoboam being deposed for his cruelty, he was sent for out of Egypt, and made
King of Israel.

The King of Scots received Henry the sixth, flying from the persecution of
Edward the fourth, Holinshed.
entertained him with a yearly Pension, and aided him for the Recovery of his
Kingdom. Frederick King of Naples, being oppressed by his Uncle the King of
Spain, fled unto the French King Lewis, Illescas. de Alexandor. 6.
who received him with great Honor and Civility, made him Duke of Anjou, and
gave him, 30000, Ducates of yearly Revenues.

Now whether it be lawful and commendable thus to receive and harbor another
Prince who flies to him for Succor: If Humanity deserves more commendation,
than Cruelty; If it be true what the Poet says Turpius ejicitur quam non
Admittitur Hospes; If Princes were first Ordained and Instituted to yield
Relief to as many as were distressed* If wiser Princes have oftener received
than rejcted them; And lastly, if God most commonly Blessed them who yielded
such Relief, and contrariwise punished those who exercised no kind of Humanity
toward them; Then this doubt is easily, and the difficulty quite taken away.
First, that Humanity which is incident to Men, is to be preferred before
Cruelty, which is proper to Beasts, no Man is so senseless as to doubt:
Secondly, that the Wisdom of those Princes who have Har^our'd their Neighbors
and Allies, T. Walsingh. in his Neustia.
is commended beyond all measure by the Writers who mention them; Whereas on
the contrary, for those Vnhospitable Princes, all Histories shall sooner
perish, then their Infamy be forgotten. And lastly, all our Chronicles do
sufficiently testify, how God Plagued the posterity of Henry the fifth, for
his extremity used to the poor distressed Prince of Scotland. And French
Histories do declare, that God never prospered Lewis (Surnamed Oultremer) King
of France, because he had dealt so unkindly with Richard Duke of Normandy an
Infant, whom he had received into his Protection.

Moreover, since it hereby appears, that every Prince ought to relieve his
Royal Brother in distress, so much more readily ought he to afford Succor to a
distressed People, by how much there is more just cause to pity many afflicted,
than one alone. If a man becomes a Wolf to man, who hinders that man (according
to the Proverb) may not be instead of God to the needy? And therefore the
Ancients have reckoned Hercules amongst the Gods, because he punished and tamed
Procrustes Busiris, and other Tyrants, the Plagues of Mankind, and Monsters of
the Earth. So whilst the Roman Empire retained her freedom, she was truly
accounted the Safeguard of all the World against the violence of Tyrants,
because the Senate was the Port and Refuges of Kings, People and Nations. In
like manner Charlemain undertook to War against the Lombardy, being requested
to assist the Nobility of Italy, although the Kingdom of Lombards had been of a
long continuance, and he had no just pretense of Right over them; Also when
Charles the Bald King of France had Tyranically put to death the Governor of
the Country between the River Soyne and Loyre, with Duke Lambert, and another
Nobleman, called Jamitius, and diverse others of the Nobility fled for fear to
Lewis King of Germany, desiring his Aid, it was there in full Assembly agreed,
that Lewis should wage War against Charles for the Re-establishing in their
Good, Honors, and Estates, those whom he had unjustly dispossessed.

Finally, as there has ever been Tyrants dispersed in all parts, so likewise
all Histories testify that there has been Neighboring Princes to oppose
Tyranie, and Maintain the People in their Rights. Wherefore that all Protestant
Princes would at this time imitate so worthy Examples, by endeavoring to
suppress that French Tyrant, who so oppresses both Souls and Bodies, and the
true Reformed Church of Christ, Office; 1.36.
is the earnest Prayers of all poor distressed French Protestants, and hearty
desires of all good Christians: For he that repelleth not injuries from his
fellow (if he be able) is in fault as he that offers it, says Ambrose, Piety
commands that the Law and Church of God be maintained: Justice requires that
Tyrants and Destroyers of Mankind be compelled to reason: Charity Challenges
the Right of Relieving and Restoring the oppressed. De Bed* and par. 2.
Now those that make no account of those things, do (as much as in them lies)
drive Piety, Justice, and Charity out of this World. It were to be wished
(says Grotius) that many Princes and People at this day would take into
consideration that free and Pious Sp^ech of Fuelco Archbishop once of Rhemes,
Admonishing Charles the Simple, thus. Who may not be afraid, seeing you covet
amity with the Enemies of God, when to the Ruin and overthrow of the Christian
Name, you take unto you Pagan Arms, and enter into Leagues detestable? For
there is little difference between associating with Pagans, and worshipping of
Idols, as the Papists do. 2 Thessalonians. ^.15.
Be ye not therefore (says St. Paul) unequally yoaked together with
unbelievers; For what fellowship has Righteousness with Unrighteousness? What
communion has Light with Darkness? 2. Cor. 6.14.15.
And what Concord has Christ with Belial? Or what part has He that believes
with an Infidel? Nevertheless too too many Protestants have Espoused and
Leagued with the Popish Interest, whereby alone the French are now rendered thus
formidable, In so much that (under God) nothing but a Protestant sincere and
Cordial League can retrieve the Reformed Religion: That as heretofore Henry the
third of France, So now Lewis the 14th. may be Ruined by that very League which
he entered into for the Extirpation of the Protestants.

Many there are (I am sensible) who raise a groundless fear and jealousy
amongst us, as if, like Zophirus of Old, who by maiming himself and
counterfeiting the Renegado from Darius, J^^n. li^. 2
was by that means admitted into Babylon, and so betrayed it to the Enemy.
These distressed French Hug^nets should come over with any such design into
this Nation: But these surmises, will seem very ridiculous, if we weigh all
circumstances concerning them. As First, the manner of their Arrival in such
small Vessels as none but men in greatest extremity would hazard themselves in.
Secondly what sort of persons they be that come over; whether they be not of
all sorts as well Women and Children, as Men? And whether they are not mostly
Men of professions, as Fishermen, Clothiers, Weavers, and such from whom we
have more reason to expect advantage from their Trades, than danger from their
Arms? Thirdly, whether there are not as manny arrived in Holland and other
Protestant Countries as here, and whether the States have not the sam^ Charity
for their distress as we have? Fourthly, whether such a conspiracy (if so)
could possibly be concea^ed amongst so many thousands who are Arrived in all
parts? Fifthly and lastly, whether it stands not to reason that the same Popish
Fury which banish them from France should not as well to conceal their own
Cruelty and ke^p them from raising an outcry against Popery by their
complaints, as to have them discountenanced and discredited where ^'re they
come. Likewise maliciously and out of design raise all these Calumnies and
false Reports against them; So that there needs* little of Argument to a
thinking Impartial Protestant to convince him of the reality of their
sufferings. And for the benefit that may accrue to the Nation, by their
Planting themselves amongst us. He that reads ancient Histories shall find that
the Romans Hospitality to Strangers was the first step of their greatness, and
Corner Stone of that vast Empire. Thus whilst Athens and Sparta (though for all
other things endowed with most excellent Law.) yet upon their Nicity of
admitting Strangers amongst them, remained inconsiderable in the World as to
power Rome in the mean while having her City thro^g'd with Inhabitants, from
being Numerous, soon grew Potent, Creseit interea Roma, Livy.
Albae Ruinis: the Ruin of Alba, was the Rise of the Romans; and may the fall
of France be the same to England. Never any State was so open to receive
strangers into their Body, as were the Romans, their manner was to grant
Naturalization, (which they call Jus Civitatis and to grant it in the Highest
Degree, that is, not only Jus Commercii, Jus Connubii, Jus Hereditatit, but
also Jus suffragii, and Jus Honorum; and this not to Singular Persons alone,
but likewise to whole Families; yea, to Cities, and sometimes to Nations; And
it sorted with them accordingly; for winning as much of their generosity, as
Arms, Rome grew to be the Metropolitan of the Universe. Now that England
following the steps of Ancient Rome in her Hospitality, may likewise imitate
her in her Victories and Grandeur is the Hearty Prayers of, Philopatris.

FINIS

