A DESCRIPTION OF THE OFFICE of CREDIT; By the use of which, none can possibbly
sustain Loss, but every man may certainly receive great GAIN and WEALTH. With a
Plain DEMONTRATION, How a man may Trade for Six times his Stock, and never be
Trusted; and that (if generally received) there can afterward no Accident
happen to cause a Deadness or Slowness of Trade, except Wars, nor need men
make any more bad Debts. WITH Diverse other public and paivate conveniences and
profits: As also Objections hitherto made against it, largely and fully
Answered.

LONDON, Printed by the order of the Society, for Thomas Rooks, 1665.

To the Reader.
Courteous Reader,
HAving a purpose to treat of the Office of Credit, which has no where (as we
are informed) an exact parallel, except Naples and Venice, though in several
other places, as Florence, Genoa, Amsterdam, Hamburgh, etc. Something is very
like it, and enough to convince any of the possibity of it is being practicable;
we have been a little larger in the Description then were necessary, if it were
not new; and that this Treatise were directed to a few judicious pesons; but
(it being of general Concernment, and consequently intended to all) we judged
it convonient to collect all that could be thought of in it is behalf. And
though we cannot expect the whole should satisfy all, since men's fancies are
as different as their faces, and one man's me at is another man's poison; yet we
desire to have such plenty and variety, as there may be something to please
every palate. And to insinuate this Design with greater facility into men's
affections, whereby the use may be universally propagated; we have endeavored
in Chap. 8. to remove two vulgar errors. 1. That Credit in Bank, is only
Current, because men can have Money when they will. 2. That without Money no
Trade can be managed. In the handling of which, (if our arguments are
convincing and prevalent) we have obtained our arm, for then, this Enterprise
which is attended with so many public and private benefits as will
sufficiently reward those that shall heartily receive and use it, must succeed.
And though we will not deny, that we have had self-end in this Design, and it is
publication, yet we dare affirm, that it may evidently redound to his Majesty's
profit, and the mighty improvement of the Trade of his three Kingdoms, without
the Interfering of their respective Interests. Now, being sensible of the
Consequences of being in Print, we have accordingly armed our selves either for
fair or foul opposition, hoping that the most generous, will fairly acquaint
us with their Objections, and patiently hear our Answers; and for such who are
contrarily minded, we shall neither value their Friendship, nor fear their
clandestine Machitions: We will only add thus much, to prevent them, if
possible, that they who will endeavor it is subversion may be of two sorts;
such who because they have no Concern in the management of it, are ignorant
that they reap advantage by it; others that fear a prejudice from it. For the
first, we dare presume there will be no person in England, but mediately or
immediately, will taste the good of it. And for the last, We can assure them,
this Office designs chiefly, to fill a vacancy, that is, to encourage such
persons to frequent it, who in the like cases, at present, are no Bodies
Customers. But admit it should more or less, entrench, upon some men's practices
(We are sure it cannot upon any man's privileged calling,) we may be as
confident, that what they lose in the length, they will gain in the breadth,
which we shall make no difficulty to prove to any that will desire it. We shall
further make this request to thee, that because the Title promises so much
beyond thy present prospect, thou will not therefore reject it, as a project or
Chymera, but either suspend thy judgment, till thou have read and examined it,
or (if thy want of faith has begotten such a prejudice, as not to suffer thee
to read it) be silent rather then by thy unjust Censure, to preoccupie the
judgments of others. Be not as the Dog in the Manger; who will neither eat nor
let the Horse eat,

Farewell
CHAP. I. The Definition of the Office, illustrated with diverse Similitudes
TO avoid a tedious Introduction, intending brevity, we immediately come to the
definition of the Office; which is, neither Bank nor Lumbard, and yet, in
effect, is both united.

It is neither Bank nor Lumbard, because the foundation of Credit in Bank, is
Money, and here it is Goods and Merchandise. And for goods received in a Lumbard
they deliver out Money, and here Credit, and yet it is like both: For after the
same manner and limitations, in every respect, as goods are received, stored
and preserved in a Lumbard, shall they be in this Office, and Credit shall be
delivered out and transferred exactly, after the manner as it is in foreign
Banks. Each party that either raises or receives Credit, having his Folio in
the Bank-Book, and is Registered Debtor and Creditor, according to what he
receives and pays.

It is a general Storehouse, receiving all parties Goods, and delivering out
their Tickets, if desired, as it is at this day, practiced in Virginia,
Barbados and other Plantations, where the Planters bring in their Tobacco and
Sugars to the Storehouses (in the absence of Ships) and receive a Note; (there
being no Money) from the Storekeeper, who is but a private person, and with
that Note, as far as the Storekeeper is known, can they purchase any other
Commodity.

It is a general Accomptant, Book-keeper, or Cash-keeper, because, in one
Book, it Registers many men's Receipts and Payments; and at that day twelve
Month a person is entered Creditor, they even his Accounts, and return the
Overplus in Money in specie to the Creditor, or (if he desire it) keep it, and
enter him Creditor for so much, for the next year.

It is likewise a third hand, or place to keep Stakes: For the Goods lodged in
the Office, are the real Debtor, and the person possessing the Credit of them
(although a hundred times, by Assignment, transferred) is the Creditor. This
Office only secures the Goods as a Pledge, till the Creditor is either
satisfied with Money, or such Commodities as please him, which he purchases
with the Credit of the Office, and peradventure of some one person, whose Goods
may be engaged, with which Credit he redeems them, as well as with Money.

It is likewise a common Security: For the party raising Credit, does, as it
were, by the Depositing of his Goods, engage this Office to become bound for so
much to his Creditor or Chapman, and successively to as many as it may be
Assigned over or transmitted, till the Credit be discharged, which cannot well
be deferred longer than one year.

It is also a Witness to all Payments made in the Office, witnessing that such
and such Goods must not be discharged, without Money, Goods, or the Credit of
some persons Goods, brought in, of the same value. And likewise, that one
person, this day, and to morrow, another, and next day a third, is Creditor of
the Goods; the Pledge still following the Credit.

It is a Pound Ouvert, wherein the Goods are pounded, till the Trespassed
Creditor is satisfied, and though there secured, yet still under the care of
their Deliverer.

CHAP. II. The manner of Using this Office.
IF any person, for necessity or convenience, has occasion for Credit, he may
bring his Goods to the Office. If fine, in Truncks, Chests, or Boxes; if gross
in Packs, Hogs-heads or Vessels, where they are viewed and appraised by
Officers, who consider what value of Credit they will bear, without prejudice
to the Office, being also the Undertakers advantage to lend as much as they can
with safety; and of what durance they may be. As to the value, if it be
overprized, it may injure the Office: but if undervalued, it cannot much
prejudice the Owner, because for redemption of them, he brings no more Money or
Credit back to the Office, than he received, and it is charges according to the
Rules hereafter prescribed for the benefit of what the Office yielded him in
Credit. As to the Durance, it must be limited according to the nature of the
Commodity: For some, if not redeemed in a Month, must be fold with the
knowledge of the owner; Others will last three months, and some a year, but
none may continue longer, without a new praisement, and all charges cleared:
because goods may fall in Market price, and decay of their intrinsic value,
and in that manner they may continue as many years as the deliverer pleases.

After the Appraisement, they are marked and lodged, and a Bill of sale
registered of them in the book: signed and sealed by the Deliverer, for the
Offices security, where note, that the office gives credit, and registers all
by five pounds: so that if any person has odd money to pay, as twenty seven
pounds, he must pay twenty five pounds in the office, and the odd forty
shillings in Money: then is the Deliverer entered creditor, in an other common
book of accounts, and if he be desirous to satisfy a debt, or buy commodities,
he writes a note after this form, which is filed up in the office for their
Warrant.

GENTLEMEN,
Pray make A. B. creditor for so much, and me debtor for the like sum, for
which this shall be your Warrant Dated

To the Society governing the Office of credit.
Signed C.D.

Which he does for every payment he makes out of the whole sum, or he may
include several sums to diverse persons in one note, and the like does every
creditor, that has any credit in the office: whether he raised or received it,
from those that did: and when a Creditor pays twelve Persons, he needs make
but one journey for them all, in an afternoon, and he may likewise receive from
as many: and make no more in the morning to note in his Table book, who has
made him creditor; which he enters at home in his bank book, and if any that
promised it have neglected it, they may be reminded.

The Deliverer likewise when the bill of sale is registered, may note down the
lowest Rate that he is willing to sell his goods for, and (if in the mean time
the office can procure a chapman, at that rate or a better) he shall have
notice of it,

The Deliverer has also free access to his goods, at the appointed hours of
the office being open, to take care of them, and prevent any damage that may
happen to them; or to bring a Chapman for them, if he can get any, who upon
discharging the office, may immediately take away the goods: or raise credit
upon them again if he pleases.

When the Deliverer has a purpose to redeem his goods, he may bring either
Moneys, credit or the like value of goods, and he may have the first returned.

If the goods be not redeemed, according to the time agreed on, they are to be
sold at a public Outcry, where the Deliverer may be present, and see the
commodities sold, and Hoise up the price of them, and what they are sold for,
over and above the credit and charges of them, the Deliverer receives,
allowing some small thing by the pound, for the sale of them.

Although most Merchants of Experience or Dealing in the world, and other
Tradesmen that have traveled beyond Sea, and have seen the Customs and
manner used in the Bank or Lumbard, and this very thing practiced as we are
informed under a Monarchy, as Naples and a free state, as Venice, might receive
satisfaction from what is already said: and fully apprehend the Benefit and
Advantages which may succeed; yet (because we cannot hope, that all who shall
have occasion to taste the sweet of this office, are so judicious and
understanding) we shall illustrate it with examples real, and imaginary, and
prescribe also an other manner of proceeding in this office: which may be
chosen by any that approve not of the first, though it will be with greater
Charges and Trouble, as for real Examples.

What is more frequent then pawning and Mortgaging of goods of all sorts, Lands
and Friends: and the receiving credit for goods, as those that sell at time:
and credit for money, as Bonds, Bills of exchange, and Bills under hand: only
the difference is, the credit of the Office is current, and these other
dorment. Besides the Store-keepers of the Leeward Islands before mentioned, is
the exact Model of it. Chap. 1.

For Imaginary Examples, Suppose a Merchant raises 100 l. credit in the
Office, and buys of the Clothier cloth for a 100 l. he goes with the Clothier
to the Office, and is made debtor for so much, and the Clothier Creditor, the
Clothier having bought wool, is made debtor, and the Woolmonger creditor upon
account: the said Woolmonger buys wool of a Farmer, for so much more or less,
so the Woolmonger is made debtor, and the Farmer creditor: The Farmer must pay
his Rent, he is made debtor, and the Landlord creditor, the Landlord buys
goods of the Mercer, Grocer, Vintner, or the like, or from all, then he is made
debtor, and the Mercer or other Tradesman creditor, then it may be such Mercer
or other Tradesman buys goods from the same Merchant who first took up credit,
and stands yet debtor: but upon sale of his goods to the Mercer or other
Tradesman, both clear their accounts in the office, and so in all Trades, as
occasion presents.

Again, several Merchants have credit in the office, as for example, A. has
1000 l. B. 2000. and C. 3000 l. and so more or less, A. has occasion to pay
unto B. 500 l. which he requires the office to do; whereupon they make A.
debtor for 500 l. and C. creditor for the same sum. So that A having assigned
unto B. 500 l. has now no more but 500 l. in the office, where he had a 1000
l. before, and B. has 2500 l. where he had but 2000 l. before, and so in the
same manner of assignation, B. does pay unto C. and C. unto others, without
touching one farthing of Money.

The second way of proceeding in this office, is to take at the delivery of any
goods, one conditional bond, to have upon the return of so much credit and
charges, the goods specified in the bond or schedule annexed, returned, and an
other bond of the sum credited, which the office will renew to every person
to whom it is transferred. As for example, A, B. a Merchant has a bond from the
office of 100 l. with which he buys so much cloth of a Clothier, whose name
the office inserts creditor, in a new bond: the Clothier buys wool of a
Gentleman, to the same value whose name likewise is inserted, in an other new
bond (the old still supposed to be delivered, and each creditor every time
registered) the gentleman owes a Mercer as much, wherefore he gets the office to
make a new bond to the Mercer, the Mercer buys to the like value of silks and
velvets, of A. B. the Merchant who returns to the office the two bonds, the one
for his goods, the other for his credit, and with them redeems his own goods.
You may note, that it is not absolutely necessary for a man to bring again the
very bond of credit, that had its rise from his own goods but any man's bond of
credit of the like value is as sufficient, or else so much Money, which must
answer any person that brings the bond at the years end, at which time it
becomes due.

CHAP. III The Charges and Terms upon which the Office receives Credit.
1. THe First Deliverer or Proprieter when he (...) his goods is to pay (...)
in the Office, according to the following rates (viz) one penny for every 5 l.
credit raised on them if under 100 l. if 100 l. 1. s. and every 25 l. more 3 d.
and so proportionably for more or less: or for Sums rising by 25 l. three
pence per week: and by 5 l. one penny per week, which is for the appraising,
registring, stowing, careful preserving from accidental damage, etc.

2. Warehouse-Room must be paid according to the nature of the Commodity, as
cheap or cheaper then else where, as for example: for Plate, Jewels, Musk,
Amber-grease and such like, which takes up small room, for every ten pounds
worth of credit, one penny per month.

For Silk, fine Linen, rich Furs, Band-strings, Laces etc. one farthing per
week for five pounds worth. For course Linen, Turkey Carpets, Hangings,
Pictures, etc. one halfpenny per week, for five pounds worth. For Beds,
Bedsteads, Chairs, Stools, Tables, Hemp, Flax, Cordage and other course mean
goods and lumber, one penny per week for every five pounds worth, which prizes
are little or nothing more then Room will cost them else where, and when one
has Commodities there must be place got for them.

3. That the person delivering Credit, pays each time for the registring of
it, from five pound to twenty five pound one penny. From 25. pound to 50 pound
two pence. From 50 pound to 75 pound three pence. From 75 pound to 100 pound
four pence, and so proportionably for more or less: which few men but will
think it well bestowed, rather than be at the trouble of telling, carrying,
hazard, of loss of some, by clipped or counterfeit money: or of the whole by
Theives.

This way can be effected with ease to the Customer, and the Office, and no
damage to either, but, because of the vain jealousies and peevish humors of
some men, and the little or no countenance or assistance this new Office can
hope for from the Law of England, till the great and innumerable advantages
which attend it, become through practice, visible to the Worthies in
Parliament, and from them obtain suitable encouragement, the Undertakers, for
their own security are compelled to be at greater trouble, and occasion the
like, with something greater charge to such as may frequent the Office: from
which superfluous charge and trouble, it is hoped that they may be delivered,
when once it shall have the happiness to be debated by the Parliament.

One trouble and superfluous Charge then is the making and paying for each Bond
6 pence, as often as it is transferred.

The Office will sometimes for the accommodation of a Customer, if he have
occasion for Money in Specie, furnish him before the time, but that is a work
of supererrogation.

The Office is, at first, but four hours in the day open, that is from 9. to
11. in the morning, and from 3. to 5. in the afternoon.

It receives no Goods of so small a value, as will not raise 5. l. Credit, nor
for less time than a Week.

The public Outcry before mentioned, after the first year, is to be held at
certain times every Month.

The manner of selling them is at the Deliverers choice, whether to begin a
high price and fall, or a low price and rise. Or else, the Commodities being
valued, as many as are willing to buy it, shall put in so many equal parts of
the whole sum, and have so many Lots put in, whereof one contains the Prise,
and every one receiving a Lot, is certain that one gains the Prise, the other
bear the loss, after the manner of rifling. The Goods to be sold, are to be
exposed in an open Hall, to public view, two or three days before.

All Merchants, or others, may have convenient Warehouse-room in the Office,
paying the ordinary Rates, and if at any time they desire to use the Credit of
all, or part of their goods from that time they begin, the first forementioned
Charge, and the Warehouse as before. And when they have no longer occasion for
the Credit, they may return it with the Charges, and continue them as before as
long as they please, upon the single charge of the Warehouse.

All persons are desired to enter a Caveat at the Office, as soon as they have
received any loss, that the Office may put a stop, if in case any such Goods
should be brought, for which Entry they pay 4. d, and after the Rate of 1. d.
per pound, if found.

They are likewise desired (if they suppose themselves wronged) to enter their
Complaints, at a place daily appointed in the Office; which upon proof, shall
receive immediate redress; which if they find not, they may appeal to the
Court of Aldermen, or -- who will redress them, by security deposited in their
hands to that purpose.

Every person, for his own and the Offices security, is desired to send his
Goods, which can be carried by Porters, by the Porters of the Office, whom they
may know by the City and the Office Ticket.

Any man that is desirous to free himself of the trouble, of coming to make
Roceipts or Payments in the Office, may entrust some one Servant of his, and
present him to the Office, and they will observe his direction, till
countermanded by the principal.

CHAP. IV. The Public and Private Advantages.
THe public and private Advantages may be something guest at, by those which
attend Banks and Lumbards; for by the help of the Bank, Trade is as much
augmented, as if there were twice the quantity of Money in the place as there
really is; for being deposited in Bank, the Credit is current, and the Specie
likewise: and a Lumbard supplies many to follow their Callings, who having no
other Credit, but what their Goods can gain them, must necessarily otherwise
perish; yet it is but a commendable accommodation of the Needy, being not able
to receive more Goods then it has Money to answer. So that a Bank does but
double the stock, and a Lumbard cannot exceed it: both which are far short of
this Office, which can augment the Trade so many fold as the Wares in the
Nation exceed the Moneys, which may be 20. or 40. Nor is it stinted like the
Lumbard, but can deliver out Credit, as long as there are Commodities to be
brought in, were they millions, and is as well for the convenience of the Rich,
as the benefit of the poor.

This Office being encouraged, Trade can never languish, unless interrupted by
Force or Wars, which at present is obstructed, or declines, either because the
Money of the Nation is diminished, or that there is not a proportion of Bullion
imported correspondent to other Commodities: and so one slow or dishonest man,
for want of payment, can for so much obstruct the Trade of 100. or more persons.

Having thus made a comparison betwixt the Bank and Lumbard, and this Office,
we will now enumerate the consequent benefits.

First to the Public.
1. Whatsoever quantity of Credit shall be raised in this Office, will be as
good, and of as much use, as if there were so much Money in specie, added to
the present stock in the Nation. 2. That the Trade of these Nations will be
increased proportionably to the Credit raised in the Office. 3. That the Kings
Customs and Excise will be improved, according to the increase of Trade, which
(by this Office) may modestly be supposed in two or three years time, to be
increased to twenty times as much as 4. That large Stocks may be suddenly
raised, for the better mannagement of the Fishing in the three Kingdoms, or
any other considerable Trade, as that of Guine, and the East and West Indies.
5. That more Manufactures will be made, as to Quality and Quantity. 6. That all
Lands may be improved, waste Grounds manured, and Mines now neglected, wrought
in to the great increase of Exportations. 7. That it will be a means to
encourage new and revive old Inventions. 8. That it will probably make a
greater and quicker Trade, whereby the number and estates of the Rich will be
augmented, and the number and necessities of the Poor diminished. 9. It will
prevent men's being, through miserable poverty, necessitated to cheat and rob,
for there will be plenty of employment, for all that will work, which by woeful
experience is now found to be contrary. 10. Ireland and Scotland may flourish
without damage to England, which, notwithstanding their abounding with
substantial Commodities, languish. 11. All sorts of Wares will be afforded at
cheaper rates, without prejudice to those that make them and sell them, because
trading will be greater, quicker, and as good as with ready money. 12. Credit
can neither be transported to the Nations disadvantage, nor hoarded up. 13.
English Merchants will be enabled to engross the Commodities of another
Country, and to withhold it from others, as the Dutch do at present, by the
help of their Banks. 14. It will procure the English Merchants credit, in
foreign parts, and Banks to buy any commodities there without money, as well
or better than with money. 15. That England (being so conveniently situated,
stored with safe Harbors, and blessed with plenty of staple Commodities and
Provisions) may (when by this Office supplied with as much Stock as is
necessary) become the Emporium of Europe, if not of the World.
Secondly, Private Benefits are either to the party receiving, or the party
raising Credit.
1. The trouble of counting Money may be much avoided. 2. The usual loss by
receiving counterfeit and clipped Money, will be saved. 3. Many fruitless
journeys for Moneys will be spared. 4. There will be fewer bad Debts, and fewer
imprisoned for them. 5. There will be fewer suits of Law about such Debts. 6.
Most men will rather deal with persons that have credit in the Office, than
upon their single credit, for then they deal securely, which most (having
through the deceitfulness of men smarted so much) do earnestly endeavor.
1. Men may be furnished at 3 and 5 per cent. at most, to support their credit,
and enable them to manage their Trades, and take the advantage of the Market.
2. Men may be assured not to fail, at all times, of the accommodation of credit
upon their Wares. 3. There is no danger of having the Goods imbezel'd, as with
Broakers. 4. More care against Fire and Thieves, than any persons can have in
their own houses. 5. Unvendable Goods may then be sold, or, at least, their
credit current, 6. The sale of Commodities is not at all retarded, every person
having the freedom of bringing his Chapmen to view them. 7. Men will not be
necessitated to under-sell the Market, to procure Money to pay Debts. 8.
Prevention of hard Bargains, by taking Ware on trust. 9. They will be enabled
to make quicker returns, and trade for five times as much as they can do now,
without being trusted.
There will be likewise less trouble to both, in the keeping of their Accounts.
So that, in fine, it will increase Trade and Wealth, and employ the Poor; nay
do more then Money, which Solomon said, did answer all things.

To confirm many of these Benefits, we have quoted page 71.73.153.154.155. of
that Authentic Lex Market.

The Inconveniences which have crept into Use, for want of this or Lumbards
(besides the privation of the premised Benefits) have been the intolerable
Grievances, Oppressions, and Exactions of Broakers, in their taking
30.40.50.60. and more per Cent, per Annum: and taking advantage, if Goods be
not redeemed at the prefixed time, to convert them to their own use, having, it
may be, not Lent a fourth of the value: their Breaking or Dying, and so the
Goods are Imbezled by Executours, with many more, which are connived at, till a
better Accommodation may be invented.

CHAP. V.
HAving thus in some measure Explained the Nature of this Office, and its
Benefits, we will come to answer such Objections as have been made.

Objection 1. That there is no need of this Office, because there is Money and
Trade enough.

We would first willingly know, how many there are, that have so much Money,
that they know not what to do with more, if they had it? If there be few or
none such, then surely this Office may be necessary; for it can enable a Man by
the Use of it, to deal for six times, or at least double, what he is worth, and
yet never be Trusted. As suppose a Silk-man be worth a thousand pound, with
which he buys Silk, he brings this into the Office, and raises 9/10 of the
worth, which is nine hundred pound; or more or less, according to the nature
of the Commodity, with which he buys again from the same Merchant more, and
brings that also to the Office to raise Credit, and so one upon the other,
according to these following Examples.

The Rule of the Office being, for the most part, to Lend. 9/10. and.

Example 1. 2. 3. 4. Principal. 1000 1000 1000 100 750 900 500 90 565 810 250
80 280 730 125 70 210 655 60 65 155 585 1935 60 100 525 55 3060 470 50 435 45
300 40 270 35 250 30 130 25 100 20 7160 765

By which 'its evident, that this Silkman may multiply his stock to 7161 l.
without ever being Credited, for the Merchant is paid in credit which is
current, and the Silkman as fast as he can get a chapman, may either sell at
his shop, or the Office: where the whole charge after three per Cent p. an.
comes for a half year to an 105 l. if no part were in that time sold, and his
gains at 10 per Cent. the usual gain comes to 716 l. where his gain would
without this help, have been but 100 l. after the same rate. Besides this
hinders him not from buying half upon credit, and then his stock would have
been 14322 l. and his gains proportionable, or suppose less credit were lent
out of the Office, taking one commodity with an other, according to the first
and third examples, it does treble or double the principal stock. I have
likewise added a fourth example of a smaller sum (upon which 90 in the hundred
is lent) that the vulgar capacities may the better understand the advantage and
profit.

We must note that a man is obliged neither to buy always from the same
Merchant, nor the same commodities, but from whom and what he pleases, the
credit being current.

But those Objectors take this assertion for granted, because they and some
they know, have no want of either Money or Trade, which is a deceitful
calculation. For, 1. If there were never so little Money, and bad Trade, yet
some would fare well enough, though the fewer.

2. If there were Moneys and Trade enough, I suppose those abounding Merchants
would not meet so often with bad Debts, and delatory Payments, as has been
usual.

3. The failing of so many Housekeepers, seems to prove, that either there is
less Money, or a greater quantity of Men to use it, and so less falls to every
one's share, which is unavoidable, unless that Money increased as fast as Men,
or prevented by this expedient, which (though Men and Goods increased ad
infinitum) can accommodate them all with Credit, which answers all the uses and
advantages of Money.

4. Notwithstanding the generallity of men, through prudence or necessity,
contract their expenses, yet grow they never the richer, but rather poorer: For
as all men contract their expenses, so every Tradesman must necessarily
receive less, and then the Commodities lie the longer in the Merchants hands.
So that, where there is a less consumption of Inland and Foreign Commodities,
and a decrease of most men's profits and gains, we must needs conclude, the
Money of the Nation is diminished, or that some rich Miser hoards it up to look
on. For, if it were in the Usurers hands, it would, upon good Security, be sent
abroad aagain.

And lastly, Though there be the same stock of Money, but a greater quantity of
Commodities than usually imported, Money being the Medium, they must needs lie
dead, till it can go round. For as an hundred yards of cloth requires longer
time to be measured with one yard than 10 yards, so does much and many
Commodities require a longer time to have the same quantity of money answer it,
than fewer, and it will sooner run through ten men's hands than twenty.

But the infallible sign of plenty of Money, and a flourishing Trade, is, when
multitudes have great dealing, and every man that is willing to work be full of
employment; which how far these present times come short off, let the
understanding Header judge.

By the help of this Office, if all the Commodities of Europe were brought in,
there could be no cessation of Trade, for the credit of one Commodity, would
still measure and purchase another; and what could not be spent in England,
might then, by the credit of other Commodities, be transported to other
Countries to find a Market; which now, for want of Money to answer, it lies
rotting here.

But the most pertinent answer is, that it will soon be decided, whether there
be need of this Office, or no? For if there be no need of it, it will have no
customers, and if it have customers, it will be an undeniable argument, that
there is need of it. Vide Lex Market. p. 48. pargr. 4. and p. 53. par. 8.

Obj. 2. That it is a new thing.

I answer, That if no new things were to be received, how come we by all those
Commodities which Adam neither knew nor needed. For all our Enjoyments are new.
Adams Food was nothing but the fruits of Plants and Water, and his Raiment
Fig Leaves. Besides, I may say, that most of our great Offices, which are now
of full and undoubted Reputation, were sometime new, as the Post Office, etc.

CHAP. VI.
Obj. 3. THat it is not practicable.

I Answer, That what is already practiced in other Countries, is practicable,
as Lumbards and Banks. For Goods can be brought by the Proprietor, received,
registered, and securely reposited by the undertakers, as in Lumbards and Men,
for the value of them, can be entered Creditor and Debtor, as they are, for the
value of Money in bank, and so can it be transferred. In all this, there is no
such Herculean labor. Vide Lex Mereat. p. 73. Register.

Obj. 4. That it is not safe under a Monarch.

There was Answer made, by a noble Earl. That it was strange, that any good
thing, which was practicable in a worse Government, should not be so in the
best, which is confirmed by the Bank of Florence, whose Duke is a Monarch. To
which I will add further, That our Sovereign studies to advance, not to
destroy Trade. We may likewise question, whether the Bank of Amsterdam can
answer every Creditor, or no? And no doubt they would, in necessity make bold
with the Bank, rather than lose that and City also, so that it is not wholly
exempt from danger under a free State. But this Office is freed from those
jealousies; for here is not a vast mass of Money, which bears no man's mark, but
the Kings, where no piece can be claimed by any man as his own; but a
Storehouse of Goods, every parcel of which bears its owners mark, and cannot
be carried away and divided, and payment made of it, as of Money, nor will it
be a greater temptation to any Prince to seize on them sooner for being in one
House, than if in one City: and, if we should fear that, we must not get Goods
into our Shops and Warehouses, for fear of Plundering, which can but be
expected from foreign Enemies, not from our own Prince, who binds himself to
Govern by Law.

Nor can we suppose any Prince to understand his own interest so little, as to
hazard the affections of so many of his subjects, as may be concerned in this
Office, in being Deliverers of Goods; and Creditors (some of which may be
clamorous Poor) together with the Undertakers, and the many Officers and
Laborers, who shall be employed in so general and profitable an undertaking,
by seizing the goods in the Office, whereby he also will diminish a great part
of his own revenue of Customs and Excise, which by it receives a 3 or 4 fold
augmentation, if not much more without a Solaecisme, and will sink with it, as
also such a proportion of the Trade of the whole Nation as is caused by it. We
may as well believe he will sell his revenue for two or three years purchase,
for (though there may be a much greater value of Commodities) yet in such a
public calamity (if they were exposed to sale, they being otherwise of little
use) it were a question whether Chapmen could be found, and if found, they
would never give a quarter of the value for them. And after such a violation,
the Office must never hope for Credit, so that such a Prince will irrecoverably
lose a certain increasing Revenue, and the means of great Wealth to his
Subjects, for that which will very doubtfully yield him the value of two years
purchase. And if we should fear his Borrowing upon occasion, because a Society,
we may as well argue, it is dangerous to live in a City, to be of the East India
or Guine Company, or any other Corporation; but we see the contrary.

Objection 5. That there cannot be sufficient Security given to answer the
Trust.

1. I answer: The Interest of the Undertakers, or at least their Bonds, will
make them honest, and their Customers will make them able.

2. It shall be given to the City, or to every private person that desires it,
when he uses the Office.

And if any man has a jealousy that he is wronged, either in his Goods or
Credit, he can immediately examine, and if he believes himself in jured, let
him instantly enter his Complaint, and upon proof shall receive from the Office
present redress, as before mentioned, or else he may take his remedy at Law,
against the whole, or any part of the Society.

Objection 6. That it will be a Discredit for the Credible Merchants to Morgage
their Goods.

I answer: That it being honest and profitable, when it is once common, it will
be no Disrepute, according to the Dutch Proverb, Lants wise Lants eer, Country
Custom is Country Honor, especially when it will not always be Necessity,
but for the most part Industry, that will invite men to the use of it, as in
Lex Market. fol. 153. For it is a disrepute only when a man is thought to have
reduced himself to that necessity, through imprudent and vicious Courses; for
shame and discredit, ought only to be the reward of vice: so that if a person
were reduced to such necessity, by Fire, War, Thieves, Loss at Sea, or any
such like Casualty, it would become us rather to pity than scorn him. Now,
contraryly, to such as use this Office, in order to an industrious improvement
of their Estates, is the greatest honor and commendation, due: and
consequently, Scorn and Contempt, to those who through Folly, and Sloth reject
it.

2. If it be a discredit or Damage to any, it must be only to those that Trade
with other men's Stocks, who having little, may be unwilling to be thought to
have less. For they who trade with their own, if they have but honest Gain to
Warrant them, eannot be injured, neither in Reputation, nor Goods, and this
Office invites only such as may receive accommodation, not inconvenience from
it.

3. If it be a discredit, I know none are exempted from it, or a greater, but
such as can raise Money on their word or single Bond, for the rest, if they
will have money, they must Pawn either Land, Goods, or Friend: and whether it
be not ten times more honest and Credible, to pawn either of his own, than his
Friend, I leave the ingenuous. Reader to judge, and yet we know that many a
good and rich Merchant, does Pawn both Land and Friends, and some (I am
informed) do Goods, which may as fitly be as the other: Nor can I judge it a
greater discredit, to be Debtor to the Office, upon the security of Goods,
than to any person whatsoever upon personal Security.

4. It may be so ordered, if men please themselves, that no man can know whose
Goods are brought into the Office, but the Party himself, and the Officers, for
he needs but send his Goods by an Office-out-Porter, who is employed in other,
as well as the Office business, and is known by the City Ticket, and the
Office Silver Ticket, which he carries on his Breast; this Porter sees them
Appraised and Registered, and the Deliverer entered Creditor, for so much, which
Credit, when he disposes of it, the Party receiving it, cannot tell whether it
was raised or received. And if the Deliverer have a mind to come and fee his
Goods, it is no more than many men do, to view and buy Goods; so that no
Stranger can tell whether they be his own, or that he would buy them; and the
Office, if he gives them Commission, will sell them for him, if Wholesale, and
if Retail, then they can be brought in and out without any notice, but the
Offices, for they need no Chapmen.

5. It is very possible, that a responsible Merchant, may want ready money, to
answer a Bill, which it will be more discredit to fail to discharge, than to
raise credit, and it will be more prudent to raise it in the Office, for three
per Cent. where they are tied but by Weeks, then else where, at ten per Cent.
without it.

CHAP. VII.
7. Object. THat Goods will yield a less Price for being mortgaged.

I answer, when it is known that conveniencie as well as necessity, induces men
to bring thither their Goods: they will not offer less than if it were in
their own Warehouses.

2. Such as may bring them thither for necessity, will be no looser, for if
they cannot have a good price, their wants being supplied by the Office, they
can wait till they may, and if none can be procured they may if they please,
have them offered at the outcry, where perchance they may yield more then
elsewhere.

3. The Office may chance to help them to Customers, knowing the lowest rate
they can be afforded at.

8. Object. Made by some, that there being no convenient place below Bridge,
there will be danger in shooting it to bring the Commodities to the Office.

I may reply, that it is their own fault, if they put it to a hazard, since, at
least once every day, one may pass the Bridge; viz. at almost high Water,
without the least danger.

9 Object. That goods will spoil in the Office through neglect:

We answer, that every one has liberty, as in a pound Ouvert to take care of
his own goods.

2. It will concern the Office, to keep servants on purpose to use all means of
preserving the Goods: from Mould, Mildew, Canker, Rust Rats, Mice, Mothes,
Spots, Stains, Wet, Dust, Rot, etc. Because they are not assured the Deliverer
will redeem them: if therefore any Damage should happen to the goods, they will
hardly reimburse the Office their credit and charges.

3. Notwithstanding this Objection, we see Lumbards beyond Sea, are frequented,
and we shall have the same or greater care.

10. Object. That Goods will be Damnified in the removing.

We Answer,

That Goods which are to be fixed, we desire not, and for movables, they
usually are often removed, and cannot be much Damnified by once or twice
removing. Besides, if Merchants please, they may have their constant warehouse
room, at the Office, paying no more then elsewhere, and then they may send
their Goods from the Custom House immediately thither.

11. Object. The Foundation of the Credit bad, because upon perishable Goods.

We say, that though the Goods are perishable, yet the Credit is good because
they are always disposed off, either by redemption or sale, before they can
perish, and if the Credit be not redeemed, there is Money or other substantial
goods still to answer it.

CHAP. VIII.
12. Object. THat Men will have Money and not Credit.

1. We will define Credit, and see how far it is already practiced amongst us,
and what makes men accept it here, and from the Banks beyond Sea.

2. We will consider what Money is, and how it comes to be so desirable, and
then comparing both, leave it to the understanding Reader to judge, whether
credit or Money be most useful, alluring or Inviteing.

1. Credit is the reputation of Man's honesty, or ability, or of a things
intrinsic value which both which Qualifications this Office is sufficiently
endowed.

Credit in Amsterdams Bank, is but to be registered Creditor, and this passes
current, not only because a Man may have money for it, when he will, but
because of its known reputation, for every man will receive it, and pay debts,
or buy any where commodities, none refusing it, they being assured, it has a
valuable pledge in a secure place, which Pledge cannot be removed till the
Creditor, who ever he be, shall be satisfied.

In this Office will be always sufficient Pledges of intrinsic value, to
answer the full credit abroad: and though for the Creditors and the Officers
ease, the Office desires not to clear Accounts, and deliver the overplus of
Credit in money in Specie, but once in a year: if then desired; yet at any
time, if a man has an absolute necessity for it in Specie, the Office can
furnish him.

But to further satisfy some Men, how Trade can be driven, Commodities bought,
and Debts paid without Money in Specie, besides the indubitable certainty of
it is being practiced in the several foreign Banks; I shall form an example or
two, of the manner and conveniences of it, as suppose A. owes to B. 100 l. B.
the like to C. and C. the like to D. and D. the like to E. and E. to F. F. to
G. G. to H. H. to I. and I. to A. which if it were possible for them all to
know, they might agree upon a Meeting, and quit each other, by rescounter. As
for example, A. quits I. he H. and H. G. and so on, till B. quits A. and then
all are satisfied, without one farthing being paid in specie; when else (for
want of this possibility of meeting, (because each knows but his immediate
Creditor and Debtor, and not the mediate) or ready money, or for default of it
this Office) they are all puzzled with Debts and Credits. For if A. had the
Money, or raised Credit in the Office upon his Goods, A, would pay B. and so
on, till I. paid A. by which it appears, if any of these were dishonest, or
disable, what a trouble they bring upon all the rest, and for so much, what a
stop upon Trade. For though one man perchance, is able to turn 100. l. but ten
times a year, yet the same 100. l. may be, by many men, turned a thousand times
a year; all which, as the case now stands, may be hindered by one covetous or
dishonest person. Now, by this Office, if a man be able, his Creditors will in
a manner oblige him to be honest for what is past; and for the future there
will be no need of Trusting, which only crept into the World, because there
was not Money enough, or that it made not so swift a Circuit as was desired, to
measure Commodities, and not because the person credited was poor; for very few
will trust a poor honest man with much.

If then it be according to a man's Estate, why should any run the hazard of
trusting when they need not, because such as they would Credit may raise a
Credit in the Office, and most wise men seek to deal securely, and the Credited
can sustain no damage, because his Goods in the Office are never the further
from a Market, and he can, with one Moiety of his Goods raise as much Credit as
he can expect to be Credited with elsewhere. Note also, that when a Man brings
Goods out of his shop, to raise Credit, so he brings the other Goods which he
bought with that Credit, to furnish his shop again: and though his shop may be
a little the less furnished, his Purse will be the better by the gain: for his
Trade will be so quickened, that he can make many more returns, which, with a
small stock, is equivalent to a greater, with fewer returns. Another Example
proves this practice more clearly, without damage to any that receives this
Credit, for what Commodity soever. As, imagine A receives this Credit by
Assignation from another, or raises it upon his own Goods brought into the
Office, and transferring it on C. discharges a Debt, which he has in exchange
of his Credit, and so is not injured. C. by transferring it on D. receives from
him the like value in such Goods he has need of, and so sustains no damage by
the Receipt of the Credit, because he has in Exchange as much Goods for it. D.
transferrs it on E. for a parcel of Land of the like value, which he purchases
of E. and so not damnified. E. transferrs it on F. as a portion with a Daughter
that F. marries, E. not injured, because by it he is disengaged from the
payment of a Dowry, and rids himself of the charge of a Daughter. F. transferrs
it upon G. for the consideration of repayment, and in the mean time, Security
with Interest of 5. or 6. per Cent. more or less as they can agree. F. has no
damage because he has Security and Interest. G. esteems it as good as Money,
because by transferring it he answers his present occasions, of either paying
an unavoidable Debt, or purchasing his intended or necessary Commodities;
which, as before demonstrated, none will refuse, because of its convenience of
answering all the Intents of Money, and (if the Creditor has urgent occasion)
at all times, or when he has stood a year Creditor in the Book of the Office,
can, of course, upon evening his Accounts, receive the Overplus in specie. And
though we put a stop to Credit at a years end, yet it might proceed to the end
of the World, and no man one Farthing wronged, nor Money in specie ever paid.
Our daily practice of receiving Bonds, Bills, Letters of Credit, and Exchange,
which are no more then Credit, will witness as much. Men are likewise Credited
according to what they have in possession, of their own, or by Credit; for we
are apt to trust a person Credited by others, which I instance, to show, that
this Office (being Credited by many, and stored with more Goods, instead of
being scrupled for having so many to answer) increases rather its reputation;
for the more it has, the more it can answer, and it will be the care of the
Offic, being managed by wise and understanding persons, to have no more Credit
abroad, than Goods at home to balance the same, it being a vanity not to be
supposed in such a Society, to call the Credit of the whole Office in question,
by sending out Credit which has no foundation within to support it.

There are likewise these further Encouragements to men, to receive this Credit.

1. They that raise it, will be so pleased at their own convenience, of being
supplied at a low rate, and satisfied, That it will, as well redeem their Goods
as money, that they will willingly receive it in payment from an other.

2. Men by this means, will be enabled to pay their debts; and clear Accounts,
which otherwise might lie a long time dorment, and it may be desperate, to the
great decrease of Trade.

3. This credit, though a paper Record, and of no intrinsic value, yet, as a
key to a rich Treasury, keeps safe goods of intrinsic value, which without the
key cannot be stirred, or like a good Mortgage which secures the Lands as well
as if the Land were in a man's pocket, can be remorgaged and assigned over as
well as if it were so much Money in specie, after enquiry into the Title. And
the Office desires none to use it upon any implicit Faith, but upon full
satisfaction, and therefore has caused this book to be printed, and will be
ready to give such further reasonable satisfaction as may be desired.

4. It Is but a token, like farthings, only of a greater value, which farthings
pass current, as far as the owner is known, and is not carried back so soon as
received, but once a year; or seldomer, or oftener, upon occasion, is brought to
the Owner, and changed into silver, which this Office propounds to do. And so I
come to show, what money is, and its uses, and wherein Credit corresponds to
it. In this I shall be brief; It is a commodity appointed by the Authority of
the place, for the common and unalterable standard to measure other commodities
with, in some Countries, Bones, Beans, Beads, Shells, etc. which though of no
intrinsic value, are made public tickets to purchase any other valuable
commodity. Money is an accomptant or means by which a man keeps an account of
his estate, and in these and most civilized parts, is either gold or silver
stamped, which pieces are not of the real intrinsic value they pass for, but
are made current, by the stamp of the Authority of the respective countries,
and was invented for the sake of the following qualifications, many of which
might be found in other Wares.

1. Money is known by all, and therefore used by all, that is the reasona man is
said to be worth 1000 l. more or less, when it may be, he has not 10 l.
Moneys, for if they should say he is worth 400. head of Cattle, 6 or 700 load
of Hay: 150 or 200 pieces of Cloth, none would know what judgment to make of
it: though a man is really as rich, that has those several goods, as he that
has Money. A man also needs but value his own Commodity, that money which he
has in exchange is valued by the public, and must be credited; for Gold and
Silver admits of several allayes, only we believe, but one of them is the
standard for money, and so cloth and other goods, if they were made by a
certain standard (which is possible) they might likewise be current.

2. The value of money, for the most part, continues and is fixed: though there
be never so great or small quantity of it in the Country, but other things are
accordingly varied, for, for the most part, when it is plenty, commodities are
dear, and when scarce, cheap, and this is possible to be effected on any other
commodities.

3. Money is durable, so that a Man is not necessitated to Trade; for if he
laid it 20. years by him, he finds the same without diminution, which if it
were in Commodities, he must Trade, or spend all, for Bread will scarce last a
week, Cheese a year, Cloth some few years more. So that at the 20. years end,
instead of being worth 100 l. a Man is worth nothing but rotten Dung, or
Moth-eaten decayed Cloth, for none of which he can purchase another Commodity.
But Mettalls and precious Stones, might answer this and other Qualifications.
And if you object a possibility of having Jewels counterfeited, I answer, That
all the ctre hitherto taken, has not been able to prevent the counterfeiting
of Money, and if it may be dispensed with in one Coin, it may be in another.

4. The generality of Commodities are not of so rich intrinsic value, but that
Men must, as in Sweden, go to Market with a Wheel-barrow or Cart, when as
agreat value of Money, can be put in ones Pocket, or under ones Arm.

Now Credit answers the first, by having its value as certainly known for a man
needs but name any sum, to the value of what he is really Creditor in the
Office, and it is of intrinsic value, and known by his only nameing it, as if
A. being Creditor, desires the Office to enter B. Creditor for 10 l. then B. is
assured of current indisputable ten pounds.

It answers the second, by being more certain, for moneys sometimes rises and
falls, but Credit is always certain to the persons receiving and possessing
it, though uncertain to the Goods, for the same may sometimes be valued at the
delivery 5 per cent. more, than at another time, according to a Market price.
Credit once made, is certain, but in the making is uncertain.

It answers the 3d. in that it is as durable for it may last to the end of the
World, without ever suffering any Decay, nor ever (unless desired) be turned
into Money.

It answers the 4th. and exceeds it; for 10000 l. Credit, may lie in the Room
of 10 l. Gold. It farther excells Money, in these particulers it eannot be
counterfeited or Clipped, it is soon told, it cannot be stolen, it is carried,
and transmitted from Place to Place, either within Land or beyond Sea, by Bills
of Exhange, with ease and safety, and many more. Besides, Money rightly
considered, is mot so desirable, for a man can pass away Money, but not
consume it, as he does other Commodities for Back and Belly. And a man only
endeavors to get Money, that he may purchase Commodities, both to Gain and
Consume. So when we sell Commodities for Money, it is with a Design, only to buy
other Commodities.

For all Men desire Wealth, Riches or Money, only that he may feed Dainty, be
Clothed Richly, be well attended and Obeyed, etc. and entail the like
abundance upon his Posterity. A Tradesman is better pleased, to have his Shop
and Warehouse stored with Goods, than his Baggs replenished with Money, and a
man is as wealthy that has 100 l. in Hay, Grass, or Dung, as he that has it
in Gold. For as 100 l. Gold can fetch any commodity, so 100 l. of Hay, or other
commodity will fetch so much Gold: for bartering is still continued, but at
every commutation Money, as a well known witness, must be the Medium for want
of this better way of Credit. Money is a Bondage upon Trade, because no
Commodity is Current till it has been measured by it, which according to the
quantity of either, is sooner or later don, and accordingly is Trade quick or
slow. And it is worthy consideration how far it may consist with the rules of
Policy, and the interest of State, to enslave all our Staple wares to the
commodity of foreign Princes, who upon occasion can withhold it from us, and so
retard and destroy our Trade at pleasure, unless we can contrive something to
officiate in its room, which if possible, is best beforehand. Ireland can
witness, that they cannot thrive notwithstanding their abundance, because this
foreign commodity Money is withheld from them. Many a man has perished through
Hunger and Cold that had Money, but none that while well Fed and Clothed, has
perished for want of Money.

13. Object. That this Credit will not yield 3d. per Diem. per Cent. at the
Goldsmiths as Money, nor anything in the Office, whilst it lies there.

This I deny, for first, when a Merchant takes up Moneys at the Goldsmiths,
it is for immediate Use, either to Buy or pay away. Then the Goldsmith being
Creditor for all that lies in his hands, assigns over so much as he desires,
and the Merchant again to the party selling him goods, or bringing him Bills of
Exchange, which Bills, though now usually satisfied in Specie, will be Answered
with Credit, or at least most of them that are considerable. For suppose A. B.
of London Consigns 1000 l. worth of Clothes to a Factor in Amsterdam, and
orders him to lay out 500 l. in certain Commodities, and remit the rest; the
Factor draws upon C.D. of London, a Bill of Exchange, to be paid to A. B. for
500 l. which the said Factor had Disoursed to buy Commodities, according to the
order of A. B. his Principal. A. B. presents this Bill to C. D. and he accepts
it, and accordingly Orders A. B. to be Registered Creditor, for so much in the
Office, which A. B. is contented with, because he may not Export it in Specie,
nor will he suffer it to lie dead. And all other uses and intents of Money
Credit answers, as above declared.

2. The Office (if a Creditor will assign it over to the Office) for the time
being, it is Creditor, will allow as Goldsmiths, but if the Creditor remains
Creditor, there is no more reason for them to expect allowance, than when Money
lies in their own houses: For, whilst they remain Creditors, it is in their
possession.

Obj. 14. That Credit cannot answer small and Country Occasions.

The first part I grant. But if that were an exception sufficient todisallow
it, then must Gold be rejected, because there are not pence and half pence of
Gold. Credit is like another species of Money, wherewith great sums can be paid
with more ease, than with either Silver or Gold, and the only use of Silver
and Gold, will be for sums under 5 l.

To the last, I answer, That for some small time, they cannot be so well
accommodated, but as soon as we shall have fettled it in every County, we can
make any man Creditor in the Office of his County, for what he receives at
London, which Credit can be transmitted from place to place, throughout England.

Obj. 15. That it will occasion many a man's ruin, because Creditors seeing a
way for their payment, will be more earnest for their Money.

This I deny. For, First, Creditors will not be earnest, unless often deluded.
2. You may as well say, a man ought not to have his own, for fear of ruining
another. 3. All good husbands that owe Moneys, have Moneys owing them, and if
they are pressed to pay, they can likewise press payment; and this enables one
as well as another to pay. For it will be a means to balance all Debts and
Credits. 4. Those that are not good husbands, ruin themselves, and therefore
the Creditor has reason, if he can, to secure his own.

16. Obj. That it will cause too great abundance of Commodities, that there
will be no vent for them.

I will grant the first part, and deny the latter; For we find that one man can
consume 1000 l's worth of commodities in a year, and another but 10 l. and by
this means, if all, or most men, become ten times richer, they will
consequently consume ten times more. Besides, there are many of our commodities
may be carried abroad, where they cannot want a Market. For we must never
expect to out-trade the World.

Obj. 17. That some Commodities are so old fashioned, that they cannot be sold.

I answer, That no commodities are so old fashioned, but that they may be new
enough in another place, as mixed red and yellow Damask is worn in Wastcoats by
Women in Hamburgh, nor so much decayed, but that they be of some use, as the
best Rags for Paper, the worst for improving Land. God having so ordered all
things by his immense Wisdom and universal Providence, that nothing should be
in vain, and that the corruption of one thing should be the generation of
another.

Thus having completed what we designed, we will plead thus much for our
selves, That if we shall want Ability, we have not wanted Will, to augment his
Majesty's Customs by contriving the only means to cause so flourishing a
Trade, as this Nation never yet knew. And to stop the black mouths of such
Zoili as (because they are not engaged in the management of this Office) will
cast all the opprobrious terms they can upon it, as Broaker-Lumbard, etc. I
will answer, That they were hated and despised, because they usually took
advantage of poor men's necessities, and compelled them to pay accordingly,
though much beyond Reason: but when they only supply the wants of the poor,
for a moderate allowance, they deserve great encouragement (and I dare boldly
affirm, that this Office (which takes no Use or Interest) demands a smaller
acknowledgement for their pains, in Praising, Registring, etc. by half, than
ever so great an accommodation was had for. If any person remains still
dis-satisfied, it will be kindly taken, if he he acquaints the Office with it,
at 5 in the afternoon, where he shall receive such further Answers to any
Objection, as he may reasonably desire, either by Word or Writing, Public or
Private. I say reasonably, because it is unreasonable to expect any thing in
this World, void of imperfection, yet I think, compared with others, this will
have the pre-eminence.

FINIS.
The Contents.
THe Preface. Chap. I. The Definition of the Office illustrated with diverse
similitudes Page 1. Chap. II. The manner of using the Office Page 2. Chap. III.
The Charges and Terms upon which Goods are received Page 5. Chap. IV. The
Public and Private Benefits Page 8.
Objections answered.
Chap. V. 1. That there is no need of this Office Page 11. 2. That it is a new
Thing Page 14.
Chap. VI. 3. That it is not Practicable Page 14. 4. It is not safe under a
Monarch Page 14. 5. There cannot be sufficient Security given Page 15. 6. It
will be a Discredit for Credible Merchants to Morgage their Goods Page 16.
Chap. VII. 7. Goods will yield a less Price for being Morgaged Page 17. 8.
Dangerous to bring Goods Through-Bridge to the Office Page 17. 9. Goods will be
damnified in the Office by neglect Page 17. 10. Goods will be damnified in the
removing Page 18. 11. The foundation of the Credit bad, because upon perishable
Goods Page 18.
Chap. VIII. 12. Men will have Money and not Credit Page 18.
Chap. IX. 13. This Credit will not yield 3d. per Diem per Cent. at the
Goldsmiths as Money, nor any thing in the Office whilst it lies there Page 24.
14. Credit cannot answer small and Country occasions Page 24. 15. It will
occasion many a man's ruin, because Creditors seeing a way for their payment,
will be more earnest for their Money Page 25. 16. It will cause too great
abundance of Commodities, that there will be no vent for them Page 25. 17. Some
Commodities are so old-fashioned, that they cannot be sold. Page 25.
Chap. X. The Conclusion Page 25.

