A DESCRIPTION Of the most Glorious and most Magnificent ARCHES Erected at the
HAGUE, For the Reception of WILLIAM III. King of Great Britain. With all the
MOTTO's and Latin INSCRIPTIONS that were Written upon every one of the said
ARCHES.

Translated into English from the Dutch.

LONDON: Printed for P. S. and are to be sold by Richard Baldwin, at the Oxford
Arms in Warwick Lane. M.DC.XCI.

A DESCRIPTION OF THE Most Glorious and most Magnificent Arches Erected at the
HAGUE for the Reception of WILLIAM III. King of Great Britain, etc.
Licensed

Feb. 4. 1690.

HIS Majesty WILLIAM the Third of Great Britain, having made His Voyage into
Holland, and being arrived at the Hague, the most Noble and most High the
Estates of Holland and West-Friezeland, as well as the Honorable Magistrates
of the Hague, gave Orders to prepare for a Reception correspondent to the
Majesty of so Glorious and so Excellent a Monarch. To which purpose their High
and Mighty Lordships, among other things, have Erected one Triumphal Arch, and
the Magistrates two more, to be set, one in the Piazza called Buyton-Hoff, the
other in the public Piazza, and the third in the Marketplace of the Hague;
the Figure and Structure of which, together with the Latin Inscriptions which
adorn them, are as follow.

That which was set up at the Buyton-Hoff was a Triumphal Arch, of a most
curious Italian Architecture, the Order compounded Doric, having three open
Gates, that of the middle being the highest of all, supported backwards and
forwards upon eight Pillars, underneath upon large Basements, separated from
the Body of the Work.

Upon every one of those Basements, stand two of the said Pillars with a Copulo
of eight Faces upon the said Overture; In the middle, upon which Copulo appears
a Pedestal, upon which is represented His Majesty on Horseback; both Figures
costly Gilded. To the Horses, on each side are tied two Slaves, or Statues of a
Brass color, prostrate and grovelling, and the whole work is colored, as if it
were of Free Stone: between the Pillars, and upon each side inward and outward,
the spaces are filled with Pictues, comprehending some Historical
Representation, and Hieroglyphical Figure, relating to the Life and Glorious
Actions of His Majesty. At the Frontispiece of that stately Arch, and upon the
forementioned Pillars, as well backwards as forwards, and at each side, are
placed in the same order, eight Statues of both Sexes together, to the height
and bigness of the Life. In that part of the Arch which faceth the end of the
Town, upon a very high Pedestal, set above all, on both sides of the round
pieces that cover the Work, is erected a Neptune, lying down with his Trident
in his Hand, with this Motto underneath.

Tiumphet in Vndis.

Let him Triumph upon the Seas.

At the other side of the Arch that looks toward the Street, commonly called
Cingel, upon a like Pedestal, a Plowman with a Spade in his hand, with this
Motto underneath,

Attingat Solium Jovis.

Let him reach to Jupiter's Throne.

Round about the Copulo is written the following Inscription.

Pio, Felici, Inclyto, Guilielmo tertio, triumphanti Patriae patri,
Gubernatori, P.C. I. P. Restauratori Belgii foederati, Liberatori Angliae,
Servatori Scotiae, Pacificatori Hiberniae, reduci.

To the Pious, Happy, Renowned William the Third, the Triumphant Father of his
Country, Governor, Stadtholder, and Restorer of the United Netherlands.
England's Liberator, Scotland's Preserver, Ireland's Pacificator, now returned.

Upon the Frontispiece underneath the Statues abovementioned on the side of
the Buyton-hoff, are these following Inscriptions.

In the first place,

Post maximas res Domi forisque gestas, arctissimo cum Principibus icto
foedere, suorum vindex, Defensor oppressorum.

After greater things done at home and abroad, as having made a strist League
with the Princes, the Revenger of his Subjects wrongs, and Defender of the
oppressed.

Under that, and upon a large Picture, there is a little Table upon which are
represented several armed men fighting a Dragon, with this Motto,

Unity fortius obstant.

Being United they make a stronger oppposition.

In the Second hallow Seat this Motto,

Mare transvectus liberat Britanniam, and late dominantibus ornatus Sceptris,
in Patriam publica, cum laetitia receptus est.

Being passed beyond Sea, he ha rescued Great Britain, and being adorned with
Scepters of a vast extended power, he has been received in his own Country
with all the Demonstrations of public joy.

In the Table underneath is represented a balance with the two Scales, in one
of which are several Crowns, and in the other a Sword, the Sword out-weighing
the Crowns, with these words,

Praemia not aequant.

Rewards are not answerable to Merit.

In the third hollow Seat, this Motto,

Lugente Patria, maerente Europ^, afflicta antiquissima Nass^viorum stirpe,
Heroum, Imperatorum, Principum Faecunda.

Our Country mourning and bewailing, Europe in tears, the most ancient Family
of Nassau (fertile and producing Heroes, Emperors, and Princes) afflicted.

In a Table underneath is represented a Phaenix burning, with this Sentence.

Praelucit posthuma proles.

Born after his Father's death, shines so much the more.

In the fourth hollow Nich.

Gulielmum posthumum, Britannorum Aransionensiumque tertium, Patriae spem,
Reipublicae palladium.

William born after his Fathers Death, the Third of Great Britain and of
Orange, the hope of his own Country, and the Support of the Commonwealth.

In a Table underneath is represented a Scepter and three Crowns with this
Motto,

Tenues ornant diademata cunae.

Tender Age an ornament to Diadems.

On the back side of the said Arch toward the Palace are also four hollow
Niches in the Frontispiece, with the following Inscriptions.

In the first hallow Nich,

Fatum Europae favens, dedi. de Coelo, faturam portend^ns Majestatem, admodum
puerum exemplar constituit.

Fate favorable to Europe, has bestowed him from Heaven, and portending his
future Majesty six'd him for an example when he was but very young.

As on the other side above a large Picture, there is a little Table, upon
which is represented a young Eagle flying upwards against the rising of the
Sun, with this Motto, Tener adversis e^^titur alis. Young and tender as he is,
he strives with all the force of his Wings against the Wind.

In the Second. Qui juventute strenue transacta, funestis jactata bellis ac
dissidiis intanto rerum discrimine. Who having spent his Youth in many
hardships, tossed with funest Wars and Seditions, in so much hazard, vanquished
all before him.

In the Table underneath is represented a Castle upon a Hill, at the foot of
which is a Javelin planted, from which spring up two branches of Laurel, with
these words, Contorta Triumphos portendit. Darted forth it presages Triumphs.

In the Third, Nutantis Belgii, quae Mari, qua Terra admotus, in prist inum
decus gubernaculi, gloriam, aras and faces asseruit. The Netherlands tottering,
and he made Chief Commander by Sea and Land, has re established the Government
in its first luster, conserved our Religion and secured the People.

In the Table underneath is a Boat with some armed men in, who row it forward,
with this inscription, Alter erit Tithys. There will be another Tithys.

In the fourth hollow Seat, Meritis famam superantibus Trophaeis,
Principiatavis Regibus editae, faelicibus junctis hymenaeis. His merited
Triumphs surmounting Fame it self, more glorious still by happy Marriage with a
Princess born of Royal Ancestors.

In the Table underneath are an Unicorn and a Lion going side by side, the
Unicorn thrusting with his horn a heap of Serpents and Vipers, with these
words, Virusque fugant viresque rep^^lunt, They drive away the Venom and repel
the force of it.

On the one side of the Pedestal, where is the King on Horseback, are these
words written, Populi Salus. The Peoples Welfare. Procerum decus. The glory of
the States.

Within the Arches Cieling are four different Historical representations, in
four Tables separated one from another, and each of them has an inscription,
That of the first Table is, Refert Saturnia Regna. He reviveth the Golden Age.

In the Second Table, Novos orbs nova Sceptra paramus. We are preparing for
new Worlds and new Soepters.

In the third Superare and parcere vestrum est. Your part it is to overcome and
to forgive.

In the fourth, Caetera transibunt. All other Things are Transitory.

The Arch it self is Adorned both before and behind, and at the top of the
aforementioned Overtures, you see the Arms of England, and the Supportes
withal; and of the large Overture, both behind and before, the Arms of Holland,
and two Flying Fames at each side of them blowing their Trumpets.

Description of the Arch in the Public Piazza.
This Triumphal Arch is as the other, of a very fine and stately Architecture,
with Pillars colored like Marble, Red and White, and the rest of the body of
the Work of Marble, Black and White; the Basis and the Chapter Gilded with four
great Pictures, two behind, and two before, set between the forementioned
Pillars, drawn in lively Colors; the Two that are foremost, representing a
Battle of the Romans by Sea and Land; and the Two that are behind, One
representing War, and the other Peace: War, with a Flaming World, near which,
several Persons represented, some dead, and some alive, make Justice lie down
in Distress. Peace, with a World, upon which, Justice and Peace standing,
embrace one another, and by them is the God Pan, and his Companions, making
themselves merry with some Fruits of the Earth. At the upper part of the Arch
in the middle, is a Pedestal, upon which is the King on Horseback, as big as
the Life, Brass-like, with this Motto,

Regi Triumphanti.

To the Triumphant King.

Above the King on Horseback, are erected two Wreaths, crossing and covering
his Head, adorned with Green, and above it a Royal Crown, with the Scepters, a
Cross underneath.

On each side of the Arch are two Squares, wherein are Set, both behind and
before, Transparent Pictures, wrought upon Silk, which were Lighted in the
Evening, and showed on one side a Cloud, and a Pillar of Fire on the other, the
Corners being adorned with Green. At the Gilded Frize of the Arch, are written
these Words;

Soloque Saeloque,

By Land and Sea.

In reprimenda tyrannide and restituenda soeculi felicitate;

In repressing Tyranny, and Restoring the Felicity of the Age.

And on each side of the aforesaid Frise, are these Inscriptions;

On the Right, Heroibus priori. To Him that excells the Hero's.

And on the Left Side, Antiquis Majori. To Him who is greater than any of the
Ancients.

On each side of the forementioned Pedestal, upon which is the King on
Horseback, are two Gilded Armors, and two covered with Silver, adorned with
Feathers, and some Trophies besides; England's Coat of Arms before, and the
King's Cipher behind.

The said Arch has on every side two Wings, in which are represented the
Histories of Hercules, Perseus, Phaeton, and Andromedes Deliverance, with four
Escutcheons of the four Kingdoms, England, Scotland, France and Ireland.

Underneath, round about the said Arch, are these words; Before, Sceptris
exercitibus, classibus votis. Behind, Augusto, armato, parato, recepto. Which
must be read thus. Augusto Sceptris, Armato exercitibus, Parato classibus,
Recepto votis.

Honored with Scepters, Armed with Armies, provided with Fleets, and received
with Acclamations.

On each side of the Arch, are two Pictures, one representing Europe
Distressed, and the other, Neptune Ravishing, with this Motto: Aeripe raptori
Miseram; Snatch the wretched from the Ravisher. The other, Mea jura tuere,
Defend my Right.

Above the Door of the Arch these words are written, Haga posuit Coss. decreto.
The Town of the Hague has erected this Arch by the Decree of the Magistrates.

The Description of the stately Arch Erected at the Great Marketplace.
This Arch is the highest of all, without any Pillars in relief. However, it is
filled with very large Pictures of a Grayish color, of which, two that are
upon the Door, are drawn upon Silk, to be Transparent by Torch-light in the
Evening. Upon that Arch is a Rainbow, with three Crowns, seeming to hang in the
Air. There is besides upon that Arch, a Sphere, and upon it a Flying Fame with
her Trumpet, and the Horse Pegasas running by her, and some Trophies on every
corner of each side. On the backside of the said Arch is seen the Imperial Coat
of Arms of Nassau, that of the Emperor Adolphus of the Family of Nassan, with
the eight Quarters on every side. Round about the forementioned Arch are these
following Inscriptions,

Nobilium Primo, Ducum Maximo, Posthumo Gulielom tertio, Caelitus dato. To the
First, of Noble Hero's, to the greatest of Generals WILLIAM the Third, a
Posthumus, the Gift of Heaven. Above the Pictures on the back side, Victoriis,
Tropheis, Fortissimo Imperatori, Cautissimo Gubernatori, destinates. Erected to
the Victories and Trophies designed for a most Strenuous Leader, and Prudent
Commander.

Underneath at the bottom of the Arch upon one side, Quatour Regnorum Regi,
faederati Belgii Gubernatori Gulielmo tertio, Virtute and triumphis fulgenti.
For William the Third, King of four Kingdoms, Governor of the United Provinces
shining with Virtues and Triumphs.

On the other side, Grati animi and letitiae publicae siguum boe erexit, Haga
Comitis.

The Hague has Erected this as a Testimony of public Joy and Gratitude On each
side of the Arch are two Wings, composing together a half Circle, and in each
of those Wings are seven Pictures, representing the Battles and Victories of
the precedent Princes of Orange by Sea and Land, each pictares having its
Motto; Upon the first of the right Wing; Patientia laesa furor fit. Patience
exasperated turns to Fury.

Upon the Second, Resposcit opem and conspirat amice. The Matter Requires Aid,
and Friendly Confederacy.

Upon the third, Per tela per undas. Through Darts and Waves.

Upon the fourth, Audentes Deus ipse juvat. God himself assists the Courageous.

Upon the fifth, Tantas dedit Unio vires. Such is the force of Union.

Upon the sixth, Aquilas and mania cepit. Nor Walls nor Armies can resist him.

Upon the seventh, Celsas superas Virtute carinas. Your Valor Masters the
Tallest Navies.

Upon the first of the Left Wing, Repetenda quiescunt arma Virum. Armies laid
aside are again to be taken in hand.

Upon the second, Non uno Virtus contenta Triumpho. Valor not satisfied with
single Triumph.

Upon the third, Crescunt numero crescente Trophaea. Number increasing the
Trophies increase.

Upon the fourth, Caesorum replebant funera campos. The Funerals of the Dead
fill up the Fields.

Upon the fifth, Ultra Garamantas and Indos. Farther than the Garamantes and
the Indies.

Upon the sixth, Fortis promissa Juventas. The Promises of a Courageous Youth.

Upon the seventh, Deos in praelia confert. He consults the Gods before he goes
to Battle.

In the middle of every one of those Wings are two Pyramids, one at each side
upon their Pedestals, which support a Picture with this Inscription: Uponthat
of the Right Hand, Hanc accipe Magno Coronam. Great Hero, accept this Crown.
Upon that of the Left Hand, Thure tuo redolent arae. Your Incence perfumes the
Altar.

The same Pyramids have each in the Front three transparent Pictures,
comprehending either a Hierogliphical Figure, or some Trophy or Cipher, being
adorned on the sides with Green, upon one of those Pyramids. The King and the
Queen upon the other are set to the bigness of the Life.

Upon that of the King is this Inscription, Quis gratior appulit oris? Whoever
arrived more Welcome to our Shore?

Upon that of the Queen, Reprimit and refigit. She represses and re-establishes.

Upon the Border of the Wings are, in their order, the first four Princes of
Orange between two Trophies.

Under the Effigies of William the First, Patriae Liberatori. To his Countries
Liberator.

Under that of Prince Maurice, Gloriae Vindici. To Glories Vindicator.

Under that of Prince Frederick Henry, Libertatis Assertori. To our Liberties
Defender.

Under that of Prince William the Second, Publicae faelicitatis Statori. To the
Conservator of our Public Felicity.

Above the opening of the Arch before is the Scutcheon of the Hague, with these
Words underneath, Hic Incunabula Divum. Behold the Cradles of the Gods.

Before the Townhouse of the Hague are seven Pictures transparent for a Light.
In the highest Range are placed in the middle the Representations of the King
and Queen; and on each side two Hieroglyphical Figures, one representing a Lion
with this Motto, Placidum venerantur, and horrent infestum. They venerate the
Moderate, and abhor the Tyrant.

On the other an Unicorn thrusting with his Horn some Serpents, with this
Inscription, Nil passa Veneni. Enduring nothing Venomous.

At the Order underneath contains three Symbols more: The first representing a
Crane sitting upon her Nest, and clapping her Wings at the Rising Sun, with
these Words, Recreator ab ort^. Revived by the Rising Sun.

The second represents Atlas upholding the World upon his Shoulder, and
stooping under the Weight, and resting upon a Mountain with this Inscription,
In te Domus inclinata recumbit. Upon thee the Falling Mansion leans.

The third represents a Crane resting in her Nest, and clapping her Wings at
the Rising Sun, with this Motto, Vidit and exultavit. She saw and rejoiced.

By the Townhouse in the public place of Execution, is a Tree like a Maypole,
surrounded with Arms in four Rows one above another for Torch-Light.

The Arch of the Bridge, commonly called the Loosduyn, has been colored with a
representation of a Man and a Woman at an Altar, upon which is the King's
Effigies with a staff in his Hand, upon which staff his Majesty's name is
written, with a Crown, and these words underneath, Io. Triumphator. All hail
Triumpher.

Upon the two Pillars of the said Arch of the Bridge, are these following
Inscriptions, Ob Cives servatos, and Hosts fugatos. For Citizens preserved,
and Enemies put to flight.

The Other side of the Arch, Ob Libertatia Regna, and Restitutas Provincias. For
the Kingdoms rescued, and Provinces restored.

Behind are two Ovals besides, in one of which is represented a Laurel, and
underneath the word Victoriae, To Victory.

On the other an Orange-Tree with the word Clementiae, To Clemency.

I add here for the conclusion, that in the middle of the Pond of the Palace
was erected a great Scaffold upon which was set down the Cipher of his
Majesty's name, with a Royal Crown above, which was shown by Torch Light,
without mentioning many other curious and artfull Lights, in several other
places; besides the firing of 30 great Guns that were planted by the said Pond,
and frequently discharged as occasions and the Design required.

FINIS.

