A MANUELL OR, Brief Treatise of some particular Rights and Privileges
belonging to the High Court of PARLIAMENT: Wherein is showed how of late times
they have been violated.

The true condition of the Militia of this Kingdom, so much now controverted
both by King and Parliament, by the Positive Laws discussed and debated, with
a brief touch of the Royal Prerogative.

Neminem oportet esse sapientiorem legibus.

Job 8.8. Interroga pristinam generationem and investiga patrum memoriam.

Ipsi docebunt te and loquentur tibi and ex cord suo proferent eloquium.

Hesterni enim sumus, and ignoramus and vita nostra est sicut umbra super
terram.

By Robert Derham of Graies-Inne Esquire.

London printed for Matthew Walbancke at Graies-Inne Gate. 1647.

To the Honorable and truly religious, the Commons of England, now Assembled
in Parliament at Westminster.
May it please you:
THis little Treatise (some may say) needs no Dedication, Res enim ipsa
l^quitur: The subject and matter of this Discourse pointing like the Heliotrope
to the Sun, unto the High and Illustrious Assembly of PARLIAMENT, whose
influence and favor are alone sufficient; yet since it has pleased God to
raise you up in this distressed Kingdom, as blessed means an^ instruments of
his glory, and of the good of this Commonwealth (as it is certainly hoped) in
composing these unhappy differences, by your eminent Wisdom and supreme
Authority, and your fidelity and constancy in this great trust committed unto
you, being so apparent unto all men; as also this work for the most part being
extracted out of your own learned Declarations, and Remonstrances imparted to
public view. I am upon these reasons emboldned to address my self unto you
for protection against Calumny and detraction. And although I know nothing
herein contained but what is warranted by the Laws of this Realm, and by the
rules of truth, yet in as much as I am not hereby justified, I crave your
favorable censure, concluding what I have written of your judicious view
wholly unworthy, and the Author hereof in respect of your noble and high
deserts shall ever remain,

Your Honors in all duty and service obliged: Robert Derham.

The Preface to the Reader.
Courteous Reader:
IT is a true saying, Pro captu Lectoris habent sua fata libelli, the capacity
and apprehension of the Reader is fatal to every thing committed to public
view; however this being a legal Treatise it must stand, or fall by the
judgment of the wise and learned in the Laws of this Kingdom. The sum of
this Discourse is grounded upon the Positive Laws, termed of late times the
known Laws. I have chosen to enter into Combat with our Adversaries at their
own Weapons, as they please to choose them, though happily it may prove
disadvantagious; and this is done with moderation (I hope) to silence, if not
satisfy the obstinate. Take this work out of the Loome, and withal Anatomize
it, with all the curious and cunning dissections of Art and wit; spare it not,
yet I am confident it shall abide firm against all opposition. I will conclude
with this Corollarie, Edicite mundo quod mundus est vanitas veritas autem est
magna and prevalebit. Farewell.

A Manuell or brief Treatise of some particular Rights and Privileges
belonging to the High Court of PARLIAMENT.
I Am enjoined out of my duty to my Country, and my zeal to the Public good,
to compile this little Treatise; little in regard of the Author, great in
regard of the Subject matter, wherein I protest before the Supreme Judge of
Heaven and Earth to deliver the truth, and nothing but the truth, according to
the Laws of this Realm established, whose unparalleld distractions both in
Church and Commonwealth I cannot but with great grief consider: Quis talia
fando temperet a Lachrymis.

The Mother and Nurse unto us all this formerly most happy and blessed Nation,
now personated in the sable habit of a most mournful widow: Quae corrupit
ecusos fletu, which has lost her glorious Lamps, even her eyes with weeping.
Sparso quoque infanebrem modum crine terribilis. Terrible to beholders with
disheveled hair, making moan for her irreparable losses, attending the
funeral Obsequies of her dear Children, requesteth, nay requires us all to
bewail her miseries, and to redress her disperate calamities.

But to leave off preambles as tedious, and to come to the Discourse intended,
I do with sincerity of heart, detesting the Doctrine and Practices of
Brownists, Anabaptists, Sectarists, and as one that truly honors the true
reformed Protestant Religion, lament and much deplore the sorrowful condition
of this Kingdom, the amiable Laws and Government being now become despicable,
through the violation or neglect at least of the fundamentals, I mean the just
and due Rights and Privileges of that High and Supreme Court of Parliament,
in whose safety and flourishing estate consists the happiness of this
Commonwealth, and in the contempt of that illustrious Assembly, this renowned
Nation will of freeborn Subjects become slaves, and degenerate from those
noble resolutions which their Ancestors did inherit.

For to let pass the disturbances in this Church of England, and the
Government thereof, and the means to redress the same, being not properly
within my cognizance or knowledge, and peradventure permitted by Divine
Providence to evidence to the world the errors and folly even of his own
Ministers, and the unsearchable Wisdom of God, even past man's finding our. My
purpose is only at this time to treat of the High Court of Parliament, and the
Laws and Liberties of the Subject in them represented, whose infallibility I
shall nor labor to maintain, as being men of the like passions that we are;
but the Venerable estimation which the wisdom of the Law has evermore
attributed unto them, not in respect of their Persons, but of the Government
and Justice which in them primitively resides, whose gravity, prudence, and
integrity has been in all Ages much admired, and their judgments and
resolutions (till these unhappy tim^s) held indisputable; for, inquire of your
Ancestors, if the gray headed Common Law (whose funerals are now in the
judgment of man approaching through the popular dis-estimation of this High
Court) did not here receive if not its first subsistence, yet its power and
glorious estate even to these times? The Kings just and due Prerogatives, if
not here first framed, yet from time to time here strengthened and
corroborated, witness that ancient Statute called Prerogativa Regis made Anno
17. E. 2. This Station is declaratory of the Prerogative, not Introductive.
wherein certain of the most weighty and great Prerogatives pertaining to the
Crown are contained and declared, as says that learned Judge Stamford. The
rich Gemmes and inestimable treasure both in Church and State from this
Fountain derivatively issuing and proceeding, and shall now the honor of this
Court so ancient be deserted? And shall it not with the lives and estates of
all noble minded Englishmen be maintained as sacred, and as just and lawful
defended? For to come to particulars, wherein I will observe this order and
method. The method of this Discourse.
First, I will present you with the Laws and Privileges of Parliament apart
by themselves, and such of them only as are unanimously acknowledged for
undoubted Rights and Privileges of that high Court. In the next place I will
deliver unto you the Exposition of the said Privileges by the positive or
known Laws, or parallel them with the rights and privileges of inferior
Courts of Justice, as also show the violation of them briefly. And lastly, I
will observe some particulars worthy the consideration both in Government and
State, arising evidently from the premises, or not impertinently depending
thereupon; where you shall likewise find some Laws and Statutes of this
Realm remarkable for use incidently debated.

Privilege of Parliament the law of Parliament.
But in the first place before the hardling of these, I would desire you to take
notice that the Privilege of Parliament, and the Law of Parliament is of one
sense in Law, Privilege quasi privata lex. Amongst the several Laws of this
Kingdom, by Sir Edward Coo^e mentioned in his Jnstitutes, the Law of
Parliament is one meaning, principally the privileges and proceedings of that
Court, mentioned in the Rolls and judicial Records thereof. For the Laws
there enacted having no special relation to that Court, are not intended in
this sense, the Law of Parliament; of which Law it is said, Ista l^x, Lex
Parliamente What it is.
and consuetudo Parliamenti est ab omn^bus quaerenda, a multis ignorata, a
paucis cognita.

This premised, the first Privilege of Parliament that I shall offer unto you
is this, That if any of either Houses shall offend or commit any Crime, that
they themselves shall have the censure and punishment thereof; yea, the ancient
Custom of the House of Commons is, That if any shall chance of that House to
offend, or not to do or say as becomes him, or if any shall offend them
being called to that His Highness Court, that they themselves (according to
their ancient Custom) have the punishment of them; which last privilege of
the House of Commons is very large, pointing out unto us, That this House of it
self is a high Court of Justice, and extends as well to Strangers as Members
of the same in their power of Judicature. And it appears that matters of
Parliament are not to be ruled by the Common Law; as also that if they might
have been else, where punished, it shall be intended that sometimes it would
have been put in ure, and the Presidents that have been against the Law in this
point, have been in all ages condemned as illegal. And for proof of these
before recited particulars, you may peruse that much to be honored Lawyer Sir
Edward Cook, in his Book called The Jurisdiction of Courts, tit. Parliament,
as also Sir Thomas Smith in his Commonwealth of England, Fol. 18. a learned
Gentleman in both Civil and Common Law, so that you see here a positive
privilege belonging to the High Court of Parliament in Criminal matters,
which no inferior Court of Justice can claim, which I shall likewise prove
unto you a positive privilege without qualification, notwithstanding the
ensuing Objection.

Privilege of Parliament a legal acception.
having only relation to that high Court of it self, and to the proceedings
thereof, and to no other Court of Justice, and in this sense it is only taken
by the words of this Law.

Privilege of Parliament a legal exception.
Privilege of Parliament is likewise a legal exception, and so it has a
relation to other Courts of Justice, which exception any Member of Parliament
may make use of, to quash all proceedings against him in inferior Courts in
Criminal matters; and as to that part of this privilege nothing is intended
by this Law, for the Members of Parliament offending crimina^ly shall be
subject to the Censure of that Court, and not elsewhere without their leave,
therefore the privilege before mentioned of this high Court in Criminal
matters remains firm, and no ways nullified by the words of this Law. His
Majesty in one of His Declarations labors much to disprove the sense and
meaning of this Law to be thus taken.

For then says the penner thereof,

I answer: Sol.
These words are opperative of this Law, and yet they are mistaken in their
explication of them, In Criminal matters ordinary and positive proceedings in
Parliament, in Civil not so.
for the privilege is not so large in Criminal matters as it is in Civil,
and that by reason of these words restrictive, for in Criminal matters they
shall be subject to Cen^ure in an ordinary course of proceedings in that Court
by Endictment, Bill, or otherwise by the meaning of this Law, whereas in Civil
Actions it is not so, there is no positive course of proceeding against any
Members of Parliament, they are only left to an extraordinary course of
Justice. Petition, or otherwise as the pleasure of that great Court will
permit. So you see this Law or privilege justified no^withstanding any
Objection, and no Cesser of Justice.

York, the Parliament sitting at London, then it he may not be questioned
until the pleasure of Parliament be known he may escape; and so a heinous
crime protected or permitted with impunity by this privilege.

No Member may be Arrested by any, but as minister to that Court.
for he may be arrested, or his person secured by any Minister of Justice, to
be delivered to the Justice of that Court upon notice of their pleasure, and so
(I take it) the privilege of Parliament is no ways infringed; he cannot be
imprisoned, or his person secured by any man as Minister of any inferior
Court, but as Minister in this particular to the Court of Parliament, there to
be censured and not elsewhere.

shall be subject to the censure of that great Court, in an ordinary course of
Justice, which before he was not, but in an extraordinary way, by Petition or
the like, in which condition he now stands as to civil actions.

To this I can give no positive answer, but I rather incline to think that
this Law was rather parcel of the privilege it self, or contemporary with
it, and no subsequent Law, and so this collection formerly mentioned nor
material. Also I conceive that if this Law before objected shall be found
subsequent to the privilege of Parliament in this particular, which for my
part I do not credit, yet before this Act or Law delinquent Members thereof
were not exempt from Justice but only in a positive course of proceeding, they
were still subject to the censure of that high Court in an arbitrary way, and
so no Cesser or defect of Justice, which were a thing of so honorable a
Tribunell not to be imagined.

Thus you see the wisdom of the Law in the framing of these great privileges
in Criminal matters, The Reason and ground of the Privilege of the Parliament
both in Criminal and Civil matters. Nota.
because both God and man require, festinum remedium, the offenses being
exorbitant, Justice open and cannot be denied even in an ordinary Course. Also
the House of Parliament being first acquainted therewith, and their leave
obtained, Censure may be elsewhere, not otherwise: in civil actions not so,
but an utter cessation of necessity of ordinary course of Justice, for if
otherwise the Parliament would be filled with private Suits and Actions, and
many of them frivolous; the many and weighty affairs of the Kingdom in the
mean time neglected. To conclude, the Parliament you see has that high
Privilege in Criminal matters communicated to no other Court of Justice, The
Privilege of Parliament paralleld with the privilege of inferior Court; in
Civil matters
but in Civil Actions there are some footsteps of this great Privilege in
inferior Courts; In the Common Pleas a Writ of Privilege or Supercedeas, to
stay proceedings against any member of that Court; and if the parry has cause
of Action, he ought to Sue in the Common Pleas: parallel this case with the
Privilege of Parliament in Civil Actions, you will find it almost the same.
The Supersedeas, or Writ of Privilege removes not the Cause, no more is the
Cause removed by clayming the privilege of Parliament, but a Cesset processus
legis quousq. etc.

If the Party has cause of Action he must Sue in the Common Pleas, Privilege
of Parliament in Civil Actions greater then of inferior Courts
so may he, I take it in Parliament by Petition, or otherwise as the pleasure
of that Court will permit, but not in any course of Justice ordinary, as he may
in the Common Pleas: here the privilege of Parliament exceeds the privilege
of inferior Courts.

Likewise in Common Pleas privilege for Strangers, Eundo, redeundo concerning
their Suits there, and this extends as well to their persons to free them from
Arrest, as to their goods necessary for their Suit and Charges; privileges of
Parliament (I take) the same, I need not use repetition.

Now to hasten to an end of this, the reason why the Law has given unto this
High Court, this and many other privileges is for the public good, to the end
that Parliaments which are to the State Tanquam medicus aegro, like the
Physician to a sick person, should not be eluded or frustrated by suggestions
of Crimes against any members thereof by the King, or any persons whatsoever,
The very being of Parliaments depend upon the privilege in Criminal matters.
being taken away from the service of the Houses and tried elsewhere by
inferior Courts, for so they might take away all, and consequently make a
Parliament what they would and when they would; which is a breach of so
essential a privilege, that even the very being of Parliaments depends
thereupon.

His Majesty in one of his Declarations says, Arundell, acknowledged their
privilege not to extend to Treason, Felony, and the Peace; the words are, They
find it an undoubted right and constant privilege of Parliament, The
privilege of Parliament in express words by themselves presented to the King.
that no Member of Parliament (sitting in the Parliament, or within the usual
times of privilege of Parliament) is to be imprisoned or restrained without
Order or Sentence of the House unless it be for Treason, Felony, or for
refusing to give Sureties for the Peace. I have faithfully and truly opened all
matters that make any ways against me, and so I will (God willing) throughout
this whole Discourse, let the Reader impartially judge.

Sol. Privilege of the Parliament as large as before notwithstanding the words
of this petition.
Although these words foregoing of this petition be very large, and seem much
to abridge this privil dge, yet upon true examination they do not; for the
words, That none shall be imprisoned or restrained, etc. plainly relate to
civil actions or proceedings; the words, Unless in case of Treason etc imply
they shall be subject to imprisonment or restraint; but note the words, they
do not say of any inferior Court, but still the privilege remains the same
notwithstanding the words of this petition. But here it may be objected, that
(...) have left out that which makes most against me, viz. these words, Without
order or sentence of the Houses, implying clearly, that in Cases of Criminal
the order and Sentence of the House is not requisite, Sentence and Order of the
Parliament an extraordinary course of Justice upon the words of this petition.
Nota.
but they may be proceeded against without leave. But mark the words and then
judge, it is plain by their sense and meaning, that in civil actions they
cannot be proceeded against, without sentence and order of Parliament, no
ordinary course of Justice. The order of Parliament upon petition or the like
is an extraordinary and Arbitrary course of Justice; but in Criminal matters
they may be censured without sentence and order of the House; that is, in an
ordinary and positive way of Justice, but this must be in the h^gh Court of
Parliament it self, and not elsewhere without their leave, and so is the
sense of these words to any rational man well observing. There is no power
given to inferior Courts by these words either express or employed, Nota.
but the privilege continues the same it was, nothing diminished by the words
of this petition.

Further, The positive law in inferior Courts and the law of Parliament
inconsistent and differing, yet both just in their proproper motion. Vide
postea.
if we should admit the trial in inferior Courts this mischief would follow;
that their Judgments might peradventure be legal yet not just, it being
lawful for a man to open his Conscience here; so far without dread or fear
in any matter touching the Commonwealth, or any particular person in a
Parliamentary way, which in other Courts would be held a crime, and by the
positive Laws of this Kingdom punishable. This being so, the vio ation of
this privilege rests to be proved, and truly I am sorry to enter into the
proof of it, it reflecting somewhat upon the Kings most excellent Majesty,
whose Royal Person I shall ever unfeignedly honor. But surely it is the
unhappiness of Kings to be abused by evil Counsel, and the error is not to
be imputed to the King, but to his Ministers. But since I must speak, it is
Soli lucem infer, to hold a Candle before the Sun, so evident it is, it
needs no proof at all, for is not the breach of this privilege in fresh
memory, when the now Members of both Houses should have been taken from them in
an unusual way? I will not say by violence, if they had been there present, to
the great fear and astonishment of that present Assembly; but I will say no
more as supposing this Act unjustifiable, however not yet absolutely disclaimed
for ought that I could ever yet see, but his Majesty has declared in print,
that he would proceed against them in an unquestionable way; (Unquestionable
way) by these words, not pronounced innocent, but rather criminous. A general
Declaration of the proceedings of this Parliament.
which words in what sense they may be taken, I do not for my part certainly
know, as being obscure to my understanding, and not to all intents
satisfactory; which violation I take it has been since pursued in his
Majesty's Declaration of the twelfth of August, 1642. in offering to prefer an
Iudictment upon the Statute of 25. E. 3. against diverse Members of the House
therein named, and I take it his meaning is not in Parliament, but of this I
will speak no more.

Another right of Parliament is this; That every Member of both Houses shall
upon Summons come to the Parliament; unser the pain of Amercement, and other
punishment, as of old has been used to be done, as appears by the Statute of
5. R. 2. cap. 4. and also by the Statute made 6 H. 8. cap. 16. It is enacted,
that no Member of the House of Commons shall depart from the Service of the
House without leave of the Speaker of the House of Commons, and the Commons in
Parliament Assembled; which license shall be entered in the Book of the Clarke
of the Parliament upon Record, under pain of losing those sums of Money
which they should have had for their Wages; by both which Statutes it does
appear, that departure from the House of Parliament without leave is a Crime,
and punishable of ancient times; 5 R. 2. Of the Common Law declaratory.
for so it appeareeh by the first of these Statutes, which was but declaratory
of the Law formerly used, and that the punishment was Fine and Imprisonment,
and sometimes Arbitrary, appears by ancient Authority of Law. But it may be
objected, R. 2. before named, it is no Crime if the Member of Parliament so
absenting himself, can reasonably and honestly excuse himself to our Lord the
King: so that the King by this Statute is made the sole Judge of the offense,
and if the King License or Command the absence of any Member of either Houses
it is sufficient.

To which I answer, Sol.
That the Statute is not to be intended in that sense, that all Parliaments may
be made frustrate and void at the will and pleasure of the King, by his
License, or Command of the absence of any Member of Parliament, without great
cause for the same, for that were not reasonable and honest, as the words are,
Et ve^ba accipienda cum effectu as the Law says, and otherwise the very
essence of Parliaments would be shaken by such exposition.

But to make a full Answer to these words: Our Lord the King before mentioned
in the Statute, are in Law taken for the King in his Politic Capacity, not in
his Personal, and so it is no more then if the words had been to our Lord the
King in his Court of Justice in his high Court of Parliament, and so the Court
of Justice is the Judge, and not the King personally, and so is the Law
frequently takan; for to give you an instance or two, and that in a Statute Law
as this is, Merton, cap. 3. Dominum Regem the Kings Court of Justice.
in the Statute of Merton, cap. 3, are these words: Statim capiantur and in
prisona Domini Regis detineanter quousque per Dominum regem, vel alio modo
deliberentur. Here the words Dominum Regem, our Lord the King are intended the
Court of Justice of our Lord the King, and not the Kings Person; and so in the
Statute of Marle-bridge, Marl. cap. 8. Cum Domino ^ege. the Kings Court of
Justice. Perceptum Domini regis perceptum curi^.
cap. 8. the words there are, Et hoc per finem own Domino Rege faciend. per
transgressione, etc. Here cum Domino Rege is intended the Court of Chancery or
Kings Bench, and so is perceptum Domini Regis, in that Statute taken for the
command of the Kings Court of Justice, and not for any other command of the
King whatsoever.

In miserecordia Domini Res. 1. curio Domini regis. Statute enacts that Fine
and ransom shall be made at the Kings pleasure intends the pleasure of his
Court of Justice, not his persons pleasure.
The Law is clear in these Cases, which are the very same in these words, with
the Statute 5 R. 2. before named. Further, (because this objection seems
great) I will give you one instance more, in a Statute latter then any of
these, the Statute of 25 E. 3. an Act so highly and worthily prised, and much
made use of at this time by the Kings Majesty, the words are these: Ou si home
levira guerre counter nostre Seignior Le Roy en son, Realm, etc.

Here the words (Nostre Siegnior Le Roy) are taken for the Laws of our Lord
our King, and by good judgment likewise as to me it seems, not for any
leavying War against his Person, for that is included in the first branch of
this Act; Si home compassa ou imagine, etc. The Laws, and the Courts of Law or
Justice intend the same thing, therefore I conclude the words; Our Lord the
King must necessarily be meant in this Statute of 5. R. 2. the Kings Court of
Justice, or the Laws of his Court of Justice, to wit, His high Court of
Parliament, who only are the Judges of any crime committed in that Court, and
no other inferior Court, as has been proved at large. Also this latter
Statute of 6 H. 8. 6 Hen. 8. ca. 16. A stricter law then 5. R. 2.
seems to conclude all Delinquents that have not License, as is before
mentioned, although the occasion of their absence be great, and urgent affairs
even in Law and conscience satisfactory.

Now to deny unto the Parliament the dispensation of Justice against Offenders
in this kind (as it is too apparent) and withal to protect them from the
censure of that high and great Court, surely (I say no more) it is a violation
of their Laws and Rights unto them anciently belonging.

But that I may answer all Objections, named, but justifiable by the rules of
all Law and Conscience.

Nota.
they would have inserted the same in their Answers, and so reasonable and
certain an Argument of their innocence would not have been omitted; as on the
contrary, so high and contumacious a defense would not have been returned, such
an affront and contempt of Justice that even a Court of Pye-powders would not
have suffered. Also see their Answers what they are, their Allegiance is the
ground of them, as if their attendance on the Kings Person warranted them to
do injustice, to violate the Laws of these Statutes before named; Is this
their Allegiance to the King? Is not the Subjects Allegiance confired to the
Laws? Is not the very Etimology of the word derived from thence? Legiantia,
Allegiance the Etymology.
quasi legis essentia, therefore their answers not legal, Their answer no^
legal, because they infringe the law, viz. 5. R. 2 and 6. H. 8. Tumult what it
is.
as also the Objection of being driven from the Parliament frivolous, for then
they would have made use of it in their answers. Further to question the word
(Tumult) before mentioned, do numbers of people with Petitions, no way
disturbing the Peace make in Law a Tumult? Certainly no; likewise it appears
by undeniable proof, that some of them were solicited away from Parliament by
Letters, therefore the former allegation is idle.

For the Kings absence from the Parliament, in what condition it stands, The
Kings absence from the Parliament by the ancient law how far justifiable.
I will offer you one of the ancient Laws of that pious Prince Edward, Sir
named the Confessor, whose Laws the Kings of this Nation at their Coronation
sweat to observe and keep: the words are these rendered in English; The King
ought to be present at his Parliament, unless he be hindered by sickness, and
then he ought to be in the same Town where the Parliament is held, and his
sickness ought to be certified by twelve Members of the Parliament, a
Committee for that purpose of the Lords and Commons. Here appears no cause of
his absence but sickness justifiable, and of this he himself is not the
Judge, it must be certified as you have heard. What, not peril of his life may
some say? Is that no just cause of His absence? You hear the Law, I have
nothing to say to questions. It seems in those days there were no such
unworthy and dishonorable thoughts in the minds of men, as to doubt the
security of Parliaments unto the Regal Person, since in judgment of Law, if
Tumults or Disorders shall happen in the Commonwealth, Parliaments are best
able to supp^^se them, and to protect both King and people from injury and
wrong. Now Parliaments are the bane of Princes, as they are now to ^^ed, they
are now Corasives, when as you see formerly they were the only curers of all
Diseases in the Body Politic. The King formerly not any where safe but here,
now the King in His own judgment safe any where but here, flying from them as
from His enemy; when as it is not possible he should find any where, that
which he desires but under God even with them (peace and security.)

Be not deceived, Great Prince, neither fly them that pursue you, not in any
Hostile manner: The Parliament follow you with humble Declarations and
Petitions for Peace, you mistake their sweet Compellations; put up your Sword
into the Sheath, and let Peace be in our dwellings and amongst us.

I have a little deviated, I will return unto my self, and I find the King
still absent, notwithstanding all that has been spoken, and justifying the
same. Indeed there is a Statute in the time of King Henry the 8 via. 33. H. 8.
cap. 21. 33. H. 8. ca. 21.
by which in the Kings absence from Parliament, His Assent by his Letters
Patents under the Great Seal, shall be sufficient.

Here it may be alleged,

I answer; Use of no force against a law. Vi. infra.
that the first and last day of Parliament is sufficient, yet that is but use
which is of no force against a Law in being, as I conceive. Further, His Assent
by this Act is limited, it is only to Acts of Parliament, and no other assent
is warranted. Note also, that to dis-assent to any matter trans-acted in
Parliament, it gives him no power at all Thus you see, Ex libro de ordine
Parlia. Editi, temp^re Edvardi filij Regis Ethel^ redi.
the Kings absence from his Parliament how it stands by the ancient Law, of
which I have an extract; as also by latter Law you have heard likewise, the
absence of the Members of the Houses debated.

But we will (Argumenti gracia) admit their Allegation true, that they were
driven from the Service of the Parliament by Tumults and disorders, which no
man will (the premises considered) suppose, yet the objection is still
frivolous, who shall judge them innocent or transgressors of the Law, shall not
the Parliament? yes verily, as it is manifestly proved by the former discourse,
so that in the confutation of this, we do but like Sysiphi sax^m voluere,
labor in vain with multiplicity of words to answer a mere false and nugatory
suggestion.

H. 8. before named, That the penalty of that Law is but lo^se of their wages
in case any of the Members of the said House of Commons shall depart from the
Service of the House without leave of the House accordingly as that Act has
appointed, and so with loss of their wages upon the point that Statute is
satisfied.

Sol. 6 H. 8. More penal abrogateth no former Law.
To which I answer; First, that Statute extends not to the House of Peers,
neither does it take away the mulct or penalty of any former Law or Statute
made in that behalf, but adds a further punishment to the crime, abrogateth
no former Law; so that Fine, Imprisonment, and Arbitrary Censure continue still
in their force: and to conclude this point, they are by one Statute or the
other, or by both transgressors of the Law, and liable to the judgment of that
supreme Judicatory.

The proceedings of the Pa^liament not subject to any debate extrajudiciall,
nor to any deba^e judicial, but of it self.
Another right of Parliament is the sole trans-action of all matters even unto
Judgment, or the Royal Assent; the proceedings of this High Court being not
subject to any extrajudiciall debate of censure of any other Court or Authority
whatsoever, but only of it self, and within it self having supreme Authority
and Jurisdiction; and whereas I spoke before of their power of preparing and
trans-acting all matters unto the Royal Assent; The transacting matters unto
the Royal Assent does not intend the royal assent Arbitrary.
I do not intend the royal assent Arbitrary, for the royal assent cannot in
Justice be denied to any Bills preferred by the wisdom of Parliament for the
public good; neither can any absolute, Negative voice no Prerogative.
negative voice of the King in this nature be any prerogative to him justly
pertaining, although by a Proclamation, bearing date at Oxford, printed not
long since, his Majesty claims an absolute negative voice in Parliament as
his undoubted right.

And likewise in one of his Declarations he justifies it as his right for this
reason,

To answer this I need say no more but this, Sol. Matters of right and Justi^e,
and of gra^e and favor legally differen^ed.
That these are thoughts dishonorable of a Parliament, to make the head and
fountain of Justice a receptory of such impure streams as these (injury and
injustice) besides these matters are in Law plainly and perspicuously
differenced in the one, viz. matters of Right and Justice, the whole Kingdom
is concerned, not so in the other as being private on particular in their
nature, as Bills of Naturalization, Indenization, General pardon how special.
grant of Franchises, on privileges to Corporations or private persons,
general pardons or particular, for though the word general be here used, yet
it operates, but especially it extends only to particular persons without you
will make all the Kingdom delinquents unto Justice; it includes genera
singulorum at the most, General statutes not national or public.
not singula generum. And so in Law diverse Statutes are called general
Statutes, of which the Judges are bound by Law to take notice of without
special pleading, and yet the Public or the whole Kingdom are not concerned
in them. For my part I shall need to say little herein, because it has been
formerly handled by others; Arbitrary Government grounded upon the negative
voice.
also I take it to be a truth as clear as the noone day, that upon this
Structure all Arbitrary Government is founded and maintained, which position
stands not with a mixed and Politic Government, as this of our Nation is,
but with a Monarchical, where the will and pleasure of the Prince is a Law, as
is known sufficiently to the learned.

In inferior Courts no negative voi^e, no voice at all.
But a little to examine this particular, and let us look into the proceedings
of inferior Courts; Has he there any negative voice? It appears he is so
far from having any negative voice, that he has no Vote at all, but the
voice of the Law pronounced by the mouths of the dispensers thereof, the
reverend Judges is that which obliges both King and people, neither can it be
disanulled by any verbal Command of the King, or any other extrajudiciall way,
although under ^he Great Seal of England, although the Judgment be against
the King himself. Nay further, I conceive the Law exercises a coersive power
over all persons without exception, the King as well as the people, surely then
the King has no voice negative, yea, the compulsary proceedings were the same
anciently, though now dis-used; that is to say, Writs issued forth against the
King as against the Subject: I have seen good Authority in print, that the
form of the Writ in the times of Henry the 1. or thereabouts as I remember was
thus: Precipe ^enrico Regi, etc. the power of the Law was here supreme but of
late times, it is now by way of Petition if the Suit be against the Kings
Servants or incumbent, as in a Quare impedit, or the like, if judgment be once
given (as it is usual) the Kings right is bound, and you see withal it is by
Writ in that Case; now if Judgment be given, Judgment against the King by the
posi^ive laws, and with all compulsary.
surely even at this day the Judgment is not illusory, for every Judgment in
its nature is an Act compulsary, Et judicium redili^us in invitum, as the
Lawyers say; for execution may be demanded upon this Judgment, and cannot in
Justice be denied; though against the King. These things thus premised I do
reiterate my former question, where is now the Kings negative voice; surely in
inferior Courts he has no voice at all; come we then to the right Court of
Parliament, Has he it there? without doubt he has it not. It is an Opinion
exployded by all good me^, unsound and rotten at the root if we but open it;
The reason why the negative voice is not consistent with this government.
for if he has a negative voice the Government is merely Arbytrary; inferior
Courts may a while be refreshed herewith, but the fountain will soon dry up,
and what then will become of the rivilets? If this may be defended De Jure to
be done, that the King may deny his Assent to twenty Bills preferred unto him
by the wisdom of his Parliament for the Public good, there will fall o^^ a
total defect of Justice in a short time, without God incline the hearts of
Princes miraculously. And this admitted, how would it let loose the reins of
Government? for if there were no supplement of new Laws, the old Laws would
soon expire, diseases breeding in the Body Politic, even as in the natural,
requiring new Laws, the ministration of new devised remedies to suppress the
mischief, the which the Art of man cannot cure or prevent by provision of old
Laws; therefore for this very reason the Kings negative voice is inconsistent
with Government. Further, to what end is the Oath so solemnly tendered and taken
by the Kings of this N^tion at their Coronations? Is it merely superfluous, or
is he bound now, and is he presently loosed in his practice and government? The
Kings Oath at his I^auguration against the negative voice.
How does his negative voice in Parliament and this Oath stand together, in
which Oath he swears to confirm, those Laws, Quas vulgus elegerit, which his
people shall choose, Some material words in this Oath explained.
the true sense and meaning of the words extending only to future Laws, to be
chosen by the people, as I take it clear without all question, for to laws
already established precedent branches of this Oath do relate, else there must
be a Tantology, which in an Oath penned with such wisdom and deliberation we
must not conceive.

The word (Consuetudines) joined with the words of this ^ranch of the Oath,
Sol. (Merchandises) vid. M^cae. ca. 30 Note that this word (Consuetudines) is
also taken for Statute law, as Centra consuetudinem communi concili^ Regni
edit. C^. M. C. f. 5. 6.
for Rents and Services due to the Lord are called Customs; be^ sides, this
wo^d (Consuetudi^es) in this very Oath plainly points out Laws and
Statutes, Franchises and Liberties: for, have the Kings of this Realm granted
Customs in this sense to their people? as are the words of one branch of this
Oath, they cannot be Customs, and yet have such denomination even at their
very commencement as these words report, but of this enough.

Now the people here intended in this Oath are the High Court of Parliament,
for where can the people make election of wholesome Laws for themselves but
here, The Commons are there representative, the Lords not so; but personally;
that is the reason a Peer may make a Proxy, not the other.
where they are representatively assembled? for no legal Assembly or
Convention totius populi can any History record, or antiquity of this Nation
ever mention, but this convention of Parliament. I will say no more, in a truth
so clear, to every capacity plain and obvious; but people disaffected
clamor much, and say, How can this be, since the Kings dignity is above all
Law, his presence suspends the Law, and surely if he may suspend the Law by his
presence, and that a Law already made, and in being, then surely he may deny
efficacy or force to any Law not in being by an explicit Act or denial of
Assent; for the former case is but implicit, and for proof of this they may
object that ancient Case of Law,

Sol.
To which I answer, that this Case is ancient, and the Law in this particular is
antiquated, not abrogated; howsoever it is pertinent to out present purpose: I
say this Case stands upon its particular reason, for the Kings presence is a
sufficient Protection in favor of liberty against the Lord, who does not agere
civiliter against his Villain, that is to say, claim him in a course of
Justice, for then if the proceed in a judicial way, The Kings presence no
Protection against the power and execution of the law.
where the power and authority of the Law appears, as he may, then I conceive
the Kings presence is no protection, but it is like the case of a man upon an
Execution awarded against him, who flies into the Kings presence upon a Capias
ad satisfaciendum directed to the Sheriff; for in that Case I take it, the Law
is plain, the Sheriff must with the power of the County (if needful)
apprehend him, and if he return the especial matter unto the Court without
executing the Writ, the return of the Writ in this case is not good, and if
the party escape, the Sheriff is subject to an Action at the Suit of the
party, who is damnified thereby.

Thus I have done with this particular, I mean the negative voice, and if
there be no coersive power to rectify the abuse of Authority Regal, as some
would have it, yet it remains still a transgression from the rule of Truth and
Justice, and that is all that I desire at this time to prove. If there be no
limits for the impetuous waves of the proud Ocean, God has appointed the Sands
to stand up, and choke them. Lo here God and Nature against exorbitant power,
but of this sufficient. There yet remains the last part of this Privilege
before mentioned a little to be spoken of, The proceedings of Parliaments
paralleld with the proceedings of inferior Courts.
viz. That the proceedings of this High Court are not subject to any
extrajudiciall censure or debate, wherein I will briefly-parallel this with the
proceedings in inferior Courts, where you shall find, that they are not so
much as to be retarded or delayed by any verbal command of the King, their
judgments binding all, until by legal course reversed; no man, no not the
King himself authorized to question, much less nullify their Acts in any
extrajudiciall way, so much ought the judgment of the Law to be had in
reverence. The King cannot warrant the absence of any man in his service, The
King cannot retard Justice but in a legal way.
either by any verbal, or Certificate by Letter to the Court of Justice, but
it must be done legally by Writ under Scale, or otherwise it will turn to a
default, he cannot retard Justice but in a legal way. And what is
extrajudiciall debate or censure, but a retarding of Justice. If Judgment be
given against the King, he cannot examine this judgment in an extrajudiciall
way before himself, but it must he subject to censure or debate in a legal
way, by Writ of Error or the like; An offense committed in the presence of a
Court of Justice, great and more capital then in the presence of the King.
I need say no more for the proof of this. I will present you with the great
Majesty that does attend the administration of Justice, and that is this; An
Offense committed in the presence of a Court of Justice, is a greater Crime and
more Capital then in the presence of the King; killing the Chancellor or Judge
of either Bench doing his office is High Treason; by the express words of 25.
E. 3. not so, if from the Bench, though in presence of the King, striking any
man in Westminster Hall in presence of the Courts of Justice, is the loss of a
man's right hand, and his goods and chattels, not so in the Palace or presence
of the King, unless blood shed ensue upon it, and that is specially by
Statute, not by common Law; but because al^ have touched upon this before, I
will return to the discourse intended.

It is manifest, that the Law is the square and rule by which both King and
people are directed, and regulated in inferior Courts; What shall we then say
to the high Court of Parliament, in comparison of which, all other Courts are
but Tanquam viburna cupresso, like shrubs to the lofty Cypress or Cedar, from
whose fullness and abundance all other Courts receive even their power and
authority.

There is an enemy at hand,

To which I answer, to the rule of Law, Ministerial or judicial Acts not
incident to the Regal dignity.
which says, That the Kings cannot do any Act ministerial to himself, a^ to
take a Recogni^^nce pro securitate pa^is, or the like, much lord do any Act
judicial betwixt himself and his people; yea not only so, but he might fit
in one Court, and reverse a Judgment given against himself in another Court,
which how injurious this same would be unto the subject, how dishonounourable
and scandalous to the Court of Justice, I suppose the weakest capacity does
apprehend. Therefore the wisdoms of the (...) has appointed the sage and
learned men, being sworn to administer Justice indifferently betwixt the King
and his people. Court of B. Le R. B. C. Courts of Justice time out of mind,
and Magna Cart. ca. to did not ^reate and constitute the Court of C. B it did
only settle it in Loc^ c^^t^. No Courts of Justice at the first in the subject
^s now, but all dispensation of Justice in the Crown, viz. by the Kings
ministry.
And the Opinion of Fineaux chief Justice in the time of King Henry the 7*
That all administration of Justice into at first in the Crown, is to be
underst^^d with this distinction, it was not in that Regal period a^ to the
dispensation of it, but it was in the regal Ministers or the Judges, and so
might be said to be in the Crown, according to the rule of Law; Qui ^er alium
facit per seipsant fadere videni^. If so in inferior Courts, the same law
^^^^^^ed sway in that high Court of Parliament also, the practice and course of
that Court shows plainly, that they are a C^^rt of Justice, without the
personal ^re^e^ce of the King Witness their rever^^^^ erro^ious judgments
given in inferior ^^^rt, ^a^^ing illegal Parents, Monopolies granted by the
King, and many other: might here be remembered. I have heard it formerly
objected, that the House of Commons could not take a Recognizance Pro
securitate pacis of themselves, but it was always transmitted to the Lords,
therefore this House was no Court of Justice, for this is incident to every
Court of Justice that is, of Record; yea a Commissioner of Oier and Terminer,
may take a Recognizans as it seems, and for proof, the Case in the 1 H. the
7.19, 20. is urged, for there it is expressly said, That the transcript of a
Writ of Error upon an erroneous Judgment in the Kings Bench shall be brought
into the House of Peers, Et per Dominos tantum, and non per communitatem
assignabitur seneschallus qui cum Dominis spiritualibus and temporalibus per
concilium Justiciar procedet ad errorem corrigendum. Hence it seems that the
House of Commons of it self cannot examine any Judgment in inferior Courts,
and therefore should seem to be no distinct Court of Justice of it self. As
also that the House of Commons considered in relation to that joint power of
Judicature, that it has with the House of Lords, cannot take a Recognizans as
is before objected, for so it may seem to be employed by this Case.

I answer, Sol.
because the weight of this objection seems great, that this Case may be
admitted for Law, and yet the power of that High Court of the House of Commons
no whit diminished; for this Case must be intended of their joint and entire
power of Judicature, Co^rts of Justice have no immediate cognizance of each
others pro^eedings, but they must be certified hereof and that in a legal way.
Certificate implies no immediate cognizans.
for otherwise the House of Lords could take no immediate cognizance or
knowledge of the proceedings of the House of Commons, nor e converso the House
of Commons of the proceedings of the House of Peers, but their proceedings
ought to be legally certified, and by the words in this Record you may see it
was done, in relation to that joint power, for the words are, Per Dominos
tantum and non per communitatem, etc. Here the Commonalty must plainly be
intended as member or part of that High Court, or otherwise the words were
merely nugatory; for what need this restriction if the House of Commons were
not conjoined with the Lords in intercourse of Justice, but were a distinct
Court and several from the House of Peers; it were as much as if the Kings
Beanch should be restrained from having any immediate Jurisdiction or Cognizans
in matters pertaining to the Common Pleas, a thing ridiculous and superfluous,
seeing by Law they are mere estranged from any knowledge in this nature of any
proceedings of each other interlocutory, until judgment given, and then it
must legally be brought before them; Jurisdiction of Courts.
so that this Case is clearly meant of their joint power, wherein by custom
(as says Sir Edward Cook) the Lords only proceed to reverse or affirm any
Judgment upon error, no whit diminishing the Power and Authority of the House
of Commons by this, for diverse matters may by custom be severally trans-acted
by Persons having the same power and authority, Transaction by one done, by all
representative.
and yet they are in Law trans-acted by all the Members or Judges of that Court
representative. How the opinion of Sir E. Cook formerly is to be understood,
viz. according to their joint power of Judicatu^e.
But I doubt not but the transcript of any Judgment in the Kings Bench may be
commanded, and that legally too into the House of Commons, and that they may
proceed thereupon either to affirm or reverse the Judgment, and that by the
power of that high Court, as a several and distinct Court of Justice from the
House of Peers, and this Case before remembered to be good Law notwithstanding,
but this I leave to the learned. The House of Commons may take a Recognizance
at a distinct court of Justice.


Now concerning the Recognizance before touched, there is nothing expressed or
employed in this Case, but that the House of Commons, as a several and distinct
Court of Justice of it self may take a Recognizance, there is no question of
that, for every Court of Record have that power unquestionably, yea, derivative
Authority from Courts of Justice, as Commissioners of Oier and Terminer are
invested with this Authority. Further, The House of Commons may take a
Recognizance according to their joint power.
the House of Commons considered in relation to their joint power* may take a
Recognizance, for so says good authority, that reverend Judge Brook, in
abridging the said Case of 1 H. 7. before cited, Videtur quod tout un are his
very words; besides, if there has no such practice been or used in the House
of Commons, that is no proof, it is no argument from a non esse to a non
posse; an hundred presidents Sub silentio make not a Law, it was never yet upon
contestation so determined, but of this sufficient. Thus I hope I have cleared
this false aspersion, it plainly appearing that they are a High and Supreme
Court of Justice, jointly and severally without the Kings personal presence.

The Assembly at Oxford no Parliament.
There has of late been an Anti-parliament (for so I may term it) erected at
Oxford, whereby they had thought to have weakened the power of this Parliament,
by Voting their proceedings as traitorous and illegal; but alas these are
poor shifts and evasions, seeing there is an Act, unto which they themselves
this very Session have assented; by which it appears, this Parliament cannot
be held, proroged, or adjournied elsewhere without the consent of both Houses
of Parliament now assembled; so that this Assembly at Oxford is no Parliament,
and consequently their proceedings a mere nullity in judgment of Law, and
withal subject to severe Censure, in regard they have assumed to themselves
the Supreme Authority of the Kingdom without any warrant of Law so to do: and
that spurious generation of Bastards, or illegitimate Children, which seek to
sever and divide the Power and Authority of this High Court, by affirming any
legal presence of this Assembly elsewhere; the wise Salomons of this
Parliament will in their due time bring to condign punishment.

Well then, they being in Parliament, and a high Court of Justice without the
King^ personal presence, Inferior Courts may command Posse comitatus.
what question can be made of their power, even as a Court of Justice to
constrain and compel all persons, yea even by force of Arms, to submit to
their supreme Authority; and in case of resistance, if inferior Courts may
command Posse Comitatus to execute their Processes and Injunctions, as it is
manifest they may, for in one common Case of Replevin from the Court of Common
Pleas, the Sheriff of the County as Minister to the Court of Justice, if the
party that has taken a Distress carry the same to a Fort or Castle, to the
end it may not be replevied, he may command the power of the County to attend
him, and abate that Fortlet or Castle in case of resistance, delivering by
Replevin the Cattle to the owner. Surely then the Parliament in case their
Power be contemned and disobeyed, may command Posse Regni, and not only Posse
comitatus, to bring all persons rebellious unto the Justice of that High Court,
there to receive according to their merits. And th^s is the case of this
present Parliament (as I take it) who have legally Summoned the Members of both
Houses now absent, to attend the Service of the Houses, and they have not
appeared, but absolutely refused to obey the Summons, Process, and Power of
that Court; which for my part, what offense it is, and where Censurable, I
leave it to the world to judge upon, wh^t has been formerly spoken, there
being no absolute case of necessity to plead for their absence (as I could ever
yet perceive) and the Laws and Statutes of this Realm being peremptory in the
mulct and penalty thereof.

The Kings presence representative by 33. H. 8. supra.
Now peradventure it is necessary to know in what the Royal Assent Personally
or Representative is required, and that is plain, in enacting any Law or
Statute to make it perpetual to oblige the people; I conceive the Royal
Assent must precede, yet the Royal Assent cannot in Justice be denied, neither
with a Le Roy s'duisera suspended, unless satisfactory reasons be given for
the same unto the Parliament, for the public good, as also the confirmation of
them is no act of transcendent grace, but of right and Justice, as has been
formerly spoken.

The power of the Parliament to make Ordinances paralleld with this power in
inferior Courts.
Nay further, it must be granted that as incident to this great Court, they may
make Ordinances to bind the people, Sedente Parliamento without any royal
assent, unto which Ordinances, although not grounded upon the positive Laws of
this Kingdom, the people ought to yield obedience as well as to the
Ordinances, Ordinances binds until definitive Judgment, though not transacted
in plena cur.
Orders, and interlocutory Judgments in other Courts of Justice, unrill
definitive or final Judgment, which is for the most part in Plena curia when
the Court is full, but that other power is used, although but part of the Court
be then sitting, and binds all persons until final Judgment; it is also
plain, that in other Courts their Orders, Ordinances, Ordinances binding
though not grounded upon the positive Laws.
and interlocutory Judgments are not grounded always upon the positive Laws,
but upon intervenient accidents, arising upon material circumstances of time
place, or other emergent causes, which Orders are held by the Sages of the Law
agreeable unto equity and Justice, although no express Law to warrant the
same. In Chancery many cross Orders, the one to the other in a cause there
depending, yea almost seeming contradictory, yet in Law and conscience
justifiable; and he that shall disobey those Orders is accounted a rebel unto
the Law, the King, and his royal Government, Jurisdiction of Courts title
Parliament.
as appears by the Writ of Rebellion usually in those cases issuing; and Sir
Edward Coke affirms, this power of Ordinance anciently pertaining to this
high Court of Parliament.

And I know not but they may proceed to definitive Judgment in Causes
notwithstanding any thing that has been formerly spoken, The Power of
Parliament to proceed unto final Judgment in case of wilful absence of any
the Judges of this Court pa^alleld with this power in inferior Court. The
Court full in Judgment of the law without those Judges which are wilfully
absent.
if any Members of the Houses, who are by Law Judges of this high Court, shall
refuse to discharge the trust committed unto them, as the case now is, and
wilfully by absence or delinquency make themselves incapable and unworthy of
that great service, for then I conceive it clear that the Court is full in
Judgment of Law without them; and under favor, there is no Law in point, but
the remaining Judges may proceed by the same authority. For to examine a little
the course of inferior Courts of Law, if any one or two of the Judges of the
Kings Bench, or Common Pleas, shall obstinately recede from that Court, and
deny his attendance there for the public, shall not the residue of the Judges
transact all matters there depending? Certainly they may, and further they
ought so to do. And although for convenience or conformity, or to the end the
Judgment may be the more unquestionable being confirmed by the greater number,
the weighty matters are agitated and determined in Plena curia for the most
part, yet I take it clear in case of absence, especially wilful or obstinate,
the remaining Court may debate and finally sentence all matters incident to
their jurisdiction. Indeed in some particular cases, the chief Justice or
Judge has formerly had the sole power as concerning Writs of Error, viz. that
the warrant for the issuing out the Writ of Error to the Chancery ought to be
under the Test of the chief Justice of the Kings Bench, No judicial but
ministerial acts by law transacted solely, by any one Judge in inferior
Courts. vid. Sup^a.
but that Case or any of the like nature I conceive are only ministerial; but
if a Writ be once returned in Court, and so the Cause there depending, no doubt
the remaining Judges may judicially hear and determine. Now if so in these
lower Courts, we cannot dis-affirme the same in this eminent Tribunal the
Parliament, the Court being the moddell and pattern of all other Courts, the
Gnomon that points out the course of the Sun, the course of Justice and
equity to all the other Courts, there being no brightness or luster of Justice
in inferior Courts, but resides more fully and more abundantly in that high
Court of Parliament.

So that I conclude, the Parliament may make Ordinances, Orders, give Judgment
and Sentence definitively in all matters whatsoever, without the Kings
personal presence, or any of the Members of either Houses, their absence being
such as is formerly declared, and that upon the reason of Law in these riv^lets
of Justice, their latitude of power, and the superlative authority considered
in themselves and in their course of pr^ceedings, being not so much as intended
to be here mentioned, but only by way of comparison or resemblance of the Law
in inferior Courts, to make things more conspicuous, not any ways to
dishonor this Court, as if it should emendicare justitiam, beg or borrow the
rules of Justice from inferior Courts, who ar^ but tanquam anc^lle, like
handmaids to this Lady and Queen of Justice; as also it is done ea intention
to inform vulgar capacities per notiora nobis, by things even subject unto
sense, to the end they might (if possible) be satisfied.

I should now enter into the proof of the violation of this privilege, almost
forgotten by this digression, namely the transacting of matters belonging unto
this high Court, by the new erect and pretended Parliament at Oxford a greater
violation in this particular, then if any inferior Court of Justice in this
Kingdom had assumed or arrogated this authority, The Assembly at Oxford
unwarrantable by law even in their Session, much more in their proceedings.
because this Assembly at Oxford have not so much as any color of Law to
warrant even their Session, much less their proceedings; the matters there
trans-acted and adjudged in derogation and dishonor of this high Court, being
so many and numerous; as also the extrajudiciall arraignement of the Votes and
proceedings of this Parliament, but I think it is manifest to all the world,
and no man ignorant thereof.

The many and weighty Remonstrances, Declarations, and Ordinances of this high
Court dec^ared, and pronounced null and void at Oxford and elsewhere, by
Declarations of his Majesty extrajudicially framed. Much might be spoken herein
with much sorrow, and peradventure not without offense, therefore I will
desist, and close up my meditations on this particular, protesting nothing but
the delivery of the truth with meekness and moderation; and my soul is full
of heaviness and lamentation, that ever so unhappy an occasion should be
ministered, ^eseeching God (if it may stand with his Will and Pleasure) to heal
all our wounds, and to reconcile all differences with peace.

There is another right of Parliament yet behind, which requires me not to be
silent, as being of all one of the chiefest; by breach of which, the Sword is
gone through our Land. Armies of men have been raised, whereby not only
violation of Laws, Rights, and Justice, but even the destruction of all is at
hand, unless God in his mercy prevent it. In brief, we have seen great
forces raised and maintained by the King, without any Law or authority to
warrant the same, being (as I suppose) misinformed and unadvised herein, The
Privilege or right of Parliament.
it being directly against the right and power of Parliament which is this;
That no Armies of men can he raised by the King, or any subordinate authority
under him, but as the positive Law has prescribed, unless by consent of
Parliament. And here peradventure it will be expected I should speak of the
Militia of the Kingdom, The Milita absolute or general. Vid. infra.
as being a matter at this time of the highest concernement, but I will refer
it to a distinct debate by it self, as you shall perceive hereafter in this
discourse; The Milita positive, or by the positive Law limited.
and here only that part of the Militia that has relation to the positive
Laws, I will open unto you, and show you even here the transgression of the
Law positive, it being not only against the ancient Law of the Land, but
llkewise against a Stature, unto which his Majesty has given his Assent this
very Sessions of Parliament.

The ancient Law of this Land is mentioned in the Preamble of this Statute,
viz. That none is compellable to go out of his Shire to the Kings wars
unless it be in case of necessity, of sudden coming in of strange enemies
into this Land, as some Sratures recite the Common Law; and other Statures w^
out the word (necessity) in the reci^^^s ^ut, ^e Common Law, but it is not at
all material, as you shall see hereafter. The body of this Statute is for the
relief of Ireland against those Popish Rebels, An Act for the relief of
Ireland.
who in a short time have made a populous and rich Kingdom even almost
desolate. You have heard the Common Law, which was to secure the Kingdom in
case a Parliament could not so speedily be called for the defense thereof; but
it is plain, that hereby is intended, (Of necessity) some Statutes recite the
Common Law thus, others not.
that no man is compelable to serve the King in his wars, against the
representative Body thereof, for that is not for the defense of the Land, but
for the ruin thereof, they being in no case to be conceived enemies unto the
King, or the Realm, but as the supporters, pillars, and maintainers of all
justice, and peace in this Commonwealth.

The Common law now in force to^ching the Militia extends only to Tenures or
Contra is.
It appears by this Law likewise, that none are compellable to go out of
their Shi^es to the Wars, although a sudden incursion of strange enemies,
but only those which are bound by Tenure or Contract, and that none others can
be forced to serve the King in his wars, unless by grant of Parliament; The
statute of Winchester seeing down an Assi^e for land, and goods, and that
without relation to Tenures or Contract^ is now not in force. Vid infra.
and this appears evidently by the Statute of 4. of H. 4. 13. a very weighty
and worthy Act for our purpose, for that Statute recites and confirms all
the Statutes formerly touching this particular, as namely, 1 E. 3. 5. 18. E. 3.
25. E. 3. which said Statutes recite the ancient Common Law; and this Statute
with the others are but declarat^ (...) the Common Law, so that open t^^
estrnce of this Statute, you open the Common Law, and Statute Law touching this
particular. Now it appears plainly by the exception in this Statute, 4 H. 4.
13. The exception of Services and Devoires other then Millitary was not of
necessity, but to satisfy those who were not so conusant of the laws, for
sure they had not been included, the style of the Act, is of millitary services
only.
and by the exception likewise in the Statute of 25. E. 3. that none shall be
charged to find men of Arms, but only those that hereunto are bound by
Tenure or Contract, for the exception always is parcel of the premises, and
relates in Judgment of Law thereunto, therefore the enacting part of these
Laws must be only meant of Military services, in respect of Lands holden by
such services or devories, and no otherwise; unless you will make the
exceptions (which are as it were explanations of the minds of the Law makers)
merely frivolous. Nota. The exception is of services due by Tenure, therefore
so must be the body of this Act intended. This Assize was some ancient law
antiquated or not in force, revived by Winchester, b^t Winchester being
repealed this Assize is of no fo^^e.
It appears thus by the meaning of 1 E. 3. cap. 5. before spoken of, that the
Common Law recited, must be intended only of Tenures or Contracts. And
further, these words (otherwise then has been done or used in times past for
defense of the Realm) do partly relate to the Statute of Winchester, which
Statute sets down the Assize or proportion of Arms for Lands and goods, and
withal is but declaratory of the Common Law or Statute in this, but it
proportions the finding of Arms in a way compulsary, which before was not so,
so that you see the result of all is this; none but those which are bound by
Tenure or Contract are compellable to serve the King in his wars, within the
Kingdom or without, and that they only in case of sudden invasion, Rebels
are not enemies as the words of the common law are
so that it may be further urged upon this Law, viz. (the Common Law before
recited) that not only against the Parliament, but even to suppress any
private insurrection or rebellion of the Subject within the Kingdom, the King
cannot force the Subject out of his Shire, for the words are as formerly you
have heard them, unless in case of sudden coming in of strange enemies,
etc. and to make the vigor and force of this Law, without doubt such is the
judgment of this Parliament in recital of this Law as you may perceive.
Instit. Sur. Littleton. The Tenure of those that hold by Escuage explained.
(This law) viz. the common law recited in 1 E. 3. 5 Service by E^cuage to be
performed out of the Realm. Sir Edw. Coke, ibid. 1 E. 3. ca. 5. good law, none
shall be force^, etc. for Escuage, or foreign service is not compulsory by the
positive law, but by Parliament; Sir Edw. Coke, f. 69. perhaps is misprin^ed in
these words (if the Ten^re be t^ go into William, Hiberniam, etc.) and the
words should be thu^ (if the Voyage Royal be to go, etc. I leave it to the
judicious.

The Law may see^e to include a general Tenure by Knights service, as a
special (as to me it seems) but if so, not material since Nulla sequatur
pena Sir E. C. f. 69. in his Institutes, where he says, that ( Scocia is put
but for example, seems to incline that the law is intended of a special
Tenure.


Sir Edward Coke seems in his Institutes to say, That he that holds his
Lands by Escuage, is bound to attend the King in his wars out of the Realm,
contrary to this Law formerly recited; but his meaning must either be intended
where the Tenure is expressed to that purpose, as to go in Scotiam, Hiberniam,
Pictaviam, etc. and then it is nothing to impeach this Law, as being intended
of general Tenures by Knights service, etc. or otherwise if his intention be
also of a general Tenure by Knights service, such as draws unto it Escuage,
yet if the Tenant attends not Nulla sequatur pena by Law, until the penalty
of Escuage for non attendance be assessed by Parliament, so that you see upon
the point the Common Law formerly recited is still in force, viz. That none are
bound to attend the King in his Wars, either within or without the Realm,
unless in case of sudden invasion, unless by their Tenures, if by their
Tenures bound to attend him in foreign service (as that is not clearly
granted) yet you see no penalty ensues for default thereof, unless the high
Court of Parliament impose it, a president of which Escuage assessed, Service
not compulsary, in effect no service.
we have not had since 8. E. 2. no such service penal or compulsary without
Parliament, which is in effect as if you should say, No such service at all
without consent of Parliament.

But I will leave the Common Law (I hope) vindicated from all objections, and
come we to the Statute it self; and that is, that such number of Soldiers
shall be impressed in all Counties of this Kingdom by the Committees for that
purpose, as shall be appointed by the King and both Houses of Parliament. This
is the substance of the Act, if not the words, and here you may see this
Statute is tender of the ancient Birthright and freedom of the subject, for it
recites it, and withal makes but a temporary provision for Ireland, The
statute for the releese of Ireland but temporary. The Common Law only in force
for the Militia of thi^ Kingdom against all persons except the high Court of
Parliament. Vi. infra.
which occasion ceasing, the Common Law has its force again, so that as to
the Realm of England and elsewhere except Ireland, the Common Law has its
force, and is at present effectual against all power and authority either of
the King or Subject, but only the supreme authority of Parliament.

Ireland, therefore the Militia for the service of this Kingdom rests as it
did before, not within the letter or sense of this Act.

Sol. (Implication) for sure the King would not have joined in an Act, if he
might have done it legally before. Object.
I answer, if we should admit this which for Argument sake we only do (there
being something to be gathered by implication from the words of this Law,
touching the power of the Militiia, as appertaining to the Parliament) then the
Common Law formerly recited must rule us; and here it is said, The Common Law,
That none shall be forced out of their Shires etc. is intended without wages,
and therefore if they have pay or wages they may be legal^y compelled by the
King to attend his service in the wars, and so are the Statutes of 1 E. 3.
18. E. 3. and diverse others, and the opinion of that reverend Judge Thirninge
in the time of H. 4. is so to be intended.

Sol. No (Innuendo) in private affairs much less in Acts of Parliament
allowable.
I answer, first, if this should be granted, it is a strange and dangerous way
to expound Laws and Statutes, and to enlarge the meaning of the Lawmakers
with an Innuendo, a thing not permitted even in private affairs, much less to
be allowed in general and public laws, viz. That they shall not be forced
out of their Shires, etc. innuendo without wages, by this course Laws and
Statutes shall be wrested, and made a no^e of wax, capable of any form or
exposition; but there is one great reason which will make this Objection but
mere cavillation, if I have not satisfy! it already, and that is this; That
one Session of Parliament, viz. 1 E. 3. confirm; and makes both these Laws. 1
E. 3. ca. 5. 1 E. 3. ca. 5.7. explained. 18. H. 6. 19. 7. H. 7. 1 3. H. 8. 5^
recites the Common Law before remembered, and confirms it too, 1 E. 3. ca. 7.
and all other Statutes relating to this Law have these words, or to this
effect: That Soldiers Impressed, viz. Foreign service not comp^lsary by the law
positive, penal by authority of Parliament, Vt supra, 1 E. 3. ca. 7. may he^
also intended of the Impressing that Militia, that was not hereunto bound
either by Tenu^e or Contract; both branches of the Militia, intended by this
law, legally raised or impressed, 1 E. 3. ca. 7. intended most especially of that
general and more absolute power of the Militia, not of the positive Militia,
viz. of those that were bound by Tenure, etc.
impressed by the King The word (Commission) in the statute of 1 E. 3. ca. 7.
must be intended, Commissioners derived from the authority of parliament, not
any other regal Commission; so foreign service might be ^ompulsary, even of
those that we^e bound by their Tenures, viz. by such Commissions.
Commission for Scotland, or Gascoigne shall have wages, Or foreign service.
f. 1. E. 3. 7.
the one Statute is general in the negative, That they shall nor be forced out
of their Shires either with wages or without, as the sense is plain to any
rationa^l man. The subsequent Law says, That the Kings soldiers shall have
wages, so that having wages allowed they may be compelled to serve. Here seems
repugnancy or contradiction may be said.

To reconcile this, and to manifest to the world the honor and wisdom of a
Parliament, notwithstanding any aspersion; by the rule of law and reason you
must make such exposition of any Law as in all parts may be operative and
effectual if it may be, and that each Chapter of a Session of Parliament may
have their genuine and proper operation; why then these Statutes Ex viso^ribus
actus (an excellent way of expounding Statutes, by comparing and conferring one
Statute with the other) are thus to be intended, 1 E. 3. ca. 5. and 7. Statutes
differing in matter and substance.
viz. That 1 E. 3. ca. 5. and 7. are Statutes differing in matter and
substance, the one not having any relation to the other, though they may so
seem upon the first view, for 1 E. 3. ca. 5. extends only to the Militia
limited by the positive Laws, cap. 7. to the Militia impressed by authority of
Parliament for foreign service, which could not legally be door without this
authority, as you have formerly heard, and so the one does not cross or oppose
the other (which of necessity they must do, if other constructions be made)
for they treat of several matters, and the sense of Law makes a great
disparity between them, though there be a sound of words seeming otherwise; so
that 1 E. 3. ca. 7. is thus to be intended. The Kings Soldiers going in
foreign service shall have wages, viz. The Kings soldiers legally raised by
authority of Parliament, and so there is no violence offered either to the
letter or sense of either of these Laws. The power of the Militia to be
employed by the King in Foreign service with wages, printed, in Calvines Case
denied for law.
That which is printed in Calvin's Case, a famous Case well known to Lawyers,
was but the arguments of Judges, ^o resolutions in this particular, and i^ they
had been resolutions they had been erroneous, as it is manifest by what is
formerly spoken, and by the judgment also of this Parliament, in reciting the
ancient Common Law in this particular in force even at this day.

Much labor has been spent in one of the Kings Declarations to put in (or)
for (and) in the Statute of 1 E. 3. No necessity but foreign invasion upon the
Common Law of the Statute^.
which recites the Common Law, and so to extend that Statute, and the Common
Law likewise to home defense, but the truth of it is, there is neither (or) nor
(and) in the Statute of 4 H. 4. which is a weighty Statute, and recites the
Common Law in this particular, and the Statutes confirming it, for the words of
this Statute are, Foreign service by statute, this Parliament enacted a
f^^tio^^^ Home defense.
None shall be forced out of his Shire to the Kings Wars, unless in case of
necessity of sudden coming of strange enemies into the Realm; thus you see
all passages cleared. His Majesty in one of his Declarations says. That he
yielded more willingly unto thi^ Act for relief of Ireland, it being no matter
of home defense but foreign as being also formerly controverted how
groundless the controversy was on the adverse part for disposition of the
Militia, for foreign service by the regal authority, you may see by what has
been formerly delivered.

Also we may reason thus upon this Statute, viz. The Statute for relief of
Ireland, that if no forces can be raised by the, King for the defense of a
foreign Kingdom, though subject to the Crown of England, a fortiori, they
cannot be raised for home defense without consent of Parliament, and certainly
if they might be raised, they must be maintained, and what provision has the
Law made for them, verily even none at all: then it follows, that Armies of
men illegally raised must be illegally maintained, that is to say, By rapine
and oppression.

Object. Commission of Array.
But it is objected, That the Kings forces are raised legally, viz. by a
Commission under the Great Seal, commonly called The Commission of Array; Sol.
to which I answer, That the Commission of Array is against the fundamental
Laws of this Realm, and is neither warranted, neither by Common Law or
Statute, or president of former times, it being against them all directly
forcing men to go out of their Counties, as it is now put in practice, against
the ancient Common Law formerly remembered, and to find Arms contrary to the
Assize limited in the Statute of Winchester, and subjecting men's bodies and
estates to imprisonment, and other penalties imposed by Commissioners for
refusal, things not warranted by any Law.

H 4. a Statute not in print, upon which his Majesty grounds his Commission of
Array is in force. Indeed, that Statute the King has made use of in print to
public view, for his sole and only warrant of this Commission, but you shall
see presently how unsafe a refuge it is, yea how upon the first trial of it,
it will not endu^e.

For in the first place I say, Sol.
It is absolutely repealed, and that by the Statute of 21. Jacobi, by which all
former Statutes concerning the power of Arraying men are repealed, and then
surely Statutes that concern the execution of this power must needs be also
repealed, as this of 5. H. 4. is, 5 H. 4. Depends upon Winchester.
as even reason teaches; for how can any Statute touching Commissioners
Arraying, or arming men stand in force, when the Statute of Winchester, the
sole Statute concerning the power of Array is by the Law repealed; but to make
it plain to every capacity, the Law of 5. H. 4. is only a Law for the
indemnity of Commissioners, putting in execution the Statute of Winchester; Now
if the Statute of Winchester be nor in force, this of 5. H. 4. 5. H. 4.
Temporary no statute.
must likewise fall to the ground, because it does necessarily depend
thereupon. Further, this Statute of 5. H. 4. was but temporary, and so expired
long ago, or no Statute at all, but a Commission enrolled, or the like, never
assented unto, in nature of an Act of Parliament, as is learnedly proved by the
Remonstrance of Parliament. Concerning the Commission of Array, I will crave
the patience to answer one Objection more particularly, because it seems
material; and this is made by the Penner of one of the Kings Declarations,
Jacobi repeales indeed the Statute of Winchester, but not 5 H. 4. Refutation of
the Commission of At^^y by Parliament.
because Winchester is only for preservation of me peace at ordinary times, as
also the As^ize of Arms in that Act mentioned, a petty and small proportion
not suitable or agreeable to extraordinary or great occasions, as sudden
invasion, or the like; and therefore 5. H. 4. Authorizing a large Commission
for the raising and leavying of Arms, agreeable to any occasion ordinary or
extraordinary must needs be still in force, notwithstanding the repeal of
Winchester, they are several Statutes to several ends and pu^poses; and
therefore the repealing of the one repeaseth not the other.

Sol. Winchester for dese^^e ordinary and extraordi^^ry.
I answer, The Statute of Winchester is intended by the very words and sense of
the Law, for defense ordinary and extraordinary, and so is the Judgment of a
Parliament, in 3. R. 2. that Winchester was made for the defense of the
Kingdom, and the small proportions of Assizes of Arms there mentioned, are
but only mentioned for example; Ex^mpla illustrant non testringunt l^gem,
Assizes or proportions other then in that Statute limited, and above those
proportions are plainly collected from the very words of this Act; as also
that Winchester did extend to other proportions was the judgment of the
Parliament, 3. R. 2. before specified.

Come we then to 5. H. 4. that recites the Statute of Winchester, and confirms
it, as likewise that the Statute of Winchester was made for the defense of the
Kingdom ordinary, The very words of 5. H. 4. shows that Winchester was for
defense ordinary and extraordinary.
and extraordinary appears by the very words of this Act for defense of the
Seacoasts, and that in that case the Statute of Winchester shall be observed:
Are the Seacoasts defended but for fear of foreign invasion? which likewise
was the cause of making this Act; for but the year before the French attempted
to invade this Kingdom: It may be said then, H. 4. if the Statute of
Winchester provided sufficiently for defense of this Kingdom.

I answer, Winchester, and this was the sole end of the making this Act. The
true sense and effect of the statute, 5. H. 4.
The Commissioners putting in execution the Statute of Winchester, the ancient
and only known Assize, No do^bt the Military Tenure by common law was
compulsary, viz. by Dist^esse or the like, to services incident by law.
for Arms compulsary are saved harmless and inpemnified by this Law,
notwithstanding their former large and illegal Commissions, and that they
shall execute so much of their Commissions as was warranted by this Statute of
Winchester and no more, and for not executing the other illegal clauses in
their Commissions, at the making of this Act issued forth, the Commissioners
are saved harmless and indemnified by this Act; so that you see 5. H. 4.
depends upon Winchester notwithstanding the former objection. Eradicate a Plant
you destroy the branch, so the repeal of the Statute of Winchester repeales 5.
H. 4. as necessarily depending upon it.

(Out of their shi^es) viz. unless in case of sudden invasion.
The conclusion of all is this; The ancient Common Law formerly recited is now
in force, none could be forced to find Arms, or serve in person, but those
that were thereunto bound by their Tenures of Contracts, nor those any further,
or otherwise, that is to say, out of their Shires, or with proportions of Arms
greater then they were bound unto, by their Tenures or Contracts; yea it
appears that by the Common Law Arms were proportioned, he which held by a
Knights Fee was to find a man in Arms, and so proportionally De coeteris, and
therefore Winchester did but affirm the Common Law in this, or further en^arge
it, as also make the proportions of Arms more penal and compulsary then
before. The statute of Winchester sets down an Assize for land; and goods, the
common law extended only to lands, and only to such lands as were bound
thereunto by Tenure: by this statute all lands are tied to find Arms
proportional, but whether those that we bound by Tenure were to be Assessed
by the Act, and so charged with a double proportion of Arms. In The ancient
Assize in this statute mentioned, was surely some law antiquated or not in
force, or at least not compulsa^y, therefore Winchester revives it, the common
aw for Tenuures is now in force only.


Now Winchester being repealed, there is neither Common Law nor Statute to
force any man to the finding of Arms, but only those that are bound unto it
by their Tenures or Contracts; and that thus the Law is taken, upon all these
Statutes concerning finding of Arms appears by Sir Ed. Come, in the secon^
part of his Instit. f. 528. in his Exposition of the Statutes of confirmations
Chartarum libertatum, for he concludes the Law to be, that no man shall be
charged to Arm himself or others, save such as hold by such service of the
King, or other Lords, whereby they are bound to it, unless it be by consent of
Parliament; and further says, that that was the Common Law which these
Statutes did affirm.

There is one Objection more, Commission of Array, and for the nullifying of
all these positive Laws formerly spoken of, and that is upon a Statute in
force, the Statute of 11. H. 7. ca 1. 11. H. 7. ca. 1.
a late Statute and subsequent to all these, by which the service of the
Subject in the Kings Wars, both within the Kingdom and without, is recited,
and the Subject charged therewith, according to their duty of Allegiance.

I answer,

The Subjects attendance on the King in his Wars (either within the Kingdom
or without) may plainly be intended according to the positive Laws formerly
remembered; The words of the preamb e.
for some especially by their Tenures were bound to attend in foreign service,
as where their Tenures were to attend in Scotiam Pictaviam, etc.

Commandment of the King what it intends.
(The Commandment of the King) here mentioned, may either be intended according
to their Tenures for foreign service, or otherwise the Commandment may be
taken for his legal command, not his personal, and that you have heard what
it is, the command of his high Court of Parliament, Nota.
and so what question of the Impressing men for foreign service; but the
Regal command according to their special Tenures, is that, which in my
judgment is full and satisfactory.

According to the duty of their Allegia^^e explained. Alleg viz. natural,
legal, local.
Come we then to those words (according to the duty of their Allegiance) the
Subjects Allegiance is natural, local, and legal, but the natural and
legal Allegiance is here intended, and what is the legal Allegiance, you
shall see likewise is the natural; therefore the legal Allegiance opened ends
all.

Legal Allegiance what it is, viz. the positive Militia.
The legal Allegiance is that per^onall service which the Subject owes unto
his Sovereign by the municipall Laws of this Kingdom; and that you have heard
at large formerly what it is, I need not use repitition. Legal Allegance and
natural agree.
Now the natural Allegiance and legal differ not, but rather the legal
Allegiance is explanatory of the natural, for the Law says, That the Subject
shall serve the King in his Wars Salvo contenemento, viz. Secundum starum and
facultates, a respect being had to every man's state, property, faculty, or
ability; and to that purpose was the Common Law, and the Statute of Winchester
limiting the Assize of Arms, viz. Secundum starum and facul^ates, what says
the natural Allegiance otherwise, but that every man shall attend the Kings
Pers^n in his Wars, according to his state and ability, if other construction
should be made, the Law natural should be unjust, and without care and
preservation of the Common Wealth, if the impos^tion of this charge were not
^^br^o respectu, to every man's property, state, and faculty. Thus you see what
is meant by (the duty of their Allegiance within this Statute, Legalis
ligeantia a^p^ex.
peradventure it may be urged, there is another branch of the legal)
Allegiance also, viz. when men be impressed for the service of the King by the
authority of the high Court of Parliament, without a^y such special relation
to their Tenures, or Estates, or to the positive Laws. I grant, This
Alleg^ance is likewise ^abito respestu ad statum, etc. agreeing with the other
legal, as also with the natural, for otherwise Acts of ^arliament should be
unjust. One branch only of the legal Allegiance intended by 1. H. 7. ca. 1.
viz. the Allegiance due by the positive law.
this is the legal Allegiance likewise, but this Allegiance is not intended in
the Act of 11 H. 7. before specified, for that Allegiance must ^ecessarily be
meant the Allegiance due by the positive Laws, and to other, because it is not
the duty of the Subjects Allegiance, but what is positive or in esse; the other
is not the duty of the Subject, neit^er is it any Allegiance at all until by
Parliament it be so enjoined, but tests in the i^te^im in nubibus, or in
consideration of Law; therefore the llegall positive Allegiance, viz that which
is due by the positive Laws ^^ely is intended by this Statute.

If it were taken in the other sense in this Statute (as it is plainly
otherwise) Nota.
yet it would not advantage the other part, All statutes penned in such
general words, as this is, intend only the legal positive Allegiance as
before.
but bring them a little nearer to the Parliament, and their power and
authority, which they so much decline.

What shall we then say unto Armies of men thus illegally raised by the King,
viz. dirctely against all these positive Laws formerly remembered; Can we in
Law or conscience aid or assist them? By Law we cannot as you see, then surely
we cannot in conscience, Humane laws enjoined to be observed by Scripture,
the Law of this Land binding the conscience to obedience, and the observance
of these humane Laws, being so often in the holy Word of God Commanded; and
for this reason as I conceive, these forces thus raised, Rebels and Traitors
not raised by lawful authority.
are termed by a Declaration of Parliament, Rebels, and Traitors, because not
raised by lawful authority; and surely if Rebels and Traitors, they are to be
suppressed, not assisted, and that men may be Rebels and Traitors, and decline
from their duty of Allegiance, although they follow the Kings Person in the
Wars, appears by the foresaid Statute of 11. H. 7. ca 1. the words of the
Statute are for defense of the King and the Land; and therefore if against the
Land, as it must be, Traitors though at nding the Kings Person in the Wars
by 11. H. 7. ca. 8.
if against the Body representative, the Parliament, it is Treason within thi^
Law, although they attend the Kings Person in the Wars; and this is that
Statute which his Majesty has frequently made use of in diverse printed
Declarations of his, whereby he would seem to exempt all those that attend his
Person in the wars from any impeachment; but surely this Statute will not
aid him, for it is apparent by the Proviso of this Statute, Provis^e.
Explanation of the Proviso.
that there is a declining from the duty of their Allegianc^ although they
follow the Kings Person in his wars, otherwise the Proviso were merely idle,
but to explain it yet ^urther, Proviso relates always to the body of the Act
in the judgment of the law.
The Proviso relates to the body of the Act, the body of the Act is only to
exempt those that attend the Kings Person in the wars, and do him true and
faithful service for the defense of his Person, and the Land. Service done
unto the King in defense of the land is the legal positive Allegiance within
this Act.
Here you see Allegiance is meant in the Proviso, viz. the service done unto
the King in defense of the Realm, provided, that none shall take benefit of
this Act, that shall decline from the duty of his or their Allegiance; that is
to say, that shall not do true and faithful service un^o the King, and the
Land, as is mentioned in the Act; and the word (None) in the Proviso is plain,
(None) relates to the body of the Act. No Traitor by law can have any benefit
of law.
viz None that shall attend his Person in the wars shall take benefit of this
Act, if he shall decline from the duty of his Allegiance, and in this sense it
must be taken and in no other; for future crimes it cannot extend unto other
then mentioned in this Act, since by Law they are made incapable of the benefit
of any Law, if transgressors of the Law; Frustra legis auxilium implorat, This
Proviso but explanatory.
qui in legem committit, and therefore this Proviso idle, if so understood;
unless you will tax a Parliament to be misconusant of the Laws. Further, this
Proviso (as it seems to me) is but explanatory of the Act, and was not
absolutely necessary to be incerted, This Allegiance upon this (...) has
relation only to the positive law. Vi. ante. The subjects Allegiance unto the
natural capacity of the King in respect of the politic.
for certainly they had been included in the body of the Act as incapable of
benefit thereby, if no such Proviso had been at all. What need I say more, the
meaning of this Law is very well delivered by the Parliament in their
Declaration concerning Hull. Here I might touch and that not extravigantly upon
the Allegiance Royal, unto what capacity of the King it is due. You see a man
may decline from the duty of his Allegiance, and yet follow the Kings Person;
therefore the Allegiance is not due unto the natural Person of the King only,
but it is due unto the natural in respect of the politic capacity, and that
you see is the Judgment of this Parliament. The Subjects Allegiance may be
declined, and yet the natural Person of the King attended; and withal note,
that in these times this is declaimed against as a Jesuiticall distinction, and
yet the judgment of a Parliament.



Statute, made pro bono publico cannot be by any (non ^bstante) dispensed
withal.
for the Proviso expressly excludes all men from benefit of this Act, be it by
the Kings Pardon or otherwise, if they shall decline from the duty of their
Allegiance, and this being an Act for the service and defense of the Realm
cannot be dispensed withal by any, Non obstante, in the Kings Pardon, as it is
to those that pe^use the Laws, manifest. I will yet crave further patience in
the aforegoing particular, in the arraying and arming of men, and show you how
tender the Law is herein, in a Statute in 1 Mar. 12. No Warlike appearance
wit^out authority of la^, but pun shable.
(I take it) If an Assembly of men were made to do any unlawful Act, as to
throw down Enclosures or the like, and did not depart within a short time
after Proclamation, they were Ipso secto, without any furth^^ Act done,
adjudged Relons by Law, and to suffer death; so tender is the Law of any
Assembly, especially in any Warlike manner, to do any unlawful Act.

Nay further, No Warlike appearance without authority of la^, but punishable.
it is a thing unlawful for any men to Assemble themselves together, or to go
or ride armed in a Warlike manner, although no evil intention appears,
unless they do it by lawful authority or command; to go or ride armed in
Fayres or Markers is the forfeiture of their Armor, and the^r bo^y
imprisonable by 2. E. 3. ca. 3. 2 E. 3. ca. 3.
and yet to evil intention appears; and so are other Statures, that no man
shall go or ride armed upon penalties of Fire and Imprisonment, except the
Kings Ministers in doing their Office, and (I take it) these Statutes last
mentioned, The King ^^niall servants are here only intended; his ^^nisters of
Justice are specially here named by themselve Vi. infra.
though ancient are still in force. Indeed the Kings servants are there spoken
of in one of these Statutes, and withal there are these words subsequent (in
presence of the King) so that the Kings servants in his prese^^e may go or
ride ar^ed: but those either for their paucity were not then, nor are now
considerable, or otherwise they were enabled in those times of danger for the
preservation of the Peace and the Kings Person against disturbers thereof.

By the ancient Law and Custom of the Parliament, a Proclamation ought to be
made in Westminster Hall, That no man, upon pain to lose all that he has,
should during the Parliament in London, Westminster, or the Suburbs thereof,
wear any privy Coat of Plate, or go armed; and the reason hereof was, That
the Parliament should not be disturbed, nor the Members thereof (who are to
attend the arduous and urgent business of the Church and Common Wealth, should
not be withdrawn from their service. Thus you see, how tender the Law is of
any Warlike appearance. What shall we then think of great numbers of men in a
Warlike Assembly armed, not in London, Westminster, and the Suburbs thereof,
but even at the doors of the Parliament, environing the House of Commons, as
it was since the Commencement of this Parliament



raising an Army? Surely no particular or private persons, No particular
person. The Clergy no Judge.
no not the Clergy themselves, who have in these unhappy times (some few only
excepted) broken down the wall of partition and separation; I mean have
intruded upon the Civil Government, and have obtruded upon the People in their
Writings and Sermons; those Positions and Maxims which admitted, would shake,
if not ruin the very basis and foundation of this famous Government. The King
n^ judge, or at least no sole Judge.
Many they are which I could here mention, but I conceive it done out of
ignorance, being not willing to discover errors (as I hope) not wilfully
committed. Nay, the King himself cannot be the sole Judge, so has it been
declared and adjudged in a like Case; the very same in Law and reason this
Parliament in a full Session, when the King and all the Members were then
present in M. Hampdens Case concerning Ship Money, where the Opinion of the
Judges, The King no sole Judge of the danger of the Realm.
together with the Judgment given in the Exchequer Chamber (That the King was
sole Judge of the danger of the Kingdom, of sudden invasion of Enemies, or
the like; and might compel his subjects to provide ships for so long time as
he should think meet, whereby the subject was forced to contribute great
sums of money) was reversed, damned, and sentenced as erroneous and illegal,
destructive to the liberty of the subject, and contrary to the Fundamental
Laws of this Realm.

Now if any man shall say, defense of the Kings Person, and that even the Laws
of Nature and reason warrant; and surely the Laws of this Kingdom repugne not
the Laws of Nature and reason.

Vim vi repellere, even by 2 multitude of persons.

(King) intends the politic capacity, not the natural.
But our Inquisition at this time is not in this capacity, but our question is
of a King constituted by Law, and the policy of man, and therein that capacity,
he can do no more then what the Law does warrant, Id Rex potest quod de jure
potest, and therefore you see an end of this objection. Then to revert to our
Discourse; by Law (it seems) the Parliament are the Eyes of the Body Politic,
The King no Judge, or no sole Judge in Parliament by the law of inferior
Courts proved.
and are the only great Counsel of the King and Kingdom, whereof the King is
the head; and they are to Judge of all dangers to the King or Realm, and the
King himself is not the Judge, and we see it is so in all other Courts of
Justice; the King Judges not nor medleth at all either in matters concerning
himself or any other, there being Judges by Law appointed for that purpose, by
whose Wisdom the King sees, discerns, discovers, redresseth all errors,
grievances or injuries, private or public, particular or general; how then
can the King be sole Judge in this Case, of the necessity of raising an Army,
although it were in his own just defense, without his Great and High Court of
Parliament approve of the same? Is not this a violation of the Law and
Government established? Ought not they at leastwise to concur in judgment
before any such Forces or Armies of men can be raised, and this only by the
Law of inferior Courts? The consideration hereof being of such high
concernement, that the proceedings and actions of all other matters seem in
comparison hereof not at all material: nay, if the King might be sole Judge in
this Case, although the danger real and just, this mischief and inconvenience
would follow; Great mischief and inconvenience of the King should be sole
Judge, viz. of the danger of the Realm.
That the King in an Act of such high consequence for the general good,
contrary to his actions and proceedings in all other Courts, even in matters of
least moment, as is before mentioned, might upon surmise or suggestion of
danger to his Royal Person, without any further consultation with his high
Court of Parliament, raise, and maintain an Army of men how numerous soever,
and justify the same as warranted by the Laws of this Realm, to the great
impoverishment of the subject, and not without great peril (that I say no
more) even to the very Principles of this well compacted government. Shall we
imagine such a power and authority by Law vested in the King, in derogation of
his high Court of Parliament, as makes the rules of Law and Justice merely
Arbitrary, as in those particulars before specified we must needs grant, and yet
in inferior Courts, the same rules in Arbitrary Government, no where warranted
or allowed; but contrary wise, their proceedings obliging both King and people
to a mutual observance, by a legal power and authority to that purpose settled
in them? This were repugnant even to sense.

Now to sum up this point, if the King cannot leavie or maintain any Forces
by Sea or Land, as is formerly proved, though for defense of the Realm or his
Person, upon his own Judgment or apprehension of danger; What shall we then
say to this effusion of blood, the Authors and fomenters of this intestine
War, shall they be protected? Surely at some men's hands this blood will be
required; and though they may here escape, yet righteous judgment must be
expected hereafter.

Papists enabled, nay compelled to bear Arms contrary to the laws, viz. 3.
Jacobi 5.
Also this matter seems more to be aggravated, since in this late great and
numerous Army of the King, those persons who are prohibited by Law to come
within ten miles of the Court, disabled by Law to bear Arms within this
Kingdom, contrary to the Kings own solemn Protestations made unto his
Parliament, are enabled, nay commanded to bear Arms to the destruction of the
Kings subjects; I mean the Popish Party in this Kingdom, whose doctrine and
practices both to King and State, in most execrable Treasons; and impious
Conspiracies, hateful both to God and man, are sufficiently manifest to all
the world, and need not here to be remembered.

Now there being such a cloud of Witnesses as is before specified, Common Law
Stat. judgment of this Parliament proving the Armies Illegal.
viz. the Common Law, the Statute Law, the Judgment of this Parliament in
Master Hampdens Case, the very same in Law and reason convincing any capacity
in the certainty of this truth, that these Armies now maintained by the King
are not warranted by Law. What shall I say more, yea, what shall we think of
this Commission of Array, Commission of Array destructive of Parliaments.
upheld by our opposites? What is this likewise but a mere usurpation, a
plain violation of the Laws; and what would follow if this doctrine should be
admitted, but a final dissolution of Parliaments? For what would they then
serve for, if Armies of men may (contrary to the positive Laws) be raised
without them? They would be at the best but (as the tyrannical Bishop of Rome
formerly boasted) Puteus inexhaustus, an ever springing Fountain, to satisfy
the ambitious desires of the mighty with the riches and wealth of the people;
nay, peradventure Aides, Taxes, and Impositions would be had at pleasure, and
the people by force compelled to slavish obedience, as we have found by sad
experience, too dearly bought in a branch of these Dominions, the unfortunate
Kingdom of Ireland, where the insolency of the Soldiers was such, yea, even
in the times of Peace, in the time of the late Earl of Strafford, that the
Laws were slighted and trodden under foot, and the Paper Decrees of the
Castle Chamber put in execution by these Agents in Arms, forcing the poor
subject to obey whatsoever was in this wicked and illegal manner commanded;
what difference now betwixt the Turkish Government and this new devised
Monarchy, of these Dreamers, the lives and estates of all men, being subjugated
to misery and inevitable destruction; but God in his good time discover these
evil instruments, and bring them to Justice, who labor to involue so great a
Prince into inextricable error and calamity. I promised moderation, therefore
I will say no more, but will divert my meditations to the period of this
discourse, as thinking I have satisfied mine own conscience, it not others, in
so large a debate hereof.

since the Army raised against the Scots, and afterward for this purpose
employed to awe this Parliament, and to force them to consent unto such Articles
framed by evil persons, touching the Government of this Kingdom; which
appears by the Depositions of diverse persons of note and quality, annexed to a
Remonstrance of Parliament, 19. Maii 1642. which sure was long before an Army
raised by the Parliament, or thought upon, the King being then present at
Parliament; and I will not say it was by his privity or knowledge: Only thus
much I will say, That this Act was alone sufficient to breed jealousies and
fears in the Parliament, and to provide further for their defense and
security. Afterward this was increased by the Kings coming to the House of
Commons in that unusual manner to demand the Members, affrighting the Assembly
there present, who upon request were denied a Guard. Afterward his Majesty at
York, at Nottingham, had a considerable Army of men, to the number of four or
five thousand (as I have credibly heard by those that were then there present)
and all this while no Army of the Parliament appearing, that I did hear of,
only speeches to that purpose. Now upon all these proceedings, the Parliament
for their own defense, the Kings Royal Person and Authority, the defense of
the rights and liberties of the Subject, raised an Army, under the command of
his Excellency Rob. Earl of Essex, which whether or no defensive, or justly
done, I leave it to the world to judge upon, that which has been formerly
spoken. But to make a more full answer, and to square my course in these
Treaties by the positive Laws, to stop the mouths of clamorous people. The
raising of Forces by the Parliament justified as a Court of Justice.
The Parliament and either of the Houses must be admitted to have supreme power
of Judicature, without the Kings Personal presence, as the Rolls and judicial
proceedings thereof sufficiently manifest, as is formerly spoken; and if so,
then they have power to Summon, Censure, and judge all Delinquents, yea, force
them to submit to the Justice of that high Court upon contempt, by enjoining
Posse commitatus, yea Posse Regni, to execute their Commands against all
disobedient persons, unto the Justice and Government of this Kingdom, and this
merely by the Law of inferior Courts, as I have formerly remembered; therefore
this shall be sufficient.

Object. Legislative power just.
There is one thing that scruples the minds of Malignants much, and that is,
That the Parliament have hitherto proceeded by a mere legislative power, and
not by the positive Laws, and that they instance in the Case of the late Earl
of Strafford. Sol.
To which I answer, first, That if they did so it were but just, according to
the Supreme power of that Court, but to descend to our Adversaries, and to
search all the Foxes Holes, that they may have no refuge. I take it clear:
that in the Case of the late Earl of Strafford, they did proceed against him,
but according to the positive Laws in respect of the Crime, The Common law of
this Realm is in force in Ireland, and all statutes enacted before 10. H. 7.
in this Realm are in force in Ireland. vid. Poynin^^ ley.
though his trial might seem somewhat differing, for surely either by the
Common Law, or by the Statute of 25. E. 3. or by the Statute of 28. H. 6. as I
remember, a Statute made and enacted in the Kingdom of Ireland, he was justly
attainted of High Treason; as for the Act of Attainder, and the Proviso
thereof, that it should be no president for the future, the meaning whereof I
will open unto you hereafter; certainly it was not for want of Crime or
Delinquency, as ignorant people and disaffected falsely say; For a little to
debate this particular in mine own apprehension, and no further, because I
have not lately seen this Act. (Act) vid. the act ^f Attainder of of the Earl
of Strafford
He was at first by Bill in the House of Commons Voted a Traitor, which Bill
was transmitted to the Lords for their concurrence therein; but the Lords being
doubtful De jure not De facto, as they were at the first, in the Case of the
late Prelate of Canterbury, to wit, whether he were guilty of high Treason by
the Positive Laws or no, therefore for their satisfaction he was tried in
Westminster Hall per pares, by his Peers upon their Honor, according to the
course of the positive Laws; a L. Steward being appointed, and found guilty
there of high Treason. Upon these proceedings was the Act of Attainder drawn
up, wherein the Clause before mentioned was inserted, viz. That this Act of
Attainder should be no president for the future, which I conceive must be
intended either in respect of the Trial or Judgment it self; The Act or
Judgment includes the trial or proceedings in law.
and although the clause should mention the Act, and not the proceedings
thereupon, it is all one as if it had in sense of Law, for the proceedings and
the trial are included and involved in the Judgment, and therefore the Act of
Attainder or Judgment comprehends all depending thereupon. Reverse a Judgment
at Law, you reverse all the proceedings without any mention of them, therefore
they are included. Now the trial was unusual, for in the House of Commons, he
was tried in a Parliamentary way in the House of Peers by the Common Law in
Westminster Hall. Further, this Clause might have a retrospect unto the Act or
Judgment, for the Judgment was unusual, at least not necessary in this
respect, he was by the positive Laws proceeded against, Judgment might have
been given against him by the Parliament; which Judgment should have been
entered into the Rolls of Parliament, Unto a Judgment by Statute all men are
privy.
according to the course of other Courts of Justice, but to be attainted by Act
this was more full and satisfactory, both to the offender, and to others in
this respect, that all men are privy and consenting unto this Judgment either
personally or representatively, and therefore all men must rest satisfied: but
to return to our former Discourse, and not to detain you any longer with mine
own fancy, as some may say, This I will confidently aver, he was by the Law
positive adjudged a Traitor for leavying war in the Kingdom of Jreland, His
person here subject for offending against a positive law, viz. 25. E. 3. as
also for offending against a Statute there made, viz. 2^. H. 6. and his
possessions in both Kingdoms clear liable by both statutes. The Act of 25. E.
3. is in force in Ireland, either by virtue of Poynings law, or else by the
ancient common law of England which is in force in Ireland 25 E. 3. is b t of
the ancient common law declaratory. C^m. ^lees of the Crown, Tit. Treason.
Treason against the law.
against the very Law it self; for he that goes about to alter the Law or
Government, or to oppose it in any hostile or compulsary way, as it was proved
manifestly he did, is a Traitor, within 25. E. 3. and leavieth war against
our Sovereign Lord the King, as the words of that Statute are for leavying
war against the Person of the King, is included in the first branch of the
Act, of compassing or imagining the Kings death, as the learned know; therefore
this Clause of leavying war against the King, if taken in the literal sense,
were not so necessary, but because of some great authority in this particular
which I have seen; I will conclude, that if taken in the sense against the the
Person of the King, yet it is also and most principally a leavying war
against the Laws and Government; a secret which ignorant people know not, for
they think no Treason can be but against the Person of the King; now least any
man being impeached of High Treason, should claim the benefit of this Act,
which peradventure would prove inconvenient; I conceive this clause for some of
these reasons added unto this Act. But some will say, That his ignorance of the
offense,

I answer, If it were so admitted, ignoruntia juris non excusat, yea the
meanest crime of the meanest person is not hereby extenuated in Law, but this
was a crime of an eminent person, the highest offense in Law, and of dangerous
consequence.

All Courts of Justice have their Seals, viz. C. B. Ble^oy, this has ^^one
but this Ergo.
There are some Rights of Parliament yet behind, as namely, the attendance of
the great Seal necessarily upon this Court, their claim and disposition
likewise of the Militia, the Navy, Forts, and Magazins for the defense of the
Kingdom; as also of the great Offices of the Realm, all these, nor any of them
being the Kings unboubted right, Militia, which (some may say, has been
formerly debated) in showing his Majesty's raising of Armies illegal and
unwarrantable, and therefore here it will be but repitition.

Sol.
I answer, if it were so, yet this being a matter now controverted of so high
consequence, it should not seem ungrateful; Que repetita placent, decies
repetita placebunt, but to dispossess you of this fancy, you shall find it
not so, the discourse of it here you will find in a larger notion (though very
brief) then before it was spoken of, as having in the former debate relation
only to the positive Laws, viz, how those that were bound by Tenure or
Contract to Military services could be enforced out of their Shires, The
Commission of Array uses this power, Vi. ante.
which are but a paucity, in respect of those which are not impressed by a more
absolute power, being neither by Tenure nor Contract bound thereunto, and this
power has been made use of both by King and Parliament, at this time most
especially; therefore here I will speak of the Militia of the Kingdom in
general, comprising those that are bound by Tenure, as others also; and show
you in whom the disposition of the other branch of the Militia, No positive law
vests the Militia of the Kingdom in the King personally. Vi. ante. Two
branches of the Militia extraordinary, absolut^ ordinary, or limited by the
positive law.
viz. that which is limited by the positive Laws, is vested and settled by Law,
which (I take it) is not so plainly expressed before, The Militia therefore is
apparent to be of a twofold consideration, extraordinary and absolute, or more
general, ordinary and limited by the positive Laws. Militia, it being out of
the compass of the positive Laws, which I have promised should be the only
square and rule of this discourse. Sol.
But you will find it here necessary to speak somewhat of this, as giving
great light in this other branch of the Militia; and withal it is a rule in
Law, that the best way to expound the meaning of any Law, Two parts of every
statute or law remediall.
is to show you what the Law was before, for by that means you shall come to
understand the two maine parts of every Law remediall. The mischief usually
mentioned in the Preamble, and the purview or enacting part specified in the
body of the Act.

It is conspicuous therefore enough, that this absolute and more general power
of the Militia was always in the Parliament, only what was communicated by
Parliament, Ratio. Why the absolute power of the Militia in Parliament, and not
in the King, or any subordinate to him.
be it to the King or his subordinate Ministers, was always by positive Laws
or Statutes limited; yea, to what purpose had been the many positive Laws
concerning the Militia, viz. That none shall be compelled otherwise then the
positive Laws, Nota.
prescribed to Military services, if this more absolute and supreme power of
the Militia had rested still in the King; What had these Statutes enacted?
Verily, even nothing at all: had they limited and restrained all persons
without exception, Two estates of one thing, viz. absolute and limited in law
repugnant and contradictory.
the King as well as his Ministers, and yet had this unlimited power remained
in the Regal Authority, the King should have had in one right and capacity two
Estates or Powers of one and the self same thing, viz. of the Militia absolute
and limited, a principle so repugnant and contradictory, that even common sense
rejects it; it is as if one should say, A man is restrained of his full
liberty, and yet may make excursions abroad wheresoever he pleases.

Further, if this absolute power of the Militia of this Kingdom had been an
incident unto the Royal prerogative, No statute mention any thing in this
nature, vi^. guest. or debate.
would his Majesty and his Royal Predecessors from time to time have divested
themselves of this Royal Robe, and have yielded to have been limited by the
positive Laws touching the Militia? yea, without any contradiction or
reluctation, for ought that is apparent, if this absolute power of the Militia
had been his undoubt^d Right and Prerogative? It is a thing so unquestionable
it needs no further answer.

But that which must stop all contradiction, Nota.
or cavillation rather in this particular is; That the King himself in none of
his printed Declarations claims that absolute power in the Militia, but
groundeth his Commission of Array, Vi. an^e.
as also all other his proceedings in this nature upon the positive Laws, viz.
upon the Statute of 5. Both these Statutes repealed, the common law only in
force.
H. 4 formerly at large spoken of; by which Statute if it were in force at this
day he had no power in the Militia, but as the Statute of Winchester had
prescribed and limited, as formerly you have heard. Which Statute of Winchester
would in no sort warrant this illegal Commission of Array, grounded upon 5 H.
4. as I take it clear.

To give you an instance material by this Commission of Array, they may be
forced out of their Shires, but not by Winchester, as I conceive, unless in
case of sudden coming in to this Land of enemies according to the Common
Law, for Winchester in this without question affirms the Common Law, Nota.
though it does also enlarge the Common Law in the assize or proportion of
Arms, making all estates both of lands and goods liable to the Assize there
prescribed. By Winchester the assize is certain, Commissions of the King
grounded upon Winchester formerly, for Arraying men according to the statute;
no Commission at this day warrantable upon this statute, nor any other positive
law. If any Regal Commission for Arraying men warrantable at this day, it must
be only upon the ^ncient common law recited in stat. 1. E. 3. ca. 5 relating
only to Tenures. Nota.
no latitude to Commissioners to assesse whom or how they please: But by this
Commission of Array no certain. Assize of Arms, but left to the discretion of
Commissioners. But to return to our former discourse, and to add one thing
more; General laws Pro bono publico bind the King, though not expressly
named, W. 2. 13. E. 1. Also the King by assenting to these laws, seems
implicitly to acknowledge it in Parliament.
If this absolute power in the Militia had been his Majesty's ancient and
undoubted Right, yet it is clear he had been debarred and foreclosed thereof
by these positive Laws, yea and constant usage in all times has manifested
this as an undoubted truth, for Commissions Regal have for the most part
issued forth upon these positive Laws, and where they have been unwarrantable,
they have been in all ages complained of in Parliament, and rectified. Hence I
conceive it is apparent, Ratio. Why the general or absolute Power of the
Militia in Parliament, a Part ante, viz. before the positive laws touching
the Militia. Et nota.
that either a Part ante, a part post, this absolute or general power in the
Militia is vested in the Parliament, but I rather am persuaded to conceive it
was vested in Parliament a Part ante, viz, even before any of these positive
Laws, otherwise so great a Prerogative (if it had been justly pertaining to
the Regal Dignity, would not have been so easily parted withal. The positive
or the Militia limited by the positive laws. The ancient common law is the
only law positive now in force touching this Militia, for Winchester is
repealed.
Then we will leave this branch of the Militia as pertaining to the high Court
of Parliament only, and we will come to the other branch of the Militia, viz.
that which is limited by the positive Laws, viz. the ancient Common Law, that
being only in force at this day. For this Branch of the Militia therefore, and
the constituting of the high Sheriff of the County, who has the power of this
Militia, so far as it has relation to the positive Law, yea and in some
manner participating also of that great and absolute power, The positive
Militia in the Sheriff, yea and some shadow of the absolute or general
Militia in him also.
for he may compel any man within the County, but no further for the
preservation of the peace thereof, to attend the defense thereof, even those
that are neither bound by Tenure nor Contract, although the King has used to
constitute and appoint him by Patent. This is but usage clearly for what is
not warranted by 9 E. 2 De vicecomitatibus is but usage, Nota.
therefore the election of such a number by the Judges in the Exchequer, the
presenting them to the King, and his election of one of them, I leave
unwarranted by this Law. Indeed the Letters Patents granted by the King unto
this great Officer of his Office, I take it are warranted by this Statute
Tacit, or by way of incidence or dependancy, for all great Offices are to be
authorized under the great Seal by Law.

But peradventure it may be objected, Edw. Coke says in his Magna Charta, f.
55. That the persons chosen by the Judges in the Exchequer, and the Kings
election of one of them, are warranted by some Statute in that behalf, and not
by bare usage only.

To which I answer, England in H. the 6. his time; but note that Sir Edw. Coke
delivers no opinion upon it himself, neither is this Statute mentioned,
either by the Judges at that time, nor by Sir Edward himself, but only so
left; but certainly the Statute intended must be 9 E. 2. De vicecomi^: And it
may further be said, That it is a rule of Law, that Optimus legum interpres es^
consuetudo, and therefore this constant usage since the said Statute is an
interpretation of it. But what if we should grant this, you are still never the
nearer the purpose, The Militia positive in whom by law vested.
for here is only a bare nomination or election of the Sheriff, no right of
the Militia. Concerning therefore the election of the high Sheriff of the
County, there is no negative Law in point to take it from the Subject, and
anciently I find clearly it did belong unto the Freeholders of the County by
Statute, and the Statute of 9. E. 2. 28 E. 1. ca. 8,
of election of the Sheriff in the Exchequer, as it is now used is but only
affirmative.

E. 1. commonly called by Legists Articuli supra Chartas, ca. 8. by which the
Subjects right in the Militia, and the election of the Sheriff the minister of
the Militia appears, and the Statute of 9. E. 2. before named are the one
contrary to the other in matter, and therefore within the rul^ of Leges
posteriores, priores contrarias abrogant, although they be both in the
affirmative.

To which I answer, that they are not contrary in matter, they differ only in
circumstance, viz. Designation of other persons difference in circumstance no
contrariety in matter. C^. 11. Re. Do^^ Fosters Case. Stamfords prerogative. f.
69. ^. Two statutes affirmatively autho^^^^e several persons; both statutes
effectual. Cr^. Jurisdiction of Courts 200. ^. says, That 32 H. 8. takes
away, 8. H. 6. It may be peradventure intended with this difference. 28 E. 1. 9
E. 2. design several persons to elect the Sheriff, both statutes shall be in
force by law.
Designation of the Persons that are to elect the Sheriff, and the rule of Law
is, That the designation of one person or persons in an Act of Parliament shall
not exclude another person or persons, which had authority to do the same
thing by an Act precedent, as to put you but one case instead of many, by 8. H.
6. ca. 16. The C^ancellour, Treasurer, and other Officers have power to demise
Lands and Tenements; afterward 32. H. 8. ca. 46. gives authority to the Master
of the Court of Wards, with the advice of one of the Counsel of the said Court
to demise the said Lands and Tenements mentioned in the former Statute, yet
this does not take away the Statute of 8 H. 6. although that this last Act
design other persons; for if before any Lease made by the Master of the Wards,
the Chancellor and Treasurer make one according to the Statute. 8 H. 6. then
the Master of the Wards cannot demise, and so if the Master of the Wards
demiseth first, then the Chancellor and Treasurer cannot demise by 8 H. 6.
Many more cases I might here insert to clear this particular, come we then to
our two Statutes, the Statute of 28 E. ^. designs the Freeholders of the
County to choose their Sheriff. The Statute of 9 E. 2. Not material if 9 E. 2.
nullify 28 E. 1. as you shall see hereafter.
appoints the Judges in the Exchequer to choose him Several Acts affirmative
design several persons to elect the Sheriff, both Statutes shall stand,
says the Law, if the one does elect according to one Statute, the others are
fore-closed, In statutes introductive the designation of the ^son, matter of
^stance not ^umstance.
and so e contrario, and the rule is true. The designation of one person is the
exclusion of another in Statutes, which create a new Law, but neither of these
Statutes of 28 E. 1. or 9 E. 2. create any new Law concerning the Militia, but
in the designation of the persons which are to choose the Militia; this last
Statute differs from the first, therefore we may safely conclude, Vbi lex non
distinguit, nec nos distinguere debemus.

I have searched all the comers of my heart to avoid Hypocrisy, and of my
understanding to avoid ignorance, and I cannot find but these cases are alike
in Law; Negative words alter the law.
therefore the 28. of E. is still in force and not abrogated. Further, if the
words of this Law had been that they should have been chosen in the Exchequer
by the Judges, and by no other persons, or, and not elsewhere, then
peradventure these negative words had utterly abrogated the first Statute. Many
Cases might likewise be remembered to prove this; but in our Statute there are
no words but affirmative only, therefore no question upon this rule in Law, so
in the end you see these two Statutes are not the one contrary to the other.
Also there is another reason which makes for us, and that is that 9 E. 2. is
only affirmative, as you have heard, and by implication must nullify 28 E. 1.
and that cannot be as I conceive.

It is a high and great right of the Subjects this of the Militia, it is one of
the chiefest flowers of the Garland of their Liberties, it cannot be divested
out of the Kingdom but by express words; The Kingdoms right cannot pass by
implication.
it is like unto Jus regale, or a Royalty of the Crown, which cannot pass by
implication as the Sages of the Law know, for it is the Kingdoms case, and no
particular Subjects case and right, One Act repealeth not another by word^
general and implicit
and therefore from all cases in Law that can be opposed differing, 10 R. 2.
ca. 5. does not take away 13 E. 1. commonly called the Statute of Donis
conditionalibus because the words are general and implicit, Statutes made by
the venerable presence of three hundred men or more, equal to the Senate of
Rome in wisdom shall not be disannulled by such ambiguous constru^^ions, but
I will leave this to the judgment of the learned. F^rther, if the disposition
of this branch of the Militia were the Kings Right by this Statute before
mentioned, If the Militia by the positive laws limited were vested in the
King, yet he is not the sole proprietor, but entrusted with it Sub modo, a^ the
positive law has appointed.
yet he it not the sole propr^etor thereof, but entrusted Sub modo to dispose
of it as the Law has appointed; and you see in what manner the Law has settled
it by this former discourse. The King cannot command the Militia, or raise an
Army either by Sea or Land, without his high Court of Parliament approve of the
same, they cannot be forced out of their Shires, but in case of sudden
coming into this Land of strange enemies by the power of the King, or by his
legal authority.

But to lay aside all other weapon of defense and argument, Argument by
admittance.
and to close with the adverse part upon this very Law of 9 E. 2. and the sense
of Law upon this Act, and admitting 9 E. 2. to nullify 28. E. 1. which yet we
do nor grant for a positive truth by admittance of it Argumenti gratia, only
we will debate this Statute of 9 E. 2. and open it plainly to every capacity,
whereby it shall appear here is no harbor for the Militia Royal, it will
prove but Statio malificae carinis, an unsafe refuge.

The words of the Statute which they s^rmise vest the Militia in the King are
these, That the Sheriffs shall be chosen in every County by the Chancellor,
Treasurer, Barons of the Exchequer, or chief Baron, as another Statute has
it, or by the Justices by one Statute, and by another Statute by the chief
Justices of one Bench, and of the other; Parum differunt que re concordant: But
to our purpose, In whom is the Militia settled by this Statute? It is apparent
not in the King, but in the Sheriff elected by the Judges, who are sworn as
well to the Kingdom and People as to the King, By 9 E. 2. a hare nomination no
right of the Militia settled in any.
as appears by their Oath. But yet further, In what right has the Sheriff
the Militia of the County? I answer, Here is no right of the Militia vested in
any by this Statute, only a bare nomination, then the right and power of the
Militia rests where it did before by Law; and that if the very letter or sense
of this Statute be urged, the right of the Militia is not in the King. Militia,
or in whom was it before this Statute, since this Law gives no right to any?

I answer, Sol.
The Sheriff had the possession of the Militia, The Sheriff of the Militia
possessour by 9 E. 2. the law and Courts of justice Cestuy que use.
the Law was Cestuy que use, that is to say, had the right and interest of the
same; the Sheriff had the disposition of it for the use, benefit, end behoof
of the Law, for that you shall see plain enough, for the words of the Law are
to this purpose, That the Sheriff is to dispose of the Militia to preserve the
peace of the County, to suppress all Riots, Insurrections in disturbance of
the peace, to execute the Judgments and Injunctions of the Law in the Courts
of Justice. What is the peace of the County, but the Law of the County, or
rather the fruit and effect of the Law? The peace of the County the law of the
County, or rather the fruit and effect of the law.
Due observance and execution of the Law is the preservation of the Peace;
whereas on the contrary, violation of the Laws brings Wars and Division with
it. Not a word here but that the Law is Vsu fructuarius of the Militia, has
the right and power of it, the Sheriff the disposition as Minister and Servant
of the Law. If it be objected that the Law says, That to preserve the Kings
Peace the Sheriff has the disposition of the Militia. The Kings peace the
Kings laws, or the fruit and effect of the law.
That is true, and yet it is nothing to prove the right of the Militia in the
King, for the Kings Peace is meant, or the fruit and effect of the Laws, by
which Laws the King injoyeth his Peace as well as the Subject, so that still
you do but labor in vain. The Law still has the right of the Militia, also
the Courts of Justice, especially the high Court of Parliament, where the law
rests as in the Center.

Usage Regal of no force in the Militia. Vi. infra.
For Usage, and the Kings disposition of the Militia De facto, though it were
since the Conquest, that is not material, as you shall see presently in the
debate concerning the great Offices of the Kingdom, Vbi eadem ratio idem jus.

The Militia of the Navy.
As touching the Navy Royal, the Forts and Magazines, it is apparent, that
either they are included as parcel of the Militia of the Kingdom, or are as
appendants thereunto, and therefore as to them, Nihil erit jam dictum, quod non
dictum sit prius. But yet to say something of them though but repitition. The
Navy, that is to say, the Ships are things in their nature transitory in Law,
they may have existence or not, Diversis temporibus as occasion requires, and
so in the eye of the Law are not things so considerable as the Militia of the
Kingdom, which is a thing permanent and abiding, and shall have a constant
existence so long as England shall continue a Nation of people; and therefore
the Law has not taken such special care for this, The Militia of the Navy
depends upon the Militia of the Land.
as for the Militia But to give you a full answer, and not to keep you in
suspense: What is the Navy Royal without the Militia? How are the Seas
defended unless the Militia of the Land be designed for that purpose. Goodly
materials without any hand to move them for the public service, fit for
prospect only, not for use; therefore you cannot consider them without the
Militia of the Land to guard them, The Navy without the Militia of the land to
guard it; not considerable.
unless they be furnished with men for public employment. Why then still all
depends upon the Militia of the Land, and you see by the former discourse how
that is settled, the King cannot dispose of it, otherwise then the Law has
appointed it; nay it seems that the positive Militia is not in him
personally, but subordinately in his Ministers, and so it is said in Law to be
in the King. Thus you see an end of this particular, the King may build Ships
but he cannot make them, otherwise then as a livelesse structure unusefull
without the Militia.

But to enlarge my self a little further on this particular, it appears that
the Navy, that is to say, the disposition of men, Since this Act some
Ordinances for the Navy no^ Act or statute.
necessary for that service, is not in the King but Parliament, who made a
temporary Act or Statute since the Parliament began, enabling the Lord Admiral
for the time being, to impressed, raise, and leavie such number of men necessary
for the service of the Navy, Ratio, why the Militia of the Navy must rest in
the power of Parliament. Et nota.
as shall be requisite for that expedition. Hence it may plainly be collected,
that since this Act is expired the Militia for the Navy must of necessity rest
in the power of Parliament, since the King by implicit consent in enacting
this Law so conceived, for otherwise he would not sure have assented unto such
an Act, so derogatory to his Regality, if the Law had not been so at that time,
but he would have authorized the Lord Admiral by Commission under the great
Seal, and so no Act of Parliament had been necessary.

Militia for the Navy was in the King before this Act, and that was the cause
of making this statute but temporary, which also being expired, the Militia of
the Navy is revested in the King again.

Actum peragere, the Militia of the Navy depending upon the Militia of the
Land before this Act, and therefore the Militia of the Land debated as formerly
you have heard at large, both that general and absolute of the Militia, as
also that which is limited by the positive laws, there needs no further answer.

The Militia of the Navy in law the land militia.
Further, it is evident to me upon this very Act without any retrospect, to what
has been formerly spoken, that the Militia of the Land, the great matter now
controverted, must of necessity rest in Parliament, for it is parcel of the
Militia of the Kingdom, Sea and land incorporated in point of dominion, if the
militia of the sea pertain to the Parliament, so must also the militia of the
land, unless you divide the power of the militia.
the Militia of the Sea is also the Militia of the Kingdom, yea of the Land it
self, for the Sea and Land are incorporated by Law in point of Dominion, and
made one body subject to one head. The Militia therefore of the Kingdom, and
the Militia of the Land are all one in Law, and in the Militia of the Kingdom
you must include the Militia of the Navy, since the kingdom in judgment of
law includes both Sea and Land; Or otherwise, if we shall abandon all reason
in the Exposition of this Statute it must at least be granted, Nota. Division
of the power of the militia dangerous to government.
that the Militia of the Navy is in the power of the Parliament, even by the
implicit judgment of the King and his great Counsel, and admit a fraction or
division of this great power so dangerous to Government, and tending much to
the weakening and enervating the great strength of this Kingdom, I mean the
Militia thereof, and be occasion of perpetual intestine wars in this Nation; a
position so inconsistent with Government, and dishonorable to the Wisdom of
this State, that I think there needs no further confutation of it.

The Forts and Magazines surely are as attendants and adjuncts unto the
Militia, The militia of the Forts and Castles.
and that common reason teaches the one to secure the Ammunition pertaining to
the Militia, and as a receptacle for the same, commonly called the Storehouses
for Arms, the other to employ the Militia in for the defense of the Land
against the enemy, Rati^, why the Forts and Castles d^fensible pertain not to
the King.
for surely the Forts and Castles defensible belong not unto the King in right
for one special reason, because if they should belong unto the King, then you
must grant him a power and right in the Militia, to be employed in the service
of these Forts and Castles, for to what purpose has the King these if he
cannot command the Militia of the Kingdom to defend them; they are then in
judgment of Law and reason houses or Princely Palaces only, nor Forts or
Castles, so that you see in conclusion by Law and Reason we are come to this.
The right and power of the Militia of the Kingdom rules all Forts, Ships,
Navy, Magazines, Castles, all depend upon this; therefore I hope I have spoken
of these particulars sufficiently.

Edw. Coke says in his Institutes upon Littleton, That no man can build a
Castle defensible or of Military strength without leave of the King; hence it
may be inferred, The ancient Common Law for the land Militia rules the Militia
for the Forts and Castles
but what of this, he has nothing to do with the Militia, this
notwithstanding. And if it should be granted otherwise, yet he cannot defend it
with any other Militia then of those persons that are hereunto especially bound
by Tenure or Contract, neither can any be forced out of their Shires contrary
to the Law, to defend this place of strength, or Castle; also that the King may
build and hold a Castle defencible, may thus be intended.

The Sheriffs possession the Kings possession of any Castle or Fort.
The Sheriff has his authority from the King, viz. by Statute, 9 E. 2. unto
which the King has assented, to defend any Castle defencible with the Militia
of the County, therefore if the Sheriff, or any such like subordinate
authority from the King hold a Castle defenceable, it is in judgment and
speech of Law the Kings possession of the same, but of this sufficient.

For the great Offices The great Offices.
of the Kingdom, the disposition of them did anciently belong unto the
Parliament as their rights, and that Master Lambard a learned Lawyer in his
Archeion of the Courts of Justice testifies, whose words are these; The great
Offices anciently pertaining to the Parliament.
That the Keeper of the great Seal was wont to be elected by Authority of
Parliament; and he says further, That he had read, that Ralph Nevill Bishop of
Chichester, being Chancellor to King H. 3. being Commanded, refused to yield
up his Seal unto the King when he required it, affirming that as he had
received it by the Counsel of the Realm, so he would not without like warrant
resign it again. And in the days of the same King, it was told him by all
his Lords spiritual and temporal, That of ancient time the creation and
disposition of the chief Justice, the Chancellor and Treasurer belonged to
the Parliament. Thus far Mr. Lambard, Dr. Cowell also in his Book, called
The Interpreter, whom I nominate at this time as a Royalist in this, yet he
cites a President in the time of King H. the 6. who directing his privy Seal
to Richard Earl of Warwick, thereby to discharge him of the Captaine-ship of
Callis, the Earl refused to obey, and continued forth the said Office, because
he received it by Parliament; and the inference of Cowell hereupon is false,
that either the King must be above his positive Laws, or else he is no
absolute King; for he is an absolute King, though not above the Laws, for his
Government were then mere Tyranny; Vid. D^vant. f. 16. 6.
also the Kings of this Nation are nor in that sense absolute Monarchies, for
this is a mixed Government, partly Political, partly Monarchical, as that
worthy Knight Sir Thomas Smith, in his Common Wealth of England affirms, and
this I have remembered before. Further, Sir Edward Coke in his Magna Charta, f.
558, 559. says, That anciently Offices either for the preservation of the
Peace, or execution of Justice, because they concerned all the Subjects of the
County were not disposed of by the King, but by the Freeholders of the County,
chosen in every several Shire by the Kings Writ; now if it were so for the
publke Offices of the County, the same Law and reason tells you, that it must
be so for the public Offices of the Kingdom, either it must rest in the
people, or their representative Body.

Edw. Coke says in the sam^ place, that the Statute before named of the 28 E.
1. is altered by 9 E. 2. and so this Office of the Sheriff being a publikt
Office for the preservation of the Peace: and execution of Justice also is not
in the Subject, or their representative Body.

(Altered) not abrogated or ^ullified.
That Sir Ed. Coke is thus to be intended, that it is altered partly as to the
election of the Sheriff in the Exchequer, if the Judges pursue the same
Statute, and the Free holders of the County do not elect before them, and so
that authority is good Law. We must make such interpretation that every learned
man's judgment may be honorably esteemed and be effectual. It likewise
appears by the same Author, that anciently the Conservators of the Peace, or
Justices of the Peace were chosen by the People, and so are many Offices at
this day, the election of the Officers is by the Freeholders or people, the
Kings Writ issuing forth first for that purpose. Usage of no forc^ against a
statute or judicial record.
Now what Law has taken away those from the people, or their representative
Body? Verily none that I know, no act Judicial, or Record, whereby the right
of the Kingdom is expressly given away, or if this did appear, No statute
gives away the Subjects right expressly in the disposition of great Office, or
of the militia.
or if it should be granted that usage recorded in the Kings Case were
sufficient, yet in these particulars it will not give a right unto the King;
and if he has time out of mind disposed of them, yet this will not avail, if
by any matter of Record, the right of the subject appear, as it does by
Statute Law before remembered, and by legal authority, Nota.
then usage is invalid as the learned in the Laws know. The Act of 28 E. 1.
settles the Militia in the subject, as you have heard formerly; here the right
of the subject appears, the Forts, Navy, Castles, and Magazines depend all
upon the Militia, either the absolute or general power of the Militia, or the
Militia positive, or regulated by the positive Laws; both which are by Law
vested in the People, or the representative Body the Parliament, as you have
heard formerly. The great Offices of the Kingdom appear by learned and legal
authority, before mentioned in the Subject, and their representative Body, both
in right and in disposition. What shall I say more, if this be not sufficient
to make the Subjects right clear in this particular. Prescription of no force
against ^ statute.
Then although the King has by usage almost gained a perpetuity in them, yet
this will not serve, no prescription or use will be of force against a Statute,
or judicial Record, for that is proof to the contrary, as the Law says. And
the Kings Case is all one with the Subjects in this; Regal use is of no force
against a Statute or judicial Record, for as the rule of Law is true, Nullum
tempus occurrit Regi, prescription is not good against the King in many Cases,
so it is as true, Nullum tempus occurrit legi, no us^ge or prescription is of
any effect either in the Kings Case, or Subject against the Law, appearing by
Statute or judicial Record; and I hope no man will say, but that the Rolls of
Parliament are judicial Records, Usage of no force against claims and
interruptions.
besides our legal Annals or Books. Further, if usage shauld be admitted, yet
here have been diverse clamours and interruptions of Parliament, yea,
dispositions by them of those great Offices, and those other particulars, and
then necessarily usage is not of force, as the Law says, for the Parliament
claims unto the great Offices of the Kingdom, yea their disposition of them
from time to time I have spoken of before; as also of the Subjects disposition
of the Militia, Usage gains no inheritance or right of claim or interruption
or their representative Body, for it cannot appear that the King has by
disposition of them time out of mind gained any inheritance in them, in the
right (as we say) but that there have been Claims and disturbances by the
Subject, or their representative Body, and then usage necessarily is of no
force. Militia, and that is this; Pleas of the Crown, f. 9.
that Sir Edw. Coke says, That no man can leavie War within the Realm
without authority from the King, for to him it only belongs.

Authority from the King intend^ his legal or politic capacity, not his
personal or natural.
and not his personal, and so the authority of every Court of Justice is the
Kings authority, the words (De mandato nostro) in the Writ of Melius
inquirendum, upon a former Office defective, are intended not the Kings
Personal Command, but his Command by Writ, issuing out of a Court of Justice;
so the authority of the King is in this place meant his legal authority, not
his Personal, which every Court of Justice specially upon Record is invested
withal. In a literal sense the Sheriffs a^thority is the Kings authority.
Also the subordinate authority of the Sheriff, as also of every Court of
Justice is the Kings authority even in the literal sense, for the Sheriff and
Judges of the Court of Justice are authorized by ^he Kings Letters Patents.

Also they that have their Authority by Acts of Parliament, as the Sheriff
has, have their authority from the King, No man etc. purport thus much, no man
of hi^ own private authority. Legal authority the Kings authority.
for are not all Acts perfected and confirmed with the Royal assent? So that
these words before specified, viz. no man, etc. purport plainly thus much; No
man of his own private authority without legal authority which is the Kings
imediate authority, can leavie War within this Realm. Nota.


If you should make other construction, you nullify the positive Laws, and
even the legal course of Justice and Government. So that we may safely conclude
(I hope) upon the premises, that the Subjects right, and consequently of their
representative Body to dispose of the Militia, and of the great Offices of the
Kingdom remains yet undoubted even at this day. These things have been
judiciously debated, and at large by a learned gentleman very well known, Note
that all the statutes touching this high point of the Militia are warily and
cautiously penned, not one law that in express words or by any sound
Collection, or inferences settles it in the King personally, those statutes
that the King make use of, and which mention the military service due unto the
Regal Dignity, are in general terms, and may very well be with relation to
the positive laws precedent, as 11 H 7. ca. 1.5. H. 4. 1 E. 3. ca. 5. None of
them can be intended of the general or absolute power of the militia, but of
that part of the Militia that is by the positive laws limited; for if
otherwise, you must by such construction nullify all the positive laws
proceed^ng. Nota. Vid. ante.
therefore of this sufficient. You that are now learned and wise, be not
seduced with error, pause a while and consider with moderation what is become
of the Regal power, viz. the Kings personal power, such as you would have it
in the Militia of this kingdom? That which the King will not part withal, no
not for any time, be it to his Wife or Children, so near and dear it is unto
him, and of so high consequence as he professes. There are but two branches of
the Militia, the one general and more absolute, the other special, and
limited by the positive Laws as you have heard. For the general and more
absolute power over the Militia, it is apparent to be inherent of ancient right
in the high Court of Parliament only; I think the premises duly considered,
no rational man will deny it; for the other part of the Militia limited by the
positive Laws, you have heard it is vested in the Kings Ministers, the Judges
and great Officers of Justice by the positive Laws not in the King personally
considered. What is then become of the great Commission of Array, which
clearly claims and uses both these powers of the Militia? What are Armies
of men raised by these illegal means? You have heard formerly in this
discourse what they are, I should be sorry to repeat it.

The supreme Moderator of all things will one day Judge these exorbitancies, I
will say no more; against his Person, an Act in it self impious, and by the
Divine or Humane Law in no wise warranted. Sol.
To which I answer, That this Allegation is false and untrue, there is no force
or violence offered, or intended to be offered against the person of the King;
we conceive his person only free from the Sword; By the Divine law the regal
person differenced from the regal power.
but if you take his person for his power raised by him coagmentative, there we
differ from you, for by the Law Divine, whether his person and power raised by
him illegally be together confounded and not distinguished; or whether Tyranny
or abused Authority shall be said to be the Ordinance of God, and so not to be
disobeyed; I will not meddle in the decision thereof, though I take it clear
they shall not; for, go to the very Etymology of the word (Ordinance)
mentioned frequently in the Scriptures of God, and so much insisted upon by the
other part, that it ought not to be resisted; it is plain, it is derived (Ab
ordine) from order, wisdom, and judgment, the shadows of the Divine essence
which is an eternal Law, of admirable wisdom even to it self, and is the
Primum mobile, and original of all Order and Law to the Creature. Now in
Tyranny and abused Authority there is nothing but folly and madness, as I may
so say, the authors of disorder and confusion; and surely if the Laws of man
be called Ordinances for this reason before mentioned, What shall we think of
the Law of God? Whatsoever is by this Law appointed is wisdom and judgment
in the abstract. 1 Samuel ca. 8.
That place of Scripture which you wrest by mis-interpretation for the purposes
warrants no such matter. This shall be the manner of the Kings, says Samuel to
the people, They shall take your Sons and your Daughters, they shall take
your Fields, your Vineyards, and give them to their servants, (Render the
words) viz. this shall be the right of the Kings.
etc. From this place of Scripture make you Tyranny the right of Kings (for so
some of you tender the words) and so Ex consequenti the Ordinance of God is,
Mos Regis, jus Regis; Is it the right of Kings because the Act of Kings? then
Murder, Adultery, etc. are the right of Kings, and the Ordinance of God; so
God himself is made the Author of all wickedness, a most impious and
detestable opinion. Yea, does not the practice of the Kings of Israel manifest
the same? Did Ahab take away Naboths Vineyard as his right without any further
proceedings? Did he not by pretense and color of Law take away his life and
Vineyard? Did he not suborne Witnesses against him? This man blasphemeth God,
and the King was he not much perplexed and troubled in mind at Naboths
denial? All these things surely had not been if it had been lawful for Ahab
to have taken his Vineyard from him; yea, what says God unto him for this?
Have thou killed, and also taken possession? Is this Divine approbation? Are
either of these Acts allowed, or not plainly reproved? have thou taken
possession implies clearly, that Ahab taking Naboths Vineyard was not Gods
Ordinance or Law, but the wicked abuse of Divine authority. Further, I conceive
upon the Acts of David and Elisha, mentioned in the Scriptures, it is lawful
to resist Tyranny and abused authority; yea, that it is lawful to oppose the
Regal power, Distinction of the regal person and the regal power by the law
of this Realm.
though not the Regal Person; but to leave these things to those that are
learned in Theology, we will search a little the Laws of the Kingdom; Do not
our Laws make the same distinction, between any power il^egally raised by the
King, and his Person? May not the one be lawfully resisted, not the other? Has
not the Law appointed the Militia of the Kingdom to suppress any Ryots,
illegal Assemblies, yea, though commanded by the King? I suppose that may be
made a parent enough, for put the case that numbers of people, being
Insidiatores viarum and agrorum depopulatores; gain the Person of the King,
yea his protection under the great Seal: by the former discourse; but I will
exp la^e the Law a little further in this particular. 2 E. 3. 8. 14. E. 3. ca.
14.
There are two or three several Statutes in the Reign of E. 3. and of other
Kings of England containing these words, or to this effect; That the Judges, or
the Kings Justices shall not delay to do justice and right, yea, they are
commanded so to do even in the Kings Case, notwithstanding the King by his
great Seal or Privy Seal command the contrary. But we then the case, that
the great Seal is sent to stay the course of Justice, and the Me^se^gers
thereof be numbers of armed men, shall not the Justices oppose this illegal
power? Shall they not apprehend these persons as Rebels unto the State and
Government, if they shall attempt the execution of this regal command by force
or violence? nay, The King by diverse statutes disabled to raise any Armies of
men, or to come in any hostile manner to disturb justic^.
I conceive they are subject unto great and severe censure (if not Capital)
for appearing in Arms in disturbance of justice, although they offer no force
or violence at all, but deliver their Message to the Court. And is it not
apparent that these persons shall be empeached as offenders, Con^ra coronam and
dignitatem Regis, These men Traitors by law, though the King present with them,
f ^n any hostile way they execute his illegal command, or endeavor the same.
notwithstanding the Kings Seal yea, if the King shall be present with them,
this will not after the Case, the Judges are to execute the ^aw in the Kings
name against them, and further, to pronounce them Traitors if in forceable or
hostile manner they shall endeavor to interrupt or hinder the power and
authority of the Law; here you see the distinction which the Law makes betwixt
the Regal person and the regal power. Nota. The Kings person not criminous by
law, and the reason.
The Kings person is subject to no debility or imperfection in judgment of
Law, and therefore no crime or offense can be incident to his person, witness
the Attainder of King H. 7. before he was King resolved by all the Judges, that
Ipso facto by attaining the regal dignity, all attainders of Treason, or any
other offense were purged, and that there needed not any reversall of them in
Law; and this appears in the legal Annals of the said King, you may plainly
perceive the Kings person incapable of crime by the Law of this Land, his
person is sacred and not to be touched with violence; yea, the Law medleth not
at all with his person, as being innocent of all crime, (Regal imputation)
as to any legal imputation; but the power of the King, Nota.
in what condition it stands you may easily see. Which Henry the 7. wisely
foreseeing procured that Act, 11 H. 7. ca. 1. before mentioned, to exempt the
attendants of his person, as also of his successors from impeachment, knowing
that by Law they might become offenders, although they followed his person in
the Wars, and did him true and faithful service for the defense of the King
and the Land, The true reason why this act of 11 H. 7. ca. 1. was made.
because his Title unto the Crown, as the times then were, might not prove
firm; for if his Title by Marriage should have failed, Nota.
as even the state of Princes is subject unto humane casualty, then his
attendants in the Wars upon his Person should be in danger of judgment, as
being raised without lawful authority, so as by this Act if a Perkin Warbecke
should attain the regal dignity lawfully; (Lawful) viz. by consent of the
Realm, by authority of Parliament.
his Attendants in the Wars were by this Act free from impeachment, if they
declined not from their duty of Allegiance in this Statute mentioned, which by
Law had not been so if this Act had not made this special provision. Now you
may view plainly the Kings Person and his Power distinguished, also you may see
in the exposition of this Statute formerly mentioned the same difference. (His
power not so) viz. his illegal power.
They may attend the Kings person in the Wars and yet Traitors by Law, his
Person secured, his power not so. And although the King pardons this Offense
upon this Statute, as it appears formerly he has done, yet surely this is
not effectual, for he is disabled by Act of Parliament to take benefit of this
act, and therefore the King cannot enable him, as upon 31. Vi. ante. f.
Eli. in case of simony, if the King present the same person simonaically to
the same Benefice, and withal in his presentation, there is a special Non
obstante, yet this will not avail. Also I conceive, Impeachment in the high
Court of Parliament disables the Kings pardon. Nota.
if he be Impeached in the high Court of Parliament upon this Act, as he may
be, and not by Indictment at Common Law, then surely the Kings Pardon will not
aid him. I have been somewhat more prolixe upon this Statute of 11 H. 7. ca.
1. because it is much insisted upon by the adverse part. Give me leave to
impart unto you some special observations upon these Statutes of E. 3. before
mentioned, viz. That Justice shall nor be delayed for the great or little Seal
of the King. Three particulars worthy the consideration branch themselves out
of these Laws naturally; Note the contrary held in Cambridge, in the Case
between the Archbishop of Canterbury and Chancellor, viz. That the King
sitting in Cathedra personally, though he might err in circumstance or the
like, yet in point of judgment he could not err, 11 Car. aut eo circiter. The
King may err in judgment proved by the law positive.
First, That the King may err in his judgment, his Commands may be illegal
and contrary to Law. Secondly, That Armies of men, or men in Arms may be
raised by the King without authority of Law. Thirdly, That these forces thus
raised by the King are to be suppressed and punished as Delinquents to the
Laws and Government, notwithstanding the Kings Command; where you may likewise
evidently perceive a difference in Law betwixt the Kings Person and his Power.
I will debate these three part^culars briefly. The King may err in his
judgment, he may Command contrary to Law; yea, that his verbal protestations
may be otherwise in private to the Judge, in public to the world; the Judge is
not bound to believe his verbal protestations, though under Seal, he is to
execute the Law, and not to delay right and justice Note here the command of
the Law, Nota.
the command of the King; the command of the Law to be obeyed, not the King:
note also here the supreme power of the Law before spoken of.

Subjects, if we should discredit the protestations, yea, the Oaths of our
Prince.

I answer,

We are good subjects notwithstanding this false aspersion; The King may raise
Armies of men contrary to law.
for the second particular, he may raise Armies of men against Law, that you
see plainly, for if he send this Message to obstruct the course of Justice by
numbers of Armed men, are not these men illegally armed? For it appears they
come to oppose the Law, a great offense, by these Laws evident enough. Here
likewise appears the truth of that Stature of 11 H. 7 before named, so much
mis-interpreted by evil Counsel about his Majesty; (such Counsel by which
his Majesty is seduced in his heart, and misled, Of what Counsel the law
takes notice of.
of which Counsel the Law takes no notice at all, whilst the wisdom of the
great Counsel of the King and Kingdom, so by Law deemed and determined, even
in the interpretation of this Law and many others, is neglected and not
regarded;) for these numbers of armed men coming with the Kings Seal to stay
Justice, yea, though the King be attended by them in Arms, are capital
Offenders and Traitors, and so to be certainly pronounced, if they shall
forceably attempt to execute this Regal Command, though the Kings person be
attended by them What speaks then the Act of 11 H. 7. but what former Statutes
have said. The Allegiance of the Subject may be declined, and yet the Kings
person followed in the Wars; for the Regal Wars may be unjust upon all
these Statutes, and so it is clear to any rational man. I am sorry to unfold
these hidden and secret Mysteries of the Law thus far; for I do unfainedly
honor the King; but, Amicus Socrates and anicus Plato sed magis amica veritas.

For the third particular, that the Judges are to suppress this illegal
power, I need not much trouble you withal, for otherwise the words of these
Statutes were idle and illusory; Regal forces not warranted by law, are
clearly to be suppressed by these laws.
how could the Judge proceed to Judgment, if these men that come to stay the
course of Justice were not hindered in the execution of this illegal Command.
The sense of the Law to be thus upon these Statutes, he that runs may read.
I intended no more but by way of supposion, but in respect that application is
necessary in these distracted times, Application, and Nota.
and useful in all Discourse, in regard that our opposites will say, and
clamor too, That none of these Laws are in question, there is no violation of
them, therefore you shall see that in our unhappy times all these before recited
particulars are verified.

The King does err in his Judgment, his Commands are contrary to Law;
witness the Kings Command to apprehend the Members of the House of Commons,
contrary to their Laws and Privileges, and to try them upon supposed Crimes
elsewhere; yea his Majesty himself came in Person into the House of Commons,
and Demanded, or Commanded delivery of them. The illegal Commission of Array
so often issuing forth, a great oppression to the people, whereby he armeth
thousands of men, at this day, contrary to Law and Justice, the King claiming
no other power to Array his people, or Arm them by his own Declarations in
print, but which depends upon the Statute of 5 H. 4. before remembered, and that
Statute is not in force, as you may perceive in this Treatise formerly. What
need I say more, Nota.
Commissions have been sent under the great Seal to Array the City of London,
and other places of this Kingdom, to take up Arms against the Judges of that
high Court of Parliament, to hinder Justice and Judgment, as these statutes
before mention; Shall not these Judges proceed to do right and justice, these
illegal Commands notwithstanding? Does not the King arm the Papists contrary
expressly to Law, yea, by Commissions under seal to fight against his People,
against his Parliament, when as by 3 Jacobi, ca. 5. they are to be disarmed,
and to bear no Arms within this Kingdom; and although the King License them,
nay, 3 Jac. ca. 5. not to be dispensed withal.
Command them to take up Arms as the case now is, that will not aid them,
since the statute is for security of our Religion, and our Laws against the
enemies thereof, the King cannot dispense with it. For the other particular,
That the King has raised Armies of men to execute these illegal commands, and
that the Judges of the Law, and of the high Court of Parliament have according
to their duties upon these Statutes endeavored these illegal forces, it is
plain enough.

Now what say you unto these things, ye that believe in error and falsehood?
Are we still rebels and traitors in your judicious opinions? Fight we for the
Laws, and for the maintenance of them, and are not one of the actions amongst
many, which might here be remembered justifiable, and yet are you the good
Subjects, and we the desperate Rebels? What if you shall say, We are no men
that are compelled to take up Arms, we serve the King voluntarily, we are none
of the illegal Commission of Array. I answer, Incidit in Scyllam qui vult
vitare Charibdem, you fly from one extreme to another, Traitors within 11. H.
7. ca. 1. though attending the Kings person in the Wars voluntarily, if you
decline from the duty of Allegiance, as it is plain you do.
from one defense illegal to another; are you not punishable to go or ride
armed by Statutes formerly mentioned, without any evil intentions appearing?
how much more then when you go about to violate and transgress the Laws.
Your voluntary act here makes the offense the greater, as for the exception of
the King and his Servants in his presence, mentioned in these Laws, that is
nothing, it will nor help you at all, for these Laws, as I have formerly
spoken, intend only his servants meniall, and for preservation of the Peace
likewise; what is this paucity of men to Armies numerous? Here is no refuge for
you in these Statutes, we are come to Nurcules Pillars, to a Ne plus ultra with
our opposites, we are come to so straight a passage that there is no declining
either to the right hand or to the left, for I think we have searched all the
corners of error; I will pursue you no further, I wish you may at length turn
into the ways of truth, least that God open the mouth of the dumb Creature to
reprove the folly and madness, since the voice of the Law moves you not at
all. Hence it is apparent, that the Law as supreme has invested both King and
people, with that power which they have by National pact and agreement, The
law uses a power coersive as to the Kings possessions, yea is to any power
illegal raised by him.
and therefore if transgressed they are liable unto judgment, as you see it
clear in matters touching the Kings possessions, though not his person; and if
the Law come so near the person of the King in point of coertion, as his Lands
and Estate, making them Subject to the Decrees and Edicts of the Law,
pronounced in the Courts of Justice; then common reason teaches you, that the
Law has a compulsary power over all illegal forces raised by the King; for
the Revenues and Lands of the Crown are more necessary and incident unto the
regal Dignity, and are nearer conjoined unto it in point of defense,
maintenance and security, then any power not warranted by Law. Witness this
Case, that the Lands and Revenues of the Crown, come they by descent or
purchase, go to the next successor to the Crown, contrary to the rules of
Law in the Subjects Case, an instance of this the descent of the Crown from Ed.
the 6. to Queen Mary, resolved by all the Judges, that the Lands of the Crown
descended to the said Queen, though but of the half blood to King Edward;
(Half blood) hinder n^^ descent of the Crown.
yea that the Jewels of the Crown, and personal Estate vested in the said
Queen, and the reason of the Law is the same before mentioned for defense,
maintenance and security of the Regal Dignity or Person; but any illegal
power raised by the King dies with his Person, it can neither descend, neither
can it be disposed of by the King, it has no affinity (as I may so say) nor
any relation to his Person; yea, the Law takes no notice of it at all but with
an eye of Justice; so that it is manifest the Law uses a coercive power, as to
the Kings possessions, yea, as to any Armies of men, or forces raised by the
King without legal authority.

Come we then to his Person, see the wisdom of the Law there also, it uses no
coersive power, because his Person by the Divine Law is Sacred; as also it is
needless for the Law to use a compulsary power over the Kings Person, seeing
that his Lands and Possessions, yea, any illegal power raised by him are
subject to the Censure of the Law: What formidable thing is his Person if you
take away any power from him but what is warranted by Law? No need of coertion
as to the Regal Person. Nota.
What need of coertion over his Person? I speak not this to diminish the just
and due rights, and greatness of the King, for the Majesty and greatness,
with which the Law has encompassed him is in truth, Majesty, Et regia
celsitudo, illegal Magnificence makes him but a poor and weak Prince,
despicable even in the eyes of his People, Ejus potestas as Bracton says, est
juris and non injuriae. But to draw to a conclusion, inferior Courts of
Justice have their authority, to suppress any force raised by the King, Argum
entu a mineri ad maju^.
if not allowed by Law, as it appears in this Treatise, that these Armies of
men by the King Commanded are in no wise legal. What shall we then say? Shall
not the high Court of Parliament have the same authority which inferior
Courts, Handmaids unto it, even in time of Peace have used and exercised? I am
ashamed of this gross ignorance. Now you that have many tergiversations and
shifts to defend error, what say you unto this; declare unto the world your
Cause, and stay these streams of blood amongst your Christian Brethren;
Publish to this Nation the blindness and hardness of their hearts, convince
their judgments and understandings, that truth may once more flourish amongst
us: But if not, be for ever confounded in your selves, and close up your lips
with perpetual silence hereafter.

But you may say, be reduced; notwithstanding there have not wanted in all Ages
Champions, and Assertors of these truths, Tempore R. 2. H. 4 Therninge chief
Justice, nostr^ tempore Crook, H^tton, Weston, etc. Illustre Parliamentum nunc
apud Westminist.
yea even in our own times there have been Propugnatores acerrimi. Witness
the Case of Mr. Hampden formerly remembered, in the damning of which Judgment I
think all these illegalities appear, which had it stood in force, property in
Estates had been a mere nullity, yea the Axe was laid to the very root, the
subversion of Justice and Government; Nota.
yea, your high Court of Parliament had been of no use for the Subject, since
upon the Kings own personal judgment and opinion, Viz. by thae judgment.
for ought that appears otherwise, for he that was the sole Judge of the
danger of the Kingdom, might have imposed what Taxes he pleased upon his
People, and upon refusal have enforced the payment thereof; a slavish and
barbarous judgment, nullifying upon the point all the positive Laws of this
Kingdom, and making the Government it self merely Arbitrary.

Pre^ogative.
I should likewise here give you a touch of the Kings Prerogatives here, as
pertinent to this former Discourse; for some may say, The Liberties of the
Subject are much insisted upon here, but where are the Kings Rights and
Prerogatives, has he none at all? Therefore to omit the numerous Prerogatives
of the King, partly mentioned in that ancient Statute of Prerogativa Regis, or
dispersed in the legal Records or Annals, which to present unto you would be
too great a labor and needless, 17 E. 2. Devant.
Ante diem clauso componet vesper Olymp^. Wardships, Liveries, Primerseisin,
Marriages, relief, fines, P^^^aliener, Customs, Mines, Wrecks, Treasure
trove, Escheates, Forfeitures, cum multis aliis etc, rights and prerogatives
done al Roy pur defend. soy mesme, and son Realm of great benefit to the
Crown, and the respect of these the subject to be free from Taxes and
Impositions. Definition of the Prerogative. Rules restrictive of the
Prerogative.
I will only in a way compendiary shadow them unto you, by their rules and
restrictions, which like the skillful Pilot steer the course of this great
Ship (the Royal Prerogatives) in the turbulent seas of humane affairs,
therefore in the first place note, that the Kings Rights and Prerogatives are
differenced in Law, his Prerogatives are only incident to the Crown his
Prerogatives are his rights, but not ^onv^^so.

The definition of a Prerogative is a power, pre-eminence, or privilege which
the King has over and above other persons, and above the ordinary course of
Law in the Subjects case in right of his Crown, his Prerogatives are either
personal, or by reason of his possessions, or having relation to both.

All of them have these restrictions, they hold not in any thing injurious to
the Subject, they must be by prescription o^ usage, beyond all memory to the
contrary; no Prerogative can Commence at this day without authority, of
Parliament. To give you some instances, Basketviles case s^venth report.
The King has title by Laps to present to a Church, he suffers a
Presentation, the Clerk is inducted and dies; now the Patron shall present and
not the King, and although the Prerogative be, that no laches or negligence
shall be impured to the King Nullum tempus occurrit Regi, faith the Statute,
yet laches here shall be imputed or otherwise the subject should be injured in
his right; the King had but only the first or next presentation given him by
Law, therefore he shall not have the second. Viz. By Writ certif. otherwise
Perpa^^ll or letters act of force.
The King may take a man into his protection by his Prerogative, to free him
from Suit and molestation if he be employed in the Kings service (and so
legally certified) but he cannot protect him that is in ^a^^^tion, or against
whom an Execution is to be granted at the Suit of the Subject, because that
would be tortious to the Subject, and dispossess him of that interest which
the Law has vested in him.

Royal Proclamation a Prerogative.
He has a great Prerogative indeed, viz. to make Proclamations Sub pena, which
no Subject can do, but this Proclamation must be in supplement, or Declaration
of a Law already in being, not in derogation of any Law established; nay, I
conceive he cannot command any thing by Proclamation (at least Sub pena) it
there be no Law in force to warrant it, although in this particular his
Proclamation be in nature of a Law remediall, preventing some great mischief
at present by no positive Law redressed. What shall we then think of those
frequent Proclamations of late times, denouncing men Traitors before the Law
has so adjudged them, contrary to the known rules of Justice; yea men, the
Members of Parliament, which cannot be legally judged Traitors but by the
Justice of that high Court, as formerly you have heard, yea, diverse others also
no ways sentenced I assure my self in any legal way so to be.

To the second rule or restriction of the Prerogative, I need say little,
authorities are so plentiful. If Lands come unto the King by Purchase, in
these he has no Prerogative, as in those he holds Jure coronae by great
antiqui y. The King has no Prerogative in the Militia. Nota.
These concerning the Militia, the negative voice in Parliament cannot be
Prerogative, they are not within these rules or limitations; for if the
Prerogative should be of force for the Militia, it would be injurious to the
Subject, it should also commence by usage within memory, contrary to the
Statute of 28 E. 1. 25 E. 3. 4. H. 4. 13. etc. Vid. ante.
yea to other more modern Laws. So likewise the negative voice in Parliament,
it would not only be injurious to the Subject, but even to the Laws and
Government it self, Mag. Char. ca. 29.
making them all merely Arbitrary, yea, contrary to Statute Law, as some good
opinion has been.

Thus you have a brief view of the Prerogatives, rather showing you what they
are not, then what they are; which I was moved unto, for the satisfaction of
those who have not so deep insight into the Laws, Perpaucos arbusta juvant
humilesque myricae. And now I have passed through the enemies Quarters, that is
to say, the strength of their Positions and Assertions, by which they have
misled a great party of this Kingdom, I will a little breath and deliver unto
you the sum of all, and run over the heads of their Principles.

Their first, The material cause, of Parliament.
as you may see in the beginning of this Treatise, strikes at the root and
branch of Parliaments, the material cause thereof; that is, the Members of
either Houses, sweepes them all away from the service of the Common Wealth,
makes that renowned Assembly a mere desolate structure.

Formal causes of Parliaments.
The Kings negative voice in the next place, as one blow takes away the formal
cause of Parliaments, that is to say, the Laws and Government, he is by this
Doctrine become the Legislator only; the Members the Lords and Commons are but
inconsiderable persons, they fill up rooms like Pageants for show only; they
out of whose mouths did flow the Oracles of wisdom are not now so to be
reputed; the Kings voice now is a Law, at least if he so please, no law shall
be enacted, the concurrence of the Prince in establishing any Law, be it never
so necessary is now but a politic mercy, or a merciful policy (as some
write) not without great peril to be altered, but simply to bind the Prince
to ratify or confirm any Law, is repugnant to Monarchy. Me thinks I see this
great Body Politic, being desperately wounded with illegal pressures ready to
expire; call for her Physicians to minister wholesome Medicines unto her: Alas,
they cannot come, they are slaire with the Sword, they are imprisoned, they
stand at the Seat of Judgment, if not capital. The Physic that should be
given unto her, Nota.
those Cordial and Medicinal laws for ^he restitution of health, see what is
likew^se become of them. This little worm at the root of Government, a
negative voice devoures all; this sweet smelling and amiable Rose has at the
root a Worm which consumes all; whatsoever affords delight or comfort. Quid
delubra juvant, est mollis flama medullas. What do the high towred conceits of
Parliaments avail, this soft fire consumes by degrees, Quod non violento
synus Aestu ex'unt; That, which the great combustions, the rage of fire and
sword could not accomplish; it wastes thy very marrow and spirits, I mean the
foul enlivening Laws; but this only by way of supposition. Thus you see the
Tree by its fruit.

The efficient and final causes of Parliaments we will join together,
Efficient cause of Parliaments.
the efficient cause of calling Parliaments is the urgent affairs of the
Kingdom, as the words of the Writ are for the calling of Parliaments, not the
issuing of the Writ by the King, that is only isntrumental; and you may see
by the ancient Law of this Land, Parliaments are to be called so often as need
shall require, 4 E. 3. 14. 36. E. 3. 10.
by two Statutes in the Reign of Edw. 3. Parliaments are to be holden once in
every year, and oftener if need shall be; Statutes for ought that I know yet in
force. With what face then can these stupid ignorant Advocates on the other
part proclaim to the world the passing of this Bill for Trienniall
Parliaments, an Act of transcendent grace and favor, when you see, it is an
Act of right and justice to call them once every year, yea, oftener if need
shall require.

Not calling Parliaments, or when called the power of dissolution no
Prerogative, because against these statutes. Vi. Devant. in le prerogative.
Parliaments to be called without the King, yea, when called, not to be
dissolved by him for such a time. Sure Regal Prerogatives conferred on the
Subject.

I answer, Even as the Sun disperseth the mists of the night, so in the
presence of truth all these foggy vapors of error will suddenly vanish;
Nota.
Which Statutes amongst other good Laws, the King at his Coronation swears
to observe and keep. How can Parliament; be holden if not called? therefore
the King is bound of right to call them.

For the second, That they shall not be dissolved for fifty days by the King;
I answer, (Parols font plea) as the Lawyers say. Are not the words, Parliaments
shall be holden once in every year? Holding of Parliaments implies continuance
of them.
Is the dissolution of Parliaments a holding of them within the letter or
sense, of either of these Laws? Nay further, I say, Nota.
They shall be holden, that is to say, By the ancient law of Edward the
Confessor, the Parliament ought not to be determined before every bill put in
to be discussed, (...) for difficulty adjourned otherwise, etc. Final cause of
Parliament.
continued not for fifty days, but for fifty years for ought that I know,
within the very words of either of these Laws, if the affairs of the Kingdom
shall so require; for otherwise they are not holden Cum effectu, as these
Statutes intend, plainly to any man's judgment that is rational.

Thus you see an end, a dissolution of these malignant Objections, but no
dissolution of Parliaments, I hasten the final cause of Parliaments, is to
make good laws, to redress grievances, to procure peace; but alas, the Dove
brings not to us the Olive branch of Peace, the voice af the Tirtle is not
heard in our Land; but the waters and inundations are increased so high, that
they have even drowned the Ark of God, the Peace of God both in Church and
Common Wealth; the urgent affairs of the Kingdom are laid aside. Me thinks
the answer of Jehu in the Scripture is very pertinent to our purpose, No peace
so long as sin abounds.
What have thou to do with peace, turn thee behind me? What peace, so long as
thy abominations continue, and are so many? The blood of so many of the Saints
shed and spilt upon the ground does cry for vengeance, and the wrath of God is
incensed against us.

Note these particulars.
Observe (judicious Reader) from this precedent discourse these few particulars
apparent and unanswerable, and as the very mind of the Author of this work,
reflect and contemplate thereupon.

The first is, That the root and original of all these troubles was the Kings
disserting the Houses of Parliament, under pretense of Tumult, and in security
of his Person, but the truth is evident enough, it was because he could not
prevail in that evil Counsel which then was given him, upon suggestion of I
know not what crimes, to take away the Members of the Houses from the service
of the Common Wealth, and trying them by Commissions elsewhere by the known
Laws of the Land (as they please now to term them) wrested and misinterpreted
by illegal Judgments to Condemn the innocent; Vi. Deat. f. 10. a
for the positive Laws, and the Law of Parliament much differ, and are not in
many particulars consistent together, and yet both Laws in their proper
Spheres and motions just and good Laws, and howsoever the people be deceived
otherwise, and by other pretexts, this is the very truth and beginning of all
our miseries; Hinc illae lachimae.

In his Majesty's absence from the Parliament these Agents have not been idle,
they then labor to invalide all the proceedings of Parliament without the
Kings presence personally, they Arraigne them, and Judge them as null, and void
by extrajudiciall Declarations, there is a sudden eruption of this impious
doctrine, That the King has an absolute negative voice to all their Votes and
Resolutions, and so their sitting there frivolous and contemptible; a position
inconsistent with the Government of this Nation, and subjecting both Laws and
people: Arbitrio principis, to the will and pleasure of the Prince. A cursed
Opinion.

And further, The Commission of Array, an illegal and unjust Commission, as
you may perceive by this former Discourse. Afterward they fly to the defense
of the Kings Person, Nota.
an Act justifiable (as they say) even by the Law of God and Nature, as if the
Law of this Land had provided for the Members of this great Body Politic, and
had left the head thereof without any security of it self; a high and great
scandal to the Government. The truth is, the King is made use of by them,
under pretense of the security of his Royal Person, but to shelter themselves
from the mulct and penalty of those great and capital Crimes, of which they
are even by the positive and known Laws guilty; you may see how largely and
wisely the Law has environed the Royal State and Dignity, with walls of
defense round about in the foregoing Discourse; therefore they need not seek
any other refuge. Last of all; they cast this a^per^^on upon the Parliament and
Kingdom, That they take up Arms against the King, which you may perceive by
this Discourse they do not; they intend no hurt to his Person but the safety
thereof, for surely they that seek to invest the King with the same garments
of Peace and Justice, with which the Law has adorned him, seek more the
security of his Person, then those that seek by these bloody courses to
present him unto his people in the indeleble Characters (that I say no more) of
error and misgovernment.

Are Usurpations the Robes of a Prince? Certainly these are not his Parliament
Robes; Is any thing denied or withheld that is his Majesty's right, if his
Majesty would cease these Wars against his People? Thus you see in brief the
beginning, progress, and continuance of these our calamitie^ unto this day on
the Kings part, by evil Counsel fomented and maintained, The Parliament and
people with them, fight for their laws and liberties; yea for the King, and
the maintenance of his regal dignity.
nothing but violation of Laws and Justice; and although it be falsely
alleged, That the King fights for his Crown, I think upon the premises
you may safely conclude, the Parliament and people fight for their Religion,
Laws, and Liberty;; yea, to set the Crown, and the due Rights thereof upon
the Kings Head; and his Posterity, which by these illegal ways has been, is,
and will be much exposed even to ruin and destruction.

If any man shall be yet so unhappy in himself, as not to rest satisfied with
what is here delivered, but that flesh and blood will still contest, I have
nothing more to say unto him then this; It is the Laws and Government of this
Kingdom that warrants this truth, Et c^ntra negu^^e^ principia non est
dispu^a^dum.

And now to draw to a conclusion of this wo^ke, you that are filled with
knowledge and wisdom (as it is much g^o^^ed in by the s^^ple and ignorant)
where is your learning and wisdom? may not I say unto you, Beho^^ how that
God has chosen the vile and abject things of the world to oppose the mighty,
the foolish things of the world to confound the wise; The Kings part fight not
for Religion, since they seek to ene^vate those Laws which (under God)
preserve and secure our religion 3 Iac. ca. 5. vi. devant.
What are these streams of blood for? Are they for your Religion? Is this your
last objection? take heed that you err ^or herein, if you endeavor to disarme
Religion, to take away the Bulworkes and Fort^fications thereof, the Laws and
Statutes of this Kingdom, by which our Religion has been hitherto under God
preserved and maintained; Are you not guilty of Sacrilege Was there not a
Statute lately made to disarme the Papist, as a dangerous enemy to our
Religion? to take away all Arms and A^munition from him, as also to banish him
from the Kings House or Court, or of his Heirs apparent, or within ten miles
of the City of London. How is this excellent ^aw most shamefully abused? Not
one jot or tittle of the same, No cause whatsoever sufficient to justify the
violation of the Laws, we may not do evil that good may come of it.
but infringed; Have they not freely repaired unto the Kings Court, as likewise
unto the Princes? yea, have they not been a Guard unto his Person? Do you not
likewise Arm, and command in Arms the enemies of our Religion against, us the
Popish Party, under pretense of the defense of the Kings Person, directly
against the Laws of this Realm, as I have showed you before. That Law which
next Divine Providence is the only security of our Religion, the disarming and
weakening the Papist, and what will ensue upon thi^, but if they should
prevail (which God avert) an utter ruin of our worship of God, or at least a
tolleration of Popery, which would soon extirpate the Protestant Religion.

Now let the world see what zealous Assertors you are of Gods true Worship and
Service, when you open the way to all profaneness and superstition.

The religion which the best of you endeavor for, is full of many
superstitious Ceremonies fit to be abolished even in the judgment of the most
modern.

I will not here enter into any discourse of them, as being impertinent, and
they being apparent unto the world otherwise.

Thus I hope I have framed a Gordian knot by the Laws of this Kingdom
established, if any man can dissolve or unty the the same, let him. Discendere
in arenam, I heartily desire that by the same rules of Law and Justice the
folly of this work may be convinced, and that with meekness and moderation by
the touchstone of truth, viz. the positive Laws, that those that sit in
darkness may be enlightened; let no man go about to hew it in pieces with the
sword of violence and injustice, R. 2.
for then hear what the blessed Apostle says, By breaking the Laws
dishonourest thou God? Think thou that the humane Laws are not the Laws of
God, when thy obedience unto them is so often in the holy Writ enjoined? yea,
can thou imagine, that if thou shall transgress this Law, that thou shall
escape the righteous Judgment of God? Rich Legacies, viz. the positive laws.
Are the rich Legacies of thy forefathers bought at so dear a price, with so
much blood and treasure, trampled under thy feet as despicable things? I will
say no more. Remember the wise man, let not mercy and truth forsake thee, bind
them about thy neck, and I beseech the Almighty God to give unto us all a right
understanding in all things.

What I intended is now finished, wherein I have squared my course altogether
by the positive Laws, because of exception of the adverse part, not touching
upon the legislative or supreme power of Parliaments, Master Plynne.
it being done already by the Pen of a learned Gentleman, whose abilities are
sufficiently known.

If I have satisfied any man in what is written, it is my desire. Epilogue.
I call Heaven and Earth to witness, that according to my knowledge in the
Laws of this Kingdom, I have delivered the truth, and I wish every man to lay
his hand upon his heart, and rightly to weigh and consider the premises, and
for passion, sinister ends or respects, to deviate neither to the right hand
not to the left, but with a sincere and clear mind to implore the Divine
assistance, that in so weighty a matter he may act, resolve, and do that which
shall be agreeable to the holy will and pleasure of God, and consonant unto the
Honorable Laws and Government of this flourishing State and Kingdom.

Soli Deo Gloria.
The Table.
ABsence of the King from Parliament how far justifiable, Page 19. as it has
been many years by no Law warrant, used only, page 21. Vi. tit. Statute 38 H.
8. ca. 21. vi. tit. use. Of any Member from Parliament how, and in what manner
justifiable, and where and in what manner punishable, p. 15 16, 17, 18, etc.
Vi. tit. Statut. 5 R. 2. and 6 H. 8. ca. 16. Acception legal, privilege of
Parliament. Page 6, 7. Act Judicial, Ministerial, in what Cases not incident
to the Kings Person, page 32: Vi. tit. presence. (Allegiance) the Etymology
thereof, p. 18. triplex, natural, local, legal, p. 57, 58, 59, etc. Vi. tit.
Statute 11. H. 7. ca. 1. to what capacity of the King due, p. 62 Arms who
permitted to bear, who not, Vi. tit. Statute 2. E. 3. ca. 3. by the Parliament
defensive, justified in them ^s a Court of justice. p. 70, 71, 72. A^^^ne
Royal in what cases requisite, in what not, p. 38.
C.
CApacity of the King natural, politic, Vi. titl. Allegiance, devant,
natural, how secured by Law, p. 66. Causes of Parliament efficient, material,
formal, final, differ. etc. p. 117, 118, 119. etc. Commission of Array
disproved, Vi. alarge p. totum, 52. 53. usque 59.
Corone.
(All Administration of Justice at first in the Crown) how meant. p. 32, 33.
Court.
Parliament a Court of Justice without the Kings personal presence, 32, 33,
34. several Courts of Justice, ibid. etc. Vi. p. 72. Their (...) to co^^^^d^^^
posse comi^^^^ posse (...) proved. p. 37, 72. Court in what Cases fall in
J^dgement o^ Law, in what not p. 39, 40
D.
DIspensation Regal against a Statute ^here of forc^ wherenot, Vi^tul. Non
obstante
E. Escuage.
The service explained not penal, but by Parliament, p. 46, 47 Exception
legal, privil edge of Parliament. p. ^6 7. Exception where it relates to the
body of the Act, (...) ^re not, p. 45. in some Cases unnecessary. ibid.
I.
(Innuendo) in Acts of Parliament where rejected p. 4^.
Judgment.
Against the King by the Law positive, and compulsary. p. 2^, ^6. Judgment, or
proceedings of Parliament not subject to debate elsewhere. p. 2^, 24, ^^
Judgment definitive in what Cases pertaining to Parliament, or other Courts of
justice. p. 39, 4^. Judicial Acts trans-acted, in what cases by part of the
Court representative by all. p. 35, 40. differed from ministerial. ibid
Judge.
Who shall he of the danger of the Realm or of the ^ecessity of raising
Armies, p. 64, 65. paralel'd with the power of judgment in inferior Courts.
ibid
K. King.
WHat capacity intended by Law, and what meant hereby, Vi. titl. Capacity. Vi.
a large titl. Stat. 5. R. 2 ^^ E. 3. p. 16, 17, 18, 97. Considered in both
capacities; natural, politic. p. 65. 66.
L.
LAw of Parliament. Vi. titl. privilege, inconsistent with the positive Law,
yet just. p. 13, 122, Common Law touching the Militia. p. 43, 44, 45. usque 52,
per totum. Vi. titl. Statut. 1 E. 3. 5, ^. H. 4. 13. The only positive Law now
in force concerning the Militia. Laws and Statutes how to be expounded. Vi. p.
50. 77.
M. Militia.
A Right of Parliament. p. 43. Duplex, general, absolute, or extraordinary,
ordinary, or li^^ted by the positive Laws. p. ^ The Militia positive extends
only to Tenures or Contracts, not to be forced out of their Shires, unless in
case of sudden invasion. p. 45, 46, 47, etc. Militia positive vest^d in the
Sheriff, as an instrument or Officer by Statute; in the Law, or Courts of
Justice in the power or right. Vi. a large p. 82, 83. usque 88. Vi. ti^l.
statut. 9. E. 2. 28 E. 1. cap. 28. The general or absolute power of the
Militia in Parliament De jure, not in the King, the reasons why at large, p.
78, 79, 80.
Militia.
Of the Navy, or the Seas in Parliament, not in the King at large debated p.
90, 91. etc. not divisible. ibid.
Militia.
The Adjuncts and Attendants of the Militia, viz. the Fort^, Castles, and
Magazines to whom they belong. ibid Different from houses, or palaces. ibid
N.
NEgative voice in Parliament to what it extends, p. 23, 24 etc. examined in
inferior Courts* p. 25 Non obsta^^te, in the Kings pardon where availeable,
where not. p. 62, 63, 105, 109.
O.
OAth of the King at his Coronation explained. p. 27, 28. Observations touching
the discourse. p. 122, 123, etc. Offense in presence of a Court of justice, and
in presence of the King differ. Ordinance, the Etymology of it, how Regal
power the O^dinance of God. p. 100, 101, 102 Ordinance, and the force thereof
in Parliaments in inferior Courts debated. p. 38, 39 Offices public, or the
great Offices of the Kingdom, to whom the disposition of them pertaines. p.
93, 94.
P.
PArdon of the King against a Statute. Vi. titl. Non ob^ posse Comitat. posse
Regni, vi. tit. Court of justice. Person and power Regal differenced by
Divine, Humane Law. p. 100, 101, 102. usque 105 In what Cases the Regal power
may be opposed, the Regal person not criminous by Law may not be opposed. ibid
No Coercive power as to the Regal person, reason why; otherwise of his Lands
and Possessions, or any illegal power raised by him. p. 110, 111, 112, 113
Privilege of Parliament in the Militia. Vi. titl. Militia. Privilege of
Parliament the Law of Parliament, the Etimology differenced from the Laws
there enacted. p. 45 Privilege of Parliament in Criminal matters, in Civil,
p. 5, 6. extending to members, strangers. ibid Larger in Civil matters then in
Criminal. p. 7, 8. in Criminal, ordinary course of justice, in Civil
extraordinary. p. 7, 8, 9. The reason of this privilege. ibid In Civil causes
somewhat paralleled in inferior Courts, not in Criminal. p. 10 The privilege
in Criminal matters essential to Parliaments, Et ratio. p. 11 Pri^iledge of
Parliament, That no Member depart without leave, etc. Vi. titl. Statut. 5 R 2.
and 6 H 8. ca. 16. Presence of the King no protection against the power of the
Law. p. 28, 29 Presence of the King in Parliament, personal, legal, differ;
one inseparable, not the other in inferior Courts. His personal presence in a
Court of justice in some cases against Law. p. 31, 32
Prerogative.
Definition of it, restriction of it, Militia, negative voice in Parliament no
prerogative, Et ratio, Proclamation a prerogative, how and in what manner;
prerogatives and rights of the King different. Vi. a large. 114, 115, 116, 117.
etc. Proclamation in time of Parliament. p. 64.
Proviso.
In Statutes expounded. Vi. titl. Statut. 11 H. 7. ca. 1. Vide statutum edictum
(...) parliamento, in case Commitis Strafford, sometimes explanatory only, p.
61, 62, 63
R.
REcognizan^ pro securi^a^^ pacis, who may takes who not. p. 32, 33, 34. Roy)
les parols nostre segnior le Roy. Vi. titl. Statut. 25 E. 3. and vi. titl.
King.
S.
SEntence and order of Parliament how understood. p. 12, 13
Statute.
17 E. 2. Declarative of the prerogative. Vi. p. 3. 114 5 R. 2. ca. 4, 6 H. 8.
ca. 16. Touching the absence of any Member from the service of Parliament
explained, p. 16, 17, 18. etc. Vi. titl. Absence. 25 E. 3. Les pa^ols, (nostre
segnior le Roy) what they intend. ibid. and p. 75. Vi. titl. roy. 33 H. 8. ca.
21. What absence of the King from Parliament warranted by this Act, p. 19, 20.
Vi. titl. Absence. Statute of this Parliament for the relief of Ireland opened
in the preamble, the Act but temporary. p. 43, 44, 47, 48, etc. Vi. titl.
Militia.
4 H. 4. 13. 1 E. 3. 5. 7. 18 E. 3. 25 E. 3. Declaratory of the ancient Militia
limited by the Common Law. p. 44^ 45. etc. Vi. titl. Militia positive. 1 E. 3.
ca. 5. and 7. Statutes in matter and substance differing. p. 49, 50. 5 H 4. ca.
expl. p. 52, 53, 54, etc. Touching the Regal power in the Array, the true
effect and meaning thereof. p. ^5 11 H. 7. ca. 1. What the words (Allegiance.)
Commandment of the King intend in this Act, p. 57, 58, 59. vi. titl. Allegiance
the true reason of the ma^ing this Act, p. 104, 105 ^ E. 3^^ 3. Who ^^^ke or Vi
(...) p. 63, 6^* 110 Statute of the Anamder of the Earl of Strafford, Hoc
parliamento editum explained (...) proceedings, judgment p. 73, 74, 57. etc.
^8 E. 3^ ca. 18. The Subjects right ^^^lecting the Sheriff of the County,
(...) Vi. a large. p. ^^, 83, 84, 85. etc. and 94 9 E. 2. Device com. the K^^gs
right in election of the She^^^e of (...) Cou^^^ ^h^^^ been used, or at least
his right or the Militia by this Statute, refuted, p. 82. 8^, (...) 88. 2 E. 3.
ca. 8. 14. E 3. ca. 14. viz. That justice shall not be delayed for the command
under the great Seal, etc. Some observation on these ^^^tu^^s. p. 103, 104, 4
E. 3. 14. 36 E. 3. 10. Touching annual parliaments, etc. (...) calling
parliament^ or when called the power of di^^^^^tion (...) prerogative, but a
matter of rights and justic^, ^^t ra^io p. 119, 120, 121. 3 Jacob. ca. 5.
Touching dis-^^ming papist^ p. 109. 125 (...) ^e dispensed withal, Vi. titl.
Non obstant.
T. Tumult
WH^^ (...) p. 19 (...) ^here, though the Kings person attended. VI. titl.
(...) 1 H. 7. c^. 1. ^reason against the Laws and Government. Vi. titl.
statut. 25 E. 3. p. 75.
V.
USe of no force a^ ^^st the Law in esse. p. 21 Of no force in (...) Militia,
the disposition of the great offices of the K^^^dome. E^ ratio. p. 94, 95.
where availeable, (...) ibid
W.
WAge^, S^^^^^^s that (...) thereof as apperta^ning to the (...) intended. Vi.
titl. Innuendo, (...) 1. ^, 3. ^^. 7. etc.
Errata.
PAge 2. l. 3. fanebrem pre furiebrem. p. 3. in marg. for station 1. st^tute.
p. 5. in m. Parliamento pro Parliamenti, p. 6. fol. 18. r. f. 81. p. 12. l. 19.
omit of, p. 16. f. perceptum, r. preceptum, p. 16. in mar. in miserecordia Dom.
Regis id est cutia, etc. l. 19. p. 26. l. 4. sor right Court, ^ high Court, l.
6, 7. f. exploeded, r. exploded. l. 15. r. assent to bills, p. 49 m r. not
bound by their tenures, etc. p. 67. in m. r. if the King, p. 76. l. 1. r.
ignorantia pro ignorantia. p. 76 l. 32. s. not impr^st, r. now impressed, p. 86.
l. 10. f malifica. r. malefida, p. 93. l. 19. f. disposition, r. deposition. p.
94. l. 3. r. Monarchies.


