THE LORD STRANGE HIS DEMANDS:

Propounded to the Inhabitants of the Town of MANCHESTER, concerning a
pacificction, and laying down of Arms:

WITH The valiant Answer and Resolution of the Commanders and Soldiers, in
denying and withstanding the said Demands.

ALSO The names of the Scots Elders and Ministers chosen by the Commissioners
of Scotland to be sent to the Assembly of Divines appointed by the Parliament
to be holden at London for the settling of Religion.

LONDON, Printed for Th. Cook. October 8. 1642.

THE LORD STRANGE his Demands of the Inhabitants of MANCHESTER.
Also a Catalogue of th^se Elders and Ministers that were chosen by the
Commissioners of the General Assembly of Scotland, to be sent to the Assembly
of Divines in England.
THe late Lord Strange, now Earl of Darby, having strongly besieged the town
of Manchester in the County Palatine of Lancaster, and lien before it with his
Forces, to the number of two thousand Foot and six hundred horse, with 8. or 9.
Pieces of Ordnance, from the four and twentieth of September to this present,
since which time many shot have been discharged on both sides; the Lord Strange
planted his Ordnance in two several places, and played very fiercely upon the
Town, and so has continued night and day ever since, but has done very
little or no harm! his Musketeers have made many furious assaults against the
town, and were as bravely withstood by those of the town, who most
courageously defended their works, and made good their quarters against the
enemy, beating them off, and killing above an hundred of them (among which were
some Commanders of note) without the loss of one man.

His Lordship seeing that by force he could not prevail against the town, he
sent a messenger to desire (...) parley with the inhabitants of the town, but
they would not condescend unto it, till after four or five messages from his
Lordship, and then they agreed that there should be a cessation of Arms on
both sides, from tuesday in the afternoon, till seven of the clock the next
day; in the mean while the L. Strange propounded these demands following:

1. That they would lay down their arms, and deliver them up to his Lordship.

2. That he might march through the town with his Army, which were both denied.

3. That they would deliver him a thousand pound in money.

4. Then he demanded but two hundred Muskets.

5. Seeing none of these would be granted, rather then be frustrate in all his
demands, in his last message he desired but fifty Muskets, and he would raise
his siege and leave the town.

After some debate and serious consultation concerning these demands between
the Commanders and common soldiers, a peremptory and resolute answer was
returned his Lordship by the unanimous consent of them all, that he should not
have so much as a sword. The town has now held out a complete fortnight, and
still continues with an undaunted resolution to stand it (...) against him.
Many of his soldiers run away, and confess they have neither meat nor money,
but what they get by robbing. Captain Bradshaw has behaved himself most
valiantly, to his everlasting renown. The enemy have discharged their Ordnance
above three hundred times, and the Musketeers have done what they could, and
yet have we not lost one person in the fight, but a boy unarmed standing upon a
style, but the townsmen have killed above a hundred, and taken eighty prisoners
of the enemies.

A Catalogue of the Elders and Ministers of Scotland appointed by the
Commissioners to be sent to the Assembly of Divines in England for settling of
Religion.
CErtain Letters are sent from Scotland to the Parliament, and read in the
House of Commons, directed to the Lord and Commons now assembled in the high
Court of Parliament of England, in manner of a Remonstrance, wherein they did
declare the sense that they have of the great distractions and distempers of
this Kingdom, tending to the subversion of the long established government
thereof, and the confusion of the whole State, and in the end would prove the
destruction of that their Kingdom of Scotland; and therefore the Lords and
Commons of that Kingdom are resolved to present a Petition to His Majesty,
with such reasons as they conceive may move him to an accommodation of peace
and agreement with both his Houses of Parliament; but if the same should be
rejected, they are resolved to assist the Parliament with force of arms, to
defend their just cause, and to bring all delinquents and incendiaries that
have disturbed the peace of the Kingdom, and caused these troubles, to
condign punishment, which the House with great joy and much thankfulness
accepted of. The Parliament seeing distractions (...) divisions, and schisms
to be crept into the Church, have made choice of an assembly of diverse reverend
and learned Divines for the settling and reforming of Religion: and the
Commissioners of the general Assembly of Scotland have made choice of three
Elders, and six Ministers to be present at the Assembly of Divines here in
England.

The Elders are The Earl of Cassells. Lord Maitland. Sir Archibald Johnston


The Scots Ministers are, M. Henderson. M. Douglasse. M. Rutherfurd. M. Bailey.
M. Gelaspe. M. Borthvicke.


FINIS.

