A Dialogue between Father P -- rs and William P -- n.
F. P. WHY how now William? Why so cursed sneakingly this morning? Methinks I
see the very same silly looks in thy countenance, as the Russianly Irish Squire
made thee put on, when he found thee a bed with his Mistress at Cork; who, as
they say, by threatening thee with a sound Drubbing, so far extinguished the
Flames within, that thou could not forbear Quaking ever since.


Will. Humh! Quaking. Truly Brother P -- rs I say unto thee, that were but thy
Actions as harmless as thy Wit, I am almost persuaded I should not have found
thee in this stinking condition. And I say further, that had thou but half so
much Light within thee, as that Son of Belial left in me, thou might have
imbibed a considerable muchness of Education, from the example of my prudence
in the time of my Tribulation.


F. P. As how I prithee.


Will. I verily when I foresaw the Timber ready to fall upon my Shoulders,
thought it a burden too heavy for me to bear, and wisely withdrew from under
the impending storm: And tho my Bowels continually earned after the Lady (so
called) yet I mortified the fleshly lusts of this wicked World, and consigned
the Outgoings of the inward Man to the secret Congregations of the Saints; and
whenever I find a necessity of obeying the motions of the Spirit, am content to
pour out my self upon the Sisters only. Now if --


F. P. Nay but William, I must here take leave to interrupt thee, and tell
thee, in thine own language, that thou lie, and the truth is not in thee: For
although thou set up thy self as an Arbitrary Tyrant over the Bodies of the
She-Saints, insomuch that the Fathers of our Society, as well as those of other
Orders, do as it were with one voice complain of thee William P -- n; that tho
they herd amongst your Assemblies more now than ever they did, yet are they
disturbed in the comfortable enjoyment of their Help-meets by thee the said W.
P. who do Traitorously and Maliciously debauch the Holy Sisters from the Duty
and Allegiance which they owe unto their Spiritual Fathers, and engrossest them
to thy self. Thus Father P. lost his precious Rebecca, thus was Father S.
deserted by the devout Priscilla. Nay, they say thou had formed a design of
carrying them all away into Captivity to thy Sylvania, and shutting them in a
Mussulmannick Nunnery, called a Seraglio, erected for thine own use and
pleasure; and for this very reason, say they, thou did in thy Declaration
there set forth, give Liberty of Conscience to Jews and Mahometans. Yet
notwithstanding all this, thou do still run a whoring after thine old
inventions, to the great scandal of the wicked, and greater anguish of mind to
those deluded Sisters. Witness the young Gentlewoman whom thou did lately
cause to squeak in the Coach, out of which she was forced to leap, and run two
miles almost up to the knees in dirt, for fear lest thou should have forced
her further to cry out. Well, but to the purpose again. I Would fain know of thee
how I might have been edified by the example of thy former debaucheries.


Will. Why then to deal plainly with thee, know that when thou wast last shopt
up in Newgate, under the clutches of thy old Friend Titus Oats, I take thy
condition to be very near akin to mine, when I was fallen into the hands of my
Merciless Irish Persecutor. Now after so narrow an escape, had thou but
valued thy Neck half so much as I did my Shoulders, or been so terrified with a
Halter as I was with the Bastinado, thou would not have run thy Head into the
same Noose, by acting over again the works of Darkness of the Babylonish Whore,
but would abominate them, as I did those of my Carnal Mistress.


F. P. I thought thou had known us better, than to forbid a Jesuit to Plot or
act Treason where ever he comes. But since we are so well acquainted in other
things, prithee leave off thy Cant for a while, and give me the best counsel
thou can how I shall behave my self in this Juncture of Affairs.


Will. Well Father, since we are alone, I shall lay aside the person of a
Quaker for the present. To deal therefore fairly with you, and like a Friend,
is to advise you to rank the Author of Killing no Murder amongst your best and
soundest Casuists; and follow that wholesome Counsel which he gives to Oliver
Cromwell.


F. P. That is, you will tell me, to one hang my self out of the way.


Will. Faith you are in the right on it. For I do assure you, there is not one
Argument in the whole Book which might not be much better applied to your
Reverence; besides, a thousand more that could be alleged, had I but the time
to tell you, or you the Philosophical patience to hear.


F. P. For satisfaction sake in a matter of this moment, pray let us have the
heads of some of them.


Will. In the first place, all that can be said for the preservation of His
Majesty's Interest and Dignity, directly persuades you to what I now advance.
For as nothing can be more serviceable to him, especially at this time, than
the united Affections of his People, so nothing can be more effectual to
re-enkindle their Zeal for his Person and Honor, than the removal of him who
is the only occasion as well of their present discontents, as the Confusion
they like to be in. Secondly, All the fine things that can be said for the good
of your Country, Center here too; for what can be more beneficial to it, whilst
there is such a Storm a gathering, than by your suspension to deprive its
Enemies of their chiefest pretense to disturb the public repose. Nay, and
lastly, If you would but once perform this Heroical Action, the very Fathers of
the Society will bear a part in the public Jubilee; for let your life be never
so long, no service you could do them will ever be able to out-ballance their
Joy, when they shall be in Possession of all those Guineas which you received
the other day from Duncomb.


F. P. Notwithstanding my condition, I cannot but smile to see thee make such a
serious Fool of thy Self; for I cannot imagine thee to be so great Ass as to
believe that I ever consulted the Interest of King or the People, nor of the
Society it self, any more than it consisted with mine. Prithee therefore
letting all those alone, which are at present the least of my thoughts, give me
the best advice thou can concerning my own Dearest Self.


Will. Why if I hold my self up there, I must still continue to exhort you to
imitate your Predecessor Achitophel, in the best Action he ever did in his
Life, and set all things in order and so proceed. For had not you better
peaceably go out of the World in a String of your own tying, than live to see
the Brave and Generous Church-of-England-men (for such even we must confess
them to be) to continue in their unshaken Loyalty to their Prince, and venture
their Lives and Fortunes against his Enemies, let their pretenses be what they
will; and consequently all your Villainous Insinuations exposed to the just
Indignation of His Majesty; Your Person to the fury of the People, as your
Name-sakes had lately like to have been, and after all to fall into the hands
of an unmannerly Executioner.


F. P. Well, but I have not behaved my self so yet, but that I have some
Friends remaining still: What think you of the Dissenters?


Will. As for the main Body of them, you have been long ago sufficiently
acquainted with their Sentiments concerning you. And then for our Pensioners,
you may easily imagine how far you may trust them, since the Pious Mr. Alsop,
the Discreet Mr. Lobb, the Zealous Mr. Vincent, instead of railing against the
Church of England, according to their Duty, have tackt about already, and are
bellowing full-mouthed against the Abominations of the Scarlet Whore.


F. P. How do you find the Quakers stand affected? I hope you have at least
procured me some Friends among them.


Will. I must confess my small endeavors han't been wanting, but that damned
Simile of my Brother Meads Fish Pond, does so stick in their Stomachs, that if
they should but see one of your Character, they would presently believe they should
be devoured as fast as the Devil in the Picture swallows down Jesuits, when he
shits whole Armies of Soldiers. Besides, instead of a Pike, they take you for a
more devouring Otter.


F. P. Well then, my last refuge must be to the Church-of-England-Men, some of
them have been my Tools already, and why may not I Cajole them so as to make
them serve again? Though the Rascals --


Enter an Honest Tory. Tory Sir, Your most humble, and most obliged Servant;
Sir, I heartily kiss your hand.


Will. Verily, John, I say unto thee, that I rejoice greatly to see thee in
this place.


F. P. Have you any Service to command me with His Majesty? Would you accept of
a Place? A Mandate? Or a Commission? Pray, Sir, make use of me.


Will. O what an inward Joy and Consolation would it be unto me, were I but
able to find out a way to assist so good a man as thou art.


Tory. A Pox take ye for a couple of Driveling Rogues: Know that I am just now
come from waiting upon His Majesty, who has been Graciously pleased to admit me
to his Hand, and given me a Commission, not sullied by the Solicitation of
such Villainous Sycophants as your selves; which I am resolved to execute in
his Service to the last drop of my blood. And let me tell you, That as your
impudent Impostures, by which, for a time, you deprived me of my Princes
Favor, the greatest blessing any true-Born Englishman can enjoy, could not
shake my Loyalty; so shall not all your cringeing hinder me from endeavoring to
discover to my Royal Master, the Villains that have brought the Nation to this
Confusion.


[Exit Tory.] Will. Damn him for an unmannerly Rascal. But How now Father,
What Is the matter with you, you look as if you were disturbed?


F. P. I must retire to consider about the advice you have given me.


FINIS.

