THE DISCOVERY Of the great enmity of the Serpent against the seed of the
Woman* which witnesses against him where he rules, both in Rulers, Priests and
People: Whose hearts are now made manifest in this great day of the Lords
power; wherein he is sending his Sons and D^ughters in the power of his spirit
to run to and fro to declare his word. WHICH Discovers the state of England,
who according to her own lusts has heaped up Teachers to her self that has
spoken smooth things to her, calling her the beautiful Church and Spouse of
Christ; but in the day of trial she is found in enmity to Christ in his
appearance in his children, and to be in the estate deluded from the spirit of
truth, recorded in 2 Timothy 4.2.3 Which cannot endure sound Doctrine, having
itching ears and turns them away from the truth to fables; and now are
Englands Teachers tried, she has leaped up to her self; and their doctrine
proved: and their Ministry made manifest in the great enmity they manifest
against Christ in persecuting the bodies of his Saints, them to destroy whom he
has sent to preach freely his eternal Word; for which they are stoned, beaten,
and imprisoned; and many of Englands Teachers whom she upholds, stirs up the
people so to do: Being deceived, not regarding what is spoken, that neither
fornicator, nor idolator, nor a adulterer, nor effeminate, nor abuser of
themselves with mankind, nor covetous, nor drunkards, nor revellers, nor
extortioners, shall inherit the Kingdom of God, 1 Cor. 6.9, 10.

A true testimony of him the world knows by name, William Deusbery, and in
scorn calls Quaker; who has been by them imprisoned in York, Darby, Leicester,
and Northampton, where he is now kept in the common Goal for the word of God
and testimony of Jesus Christ.

Also his Call to the Ministry of the everlasting Gospel by the still voice of
the Spirit of God and his mighty power destroying with the flaming sword the
disobedient that would not stand in his counsel, and causing the soul to
submit to his counsel the light that comes from Christ in it to wait on him to
open the seals of the Book, and make known the mystery of eternal life to the
soul, the Scripture test^fie^h is in Christ the truth of it to know as it is in
Jesus.

The word of the Lord to all in England whom the Lord has betrusted with power
from the highest to the lowest, to see the peace be kept; and to judge the cause
of the People with righteous judgment.

With a lamentation over all in England; who oppose Christ in his spiritual
app^arance, and to slight the day of your visitation to your own destruction.

From the common Goal in Northampton the 25. day of the 4. month, 1655.

LONDON, Printed for Giles Calvert at the West end of Pau^s, 1655.

The Discovery of the great enmity of the Serpent, against the seed of the
woman, which witness against him where he rules, both in Ruler, Priest and
People.
Oh people in England!

AM I become your enemy, because I tell you the truth; and deals plainly with
you in declaring the mind of the Lord unto you? which in the eternal riches of
his love he has made known unto me, by the word of God and testimony of Jesus
Christ, for which word and testimony I suffer outward bonds and persecutions,
as my Lord and Master did; who was called a blasphemer, Beelzebub the Prince of
Devils, by the High Priests; who cried to the unjust Magistrates, to deliver
him up into their hands, that their persecuting murdering spirits; that
thirsted after his blood, might be satisfied; which the unjust men in Authority
to do them a pleasure, in satisfying their wills abused their power, and
delivered him up; and though they proved not any thing against him, they put
him to death, calling him a blasphemer; and he sealed his testimony with his
blood: And all my holy Brethren, Prophets, and Apostles, were called
Blasphemers, Heretics, Seducers, and Deluders, by the false Prophets,
Highpriests, and Pharisees then; who professed the name of God in words, but
denied him in their practices; and persecuted his children, who were guided by
his word, under the names formerly written: as I and my brethren is now
persecuted by the same generation, which profess God and Christ in words, but
denying him in their practices, living in pride, and pleasures, envy and
mu^der: every way persecuting, and seeking to destroy the bodies of the Saints
of the most high God; where the righteous seed is raised up, which witnesses
against their unrighteous practices, and discovers them in their secret
hypocrisy, which is hid under their voluntary humility, which causes them to
appear what they are, and manifests what was hid in their hearts, under their
fair coverings of outward forms and profession of Religion, which they now
manifest forth bp their fruit, whose children they are, in obedience to their
father the Devil; who was a persecuter and a murderer from the beginning,
whose works they now do that profess Christ in words, but denies to be guided
by his spirit; for his spirit is no persecuter: and so are they made manifest
(in what they do) to all that have eyes to see, that they are strangers to
Christ, while they continue in Cains nature persecuting the righteous seed
without a cause, as he did, and does in this Nation: both in the North of it,
and in other Prisons in several places of it, there has been cast into them
the Saints and Children of the most high God for obeying his will, in
witnessing forth his eternal Word that he has made manifest in them: And no
breach of any National Law proved against them, but a Popish Law made in Queen
Mary's Reign, which some has suffered under; and many others of the Saints
and Children of the most high God, they have persecuted and cast into prisons,
and not the breach of any National proved against them; but in the pride and
envy of their hearts do they persecute the innocent, to satisfy their own
wills; as I am a witness against them who have persecuted me, and cast me into
prison under the name of a Seducer (as they say,) for the Seducing of the
people of this nation, and for suspicion of Blasphemy, and breaking of the
public peace, in dispersing principles contrary to the truth of the Gospel,
and peace of the Nation; and not any accuser appeared to my face to prove what
they charge against me, as is formerly written, either by the Law of God or the
Law of the Nation; but the Serpent in whom he rules, has manifest his enmity
against me, whom the Lord has redeemed from the Earth; and sent to preach the
everlasting Gospel to those that dwell upon the Earth; and to witness against
the wickedness of the dark world that the deeds thereof are evil, for which
testimony the world that hates the light that comes from Christ, whom they ever
persecuted to fulfill the measure of their fathers iniquities; has me and my
brethren persecuted under the names as formerly written; charging me with
making tumults and breaking the public peace, for walking in obedience to the
Spirit of Christ, which guided all he sent to preach his Gospel, to run to and
fro as I have done in thee oh England! that knowledge may be increased, as is
recorded in the Scripture of truth, Dan. 12.4. And is according to the commands
of Christ; Go your ways, Behold I send you forth as lambs among wolves, carry
neither purse nor scrip nor shoos, and salute no man by the way, and into what
City ye enter, and they receive you, eat such things as is set before you, Luke
10, 3, 4 and 8 verses. But beware of men, for they will deliver you up to their
counsel, and they will scourge you in their Synagogues, and you shall be
brought before Governors and Kings for my names sake, but he that endures unto
the end shall be saved, Mat. 10.17, 18, and 22 verses*

According as it is written the wicked world that always did as they now do
persecute the Messengers of Jesus Christ, who to them were and are sent to
witness against them in their markets and meeting places that their deeds are
evil; which the children of this generation, that are strangers to the leadings
of the spirit of truth, calls them that are guided by the spirit to walk
according to the Scripture; makers of tumults, movers of sedition, breakers of
the public peace, as the unrighteous generation did, who persecuted Christ and
his Apostles, whose practice was to declare the mind of God in their Synagogues
and Markets, as the Ministers of Christ do now; And they found him in the
Temple sitting in the midst of the Doctors both hearing and asking the
questions, Luke 2.46. When Jesus came to Nazareth where he had been brought up,
and as his custom was, he went into the Synagogue on the Sabbath day, and as
was declaring the word of eternal life to the people, all they in the Synagogue
when they heard these things he spoke were filled with wrath, and rose up and
thrust him out of the City, and led him to the brow of the hill (whereon the
City was built) that they might cast him down headlong: But he passed through
the midst of them, and went his way, Luke 4.16, 28, 29, 30. And Paul an Apostle
of Jesus Christ not of man neither by man; but by Jesus Christ, and God the
Father, who raised him from the dead, Gal. 1.1. He was a chosen Vessel unto the
Lord, to bear his name amongst the Gentiles, and Kings, and the children of
Israel, Acts 9.15. It was his practice to go too and fro to preach the word of
eternal life to the people in their Synagogues and Markets, as the Ministers
of Christ does. When Paul and Silas came to Thessallonica, where was a
Synagogue of the Jews; Paul as his manner was went in unto them, and three
Sabbath days reasoned with them out of the Scriptures, Acts 17, 1*2. When Paul
went unto Athens his spirit stirred in him when he saw the whole City given to
Idolatry, therefore disputed he in the Synagogue with the Jews and with the
devout persons, and in the Markets daily with them that met with him. Then
certain of the Philosophers of the Epicureans and of the Sto^cks encountered
him, and some said what will this babbler say, other some he seems to be a
setter forth of strange Gods, because he preached unto them Jesus and the
Resurrection, Acts 17.16, 17, 18. verses.

And all my Brethren this day with me; that witnesses Christ Jesus risen from
the dead, and are sent to preach Christ the Resu^rection, who has enlightened
every one that is come into the world; that all his light that from him comes,
that shows them sin; wait for his power to cleanse them from sin, and raise
them out of the fallen and dead estate, by the power of his resurrection, to
live in pure obedience to God.

We are by these the world calls their Ministers and Teachers, withstood as
Iannes and Iambres withstood Moses. But the Lord is making them daily manifest
that all shall see their folly, and by them be no more deceived, 2 Timothy 3.8, 9.
And as the heathen Philosophers, before written, encountered Paul, so has these
men encountered with us, as before written, for witnessing Jesus the
resurrection, and the true light that lightneth every one that comes into the
world.

And as Tertullus the heathen Orator accused Paul before Felix. Acts 24.1, 5.
We have found this man a pestilent fellow, and mover of sedition amongst all
the Jews throughout the world, and a ringleader of the sect of the Nazarens.
The same spirit that was in the heathen Orator Tertullus that led him to accuse
Paul before Felix, did Edward bowls, whom the people of the world calls
Minister, and teaches in the high place in York; manifest to be in him, who
never had spoken to me, when he by that dark spirit was led to give in an
information against me; and at the time when it were expected I should have the
privilege of the Law, (that thieves and murderers had by it to be tried, and
my accusers to appear face to face, the said Edward Bowls did not appear to
prove against me what was written in the Information; neither a perfect copy
of it would he or they that had it in keeping give (...) when it was demanded,
least their works of darkness should be brough^ ^o light; but what was brought
to light when it was demanded of Edward Bowls: This is a perfect copy that he
wrote with his own hand, as follows: It is informed that on William Deusbery,
a ringleader of the persons called Quakers, goes up and down the country of
York, and is now in the west riding thereof, dispersing principles prejudicall
to the truth of the Gospel, and peace of the Commonwealth: It is therefore
desired, that seeing no man is allowed publicly to exercise his gifts to a
particular Congregation unless he be first tried and approved, that the said
William Deusbery may not be permitted to go up and down from place to place
teaching, until he receive approbation of some persons, who shall be thought
fit to judge how agreeable his principles are to truth and peace.

This is the substance of what I delivered into Mr. Payler; but the particular
words I cannot exactly remember but I believe they do not any thing
considerably vary from this Paper.

E. B.



This man whom Edward Bowls call Mr. Payler was the foreman of the Grand Jury,
to whom he delivered the information against me, that they it might deliver to
Hugh Windham, who sat Judge of life and death at the general Assizes holden at
York, about the time of the 13 and 14 days of the first month called March,
1653. Upon the sight of the information given in against me, the Judge granted
a VVarrant in the open Court to the men that was in Commission to do Justice
in Yorkshire to apprehend me.

Which after that time, I being at a place called Tholthorp about 10 miles
from York in the North riding thereof, and many of the servants of the living
God with me waiting on him his power to manifest to his glory; And while we
were together there came one George Mann in great rage two several times, with
an Iron fork to satisfy his bloody thirsty mind; the Lord with his power did
him chain, and prevented his bloody intents: To satisfy his will on me, he
went to Thomas Dickeson, who was at a place called Kirby Hall in Yorkshire; and
he accused me (as Thomas Dickeson said before him) that I said I was Christ,
upon which accusation he granted forth a Warrant on the 26 day of the second
month called April: And on the 27 day, I being with the children of the Lord
(at Crake?) John Lockwood called high Constable apprehended me with the Warrant
before mentioned; and the day being far spent, he said to the friends with me,
if they would engage for my appearance the next day, he would show me that
favor that I should stay with them that night; (I replied these words) not any
man shall engage for me, neither desire I favor at the hands of men, if thou
have power over the body do with it what thou have power: Then John Lockwood
said, the day is far spent, I shall not go with thee to the Justice to night,
until to morrow stay at thy friends house. Reply, If thou say I shall stay
here, if the Lord please I shall be ready to go with thee, where he gives thee
power to have me; so he went a way and said he would send for me the next day:
and in the night season many of the Lords servants and children was with me
waiting on him, who is worthy to be waited on, for he is good to the souls
that wait on him, and to the souls that seek him; when much of the night was
spent, the inhabitants of Crake in great rage (...) fury came to the doors and
windows of the house, like the inhabitants of wicked Sodom, crying and rushing
at the doors, and said, they would have me forth to dispose of me according to
their wills, for I should not be there; and John Lockwood high Constable, so
called, who said I should be there until the next day, yet to do the people a
pleasure, he contrary to his word came in and took me forth, and had me into
the streets, where the people shouted with a loud voice, as they had me to and
fro from one house to another (where they sold Ale) till the people in one
house let them in, and there they set two men to watch over me until the next
day, which was the 28 day of the month before written; on which day they had me
before Thomas Dickeson! who granted forth the Warrant for me to be brought
before him, and did me examine, and it was manifest before him, that what I was
accused of in the VVarrant, and (the day the VVarrant mentioned my being in
that place) was false, for I had not been in that place that day, neither could
they prove any such w^^^* spoken by me as I was accused of; and when he had
nothing against me in that VVarrant, then he did commit me to prison by a
VVarrant* that he said Judge Windham granted forth at the general Assize,
before writeen, which VVarrant I never saw.

A true Copy of the Mittimus, as follows.

North riding of Yorkshire. To the Sheriff of the said County of York, and to
the keeper of the Goal of the Castle of York.
Whereas there was a Warrant directed for the apprehending of William Deusbery
of Stanly, for the seducing the people of this Nation, from Judge Windham the
last Assizes; and he being brought before me, and refuses to find sureties to
be of good behavior and to appear at the nex^ Assize to be holden for the said
County, to answer the premises: You are hereby required to receive into your
costody the said William Deusbery, and him safely to keep, until he shall be
delivered by due course of Law.

Given under my hand and seal the 28 day of April 1654. Thomas Dickeson.

According to his command, as aforesaid, I was had to York Castle, and there
kept prisoner until the general Assize, which was holden about the time of
the 22 day of the 5 month called July in the year above written, and there Hugh
Windham did sit judge of life and death, who at the Assizes before mentioned,
which was in the first month called March, gave order to apprehend me, and
according to his order it was done; and he coming to judge the cause between me
and my accusers, it was pressed on him by some friends of the truth (for the
truths sake) that I might have the benefit as those had that were arraigned for
felony and murder, to be brought before him and the people of the country,
and there my accusers to appear face to face to prove their accusation, that I
might suffer according to the Law, if I had it transgressed; otherwise that I
might by it be cleared before the country, of the lies and aspersions and false
accusations they had publicly charged me withal; his promise was I should be
brought before him, and have a fair trial at Law as other prisoners had; but
he was not faithful to do as he had said, before him I was not brought at that
time nor any trial had: but at the end of the Assizes cleared me by
Proclamation, and sent me a Liberato (as they call it) to pass away.

Into prison I was cast, as formerly written, the 28 day of the second month
(called April,) and there was kept until the 24 day of the 5 month (called
July) and then was turned forth as is formerly written, without any trial or
Law me read, why they had kept me in prison that time: so for the truths sake;
to that of God in every ones conscience I this day lay before, He that has an
eye to see let him see.

Which after the Lord by the arm of his mighty power had me set at liberty ou^
of the hands of those unreasonable men; I journed as I was led by his spirit,
his word in Cleueland and other parts in Yorkshire, Notinghamshire, and so to
Derby, and as I was declaring the word of the Lord to the consciences of the
inhabitants of Derby, there came two men and laid hold on me, and had me before
the men who were in commission to have done justice, who there did sit at the
general Sessions holden at the Town, about the time of the 24. day of the 6
month called Aug. 1654.

When I before them was brought, the first question to me by them propounded
was, In whose presence do^t thou stand? (the answer to them was) in whose
presence, of the everliving God; the men called Justices replied with these
words, Iaylor take him away, put him in prison for disturbing the Court, which
was done at their command, into prison I was put, and when the day was spent
Thomas You Will called the Mayor of Derby sent for me, and when I came before him
he asked me what I came to the Town to do? The answer to him, I came to
declare the word of the Lord to the consciences of the inhabitants of Derby;
the Mayor replied, will thou go out of the Town? Answer to him, when the Lord
orders me to go forth then I shall go, till then I shall stay; then Thomas
Youll the Mayor commanded the man to put me into prison again, which was done;
the next day about the 9 hour there came William B^sld one of the Mayors
officers, and said to me, if thou will go forth of the Town and in it no more
come, I will open the doors for thee to come forth; the answer to him, out of
the Town I shall not go until I am ordered of the Lord, and if thou openest
the door forth of the prison I shall not come till the man that said he had
authority to put me in, come by* the same authority and take me out, then away
the man did go, and afterward did come, and the man whose name John Slalous
who put me in prison, opened the door and took me by the arm and put me forth
in much wrath, and delivered me to the other man, whose name is before written,
who said, he had order to put me forth of the Town, which he did, and strictly
charged me to depart out of their co^sts with many threatenings what should be
done to me, if in the Town again I returned; but the words of vain man was not
regarded, into the Town I returned, and there did stay till I was free in my
spirit to depart from thence.

Then I journeyed to Leicester, and was there the first day of the week which
was the 3 day of the 7 month (called September,) And with me was many people to
whom the word of the Lord was declared; and after the testimony of Jesus was
finished to them, I went into the high place of the Town which the people of
the dark world calls their Church, and after the man they call their Minister
had done, the word of eternal life was declared to the consciences of the
people, who did hear with much attention, until two men came to me and said
they had order from Edmund Johnson called Mayor, to take me away, and with
violence drew me forth, and had me before the said Edmund Johnson, who
commanded his officers to put me in prison before he did me examine, which was
done; and the next day the man that put me in prison forth me brought before
the Mayor, and William Bill^rs another of the Rulers of the Town, who did me
examine; and not finding any thing against me, commanded Robert Brewin Keeper
of the common Goal, to put me out of the Town, and strictly charged me to
depart forth of their coasts, with many threatenings what they would do if I
again into the Town did come: but the threatenings of man was not regarded, into
the Town I did return in obedience to the command of the Lord, to finish the
testimony of Jesus, I was to witness to the consciences of the inhabitants of
the Town of Leicester.

Then in obedience to the Spirit of truth, I journed into Northamptonshire; and
in a Town called VVellingborrow and thereawayes many did receive the word of
life with much gladness of heart: And at a time as I was going along the
street in that Town near the house of Thomas Andrews, whom the people of the
world calls their Teacher; he to me did speak these words, Give over deceiving
the people least the plagues of God fall upon thee; the answer to him was, If
thou say I deceive the people make it appear wherein I deceive them; he
replied, thou tells them there is no original sin; I required of him, did
thou hear me say so? to that he made no answer: then these words was to him
declared, thou must either prove what thou accusest me of, or own thy
condemnation upon they false accusation; he fled away and did make no answer.
About the time which was near 3 weeks after, I was ordered of the Lord to
return again to VVellingborrow, and hearing there was a meeting in the
Steeple-house where Thomas Andrew was, who had he falsely accused, as is
formerly written, for the truths sake into the Steeple house I did go, and in
silence did stand till the man called their Teacher had done, then I declared
the word of the Lord to the people, who did hear peaceably, and afterward I
spoke in particular to Thomas Andrews to prove what he had falsely accused me
of, in saying I deceived the people, and there make it manifest before the
people, or to own his condemnation upon his false accusation; but to what was
required no answer he did make, but away fled, and the men that was there whom
the world calls their Teachers: then Henry Smith who in that Town dwells, out of
the Steeple-house haled me into the yard, where the truth to the people was
declared, who did there stand peaceably to hear, till William Baw called high
Constable did take hold on me, and had me away into the market place amongst
the people; and said, he would bring evidence against me for Blasphemy; so had
he me as prisoner too and fro in the market place, with so doing he made
disturbance among the people; but when he could not prove what he had falsely
accused me with, he let me go; who at the present time went from amongst
the people to a friends house, and came no more forth amongst the people in the
market that day.

The next day being the 28 of the 10 month (called December) Richard Dennis
being Constable of VVellingborow came to the friends house where I was, and
took me forth by vertu^^ of a Warrant that had no name, but for one who is
commonly called Quaker, and had me with it before Thomas Pentlow called Justice
at VVilby in Northamtonshire, who did me examine, but would not read me any
Law I had transgressed, but a Mittimus made and sent me to the common Goal in
Northamton, on the 29 day of the 10 month called December 1654. A copy of the
Mittimus I was denied by John Snart keeper of the Goal; and also the men that
were in commission to do Justice when it was of them desired in the open
Court, at the general Sessions holden at Northampton the 10 day of the 11
month, by those whose names are John Clark, John Parker called Sergant at Law,
George ^enson, John Mansil, John Brown, who there did sit in Commission to have
judged the cause in righteousness between me and mine accusers; but when the
Mittimus was read where the charge against me was written, not any appeared to
prove what the Blasphemy was for which they committed me to prison in
suspicion of; neither they to me read any Law that any thing charged against
me, had it transgrest; but again ^o prison did me commit to answer at the
Assizes holden at Northampton the 10 and 12 day of the first month called March
1654. And three times I was there brought before Matthew Hail, who did sit
judge of life and death to answer what might be objected against me; and the
last time I before him was brought Hugh Windham was with him, who then was in
commission with to have judged the cause in righteousness between me and my
accusers; and though not any accuser appeared against me, to prove me the
transgressor of any Law; neither would these that sat to judge my cause any
Law to me read that any evidence given in against me was the transgression of;
but they me committed to prison where I had been amongst those arraigned for
felony and murder; so under all these lies and aspertions false accusations I
suffer; and instead of being cleared of them (when I was brought before those
that are in Commission to judge with righteous judgment) more accusations is
laid upon me by them: which was done by John Parker at the general Sessions
before written: and Hugh Windham at the general Assizes, before mentioned,
which both did accuse me in the open Court, before the people, that I was a
seducer; and when I required them to make manifest wherein I did seduce any,
they would not answer to what then was required; (...)
and a copy of the ground of the evidence they pretend they have against me,
they denied to be given me, in all places where they have proceeded against me,
as is formerly written, least their works of darkness should come to light,
and their folly made manifest, and truth cleared of the lies and false
accusations with which they blind the eyes of many, and cause them to stumble
at the ways of truth, in speaking evil of the things they know not, as is
manifest in what is written.

So for the truth sake I bare testimony of, and it to clear from all lies and
aspe^sions cast upon it, which has caused the simple to stumble at the way of
truth, and that they no longer be turned aside by the lying spirit who every
way seeks to murder and destroy the truth from the earth, in persecuting the
bodies of the Saints, and shutting them up in prison under the names of
blasphemers, deceivers, seducers and disturbers of the peace, so make lies
their refuge, as that persecuting spirit ^ver did in all ages, to stop the
lying mouth and for the simple sake that desires in the truth of their hearts,
to know the leadings of the spirit of truth in the way to know the only true
God, I here publicly declare to the inhabitants of England, and to all that
dwell upon the earth, what I was in the fallen estate, and how the Lord raised
me up by the arm of his mighty power, and carried me on through the great work
of regeneration, that all may know the truth, I am sent to bear testimony to
the consciences of those that dwell upon the earth, is not any seducing nor
contrary to the truth of the Gospel, but is according to the truth, as it is in
Jesus, He that has an eye to see let him see, and ^n ear to hear let him hear.

The first Birth.
Psalm. 51 5.
I Was conceived in sin and brought forth in iniquity, and in that state lived
and delighted in pride and pleasures lightness and vanity, as all does in that
nature, until I were about eight years of age, though before that time when I
did live in vanity, the light in my conscience did witness against me and
caused some trouble in me, but I departed from the light, and so followed the
counsel of my own heart, that lead me into vanity to live without the fear of
God* And about the time when I was eight years of age, of my natural birth; the
word of the Lord came unto me, Isa. 43.7.
I created thee for my glory an account thou must give to me for all thy words
and actions done in the body, Mat. 12.36.
which word enlightened my heart and opened ^he book of conscience in me, where
all was written I had done in the body ever since I was a child or had any
remembrance, 2 Cor. 5.10*
and when I had read my condition, how I had lived without God who created me
for his glory: The word of the Lord then came unto me, Isa. 43.7.
Shall the axe boast it self against him that heweth therewith, or shall the
saw magnify it self against him that shakes it? As if the staff should shake
it self against him that lif^eth it up, Isa. 10.15.
or as if the staff should lift up it self as if it were no wood; and by the
power of the word of the Lord that spoke in me, my understanding was
enlightened, and my conscience bore witness that it was my condition, I had
lifted up my self against the livi^g God in living without his fear, Isa. 43.7.
who created me to live in obedience to him, but I had lived in disobedience to
him until that day; so deep sorrow seized upon me, and I knew not what to do
that I might get acquaintance with the God of my life, who created me for his
own praise and glory: then I ceased from my vain conversation which I had lived
in, Isa. 43.7.
and began to read the Scriptures and books, and mourn and pray to a God I knew
not where he was, but expected him without looking up toward the firmament
where my carnal imagination told me he was, and as I had heard those the world
calls Ministers whom I went to hear whose words did witness with my carnal
imagination of God, they said he was above the skies calling it heaven; but I
felt the hand of the Lord within me, executing justice upon the wicked in me,
Luke 17.20.
and what way ever I turned to seek him in observations thither the flaming
sword turned, Genesis ^3.24.
which was placed against me to keep the way of the tree of life, and executed
the righteous justice of God upon me: so I stood before the Throne of the Lamb,
Rev. 20.11* 12.
reading in my mournful estate the sentence of condemnation that passed upon
me from the glory of his presence, and in this condemned estate I continued,
and through the ignorance (where God was, Luke 17.20.
what his worship was) I strove to satisfy his justice in outward observations
imitating what the Saints did, Acts 10.30.
sometimes in fasting and prayer which was the practice of Cornelius and others
of the Saints of the most high God, Deu. 10.21.
as I found recorded in the Scripture of Truth: But notwithstanding all my
strict walking in observations, Luke 17.20.
in which I was seeking the Kingdom of God I found him not, Genesis 3.24.
but the flaming sword cut me down; so my sorrow increased, for I found none in
my condition that I could declare it to: Then it pleased the Lord to order my
friends in the flesh to put me to keep the sheep where I was retired from
company, so my mind was kept in my mournful estate, where my great ease was in
mourning to a God I knew not, nor none could tell me where I should get
acquaintance with him: Heb. 22.21.
In the place where I was in the outward being in a Town called Allathorp, nigh
Pocklington in Yorkshire; but hearing of a people about Leeds that walked more
strictly in profession of the name of God then any did where I was* I had no
rest in my spirit till my Parents, in the flesh, sent me thither to be an
apprentice not regarding what Calling, Gal. ^.16.
so I might be amongst those that feared the living God, Heb. 22.21.
that I might be acquainted with the God of my life, who had created me for
himself, and the desires the Lord raised up in me was answered when I was
thirteen years old of my natural birth, I was bound an apprentice to a
Clo^k-maker in a Town called Holdbeck near Leeds; and as I heard so it was,
there was much speaking of God which they called preaching and professing him
in words from the letter of the Scripture what the Saints had spoken forth, so
intimating the Saints practice in their carnal wisdom, Luke 17.^6.
seeking the Kingdom of God in outward observations, as I had done before I
came there; Psalm. 66.16.
but when I met with none that could tell me what God had done for their souls
in redeeming them from the body of sin, Romans 7.24.
which I groaned under, and separated me from the presence of God, though I
walked strictly with them in their outward observations running to hear one man
after another, Luke 17.20.
which they called Ministers, yet I found no rest nor peace to my weary soul,
Genesis 3.24.
but the flaming sword, the righteous Law of God* cried in me for a perfect
fulfilling of the Law of God, and did meet with me wherever I was, that I
could find no peace in that worship of God the world has set up, as in
receiving the bread and wine, which they told me was the seals of the Covenant,
which were long ere I durst receive it, Psalm. 51.3.
because I saw not my self prepared, 1 Cor. 11.28* 29.
for the evil of my heart stood before me, and when I was to receive it, I
sought the Lord to keep me by his power that I might receive it worthily, and
when I did receive, my desire was the Lord would seal up his love to my soul,
but I found nothing sealed up to my soul with it: Then much fear seized upon my
soul for a long time after; and Judas condition was cast into my mind, John
15.27. Luke 22.2. Ephesians. 4 30. 1 Cor. 10.16* 17. Phil. 3.15. Ephesians. 5.11. 1 John
1.6. Ephesians. 5.13.
until it were showed that the seal of the Covenant was the Spirit of Christ,
and no outward element; and the supper was the body and blood of Christ, which
the world does not know, nor I at that time, but was made to wait for the
manifestation of it to me: Then I durst join no more with the world in that
practice; nor in their practice in singing David's conditions, which they called
Psalms; for the light in my conscience let me see the evil of my heart that I
was not in David's condition; the sense of which stopped my mouth, and while
they were singing, I did mourn and weep for want of the pure spirit that David
had that caused him to sing, James 5.3.
neither could I apply the promises which they told me belonged to me, for I
found no promise belonging to that nature, but the wrath of God abode upon me
for my disobeying his counsel in me the light in my conscience, Ephesians. 5 6.
(but being ignorant) it was his counsel I departed from it, and lent my ear
to those without that said they spoke from the mouth of the Lord, so was
deceived, and caused to err by their lies, Ier. 23.32. Luke 17 20. Deuteronomy.
30.14. Isa. 30.^ Job 33. from 19. to 22.
that did draw me to seek the Kingdom of God in observations without, but the
word of the Kingdom was in me, and executed the righteous justice of God upon
my adulterous heart that took council, and not at his mouth, till I was
consumed and my body was brought so weak, I was not able to answer the
expectation of him whom the Lord has placed me with, though my conscience was
clear I did what I were able; and he in his carnal wisdom thought I were in a
consumption, and was in mind sometimes to have sent me away to my friends in
the flesh, and othersome times he would have the men the world calls Doctors,
to apply some things to my body for my recovery, but I was not free to let
them, Ier. 5.25. Isa. 59.2.
but once for fear of giving them offense, for I knew my infirmity was the evil
of my heart that separated me from the presence of my God, and how to be freed
from it none told me; and when I found no help in outward observations in
reading, Luke 17.20. Ezekiel. 34.6.
praying, hearing, or meditating of what I heard, my sorrow and misery was so
great, it constrained me to run to those the world calls Ministers and
Professors, which appeared to me had most acquaintance with God, Acts 2.37.
to ask them what I might do to be saved, and they spoke smooth things to me,
to believe in the name of Jesus Christ, and to apply the promises, 2 Cor. 13.5^
but that he was to be found within me none told me, which added to my sorrow,
telling me to believe in Christ I knew no^ where he was; then at that time did
the wars begin in this Nation, and mine eyes being s^ill abroad to do something
in outward observations for my life; Luke 7.20.
The men called Ministers cried ^u^se ye Mer^z, Judge 5.23.
because they went not forth to help the Lord against the mighty: Then I was
willing to give my body to death, in obedience to my God, 1 Cor. 13.3.
to f^ee my soul from sin* that I might escape the wrath I lay under, John
22.2.
and get acquaintance with him; I* j^yned with that little rem^ant which said
they fought for the Gospel, John 5.39.
but when I was amongst them I found as much ignorance of the Gospel, as was in
th^se I had been with, none told me what the Gospel was, but the dead letter,
which is the outward tes^imony and declaration of the Gospel, Luke 1.^.
which is Christ, who is the glad tidings to sinne^s; Luke 2 10 11.
but they called the dead letter the Gospel, as I had heard before, so I found
no rest to my soul amongst them: Then I heard there was in Scotland a refo^med
Church, who they said walked in the fear of the Lord; I journ^yed into that
country, and to Edenbourgh, where I found nothing but formality, their Teachers
calling to the people to seek the Kingdom of Heaven in outward observations,
Luke 17.0.
as I had heard in England: Then I returned back to England again, and went
amongst those that called themselves the Church of Christ, who is called by the
names Anabaptists and Independents, who were setting up a more glorious image
in outward observations, and said they were the children of God; but I could
not join with them, for the testimony of his love my soul wanted* And then the
Lord discovered to me that his love could not be attained in any thing I could
do, Micah 6.6.7. 8* 9.
in any of these outward observations; so in all these my turnings in my
carnal wisdom, seeking the Kingdom of God in observations without, Luke 17.10.
thither the flaming sword turned, Genesis 3.34.
which kept the way of the tree of life, and fenced me from it, and cut me
down, and rent all my fig-leave, coverings, and neuroyed that mind that looked
out to seek the Kingdom of Heaven in observations, Luke 17.20.
or to hearken any more to hear the word of the Lord from man: Isa. 54.13.
then my mind was turned within by the power of the Lord, to wait in his
counsel the light in my conscience, to hear what the Lord would say; And the
word of the Lord came unto me and said, 2 Pet. 1.19.
put up thy sword into thy scabard, if my Kingdom were of this world, then
would my children fight; knowes^ thou not that if I need I could have twelve
legions of Angels from my Father; John 18.36. Man. 26^ 52 53.
which word enlightened my heart, and discovered the mystery of iniquity, and
that the Kingdom of Christ was within; Luke 17.^^
and the enemies was within and was spiritual, and my weapons against them must
be spiritual, 2 Cor. 10.4*5
the power of God; Then I could no longer fight with a carnal weapon against a
carnal man; Mat. 26 53.
for the dead letter, which man in his carnal wisdom called the Gospel, had
deceived me; but then the Lord discovered to me the deceits of all these men in
England, that were seeking the Kingdom of Heaven in outward observations; And
the messenger of the Covenant, Luke 17.20.
forth of his mouth proceeded the two edged sword wi^h which he slayes his
enemies, Rev. 19.15.
cut me down and caused me to yield in obedience, Mat. 26 52.
to put up my carnal sword into the seabbard, (...) leave ^^e Army.

Then I returned to my outward habitation and calling I had in the world, Isa.
26.8.
and there labored with my hands, my mind being turned within to wait upon the
Lord in the way of his judgments; and this I witness, Genesis 4 14.
the administration of Moses in which Cain is banished, Rom 9.13.
Es^u rep obated, Phar^oh plagued, the first born of Egyp^ slain, Exodus 9.
and my will brought in subjection for the Lord to do with me what his will
was, Ephesians. 25.8.9.
if he condemned he might, and if he saved me it were his free love; and in
this condemned estate I lay crying in the depth of misery without any hopes of
deliverance by any thing I could do to pacify the wrath of God, Jonah. 2.2.
Isa. 9.6.^7.
till the administration of the Prophets, that witnessed to my soul therewhere
free redemption laid up for me in the Lord Jesus, and by the power of the word
of their testimony there was a secret hope raised up in me to wait for his
coming, Lam. 3.26.
there I waited till the administration of (...); and I witness that of all
that is born of a woman there is (...) ^^reater then John; for he is a burning
and a shining light, John 5.35.
who discovered more of the mystery of iniquity in me in his administration,
and the sense of my condition was more manifest, the cry of my condemned soul
was great and could not be satisfied, Mat. 5.6.
I breathed and thirsted after Christ to save me freely through his blood or I
perished for ever, Ephesians. 2.23.
and in this condemned estate I lay waiting for the coming of Christ Jesus,
Mat. ^4.27.
who in the appointed time of the father appeared to my soul, as the lightnings
from the E^st to the West, and my dead soul heard his voice, John 5.25.
and by his voice was made to live, who created me to a lively hope, Ephesians. 1.13.
and sealed me up in the everlasting Covenant of life with his blood; 1 Pet.
1.3.
then I witnessed the wages of sin and death, and the gift of God, eternal life
through Jesus Christ my Lord; Isa. 55 3. Romans 5 14. Mat. 11.13. and 12.
and I witnessed according to testimony of Scripture, death reigns over all
from Adam to Moses, and Moses until the Prophets, and the Prophets until
John, and from this day the Kingdom of Heaven suffers violence, and the violent
take it by force; there is no rest to the soul till Christ be manifest, and
this the Scripture witnesses; and I witness these Scriptures fulfilled in
me, in the year according to the account 1645.

The witnesses that stood before the God of the earth, Rev. 19.15. Mat. 2.13.
Rev. 1 ^.7, 8, 9.
and had power to plague the earth; having finished their testimony, the (...)
ascends out of the bottomless pit, and makes war against (...) and kill them,
and their dead bodies lay in the stree^ of the great City spiritual Sodom and
Egypt, where our Lord was crucified; and this Scripture was fulfilled in me in
the year according to account, 1648.

Then Kindreds tongues and the Nations of the earth made merry over the
witnesses; Rev. 11.10. Mat. 24.15. Dan. 11.31.
and I see the abomination that makes desolate, which is spoken of by Daniel
the Prophet, standing in the holy place where it ought not; and then was I led
by the Spirit into the wilderness and tempted of the Devil, that the
Scripture might be fulfilled, Luke 4.1.

In that day and hour of temptation, which was in the time as the lines
following gives testimony: I witnessed these Scriptures fulfilled in me of
Paul's condition, Romans 7.19, ^0 2^, 13, 24.
wherein he complained as I then did, who found a law in my members warring
against the Law of my mind, that when I would do good evil was present with m^
the sense of which caused me to cry, Oh wretched man that (...) who shall
deliver me from the body of this death? And as (...) crying to the Lord to free
me from the burden I groaned under; the word of the Lord came unto me saying,
My grace is sufficient for thee, 2 Cor. 12.9.
I will deliver thee; and by the power of his word I was armed with patience to
wait in his counsel groaning under the body of sin in the day and hour of
temptation, until it pleased the Lord to manifest his power to free me, Romans
7.24.
which was in the year according to the account, 1651.

The spirit of life from God entered into the witnesses, Rev. 11.11.
and they stood upon their feet, then great fear fell upon all that saw them;
and the Temple of God was opened in Heaven, and I saw in his Temple the Ark of
his Testament, and there were lightnings, voices, Verse 19. Rev. 17.5. Rev.
18.3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8.
thunder, earth-q^akes, and great hail, then mystery Babylon the great, the
mother of harlots, and the abomination of the earth, which made all Nations
drunk with the wine of the wrath of her fornication, she was discovered in me,
and God remembered her when the mighty day of the Lords power was manifest upon
her, 2 These. 1.7.8.
Jesus Christ was revealed from Heaven in flaming fire, pouring vials of wrath
upon her, and rendering vengeance upon all in me that knew him no^ (and
disobeyed his Gospel, Isa. 4.4.
) and purged away the filthy nature (that did me imbondage) with the spirit of
judgment, and with the spirit of burning, so through the righteous law of life
in Christ Jesus, Rom 8 2. Rev. 7.14. Rev. 22.14. Rev. 21.27. Mat. 5.6. Rev.
22.2.3, 5^ John 3.3. Rev. 20.
I was made free, and am from the body of sin and death; and through these
great tribulations my garment is washed, and made white in the blood of the
Lamb, who has led me through the gates of the City into the new Jerusalem,
where there is nothing enters that works abomination or makes a lie, but what
is written in the Lambs book of life, where my soul now feeds upon the tree of
life, which I had so long hungered and thirsted after, that stands in the
Paradise of God, where the^e is no more curse nor night, but the Lord God and
the Lamb is my light and life for ever and ever; I witness I am regenerated and
born again of the immortal seed, and has pertaked on the first resurrection,
on whom the second death has no power.

And this I declare to all the inhabitants in England, John 6.45. Isa. 54.13.
Mat. 25.15. John 1.9., Ephesians. 5.13. Titus 2.11.
and all that dwell upon the earth, that God alone is the teacher of his
people, and has given to every one a measure of Grace, which is the light that
comes from Christ, that checks and reproves for sin in the secret of the heart
and conscience; and all that wait in that light which comes from Christ (which
is the free grace of God) for the power of Jesus Christ to destroy sin, and to
guide them in obedience to the light, so shall they come to know the only true
God and Father of light in Christ Jesus, Ioh. 17.3. John 14.6.
who is the way to him: And (...) I witness to all the sons of men, that the
knowledge of eternal life I came not to by the letter of the Scripture nor
hearing men speak of the name of God, I came to the true knowledge of the
Scripture and the eternal rest (they testify it in Christ) by the inspiration
of the Spirit of Jesus Christ, John 5.89.
the Lion of the Tribe of Judah, Job. 32.8. Rev. 5.3, 4, 5.
who alone is found worthy to open the seals of the book; and I witness none
else can, for he alone opened the seals of the book in me, and sealed it up to
my soul by the te^timony of his own spirit, Ephesians. 1.13.
according to his own promise, I will bind up the testimony, and seal the Law
amongst my D^sciples, and I will write my Law in their hearts, Isa. 8.16. Ier.
31.33.34. Ezekiel. 36.24, 25, 26, 27, 28. Heb. 8.10, 11, 12. Isa. 54 13.
and put my spir^^ (...) their inward parts, and they shall not depart from me;
neither shall they need to reach every man his neighbor, and every man h^s
brother, for all shall know me from the least of them to the greatest, for I
will be merciful to their unrighteousness, and their sins and in^qu^ties will
I remember no more: and all my child^en shall be taught of me, says the Lord
God, and great shall be the peace of my ch^ldren; and this here declared the
Scriptures witness, and I witness the Scriptures fulfilled in me; Rev. 19.1.
Praises, pra^ses, Hallelu^ah, and eternal praises be unto thee Lord God
Almighty, who ha^h taken unto thee thy great power to sit upon thy throne, Rev.
5.13.
and to the Lamb for evermore.

It being charged on me my imprisonment to be j^st until I give a reason of
the hope of my calling, and that I am u^willing so to do; to stop the ly^^g
mouth of the false accuser, and to clear the truth of the lies laid on it as
before written, and in love to the souls of the people that they the truth may
know as it is in Jesus: Gal. 1.15.16.
Here I have declared the work of the mighty God in revealing his Son in me,
who led me on my journey through the dark world, where I passed through great
tribulations, Rev. 7.14.
as forme^ly written, until I came to the end of the world, over it to rejoice
in the power of my God (1 Cor. 10.11. upon whom the ends of the world are come)
whom the whole world that lies in wickedness hates and persecutes: John 5.19.
Mat. 6.22.
but to the pure single eye, that is not of the world, I lay this before which
is written, that all which it minds may see the truth I bear testimony of is
not any Popish Tenet (though I was questioned concerning them at the general
Assizes holden at Northampton the 10 and 12 days of the first month called
March 1654.) neither is it seducing nor blasphemy nor prejudicial to the truth
of the Gospel or peace of the Nation, Rev. 14.6.
but according to (...) truth of the everlasting Gospel and sound peace of the
Nation, for which testimony I am still kept in bonds in the common Goal in
Northampton, numbered amongst the transgressors in the low prison with those
arrained for felony and murder, Isa. 53.12.
waiting in rest and peace till the sufferings of the righteous seed be
fulfilled. And all you that are enemies to the truth of God persecuting it
under the names as formerly written, calling the preaching of the truth
seducing, this I declare and confess unto you in the presence of God; Acts
24.14.
after the way you call seducing d^ I worship the Lord God of my fathers: and
witness fulfi^^^ what is written in the Law and the Prophets; he that can
receive me let him.

W. D.

Dear friends whose minds are turned to the effectual light that comes from
Christ, all mind your own measure and be content in what the Lord has
committed to you; with the light judge that which would draw your minds to look
forth at others conditions, and in impatiency to covet what the Lord ha^h given
to them, before it be manifest to you: be faithful every one in your own
measure, and in patience wait in the light for the unlim^ted spirit of Christ
your life to open the seals of the book, and make known unto you the mystery of
eternal life, which he will daily reveal in you that are faithful in your own
measure to follow the Lord in what he makes manifest to you, whom he has
called into his Vinyard at the ninth and eleventh hour, be faithful to the
Lord in walking in obedience to him in the light; he will make a short work in
the earth for his seed sake, and your reward shall be rest and peace in the
presence of God in Christ, with those that came into the Vinyard the third and
sixth hours and labored the heat of the day; God almighty be with you his
chosen servants and children, and all in your measure keep in his eternal
power bold, valiant and faithful unto the end, and crown you with eternal
glory in Christ one Judge Lord and King, God over all blessed for ever, Amen.

To all you that rule ^n England from the highest to the lowest, whom the Lord
has betrusted with power to see the peace be kept, and to judge the cause of
the people: He has given you power theri causes to judge with righteous
judgment, the evil doers to punish, and the righteous set free out of the
hands of those that oppress them.
This is the word of the Lord God to you:
THat you lend not your ears to the counsel of your own hearts, or to the
counsel of any without you that tempts you to draw your minds from the pure
counsel of God, which is the light that comes from Christ Jesus, and calls on
you in your consciences to judge with righteous judgment as you will eternally
answer before the pure powerful dreadful God; take heed of abusing your power
he has betrusted you with, in establishing any Law which is contrary to
Scripture and the righteous Law of God in the conscience, as those did whom the
Lord drove out and destroyed before you in his wra^^nd overturnd in his fierce
displeasure, which if you uphold those Laws they made in their wills, or any
other which is contrary to the righteous Law of God in the conscience, and rule
according to them Laws; and exercise the power committed to you to bind the
Laws upon the consciences of the children of the Lord, whom he has chosen out
of the world, and made his jewels to fear an oath, in obedience to the
righteous Law* which says, swear not at all; which if you by these
unrighteous Laws take advantage against the righteous seed concerning the Law
of their God, them to ensnare under your power, that you on them may satisfy
your wills: This I declare to you from the eternal God of Heaven and Earth, It
is hard for you to kick against the pricks; for what is done to his people he
takes it as done to himself, and better a Millstone were hanged about your neck
and you cast into the Sea, says Christ, then to offend one of these little
ones that believes in his name and obeyes his command, who says, swear not at
all: and now is manifesting his power in his people, that all them may know
between those that swear and them that fear an oath, which if you them that
fear an oath oppress; this know, the Lord God will plead their cause as he did
the cause of all his people in all ages, and destroyed those that oppressed
them; as in the time of Pharaoh, and in the time of Nebuchadnezzar, and in the
time of Hamon in the reign of King Ahasuerus, and in the time of King Herod
whom he smotein his righteous judgments, and consumed him with worms, Acts
12.23. for persecuting his people and robbing him of his glory, the righteous
justice of God he manifested upon the enemies of his people, is left upon
record you to fo^ewarn, that you touch not his chosen anointed people, nor do
his Prophets no harm, for whose sakes the Kings rebukes, and all that oppress
them, as is recorded in Scripture of truth* and has been witnessed before your
eyes, in destroying the Bishops, and the King that oppressed the people of God
by their power, in binding Laws upon them contrary to the righteous Law of God
in their consciences, and you Rulers of England who promised to the Lord God if
he would deliver those that oppressed his people into your hands, and give you
power over them, you would take away all Laws that burthe^ed the consciences of
his people, and they should have free liberty to worship him in spirit and in
truth, according to his Law written in their own hearts; and according to your
desires the Lord appeared while you in his counsel stood, and gave all into
your power, according to the desires ofyour own hearts; and now is the time of
your t^y all wherein the Lord is trying all you this day whom he has put power
into your hands, which if you now forget the Lord God, who appeared to you when
you were little in your own eyes in the day of your distress, and deny to
perform your promises you made to the Lord when he delivered you out of the
hands of those that sought your life's; but contrary to all your promises abuse
your power you are betrusted with, to build up again you seemed to destroy
which cost the price of so much blood, in establishing Laws which are contrary
to Scripture and the righteous Law of God in the conscience, and by them think
to scatter the power of the holy people, and to weary out the Saints of the
most high God in turning judgment backward, and keeping justice a far off,
that truth falls in the streets, and ^quity cannot enter, so he that
departs from evil makes himself a prey to your wills, and the Lord God
sees it, and is displeased with you, that there is no judg^ment for his
people: therefore to you this is the word of the Lord, that abuse your power
you are betrusted with, in perverting judgment, as before written; thus says
the Lord God, The pit you dig for my people you shall fall into it your selves,
and my people I will deliver by the arm of my mighty power, and according to
your deeds I will to you repay, and recompense fury and vengeance to you my
adversaries, and will you sweep away with the beesome of my wrath except you
repent, and your blood shall be upon your own heads, and you shall not escape,
but come to your end, and none shall help you; He that has an ear to hear let
him hear.

And be forewarned now in this day of your visitation, wherein the Lord has to
you sent you, to forewarn of the evil that is coming upon you, that you may
speedily to him return, and lay your Crowns in the dust at the feet of Jesus
Syons King, and in his counsel stand; which is the light in the conscience that
in you witnesses against every vain thought, and wicked imagination, and in
the light wait his power you to guide to perform your promises, and to take
away all Laws contrary to Scripture, and the righteous Law of God in the
conscience, that the righteous Law of God may be your guide, which is the guide
of all the children of God; then will the Lord God of Heaven and Earth be with
you, and with the arm of his mighty power destroy all that plot or rise up
against you, before whom he will make the unrighteous powers of the earth to
shake if you abide faithful in his counsel, and will make you a terror to the
evil doers, and a p^aise to them that do well, and will bring you into the
eternal peace, and rest he has prepared for his people; but if you reject his
counsel and cast his righteous Law behind your backs, as you have done, and
follow the counsel of your own hearts, all that have an eye to see read and
understand, Prove. 29.1. He that has been often reproved and hardens his
neck, shall suddenly be destroyed and that without remedy: and in that day I
shall be clear of your blood, who in love to your souls has not hid the
counsel of God from you, which he has made known to me, that you may be left
without excuse, in the da^ of the Lords anger, when he does perform what he
has spoken. Then shall I be remembered whom the world knows by name William
Dousbery, and by some of you that professes to minister justice cast into
prison, and there kept in the common Goal in Northampton, for the word of God
and Testimony of Jesus Christ.

From the Goal in Northampton the 25 day of the 4 month, 1655.
O England! England! over all in thee I lament, who persecutes the Sons and
Daughters of the most high God, he has to thee sent, thee to forewarn of the
evil day that is coming upon thee.
O That thou in this day of thy visitation did know the things belonging to thy
peace! which the living God tenders to thee in this day of his mercy, wherein
he waits on thee to be gracious unto thee, and to make thee the glory of all
the Nations of the world, and in all thy straits for thee appeared, and in his
mighty power has destroyed all that did secretly plot and rise up against
thee, to establish unrighteous Laws, and them bind upon the consciences of
those that fea^ed the Lord in thee, and walked humbly before him according to
the measure of light received; and now has he appeared in the day of his
mighty power in thee O England, to exalt the Kingdom of Christ in the hearts of
his Saints, and has sent them to preach his everlasting Gospel in thee, to
turn the minds of the people from darkness to light, which comes from Christ,
in it to wait for his power to guide out of all sin and uncleanness, into
union and fellowship with the Father of light, which many of you people in
England seemed to desire above all things, and content to give up your lives to
withstand them that did appear, to bind any unrighteous law upon you, and by it
to take advantage against you, concerning the Law of God, which you professed
to love, and to delight in your liberty in it more then in your nearest and
dearest relation, or life, or any outward enjoyment, and all you in that day,
who were faithful to the Lord according to the measure of light manifest in
you, the Lord God did appear for you, and in his mighty power has scattered
those that stood up in enmity against you, to bind Laws upon your consciences,
which is contrary to Scripture, and the righteous Law of God in the heart; and
the Lord has given you power over all those your enemies, and now have you
free liberty which they cannot take from you, to worship God in spirit and in
truth, according to the desires you seemed to manifest in the day you cried to
the Lord when you were in distress: and now is the Lord come to visit you in
his tender mercy, and has sent his Ministers to preach his eternal word freely
without money or price, in season and out of season, to reprove rebuke exhort,
with all long-suffering and doctrine, which many of you people in England, who
promised the Lord to worship him in spirit and in truth, now his counsel
rejects, and turns to the teachers you have heaped up to your selves, according
to your own lusts, who cries peace, peace to you in what you do, while you put
into their mouths; and now is the time come to the fulfilling the Scripture in
you, who have itching ears and cannot endure sound doctrine, but turns from it
to fables, which if you continue in your careless minds, slighting this day
of your visitation, and not like to retain God in your knowledge, God will give
you up to reprobate minds, that profess you know God but in works deny him,
being abominable and disobedient and to every good work reprobate, upon whom
the Lord will get his glory in his righteous judgments, and if the Lord in his
everlasting love had not left a seed in thee O England! thou w ith all thy
teachers whom thou have heaped up according to thy own lusts, would have become
as Sodom, but for his own seed sake, whom he has blessed, he will do good to
the inhabitants of England, who stands faithfully in his counsel to be guided
by his power, and will scatter all those that stand in opposition to his
righteous seed Christ, whom he is exalting in the hearts of his elect and
chosen people in England, to rule for ever over all that stand in enmity to
him, this is the day the mighty God is giving all power unto his son Jesus, to
whom every knee shall bow; and all you proud stubborn self-willed lofty ones
that hates the light of Christ in you, that witnesses against sin in the secret
of the heart and conscience, and it rejects, and denies to be guided by it, but
turns to the counsel of your own hearts, and the Teachers you have heaped up
according to your lusts, and with them sits at ease in the flesh, and turns the
grace of God into wantonness, and forgets the loving kindness of the Lord, who
delivered you by the arm of his mighty power, when enemies compassed you on
every side, and gave your lives for a prey, when they were nigh unto death; and
now you abuse your liberty, to walk with your teachers according to your lusts,
and with them commit this filthy and abominable thing in the land, the Priests
to teach for hire, and the Prophets that divine for money, and you people love
to have it so, but what will you do in the end thereof, which day you put afar
off and do not regard, but that you shall not be ignorant of the mind of the
Lord, and left without excuse, in the mighty day of the Lords anger, who has
sent his servants and children early and late, to forewarn you of the evil day
that is coming upon you, if you do not speedily repent, and turn to the Lord,
but slight this day of your visitation, then shall the things now belonging to
your peace, be hid from your eyes, and your end shall be according to the word
of the Lord I declare to you; thus* says the Lo^d, All these my enemies, that
will not that I shall rule over them, bring them hither and slay them before
me; and this is your portion you enemies of Christ, that hates his counsel, as
is before written, he will you consume with the breath of his mouth, and the
brightness of his coming, which will overtake you that sit at ease in the
flesh, as a thief in the night and in flames of fire will render vengeance on
you that disobeys his Gospel, and will give to every one of you according to
the works done in the body, and you shall not escape from Isreal's Judge, Syons
King, who will all his people deliver, and you proud lofty ones under bring, by
his mighty power, to the praise and glory of his righteous justice, who alone
is worthy, God over all blessed for ever, Amen.

Remember you are warned in your life time, and prize this day of your
visitation, while the Lord in patience and long-sufferance waits to be
gracious and merciful to you, if you speedily return to his counsel, which is
the light of Christ in your consciences that shows you sin, and wait in it for
his power to lead you to repentance, and to cleanse you from sin, and in the
straight way of self-denial, and the daily cross, you to guide in obedience to
the Father of light, then will the Lord God be merciful to you, and heal your
backslidings, and love you freely, and blot out your transgressions for his
names sake, which if you will have none of his counsel but it rejects as you
have done, and still commits this filthy and abominable thing in the land, the
Priests to teach for hire, and the Prophets to divine for money, which is the
practice of your teachers, you have heaped up to your selves according to your
lusts, and love to have it so; then your portion you must own, what the Lord
has spoken he will perform, and you and your teachers shall reap the fruit of
your doings, according as is declared, and in that d^y I shall be remembered
when you lie upon the bed of sorrow, who is clear of all your blood, who perish
through your disobedience in that I have not hid the counsel of God from
neither Rulers Priests nor People.

And to the light of Christ in all your consciences I clear my con^cience in
the presence of the living, pure, and dreadful God, who will perform according
to his words, and the condemnation of the evil doers sl^mbers not, the Lord
will cleanse the Land of you, and not any that rejects Christ the corner stone
shall rule in England, for the Lord will make it the glory of all the Nations
of the world, notwithstanding all that oppose him, his own work he will carry
on in it, by the arm of his mighty power will he exalt Christ Jesus, to be King
in it, to rule the people according to his righteous Law, and all that will not
his Laws obey, and their Crowns lay down at his feet, and to him their knee
bow in perfect obedience to his righteous law, written in the heart and
conscience, he will you break in pieces, with his rod of Iron, and dash in
sunder like a potters vessel, and not any shall escape that does evil, and
bring the curse upon the earth, which the Lord is making as the garden of Eden,
the mouth of the Lord of Hosts has spoken it, he that can receive it let him,
and an ear to hear let him hear: And whether you people in England hear or
forbear, in your consciences I shall be for ever manifest; and you shall
eternally witness the truth I have declared is to you the word of the Lord
God, the day will declare it.

W. D.

FINIS.

