A DIALOGUE Between Monmouth-shire, AND YORKSHIRE.
About Cutting RELIGION according to Fashion.
Mon. THis Religion (Mr. Yorkshire) is a very Seasonable Garment; cool in
Summer, hot in Winter, and Suits with Spring and Autumn both.


York. Ay in troth, so it is; and I have a good mind to make me a Cloak on it;
for that is the Wear I fancy most.


M. Why a Cloak, prithee?


Y. Oh, Sir, Have you never experimented the Convenience of that Garb? I Will
tell you how it saved me a Scouring once, when I met my Tutor full-but with my
Neighbors Cock under my Cloak, who inquiring what I had got, was soon satisfied
with this answer; 'Twas a Riders Dictionary: God-a-mercy Cloak for that shift:
I had as certainly gone to pot as the Cock did afterward, had not my Cloak hid
the Roguery.


M. Well, and ever since you love the wear.


Y. Ay, and ever shall do as long as I live for several substantial Reasons;
whereof I give this as one: That a man in a Religious Cloak may walk incognito,
carry Vice on with Virtues Face, present his Friend a Dagger; when he expects
but a How do you; and a shake by the hand; appear upright, though stigmatized
and ill stamped by Nature.


M. But what piece of Religion do you fancy most to make a Cloak on? There Is
the Protestant-piece, the Presbyterian piece, the Romansingers, Independents,
Quakers, and the Lord knows what?


Y. I know that well enough, but the Roman-piece for me, that is the Original,
and is most in Fashion all over the World.


M. Don't tell me of Rome, France, Italy and Spain, and them Foreign Places: I
am for what is most worn in my own Country, and for that which my Father wore
before me.


Y. Now you say something; ha, ha, ha! Your Father wore before you, quoth the
man; prithee how do thou know what Clothes thy Father wore?


M. Why I am sure 'twas a Protestant Cloak.


Y. Ay, but what was the Coat and Britches?


M. Faith I cannot tell that, for the Cloak was always wrapped so close about him,
that the Devil himself could not see what Cut the Suit was of.


Y. Well with what Antiquary will you consult for the Fashion?


M. Hold I-I-I have a pretty pattern of a Britches; but I --


Y. Something like that on Oliver's Half-Crown.


M. Ay, ay, 'Twas the Half-Crown I had in my Head.


Y. Pox of that pattern, it cost my Father a whole Crown, and I hate the
Fashion ever since, and dare not countenance it, lest it should cost me one too.


M. Prithee, what do talk of Fashion? This is all the difference 'twixt ours
and yours: We cut our Cloth according to Religion, you your Religion according
to your Cloth; we make interest according to Religion, you Religion according
to Interest.


Y. Ay this Religion and Interest go glew'd together with you and us too; for
which reason I Will make me such a large Roman Cloak, that shall be subject
enough for three Kingdoms to talk of.


M. I Will lay you a Crown; my Britches in Octavo, shall raise as much discourse
as your Cloak in Folio.


Y. Prithee don't think to bubble me out of my Crown so: I know not what
correspondence you have with the Rabble, I will not hazard any thing to their
wavering Fancy.


M. That which you term Correspondence, perhaps may prove such Influence, as
shall be able to trounce you out of Fifteen Shillings; then how will you look
when you have lost Three Crowns, if you stick so much to hazard One.


Y. Trounce me! what is trounce me? I am sure you cannot get it by Fair play, and
therefore you must use some Cheat; and male parta, male dilabuntur, what is got
over the Devils Back, is spent under his Belly. But God bless him that holds
the stakes.


M. Amen, from you and all Yorkshire Blades.


Y. Why from all Yorkshire Blades, do you think there is none sound and honest
of them.


M. I cannot tell how sound you are, but this I Am sure, there has been a sad
Murrain among you: Neither know I your honesty, but I believe there is not one
of you would stick to cut his Brothers Throat for interest, and that your red
lettered Calender signifies well enough.


Y. Prithee don't pretend to be so much of a Headpiece, as to make expositions
on any thing: What Is what is enough for you.


M. Marry, but I know I may lawfully pretend to any Headpiece more than you,
either to the Fore-piece, or Hind-piece, but especially to the Crown-piece.


Y. I confess you might have had better pretensions than I far to it, had you
not met with that unlucky Knock in your Cradle, which cracked your Crown.


M. I vallue not that Knock, though it beat it flat; for I doubt not when the
College of Physicians shall set in commune bonum (for every ones disease) but
they will take me into cure too, and settle my Crown fast enough I Will Warrant
you, and I am resolved to stand the Touch.


Y. Perhaps your Body of physicians may work extraordinary things, and alter
even Natures course contrary to all right and reason; but I believe you must
Fee 'em high.


M. Nothing shall be wanting toward so extraordinary a Cure, neither diligence
nor confidence; and then with what a Jesuitical Face will you look?


Y. Troth I shall have reason enough to put on a sour countenance, but stay
till it comes.


M. I Will wait the opportunity, and pray don't you use means to hasten it.


LONDON, Printed for W. R. 1681.


