A SPEECH made in Parliament by Sir SIMON DVCY Knight: On Twesday the Eleventh
of January: Concerning proceeding against the 12 Bishops accused of High
Treason, to bring them to their trial.

1642.

LONDON, Printed for F. Coals and T. Banks. 1642.

A Speech made in Parliament by Sir SIMON DVCY Knight: on Tewsday the eleventh
of January, concerning, proceeding against the twelve Bishops accused of High
treason.
Mr. Speaker,

DElaying prosecution of any business of weight and consequence, is the only
way to produce danger, especially if it be tending to the removal of eminent
evils practiced and threatened by evil and wicked spirits, bending themselves
only to act such things, that the success thereof must either prove the
fulfilling of their own desires, or the utter ruin and destruction of the
State wherein they live.

Mr. Speaker. Light offenses are easily dispensed withal or removed, but
grievous crimes and great misdemeanors committed by high hand are troublesome
to be restrained, hard to be corrected. In any proceedings against such, there
must be both wisdom and courage equallizing the subtilty and power of the
offenders: to accuse or impeach any person of any crime, whether treason or
otherwise, is ordinary, but to prosecute such accusation or impeachment to
bring the same to perfection, to a period, to judgment, whether by the sword
of justice to cut off such accused (if found guilty) as unsound and rotten
members of a Commonwealth, thereby to preserve the whole, or to clear and
discharge the same, either way satisfying the Kings loyal Subjects concerning
our proeeedings: if deserving death, you know Master Speaker how dangerous it
is to protract time in their trial and just sentence: you know, dangerous to a
City is the setting on fire but of one house in the same, you know no better
remedy to prevent this danger, but by pulling down the next adjacent houses to
that on fire: Even so, if there be in a City, State, or Kingdom, wherein are
some firebrarnds members, threatening desolation to the whole Commonwealth
wherein they live, or any part thereof; whose tongues are set on fire even with
the fire of Hell, issuing forth, flashes, sparks, nay flames of wicked tenants
and doctrines, pleasant and delectable only to themselves and associates;
seducing in religion the children of God, nay I verily believe the saying is
fulfilled foretold in Scripture, such seducers should be in the world, that if
it were possible, they would seduce the very elect, drawing all men as they can
to their faction, or else seek their utter destruction, both of their lives,
liberties, and estates. These firebrarnds, Mr. Speaker, has caught in diverse
places of this Kingdom, as well Cities, as Towns, and Villages; and if speedy
course be not taken to extinguish them, by pulling down, cutting off, not only
the Original root of this danger, but the neighboring parties; not only to
cut down the body of the tree, but lop off also the branches, especially, the
greatest arms thereof, for the lesser twigs, they may of themselves wither and
dye in time: they will endanger the whole kingdom, and cause great trouble and
hazard in preserving the same from ruin.

Mr. Speaker: The subject of my discourse is concerning our proceedings against
the Bishops, by this honorable House accused of High Treason, That we with all
convenient speed bring them to their trial and judgment upon the same.

Mr. Speaker: It behooves us to be men of courage and magnanimity, not daunted
with any fear, or discouraged by any opposition that has been made against
us, and our proceedings concerning the same, to hinder our perfecting those
things in our prosecution of these Incendiaries, so much importing the peace
and security of his Majesty and all his kingdom. The evil effects that we
have experimentally found, in not performing our desires, and the expectation
of those that sent us hither, by whom we are entrusted to preserve and defend
them in their persons, free liberties, and rightful possessions; and the many
and urgent petitions which we have received, not only from the Citizens of
London, but from diverse other parts of this kingdom, expr^ssing their loves
and tender affections to his Royal Majesty and Princely Progeny; their
confidence imposed in us of our faithful integrity and true heartedness
toward our Country, in the right framing and rectifying all things that have
been amiss and disordered in the same; the redressing of their unjust
grievances and oppressions, and the settling of true Religion in this kingdom:
their loving encouragements for our cheerful and willing performance of their
just de^i^es, may as I conceive, be sufficient causes to stir up our hearts
and ardent affections to satisfy them therein, and not any longer, for any
cause whatsoever shall be pretended in opposition of the same, to procrastinate
any further time, to bring these Bishops accused, and all other Delinnqents in
this State to just trial and deserved punishment.

Mr. Speaker: The evil effects that have succeeded of late, by ^eason of the
intermission of our proceedings against these Bishops and others, are not
unknown to all men; of dangerous consequence, disturbing our peaceable and
just proceeding in all our designs, touching the great affairs we have had in
agitation both of Church and State; endangered our persons, by giving them
liberty to endeavor to put in execution their malicious and divellish plots
against us the raising and causing great tumults and uproares about the
Parliament, causing and procuring the members of our House, great Pillars in
this our Temple, to be accused and questioned as criminous persons; thereby to
avert our prosecution against them; causing evil suspicions and jealousies of
our integrities and loyalties to our gracious Sovereign, and our native
Country; encouraging thereby their favorites and well-wishers to their evil
practices, to adventure upon any stratagem, against both our persons and
proceedings: Which we, Master Speaker, (if we in time labor not to prevent the
same) may with too late repentance, bewail those greater dangers and
irrecoverable troubles threatened by these firebrarnds of State, who burns with
mischievous intentions of our utter destruction.

Mr. Speaker: My humble motion therefore is, that considering seriously with
our selves those things which I have briefly mentioned unto you, we may lay
aside all fears, depending only upon Almighty God his providence over us, and
our Countries loves proffering to defend us, whose servants we are; and
cheerfully with good courage and magnanimous spirits, go on as we have begun,
to bring all misdoers in this Kingdom, especially the greatest and chiefest of
them, to their trial and condign punishment.

FINIS.

