THE DISCOVERY OF MAN'S RETURN To his First Estate by the operation of the Power
of GOD in the great Work of REGENERATION.

With a Word to all Saints, who set their faces toward Sion to seek the Lord
their God. And to those that are waiting in Sion, to worship Him in Spirit and
Truth.

A Word to the Back-slider, who has tasted of the good Word of GOD, and the
powers of the World to come, and has turned the grace of God into wantonness,
and gone back into spiritual Sodom and Egypt, where our Lord is Crucified.

With a Discovery of Mystery-Babylon, and her Merchants: With a Word to the
hard-hearted unbelieving Jews, who profess Christ in words, and deny to be
guided by his Counsel, the light in their Conscience, and stumble at him to
their own Destruction.

From the Spirit of the Lord, Written by one whom the people of this World
calls a Quaker, whose name in the flesh is William Deusbury; but has a New
Name, the world knows not, written in the Book of Life.

London, Printed for Giles Calvert, at the Black-spread-Eagle, at the West End
of Paul's. 1655.

All Men and Women, Behold, and see in what Estate you were created.
ANd God said, let us make man in our Image, Genesis 1. 26, 27
God created man in his own Image, and in the Image of God created he him, male
and female created he them.

And the Lord God took the man and put Genesis 2. 15* 16, 17
him in the Garden of Eden to dress it, and to keep it, and the Lord God
commanded the man, saying, Of every tree of the Garden thou may freely eat*
but of the tree of the knowledge of good and evil thou shall not eat of it, for
in the day thou earest thereof thou shall surely dye the death.

The S^rpent was more subtle than a^y beast of the Field, Genesis 3. ^, to 16
which the Lord God had made, he said unto the Woman, ye shall not surely die,
for God does know that in the day you ^at thereof, your eyes shall be opened,
and ye shall be as God knowing good and evil.

And when the woman saw the tree was good ^or food, and that it was pleasant
unto the eyes, and a tree to be de^red to make one wise, she took the fruit
thereof and did eat, and gave also to her husband with her, and he did eat.

And the eyes of them both were opened, and they knew that they were naked, and
they sewed fig leaves together, and made them aprons.

And they heard the voice of the Lord God walking in the garden in the cool of
the day, and Adam and his Wife ^d themselves from the presence of the Lord
among the trees of the garden; and the Lord God called unto Adam, and said unto
him, where art thou?

And he said, I heard thy voice in the garden, and was afraid, and because I
was naked, I hid my self. And he said, who told thee that thou wast naked? have
thou eaten of the tree where^f I commanded thee that thou should not eat? and
the man said, the woman who thou gave to be with me, she gave me of the tree,
and I did eat.

And the Lord God said unto the woman, what is this that thou have done? the
woman said the serpent beguiled me, and I did eat.

And the Lord God said unto the Serpent, because thou have done this, thou art
cursed above all cattle, and above every Beast of the field, upon thy belly
shall thou go, and dust shall thou eat all the days of thy life.

And I will put enmity betwixt thee and the woman, and between thy seed and her
seed, it shall bruise thy head, and thou shall bruise his he^l.

And the Lord God said, Behold this man is become as one of Genesis 3. 22* 23, 24.
us to know Good and evil, and now lest he put forth his hand and take also of
the tree of life, and eat and live for ever, therefore the Lord God sent him
forth from the garden of Eden, to till the ground from whence he was taken* and
he drove out the man, and placed at the East end of the garden Rev. 2 5
of Eden, Cherubims and a flaming sword, which turned every way to keep the way
of the tree of life.

Every Man and Woman behold and see how you are fallen from the estate and
condition you were created in; Genesis 1. 26, 27
you were created in the image of God to delight alone in him, but you are
fallen in obeying the counsel of the Serpent, and are driven out of the
presence of God into the earth, and there your minds are feeding upon the dust
Genesis 3. 24
of the earth, created objects which will perish: some delight in father and
mother, some in wife and children, some ^n house and lands, some in money and
gold, some in meats and Luk 14 26 Mat. 10 37 Ephesians 4 5 (...). 2 3 (...) 9 33 ^oh.
5. 44
drinks, some in raiment what they shall put on, some in lusts and pleasures,
in wantonness, vain idle communication, foolish jesting and laughter, which is
madness and folly, and some in honor and preferments in this world, wherein
their hearts are lifted up in pride and exaltation above others whom they have
power over, not considering how ye are dri^en out from the presence of the Lord
wherein you were placed in the beginning: and some 1 Cor. 3. 6
there are that feed upon the letter of the Scripture, which is death,
comprehending God and Christ in their wisdom from what the Saints of the most
high God spoke forth from the life they enjoyed in Christ Jesus, which was in
Col. 1* 27
them the hope of their glory, and man in his serpentine wisdom steals the
Saints words into his understanding, Ier. 23. 30 1 Cor. 9 9* 27
and never knew the life and power thereof in himself, and so speaks a
divination of his own brain, a riddle to his own heart, and while he speaks to
others, himself is a castaway.

Every man and woman in particular, deal justly with your hearts, and see where
your hearts are, and what they delight in, for in some of these created objects
you delight in, and feed upon, if you cannot witness your change by the eternal
and powerful Word of Truth; for into the earth you are driven from the presence
of God, and these are the fruits which spring forth of the Genesis 3 24* Mat. 15.
19
earth which is in your hearts, self-love, pride, covetousness, anger, revenge,
hastiness, frowardness, backbiting, Gal. 15 19, 20, 21
hard-heartedness, cruelty, and oppression, lust and uncleanness, drunkenness,
impatiency, and unbelief, and you are fenced out from coming to the Tree of
Life with Cherubims and the flaming Sword, which turns every way to keep the
Tree of Life. So every one see what Genesis 3. 24
you can witness of your return again unto God from whence you are separated by
the disobedience and evil of your hearts, and see what is the ground of the
hope of your callings, and by what power you are acted in your obedience unto
God, whether by the power of the first Adam, or by the power of the second, for
if thou upon the convincement of the evil of thy ways, do not wait in the
light, which is in thy conscience, that convinces thee of the evil of thy
doings, for power from the Lord Ephesians. 5. 3
to guide thee forth of the evil, which the light discovers, which would guide
thee into the Kingdom of God, but thou runnest out into the wisdom of the
first Adam, to seek the Kingdom of God in outward forms and observations Luke
17. 20
according as thou comprehendest of the Saints practices, and thou imitatest
their practices in thy wisdom, and though thou walk never so strictly in these
outward forms, thou art alive in the first Adam, sewing fig leaves together to
cover thy nakedness, a piece of new Genesis 3 7 Mat. 9. 16 17 Gen 1. 14. to ^
cloth in an old garment, thou art putting new wine into old bottles, and art
building up a tower to get up to God, in thy heathenish and Babylonish wisdom,
and confusion will come upon thee: in the day when the Lord comes to look for
fruit, thou will be found a fruitless tree that cumbers the ground: Cain, with
his offering up sacrifice unto God in thy first nature, Esau seeking Genesis 5
Genesis 27. 34 38 Heb. 12. 17 Genesis 12 9 10 ^ Pet. 1. 19, 20
the birthright with tears, who shall never find it, and all the fruit that
is raised in thee is from Hagar the Bondwoman, and thou have thy end for thy
self in all that thou do which is thy hire, which thou expectest in the end,
life, for thy labor, and obedience, and thou regards not the glory of the
Lord, and his fear is not before thine eyes; therefore every man and woman,
deal justly with your own hearts, under what name or title soever thou be,
whether thou be a Teacher of others, or a Professor of what thou comprehendest
to be truth from the Testimony the Saints gave forth, from the life and power
of Christ that was in them, and thou expectest life in thy outward forms and
observations, and mindest not to be guided by the light which is of Christ in
thy own conscience, which light guided the Saints that gave forth the
Scriptures, and while thou disobeyest that light, profess what thou will, thou
art in the fall, first Adam is yet alive in thee, Cain is not yet banished, nor
Esau reprobated, Gen 4. 10, 11, 12 Genesis 21. 1^ Gal. 4. 3^
nor the bondwoman and her son cast out; which are all figures and types of
the first nature, which is yet alive in thee, and thy will is thy guide, and
thy heart is in the earth, notwithstanding all thy profession, and thou Rev.
28. 3
art a painted beast, made drunk with the wine of the wrath of the Whore, which
is thy wisdom, which comprehends* that which thou never did know manifest in
it self, and sits decked a well-favoured harlot, above the Cross of Christ,
thou will be found a Thief and Robber, who comes not in by the door Jesus
Christ, but climbs up John 1. ^
some other way; and thus far went the Scribes and Pharisees, and the young
man, who had kept the Commandments Mat. 10. 20, 2^
from his youth, but when he should have sold all for Christ, he went away
sorrowful: And thus far went Paul when he persecuted Jesus Christ, according to
the Law he walked blameless, and all thy strict walking to get Phil. 3 5* 6
life in observations according to the Letter, is striving again to get the
tree of life by thy own power, who art fenced out with Cherubims, and a flaming
sword which turns every way to keep the way of the tree of life: And if Genesis 3.
24
thou never ^awest thy self senced out from the presence of God,
notwithstanding all thy righteousness in observations, thou art not come so
near God as to see the flaming sword, which is placed to meet thee in every way
thou turnest to get life in thy own power, and to cut thee down and kill thee,
that Christ may be thy life, thou art alive in Gen 2* 7 (...) ^ 1^ (...)* 11*
12 13
the first Adam, and art in the death, for death reigns over all from Adam to
Moses, and Moses is until the Prophets, and the Prophets till John, and John
until Christ, and if thou can not witness that thou art come to Moses,
profess Luke 1 26 I^. 1. ^, (...) 9, ^ 20 2^* (...)* Mat. 7. 1^ 14
what thou will thou have not set thy face toward God, no^ one step in the
strait and narrow way to eternal life, but art going the broad way to
destruction, whatever thou be, whether a Teacher of others, or a Professor of
what thou comprehendest to be truth from the Le^ter of the Scripture, under
what form, name, or title soever thou be, thou art a dead man, and a dead
woman, and the wrath of God abides on thee, though thou see it not* Romans 7. 9.
there Paul witnesses, I was alive without the Law once, Ephesians. 2 1. 2. 3 Ioh. 3.
36
but when the Commandment came, sin revived, and I dyed. Friends, every one in
particular, deal justly with your hearts, see what you can witness of your
death with Christ by the powerful word of truth which enlightens the
conscience, and condemns sin in the flesh, for every one Ioh 1. 9 Romans 8. 3
would ascend with Christ to be partakers of the life and glory with him, but
he becomes a stumbling stone to be 1 Pet. 2 8 Gal. 3. 27 Romans 6. 3 (...) Romans
8. 17 2 Timothy 2 11. 12. ^oh. 5. 15
baptized with him into his sufferings and death, to ascend with him into hell,
and this thou must witness before ever thou come to sit with him in heavenly
places; for it is they, and they alone that shall reign with him, who suffer
with him, and they that are dead with him shall live with him; it is the dead
that hears the voice of the Son of God, and they that hear shall live: Arise
thou that sleep in the dust of the earth, securely in thy earthly and Ephesians.
5. 14
Serpentine wisdom, thy mind feeding upon the dust of the earth, created
objects which will perish; arise, stand up to Judgment that Christ may give
thee life: This is required Mich. 6. 1
of thee, O man* to do justly, love mercy, and to walk humbly with thy God;
examine thy heart, and deal justly with thy own soul; there is a light in thy
conscience, which light is of Christ, minding it will let thee see the mystery
Ioh. 1. 9. and 8 12. and 9. 5
of iniquity that lodges in thy heart, which is deceitful and desperately
wicked; and this light in thy conscience which discovers unto thee the evil of
thy heart, is of the ^er. 17: (...)
etarnal Word of God, and was from the beginning, according as it is written in
the outward testimony of Ephesians. 5. 13,
the truth.

In the beginning was the word, and the word was with God, and the word is God;
and the same was in the beginning with God; all things were made by him, and
without him was Io^. 1. 2. 3. 4. 5.
not any thing made that was made; in him was life, and the life was the light
of men and the light shines in (...), and the darkness comprehends it not:
Every one arise out of your earthly wisdom, and mind the light in thy
conscience, and wait on the power of the Lord in Rev. 20. 12, 13.
it, and it will bring thee to Judgment before the Throne of the Lamb, where
the righteous Law will be opened in thy heart, that will cry through thy
earthly heart for righteousness and judgment, and the book will be opened in
thee, where thou shall see all written that thou have done in the body, and
shall give an account 2 Cor 5. (...) M^t. 12. ^6
for every idle word, and receive thy reward for what thou have done, and thy
reward is wrath and condemnation which will pass upon thee from the presence of
the Lamb for thy disobedience, and breaking of the righteous Law, which must be
fulfilled, and what way soever ^es 2. 10
thou turnest to get life in outward forms and observations, the flaming
sword, which is the righteous Law* that goes out of the mouth of the Lamb, it
will turn every way and meet thee, and cut thee down and cast thee into hell,
where there is weeping and wailing for want of the presence of God, and thou
can do nothing to pacify the wrath of God which is gone out against thee.
Now would thou hide thy self as Adam Gen 3 8 9, 10 Genesis 3. 7
did, when he appears in thy heart, thy fig-leafed garment of prayers, tears,
forms, outward observations according unto thy comprehensions of the letter,
will not cover thy nakedness; it served to cover thy nakedness from the sight
of men, but now when the Lord appears in thy heart, thou can not stand before
him; now comes Cain in thee to be driven from the face of God to be a fugitive
Genesis 4. 12, 13, 14
and a vagabond in the earth notwithstanding all his sacrifice; and Esau in
thee reprobated, never to have the blessing though he seek it with tears, and
the bondwoman Genesis 27 34, 38 Heb* 12 17 Ge^. 21. 10 Rev. 19. 15
and her son cast out, and the first Adam now slain with the sharp sword that
goes out of the mouth of the Lamb, and art made to give up thy soul to God
whose it is, to do with thee what he will, if he destroy thee for ever he may;
and if he save thee from eternal death it is his free love; now art thou
baptized with Romans 3. 6 to (...) 2 Timothy 2. 11. ^2
Christ into his sufferings and death, where thou lie sealed down under the
eternal judgment of God, and there perishest for ever for any power or help
thou have in thy self, and this is the administration of Moses, where thou
lie condemned for ever under the righteous Law, without any help or hope
until the administration of the Prophets, that prophecy of a Christ that has
satisfied the righteous Law of God for thee who art lost and condemned M^t.
(...). 11 L^ke 19. 10
under the power of the Law of Moses, and now there is a secret hope raised up
in thy soul, and thou look up from under the condemning power of Moses for a
Savior; and the Prophets are until John, and of all that were born of woman
there was not one greater than John; for he is a burning and a shining light
that lets thee see the Luke 16 16, 17 Man. 11. 11 John 5. 35
filthiness of thy heart, and the Law shines in its purity to condemn the
earthly man in thee, but he strengthens the hope in thee that was raised up by
the Prophets, to see the beauty and excellency of Jesus Christ, which ravishes
thy lost condemned soul that thou art willing to sell all for him, the
Scripture being now fulfilled in thee who witnesses this from the days of John
even until now, the Kingdom of God suffers violence, and the violent take it by
force, now is every* mountain and hill laid low in thee, Mat 1. 12 Luke 3. 5
and crooked ways made strait, and the rough way in thee made smooth, and thou
wait in the wi^derness and lost condition of thy self, for the salvation of
God, to be manifest to the in Jesus Christ: and in the appointed time of the
Father, the Son of man comes to thy soul as a 2 Pet. 2. 10 L^k* 17. 24 John 5.
25
Thief in the night, as the lightning from the East to the West, so is his
appearance in thee, and causes thy dead soul to hear his voice, which witnesses
to it eternal life freely through his own blood, and thy soul hears his voice,
and by the word of his power is made to live, and are sealed up by the holy
spirit of promise, the Spirit of God bearing witness with thy spirit, that thou
art his child: now come thou to witness the second Adam to Romans (...). 16 1
Cor. 14. 45 R^m. 6 23 Ephesians* 25* (...), 10
be a quickening spirit, and Isaac the promised seed to be heir for ever; and
that the wages of sin is death, but the gift of God is eternal life: and that
by grace tho^ ar^ saved through Faith in the Lord Jesus, not of works lest any
should boast, and he that has hope in him purifies himself as he is pure, and
the love of Christ constrains thee now, who can witness this work of
Regeneration manifest in thee, to follow him whither soever he goes, no more to
obey him for life as thou did, when thou wast without* 1 John 3 (...) 2 Cor.
3. 14 Titus 3* 5
seeking him in forms and observations, but now the love and life thou enjoyest
in Christ Jesus constrains thee to deny thy self, and take up thy Cross daily
and follow him: Now art thou come into the beginning to live in the Luke 9. 23*
24
Lord, guided by the powerful word of faith, the light that shines in thy
heart, which is the light of the City, New Jerusalem, to whom thou art come to
worship the John 4. 110 5
Father in Spirit and Truth, and all that are come to walk in the light of the
City New Jerusalem, are the true Israel John 23. 24
of God that are taught of God, to whom the New and everlasting Covenant is
made, according to the promise Isaiah 54 14 Heb. 8. 10, 1. 12
of the Lord: This is the Covenant I will make with the house of Israel, and
with the house of Judah, after those days, says the Lord, I will put my Law
in their inward parts, and write it in their hearts, and I will be to them
Ezekiel. 36 24, 25. 26* 27. 28
a God, and they shall be to me a people, and they shall teach no more every
man his Neighbor, and every man his Brother, saying, know*the Lord, for they
shall all know Iet. (...). 33. 3^
me from the least of them to the greatest of them, I will be merciful unto
their unrighteousness, and their sins and their iniquities will I remember no
more, and in this City t^ere is no need of the Sun, neither of the Moon Rev. 21
23 24 25 and 27 ver
to shine in it, which are borrowed lights, outward dispensations, and
teachings of men, for the glory of the Lord God does lighten it, and the Lamb
is the light thereof, and the Nations of them that are saved shall walk in the
light of it, and the Kings of the earth bring their glory and honor unto it,
and the^ shall in no wise enter into it any thing that defiles, neither
whatsoever works abomination, or works a lie, but they which are written
in the Lambs Rev. 22. 5
Book of life, and the gates of it shall not be shut at all by day; for there
shall be no night there; for the Lord gives them light, and they shall reign
for ever and ever.

HALLELUIAH, to the Highest.
A Word from the Lord to all that are waiting on the Lord in Sion: And to those
that are weeping, and are se^king the Lord their God, asking the way to Sion
with their faces thitherwards.
FEar not ye mourners in Sion, the Lord waits on you to be gracious unto you,
and Is^ 61. 2 Isa. 3^. 18, and 20* 21
though he give you the bread of adversity now, and the water of affliction,
yet shall not your Teachers be removed into Corners any more, but your eyes
shall see your Teachers, and your ears shall hear a voice behind you, saying,
this is the way, walk (...) 1. 9 and 8. 12 Ephesians. 5 13 1 John 2 27 Isa. 42 3 Mat*
12. 20. Prove. 20. 22
in it, when you turn to the right hand or to the left, therefore every one of
you mind the light which is of Jesus Christ in you, that judges the
unrighteousness of your hearts, give up to be guided by the pure light in you,
which is your Teacher, the counsel of Jesus Christ, and it will bring Judgment
forth unto victory; and whatever he makes manifest to you to be his will, wait
on the Lord in his counsel, and he will give you power to obey, and when you
have obeyed his will, take ^eed of departing from the counsel of the Lord,
which is the light within you, to hearken to the counsel of your own hearts,
which will draw your minds to look back to your obedience, and the experiences
you have passed through, so will the beast, which received a deadly wound with
the sword, the righteous Law, that goes out of the mouth of the Lamb, in you
his deadly Rev. 13. 3
wound will be healed, and sits a painted beast above the Cross of Christ,
working lying wonders in your hearts, and imitating the operations of the power
of God who is purifying his Sons and Daughters with the spirit of Rev. 1^. 11,
12* 13* 15
Judgment, and the Spirit of burning, and the beast in you, that tasted of the
power of God when he received his deadly wound under the justice of God, now
can imitate the same in deceit, and cause fire to come down from heaven in the
sight of men, imitating the operation of the spirit of burning, and so deceives
himself and all that dwell upon the earth, he is made manifest to all that dwell
in the Mat. 13. 37 1 Pet. 5 8
heavenly light in their hearts. All friends mind your watch, for your
adversary the devil goes about like a roaring lion 2 Pet. 1. 19
seeking whom he may devour; abide in the counsel of the Lord, which is the
light in you, and you will discern between the Beast, which is Antichrist in
his lying wonders, and the Lamb Jesus Christ in the operation of his power; so
you will come to try the spirits whether they be of God 1 John 4 1, 2, 3
yea or no; all that are guided by the Beast have their life in speaking and
acting in outward operations what they once experienced, and what they
comprehended to be truth; speaking that they enjoy not, and is exalted in
pride, the heart returned into the earth. But thou that art guided by the Lamb,
the light in thy conscience* the righteous Law cries through thy earthly heart,
and brings it to judgment, and thou can find no life in the operations of the
power of God, nor in thy obedience, but whilst the presence of the Lord is with
thee in it; and when thou have done the will of God in obeying what he has
made known unto thee, thou see thy self to be an unprofitable servant, and
have need of patience, that thou may receive the promise Luke 17. 10 Heu. 10
36 Col. 3. 2 Eze 36 31 32 1 Cor. 1. 2^, 31
where thy life is hid with Christ in God, to save the freely for his names
sake, or else thou perishest, and to carry thee on by his mighty power, or else
thou fallest; so thou have n^thing to glory in but in the Lord.

And as they that are guided by the Beast (which is Antichrist) speak of the
truth, a riddle to their own hearts, not knowing the power and life of what
they speak, adding to the Word of the Lord, and the plagues and curse of God
will be added unto them. But thou that art guided Rev. 22* 1^
by the Lamb Jesus Christ, thou know when the Word of the Lord is committed
to thee: If any have my Word* (says the (...)) let him speak my Word
faithfully: is not my Word Like (...) (says the Lord) and like a hammar I^r
23. 28. 29
that breaks the rocks in pieces: Thou can witness the Word of the Lord
to be as a fire, and as a hammar 2 Cor. 10. 4. 5
to break the rocks in pieces in thee, and bring down all in thee in subjection
to its self, and it alone rules in thee: and thou that can witness the word
of the Lord thus manifest in thee, thou art a true Messenger of the Lord, let
not the deceit stop thy mouth; for the word the Lord calls thee to speak,
shall perfect his work for which he is sent. Rev. 14. 4. 5


All friends stand fast in the counsel and will of God, be faithful in
following the Lamb daily through the Cross, and none be discouraged; in
temptations be content; James (...). 3
look up to the Lord to keep you in the hour of temptations; for it is no sin
to be tempted, but to yield to the tempter; and when the Lord delivers you from
the power of the Tempter, watch that your will get not from under the Cross,
but sink down into the love of God, and every one be content in what the Lord
has made manifest Man. 25* 20. 21. 22 23.
to you, and be faithful according to your Talents, and more will be
communicated to you; and none look forth at others conditions; for if you do,
the Enemy will cause you to stumble, and you will come to a loss in your own
condition: wait patiently in the counsel of the Lord, the light in you; for he
is making a short work in the earth Mat. 1. ^0 v. 12
that you that come into the Vineyard at the eleventh hour, shall receive as
much as they that came in ^t the third hour, and have labored in the heat of
the day.

All ye children of the Lord lift up your heads, behold your King riding in
majesty and power, upon the wild Ass Colt, which is your wild nature,
subjecting it to himself, Mat. 21. 5
that you may enter with him through the gates of the City into New Jerusalem,
where there enters nothing that works abomination, and makes a lie, but what
is written in the Lambs book of life, and there you shall dwell in Rev. 22. 14
Rev. 21. 27 Cant. 2* ^
the banqueting house of the Lord forever, feeding upon the feast of fat
things, rejoicing (...) ^he eternal love and mercy of your souls, in the free
Covenant of life, in the blood of Christ, who is the Lord of Lords, and King of
Rev. 17. 4 Rev. 19. 16 Rev. 5 9. 10
Kings, God blessed for ever, who is riding on in Majesty and in Power,
conquering and to conquer all the powers of darkness in the hearts of his
Saints, that they may reign as Kings upon the earth, to the praise and glory of
our God, who is taking unto him his great power to reign in his Saints for
evermore, to whom alone be all honor, glory, power, and eternal praises for
ever.

To all revolted souls who have departed from the Counsel of the Lord, and are
made drunk with the Wine of the wrath of the fornication of Revelat. 8. 3
the Whore, bewitched with the mother of Witchcraft, to return into spiritual
Sodom and Egypt, where our Lord is Crucified.
WHoever thou art, in whom the righteous law of God, Jesus Christ the light in
thee has cried through thy earthly heart, for righteousness Revelat. 20. ^
Matthew. 12 36
and judgment, and there thou did stand arraigned before the Throne of the
Lamb, where the book was opened in thee, and written therein all the deeds thou
have done in the body, and the sentence of wrath and judgment passed out of
the mouth of the Lamb on thee for every idle word, and all that thou have done,
and in this thy condemned estate, thou runnedst too and fro to hide thee from
the wrath of Genesi. 3 2.
the Lamb, in reforming thy ways, and strictly observing what thou wast
convinced of to be the Will of God; but what way soever thou turnedst in thy
obedience toward God, to get life, thither the flaming sword turned that
proceeded out of the mouth of the Lamb, and cut Revel. 19. 15
thee down, and cast thee into hell, where thou lie weeping and waling under
the wrath of God, sealed down under his eternal judgment for evermore, for any
help or power thou had in thy self, until Jesus Christ manifested eternal
love and mercy freely to thy poor lost condemned soul, and raised thee up to a
lively hope, and sealed thee up in the Covenant of life with his own blood: Now
after the witnesses have sealed up their testimony, the Beast, which is thy
will, that ascends out of the bottomless pit of thy deceived heart, which is
deceitful and desperately wicked, has made war against the witnesses, Christ
in thee, and slain them, and they Rev. 11. 7* 8 Ier* 17 9
lie dead in the spiritual City of Sodom and Egypt, where our Lord is
Crucified, and thou art made drunk with the wine of the wrath of the
fornication of the whore, and bewitched with her witch-crafts, who now tells
thee, whom he loves he loves to the end, and to the pure all things are pure,
thou art no more under the Law but under grace, and all things are alike, that
when thou disobeyest the pure Law, which once had power over thee, and it
witnesses against thee secretly, crying in thy heart, use thy liberty, but not
as an occasion to the flesh, thou regardest not the counsel of the Lord, Gal.
5. 13.
but harkens to the Mother of Harlots in thee, and causes thee to wrest the
Scriptures to thine own destruction, and tells thee the Law has no power over
thee, thou art under Grace, it is but the Law in thy Members, that wars against
the Law in thy mind, the acting of the humanity which acts in its place, that
the Grace of God may appear more gloriously, God sees no sin in thee, for it is
no more thou, but sin that dwells in thee, and the former misery thou was in
under the wrath of God, for the dis-obeying of the righteous Law, thou now
treadst under thy feet, and lies slain in spriritual Sodom and Egypt, in thy
heart, yet not put in grave, but lies in thy sight, and lets thee see the evil
of thy doings, and vexes and torments thy earthly and carnal heart in the midst
of all thy joy; but the Whore in thee tells thee, that the former trouble thou
wast in, it was through the ignorance of God, but now thou art grown up to a
higher stature in Christ, to see nothing but love in whatsoever thou do, and
now thou know nothing but to eat, and to drink, and be merry, for the
Children of the Bride-chamber cannot mourn while the Bridegroom is with them:
time was thou did mourn, but it was when the Bride groom was not with thee;
but now the Winter is past, and Summer come; and singing of birds is heard in
thy land, and now wash thy face, and anoint thy head with Oil, that thou appear
no more before men, as thou did when thou wast a Pharisee; now to be a friend
to Publicans and Sinners, and become all to all that thou may win some, and
whatever thou do it is God that acts thee, for thou art not stronger than he
to resist him, and if he would have it otherwise, how could thou hinder it?
so it is as it must be, and it cannot be otherwise, thus the subtle Serpent
winds into the mind of man, and causes him to wrest the Scriptures to his own
destruction to draw back into perdition.

Woe, woe unto thee thou Back-slider in heart, who chargest God, who is purity
it self, to be the Author of Prove. 14. 14 H^b. 1. 13
sin, and the actor of thee in all thy filthy and unrighteous walking, and
have turned the Grace of God into Heb. 10 38 Romans 6* 1 Mat. 25 17* 18
wantonness, and take liberty to sin, because Grace abounds, and make
the coming of Christ, (who came to fulfill the Law) to destroy it, through
the evil of thy heart, that when the righteous Law cries in thee for purity,
and condemns thee for thy unrighteous walking, then thou fliest to the free
Grace in Christ, to save thee from the power of the Law, but thou shall find
the Law has power over the fleshly man, as long as he lives, Romans 7. 1
and the fleshly man that now guides thee, is under the Law until it be
destroyed through faith in Jesus Christ, Mat. 15. 17, 18
for he came not to destroy the Law, but to fulfill it, and the Saints witness
it, though thou wrest the words of Paul (when he declared his condition before
he came to the fulness of stature in Christ) to thy own destruction. I see a
Law in my members warring against the Law of Romans 7 23
my mind, and brings me into Captivity into the Law of sin, which is in my
Members; but he gave not up himself Romans 6. 16
to be a servant of sin as thou do, it was his burden that made him to cry,
Oh wretched man that I am, who shall deliver Roman 7 25
me from this body of death; and he waited in the Faith until he was freed,
Romans 8. 2. For the I aw of the spirit of Life in Christ Jesus has made me
free from the Law of sin and death, that the righteousness of the Law Romans
vc. 5
might be fulfilled in us, who walk not after the flesh, but after the spirit;
He witnessed Christ came in him to fulfill the Law, and so do all the Saints
now, according to their growth; some witness the Law fullfilled in them, and
Luke 9. 23.
others are waiting in the faith patiently, following the Lord daily through
the Cross, until the Law be fulfilled. But thou art departed from the counsel
of the Lord thy God, and caused his name to be evil spoken of, and have made
the hearts of his people sad, as they did that the Apostle speaks of; For many
walk of whom I have told Phil. 3. 1^. 19
you often, and now tell you even weeping, that they are the enemie^ of the
Cross of Christ, whose end u destruction, whose God is their belly, and whose
glory is their shame, who mind earthly things. These Scriptures are fullfilled
in thee, which the Apostle mentions, And while they promise them 2 Pet. 2 19*
20 21
liberty, they themselves are the servants of corruption, for of whom a man is
overcome, of the same is he brought into bondage, for if after they have
escaped the pollutions of the world, through the knowledge of the Lord and
Savior Jesus Christ, they are again entangled therein and overcome, the latter
end of them is worse with them then the beginning, for it had been better for
them not to have known the way of righteouse esse, then after* they have known
it, to turn from the holy Commandment delivered unto them, but it is happened
unto thee according to the true Proverb, the dog is turned to his own vomit
again, and the Sow that was washed to her wallowing Verse 2^
in the mire, and thou may read what will be manifest to thee from the Lord.

For if we sin wilfully, after we have received the knowledge Hebrews 10. 2^ to
32 verse.
of the truth, there remains no more sacrifice for sin, but a certain fearful
looking for of judgment, and fiery indignation, which shall devour the
adversaries.

He that despised Moses Law died without mercy, how much sorer punishment
suppose ye shall thou be thought worthy of, who have trodden under foot the Son
of God, and have counted the blood of the Covenant wherewith thou wast
sanctified an unholy thing, and have done despite unto the Spirit of grace; and
we know him that has said, Vengeance belongs unto me, I will recompense says
the Lord: it is a fearful thing to fall into the hands of the living God.

Remember from whence thou art fallen, and repent, and Revelations 2 5
do thy first work, in minding that light of Jesus Christ in thee, before whom
thou once stoodest condemned for that thou now live in; prize the time, and
give up to be guided by the counsel of the Lord in thee, the light of thy
Ephesians 4 ^3
Conscience, that discovers every vain thought, wait on the power that is
present with the light; and it will dash Psalm 137. 8. 9
Babylons children against the stones, which is sin in its conception, so will
thy carnal mind be brought to the cross daily, and thy heart will be purged
with the spirit of judgment, and the spirit of burning: kiss the Son in
obeying his counsel, the light in thee, lest thou perish in the way; for if his
anger be kindled a little, blessed are they that trust in him. Psalm 2* 11, ^2


The Discovery of Mistery-Babylon.
To all inslaved Captives in Babylons Kingdom, who are made drunk with the
wine of the wrath of her fornications, Rev. 18. 3
and bewitched through the multitude of her enchantments.
FRiends, Babylon, is within you, the mother of Harlots is within you, and she
bewitches Rev. 17. 5
you through the abundance of her Sorceries; and the beast is within you that
arises Rev. 11. 7
out of the bottomless pit of the deceived heart, which is deceitful* and
desperately wicked; and the beast which all the world wanders Je^. 17. 9 Rev.
13. 4
after, is your wills, that makes war against the Lamb of God in you, which is
the light that makes manifest the evil of your hearts, and your wisdom is the
great Whore John 1. 9 Ephesians. 5. 13 Rev 17. 3 Rev. 17. 4
that sits upon the Beast, that arises out of the bottomless pit of the
deceitful heart, and she finds out many deceitful inventions to preserve the
beastly will alive, having a golden Cup in her hand, full of the abominations of
the earth, and this golden Cup is your outward professions, glorious
comprehensions and conceivements of God and Christ, imitating what the Saints
did empower, according as they were 2 Pet. 1. 11
moved by the operation of the spirit of the most high God and you imitate the
Saints practice by your wisdom.

There is nothing but confusion in the Ringdome of Babylon; so come you to be
divided into so many particular Genesis 11. 7, 8, 9
forms, as Presbyterians, Independents, Anabaptists, and diverse others that are
in outward worships painted over with glorious words, and yet you whose wills
guide you, are painted Beasts, bewitched with the Mother of Harlots,
notwithstanding all your outward professions and glorious observations, they
are but the golden Cup, and within you Rev. 17. 4 Mat. 15 19, 29 Genes^s 6. 5
are full of the abominations of the earth, as self-love, covetousness, lust,
and uncleanness, hastiness, frowardness, backbiting, slandering,
hard-hartednesse, cruelty, and oppression, Gal. 5* 19* 20, 21 Prove* b^ 1. 7
grinding the faces of the poor, impatiency, and unbeleef, and the fear of the
Lord is not before your eyes, and thus you lie poor inslaved Captives in the
Kingdom of Babylon, refreshing your hearts in the creature enjoyments, Luke 14
26 Marth 10 37 Matthew. 1^* 29 (...). 9. 23 Io^ 5 44.
which will perish, some in father and mother, some in wife and children, some
in house and land, some in money and gold, some in self-wisdome, delighting in
themselves some in honor and preferment in this world, and when there is
enjoyment of these visible creatures, then there is content; and when they are
taken away there is trouble, the mind always plodding, contriving, and acting
every way to get of the Creatures what the heart lusts after, and he that gets
the most is the highest exalted, so every one is exalted above another, and
there is nothing but tyranny, cruelty, Matthew* 6. 21 M^cah 21, 2 Prove. 22 16 Am^
4. 1. H^sea 2. 7 Rev. 18 2^ Rev. 18 13 Ioh 1. 9 and 8 12 and 9. 5 1 John 2 27 8
Luke 17. 2^, 21
and oppression among you, you sons and daughters of Babylon; And in her was
found the blood of the Prophets, and of the Saints, and all that were slain
upon the earth.

The Merchants of Babylon are your Teachers, who draw you from your guide,
which is the pure light of Christ in you, to seek the Kingdom of God in
observations without you, contrary to the mind of Christ, the Kingdom of God
comes not with observations, neither shall they say, lo here, or lo there, for
behold the Kingdom of God is within you.

But these your Merchants have no Scripture for their Merchandise, which they
sell to you inslaved Captives for so many hundreds in the year, and is paid in
the Nation, or elsewhere; for these observations they tell you, you must
observe, or else you cannot come to the Kingdom of heaven, though they are
contrary to the Scripture, as are practiced by them; there is no Scripture that
witnesses their call to the Ministry by ^mane wisdom; Notmany 1 Cor. 1. 26.
great, not many noble, not many wise after the flesh.

There is no Scripture that any that Jesus Christ sent Matthew. 10 8
forth, made a bargain with the people for so much a year, as these do that
profess themselves to be sent of Christ.

This is the call of the Ministers of Christ, Paul an Apostle Gal. 1. 11, 12
of Jesus Christ, neither of man, nor by man, but by the Revelation of Jesus
Christ*

I send you forth (says Jesus Christ) as Lambs among Mat. 10* 16 Mat. 10. 10.
v. 8
Wolves, into what Town or City ye enter, inquire who is worthy and if they
receive you, there abide, eating such things as is set before you, the labourer
is worthy of his meat, freely ye have received, freely minister.

Those whom Jesus Christ commits the Word of eternal life unto, and calls them
forth to declare it unto others, the love of Jesus Christ, which is sealed up
to their souls 2 Cor. 5. 14. 19 20
through his own blood, constrains them to give up themselves to death, in
witnessing forth the eternal life they enjoy in Christ, as it was, it is; the
love of Christ constrains me to Preach the Gospel (says Paul) But these your
Merchants are they, which have forsaken the right way, and are Acts 21. 13 2
Pet. 2. 15 Jude 11
gone astray, following the way of Balaam the son of Bosor, who loved the wages
of unrighteousness.

And as there is no Scripture for their call to the Ministry by their humane
learning, nor making bargains with the people for so much in the year; so there
is no Scripture for these observations they call the Ordinances of God, as they
are practiced by them.

There is no Scripture that Christ or any that he sent forth, did take a child,
and sprinkled water on its face, and said in so doing they baptized it into the
Church of Christ.

Suffer little children to come unto me (says Christ) and Mark 1^. 14, 5
forbid them not, for of such is the Kingdom of God; for whosoever shall not
receive the Kingdom of God as a little child, Matthew. 19. 14
shall not enter therein, he sets the child as a type and a figure, to show
forth to every one, that they must become as a little child depending upon the
will of God, before they enter into the Kingdom of God: he took them up Luke
^8. 16 17 Mark 1^. 16
in his arms, and put his hands on them, and blessed them; but that he
sprinkled water on their faces, and said, He baptized them into his Church,
there is no such Scripture.

An other observation your Teachers tell you, you mu observe, is hearing these
stndied Sermons, in taking a part of ^ Peter 1. 20 Revelat* 22, 18
Scripture, and adding to it their wisdom, calls it the word of God, which is
contrary to the Scripture; but they say, they have Christ for an example.

There was delivered unto him the book of the Prophet Isaiah, and when he had
opened the book* he found where it was written. Luke 4 7 22. 23.
The spirit of the Lord is upon me, because he has anointed me to preach the
Gospel unto the poor, he has sent me to heal the broken hearted to preach
deliverance to the Captives, and recovering the sight of the blind, and to set
at liberty them that are bruised, to preach the acceptable year of the Lord:
and he closed the book and sat down: and he began to say unto them, This day
is this Scripture fulfilled in your ears; and all bare him witness, and
wondered at the gracious words that proceeded out of his mouth; he was the
substance of the prophecy which was then fulfilled in him.

This is no ground for any to take the Saints words, and add to it their
wisdom, and call that the word of God. Ier* ^3. 29 30


The Prophet that has a dream, let him tell a dream: he that has my Word let
him speak my Word faithfully. What is the chaff to the Wheat? says the Lord.
Is not my word like a fire, and like a hammer? says the Lord, that breaks the
2 Cor 1^* 4, 5
rocks in pieces. All to whom the word of the Lord is committed, can witness it
to be as a fire within them, and as a hammer that breaks rocks in pieces, in
subjecting all in the heart, under the power of it self, so it alone rules and
guides him that he is what he speaks, that if he had never seen any thing that
the Saints has declared without him, he had known what is manifest in him: and
he to whom the word is thus made manifest is a true Minister of Christ, who is
called to speak the Word faithfully. Isa* 56* 10, ^1 ^0. 5 30, 31 M cah 3. 11
verse 5 Ier. 23 30


But these that call themselves your Teachers, and makes bargaains with you for
so much in the year, they never witnessed the word of the Lord in them, as a
fire and like a hammer that breaks the rocks in pieces, so they never had any
thing to have spoken of the Lord; but as they have stolen it from the testimony
of the Saints, so they speak a divination of their own brain, a riddle to their
own-hearts; and whilst they speak to others, themselves are cast away.

And the Lord testifies against them, Behold I am against 1* (...)* 9. 27
the Prophets says the Lord, that steals my word every one from his neighbor.

Behold I am a ainst the Prophets, says the Lord, that use their tongue, and
say, H^ says. Je. 23 31* 32


Behold I am against them that prophecy false dreams, says the Lord, and do
tell them, and cause my people to err by their lies, and by their lightness*
yet I sent them not nor commanded them; therefore they shall not profit the
people at all says the Lord, and this fruit is made manifest of the ministry
that has been in England.

Another observation your Teachers tell you to observe which is contrary to the
Sci^ture at it is practiced by them in singing of David's Psalm. in Meter,
taking David's word^, who was a man after Gods own heart, and putting words
into the mouths of poor ignorant people to sing that which they never knew, and
so causes them to blaspheme the name of Psalm 131. 1
God, saying; Let us sing to the praise and glory of God* as, O Lord I am not
puffed in mind, I have no scornful eye, I do not exercise my self in things that
be too high for me: when they never knew any change wrought in their minds, and
so causes Psalm 38. 1. 10. 7
the people to lie. And causing them to sing David's prayers, as, O Lord rebuke
me not in thy wrath, neither chasten me in thy hot displeasure, for thine
arrows stick ^ast in me, and thy hand presses me sore, for my iniquities are
gone over my head, as a heavy burden, they are too heavy for me to bear; my
wounds stink and are corrupt, because of my foolishness, I am troubled, I am
bowed down greatly, I go mourning all the day long; and may be none of you in all that place can witness the condition and so blasphemes the name of God, who
will be worshipped in spirit and in truth, and this is the rule given out from
him, If any be afflicted, John 4. 24 Iame: 5 16
let him pray if any be merry let him sing Psalms: and there is none merry but
the ransomed of the Lord, who returns to Sion with joy and singing, and
^verlasting j^y shall be Isaiah 51. 11
upon their heads, and they shall obtain gladness and joy; and sorrow and
sighing flies away.

All people may search the Scriptures, and see how you have been deceived by
your Teachers, who have caused you to seek your lost God in carnal and dead
observations, which they have not any Scripture for, all cease from them; for
the Lord complains of them; The leaders of my people causes them to err, L^k*
17. 2^ 2 Cor* 36 Isalah 3* 12
says the Lord of Hosts; and now are these Scriptures fulfilled in these men,
which the Apostle prophesied ^f.

This know also, that in the last days perilous times shall 2 ^mothy 3. 1 2^*
come; for men shall be lovers of their own selves, covetous, boasters, proud,
blasphemous, disobedient to Parent^, unthankful, unholy; all people see, are
not your Teachers (...) (...)? before they come at you, they must know what
they must have* covetous, griping for much; and if you will not give them so
much as they can have in another place, they will not come at you; here is
self-love and covetousness manifested: without natural affection,
truce breakers, false accusers, traitors* heady, high-minded, lovers of
pleasures more than lovers of God, having ^ form of godliness, but denying the
power thereof; from such the Apostle exhorts to turn away. All people behold
and see all these Scriptures are fulfilled in your Teachers, they speak against
pride and live in it: against covetousness, and live in it; they teach by their
wor^s to be natural affectionated one toward another, and they walk contrary,
causing poor people to pay, to maintain them in pride and high ranks in the
earth, who can scarce get bread for their bellies, and clothes for their backs;
yet they force them to pay to them, being void of all natural affections; and
they are truce breakers, breaking all Bonds and Covenants if they can get more
money in another place. Thus they show forth to all the world, that they are
lovers of pleasures, more than lovers of God and have a form of godliness in
words* but deny the power thereof; from such turn away; for of this sort are
they which creep into houses, and lead captive silly women, laden with sin and
diverse lusts; these Scriptures are fulfilled in your teachers every one has
his particular house to creep into, where none must come but themselves or whom
they please which is contrary to the practice of Christ or any that he sent
forth* they went through the Countries, Towns, Cities, Villages, according Mat.
10. 12. 16
as they were guided by the spirit of God, to declare what he gave them to
speak; and your Teachers lead silly women captives, laden with sin, and led
away with diverse lusts, ever learning, and never able to come to the knowledge
of the truth; do they not tell you to look for Christ's coming in such
observations as they set up? which is nothing but the invention of their
brains* for Christ tells you, The Kingdom of God comes not with Luke 17. 20. 2
Ephesians 5. 3
observations, but is within you. But many of them that deny, that the light in
your conscience, which makes manifest the evil of your hearts, is the Kingdom
of God, calling it the light of a corrupt conscience, so shuts the Kingdom of
heaven against men and will neither enter in themselves to be guided by 1 John
2* 27 Matthew. ^3. 13
the pure light of the Kingdom of Christ within them, nor suffer them that are
entering in, to enter as the Scribes and Pharisees did; now as Jannes and
Jambres withstood Moses, so do these men resist the truth, men of corrupt
minds, reprobates 2 Timothy 3. 8 9 Revelat. 18. 11
concerning the faith, but they shall proceed no further, for their folly shall
be made manifest to all men, as their also was, and no man shall buy their
merchandise any more*

All you inslaved Captives in the Kingdom of Babylon, why will you lay out your
money for that which is not bread, and your labor for that which satisfies
not? hearken diligently unto Jesus Chrst, the light that lets you see the evil
of your Isaiah 55. 2
hearts to be guided by it, and you shall eat that which is good; Incline your
ears (says Christ) and come unto me; hear and your Ephesian* 2. 13 Isaiah 55* 3
souls shall live, and I will make an everlasting covenant with you, even the
sure mercies of David; mind the call of a powerful and tender Father in the
Lord Jesus, who calls, Come forth of Babylon my people, and touch no unclean
thing, and I will receive you, and Revelat. 18 4 2 Cor. 6* 7* 18
will be a Father unto you and ye shall be my sons and daughters, says the Lord
God Almighty. Friends prize your time slight not the day of the Lords mercy,
for he waits to be gracious and says, I stretch forth my arm all the day long
to a backsliding Isaiah 38. 18 Isaiah 65. 2 Jeremiah 3 12 14 22
and gainsaying people. Every one mind your conditions, deal justly with your
own hearts, see what your hearts has fellowship with* and what guides your
minds for the Kingdom of Christ is within you, it is not in observations as
your Teachers Mosea 14 4 Micah 6 ^ Man. 6 21 Luke 17. 21 Roman 8. 14 1 John 6
26 Matthew. 23* 31 Mark 24 32 36
tells you; for they deceive you, therefore Christ forewarned us for looking
forth at those which would come in the latter days that would say, Lo here is
Christ, lo there is Christ, as it is in these our days, some say, Lo here is
Christ in the Presbyterian practice; the Independents say He is there, and the
Anabaptists say, Lo he is here. But friends mind what Christ says unto you,
Believe them not, look not forth, the Kingdom of Christ is not in any of those,
nor in any other outward observations, but (be awarned) the Kingdom of Christ
is in you, and that is the light which lets you see the evil of your hearts;
and Christ Luke 17 20. 21 Ephesians 5* 3 Matthew 3. 21 32 3. 33 Zachary 4. 19
compares it to a grain of Mustard seed, the least of all seeds, and it grows
up above all other herbs, and becomes a tree that the Fowls of the air lodges
therein; and he compares it to a little leaven, that a woman took and hid in
three measures of meal, and it leavened the whole lump. These are earthly
parables and figures, which Christ lays down, speaking to the earthly and
carnal heart of man, that he may read his condition within. Therefore despise
not the day of small things, but mind the John 1. ^
counsel of the Lord Jesus, the little light that shines in thy dark heart,
look upon the figures, the parables, the little leaven which is hid in three
measures of meal, it changes the whole John 1. 1 to 6
lump into the nature of it self; so the little light that shines in thy dark
heart, is the powerful word of faith, which was in the beginning by which all
things were created, and without him was nothing made, this word is life, and
the life is the light of men, and light shines in darkness and the darkness
comprehends it not: this light is the word of faith the Apostle exhorted to
take Romans 10. 6, 7, ^
heed unto; Say not in thy heart, who shall ascend up to Heaven to fetch Christ
down? or down into the deep to fetch him up? the word is nigh thee, in thy
heart and in thy mouth, and this is the word of faith which we preach, the
unction of the holy one given of the Father, whereby we need not to teach one
another 1 John 1. 1^ 1 John 1* 27 2 Peter 1* 19 Romans ^. 14
but as the anointing teaches us, which is truth and no lie, which is the sure
word of Prophecy, whereunto ye do well to take heed as unto a light shining in
a dark place, until the day dawn, and the day star arise in your hearts.

All people return within, give up your selves freely to be guided by that
light, that discovers to you the evil of your hearts, and none be discouraged
because you see an evil heart, but prize the love of God that discovers it to
you, and whatever the light makes manifest to you to be evil; wait on the Lord
Prover. 20 22 Lame* ^. 3. 25 Isaiah ^ 17 Matthew 25. 21
for power, and he will give thee power to obey, and in being faithful in a
little, more will be communicated from the Lord, so will the righteous law be set
up into your hearts, that will cry through your earthly and carnal hearts for
righteousness and judgment, and so will bring you to an account for every idle
Matthew. 12. 36 2 Co* 5 10 Isa. 57 15, 16
word, and all deeds done in the body. Look up unto the Lord against whom you
have sinned, and he will arm you with power to what he lays upon you, with
patience to undergo his will until all the powers of the earth in you be
famished, and slain under his righteous judgments; then will judgment be brought
Matthew. 12* 20
forth unto victory, that you can no longer live without the loving kindness
of your Father in Christ Jesus.

Now is the parable fulfilled, the little grain of Mustard Seed Matthew 13 31 32,
33 Luke 15 17* 18 19* 20
grown up above all herbs, and the little leaven has leavened the whole lump,
and the Prodigal starved for ever, if his father receive him not freely into
his house.

Thou that can witness this condition, stand still in the will of God, he
will raise up his seed in thee to trust in his name, and Isaiah 55. 3 Isaia ^
817 Revela 18. 4 2 C^. 6. 17
to delight in the eternal Covenant of love and life, he has made with thy
soul in the Lord Jesus Christ, and will guide thee by the word of his power, in
a way thou know not, forth of Babylon (where thou wast an inslaved captive
under the power Ephesi 2. 2, 3 Matthew 7 13
of the filthy beast, which is thy will; and the whore the mother of
Witchcrafts, which is thy wisdom, which inthralled thee under the power of
darkness, to satisfy the lusts of thine H^bbak. 2. 4. R^man 1. 17 1 John. 3.
3 Act. 15. 9 C^l. 1 13 2 Pete. 2. 9 R^velat. 15. 13 Revel. 9 1 6*
own heart which led thee to destruction) up to Sion, to live by faith in the
Lord Jesus, which will purify thy heart, and set thy soul free from under the
powers of darkness, into the glorious liberty of the sons of God, where thou
shall sing the songs of Sion, Hallelujahs and Praises for evermore, unto the
Lord God that sits upon the Throne, and to the Lamb for ever and ever.

To all inslaved, heard-hearted, and unbeleeving Jews in this Nation and
elsewhere, who are made drunk Revela 18. 3
with the Wisdom of the Whore, and bewitched through the abundance of
Sorceries, to put the day of the Lord a far off, looking for Christ's coming in
the Spirit, as the hard-hearted unbeleeving Jews in the letter, did for his
coming in the flesh, according to the promise; but they limited the holy one,
according to their carnal Wisdom, expected his coming in great Pomp and
Glory: and when he came in that poor despised way, contrary to their
expectations, they Luke 27 Matthew 13* 54 5* 5^, 57 Ma. k 6. 4
stumbled at him, and would not own him to be their Savior, but rose up
against him, and put him to death, Matthew. 27. 1, to 50. verse.
BEhold, you hard-hearted and unbelieving Jews, do you not look for Christ
coming in the Spirit according to his promise, as they did for his coming in
the flesh? but you limit the holy one, as they also did expecting Christ to
come in power and glory, according to your own fancies; and so puts the day of
the Lord a far off you, in rejecting and despising the counsel of Jesus Christ
the pure light in your Consciences, which lets you see every evil thought, word
and action, and cries behind you, This is the way walk in it; but you disobey
Isaiah 30 21
the light, and hearkens to the counsel of your hearts, as the Jews in the
letter did, that put Christ to death, and so you slay the witnesses in
spiritual Sodom and Egypt in your hearts, where Revelat. 11. 8
our Lord is crucified, in not regarding the counsel of Christ, which is that
light that shines in your dark hearts, which knocks at the door according to
his words, I stand at the door Revelat. 3* 20
and knock; if any man hear my voice and open the door, I will come in to him,
and will sup with him, and he with me.

Oh thou inslaved soul under the power of Babylon in thee, Revelat* 19. 4 2
Peter 1. 16 Colos. 1 27 Judah 1 Psalm 2 12 Matthew. 7. 14 2 Timothy 2 11 2 Ephesians. ^
22 Revel. 2* 14 Act* 26. 18 Revel. 2 9 10 Revel. 15* 3 Revelat. 19 1
come forth, mind the light in thee, which is the sure word of prophecy,
whereunto you do well to take heed, as unto a light shining in a dark place,
until the day dawn, and the day star arise in your hearts* stand not out
against this secret counsel of Christ in you lest you perish in your
gain-sayings; for if his anger be kindled a little, blessed are all they that
trust in him. All give up, give up freely to be guided by the counsel of the
Lord the light in you, believing in his power that is present with the light;
he will lead you daily through the Cross in the straight way of his sufferings
and death, where the old man will be put off with his deeds, and so you shall
have right to the tree of life, and shall enter with him through the Gates into
the City New Jerusalem, where you shall have communion with the Father and the
Son, and an inheritance with those that are sanctified in Christ Jesus, and
shall reign as Kings upon Earth, to the praise and glory of the riches of the
grace of our heavenly Father, to whom alone be all power, dominion, honor and
glory, for ever and ever.

FINIS*

