A DIALOGUE BETWEEN Duke LAUDERDALE, AND THE LORD DANBY.
D. GReat Sir, I cannot but congratulate
The just Submission of your stubborn Fate;
Which to your Honor has a Tyrant been:
But now she sees her Folly and her Sin.
Still may she prove most constant unto you,
And always pay what to your Grace is due.

L. Dear Sir, for naught can I commend my Fate,
But that she'th made me happy in a Mate.
And such I Will prove, even in Extremity,
Since we are Brothers in Iniquity.

D. My Lord, you very much mistake the Word.
We were so once: to that I do accord.
But now our Pardons for our sins are Sealed,
I think the Guilt is justly then Repealed.
Though we were covered over with Clouds of Sin,
They Are vanished now, and all our fears therein.
Now dare we our Protection claim as Right
Of Charles our King; who surely will, in spite
Of all our Foes, resolve to set us free:
Nor will he lose that Right of Majesty.
His Royal Word is past, we need not doubt;
His Honor will take care to make it out.

L. Right Tom; and, by my Soul, I Will never fear
Before the insulting Commons to appear,
And let them but affront me if they dare.
For all their humming noise, I Will make them know,
I Will sit above when they sha'n't sit below.
There will I still with Courage vindicate
Thy Honor, and subvert the unjust Hate
Of all thy Foes: nor shall they dare pretend
To say thou art not King and Country's Friend.

D. Pox on them; Let them go for a damned Crew,
Whilst we with Craft their Ruin do pursue.
Let them vote on, and we will still devise
To make them all a burning Sacrifice
To him, against whom they have made so many Lies.
My drooping Soul transported is to think,
When he does rise, how all these Rogues will sink.
With Vengeance we'll pursue them in Retreat:
We'll hash them quick, and let our Dogs them eat.
For Heretics we'll damn them whilst alive;
And then to Hell in Flocks we will them drive.

L. Thy Courage bold I cannot but commend,
For sure he is both our worthy Duke and Friend.
Let Us not despair, but briskly carry on
The Glorious Work we have so well begun.
Let Us then once more our Treasons all repeat,
And leave the Lovely Duchess then to treat
For new Pardons; to whom we need not fear,
The King will lend a gracious heart and ear.
Thou know how much she is obliged to thee,
Nor do I doubt but she our Friend will be.

D. Thy Counsel bravely elevates my Soul:
We'll practice Treason still without Control.
But that His Majesty shall never believe;
Or if he do, he quickly shall forgive:
My Duchess shall so all his Senses charm,
He never shall believe we'll do him harm.

L. By my Soul, Man, she is a most powerful Spell;
Were not for her, we'd surely been in Hell.
She is the strongest Pillar of our Hope;
The surest Friend to our brave Plot and Pope.
She is all Power, she is all Command:
By her Assistance we'll betray this Land,

D. Much Honor to her Goddesship is due;
But I Would saved her the labor, Sir, and you,
Had my Army, filled with lusty Fellows,
Not yet been disbanded by the Jealous
And mistrustful Parliament, Pox on 'em:
Presumptious Fops, to take that Act upon 'em.
But let that pass; ever long they will surely find,
They Would better been more Loyal and more Kind.

L. Saved me the Labor, Sir? What do you mean?
I never grutch'd my Labor or my Pain.
You know I had ten thousand Men at Call,
To join with you to work these Nations Fall.
If you compare our Actions in this Plot,
You Will find I come not short of you one Jot.
What Is all the noise the Rebels made of late
In Scotland? Did not I it all create?
Was it not on my Counsel first resolved,
The Old New Parliament should be dissolved?
Or we had both in Ruin been involved?

D. My Lord, all this and more I do allow,
And do my Faith to my Experience owe.
I never meant to detract from your Just Fame;
But to my death I Will still maintain the same,
You are a drudging Rebel; and, by Jove,
I Will never forsake you while I stand or move.
But now, My Lord, I feel my self not well;
I therefore kiss your hand, and bid farewell.

FINIS.

