A Dialogue Between An East-Indian BRACKMANNY OR Heathen-Philosopher, AND A
French Gentleman Concerning the Present Affairs of Europe.

LONDON: Printed and Sold by Andrew Soul at the Crooked-Billet in
Holloway-Lane, in Shoreditch, 1683.

A Dialogue between an East-Indian Brackmanny, or Heathen Philosopher, and a
French Gentleman, etc.
Heathen. SIR, I will not be so inquisitive as to ask what Accident or Occasion
brought you into these Oriental Regions. Be it either Curiosity, or Business, a
natural desire of improving your Understanding, or intention of Commerce, I
speak you heartily welcome, and shall to my power be ready to serve you,
esteeming it both my Duty and my Happiness, to do good Offices to all the
Creation, and especially to Strangers, as standing many times most in need of
them.


Frenchman. Worthy Sir, your Civilities have rescued me from that common Error
of thinking, that out of Europe or the Pale of Christendom dwells nothing but
Rudeness and Barbarism. I find no less Courtesy in this, than in the other
Hemisphere; and perceive People may be born at some thousand Leagues distance,
under different Climates, and where the same Stars are never seen; nay, which
is more, under various Religions and Rites of Worship, wholly strange to each
other, and yet may agree well enough, if they would give their Minds to it, in
the practice of the common Duties of Humanity.


Heathen. There is no doubt of it Sir; for the Modes and Customs of your
Country differ just as much from Ours as Ours do from Yours; and therefore we
are not for that variety to scorn or laugh at, much less hate and plague each
other; but rather impartially consider which is most agreeable to Nature, to
the noble divine Principle, and the real benefit of humane Life -- But waving
this Discourse, pray what is the present News in Europe?


Frenchman. That Question will lead us to the very Antipodes of what we were
discoursing of; for nothing is more frequent among us than Contentions,
Controversies and Wars.


Heathen. For what, I pray?


Frenchman. Some for Empire, some for Glory, but most about Religious points,
and the nearest way to Heaven.


Heathen. Now in my Opinion, neither of these things should administer occasion
for such Violences and Confusions. For if men considered the weight and cares
of Empire, those that are without it would rather fly from than fight for it.
And that Prince's Dominions are wondrous small that cannot employ all his
Virtues in meliorating his own Subject, rather than in invading, oppressing and
ruining those of his Neighbors. Nor can I understand, that any Glory is to be
got by destroying men. I think it is rather matter of Praise to beget them. Your
Alexander and your Caesar (for we have heard of their Names, and the former
spread the Venom of his Ambition even into these parts) made some Millions
Fatherless, yet could neither of them boast of one Son of his own, but both
dyed Childless. And then for Religion, that methinks should teach you quite the
contrary, especially your Christian Doctrine, which (I have heard) enjoins you
to love your Enemies, to turn the left Cheek to him that smites you on the
right, etc.


Frenchman. It Is very true, the Principles of our Religion are such, but the
general Practice nowadays runs quite contrary.


Heathen. And yet Practice is the Life of any Religion: If you do verily
believe those Principles of Christianity to be true, why do you not follow them
in your Conversations? If you do not believe them, why do you call your selves
Christians? If you do believe them, and yet resolve not to practice them, you
are wilful obstinate Rebels, and greater Affronters of Christianity than we
that do not make profession of it. Can any thing be more absurd than to turn
Earth into a kind of Hell, under pretense of driving men to Heaven? and to
commit Murders and Cruelties for the sake of the God of Life and Love? Alas,
Sir! the infinite Deity delights not in Manslaughter; Strife, War and
Contention enter not into his Tabernacle: Above, all is clear, bright, serene,
calm and quiet; it is in the lower Regions of the Air only, that Storms are
generated, and Thunder and Lightning break forth. God is no Respecter of
Persons, but (as your own Prophets say) every one that does well is accepted of
him; he causes the blessed and glorious Body the Sun to shine on the just and
unjust, and commands the sweet Influences of the Coelestials to fall upon all:
The Blessings of the four Worlds are equally distributed to all men, as well
Inferior as Superior. He sustains and preserves the universal Systeme of Nature
by the hand of his out-spread Providence; and when the Sons of Men, by their
sinful Vanities, Oppressions and Violences have awakened his Wrath, he does not
presently dart down the Thunderbolts of his Vengeance on their guilty Heads,
but first sends his Brackmannys to tell them of their Evil, and call them to
Repentance. And if Mankind will walk in the right Way, and dwell in the
everlasting Regions of Bliss, they must endeavor to imitate their Creator,
whence our Seers call Man the Image or Likeness of God, and the Horizon of both
Worlds, since in him the superiors and inferiors are united. Now if People
would study to be truly like their Maker, Violence, War and Oppression would
have no place in the World.


Frenchman. I perceive you are much for peace and quietness; yours is a
strange Religion indeed that will not allow of the Noble Feats of Arms, and the
Arbitrament of the Sword.


Heathen. For ought I can hear, your Religion allows the same as little as
mine, and threatens, that whoever uses the sword, shall perish by the sword.


Frenchman. And yet the Cause, or at least the Pretense of most of our Wars is
Religion; and it is by the Profession of Arms that men amongst us become great
and honouroble.


Heathen. If Killing be so honorable, Butchers sure with you are a worshipful
Company.


Frenchman. Butchers of Beasts are but meanly regarded, but Butchers of Men
are celebrated as the only Hero's.


Heathen. And after what fashion, I pray, do these Hero's live?


Frenchman. For the most part, they are such as love to eat to Gluttony, and
think that day ill spent wherein they are not drunk; their Discourse is nothing
but Boasts and Rhotomontado's, intermixed with such horrid Oaths and
Blasphemies, that modest men tremble more at their Talk, than for fear of the
fury of their Arms; wherever they come they carry Ruin and Confusion with
them, destroying Men and debauching Women, deflouring of Virgins, ravishing of
Matrons, Robbing, Plundering, firing of Houses, devouring what they can, and
destroying the rest is, their Profession and Delight; and this they call Living
at Discretion.


Heathen. If these be the Christian Hero's, I wonder what are your Devils? I
hope these are none of those that you said do contend so much about the Right
way to Heaven.


Frenchman. Yes, I Will assure you, none more ready to Kill and Damn all that
will not be of the Religion they pretend to. We have in our Country a parcel of
People called Heretics and Hugenotes, their Conversation is generally Just and
Honest, and they are Peaceable and Obedient to their King, and as ready to
serve him, and do good to their Neighbors as any: But they will not join with
us in our Religions, Opinions and Ceremonies.


Heathen. As how, I pray?


Frenchman. Why, they will not acknowledge our supreme Caliph at Rome to be
Infallible: They will not say their Prayers to a Statue, an Image, or a
Picture, because they fancy those fine things can neither hear them, nor help
themselves: They will not own that the Bone, or a piece of the Garment of a man
who is himself many Years agone dead and rotten, can Cure them of Diseases, or
preserve them from Dangers; But especially when we give them a piece of Bread,
and tell them it is Flesh, Blood and Bones, they think it is Bread still, and are
so impudent as to believe their own Eyes before the dictates of our Priests.


Heathen. Why! Do you your selves believe and practice these Absurdities?


Frenchman. Ye marry, and would Burn you too, if you were in some parts of
Christendom, and durst say you did not believe them as well as we.


Heathen. Then I bless the good and infinite Being, that I have no business in
such a Christendom. But pray proceed with the Story of your Hugenotes.


Frenchman. We endeavored to suppress and root them out by severe Laws, and
open Wars, but finding that Course ineffectual, we resolved upon a Stratagem to
cut them off; pretended to be very kind to them, and that we desired a perfect
Reconciliation, and to that purpose made a Match between one of the chief of
that Party and a great Lady of ours; to solemnize this Wedding, the principal
Hugenotes repaired from all parts of the Kingdom, and had the greatest
Assurances given them of Friendship. But one Night whilst they suspected
nothing, Soldiers being drawn together, at a certain Hour fell upon them in
all parts of the City, destroying Men, Women and Children, so that in two or
three Hours time, there were above ten Thousand of their dead Bodies flung
naked into the Streets, and the Channels flowed with their Heretical Blood: And
at that time Messengers were sent to other Cities and Towns to do the like, so
that in a few days there were above forty Thousand of them slain. Was not this
a noble expression of Zeal for Religion?


Heathen. God keep such bloody Zeal still from our Indian Territories. Do your
Priests allow of such doings?


Frenchman. Allow! Yes and applaud them too, they are the Men that excite us
to these gallant Exploits, and for a Reward for these Services, do forgive us
all our Sins, and assure us of Heaven.


Heathen. I know not what they may pretend; but this I know, that God is Love,
and that such barbarous Cruelties are to him an Abomination; And to speak
truth, so long as men continue Obstinate, Revengeful and Contentious, and
suffer the wild savage Nature, and bitter Spirit to reign in their Hearts,
neither Men nor God can forgive them; for Inequality and Discord cannot move
Equality: such a Spirit is contrary to the divine Nature, and therefore cannot
expect Forgiveness till it is changed and transformed. For men cannot draw nigh
to the Fountain of Benignity, nor be heard of the Sovereign Being, but as they
become like unto him, for every like is molded by its likeness; Blood requires
Blood, but the Merciful shall find Mercy from the God of Peace and Compassion,
whose Mercies never fail. For this cause we have for many Generations totally
abstained from all Violence, Oppression and Killing, either of Man or Beast;
for the Groanings and Miseries of those Creatures that suffer Wrong, are the
beginnings of Trouble and Sorrow to those that do it, and do certainly stir up
and awaken the fierce Wrath in Nature, as the Loadstone attracts Iron.


Frenchman. These are pretty Notions, but methinks impracticable: For if we
Europeans should live the Life you talk of, and lay aside Arms, and not
vindicate our Religion and Liberties by the Sword, we should be overrun, and
be made the greatest of Slaves. Have not you heard of the Inroad made (at this
Instant) by the Turks into Germany? Now would you have us stand with our Arms a
cross, and suffer them to overran all Christendom?


Heathen. I pray, what do you account the occasion that moved the Turk to this
Expedition.


Frenchman. Why, the Emperor of Germany in certain of his Territories, had
some of those Heretics that I described to you but now, and he would force
them to be of his Religion, and to compel them thereunto, seized on their
Priests, and clapped them into Dungeons and Prisons, where they were starved and
pined away in Want and Misery; and others he sold for Slaves, and sent
Soldiers amongst them to kill and destroy all that would not Conform to his
Ceremonies: Hereupon they took Arms in their own defense, and observing their
Brethren to live free from such Violences, and enjoy their Religion under the
Turks, paying only such Tribute, they desire the Turk to protect them, which
offends the Emperor, and so the Quarrel increasing, the Turk sends an Army
against him.


Heathen. This confirms and illustrates what I assert; for here you see this
Deluge of Calamity had not happened to Germany, had they not first stirred up
the Wrath, and caussesly vexed their Neighbors. It appears plainly these
Flames arise from Sparks of their own kindling; besides, Experience shows that
none are such Vassals, and subject to so many Miseries as those that give
themselves to the use of Arms, viz. to Guns, Swords, and the like Weapons of
wrath, and most of them perish by the use of them. For our own parts, it is true
we do live in subjection, and under the burden of many great Taxes, which are
levied on us at the pleasure of the Princes we live under; but then they
protect us from the Injuries of the Multitude, allowing us our free Egress and
Regress through their Dominions, and unquestioned Liberty for the Exercise of
our Religion and manner of living: They do not endeavor to peep into our
Breasts, and examine our Opinions, or punish us for not thinking as they do. We
go freely about our occasions; nor do they permit every Idle Fellow to take
away our Goods, nor give us abusive Words, or hurry us to loathsome Prisons; nor
are our Sons forced into the Wars: They threaten no Punishment to us, provided
we do not offend the civil Laws; for they matter not what gods we worship, nor
after what fashion, so we are just to men, and live peaceably, and pay our
Tribute. If they have our Money, they know they cannot want Men that will Fight
for two Pence a day: But we value our Health, our Lives, Liberties and
Religion, more than Money. We all drink Water, and the fragrant Herbs, wholesome
Seeds, Fruits and Grains suffice us abundantly for Food: Our Stomachs are
clean, our Appetites sharp, so that we taste the inward Virtue of each thing,
and sing Songs of Praise to the Creator, who affords unto us the plenty of the
Earth, and the pleasant Dews of Heaven; so that as Fish live in the Salt and
Brackish Ocean, and yet their Flesh is fresh and sweet; so we in the midst of a
tempestuous troublesome World live Calm, and as it were in Paradise.


Frenchman. I am glad to hear you esteem your selves so happy; there are few
Mortals that are so content with their Lot, but are whining, repining,
complaining, and always on the Tenter-hooks of new Hopes and Desires.


Heathen. And the reason is, because they forsake Nature, and let loose their
Desires, which having once cast off the Bridle of Moderation, run on without
stop or Bounds.


Frenchman. But I perceive you are for Liberty of Conscience, and that every
one may follow his own Opinion and Fantasy; and if so, we should have a mad
World; such a License is destructive to Government, and the very Nurse of
Rebellion.


Heathen. I do not well understand what you mean by Opinion and Fantasy,
People will think as they list, do you what you can. But this I know, that he
that fears God, and hurts not his Neighbor, oppresses not the Creation, and
obeys the civil Laws of that Country he lives in, and freely pays all Duties
and Tributes to the Princes that protect him, is a good and faithful Subject to
God and his King. Nor have we any temptation to Rebellion, for to us all
Governments are alike, as long as they protect us from Violence. I have read
something of your Europian Affairs; and if I mistake not, in France, Spain,
etc. where the Laws are to force People to be all of a mind, there have been
abundance more Rebellions, Insurrections, Plots and Conspiracies against the
Government, than in Countries, where Liberty of Conscience is publicly
allowed; whence I rather infer, that not the indulging, but restraining Liberty
of Conscience is the grand Cause of those Disorders amongst you. It Is certain,
every man ought to have Liberty in Well-doing, and to be punished only for the
contrary. And we Baunians scarce know any thing that is a greater Evil, than
for men to Contend, Hate, Envy, Oppress, Fight and Destroy one another, because
they are not in all particulars like themselves: For men naturally are as
various in their Intellects, as in their Shapes, Forms and Complexions; for the
Shape and Form of every Body is according to the Nature, Equality or Inequality
of the Spirit. The Lord has made all things to differ; there is not any two
things in the four Worlds alike in all particulars; therefore whosoever is
offended with another, because he is not persuaded, or does not understand just
as he does, is in truth offended with his Maker, who is the author of that
Variety. If two things were exactly in all respects alike, they must become the
same; the nearest similitude of things is made by casting them in a Mould, and
yet even then they differ.


Frenchman. You say right, and therefore to make all men's Understandings of
asize, our Churchmen prepare Moulds for them, viz. Creeds, Liturgies, Systems
of Divinity, and the like, wherein they cast and fashion all men's
Understandings, so that none but must own those, though he do not understand a
Word of them; nor must dispute them; though his Heart and his Brain tell him
they are false and impious.


Heathen. This is much such an Uniformity as I have heard in some of your
Books, was practiced by the Tyrant Procrustes, who dwelling near a common Road,
seized all Travelers, and carried them to his Bed, which was framed exactly
for his own Stature, and if their Bodies were longer, chopped off their Feet or
Heads to make them fit, and if too short, strained their Bones and Sinews out
with Engines to a due proportion; Was not this Gentleman a great lover of
Decency, Order and Uniformity? If there were not Variety, there would be no
Motion, for it is the various working Power, and as it were Strife between the
Properties that causes all Vegetation and Manifestation; if there were but one
thing, there would be nothing, or a standing still, which the Jews great
Prophet seems mystically to show, when he says, God made all things out of
Nothing: For there was no Manifestation or Appearances before God moved himself
on the Face of the Waters; which moving, seems to signify the Strife of the
various Forms, Qualities and Properties of the hidden Nature, without which
nothing could be generated. But here I must be silent, for we are counted
Heathens already, and I do not know what worse Censures may pass upon us, if we
too far explain those Notions, which though founded in Nature, are yet so
disagreeable to the Conceits and Practice of the Multitude. But this we are
sure of, that men ought not to hate or suppress any thing but Evil; for Man's
most deadly Enemies are within himself; whence one of the wisest of the Jews
Kings affirmed, That he that overcame his own Lusts and Passions was a greater
Conqueror than he that subdued a City.


Frenchman. For my own part I shall for the future be more careful how I
credit Reports; we in our Country are told by our Learned, that you are mere
Heathens, Infidels, Idolaters and Worshippers of the Sun, Moon, and all the
Host of Heaven.


Heathen. I nothing wonder that you Europians should be mistaken about us, who
live so remote, since you seem so little to understand the Opinions of each
other amongst your selves, every one misrepresenting the Sentiments and
Doctrines of all that differ from him. It Is true, we do highly esteem and
admire all the heavenly Host, and those Refulgent Quires of the Coelestials,
especially that glorious Eye of the World, the Sun, as being the Handy-Works
and Wonderful Powers of the incomprehensible Creator, and think it part of our
Duty to express our Gratitude and Veneration to the one only Fountain whence
all those amazing Wonders proceed; for he that contemns the Streams cannot
truly honor the Fountain. Do not your own Prophets teach you to Honor Rulers
and Governors, because they derive their Government from God* And if you do
not only worship and bow the Knee one to another (who are at best but brittle
animated Dirt) but also reverence the Works of your own Hands, as a man
clothed in goodly Raiment, and the like, how much more ought we to have in
high Veneration those wonderful Fountains of Light, Heat, Motion and Vitality,
which are the manifested Powers of God, and his upper Vicegerents and
Lieutenants over the lower World? Did not you tell me but now that you esteemed
your Hugenotes worthy of Death or Persecution, because they would not pay
Esteem and Adoration to a few painted Clouts, the Pictures of their
Fellow Creatures, which you call Saints, not knowing whether they be truly so
or not; and yet will you condemn our Brachmans, for directing their Esteem to
these glorious Masterpieces of the Creation? If you count such lifeless
pitiful things, as Wood and Stone, or things painted and fashioned by Man, fit
to be Representations of your Godds, and means whereby to enliven your
Fantasies and Minds to an higher degree of Devotion (which was the sole intent
of the first Inventers of those things) what regard then ought we not to have
of those living Powers of God, the Celestial Bodies, by whose sweet and
friendly Influences all created Beeings are preserved and nourished? What is
more exciting to a well-disposed Mind than to behold that glorious Body the
Sun, with the innumerable Train of Stars, and the various Species in the four
Worlds? or what does more ravishingly declare the Greatness, Goodness, and
eternal Wisdom of the immense Creator? This is a Book we study, in which the
grand Charter of Nature, and the holy Mysteries of God are recorded, and we
think we do not Err in preferring it before the endless and contentious
thwarting Volumns of the Talkative Philosophers and Wrangling Schoolmen.


Frenchman. I have been told, and you seem to own it, That you will not Kill
any of the inferior Creatures, nor eat their Flesh; but I pray, has not Man
power to do as he pleases with those Creatures? and were not the made for that
very purpose?


Heathen. God has made all Creatures inferior to Man, who has freedom to use
and do unto them all as he pleases, having free will to choose either Good or
Evil; but he that follows the better and leaves the worse, chooses the better
part, and is made God's Friend, and in Amity with all the Creation; for man is
a likeness of all things, and contains their true Natures and Properties; and
therefore whatever he gives himself unto, the same becomes strong in him, be
it Virtue or Vice: For which cause, our well-advised Fathers commanded us, our
Wives and Children, to abstain from all kinds of Violence and Oppression,
especially to those of our own Species, that thereby our Souls might be
preserved from being precipitated into Wrath, and so retain Humanity, and the
more noble Faculties of our Souls unspotted, as well as our Bodies rendered
wholesome, clean, and fit to be Temples for the divine Spirit, esteeming
Abstinence, Cleanness and Separation to be the true Paths that lead to all
external and eternal Bliss; it being in our Opinion an unfit, and altogether
unworthy thing, that the great, noble and immortal Soul of Man should so much
degenerate from its high and illustrious Birth, as to join or suffer it self to
be incorporated with the low and savage Nature of Beasts. Nor do we think it
lawful for us to heat our Veins, and distemper our Blood with Wine, since Water
more kindly quenches our Thirst; the innocent and fragrant Herbs and Fruits of
our Gardens afford us ample Satisfaction; and we should be ashamed to make our
Bodies the Graves of the inferior Creatures* And though our Princes are
sometimes harsh and severe to us, yet we pacify them with meek, submissive and
humble Behavior. And since as little as possible we can, we hurt not any
thing, therefore nothing hurts us, but live in perfect Unity and Amity with all
the numberless Inhabitants of the four Worlds, doing by them as we would be
done unto, whereby we dis-arm their Rage, and their Fury finds no place against
us.


Frenchman. But pray tell me how long you have led this kind of Life; and
whether your Sons and Daughters do follow your Religion and Examples; for
amongst the Europians nothing is more common than for Youth to degenerate, and
wander after the Multitude, and abandon their Fathers Rules, especially if they
should be but half so singular as you are.


Heathen. As for the Antiquity of our Course of Life, I think for the greater
part, I may date it from the Worlds Original. Your own Doctors teach, that
Adam, the first man, was placed in a Garden, and that the green Herb and Tree
bearing Fruit was to be to him for Meat; and do generally agree that
afterward, at least during the old World, viz. to the time of the Flood (which
was in the Year of the World, 1616.) eating of Flesh was not allowed or
practiced; and though afterward it was practiced, yet it is probable it did not
obtain with all: But there is reason to believe that still the better and more
reserved sort did abstain; For about the Year of the World, 3300. (near the
time that your holy Records mention Jerusalem to be besieged by Nebuchadnezzar)
we find the famous Philosopher Pythagoras flourishing, who expressly taught his
Followers (which by reason of his Parts and Virtues were not a few) not to eat
any Flesh, but content themselves altogether with Vegetables; and this great
man traveling for the acquest and diffusion of Knowledge into diverse parts,
left not our India unvisited, and there planted this wholesome Doctrine, which
ever since has not wanted Observers, derived down by a continual Succession to
our Times. It Is true, our Ancestors have obliged us to some things, which may
seem frivolous and vain, as not to kill any kind of Vermin, which are very
offensive to the Life of Man: But indeed these Prohibitions well regarded, show
their more deep Wisdom and Foresight; for they did consider, that their
Philosophy would not only be embraced by Wise Men, but also by a great number
of Fools (as the most part of all men are, in one thing or another) and if they
should have permitted them to have killed any kind of Creatures, the Foolish
would have concluded, they might by the same Rule as well kill others, and so
by degrees come to kill men, as most other Nations do. Besides, not only our
cleanly regular temperate Lives free us from many of those Vermin wherewith
others are troubled, but we take it for a Rule, that such as would live an
abstemious separated Life from Evil and Violence, must refrain from some things
that are lawful, as well as from those that are unlawful; as one of your
Prophets says excellently, All things are lawful, but not expedient. Touching
our Sons and Daughters, they all constantly follow our Footsteps, and it has
very rarely been known, that any of them have forsaken the Precepts of their
Fathers; being descended from a Root of Temperance and Equality, they are
naturally Sober and Temperate, for they use not Tippling-Houses, nor spend
their Patrimony in drinking Wine, Gaming, Debauchery and Gluttony; so that the
more Children we have, the Richer we esteem our selves, they proving no more
chargeable to us than Lambs do to Sheep: They all marry Wives of our own Tribe
and Religion, and there is no dispute about either Portion or Jointure: Their
greatest Pleasure and chief Recreation is to contemplate the Heavens, and their
glorious furniture, the Sun, Moon and Stars in their various Motions and
Configurations, as also the pleasant Gardens, Groves and Fountains, and to free
the Inhabitants thereof from the Tyranny and Bondage of men as much as in them
lies: And so through the whole course of our Lives, abstaining from all that
tends to Evil, and promoting what we can the good of the whole Creation; we
endeavor to imitate the adorable Maker and Conserver of the Universe, whose
Offspring we are, and in whom we live, and move, and have our Being.


Frenchman. You have not only gratified my Curiosity, but in several things
informed my Understanding. And I heartily wish that your Virtue and Morality
were crowned with true Christianity, and our Christianity embellisht with the
real practice of your Virtue, Temperance and Moderation. And so bid you
Farewell.


To show that the recommending Abstinence from Flesh, is no new upstart
Conceit, I shall here add those notable Verses of the ingenious Poet Ovid,
written above 1600 Years ago, in his Metamorphosis, as I find them translated
by Sandys, where he brings in the famous Philosopher Pythagoras (from whom the
Indian Bannians derive their Doctrine) thus discoursing.
FOrbear your selves, O Mortals, to Pollute
With wicked Food, Corn is the generous Fruit.
Apples oppress their Boughs, plump Grapes the Vine,
Thousand sweet Herbs and savoury Roots combine
With beauteous Flowers of most fragrant scent,
Your nice and liquorish Pallates to content.
The prodigal Earth abounds with genele Food,
Affording Conquests without Death or Blood:
But Beasts with Flesh their ravenous Hunger cloy,
And yet not all; Horses in Pastures joy,
So Flocks and Herds: But those whom Nature has
Endu'd with Cruelty and savage Wrath,
Wolves, Bears, Armenian Tigers, Lions, in
Hot Blood delight. How horrible a sin!
That Intrails, bleeding Intrails should Entomb!
That greedy flesh, with Flesh should fat become!
Whilst by the Livers Death the living lives,
Of all, which Earth, our bounteous Mother gives,
Can nothing please, except they Teeth in Blood
And Wounds, and stygian Fury be imbrew'd?
Naught satiate the wild variety
Of thy rude Paunch, unless another dye?
That good old Age, that innocent Estate,
Which we the Golden call, was fortunate
In Herbs and Fruits, her Lips with Blood undy'd;
Then Fowls through the Air their Wings in safety plied
The Hare then fearless wandered over the plain,
Nor Fish by their Credulety were slain*
Not taught, was Man, that fawning Treachery,
All hv'd secure, till he that did envy
(What Demon ever it was) those harmless Cates,
And cramb'd his Guts with Flesh, set open the Gates
To cruel Crimes. But first, these slaughtering harms,
A fire of zeal at holy Altars warms;
Enjoining Sacrifices with the Blood
Of Savage Beasts, which made our lives their food.
Thus the wild Boar for rooting up the Corn,
And leaving painful Plow-mens hopes forlorn,
Was thought to merit Death: Vine-brouzing Goats
Do next to angry Bacchus yield their Throats.
What harm have poor Sheep done, whose Udders swell,
And yield of Nectar a perpetual Well?
Supplying man with their soft Wool, and are
Alive than Dead, more profitable far.
Or what the Ox, a Creature without Guile
Inured to Patience and continual Toil?
He most ungrateful is, deserving ill
The gift of Corn, that can unyoke, then kill.
The Husbandman that Neck with Ax to wound,
Is too severe, that plowed his stubborn Ground;
So often Tilled, so many Crops brought in,
Yet not content therewith, ascribes the Sin,
To guiltless Godds, as if the Powers on high
In Death of laboring Innocence could joy.
Whence springs so dire an Appetite in man
To interdicted Food? O Mortals! can
Or dare you feed on Flesh? Henceforth forbear,
I you entreat, and to my words give ear,
When Limbs of slaughtered Beasts become your Meat,
Then think and know, that you your Servants Eat.
FINIS.

