A DIALOGUE Between a Yorkshire-Alderman and Salamanca-Doctor, at the Devil by
Temple Bar.
About Swearing.
Doct. HOW now Swear apace, how does our noble Knight of the Post?


Ald. How now Lie apace, Vicar of Tyborn and Knight of the noble Order of the
Halter, what do you at the Conference.


Doct. Well met noble Sir P. this is fortunate that we should be the first of
the Company, now we may consult of an Expedient in our present Exigence.


Ald. If there be any mischief on foot, thou art one of the first that will
have a hand in it. The first at the Conference, the first at the Devil, the
first in the Plot, and the first in Discovery, the first in Vilany, and I am
made the first Example.


Doct. Good Sir, Patience. The Protestant Joynor was preferred before you, and
the Protestant Cooper to avoid the same Destiny showed (...) fair piair of
heels, we must have Patience to follow. The way is open, ^here is no other
means left for your deliverances, for if it comes once ^o the Pillory amongst
all your beloved Brethren (for whose Interest you stood with the hazard of your
Ears) you will hardly find any that will be so civil as to stand up for you.


Ald. Art thou the Savior of the Nation, the Defender of our Lives and
Liberties, have thou saved our Necks from the Yoke of Tyranny and Slavery, our
Throats from a Popish Dagger, our City from Fire, and our Kingdom from
Invasions, and can thou not save the Remnant of a poor Delinquents Ears? Oh
Patience.


Doct. This is your Swearing, oh Patience.


Ald. Swear, if that were a crime where would thou be exalted?


Doct. Indeed Swearing is but a Venial Sin, as the times go now, but your
forswearing, and amongst the Brethren too. pa, pa.


Ald. Thou Buggering, Brazen-faced, Lanthorn-jaw'd, Tallowchap't Leviathan,
have thou sworn so many honest people out of their Lives, told so many damnable
Lies and Contradictions, and have thou the Impudence to upbraid me with
Swearing? I am beyond all Patience.


Doct. If I Swore and Ly'd to your knowledge I was paid for it, and if I was
forsworn a thousand times over, I was never caught in it.


Ald. Yes in every particular thou Sworst to. In the blindest Laberinths and
darkest windings of the Plot a blind Man may catch thee. Were not you caught
at Doctors Commons, before the King and Council and House of Lords, in every
Examination and in every Paragraff of your Narrative, were you not caught in
your black Bills and your Pilgrims, wast thou not caught in little Don John
and the Circumcised Parson, and what was your Black Boy Apple-tree-Will, Barley
Broth, Mum, Chacolat, Order of Magpies, Fire balls of Sheeps Fat, Tormentillios
and Tewxbury Mustard Balls, but so many Snares to catch credulous Fools,
wherein thou wast caught thy self at last?


Doct. If I was, I had the Wit or Impudence to stand it out. I was never
caught by the Ears, for being caught in a silly Lie.


Ald. No, thou art Destined for another Catch; but I wish I had had no Ears
when I first gave Ear to thy cursed Plots and Forgeries, I had not then stood
in this danger of loosing them.


Doct. It is but what your folly deserves, Was it not enough that you must
stand up for the Cause, and the Brethren, but you must stand up for a Wooden
Roof to your Copper Chain, the Pillory even to the hazard of standing upon it,
being not only perjured for the Brethren, but even to their Eternal shame found
guilty of that Perjury. Is this your Patience for the Cause?


Ald. If I am Perjured, it is upon the Evidence of others, but thou, as if it
were not sufficient to be proov'd perjured by others, must needs prove perjury
upon thy self, by thy own positive Testimony, for abetting many several
undeniable perjuries, in the Case of the Jesuits, Wakeman, Marshal, Carter,
etc. thou swor'st point blank at White Hall, thou saw Mr. Turner in a
Consult at Wild-Honse, and at his Trial thou swor'st it was at Fenwicks
Chamber; did thou not swear as Colemans Trial, thou never saw Mr. Langhorn
after April 78. and vet at Langhorns Trial, thou swor'st thou saw him Forty
times in July following, that was a Rapper.


Dect. Did not you swear Pilk -- on did not mean the Duke, when you clapped your
hand upon his Mouth after he had expressed the words? where was our Patience then?


Ald. Did thou not swear thou saw him at Mass in St. Jamses, through
fifteen or sixteen Stone Walls, and as many double Doors, in his own Closet?
That was a Swinger.


Doct. Was it not you and your Accomplices that put me upon that Sham to bring
him into the Plot? Made me your Hackney to swear and forswear, as the Devil and
Money prompted me? Come, come, I have not Patience any longer; if you allow me
not my Lifeguard and Ponsion as formerly, I can turn Cat in Pan as well as and
Whig Poet, and be an Evidence against you, as well as for you.


Ald. Thou have Shamed thy own Plots, and outswearing all possibility, art
already become an Evidence against thy self.


Doct. Well, well, commend me to Elkanah, to take up in time, his Ears had
hardly else atton'd for his Popish Successor. I Will write a Narrative I hear of
a great Citizen (...) coming over on the same Account, if they have Patience to
hear.


Ald. If the Wind be in that Corner, it is time for me to tack about for
Holland, not a Minute longer for my Ears.


Doct. Yet while you have 'em, have Patience to hear me one Word, I have been
lately with a Great Man in Drury Lane.


Ald. I understand you, and how, and how goes on the new Plot, I know you are a
Brewing.


Doct. I have not been there lately, I never pass by but Bowman the Dog has a
snap at me by the way. Sometimes they upbraid me with the Dukes Health, then
out of Derision they cry a Waller, a Waller, Pilkington and Patience, then
they hang a Halter out of the Window, and bid me remember the Protestant Joyner.


Ald. That same is a Nest of notorious Tories, well, if the Cause had gone on
our side, I had made the Dog too hot for their burning of Shaftsbury, but we
must Pray for Patience, and when I am gone, Pray still that the Lord may grant
you Patience to go along with you in the great Work. Farewell.

He was no sooner gone but the Company came in, when there began immediately a
great contest about setting a new form of Government, the Army and Militia,
which being different from that of the Doctors former Model in St. Omers, had
like to have raised the Devil amongst them: but Shad -- ll came in with his
Lute, and allayed the Evil Spirit.


LONDON, Printed for John Smith. 1683,


