A DIALOGUE BETWEEN A Papist and a Quaker.
QUAKER. MY Friend well met, I wonder where thou'st been
What have thou flow'n for fear thou should
Sure thy Religion en't so good as out be seen
We fear no Magistrates, not higher Powers;
The Light within us now so brightly shine,
That now methinks thy Tapers much declines;
Yea, Yea, my friend it is without all doubt,
Our Light within, that puts your Tapers out!
I find my Friend, that you have nor a Lay Man,
That can compare with any yea and nay Man.

PAPIST. Why do you tax me for forsaking those?
Who is they find me will my Corpse dispose,
First to the Gallows, thence unto the Gates,
Where some of our Saints have had their Fates,
There to be placed unto the view of such,
Who if there were a thousand, would not grutch,
But laughing say, here is the Corpse of those,
That would our King most willingly depose;
Forth from his Throne, and made it their Delight;
To Rob poor English Protestants of Right.

QUAKER. Why do thou think that we have no Design?
To make our power full as great as thine!
What though we do hold forth the Pope is naught,
And that no Bulls nor Pardons can be bought,
Youll find our Faith will prove to be as good
As yours, who by the publick's understood;
Before those people Protestants we roar,
And do exclaim, and say the Pope's a Whore
Of Babylon, yet you shall find,
That we are clearly of another mind.

PAPIST. Well done my Friend, it is great Policy
To cloak such choice Designs by secresy;
You by pretended Zeal have such a wile,
That may poor simple Protestants beguile.
They take you though you are Wolves, to be but Sheep,
And think by such they may securely sleep;
Not thinking such poor Innocents can be,
Such plotting, Firing, Blood suckers as we.
When if they should but search, I fear they would find,
That ye are Wolves, for murdering Sheep designed.

QUAKER. I pray thee Friend, now do but mind the Light
Which is within us, and does shine so bright;
It does put out the Light of others Eyes,
That they poor Souls, cant see their Enemies.
They are deluded by our yea and nay,
And think we always mean as we do lay;
But they will find unto their Detriment,
That we to ruin them are fully bent,
And only cloak our great Designs by wiles,
As Crafty Faulconers harmless bird, beguiles.

PAPIST. I find my Brother, you as Guilty are,
Of that which Protestants pretends a Snare;
Laid by us only, whom I must confess,
Were the contrivers of this wickedness;
Whilst ye assist us with this fine pretense,
That ye are mirrours of all innocence,
Which they believe, whilst ye do lie perdue,
Upon the Scout to hear what Plot is new;
Which when ye secretly do understand,
You will not fail to lend your helping hand.

QUAKER. My Friend I tell thee for thy future good,
I wonder much thou have not understood,
With what obscurity we do design,
The simple Protestants to undermine;
Surely my Friend thou have not quite forgot,
How formerly we managed a Plot,
We by pretended Innocense did cause,
The overthrow both of our King and Laws.
Yet still we are thought to be innocents,
Only we are condemned for Malcontents.

PAPIST. If thus ye have by innocent disguise,
Made King and Kingdom, Laws and all a Prize;
Or your Assistance we may make no doubt,
For Treachery once harbored never will out,
And if of subtle Plotters we grow scant,
We Will search amongst ye to supply our want,
But if we should do so a pox upon it,
The Pope will say it is Quakers that have don't;
Then all our Works by him will be despised
And we for Saints shall never be Cannoniz'd.

QUAKER. Fear not my Friend, we will Rob thee of thy due,
But let us weigh what we intend to do;
My Conscience checks me with a thousand stings,
And says it is heinous for to murder Kings.
Me thinks I hear the Blood for Vengence cry,
Of Charles the first, who innocent did dye.
And shall we then embrew our hand again,
In Royal Blood, nay let King Charles remain
To be our Guide, let him the Scepter sway,
And as he is Supreme, let us obey.

PAPIST. If once you talk of Conscience I have done.
For our Religion will allow of none;
The Pope allows of it, and says it is just;
We may contrive to please our carnal Lust;
And for Revenge we murder may commit,
And we do justly, when we practice it,
Our Doctor says a Dose of Royal Blood,
Against Distempers is exceeding good;
Shall we despise it then for this pretense,
We are afraid of checks of Conscience.

QUAKER. Thou vile pretender to the Christian-Faith,
Mind what the Spirit now within me says;
It tells thee thus, thou may'st-not hurt the King,
Unless thou vvilt thy Soul to Ruin bring.
Then offer not that Royal blood to touch,
One drop of which, will stain thy Soul so much.
Think not of the allowance of the Pope,
For which the Laws will noose thee in (...) Rope;
But rather think how thou thy mind may bring,
To love and honor Charles our Gracious King.

PAPIST. What fond delusions works within thy Pate,
Will thou to us now prove a Reprobate,
I thought you had been faithful in your vvays,
But you delude us with your yeas and nays;
Never more i will trust a Quaker for thy sake,
Thou to assist us once did undertake.
But now our Plot is Rotten at the Root,
You cry your Conscience would not let you do it,
Hence Quaker hence, I have no more to lay.
But this, I Will cautious be of Yea and Nay.

FINIS.

