DEVOTIONS In the ancient Way of OFFICES. WITH Psalms, Hymns, and Prayers FOR
Every Day of the Week, AND Every Holiday in the Year. Reformed by a Person of
Quality, AND Published by George Hickes, D. D.

LONDON, Printed for J. Jones at the Bell, in St. Paul's Churchyard, 1700.

TO THE READER.
IT is not the respect for the Reformer if these Devotions, which I acknowledge
to be very great, nor any thoughts of advantaging the Bookseller, for which I
write this Preface, but a pure and uninteressed desire to give some Account and
Character of this Book, which in one dress or other, has been sent abroad no
less than nine Times into the World.

It has had Four Editions unreform'd from the Roman Catholics, in the last of
which is added, The Office for the Blessed Virgin, which J. S. in the Epistle
Dedicatory before the Second Edition, assures us, was begun by the excellent
Author before he died, who intended to annex it to his Devotions; and truly I
cannot but wonder, who he was that durst undertake to finish a Piece, that this
Apelles, left imperfect, especially after so great a Judge of Sense and Style
as Mr. S. had said that -- It was so inimitably excellent, that scarce any
would be found in all respects able to match his Sense and Expression, or
finish it as it ought. It has had Five Editions more, as it was reformed by
the Reverend and Worthy Mr. Dorrington, and a great part of it has had diverse
other Editions in stolen Books of Devotion, whose Mercenary Authors, have
wisely concealed their Names, lest their shameful Practices should be proved
upon them. It now presents it self again in a new reform unto the World, in
which I do not doubt but it will have many Editions, and perhaps as many, as
any Book of Devotion in what Language soever, except the Psalter, ever had. For
though Mr. Dorrington's reform of it has very well deserved the good reception
it has found in the World, yet it was not altogether so acceptable to some
discerning, as well as devout Persons, who were skilful in divine Offices, and
curious in the Theory, as well as constant in the practice of Devotions. Among
these I have known not a few, who chose to mark with their Pencils, whatever
was amiss in the unreform'd Devotions, that they might use them for their own
private Benefit in the Author's own Method, rather than in that of Mr.
Dorrington, which in their Judgment was not so enflaming, nor fitted for the
great and delightful Benefit of mutual and alternate Devotions, for which the
divine Author (so I cannot but call him) seemed principally to contrive his
Book, though it is no less fit for solitary Devotions, than that of Mr.
Dorrington is.

Besides, they objected, that Mr. Dorrington had contracted the Four daily
Offices into Two, that he had omitted the Lessons; as many of which as are
Scriptural, the devout Author of this Reform has continued in the Version of
the Church of England; that he had not reformed the Office for the Dead; that
in the other he had left out many things, which they think as useful as any he
has taken in, together with the Versicles, Responsories, and Antiphons, as
Such; with which the Psalms make up that most venerable, edifying, and
elevating way of alternate or social Devotion, which was used in the best and
purest Ages of Christianity, and truly resembles the Worship and Devotions of
the great Choire of Saints and Angels in the Church Triumphant, that most
glorious Jerusalem, which is above.

Wherefore to oblige those devout Persons who desired another Reformation of
those Devotions, another is here presented to them in the Author's own Way,
from the Pen of a most Pious, as well as Ingenious and ready Writer, who has
not left out or altered any thing, but some few Sentences and Expressions,
which hindered those Offices from being introduced into the Closets and
Oratories, of the more devout Sons and Daughters of the Church of England,
especially of those who delight in the more Heaven-like way of Worship; I mean
in alternate or choral Devotion, which it is in the power of every devout
Master, or Mistress of a Family, or any two or more religious Persons, who
happen to live in the same House, or Neighborhood, or to Travel together in
the same Journey, to exercise themselves in at vacant Times, to the Honor of
God, whom they delight to Worship; the comfort and satisfaction of their own
Consciences, when they find their Souls so quickened, and delighted in bearing
their Parts in such harmonious Devotions; nay, to the unspeakable inward Joy,
and exultation of the immortal Spirits within them, which have ravishing
foretastes of Heaven in those Heaven-like Exercises, which make this Life much
more than other Devotions, resemble that which is to come.

But of all others, none have it in their Power to practice this most
delightful way of Worship in the Heaven like Fellowship of alternate Devotion,
to so much advantage as the Religious Societies, of whose Rise and Progress,
the World has lately had an Account, by the Reverend Mr. Woodward, Minister of
Poplar. It is to the Votaries of these, and such like Societies, that I
particularly recommend this Book of Devotions, which in other forms, has
already more than once been recommended to the whole Christian World. J. S. who
I suppose is Mr. John Sergeant, in the Epistle Dedicatory, of the Second
Edition, tells us, that it is the most substantial part of Divinity rendered
usefully Practical, the best Matter delivered in the best Manner, and that it
neither needs nor courts any Man's Patronage to set it off, as being above all
the Ends at which Dedications commonly aim, nay, above the World it self, as
consining upon its nearest Neighbor Heaven. The Reverend, and most Worthy Mr.
Dorrington, to whom the World is so much obliged for the first Reform of it,
tells us, in the Epistle Dedicatory, that it is a Book very excellent in its
kind, and worthy, as such, to be recommended to the World; that it is fitted to
possess Men's Minds with that pure and peaceable Wisdom which is from above, to
excite Devotion in the coldest, and most careless Hearts, nay, to possess with
a love of Devotion, our too nice and witty Age, as being rational, solid, and
ingenious in its highest flights. He thinks no Book of Devotion of any Author
of the same Communion comparable to it, and reformed from the Errors with which
it was first composed; he thinks it as fit to possess Men's Minds with an
affectionate, and powerful sense of the Truths of Christianity, as any Book
that can be met with, unless any one will except the Exposition of our
Church-Catechism, composed for the use of the Diocese of Bath and Wells.

But before I proceed farther in the Character of this Divine Book, I think fit
to give some Account of its Offices, with some Directions about the use of
them, which those, who are not versed in divine Offices, will not easily find
out.

Know then, It consists of Eleven Offices; One for every Day in the Week, One
for our Savior's Feasts, One for the Holy Ghost, One for Saints, and One for
the Dead, which the Author of this Reform has entitled, A Preparatory Office
for Death.

The Offices for every Day of the Week, though indeed they may be used on any
other Day, are appropriated to their respective Days, not only for the sake of
Order or Method, but for particular Reasons, upon which the great Author had
his Eye in their respective Appropriations. This appears from the Offices
themselves; as in that for Thursday, which is all upon the Subject of the Holy
Eucharist, and its Institution, because on that Day our Lord before his Passion
appointed that Holy Sacrament, and commemorative Sacrifice, to be a perpetual
Memorial, or Commemoration before God, as well as among Men, of the great
Propitiatory Sacrifice he made upon the Cross.

The Subject of Fridays Devotions, are our Savior's Sufferings, and our
Redemption by them.

Saturday's Office is upon the same Subject of our Lord's Sufferings, with a
particular respect to the Victory he thereby obtained over Sin and Death, and
the Powers of Darkness.

Sunday's Devotions are chiefly upon the Subject of our Lord's glorious
Resurrection, with some Psalms in it, which become the Christian Sabbath, upon
God's finishing the Creation, and resting from all the Works which he had made.

The Office of Monday, which was the second day of the Creation, is all
composed in the praise of God for the Works of Creation, and in celebrating his
infinite Power, Wisdom, and Goodness of the great Architect, who made the World
with infinite Art in Number, Weight, and Measure.

Tuesday's Office is made in the Praise of God, as Preserver and Sustainer of
all that he has Created, and particularly, as the Preserver, and Guardian of
Men.

Wednesday's Office is appointed to adore God, as the great Governor and
Sovereign of the Creation, who appoints every Creature its proper Office, and
guides all the Motions of the Universe, according to his own infinite Wisdom
and Counsels, so as to bring about his own glorious Designs.

The Office of our Savior is all contrived to set forth his Nature, as
Mediator, and Redeemer, and the Praises of his infinite Love toward Men, in
undertaking, and accomplishing the great Work of our Redemption.

The Office of the Holy Ghost is all in the Praise and Adoration of the Holy
Spirit of God, the Third Person of the blessed and undivided Trinity, as He is
our Sanctifier, where, after asserting his eternal Procession from the Father
and the Son, and his equality with them in Glory, the Author celebrates his
Praises in most divine Psalms and Hymns, as the Author of our second Birth, and
glorifies him for all his Gifts, and Graces, and Comforts to the Sons of Men.
More particularly for illuminating our Understandings, and sanctifying our
Wills, for helping us in our Prayers, and assisting us against Evil Spirits;
finally, for being our Director, Guide, and Counselor, for making our Bodies
his Temples, and for finishing the Mystery of our Redemption; withal, praising
our Lord for sending him in his miraculous Effusions upon the Apostles
punctually according to his Promise, and showing how every Person of the
blessed Trinity, as one co-infinite Goodness contributed to our Redemption, and
graciously agreed to complete our Felicity.

In the Office for the Dead every thing is said that the Subject of Death, or
our Preparation for it can require. There is set forth in most affecting manner
the Misery and Vanity of Man, as Mortal; the excellency of his better and
immortal Part; the happiness of departed Spirits; the moderation with which we
ought to temper and limit our Sorrow for our dead Friends; how nearly it
concerns us to secure our Peace with God before we die; with many things
interspersed, concerning the Resurrection, and the last Judgment, and the
impartial, and indispensible Justice of God in inflicting Death without
distinction, or respect of Persons, upon all Sorts, Ranks, and Conditions of
Men.

In the Office of Saints are described in most devout manner the Sovereign
Majesty, and Glory of God, as King of Saints; and Angels, the Glories of the
other State in the Kingdom of Heaven, the union of Prophets, Apostles, Martyrs,
and Confessors, and all the Saints departed in one happy Fellowship, with
Angels; and Seraphims; the wonderful Progress from Grace to Glory; the immense
Goodness of God who rewards such imperfect Services, and short Sufferings with
infinite Rewards, and the obligation which lies upon us to mention the Saints
departed with Honor, to commemorate and imitate their Virtues, to follow their
blessed Examples, and reverently to obey the Church in observing those
Festivals, which she has appointed to remember their Virtues, and recite their
Sufferings for our own Edification, their Honor, and the Glory of God, to whom
the Church of England, in her excellent Office for the Communion, first after
the Reformation, did, in most Catholic manner, offer most high laud, and
hearty thanks for the wonderful Graces and Virtues, which he had declared in
all his Saints, and by them bestowed upon his Church from the beginning of the
World.

Every one of these Offices has Four Parts; and every one of these Parts may,
as they are reformed in this Book, be performed in single, or solitary Devotion
in a quarter of an Hour, or little more, which make but a small part of Time in
every day to spend in God's Service, and may well be spared from our other
common Employments, or from our vacant Hours, wherein we do nothing, or are apt
to do ill, and are much better spent than in giving and receiving vain, idle,
and unprofitable Visits, or wasting our precious Hours in places of public,
and dangerous Resort, or long, and tedious Dresses, or foolish amusements of
our Thoughts, which so many times in the Day might be so nobly entertained with
the sublime, and ingenious Notions of this Book.

Two of these Four Parts are allotted for the Morning, or Forenoon, and Two for
the Evening or Afternoon, at such Hours as every one may find most convenient
for himself, if he is a single Person, or as many Persons agreeing together may
appoint with least inconveniency to themselves. If a single Person happens to
be engaged unawares in Business, or Company, or to be in a Journey, or Voyage
with others, he may retire with his Book for one quarter of an Hour, into some
recess, in an House, Garden, or Field; and a Master of a Family, that has
appointed Hours for Devotion, may order his Books to be laid at his appointed
Hours, and invite his Friends who come in to join with him, if they are such as
he may Communicate with, or they with him, or if not, with all Civility he may
borrow so small a part of an Hour of them, while he says his Prayers. This
Custom, if generally observed, would soon bring Religion, and Religious Persons
into Credit, Honor, and Veneration; and I hope no Man will be so uncharitable,
as to think, that while I thus recommend set Hours of Devotion, I am so
Superstitious as to put any Trust in the bare recital of a few Psalms, and
Prayers, and Hymns, at such and such prescribed Times, but that I do it to
restore the ancient practice of Devotion, which was in use among the Jews and
the Primitive Christians, among whom the distinction of Hours for Prayer was
not the effect of Superstition, but a rational Institution, in which they
agreed as it were by common Inspiration, as the best means of advancing Piety,
and Devotion.

Of the Four last Offices, that of our Savior is to be used on all the Sundays
in Advent, and the Festivals of our Savior, as Christmas Day, the
Circumcision, or New-Years-day, Epiphany, called among us, from the time of the
Saxons the Twelfth-Day, the Annunciation, Passion-Sunday, which may be
innocently observed, though not noted in the Church of England Calendar,
Palm Sunday, and Ascension-day.

The Office of the Holy Ghost is to be said on Whitsunday, Monday, and Tuesday.

The Office of Saints is to be used on all the proper Festivals, or days of
Commemoration for particular Saints, whose Offices are also here added by the
excellent Reformer of the Devotions.

The Office of the Dead is intended to be said at discretion upon all
Occasions, of epidemical Diseases, and Mortality, upon the death of our
Neighbors, Friends, and Relations, or upon the Anniversary day of the death of
any Persons, whose Departures we think fit to Commemorate, as long as we
survive them; or sometimes a devout Person may have occasion, or inclination to
say one or other of these Offices on any day of the Week, with great advantage,
which may be done, omitting the proper Office of the day.

As for directions in using these Offices, none are to be given to those who
use them alone; but they are wholly left to the government of their own
discretions. But when two, or more say them together, it is fit they should
observe some Orders, and Rules in their social Devotion, for which purpose I
propose these which follow.

First, As to the place, let it be some private Oratory, if any such can be
had, at least some retirement, if the House where they meet will afford any
such.

At Mattins both falling down on their Knees, let them implore the Assistance
of God; A. saying, Prevent we beseech thee, etc. Then both rising, let them say
together, In the Name of the Father, etc. Then let A. say the Invitatory, and
B. repeat it every where as in the Book. Then both continuing standing, let A.
recite one Stanza of the Hymn, and B. the other, or rather sing them if they
have skill answerable to their Devotion. But if there be so many Persons
present, as to make a Choire, then they may be sung in the Tunes of the singing
Psalms, as Mr. Dorrington directs, viz. Hymn 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 8, 9, 11, 13,
14, 15, 18, 20, 21, 28, 31, 39, in the more common Tunes; Hymn 7, 12, 16, 17,
23, 24, 25, 27, 33, 36, 38, 40. in the Tune of the Hundredth Psalm; Hymn 10,
26, 29, 30, 35, 37. in the Tune of the Hundred and thirteenth Psalm; and Hymn
19, 22, 33, 34. in the Tune of the Twenty fifth Psalm. Then let A. say the
Antiphon, and B. begin the Psalm, which they are to recite alternately; or if
they like it better, let the Antiphon be said at the beginning and end of the
Psalm, and the Verses of the Psalm be read alternately in the way of Psalmody,
according to the present practice of most Congregations of the Church of
England, which makes a most divine Harmony in Worship, betwixt the Priest and
Chorus of the People. But the way of reciting the Antiphon, and the Verses of
the Psalm alternately, is preferred by the Reformer, as well as the Author of
the Devotions. The Primitive Church had them both from the Synagogue; and there
are many Examples of both to be found in the Book of Psalms. At the end of
every Psalm, let A. say, Glory be to the Father, etc. and B. As it was in the
beginning, etc. both continuing to stand, and showing some other sign of
Worship by bowing the Head, or lifting up the Eyes to Heaven: For in all
Devotion, the exterior Worship is never to be neglected, and those stiff,
morose, and saturnine Votists, who are so sparing of bodily Adoration, in our
most solemn Services, refusing to stand at the singing of Psalms, and Anthems,
or to bow to God before his Holy Altars, act not only against the common
Notions of Mankind, and the Nature of divine Worship; but if they would observe
it, against their own Inclinations, which if not restrained by false
preconceptions, or warpt contrary to their bent, by perverseness of Humor, and
Education, would naturally prompt them, like other Men, to declare their inward
by their outward Adoration, and join the Worship of the Body with the Devotion
of the Soul. The Psalms being ended, let A. read the Lessons, and B. the
Responsories; or rather let the Responsories be marked with Stars, as in the
unreformed Devotions, and then let A. and B. read the parts of the Responsories
so distinguished alternately in their turns. The Great Hymn, called TE DEUM, is
distinguished to be said on Sundays and Holidays, at the end of the third
Responsory, or indeed on any other day, when the Votaries please, and at the
end of it, or the third Responsory, when it is not used, A. may conclude the
Mattins with the solemn Benediction, viz. The Peace of God, etc. But if he is
not a Priest OUR is to be used instead of YOUR, and US instead of YOU.

The same Invitatory may serve to begin all the other parts of every Office, as
well as the Mattins, and the same directions will serve to guide all devout
Persons in the use of them; and at any time, when unforeseen accidents, and
business will not allow them to say them at distinct Hours, they may pass
immediately from the Mattins to the Lauds in the Morning, and from the Vespers
to the Complines in the Afternoon. And it is to be noted, that any other
Prayers, or Forms of Prayer, for the Morning or Evening, for the King, the
Church, or our Friends, or Intercessions for any other Persons, or Petitions
for Things; as also any Forms of Thanksgiving, may be used in any, or all the
Parts of these Offices, as Prudence shall direct single Persons in their
solitary Devotions, or as Religious Companions, or Societies, who join together
in social Worship, shall agree among themselves.

Thus much I thought fit to premise concerning the excellency of these Offices,
and the use of them, and I hope no Friends to Piety, or Devotion will, through
prejudice, or other human Weakness of Understanding, dislike them because they
are Reformed Devotions. Far be this from any Man that would be thought wise, or
good, lest by the same Power of Prejudice and Passion, if God do not restrain
him, he should come to dislike our pure Religion it self, and its solemn
Worship, because they are both Reformed.

There are some among the Learned, as well as among the more common Sort, that
are subject to such Prejudices against the Church of Rome; they are apt to
think there are no true Fruits of Piety among those of that Communion, nor any
helps to Heaven can come from thence. But these Persons should consider, that
there are three sorts of Men in that Church, who are not so accountable for the
Errors and Corruptions thereof. Some through the powerful Influence of
Education, and the invincible, or almost invincible Ignorance, that attends it,
do not discern the great Faults of their Church, and God being merciful to such
Men's Mistakes, gives them his holy Spirit, by the assistance whereof they bring
forth the Fruits of true Piety; and among these we may find many Persons
eminent for Humility, Purity, Charity, Devotion, Gentleness, Self-denial, and
Resignation, and other Christian Graces, and where we find Men in dangerous
Communions, so secured against the dangers of them, by the special favor of
God, we ought to magnify his Goodness, and their Examples ought to provoke us
to emulation, and to imitate the Patterns they set us in good Works.

Some there are again, who knowing the controverted Doctrines, and practices of
their Church, and the heavy Charges we justly lay upon them, yet through the
modesty and humility of their Tempers, joined with a credulous Charity, and
great admiration they have for that Church, upon the account of some Such as
Antiquity, a clearer History of Succession, great extent over many Dominions,
number of Martyrs, being the Mother or Planter of many other Churches, etc.
glaring, but accidental Advantages, which other Churches want, they are
unwilling to enter into a thorough Examination of the Points in Controversy,
thinking it the safest way to make no strict Researches, but to deny their
Understandings in some things, as they do their Wills in others, in submission
to the Church's Authority, and to believe, as she does. This, as I guess, from
some Expressions in the Thursday-Office of the unreformed Devotions, was the
Case of that humble and charitable Gentleman, who was the Author of these
Devotions. He thought it hard to charge a Church of such eminent Prerogatives
with such great Errors, and could not believe, that so great a part of
Christianity, as she possesses, and so many guides of Souls, that are in her,
should all be in the Wrong. Thus his Modesty and Charity to that Church made
him forget the state of the Jewish Church in the Reign of Ahab, and of the
Christian in the Arrian Reigns. Nevertheless, we ought to magnify the abundant
Mercy of God, who, in infinite pity to his mistaken Humility, and too credulous
Charity, was pleased to give him the Spirit of Devotion, with many other
eminent Gifts, and Graces, of which we have an account in the Epistle
Dedicatory to the unreformed Devotions, by J. S. which is left out of the
Fourth Edition of them.

Others there are in the third place, who though they are convinced of the
dangerous Errors both in Doctrine and Practice of their Church, and that it
ought to reform from them, yet think it better to bewail them in private, and
daily praying for a Reformation, to bear with them till the happy time when the
Church shall refosm it self in Peace, and with Security to the Succession, and
Authority of the Priesthood, the Government, Discipline, and Patrimony of the
Church, and the just exercise of all her spiritual Powers, and Rights. Great
Numbers of such well disposed Men are, and always have been in the Church of
Rome, since it needed to be reformed, and the Christian World is beholden to
many of them, for their admirable Works, which we are to embrace, with all
respect to their Persons, and Memories, and thankfulness to God, who gave them
such excellent Gifts. These Men are none of those, who send us in the lump to
Hell, as Heretics, though they think us not Reformed in that happy manner,
that in love to the Church of God, and compassion to us, some of them seem
heartily to wish. One of them writing of us not long since, said, we are rather
to be called Non-Catholicks than Heretics; and though these Men do not come
over to us, but think it best to abide in that Communion, from which we had
great reason to reform; yet it would be not only great weakness, but
peevishness, and want of Christian Candor for us to refuse to pay that Honor
to their Persons, or Memories, which is due unto them, upon the account: of
their singular Gifts, or not give their excellent Writings, that acceptance
they deserve, especially when they are reformed.

Wherefore in commending the Author of the Devotions, and recommending this
reform of them to the World, I hope, I have done nothing contrary to my
Character, and the relation I bear to the Church of England, to which I would
to God every one that is of her Communion, wished as well, as I do. I am sure
such Books, as this, will do her no harm, but very much good, though it comes
from a Member of a Church, that will never be Friends with us for reforming
from her, till God shall give her Grace to reform her self. I have commended it
purely for its Worth, and Excellence, Upon the account whereof, I am not
ashamed to declare, that I intend to use it my self, and make it one of my
Companions wheresoever I go, as being, in my Judgment, a Book of Devotion,
which contains very great variety of sublime, and useful Thoughts in the most
proper, pure, and plain Language, and joineth the highest flights of Devotion,
with Liturgical Gravity, in a seraphick, but sober Style. Indeed, I think it a
just Pattern for Christian Devotion in all its Offices, being accommodated with
great exactness of Composure to devout Persons of all Tempers, and made, not
only to excite, but to govern, and regulate Devotion. It not only raises the
dull, and quickens the sluggish, and warms the frozen Spirits, but tempers the
fervor of over-hot Votaries, and secures them with great Art against the
Enthusiasm of their Tempers, and from running into the frenzy, and rapturous
Excesses of the mystical Devotion. Wherefore this Book being wisely and
curiously suited to Religious Persons of all Dispositions, and Tempers, I have,
I hope, without deserving any Censure, presumed to recommend it to Masters of
Families, and to Religious Fellowships, and Societies; in the last of which,
there must be Votaries of all sorts. Among the former I commend it more
especially to those, who cannot have the benefit of Public Instruction in the
Churches, or who cannot have it so duly, and constantly, as the Necessities of
their Families require. Such are they, who live at a great distance from
Churches, to which access is difficult in the Winter. Such also who have the
misfortune to live in the Spiritual Deserts, which Sacrilege has made in many
Places, where, for want of Maintenance, there is an insufficient Clergy, or it
may be none all. And lastly, Such who happen to live in Spiritual Deserts, of
another Nature, in Pagan or Mohammedan Countries, or in Christian Countries of
another Communion, to whose Assemblies they cannot go. The use of this Book, in
such destitute Families, will not only teach the Children, and Servants how to
pray in the best manner, but also instruct them in all the Doctrines, and
Duties of Christianity, and in a great measure supply the want of going to
Church. It is incumbent upon Masters of Families, in these unhappy
Circumstances, to be, as far as they can, Priests in their own Families; and
those who think fit to use this Book, by the benefit of it will with great
ease, make their Domestics truly knowing Christians; and if to the daily use
thereof they please to add, on the Lord's Day, the reading of the Church
Catechism, as expounded by the R. R. the Bishop of Bath and Wells, Mr.
Kettlewell's Practical Believer, and the Christian Monitor, they will, in great
measure, make up the loss of Parochial Instruction, and thoroughly furnish their
younger Dependants unto all Good Works.

Among the latter, I have more particularly commended it to those Religious
Societies, of which the Reverend Mr. Woodward has given us an Account. They
cannot, in my Opinion, better Sanctify the Lord's Day in their Families, or
Meetings, for which they worthily profess so great a Zeal, than by the
Sunday-Office of this Book. They cannot better prepare themselves for the
Worthy Receiving of the Holy Communion, to the frequent Reception of which they
devoutly oblige themselves, than by reading the Thursday-Office thereof, in
their Meetings, or in their Closets. And as they often meet together to
Discourse on Spiritual Subjects, so they will no where find more, or more noble
Subjects of that nature, than in this little Volume; which will also answer the
Orders they have made, to bind themselves to pray many times every day, and to
read pious Books for their Ediucation. In short, it is a Book fitted for their
Religious Conferences, and Devotions; and if at any time they think fit to use
its Offices, the Stewards who preside in their Meetings, may do the part of A.
in the Directions above given, and the rest making a noble and harmonious
Chorus, may perform the part of B.

But all this while I have been speaking of the Book, I had almost forgot the
devout Reformer of it, who is one that has a mighty genius for Divinity; and
though never bred in Scholastic Education, yet by Conversation with learned
Clergymen, and reading the best Divinity Books, has attained to a Skill in
the Sacred Science, not much inferior to that of the best Divines. It is one
who has already given the World one Book of Devotions, which has been well
received in Three, or Four Editions, and will leave it another, for which
Posterity will bless the Author's Name; one whose House is a Temple, and whose
Family is a Church, or Religious Society, and whose Hands are daily lifted up
unto Heaven, with Alms, as well as Prayers; one when Religiously observes all
the Orders of the Church, that concern the People, and wishes, that those were
better observed, which concern the Priests; one who more particularly keeps
with most exact Observance, all the Fasts and Festivals of the Church, and for
the great Ends for which they are enjoined; in a word, One who is a great
Example of Christian Piety, and a singular Ornament to our Communion, in this
degenerate Age; and among the many and most serious good Wishes I have for the
Church of England, this is, and always shall be one, that all her Sons and
Daughters were Such.

GEORGE HICKES.

A Preparatory Collect for all our Addresses to Almighty God.
Sundays Devotions.
PRevent, we beseech thee O Lord, all our doings with thy most gracious favor,
and farther them with thy continual help; that every Prayer and Work of ours,
may begin always from thee, and by thee be happily ended, and more especially
the Service we are now entering upon, through Christ our Lord, Amen.

In the Name of the Father, and of the Son, and of the Holy Ghost, Amen.

Blessed be the holy and undivided Trinity, now and for ever-more, Amen.

The Invitatory.] Come let us Adore our Glorified Jesus.

Come let us Adore our Glorified Jesus. Psalm 1.
BEhold the Angels Assembled in their Choires, and the Blessed Saints ready
with their Hymns; behold the Church prepares her solemn Offices, and summons
all her Children to bring in their praises.

Come let us Adore our Glorified Jesus. The King of Heaven invites us, and
graciously calls us into his Presence; he bids us suspend our mean employments
in the World, to receive the honor of Treating with him.

Come let us Adore our Glorified Jesus. To him we owe all the days of our
Lives; at least let us pay this one to his Service, a Service so sweet and
easy in its self, and so infinitely rich in its Eternal Rewards.

Come let us Adore our Glorified Jesus. Let us cheerfully ascend to the House
of our Lord, the place he has chosen for our sakes to dwell in; Let us
Reverently bow before his Holy Altars, where himself comes to meet us and our
prayers.

Come let us Adore our Glorified Jesus. Glory be to the Father, and to the Son,
and to the Holy Ghost;

As it was in the beginning, is now and ever shall be, world without end, Amen.

Hymn. 1.
BEhold we come, dear Lord, to thee,
and bow before thy Throne:
We come to offer on our Knee,
our Vows to thee Alone.
What e're we have, what e're we are,
thy Bounty freely gave,
Thou do us here in Mercy spare,
and wilt hereafter save.
But O can all our Store afford,
no better Gifts for thee?
Thus we confess thy Riches Lord,
and thus our Poverty.
It Is not our Tongue or Knee can pay,
the mighty Debt we owe;
Far more we should, than we can say,
far lower should we bow.
Come then my Soul, bring all thy powers,
and grieve thou have no more;
Bring every day thy choicest hours,
and thy great God Adore.
But above all, prepare thy Heart,
on this his own blessed Day;
In it is sweet task to bear thy part,
and Sing, and Love, and Pray.
Glory to thee Eternal Lord,
thrice Blessed three in one;
Thy Name at all times be adored,
till Time it self be done.
Antiphon.
This is the Day the Lord has made; let us be glad and rejoice therein,
Alleluja.

Psalm 2.
WElcome blessed Day, wherein the Sun of Righteousness arose and chased away the
Clouds of Fear.

Welcome thou Birthday of our Hopes, a day of Joy and public Refreshment.

A Day of Holiness and Solemn Devotion; a day of Rest and Universal Jubilee.

Welcome to us and our dark World, and may thy Radiant Name shine bright for
ever; May all the Earth be enlightened with thy Beams, and every frozen Heart
dissolve and sing.

This is the day which our Lord has made, let us be glad and rejoice therein.

This is the day he has Sanctified to himself, and called by his most holy
Name;

That in it we may meet to adore his Greatness, and admire the Wonders of his
infinite power;

That we may remember his innumerable Mercies, and deeply imprint them in the
very center of our Hearts.

That we may visit his holy Temple, and humbly present our homage before his
holy Altars.

Those Sacred Altars where the Sacrifice of the Lamb of God is daily shown
forth, and the Memory of our Savior's Love continually Renewed.

Worthy O Lord art thou of all our time, Worthy the praises of all thy
Creatures.

Every Moment of our Life is bound to bless thee, since every Moment subsists
by thy Goodness.

Shall others Labor so much for Vanity, and shall we not rest for the Service
of our God?

Shall we employ the whole Week on our selves, and not offer in gratitude one
day unto thee?

To thee, who bestowest on us all we have, and wilt give us hereafter more then
we can hope.

O Gracious God, whose Mercy accepts such slender payment as our poverty
affords, whose bounty grants so liberally to us, and retains so small a part to
thy self:

O make us faithfully observe our Duty, and render so exactly the Tribute we
owe thee,

That passing still thy Days to thy Honor, we may end our own in thy Favor.

Glory be to the Father, etc.
As it was in the beginning, etc.
This is the day the Lord has made, let us be glad and rejoice therein.

Thou have created all things, O Lord, for the use of Man, and Man for the
enjoyment of thy self.

Psalm 3.
When the Harvest Sun provides a Cloud, and seems to rest his wearied Beams;

He seeks not to save the Journey of his Light, but only spares the Reapers
Head.

Much less seek thou, O Lord, who made the Sun, and inspirest all
Creatures to represent thy bounty by the reserve of a day, to procure thine own
Repose.

Thou who created'st all things by a word of thy Mouth, and sustainest them in
thy hand without feeling any weight;

Who governest the whole World without perplexing thy thoughts, and always
remain'st the same unchangeable fullness;

It Is not to increase thine own Eternity, that thus thou take a portion of
our Time?

Thy Goodness friendly bears the Name, but intends for us all the profit of the
Day.

That the wearied hands may be relieved with Rest, and enabled to lift up
themselves to thee.

That the ignorant Minds may be taught thy Truth, and learn the way to
Everlasting Happiness.

That the Guilty Consciences may accuse their Crimes, and be absolved on Earth
to be pardoned in Heaven;

That the love prepared Souls may approach thy Table, and feast their Hearts
with that Delicious Banquet.

That all may speak to thee by Prayer, and hear thy Voice by the Mouth of thy
Pastors:

O Blessed Lord, what excellent Arts has thy Wisdom invented to bring us unto
thy self?

Thou take our Eyes by the beauty of thy House, and the decent Splendors of
thy solemn Offices.

Thou quickenest our Affections by our mutual Devotions, and meltest our Hearts
with the sweetness of thy Music.

Thou strengthenest our Faith by thy public Assemblies, and improvest our Love
both to thee and one another.

Whilst we all meet for the same blessed end, and by mutual Reflections increase
our Fervours:

Happy, thrice happy they O merciful God, whom thy providence has favored with
all these Blessings.

Who freely may enter thy holy Sancturay, and sing a loud their praises to thy
Name;

Who every day may wait on thy Altars, and there securely adore thy Person;

But where thou art pleased to deny these Mercies, Refuse not, O Lord, to
extend the greater measure of thy Grace;

And in all Afflictive Destitutions, grant us thy more extraordinary supply;

That at least we may build a Chapel in our Hearts, and Consecrate our selves
entirely unto thee.

Grant that the more we want of other helps, we may find the greater
Assistances from thee:

Forgive both the neglect and ill improvement of those Blessed opportunities we
have had, and now want to wait upon thee:

And be thou present gracious Lord, and fill our Souls with thy chaste Love.

Bring to my Remembrance those saving Truths I have learned, and direct my life
thereby?

Nor farther Motives shall we need to draw us, nor can we be destitute whilst
Replenisht by thee;

Since every place where thou art not present, by thy favor is Miserable; but
where thou art by the influence of thy Spirit, is Joy and Peace.

Antiphon.
Thou have created all things for the use of Man, and Man for the enjoyment of
thy self.

Ant. Has the Almighty Goodness made all things for us, and shall we do nothing
for him, nothing for our selves?

Psalm 4.
COme let us lay aside the Cares of the World, and take into our minds the Joys
of Heaven.

Let us empty our heads of all other Thoughts, and prepare that upper Room to
entertain our God.

Retiring from the many Distractions of this World, and closely recollecting
all the Forces of our Souls.

So to pursue in earnest that one Necessary Work, the securing to our selves
the Kingdom of Heaven.

Why should we thus neglect sacred Science, and be busy in every thing but our
own Salvation?

Why should we forsake the real Substance, to embrace an empty Fancy?

Miserable are they, O Lord, who study all things else, and never taste thy
Sweetness.

Miserable, though their Skill can number the Stars, and trace out the Way of the
Planets.

To know thee, Lord, is to be truly Wise, and to contemplate thee, the highest
Learning.

But, O thou glorious God of Truth, in whom the Treasures of Knowledge are all
laid up.

Unless thou draw the Curtain from before our Eyes, and drive away the Clouds
that intercept our Sight,

Never shall we see those Heavenly Mysteries, nor ever discern the Beauty of
thy Providence.

Send forth thy Light, O thou Morning Star, and lead us to thy Holy Hill.

Send forth thy Truth, O uncreated Wisdom, and bring us to thy Blessed
Tabernacle.

Show us thy Self, O blessed Jesus, and in thee we shall behold all that we can
wish.

Only so much we beg, to conceive of thy Majesty, as may move our hearts to
seek thee.

Only so much of thy Approachable Deity as may guide our Souls to find thee.

If we may not know thee clearly here, let us know thee so much, as to long to
know thee more.

If we cannot love thee perfectly, let us love thee so much, as to desire to
love thee more.

Let us so love and know thee here, O thou sovereign Bliss of our Souls,

That hereafter we may know thee better, and love and enjoy thee for ever.

Glory be to the Father, etc.
As it was in the beginning, etc.
First Lesson, 1 Cor. 15. 20. and Col. 3.
BUT now Christ is risen from the dead, and become the first Fruits of them
that slept.

For since by Man came Death, by Man came also the Resurrection from the dead.

For as in Adam all died, even so in Christ shall all be made alive.

If ye then be risen with Christ, seek those things that are above, where
Christ sits on the right hand of God.

Set your affections on things above, not on things on the Earth.

For you are dead, and your life is hid with Christ in God.

When Christ, who is your life, shall appear, then shall ye also appear with
him in Glory.

Mortify therefore your Members that are upon the Earth; Fornication,
Uncleanness, Inordinate Affection, Evil Concupiscence, and Covetousness, which
is Idolatry:

For which things sake the wrath of God comes on the Children of disobedience.

In the which you also walked when you lived in them.

But now you also put off all these; Anger, Wrath, Malice, Blasphemy, Filthy
Communication out of your mouth.

Lie not one to another, seeing that you have put off the Old Man with his
deeds;

And have put on the New Man, which is renewed in Knowledge, after the Image of
him that created him.

Where there is neither Greek nor Jew, Circumcision nor Uncircumcision,
Barbarian, Scythian, Bond or Free, but Christ is all in all.

Responsory.] O Glorious Jesus, in whom we live, and without whom we die,
mortify in us all Sensual Desires, and quicken our hearts with thy holy Love;
that we no longer esteem the Vanities of the World, but place our affections
entirely on Thee; Who did die for our Sins, and rise again for our
Justification. O thou, our only hope and portion in the Land of the Living, may
our Thoughts and Discourses still be of thee, our Works and Sufferings all for
thee; Who did die for our Sins, and rise again for our Justification

Second Lesson, Col. 3. 12.
PUT on therefore (as the elect, of God, holy, and beloved) bowels of mercies,
kindness, humbleness of mind, meekness, long-suffering;

Forbearing one another, and forgiving one another, if any man have a quarrel
against any: even as Christ forgave you, so also do ye.

And above all things put on Charity, which is the Bond of Perfectness.

And let the peace of God rule in your hearts, to the which also ye are called
in one body; and be ye thankful.

Let the word of God dwell in you richly in all wisdom; teaching and
admonishing one another in Psalms and Hymns, and Spiritual Songs, singing with
grace in your hearts unto the Lord.

And whatsoever ye do in word and deed, do all in the Name of the Lord Jesus,
giving thanks to God and the Father by him.

Wives be subject unto your own Husbands, as it is fit in the Lord.

Husbands love your Wives, and be not bitter against them.

Children obey your Parents in all things, for this is well-pleasing unto the
Lord.

Fathers provoke not your Children to anger, lest they be discouraged.

Servants obey in all things your Masters according to the flesh; not with
Eyeservice, as Men-pleasers, but in singleness of heart, fearing God.

And whatsoever you do, do it heartily as to the Lord, and not as unto Men;

Knowing that you shall receive of the Lord the reward of the Inheritance: For
ye serve the Lord Christ.

But he that does wrong, shall receive for the wrong which he has done; and
there is no respect of Persons.

Respons.] Open thou our Eyes, O Lord, that we may see the beauty of thy
Commands; how wise and sweet they are in themselves, how necessary and
beneficial unto us while they improve our Felicity here, and entitle us to that
of hereafter. Guide thou our Lives, O Lord, in the ways of thy Precepts, that
by observing faithfully these excellent Rules, we may be all every where happy.

Third Lesson, part of the 12th and 13th of the Hebrews.
LET us lay aside every weight, and the Sin that does so easily beset us, and
let us run with patience the Race that is set before us,

Looking unto Jesus the Author and Finisher of our Faith; who for the Joy that
was set before him, endured the Cross, despising the shame, and is set down at
the right hand of the Throne of God.

For consider him that endured such Contradiction of Sinners against himself,
lest ye be wearied and faint in your minds.

Ye have not yet resisted unto Blood, striving against Sin.

And you have forgot the Exhortation, which speaks unto you, as unto
Children, My Son, despise not thou the Chastening of the Lord, nor faint when
thou art rebuked of him.

For whom the Lord loves, he chasteneth, and scourges every Son whom he
receives.

Now no chastening for the time seems to be joyous, but grievous;
nevertheless afterward it yields the peaceable fruit of Righteousness unto
them which are exercised thereby.

Follow Peace with all men, and Holiness, without which no man shall see the
Lord:

Looking diligently, lest any man fail of the Grace of God; lest any root of
Bitterness springing up, trouble you, and thereby many be defiled.

Be not forgetful to entertain Strangers, for thereby some have entertained
Angels unawares.

Remember them that are in Bonds, as bound with them; and them which suffer
Adversity, as being your selves also in the Body.

Let your Conversation be without Covetousness, and be contented with such
things as you have; for he has said, I will never leave thee, nor forsake thee.

So that we may boldly say, The Lord is my helper, and I will not fear what Man
can do unto me.

Now the God of Peace, who brought again from the dead our Lord Jesus Christ,
the great Shepherd of the Sheep, through the blood of the everlasting Covenant,

Make you perfect in every good work, to do his Will, working in you that which
is well-pleasing in his sight, through Jesus Christ; to whom be Glory for ever
and ever. Amen.

Respons.] Thither, O my Soul, let us still be going, where once to arrive, is
always to be at Rest: There let us dwell already in hope, where once to enjoy,
is always to be happy: Since whatever we desire we are sure to have, and
whatever we have can never be taken from us. Let us believe, and obey, and
suffer; let us read, meditate and pray: Heaven is a reward worth all our pains;
since whatever we desire we are sure to have, and whatever we have can never be
taken from us.

Glory be to the Father, etc.
As it was in the beginning, etc.
Te Deum Laudamus.
WE praise thee, O God: we acknowledge thee to be the Lord.

All the earth does worship thee: the Father everlasting.

To thee all Angels cry aloud: the Heavens, and all the Powers therein.

To thee Cherubin, and Seraphin: continually do cry,

Holy, holy, holy: Lord God of Sabbath.

Heaven and Earth are full of the Majesty: of thy Glory.

The glorious Company of the Apostles: praise thee.

The goodly Fellowship of the Prophets: praise thee.

The noble Army of Martyrs: praise thee.

The holy Church throughout all the World: does acknowledge thee;

The Father: of an infinite Majesty;

Thine honorable, true: and only Son;

Also the Holy Ghost: the Comforter.

Thou art the King of Glory: O Christ.

Thou art the everlasting Son: of the Father.

When thou tookest upon thee to deliver Man: thou did not abhor the Virgins
Womb.

When thou had overcome the sharpness of Death: thou did open the Kingdom
of Heaven to all Believers.

Thou sit at the right hand of God: in the Glory of the Father.

We believe that thou shall come: to be our Judge.

We therefore pray thee help thy Servants: whom thou have redeemed with thy
precious Blood.

Make them to be numbered with thy Saints: in Glory everlasting.

O Lord, save thy People: and bless thine Heritage.

Govern them: and lift them up for ever.

Day by day: we magnify thee;

And we worship thy Name: ever World without end.

Vouchsafe, O Lord: to keep us this Day without Sin.

O Lord, have mercy upon us: have mercy upon us.

O Lord, let thy mercy lighten upon us: as our trust is thee.

O Lord, in thee have I trusted: let me never be confounded.

O God make speed to save us; O Lord make haste to help us.

Invitatory.]
Come let us Adore our Glorified Jesus.

Psalm 5.
SIng unto our Lord a Psalm of Joy; sing Praises to the God of our Salvation.

Sing with a loud and cheerful voice; sing with a glad and thankful heart.

Say to the weak in Spirit, be strong; and unto the sorrowful, be of good
comfort.

Tell all the World this Soul-reviving Truth; and may their hearts within them
leap to hear it.

Tell them, the Lord of Life is risen again, and has clothed himself with
immortal Glory.

He made the Angels Messengers of his Victory; and vouchsafed even himself to
bring us the joyful News.

How many ways did thy Mercy invent; O thou wise Contriver of all our Happiness?

To convince thy Followers into this blessed belief; and settle in their hearts a
firm ground of hope.

Thou appearedst to the holy Women in their return from the Sepulcher; and
openedst their Eyes to know and adore thee.

Thou overtookedst in the Way, the two that discoursed of thee, and made their
hearts burn within them to hear thee.

Thou show thy self on the steadfast Shore, to thy weary Disciples laboring
at Sea:

Laboring all Night, alas, in vain; without the Blessing of their beloved
Jesus:

Thou shew'd'st thy self, and told'st them who thou were, in the kind known
Token of a beneficial Miracle.

Through the Doors, though shut, thou swiftly passed'st, to carry Peace to thy
comfortable Friends;

To encourage their Fears with thy powerful Presence, and secure their Faith by
thy Charitable Arguments.

How did thou condescend to Eat before them, and invite them to touch thy
impassible Body!

How did thou sweetly provoke that Incredulous Servant to thrust his Hand
into thy wounded Side!

Actions, we know, unfit for thy Glorified State; but absolutely necessary for
our slow belief.

How often, O my gracious Lord, in those blessed forty Days, did thy Charity
cast to meet with thy Disciples!

That thou might teach them still some excellent Truths, and imprint still
deeper thy Love in their hearts. Discoursing perpetually of the Kingdom of
Heaven, and establishing means to bring us thither.

At last, when all thy glorious Task was done, and thy parting Hour from this
Earth approached;

Thou tenderly gatheredst thy Children about thee, and in their full sight
went up to Heaven;

Leaving thy dearest Blessings on their heads, and promising them a Comforter
to supply thine Absence.

O how Adorable are thy Counsels, O Lord! how strangely endearing are the ways
of thy Love!

Say now, my Soul, is not this Evidence clear enough to answer all our darkest
Doubts? Is not this Hope abundantly sufficient to sweeten all our bitterest
Sorrows?

What, though we mourn, or be afflicted here; and sigh under the miseries of
this World for a time? We are sure our Tears will be one day turned into Joy;
and that Joy none shall take from us.

What though our Bodies be crumbled into Dust; and that Dust blown about over the
face of the Earth?

Yet we undoubtedly know our Redeemer lives; and shall appear in brightness at
the last great Day.

He shall appear in the midst of innumerable Angels, and with these very Eyes
we shall see him:

We shall see him in whom we have so long believed; we shall find him whom we
have so often sought. We shall possess him whom our Souls have loved, and be
united to him for ever, who is the End of all our Being.

Glory be the Father, etc.
As it was in the beginning, etc.
Psalm 6.
RAise thy head O my Soul; look up and behold the Glory of thy Crucified
Savior.

He that was dead and laid in the Grave low enough to prove himself Man,

Is risen again and ascended into Heaven, high enough to prove himself God.

He is risen, and made the Light his Garment, and commanded the Clouds to be
the Chariots of his Triumph.

The Gates of Heaven obeyed their Lord; and the Everlasting Doors opened to the
King of Glory.

Enter bright King attended with thy beauteous Angels; and the glad Train of
thy new delivered Captives.

Enter and re-possess thy Ancient Throne; and Reign Eternally at the Right hand
of the Father.

May every Knee bow low at thy Exalted Name; and every Tongue confess thy Glory.

May all created Nature adore thy power; and the Church of thy Redeemed exult
in thy Goodness.

Whom have we in Heaven O Lord but thee, who expressly wentest thither to make
way for thy Followers?

What have we on Earth, but our Hope by following thee, to arrive at last where
thou art gone before us?

O Glorious Jesus, our Strength, our Joy, and the immortal life of all our
Souls!

Be thou the principal subject of all our Studies; and daily entertainment of
our most serious Thoughts.

Draw us dearest Lord from the World and our selves; that we be not entangled
with any earthly desires.

Draw us after thee, and the odor of thy sweetness; that we may run with
delight the ways of thy Commands.

Draw us up to thee on thy Throne of bliss; that we may see thy Face, and
rejoice with thee for ever in thy Kingdom.

Glory be to the Father, etc.
As it was in the beginning, etc.
Psalm 7.
WHy should our hearts still dwell upon Earth, since the Treasure of our hearts
is returned to Heaven?

Since our Glorified Jesus is ascended above; to prepare us a place in his own
Kingdom?

A place of Rest and secure Peace, where we shall see and praise, and adore him
for ever:

A place of Joy and everlasting Fruition; where we shall love and possess, and
delight in him for ever.

O happy we and our poor Souls, if once admitted to that blissful Vision!

If once those Heavenly Portals unfold their Gates; and let us in to the Joys
of the Lord.

How will our Spirits be ravished within themselves; to reflect on the fullness
of their own Beatitude!

How shall we all rejoice in one another felicity; but infinitely more in the
infinitely greater felicity of our God!

O Heaven! toward thee we lift up our Languishing Heads, and with longing
Hearts and stretched out Hands, reach at thy Glories.

When, O thou finisher of all our hopes; when shall we once behold that
incomparable Light?

O Light shine thou perpetually in our Eyes; that thy brightness may darken the
false Luster of the World.

O Light shed thou thy Flames in our Hearts; that thy heat may consume all
other desires.

That we may burn continually with the chaste love of thee, till thine own
bright day appear;

Till we be called from this Veil of Darkness, into the glorious presence of
the living God.

To see him that made the Heavens and the Earth; and disposes all Creatures
into such beauteous Order;

To see him who first gave us our being, then governed us in our way, and
brought us at length to so blessed an end.

Mean while, O gracious Lord, the crown of all thy Saints, and only expectation
of thy faithful Servants!

Make us entertain our life with the comfort of this hope, and our hope with
the assurance of thy promises.

Make us still every day more perfectly understand our own great Duty, and thy
infinite Love.

Make us continually meditate the advancement of thy Glory, and invite all the
World to sing thy praises.

Praise our Lord O ye holy Angels! praise him O ye happy Saints!

Praise him O ye faithful departed in his Grace! praise him O ye living who
subsist by his Mercy!

Praise him in the vast immensity of his Power; praise him in the admirable
Wisdom of his Providence.

Praise him in the blessed effects of his Goodness; praise him in the
infiniteness of all his Attributes.

Be thou for ever thine own praise, O Glorious God! and to all the felicities
thou essentially possessest, may every Creature say, Amen.

Glory be to the Father, etc.
As it was in the, etc.
Antiphon.
O how Adorable are thy Counsels, O Lord, how strangely endearing are the ways
of thy love, Alleluja.

1 Peter 1. 3.
Blessed be the God and Father of our Lord Jesus Christ, which according to his
abundant Mercy, has begotten us again unto a lively hope, by the Resurrection
of Jesus Christ from the dead.

Hymn 2.
Wake, my Soul, rise from this Bed
Of dull and sluggish Earth,
Quickly rise, lift up thy head,
And see thy Lord's new Birth.
Once he came, O Blessed He!
Born of a Virgins Womb;
Now he comes (both times for thee)
Sprung from a Virgin Tomb.
Lo he rises fresh and bright,
Incircled round with Stars;
Which from him take all their Light,
And from his Glorious Scars.
Still as he his Progress makes,
Up to his Heaven again;
Each blessed Saint his Music takes,
And follows in his Train.
Thus together they ascend,
Till at Heaven's Gate they come,
Where the Angels all attend,
To bid him welcome home.
Soon they know again their King,
Soon they his call obey;
All the Quires come forth to sing,
And crown with Mirth the Day.
Come my Soul let us rejoice,
Let us our Consort bring,
Up to Heaven lets lift our Voice,
And with the Angels sing.
Glory, Honor, Power and Praise,
To the Mysterious three;
As at the first beginning was,
May now and ever be.
Antiphon.
Why seek ye the Living among the Dead? He is not here, he is gloriously
ascended, and the Heavens have received him, Alleluja, Alleluja

V. Our Lord is risen and ascended indeed:

R. The First Fruits of them that die in his Love.

The Prayer.
O God, who have glorified our victorious Savior with a visible Triumphant
Resurrection from the Dead, and Ascension into Heaven, where he sits at thy
Right Hand, the World's Supreme Governor and final Judge; grant, we beseech
thee, that his Triumphs and Glories may ever shine in our Eyes, to make us more
clearly see through his Sufferings, and more courageously wade through our own;
being assured by his Example that if we endeavor to live and die like him,
purely for the advance of thy Love in our selves and others, thou will raise
again our dead Bodies too, and conforming them to this glorious Body, call us
up above the Clouds, and give us possession of thy Everlasting Kingdom; through
the same Lord Jesus Christ thy Son, who with thee and the Holy Ghost, lives
and reigns One God World without end, Amen.

Sunday Vespers.
In the Name of the Father, and of the Son, and of the Holy Ghost.

Blessed be the holy and undivided Trinity now and for evermore, Amen.

V. O God make speed to save us;

R. O Lord make haste to help us.

Psalm 8.
LET them, O Lord, seek other Delights who expect no Felicity from thee.

Let them fill up their Time with other Employments, who think thy Rewards not
worth their Labor.

As for thy Servants, our chief Content shall be to meditate the Glories
prepared for us Above.

All the few Years we live, shall spend themselves to purchase that One Eternal
Day.

That Day whose Brightness knows no Night; nor ever fears the least Eclipse.

Whose cheerful Brow no Cloud o'ercasts; nor Storm molests the Passage of its
Rays.

But still shines on serene and clear; and fills with Splendour that spacious
Place.

It needs not the fading Luster of our Sun; nor the borrowed Silver of the Moon.

The Sun that rises there, is the Lamb; and the Light that shines, is the Glory
of God.

O how beauteous Truths are sung of thee, thou City of the King of Heaven!

Thy Walls are raised with precious Stones; and every Gate is as one rich Pearl.

Thy Mansions are built of choicest Jewels; and the Pavement of thy Streets
transparent Gold.

Down in the midst runs a Crystal River, perpetually flowing from the Throne
of God.

There all along those pleasant Banks, deliciously grows the Tree of Life;

Healing all Wounds with its balmy Leaves; and making immortal all that but
taste its Fruit.

Thus is the Holy City built; thus is the new Jerusalem adorned.

O fortunate and glorious City! how free and happy are thy glad Inhabitants!

Every Head wears a Royal Crown; and every Hand a Palm of Victory.

Every Eye overflows with Joy; and every Tongue with Psalms of Praise.

Behold, O my Soul, the Inheritance we seek; and where can we find more Riches
to invite us?

Behold the Felicities to which we are called; and where can we meet such
Pleasures to entertain us?

Away then, all vain and worldly Desires; be banished for ever from molesting
my Peace.

Descend thou blessed Heaven into my Heart; or rather take up my Heart unto
thee.

Thy Joys are too great to enter into me; O make me fit to enter into them.

Make me still think on my Country above; and there establish my Eternal Home.

Where I shall dwell perpetually in the view of my God; and be filled for ever
with the Sweetness of his Presence.

Glory be to the Father, etc.
As it was in the beginning, etc.
Antiphon.
Glorious things are said of thee, thou City of my God!

Ant.] If these imperfect Shadows so sweetly please, how will the real
Substance transport our Hearts! Alleluja.

Psalm 9.
Blessed be thy gracious Wisdom, O Lord, that so mercifully stoops to our low
Conceits.

Under these Veils thou hidest those glorious Mysteries; too high and Spiritual
for our Flesh and Blood.

Thou hidest, or rather, so revealest thy sublime Rewards; to take us with
things we most admire.

Scepters and Crowns thou know are apt to win the Hearts of us thy Children:
^ Children, alas, too truly in useful Knowledge; O that we were so in Love and
Duty!

What is a Drop of Water to the boundless Ocean; or a Grain of Dust to this
vast Globe?

Such, O my God, and infinitely less, are the richest Kingdoms here below;

Should we compare their most pompous State, to the meanest Degree in the Court
of Heaven.

When thou have fed us with Milk; thou invitest our Appetite to stronger Meat.

Thou tellest us of a sweet delicious Life; in the blessed Society of Saints and
Angels.

With whom we shall dwell in perpetual Friendship; and be loved and esteemed of
them all for ever.

Thou tellest us of a pure Soul-ravishing Joy, to behold the amiable Face of
Jesus;

Whose gracious Smiles shine round about; and fill the Heavens with Holy
Gladness.

Thou tellest us still of incomparably higher Delights; hearken, O my Soul, and
humbly adore thy God;

Whose Bounty has provided thee large Rewards; since they are no less than his
very Self.

Himself he will clearly unvail before us; and openly show us that great Secret.

O happy Secret, if once at last attained; if once we but see the Face of our
God!

What is it, Lord, to see thy glorious Face; but to know thee as thou art in
thine own blessed Being?

To know the immensity of thy Selfsubsisting Essence; and the infinite
Excellence of all thy Attributes.

To know the Power of the Eternal Father; and the Wisdom of the Increated Son.

To know the Goodness of the Holy Ghost; and the incomprehensible Glories of
the Undivided Trinity.

This, O my Soul, is the top of Happiness; this is that supreme Perfection of
our Nature.

This, this is alone the Aim of our Being; the Hope and End of all our Labors.

When we are come to this, we shall presently rest; and our satisfied Desires
reach no farther.

We shall be filled with overflowing Bliss; and our utmost Capacities hold no
more.

But in one Act of Joy will be eternally fixed; and that one Act spring fresh
for ever.

Glory be to the Father, etc.
As it was in the beginning, etc.
Antiphon.
If these imperfect Shadows so sweetly please, how will the real Substance
transport our Hearts! Alleluja.

Ant. Never can we say too much of this Glorious Subject; never can we think
enough of the Felicities of Heaven. Alleluja.

Psalm 10.
ARise, my Soul, to thee these Joys belong; arise, and advance thy self on high.

Leave here below all Earthly Thoughts; and fly away with the Wings of thy
Spirit.

Fly to that glorious Land of Promise; and gladly salute those Heavenly Regions.

Hail happy Paradise of pure Delights; thou beauteous Garden of never-fading
Flowers!

Hail blessed Society of beatify'd Spirits; who perpetually contemplate the
Eternal Deity!

Hail, and for ever may your Glories grow; till they are so high they can grow
no more.

Hail, and among your cheerful Hymns; remember us who dwell below in this Vale
of Tears.

We hope one Day to come up to you; and be placed, and sing in your Holy Quires.

We hope to know all things produced; we hope to know that All-producing Cause.

O what a Fire of Love will it kindle in our Hearts; when we shall see those
shining Mysteries!

When our Great God, like a burning Mirror, shall strike his Brightness on the
Eyes of our Souls.

O what excessive Joy will that Love produce; a Love so violently desiring, and
so fully satisfied?

When our Capacities shall be stretched to the utmost; and the rich abounding
Objects fill and overflow them.

O what profound Joy will that Love beget; a Joy so infinitely high, and so
eternally secure!

When in an amorous Languishment we shall sweetly dissolve, into the blissful
Union with our first Beginning.

When without losing what we are, we shall become in a great measure even what
he is.

We shall take part in all his Joys; and share in the Glories of all his Heaven.

O what Divine and ravishing Words are these! how gently they enter and delight
my Ear!

How they diffuse themselves over all my Brain; and strongly penetrate to my
very Soul!

Methinks they turn to Substance as they go; and I feel them work and stir
through all my Powers.

Methinks they lie as a Cordial at my Heart; and send forth Spirits to quicken
and refresh me.

There, O my Soul, we shall rest from all our Labors; which are but the way to
all that Happiness.

There we shall rest from Sin and Sorrow; and no longer be troubled with our
selves or others.

There we shall rest for ever in the protection of our God; in the Arms and
Bosom of our dearest Lord.

O Heaven! the eternal Source of all these Joys; and infinitely more, and
infinitely greater.

As the Heart pants after the Waterbrooks; so let my Soul thirst after thee.

After thee let me daily sigh and mourn, and with a fixed and longing Eye look
up and say,

When, O my God, shall I sit at that Fountainhead; and drink my fill of those
living Streams?

When shall I be inebriated with that Torrent of Pleasures; which springs for
ever from thy glorious Throne?

O that the day of my Banishment were fully finished! how is the time of my
Pilgrimage prolong^d!

Why am I still detained in this Valley of Tears? still wandering up and down in
this Wilderness of Dangers?

Come thou, sweet Jesus, my only Hope; and sure Deliverer out of all my Sorrows.

Come thou, and here begin to dwell in my Heart; and fit me for the Life I
shall lead hereafter.

Come, O my dearest Lord, and prepare my Soul for thee; and then when thou
please, take it to thy self.

Glory be to the Father, etc.
As it was in the beginning, etc.
Antiphon.
Never can we say too much of this glorious Subject; Never can we think enough
of the Felicities of Heaven, Alleluja.

Romans 12. Ver. 9.
LET Love be without Dissimulation; hate that which is evil, cleave to that
which is good.

Be kindly affectionated one toward another, with brotherly Love, in Honor
preferring one another:

Not slothful in Business; fervent in Spirit, serving the Lord.

Rejoicing in Hope, patient in Tribulation, continuing instant in Prayer,

Distributing to the Necessity of Saints; given to Hospitality.

Bless them which persecute you; Bless and Curse not.

Rejoice with them that do rejoice, and weep with them that weep.

Be of the same Mind one toward another.

Mind not high things, but condefcend to Men of low Estate.

Be not wise in your own Conceits.

Recompense to no Man Evil for Evil; provide things honest in the sight of all
Men.

If it be possible, as much as in you ly^h, live peaceably with all Men.

Dearly beloved, avenge not your selves, but rather give place unto Wrath; for
it is written, Vengeance is mine, and I will repay it.

Therefore if thine Enemy hunger, feed him; if he thirst, give him drink; for
in so doing thou shall heap Coals of Fire upon his Head.

Be not overcome of Evil, but overcome Evil with Good.

Hymn 3.
WHY do we seek Felicity
Where it is not to be found;
And not, dear Lord, look up to thee,
Where all Delights abound?
Why do we feek for Treasure here,
On this false barren Sand:
Where naught but empty Shells appear,
And Marks of Shipwrackstand.
O World, how little do thy Joys
Concern a Soul that knows
It self not made for such low Toys,
As thy poor Hand bestows!
How cross art thou to that Design
For which we had our birth!
Us, who are made in Heaven to shine,
Thou bow'st down to thy Earth.
Nay, to thy Hell; for thither sink
All that to thee submit:
Thou strew'st some Flowers on the brink,
To drown us in the Pit.
World, take away thy Tinsel Wares,
That dazzle here our Eyes;
Let us go up above the Stars,
Where all our Treasure lies.
The Way we know; our dearest Lord
Himself is gone before:
And has engaged his faithful Word,
To open us the Door.
But, O my God, reach down thine Hand,
And take us up to thee:
That we about thy Throne may stand,
And all thy Glories see.
All Glory to the Sacred Three,
One ever-living Lord:
As at the first, still may he be
Beloved, Obeyed, Adored. Amen.
Antiphon.
O Glorious God! thy infinite Perfections cause us to admire thee; and thy
bounteous Promises engage us to hope in thee. Thy incomparable Beauty ravishes
our Hearts; and the Joys thou have prepared for us, transcends all our Wishes.
Alleluja.

V. It has not ascended into the Heart of Man.

R. What he has prepared for them that love him.

The Prayer.
O God, who graciously wooest us to our Eternal Inheritance, by describing its
inexpressible Glories all manner of ways which are apt to work upon our low
Conceits, that they may fitly insinuate themselves, and become by degrees
absolute Master of our Hearts: Bring them, we beseech thee, still seasonably
into our Memories; and so strongly settle them in our Affections, that our
Souls being wholly ravished with those great Hopes, all the Temptations and
Vanities of this World may fly unconcernedly by us, and never be able to
distract our entire and steady and daily strengthening Desires of entering once
for ever into possession of thy Kingdom, through our Lord Jesus Christ; who
with thee and the Holy Ghost, lives and reigns one God, World without end,
Amen.

V. Bless we our Lord:

R. Thanks be to our God.

COMPLINE.
Antiphon.
All is unquiet here till we come to Thee; and repose at last in the Kingdom of
Peace.

Psalm 11.
WHO will give me the Wings of a Dove; that I may fly away, and be at rest?

That I may fly away from the Troubles of the World; and be at rest, dear Lord,
with thee:

Here, alas! we are fore'd to sigh, and bear with Grief the Burden of our
Miseries.

Often we encounter Chances that endanger us; and divert our Progress to the
Way of Bliss.

Often we are assaulted with Temptations that overcome us; and set us back in
the Accounts of Eternity.

How many times, O my Soul, have we plainly concluded, that this Earth affords
no real Joy!

How many times have we fully agreed, that Heaven alone is the place of
Happiness!

Yet do these false Allurements again deceive us; and steal away our Hearts to
dote on Folly:

Yet do unconstant We forget our Resolutions; and wretchedly neglect our true
Felicity.

O thou victorious Conqueror of Sin and Death! do thou assist us in this
dangerous Warfare.

O thou benign Refresher of distressed Spirits! do thou relieve us in this
dangerous Pilgrimage.

Make us still thirst and sigh after Thee; the Living Fountain of Life-giving
Streams.

Make us despise all other Delights; and set our Affections entirely on thy
Joys.

Since nothing, Lord, can satisfy our Souls but Thee, O let our Souls seek
nothing but thee.

Glory be to the Father, etc.
As it was in the beginning, etc.
Psalm 12.
GIve me, O Lord, the Innocence of Doves; and fill my Soul with thy mild Spirit:

Then I shall need none of their Wings; since Heaven it self will dwell in my
Heart.

It Is on the Proud thou look afar off; but enclinest thine Ear to the Humble
and Meek:

Who delight in the Peace of a contented Mind; and limit their Thoughts to
their own little Sphere:

Never intermedling with the Actions of others; unless where Charity and Reason
engage them:

But their beloved Employment is to sit in Silence; and think on the Happiness
they expect hereafter.

To meditate the Joys of Saints and Angels; and the blissful Vision of the Face
of Jesus.

O how securely and sweetly do they sleep; who go to Bed with a quiet
Conscience!

Who after a Day of faithful Industry, in a Course of just and pious living,

Lay down their wearied Heads in peace; and safely rest in the Bosom of
Providence:

If they awake, their Conscience comforts them in the dark; and bids them not
fear the Shadow of Death:

No, nor even Death it self; but confidently look up, and long for the Dawn of
Eternal Day.

This, too, my Soul, should be our Care; to note, and censure, and correct our
selves:

To strive for mastery over the Passions that molest us; and dismiss from our
Thoughts what no way concerns us.

Are not our own Occasions Business enough, to fill as much time as this Life
deserves?

Does not the other, at least, deserve every Minute of Leisure we can spare
from this?

Let then the Worldly pursue their Liberties; and say and do as they think fit:

What Is that to thee, my Soul! who shall not answer for others; unless thou
some way make their Faults thine own.

Thy Pity may grieve, and thy Charity endeavor; but if they will not hear,
follow thou thy God.

Follow the Way that leads to Truth; follow the Truth that leads to Life.

Follow the Steps of thy beloved Jesus, who alone is the Way, the Truth, and
the Life.

Follow his Holiness in what he did; follow his Patience in what he suffered.

Follow him that calls thee with a thousand Promises; Follow him that crowns
thee with infinite Rewards.

Follow thy faithful Lord, O my Soul, to the end; and thou art sure in the end
to possess him for ever.

Glory be to the Father, etc.
As it was in the beginning, etc.
Psalm 13.
MEekness indeed is the Heaven of this Life; but the Heaven of Heavens, O Lord,
is above with thee.

Meekness may qualify our Miseries here; and make our Time pass gentlier away.

But to be fully happy we must stay till hereafter; till thy Mercy bring us all
to our last great End.

That glorious End for which our Souls were made; and all things else, to serve
them in their way.

It Is not to sport our Time in Pleasures that thou, O Lord, have placed us here.

It Is not to gain a fair Estate; that thy Kindness still prolongs our Days.

But to do good to our selves and others; and glorify thee in improving thy
Creatures.

To increase every day our longing Desires, of beholding thee in thine own
bright self.

O Glorious Lord, whose infinite sweetness provokes and satisfies all our
Appetites!

May my entire Affections delight in Thee; above all the vain Enjoyments of the
World.

Above all Praise and empty Honor; above all Beauty and fading Pleasure.

Above all Wealth and deceitful Riches; above all Power and subtlest Knowledge.

Above all even thine own Bounty can give; and whatever is not thy very Self.

O, may my wearied Soul repose on Thee; the Home and Center of Eternal Rest.

May I forget my self to think of Thee; and fill my Memory with the Wonders of
thy Love.

That infinite Love which when my Thoughts consider; not as they ought, alas!
but as I Am able,

The Goods and Ills of this World lose their Name, and yield not either Relish
or Distaste.

O my adored Jesus! let me love thee always; because from Eternity thou have
loved me:

O let me love thee only, gracious God! because thou alone deservest all my
Heart.

Always and only let me love thee, O Lord! since always my Hope is only in thee.

Glory be to the Father, etc.
As it was in the beginning, etc.
Antiphon.
All is unquiet here, till we come to Thee, and repose at last in the Kingdom
of Peace.

Hymn 4.
DEar Jesu, when, when will it be
That I no more shall break with thee!
When will this War of Passions cease,
And let my Soul enjoy thy Peace!
Here I repent and sin again;
Now I revive, and now am slain:
Slain with the same unhappy Dart,
Which, O, too often wounds my Heart.
When, dearest Lord, when shall I be
A Garden sealed to all but Thee!
No more exposed, no more undone;
But live and grow to thee alone?
It Is not alas in this low Earth,
That such pure Flowers can find a birth:
Only they spring above the Skies,
Where none can live, till here he dies.
Then let me die, that I may go,
And dwell where those bright Lillies grow;
Where those blessed Plants of Glory rise,
And make a safer Paradise.
No dangerous Fruit, no tempting Eve,
No crafty Serpent to deceive;
But we like Gods indeed shall be;
O let me die that Life to see.
Thus says my Song: But does my Heart
Join with the Words, and sing its part?
Am I so thorough wise to choose
The other World, and this refuse?
Why should I not? what do I find
That fully here contents my Mind?
What is this Meat, and Drink, and Sleep,
That such poor things from Heaven should keep?
What is this Honor, or great Place,
Or Bag of Money, or fair Face?
What Is all this World, that thus we should
Still long to dwell with Flesh and Blood?
Fear not, my Soul, stand to thy Word,
Which thou have sung to thy dear Lord;
Let but thy Love be firm and true,
And with more Heat thy Wish renew.
O may this dying Life make haste,
To die into true Life at last;
No hope have I to live before,
But then to live, and die no more.
Great Ever-living God, to Thee
In Essence One, in Persons Three:
May all thy Works their Tribute bring,
And every Age thy Glory sing.
1 John, Chap. 2. Ver. 15.
LOve not the World, neither the things that are in the World: If any Man love
the World, the love of the Father is not in him.

For all that is in the World, the Lust of the Flesh, and the Lust of the Eyes,
and the Pride of Life, is not of the Father, but is of the World;

And the World passes away, and the Lusts thereof; but he that does the Will
of God abides for ever.

Antiphon.
Learn of me, says our Lord, for I am meek and lowly in Heart, and ye shall
find rest for your Souls.

V. Meekness indeed is the Heaven of this Life;

R. But the Heaven of Heavens is Above with thee.

The Prayer.
O God, whose gracious Providence has particularly ordained the Spirit of
Meekness to waft us safely through the turbulent Sea of the World, to our Haven
of Bliss; vouchsafe, we beseech thee, that the clear Experience we every Day
make of our own Weakness and Vanity, may so dispose us for this precious
Virtue, that our Minds may never be discomposed with Passion, nor our Tongues
break forth into violent Expressions, but our Temper may be always preserved,
(let the World stir how it will about us,) calm and regular, and as becomes
those, all whose Powers are possessed of the Joys of Heaven, and apt to feel in
every thing only the sweet Impulses of Hope and Charity, through our Lord Jesus
Christ thy Son; to whom with thee and the Holy Ghost, be all Honor and Glory,
World without end, Amen.

Monday MATTINS.
Invitatory.
Come let us Adore our God that made us.
Come let us Adore our God that made us.
Psalm 14.
LET us with Reverence appear before him, and humble our selves in the presence
of his Glory; Let us all bring out our Psalms of Praise, and sing with Joy to
our great Creator.

Come let us Adore our God that made us. He made us, not we our selves, and
freely bestowed on us all the rest of his Creatures, to engage our Hearts to
love his Goodness, and to admire the Riches of his infinite Bounty.

Come let us Adore our God that made us. Our Bodies he framed of the Dust of
the Earth, and gave us a Soul after his own Likeness; a Soul which all created
Nature cannot fill; nor any thing below his own Immensity. Come let us Adore
our God that made us.

For himself he made us, and for his glorious Kingdom, that we might dwell with
him in perfect Bliss, and sing his Praises for ever.

Come let us Adore our God that made us. Glory be to the Father, and to the
Son, and to the Holy Ghost;

As it was in the beginning, is now and ever shall be, world without end, Amen.

Hymn. 5.
WAke now, my Soul, and humbly hear,
What thy mild Lord commands;
Each Word of his will charm thine Ear,
Each Word will guide thy Hands.
Hark! how his sweet and tender Care
Complies with our weak Minds;
Whatever our State and Tempers are,
Still some fit Work he finds.
They that are merry, let them sing;
And let the sad Hearts pray;
Let those still ply their cheerful Wing,
And these their sober Day.
So mounts the early chirping Lark
Still upwards to the Skies;
So sits the Turtle in the dark,
Among her Groans and Cries.
And yet the Lark, and yet the Dove
Both sing, though several Parts;
And so should we, how ever we move,
With Light or heavy Hearts.
Or rather both should both assay,
And their cross Notes unite;
Both Grief and Joy should sing and pray,
Since both such hopes invite.
Hopes that all present Sorrow heal,
All present Joy transcend;
Hopes to possess, and taste, and feel
Delights that never end.
All Glory to the sacred Three,
All Honor, Power, and Praise;
As at the first may ever be
Beyond the end of Days.
Antiphon.
All things lie open to the Eyes of God. All things are naked to him with whom
we speak.

Psalm 15.
HAppy are they, O glorious Lord! who every where adore thy Presence.

Happy, who live on Earth as in the sight of the King of Heaven; and every
Moment say in their Heart, Our God is here:

Here in the Center of our Souls, to witness all our Thoughts, and judge
exactly our most secret Intents.

Though his Throne of State is established Above; and the splendors of his Glory
shine only on the Blessed:

Yet his unlimitted Eye looks down to this lower World, and beholds all the
ways of the Children of Adam.

If we go out, he marks our Steps; and when we retire, our Closet excludes not
him.

While we are alone he minds our Contrivings; and the Ends we aim at in all our
Studies.

When we converse with others he observes our Deportment, and the Good or Ill
we do them or our selves.

In our Devotions he notes our Carriage; and regards with what Intention we
recite our Prayers.

All the day long he considers how we spend our Time; and our darkest Nights
conceal not our Works from him.

If we deceive our Neighbor, he spies the Fraud; and hears the least whisper
of a slandering Tongue:

If we in secret oppress the Poor; or by private Alms relieve their Wants:

If in our Hearts we murmur at the Rich; or live contented with our little
Portion.

Whatever we do, he perfectly sees us; where're we are, he is sure to be with
us.

Why, O thou Sovereign Lord of Heaven! why do thou stoop thus low thy
glorious Eye?

What can thou find that here deserves thy sight, among the Trifles of this
empty World?

What can thou find, alas! that should not offend thy sight, among the
Follies of our vicious Lives?

It Is not thy self, O Lord, thou seek to satisfy; but all thy Design is for
our Advantage.

Thou graciously stand by to see us work; that thine awful Eye may quicken
our Diligence.

Thou art still at hand to relieve our Wants; that so friendly a nearness may
increase our Confidence.

Thou appearest still ready to punish Sins; that the shake of thy Rod may
prevent our Miseries.

Sure, O my God, thy Favors must needs be sweet; since even thy Threatenings
have so much Mercy.

Sure we must needs be worse than blind; if to the Face of Heaven we dare be
wicked.

Henceforth, O gracious Lord! as Children freely play in the indulgent presence
of their tender Father;

So make us still with humble Boldness, rejoice before thee our merciful
Creator.

As new-pardon'd Subjects justly fear the angry Brow of their offended Prince;

So let our oft-forgiven Souls continually tremble to provoke the Wrath of thy
dread Majesty.

O temper thus our Love with Reverence; and thus allay our Fear with Hope.

Glory be to the Father, etc.
As it was in the beginning, etc.
Antiphon.
All things lie open to the Eyes of our God; all things are naked to him with
whom we speak.

Ant. Happy we, who have our God so near us; happy if our pious Lives keep us
near him.

Psalm 16.
MY God since thou art never absent from us; let us be always present with thee.

Let us go to thy Throne above; and there contemplate and admire thy Glory.

Let us attend on thy Altars; and there adore and praise thy Mercy.

Every where let us seek to meet thee; every where let us delight to find thee.

All our Wants let us spread before thee; all our Petitions let us offer unto
thee.

Thou willingly enclinest thy gracious Ear, to the Prayers that come from a
fervent Heart.

Thou love to hear us treat of Heaven; as if we made it our Business indeed
to go thither.

All other things we must ask with submission to thee; since we know not
absolutely what is good for our selves.

But thy Eternal Joys we may beg without restraint; and urge and press for thy
Assistance to gain them.

Heaven we may wish, without the Check of Resignation; Heaven we may pray for,
without fear of Importunity.

O wise and gracious Lord! whatever thou do, thy Love intends it all for the
good of thy Servants.

If thou deferrest sometimes to grant our Requests, it is only in Charity to
make us repeat them;

That we may feel more sensibly our own Poverty; and be stronglier convinced of
our dependence on thee:

That we may practice our Hope while we long expect; and increase our Gratitude
when we receive at last:

That we may learn this sure and happy Skill, of working in our Souls the
Virtues we desire;

By often renewing those very Desires, till themselves become even the Graces
we seek.

But, O improvident we! how unwilling to pray are most of us always, and all of
us sometimes?

How do our little Offices seem long and tedious; and half an Hour quite tire
our Patience?

How are we slow to begin, and swift to make an end?

How heavy while they are saying, and glad when they are said?

Yet sure no easier Work than to ask what we want; no cheaper Purchase than to
have for asking.

Sure no sweeter Pleasure than to converse with God; nor greater Profit than to
gain his Favor.

Still we have new Transgressions to confess; and shall never, alas! want
Infirmities to lament.

Often, O dreadful Lord, when we speak to thee, we do not so much as hear our
selves:

Often we pursue impertinent Objects; and our careless Thoughts contradict our
Words.

But, O thou blessed End of all our Labors, and only Center of all our Wishes!

Do thou reclaim our wandering Fancies; and guide and fix them to atend thy
Service.

Night and Day let us call on thee, and never cease knocking at the Doors of thy
Palace.

Let no Delay discourage our Hope; nor even Refusal destroy our Confidence.

But let this firm Foundation still sustain us; and on this let our Peace be
established for ever.

What Is truly necessary thy Goodness will not deny; the rest our Obedience
submits to thy Pleasure.

Glory be to the Father, etc.
As it was in the beginning, etc.
Antiphon.
Happy we who have our God so near us; Happy if our pious Lives keep us near
him.

Psalm 17.
DEliver us, O Lord, from asking of thee, what we cannot receive without danger
to our selves.

Deliver us from receiving what we cannot use, without offending others, and
ruining our own Souls.

Deliver us from presuming so on thy Bounty; that we omit to perform our Duty.

Still to our Devotions let us join our best Endeavors; and make our Earth
comply with Heaven.

If we desire of thee to relieve our Necessities; let us faithfully begin to
labor with our Hands.

And not expect a Blessing from the Clouds; on the idle Follies of an
undisciplined Life:

If we beg Grace for Victory over our Passions, let us constantly strive to
resist their Assaults:

Let us wisely foresee our particular Dangers; and use the proper Weapon
against every Sin.

To obtain the Gift of Chastity, we must mortify our Senses; and immediately
fly the least Shadow of Temptation.

In vain we approach thy Holy Altars; if our Lives prepare not their way for
our Offerings.

Thou shuttest thy Ears to our loudest Prayers; if we open not ours to the
Voice of the Poor.

Thou denyest to pardon our Trespasses against thee; unless we have already
forgiven our Enemies.

O the extreme Benignity of our glorious God; who treats with his Creatures
upon equal Terms!

Who deals no otherwise with us, miserable Wretches; than we our selves deal
with one another.

He promises to give the same measure we give our Neighbors; and performs
incomparably more than he promises;

Pressed down, and shaken together, and running over, into the Bosoms of them
that love him.

Such, O my God, is the Bounty of thy Goodness; and no less the Patience of thy
generous Hand.

Thou hold thy Blessings hovering over our Heads; still watching the time we
are fit to receive them.

Then thou immediately sendest them down upon us; to enter our Hearts, and
dwell with us for ever.

Even that very Temper which thus disposes us entirely, depends on the Favor
of thy Providence.

Every Condition thou requirest on our parts, being nothing else but thy own
free Gift.

Thy Mercy alone is the Fountain of all our Blessings; and in what Channel
soever they flow to us, they spring from thee.

Thou art the God of Nature and Reason; thou art the God of Grace and Religion.

Give, gracious God, what thou art pleased to command; and then command what
thou please.

Glory be to the Father, etc.
As it was in the beginning, etc.
Antiphon.
You have not because you ask not; you ask and receive not, because you ask
amiss.

First Lesson.
GOD from the beginning made Man, and left him in the hands of his own Counsel.
He added his Commandments and Precepts; if thou will keep them, they will
preserve thee. Fire and Water are set before thee, stretch forth thy hand to
which thou will. Before Man is Life and Death, Good and Evil; that which he
chooses shall be given him, for the Wisdom of God is great, and he is mighty in
Power; his Eyes are toward them that fear him, and he knows every Work of Man:
He has commanded none to do wickedly, neither has he given any a License to
sin; but the Penitent he restores to the way of Justice; and those that are
failing in Perseverance he confirms, and appoints them the Lot of Truth. Turn
to the Lord, and forsake thy Sins; pray before his Face, and lessen thy
Offenses. Be not rash with thy Mouth, nor let thy Heart be hasty to utter any
thing before God; for God is in Heaven and thou art on Earth, therefore let thy
Words be few. Before Prayer prepare thy Soul, and be not as one that tempts
God. Go not after thine own Lusts, but turn away from thine own Will. If thou
give to thy Soul her Desires, it will make thee a Derision to her Enemies. A
wise Man will fear in every thing; and in the occasion of Sin will take heed of
being negligent. He that loves Danger shall perish therein, and he that
despises small things, shall fall by little and little. Better is he that has
less Knowledge and Fears, than he that abounds in Understanding, and
transgresses the Law of the Lord.

Res.] My Soul, what can thou wish for more? Behold thy gracious Lord offers
thee to choose what thou will, and promises to give thee what thou choosest! O
infinite Goodness! it is thy self alone I choose, for thou art my only Happiness
for ever. I see my Portion hereafter depends on my Choice here, but my Choice,
O Lord, depends on thee. Guide me with thy Holy Grace, that I withdraw my
Affections from all vain and perishable Creatures, and fix them entirely on
thee, my Lord and my God, and my eternal Felicity.

Second Lesson.
THE beginning of Wisdom is the true desire of Discipline; the care of
Discipline is Love, and Love is the keeping of her Laws, and the keeping of her
Laws is the accomplishment of Incorruption, and Incorruption makes us next to
God; therefore the desire of Wisdom leads to an everlasting Kingdom: If then
you be delighted with Thrones and Sceptres, seek Wisdom that you may reign for
ever. Into a malicious Soul Wisdom will not enter, nor dwell in a Body subject
to sin. For the Holy Spirit will fly from him that dissembles, and withdraw
himself from Thoughts that are without Understanding, and be chased away when
Iniquity comes in. The Spirit of Wisdom is gentle, and will not deliver the
Curser from his own Lips; for God is Witness of his Reins, and Searcher of his
Heart, and Hearer of his Tongue; therefore he that speaks unjust things cannot
be hidden; nor shall the chastizing Vengence forbear him. If thou shall call
for Wisdom, and incline thine Heart to Prudence; if thou shall seek her as
Money, and dig her up as Treasure; then thou shall understand the Fear of the
Lord, and find the Knowledge of God; for our Lord gives Wisdom, from his Mouth
is Prudence and and Knowledge.

Res.] Send down, O God of our Fathers, and Lord of Mercy, send down thy Wisdom
from thy Holy Heaven, and from the Seat of thy Greatness, to be in us, and
labor with us, and teach us what is acceptable unto thee; that we may know our
End, and wisely choose our Way, and order all our Actions to our true Felicity.
Our Thoughts are fearful, and our Prudence uncertain; we scarce conjecture the
things that are on Earth, and find with Pains the things that are in sight.
Give us, O Lord, the Wisdom that assists at thy Throne, and reject us not from
among thy Children.

Third Lesson.
THE Spirit of those that fear God shall live, and at his sight shall be
blessed; for their hope is in him that saves them, and the Eyes of God are on
them that love him. He that fears the Lord shall tremble at nothing, because he
is his Hope; he raises up the Soul, and illuminates the Eyes, and gives Life,
and Health, and Blessing. Our Lord is only theirs that expect him in the way of
Truth and Justice. The Highest allows not the Gifts of the Wicked, nor regards
the Oblations of the Unjust, nor pardons their Offenses for the multitude of
their Sacrifices. By Mercy and Faith Sins are purged, and by the Fear of the
Lord every one declines from Evil. Despise not a Man that turns himself from
Sin, nor upbraid him therewith, remember we are all in a state of Guilt.
Forgive thy Neighbor that hurts thee, and when thou prayest, thy Sins shall be
forgiven thee. One Man reserves Anger against another, and does he seek pardon
of God? He has not Mercy on a Man like himself, and does he entreat for his own
Sins? Remember the last things, and cease to be at Enmity: Remember the Fear of
God, and be not angry with thy Neighbor. Have thou sinned, do so no more, but
withal pray that former Sins may be forgiven thee. Fly from Sin as from the
face of a Serpent; if thou approach, it will bite thee: The Teeth thereof are
as the Teeth of Lions, killing the Souls of Men. He that is washed from the
Dead, and touches him again, what does his washing profit him? So a Man that
fasts for his Sins, and does the same again, what avails it to have humbled
himself? who will hear his Prayer?

Res.] Deliver us, O Lord, from relapsing into the Sins we have repented of,
the Sins we have so often promised to amend: Deliver us from all Malice and
Enmity with our Neighbors, and from oppressing the Poor, who have none to
defend them. Then may we confidently expect thy Protection, if we serve thee,
and love one another. Thou art our Strength, O Lord, whom shall we fear? Thou
art our Salvation, of what shall we be afraid? Nothing can hurt us but our own
vicious Desires; nothing can endanger us but Disobedience to our God.

Antiphon.
Consider well your Steps, O ye Children of Men, behold who regards you: walk
sincerely and walk confidently, for his Rod and Staff are ever at hand to
comfort you.

V. Fear not, O ye of little Faith, he is here.

R. Presume not, O ye inclined to Folly, he is here.

Let us pray.
O God, who art ever present to all that thou have made, still watching to
improve us, as we grow fit for greater Bounty; keep, we beseech thee, our Eyes
continually fixed on thine over us, at once awfully checking our Inclination to
Folly, and tenderly encouraging our Pursuit of true Good: Make us always feel
our selves under thy sure Protection in our Dangers, and within free reach of
thy gracious Ear, for whatever Good we faithfully ask, and use our just
Endeavors, according to thy discipline, to attain, through our Lord Jesus
Christ thy Son. Amen.

Monday LAUDS.
Antiphon.
Bless the Lord, O my Soul, and all that is within me, praise his holy Name.

Psalm 17.
COme let us sing the Praises of God; and joyfully recite his Divine
Perfections.

His Being is of himself alone; and no Dependence his eternal Essence knows.

His Knowledge fathoms the extent of all things; and his Power commands them as
he pleases.

His Goodness is supreamly Infinite; and all his glorious Attributes
transcendently adorable.

Come, let us sing the Praises of our God; and joyfully recite his Divine
Perfections.

He is the Source of all Felicity; eternally full of his own unchangeable Bliss.

Before Time began he was; and when the Sun must lose his Light, his Day will
remain the same for ever.

The Heaven of Heavens is the Palace of his Glory; and all created Nature the
Subject of his Dominions.

In his Presence the brightest Seraphins cover their Faces; and all the blessed
Spirits bow down their Heads to his Footstool.

Come let us sing aloud the Prerogatives of our God; and stretch our utmost
Thoughts to exalt his Greatness.

But, O most glorious and dreadful Deity! how dare we Wretches undertake thy
Praises?

How dare our Sin-polluted Lips pronounce thy Name? or where shall we seek
Expressions fit for thee?

All that we can say is nothing to thy unspeakable Excellencies; all we can
think but a faint Shadow of thy unconceivable Beauties.

Even the Voice of Angels is too low to reach thy Worth; and their highest
Strains fall infinitely short of thee.

Only in this shall thy Servants rejoice; and all the Powers of our Souls be
glad:

That thy self alone art thy own full Praise; be to thy self thine own Glory.

Live, our great God, eternally encompast with the Beams of thine own
inaccessible Light.

Live our adored Creator, and reign for ever on the Throne of thine own
immortal Kingdom.

Glory be the Father, etc.
As it was in the beginning, etc.
Psalm 19.
TOO glorious art thou, O Lord, in thy self; and thy direct Rays shine too
bright for our Eyes.

Yet may we venture to praise thee in thy Works; and contemplate thee at least
reflected from thy Creatures.

In them we may safely behold our mighty Maker; and freely admire the
Magnificence of our God.

Heaven and Earth are full of his Greatness; Heaven and Earth were created by
his Power:

From him all the Hosts of Angels receive their Being; from him they have the
Honor to assist in his Presence.

He kindled Warmth and Brightness in the Sun; and beauteously garnished the
Firmament with Stars.

He spread the Air, and stored it with Flocks of Birds; he gathered the Waters,
and replenished them with Shoals of Fishes.

He established the Earth on a firm Foundation, and richly adorned it with
innumerable Varieties.

Every Element is filled with his Blessings; and all the World with his liberal
Miracles.

He spoke the Word and they were made; he commands and they are still preserved.

He governs their Motions in perfect Order; and distributes to each its proper
Office

Contriving the whole into one vast Machine; a spacious Theater of his own
unlimited Greatness.

O glorious Architect of universal Nature; who disposest all things in number,
weight, and measure!

How does thy Wisdom engage us to admire thee? how does thy Goodness oblige us
to love thee?

Not for themselves alone, O gracious God, did thy hand produce those happy
Spirits:

But to receive in charge thy little Flock; and conduct them to the Folds of
Bliss.

Not for themselves at all, O bounteous Lord! were the rest of this huge
Creation framed:

But to sustain our Lives in the Way; and carry us on to our eternal Home.

O may our Souls first praise thee for themselves; and employ their whole Power
to improve in thy Service.

May we praise thee, O Lord, for all thy Gifts; but infinitely above all still
value the Giver.

May every Blessing be a motive of gratitude; and every Creature a step of
approach toward thee.

So shall we faithfully observe their end; and happily arrive at ours.

Using them only to entertain us here; till our Souls be prepared for the Life
of Heaven.

Till they become full ripe for thee; and then fly away to thy Holy* Presence.

Glory be to the Father, etc.
As it was in the beginning, etc.
Psalm 20.
HOW admirable is thy Name, O Lord over all the Earth? how wise and gracious
the Counsels of thy Providence?

After thou had thus prepared the World as a House, ready furnished for Man to
inhabit:

Thy mighty hand framed our Bodies of the Dust; and built them of a shape of
Use and Beauty:

Thou did breath into us the Spirit of Life; and fit us with Faculties
proportionable to our End.

Thou gave us a Soul to govern our Bodies; and Reason to command in this our
Soul.

Thou revealedst unto us a Law for the improvement of our Reason; and enabledst
us by thy Grace to observe that Law.

Thou made us Lords over all thy Creatures; but little inferior to thy
glorious Angels.

Thou compelledst whole Nature to serve us without Reward; and invitedst us to
love thee for our own Happiness.

Thou designedst us an Age of pure Delights, in that sweet and fruitful Garden;

Where having led a long and pleasant Life; thou promisedst to transplant us to
thine own Paradise:

All this thou did, O glorious God; the full Possessor of universal Bliss!

Not for any need thou had of us; or the least Advantage thou could derive
from our Being.

All this thou did, O infinite Goodness, the liberal Bestower of whatever we
possess!

Not for any Merit, alas! of ours; or the least Motive we could offer to induce
thee:

But for thine own excessive Charity, and the mere Inclination of thine own
rich Nature,

That empty we, might receive of thy Fullness; and be partakers of thy
overflowing Bounty.

So sheds the generous Sun his Beams; and freely scatters them on every side;

Gilding all the World with his beauteous Light; and kindly cherishing it with
his fruitful Heats.

And so do thou, and infinitely more, O thou God of infinite more Perfections!

So we confess thou do to us; but we, what return have we made to thee?

Have we well considered the end of our Being; and faithfully complied with thy
Purpose to save us?

Ah wretched we! we neglect thy Holy Rules; and govern our Actions by Chance
and Humor.

We quite forgot our God that made us; and fill our Heads with Thoughts that
undo us.

Pardon, O gracious Lord, our past Ingratitude; and mercifully direct our time
to come.

Teach every Passage of our Lives, how to express an Acknowledgment fit for thy
Mercies.

O make our Senses subject to our Reason, and our Reason entirely obedient unto
thee.

O make the whole Creation conspire to thy Honor; and all that depend on thee
join together in thy Praise.

This is the only Praise thou expectest from us; and the whole Honor thou
requirest of thy Creatures.

That by observing the Order, thou appointest them here, in this lower Region
of Motion and Change; we may all grow up to be Happy hereafter, in that State
of Permanency and Eternal Rest!

Glory be to the Father, etc.
As it was in the, etc.
Antiphon.
Praise the Lord, O my Soul, and all that is within me, praise his Holy Name.

4 Revelation, the last.
Thou art worthy, O Lord, to receive Glory, and Honor, and Power; for thou
have created all things; and for thy Pleasure they are and were created.

Hymn 6.
HArk, my Soul, how every thing
Strives to serve our bounteous King;
Each a double Tribute pays;
Sings its part, and then obeys.
Nature's sweet and chiefest Quire
Him with cheerful Notes admire;
Chanting every day their Lauds;
While the Grove their Song Applauds.
Though their Voices lower be,
Streams have too their Melody;
Night and Day they warbling run,
Never pause, but still run on.
All the Flowers that gild the Spring,
Hither their still Music bring;
If Heaven bless them, thankful They
Smell more sweet, and look more gay.
Only we can scarce afford
This short Office to our Lord;
We, on whom his Bounty flows,
All things gives, and nothing owes.
Wake for shame, my sluggish Heart,
Wake, and gladly sing thy part:
Learn of Birds, and Springs, and Flowers,
How to use thy nobler Powers.
Call whole Nature to thy Aid,
Since 'twas He who Nature made;
Join in one eternal Song,
Who to one God all belong.
Live for ever glorious Lord!
Live by all the World adored;
One in Three, and Three in One,
Thrice we bow to thee alone.
Antiphon.
The boundless Ocean of Being could not contain its Streams, but overflowed
upon pure Nothing; and behold a beauteous World appeared: Heaven, and Earth,
and all therein, from the highest Angel to the least Grain of Dust, altogether
the most perfect participation of his Essence.

V. He spoke the Word, and they were made.

R. He but commanded, and they were created.

The Prayer.
O Almighty Lord, the only wise and good Creator of the Universe, who made
all Corporeal Nature for the use of Man, and Man for his own Felicity! enlarge
our Souls, we beseech thee, humbly to admire and adore thy infinite fullness of
Being in thy Self, and thy immense Liberality of it to us; and mercifully carry
on the whole Creation to its End, vouchsafing so to order all thy Creatures
about us by thy Grace, that they may attain their Perfection in duly serving
us; and we ours in eternally enjoying thee, through our Lord Jesus Christ thy
Son, Amen.

Monday Vespers.
In the Name of the Father, and of the Son, and of the Holy Ghost.

Blessed be the Holy and Undivided Trinity, Amen.

Psalm 21.
LET us now consider, O Lord our God; let us thankfully remember what thou art
to us.

Thou art the beginning of our Nature; and glorious end of all our Actions.

Thou art the overflowing Source from whence we spring; and the immense Ocean
into which we tend.

Thou art the free Bestower of all we possess; and faithful Promiser of all we
hope.

Thou art the strong Sustainer of our Lives; and ready Deliverer from all our
Enemies.

Thou art the merciful Scourger of our Sins, and bounteous Rewarder of our
Obedience.

Thou art the safe Conductor of our Pilgrimage; and the eternal Rest of wearied
Souls.

Such Words, alas! our Narrowness is constrained to use; when we endeavor to
speak thy Bounties.

Wider a little can our Thoughts extend; yet infinitely less than the least of
thy Mercies.

Tell us thy self; one Word of thine expresses more than all the Eloquence of
Men and Angels.

Tell us thy self, O thou mild Instructor of the Ignorant! what thou art to us.

Say to our Souls, thou art our Salvation; but say it so, that we may hear
thee, and feel it so.

Gladly will we run after the Sound of that Voice; and hope by following it to
find thee.

When we have found thee once, O thou Joy of our Hearts! never let us lose thy
sight again.

Never let us turn our Eyes from thee; but steddily fix them on thy glorious
Face.

Suffer us not to go till thou have given us thy Blessing; and then may thy
Blessing bind us faster unto thee.

Glory be to the Father, etc.
As it was in the beginning, etc.
Antiphon.
To know thee, Lord, is the highest Learning; and to see thy Face the only
Happiness.

Ant.] To know our selves is the truest Wisdom; to see our own Poverty the
safest Riches.

Psalm 22.
LET us now consider, O Lord our God! let us humbly remember what we are to
thee.

We, who, alas! are nothing in our selves; what can we be to thy Immensity?

Thou, who art all things in thine own rich Self; what can thou receive from
our Poverty?

This only we are to thee, O great Creator! the unthankful Objects of all thy
Bounties.

This only we are to thee, O dear Redeemer! the unworthy Cause of all thy
Sufferings.

Guilty we committed the Crime, and thou with thine Innocence undertookest the
Punishment.

We went astray from the Path of Life; and thy Mercy came down from Heaven to
seek us:

To seek us in the Wilderness where we had lost our selves; and bring us home
to the discipline of thy Love.

Lord what are we that thou should thus regard such poor, and vile, and
inconsiderable Wretches!

What can our Good Will avail thy Bliss; that with so many Charms thou wooest
us to thy Love?

What can our Malice prejudice thy Content; that thou threatnest so violently
if we love thee not?

Is there not, O my God, Felicity enough in the Sweetness alone of loving thee!

Is there not perhaps Misery enough in living deprived of thy blissful Love?

Yes, yes, dear Lord, and that thou knew; and that is the only Cause which
moved thy Goodness to court our Affections.

Thou knew, we else should cast away our selves; by doting on the Follies of
this deceitful World.

Thou knew the danger of our wilful Nature, and therefore strivest by
greatest Fears and Hopes. And all the wisest Arts of Love and Bounty, to draw
us to thy self, and endow us with thy Kingdom.

Unhappy we, whose Frowardness required so strange Proceedings; to force upon
us our own Salvation!

Happy we, whose Wants have met so kind a Hand; that needed but our Emptiness
to engage thee to fill us!

Happy we, that our Lord that thus favors us will at last even give us Himself.

Glory be to the Father, etc.
As it was in the beginning, etc.
Antiphon.
To know our selves is the truest Wisdom; and to see our own Poverty the safest
Riches.

Ant.] Vanity of Vanities, all is Vanity, but the love of God, and hope to
enjoy him.

Psalm 23.
LOrd, without thee, what is all this World to us; but a flying Dream of busy
Vanities?

It promises indeed a Paradise of Bliss; but all it performs is an empty Cloud.

Thine are the Joys that shine fixed as the Stars; and make the only solid
Heaven.

Lord, without thee, what are we to our selves; but the wretched Causes of our
own Ruin?

We, till thou gave us Being, were purely Nothing; and must have remained so,
had not thou made us.

And now thou have made us, we wholly depend on thee; and perish immediately if
thou forsake us.

Thou, without us, art the same Allglorious Essence; brimful of thy own Eternal
Felicity.

Without us, thy Royal Throne stands firm for ever; and all the Powers of
Heaven obey thy Pleasure.

Pity, O gracious Lord, our imperfect Nature; whose every Circumstance is so
contrary to thine.

Thou dwell'st above in the Mansions of Glory; and we below in Houses of Clay.

Thou art immortal, and thy Day outlives all Time; we every Moment go downwards
to the Grave.

Thou art immense, and thy Presence fills the Heavens; but the greatest of us,
alas, how little are we!

Two Yards of Air contain us while we live; and a few Spans of Earth suffice us
at our Death.

When, O my God, shall these Distances meet together? when will these
Extremities embrace each other?

We know they were once miraculously joined, in the Sacred Person of thy
Eternal Son.

When the King of Heaven stoopt down to Earth, and grafted in his Person the
Nature of Man.

We hope they once again shall be happily united; in the blissful Vision of thy
glorious Self.

When the Children of the Earth shall be exalted to Heaven; and made Partakers
of the Divine Nature.

But are there no means for us here below? O thou infinitely high and glorious
God!

Is there no way to approach toward thee; and diminish at least this
uncomfortable Distance?

None but the way of Holy Love; which none can attain but by thy free Gift.

But how can we Sinners dare to ask thou should love us; being infinitely
unworthy to be called thy Servants;

Let us humbly beg the Grace we may love thee; who art so many ways worthy of
more than our Hearts.

And yet, O dearest Lord, unless thou first love us; and sweetly draw us by thy
gentle Hand:

Never shall we be so happy as to love thee; or ever be happy unless we do love
thee.

O bounteous God! to all thy Favors add this one; of making us esteem thee
above them all.

Be thou to us our God and all things; and make us nothing in our own Eyes.

Be thou our whole and everlasting Delight; and let nothing else be any thing
unto us.

Glory be to the Father, etc.
As it was in the beginning, etc.
The Lesson, Ephesians. 6.
CHildren obey your Parents in the Lord, for this is right.

Honor thy Father and Mother; which is the first Commandment with Promise.

That it may be well with thee, and thou may live long upon the Earth.

And ye Fathers, provoke not your Children to Wrath, but bring them up in the
nurture and admonition of the Lord.

Servants be obedient to your Masters according to the Flesh, with fear and
trembling, in singleness of Heart, as unto Christ.

Not with Eye-service as Men-pleasers, but as the Servants of Christ; doing the
Will of God from the Heart; with good Will doing Service as unto the Lord, and
not unto Men;

Knowing that whatsoever good thing any Man does, the same shall he receive of
the Lord, whether he be bond or free.

And ye Masters do the same things unto them, forbearing Threatening, knowing
that your Master also is in Heaven; neither is there respect of Persons with
him.

Hymn 7.
LOrd who shall dwell above with thee,
There on thy holy Hill?
Who shall those glorious Prospects see,
That Heaven with gladness fill?
Those happy Souls who prize that Life
Above the bravest here;
Whose greatest Hopes, whose eagerest Strife,
Is once to settle there.
They use this World, but value that,
That they supreamly love;
They travel through this present State,
But place their Home above.
Lord! who are they that thus choose thee,
But those thou first did choose?
To whom thou gav'st thy Grace most free,
Thy Grace not to abuse.
We of our selves can nothing do,
But all on thee depend;
Thine is the Work and Wages too,
Thine both the Way and End.
O make us still our Work attend,
And we'll not doubt our Pay;
We will not fear a blessed End,
If thou but guide the way.
Glory to thee, O bounteous Lord!
Who giv'st to all things Breath;
Glory to thee eternal Word!
Who sav'st us by thy Death.
Glory, O blessed Spirit, to Thee,
Who fill'st our Hearts with Love;
Glory to all the mystic Three,
Who reigns One God above.
Antiphon.
He that framed the Heart of Man, designed it for himself, and bequeathed it
unquietness till possessed of his Maker.

V. Vanity of Vanities, all is Vanity;

R. But to love our God, and attend his Service.

The Prayer.
O God, who alone art all in all things to us, and to whom we are nothing but
wretched Objects of thy Bounty, which the more it flows upon us, the more we
truly feel our own Emptiness and want of it; increase, we humbly beseech thee,
this happy Sense of thy Servants, by the experience we every day have, how
unsatisfactory this World is; and grant that finding it ordained by thee to
increase and widen, not fill our Capacity, we may make this only Use of all thy
Creatures here, to raise and heighten our Desires of thy infinite Self in
Eternity, through our Lord Jesus Christ thy Son, who with thee and the holy
Ghost, lives and reigns one God World without end, Amen.

Monday Compline.
Antiphon.
All thy Ways, O Lord, are Mercy and Wisdom.

Ant. And all thy Counsels tend to our Happiness.

Psalm 24.
MY God, in every thing I see thy Hand; in every Passage thy gracious
Providence.

Thou wisely governest the House thou have built; and preventest with thy
Mercies all our Wants.

Thou call us up in the early Morning, and give us Light by the Beams of
thy Sun.

To labor every one in their proper Office; and fill the little place
appointed them in the World.

Thou providest a Rest for our weary Evening; and favourest our Sleep with a
shady Darkness.

To refresh our Bodies in the Peace of Night; and save the waste of our
decaying Spirits.

Again thou awakest our drowsy Eyes; and bid'st us return to our daily Task.

Thus has thy Wisdom mixed our Life; and beauteously interwoven it of Rest and
Work.

Whose mutual Changes sweeten each other; and both prepare us for our greatest
Duty:

Of finishing here the Work of our Salvation; to rest hereafter in thy Holy
Place.

Glory be to the Father, etc.
As it was in the beginning, etc.
Psalm 25.
LOrd, how thy Bounty gives us all things else, with a large and open Hand!

Our Fields at once are covered with Corn; and our Trees bow under the weight
of their Fruit.

At once thou fillest our Magazines with Plenty; and sendest whole Showers of
other Blessings.

Only our Time thou distillest by Drops and never give us two Moments at once.

But take away one when thou lendest another; to teach us the price of so
rich a Jewel.

That we may learn to value every Hour; and not childishly spend them on empty
Trifles:

Much less maliciously murder whole Days; in pursuing a Course of Sin and Shame.

Lord, as thou have taught our Ignorance; so let thy Grace enable our Weakness;

Wisely to manage the time thou give us; and still press on to new degrees of
Improvement.

That with our few, but well-spent Years, we may purchase to our selves a blessed
Eternity.

Glory be to the Father, etc.
As it was in the beginning, etc.
Psalm 26.
IT was thy Mercy too, O gracious Lord, to dispense by Parcels our Portion of
Time;

That the succeeding Day may learn to grow wise, and correct its Faults by
experience of the past.

Else were our Being all at once; as it shall be in the next eternal Life.

Our Sins would have here no power to be repented of; and then alas! how
desperate are we?

We, who are born in the way of Misery; and unless we change can never be happy.

We, who so often wilfully go astray; and unless we return, must perish for
ever.

O Thou, in whose indulgent Hands are both our Time and our Eternity!

Whose Providence gives every Minute of our Life; and governs the fatal Period
of our Death!

O make us every Evening still provide, to pass with Comfort that important
Hour.

Make us still balance our Account for Heaven; and strive to increase our
Treasures with thee.

That if we rise no more to our Acquaintance here; we may joyfully awake among
thy blessed Angels.

There to unite our Hymns with theirs; and join altogether in one full Quire.

Glory be to the Father, etc.
As it was in the beginning, etc.
Hymn 8.
NOW my Soul the Day is gone,
Which in the Morn was thine;
Now its Glass no more shall run,
Its Sun no longer shine.
True alas! the Day is gone,
O were it only so:
Is It not lost as well as done?
Cast up thy Counts and know.
Are we so much nearer Heaven,
As to the Grave we bow?
Has our Sorrow made all even,
And cleared the Debts we owe?
From what Vice have we refrained,
To break the Course of Sin?
What new Virtue have we gained,
To make us rich within?
Time is well bestowed on those,
Who well their Time bestow;
Whose main Concern still forward goes,
Whose Hopes still riper grow.
Who, whene're the Clocks proclaim
Another Hour is past;
Have an Art to set their Aim,
And Thoughts upon their last;
That their last and happy Hour,
Which brings them to their home;
Where they sing and bless the Power,
That made them thither come.
O my God of Life and Death,
The Ever-living King!
Since thou giv'st to all their Breath,
May all thy Glory sing.
Glory, Honor, Power, and Praise
To the mysterious Three;
As at first beginning was,
May now and ever be.
Lesson, Ephesians. 4. 26.
BE angry, but sin not; let not the Sun go down upon your Wrath.

Neither give place to the Devil.

Let him that stole steal no more; but rather let him labor, working with his
Hands the thing which is good, that he may have to give to him that needs.

Let no corrupt Communication proceed out of your Mouth, but that which is good
to the use of edifying, that it may minister Grace to the Hearers.

And grieve not the Holy Spirit of God, whereby you are sealed unto the Day of
Redemption.

Let all Bitterness, and Wrath, and Anger, and Clamor, and Evil-speaking be
put away from you, with all Malice.

Be ye kind one to another, tenderhearted, forgiving one another, even as God
for Christ's sake has forgiven you.

Antiphon.
Happily ends the Day whose Evils end with it, cancelled by just Contrition;
happily begins the Night which is introduced with Aspirations to eternal Rest.

V. The Day is thine, and the Night is thine,

R. Lord, may thy Grace through both breed us up also to be thine.

The Prayer.
O God, whose gracious Providence vouchsafes to put us frequently in mind of
our own and the World's last End, by burying every Day in the silent Grave of
Night; sweeten, we humbly beseech thee, and render familiar to our Expectation,
those terrible Periods of Time, by our constant due use of this, to even our
Accounts with thee, and fit our selves for Sleep, with a devout Composure of
our Souls to their eternal Rest: And grant that our yielding so often, and so
easily at the Summons of our drowsy Humors, to suspend for some Hours all
Operations of the whole Man, may teach our Souls to reflect themselves into a
more reasonable Willingness, when ever thou call'st us to leave our Bodies in
the Bed of Dust, and pass into the state of their own perfect and ever-waking
Activity and Bliss, heightened by sure Hopes of a completely glorifying
Resurrection, t^^^^g^ our Lord Jesus Christ thy Son; (...) with thee and the
Holy Ghost, lives and reigns one God world without end, Amen.

Tuesday MATTINS.
Introduction.
In the Name of the Father, and of the Son, and of the Holy Ghost.

Invitatory.
Come let us Adore our God that preserves us.
Come let us Adore our God that preserves us.
Psalm 27.
FRom thee, O Lord, we derive our Being, and from the same Goodness our
continuance to be: If thou withdrawest thy Hand but a Moment, we instantly
return to our first Nothing.

Come let us Adore our God that preserves us. From all our Enemies his
Providence defends us, and covers our Heads in the day of Danger; he sends in
his Grace to relieve our Weakness, and disappoints the Temptations that
threaten to undo us.

Come let us Adore our God that preserves us. Here his Almighty Power sustains
our Life, and mercifully allows us space to repent, that by well-employing the
Time he lends us, we may wisely provide for our own Eternity.

Come let us Adore our God that preserves us. He still repeats his Blessings to
us, and shall we neglect our Duty to him? he freely bestows on us all our Day,
and shall we not spend half an Hour in his Service?

Come let us Adore our God that preserves us. Glory be to the Father, and to
the Son, and to the Holy Ghost;

As it was in the beginning, is now and ever shall be, world without end, Amen.

Hymn 9.
COme let us adore the gracious Hand,
That brought us to this Light;
That gave his Angels strict command,
To be our Guard this Night.
When we laid down our weary Head,
And Sleep sealed up our Eye;
They stood, and watched about our Bed,
And let no harm come nigh.
Now we are up they still go on,
And guide us through the Day;
They never leave their Charge alone,
Whatever besets our Way.
And O my Soul, how many Snares
Lie spread before our Feet?
In all our Joys, in all our Cares,
Some Danger still we meet.
Sometimes the Sin does us overtake,
And on our Weakness win;
Sometimes our selves our Ruin make,
And we overtake the Sin.
O save us, Lord, from all those Darts,
That seek our Souls to slay;
Save us from us, and our false Hearts,
Least we our selves betray.
Save us, O Lord, to thee we cry,
From whom all Blessings spring:
We on thy Grace alone rely,
Alone thy Glory sing.
Glory to thee, eternal Lord,
Thrice blessed Three in One;
Thy Name at all times be adored,
Till Time it self be done.
Antiphon.
If we receive all we have of God, why do we boast as if we had it of our
selves?

Psalm 28.
NOT unto us, O Lord, not unto us; but to thine own blessed Name give all the
Glory.

When we have applied our utmost Cares; and used all the Diligence that lies in
our power:

What can we do but look up to thee; and second our Endeavors with Prayers for
thy Blessing?

When we have implored thy gracious Mercy; and offered thee our dearest
Sacrifice to obtain it:

What can we do but submit our Hopes; and expect the Event from thy own free
Goodness?

We know, and thou thy self have taught us; unless thou defendest the City, the
Guard watches in vain.

We know, and our own Experience tells us; unless thou reach forth thy hand, we
are presently in danger of sinking.

Every Moment of our Day subsists by thee; and every Step we take moves by thy
Strength.

Even the Line we now repeat must beg its Breath of thee; and stop if thou
denyest it.

If thou denyest it, who can compel thy Will; or call in question thy Decrees?

Are we not all thy Creatures, O gracious God! and as helpless Children hanging
on the Breast of Providence?

Are we not all as Clay in thy Hands; to frame us into Vessels of what use thou
please?

Behold, we confess, O Lord, in thee we live; in thee we move, in thee we have
our Being.

All our Sufficiency proceeds from thee; and all our Success depends on thy
Favor.

Others may tell us the way we should go; but thou alone can enable us to
walk.

Others may tell us the way; but even they must first be taught by thee.

Should we, O Lord, presume to divide thy Grace; and proudly challenge any
Share to our selves:

Thy mighty Truth stands up against us; and our own Infirmities plainly confute
us.

Should thou severely examine our Hearts; and ask who works all their Actions
in them;

Sure we must needs bow down our Heads; and from our low Dust humbly say:

Nothing are we, O Lord, but what thou have made us; nothing have we but what
thou have given us.

Only our Sins are entirely our own; which O may thy Grace extinguish for ever.

O may all Self-presumption die in us; and our whole Confidence live only in
thee.

May even our Frailties make us more strong; and our being nothing teach us to
be humble.

So shall thy Power, O Lord, be magnified in our Weakness; and thy Mercy
triumph in relief of our Misery.

Glory be to the Father, etc.
As it was in the beginning, etc.
Antiphon.
If we receive all we have of God, why do we boast as if we had it of our
selves?

Ant.] God is my Savior, whom should I fear? God is my Protector, of what
should I be afraid?

Psalm 29.
THus we depend, and happy we in this Dependence; did we but know our own true
Interest.

We, and our whole Concerns are deposited with God; and where can we find a
better Hand to ensure them?

Is he not wise enough to choose Safety for us; who disposes all Nature in so
admirable an Order?

Has he not power enough to go through with his Purpose; who commands the Wills
of Men and Angels?

Wants he perhaps an Inclination to favor us; who desires our Felicity more
than our own Hearts can do?

He feeds the Fow's of the Air; and curiously clothes the Lillies of the Field.

And without his Providence not a Sparrow falls to the Ground; and shall we
distrust his Care for his Children?

Under his Government we have lived all this while; and can we now suspect
he will forsake us?

He has shown his Bounty by extraordinary Graces; and will he deny us his
lesser Blessings?

He has freely bestowed on us his dearest Son; how shall he not with him give
all things else?

All that are truly useful to carry us on our way; and bring us at length to
his eternal Rest?

If our Necessities be the effect of our Folly; we must not presume he will
maintain us in our Sins.

Rather we should strive to moderate our Appetites; and correct those Vices
that have bred these Miseries.

But if our Wants be innocent and pressing; he will sooner do a Miracle than
break his Word.

His Word, which he has so solemnly engaged; so often proved by a thousand
Experiments.

Ask but the former Ages, and they will tell you the Wonders he wrought in
favor of his Servants.

He multiplied the Oil in the Widow's Cruse; and fed his Prophet by the Service
of a Raven.

He dried the Sea into a Path for his People; and melted the Rocks to refresh
their Thirst.

He made his Angels Stewards of their Provision; and nourished them in the
Wilderness with the Bread of Heaven.

Still, O my God, thy eternal Charity retains the same Affections for those
that rely on thee.

Still thy All-seeing Wisdom governs the World; with the same immense,
unalterable Goodness.

Nay surely now the Streams of thy Mercy run more strong; and have wrought to
themselves a larger Channel.

Since thou broughtest down the Waters from above the Heavens; and openedest in
thine own Body a Spring of Life.

A Spring of Pleasures of Joy and Bliss, to revive our Hearts; and overflow
them with a Torrent of everlasting Jubilees.

Glory be to the Father, etc.
As it was in the beginning, etc.
Antiphon.
God is my Savior, whom shall I fear? God is my Protector, of whom shall I be
afraid?

Ant.] Seek ye first the Kingdom of God, and all these things shall be added
unto you.

Psalm 30.
LET us then sit down in Peace, O my Soul; and rest secure in the Providence of
God.

Let us not disturb the Order of those Mercies; which our God has designed us
in his eternal Counsels.

Every Accident may be turned into Virtue; and every Virtue is a step to our
glorious End.

If our Affairs succeed, let us praise our great Benefactor; and think what
he will give us hereafter, who so favors us here.

If they miscarry, let us yield to the Will of Heaven; and learn by our Crosses
in this World, to betake us to the other.

Whatever happens, let this be our constant Rule; to provide for the future
Life, and to be contented with this.

Shall not we patiently accept a little Evil from him, that has given us so
much Good?

Shall the being without some one thing we need not, more sensibly affect us,
than the having all we need?

Ungrateful we! the common Benefits we all enjoy, deserve the Thanksgiving of a
whole Life.

The Air we breath in, the Sun that shines upon us; the Water and the Earth
that so faithfully serve us:

The exercise of our Senses, and the use of our Wits, if not in Excellence, at
least in some degree:

All these, O Lord, thou generally give to the Good and to the Bad; and for
the least of these none can praise thee enough.

What shall we say to those high supernatural Blessings; The Son of God to
redeem us, and Heaven to reward us?

What shall we say? can we yet complain, because some few perhaps are more
prosperous than we?

Had we some desperate Canker breeding on our Face, or noisome Leprosy
spreading over our Skin:

(These, we must confess, are incident to our Nature; and more than these due
to our Sins.)

What would we give to be as now we are? how gladly change for a moderate
Affliction?

It Is but interpreting our worst Condition well; and we find Motives enough for
our Gratitude to God.

It Is but interpreting our best Condition frowardly; and we find Defects enough
to think our selves miserable.

Did we adore as we ought the Wisdom of God; we should easily trust him to rule
his own World.

Could we understand the secret Character of his Decrees, we should read in
each Syllable a perfect Harmony.

Teach us, O thou blessed Enlightner of our Minds; teach us to expound thy
Actions in a fair Sense.

Still let us construe the Afflictions thou sendest us; as meant to correct,
not to destroy us:

To prevent some Sin, or beget some Virtue in us; and when we need our Crosses
no longer, thou wilt take them away.

Mean while, O gracious Lord, make us wait thy Time; and not impatiently
prescribe Limits to thee.

Make us rejoice that our Lots are in thy Hands; but, O let thy Mercy choose
favorably for us.

Dispose as thou please our Condition here; only our Portion hereafter let it
be with thy Blessed.

Glory be the Father, etc.
As it was in the beginning, etc.
Antiphon.
Seek first the Kingdom of God, and all things else shall be added unto you.

First Lesson.
TRust in our Lord with all thy Heart; and lean not to thy own understanding.
In all thy Ways think on him, and he will direct thy Paths. Be not wise in
thine own Conceit; fear God, and depart from Evil: The greater thou art, the
more humble thou should be; seek not the things that are too high for thee,
nor search into those above thy Strength; but the thing that God has commanded
thee, that do thou; and in many of his Works be not thou curious, since it is
not necessary for thee to see with thine Eyes those things that are hidden. Lay
up thy Treasure according to the Commandments of the Most High, and it shall
profit thee more than Gold. Shut up Alms in thy Storehouses, and it shall
deliver thee from all Affliction: It shall fight for thee against the Enemy
better than a mighty Shield and strong Spear: In all thy Gifts show a cheerful
Countenance, and pay thy Tithes with gladness. Give to the Highest according to
what he has given thee, and with a good Eye give according to the Ability of
thy Hands; for the Lord is thy Rewarder, and he will repay thee seven times as
much. When a Man's ways please the Lord, he makes even his Enemies to be at
Peace with him. The Heart of Man devises his way, but the Lord directs his
steps. He that is patient is better than he that is strong; and he that rules
over his Mind, than he that conquers Cities. There is no Wisdom, nor
Understanding, nor Council against the Lord.

Res.] Well may we give thee, O Lord, some part of that we have, since we
received from thee all we have; well may we give with gladness to thee, since
thy Bounty rewards us with so great Advantage. O make us still mistrust our
selves, and with an humble Confidence rely on thee. Without thy Blessing our
Labor is in vain, and against thy Decrees no Policy can succeed; but if we
humbly submit to thee, thou will direct us; if we keep thy Commandments, thou will defend us.

Second Lesson.
WHen thou come to serve the Lord, prepare thy Soul for Temptation; cleave
unto him, and depart not away, that thou may be increased at thy last End.
Whatever is brought upon thee, take cheerfully, and be patient when thou art
changed to a low Estate; For Gold is tried in the Fire, and acceptable Men in
the Furnace of Adversity. Believe in God, and he will help thee; order thy way
aright, and trust in him. Ye that fear the Lord, wait for his Mercy, and go not
aside, lest ye fall; ye that fear the Lord, believe him, and your Reward shall
not fail: Ye that fear the Lord, hope for Good, and for everlasting Joy and
Mercy. Look at the Generations of old, and see, did ever any trust in the Lord,
and was confounded, or did any abide in his Fear and was forsaken? Or whom did
he ever despise that called upon him? For the Lord is full of Compassion and
Mercy, Long suffering, and very pitiful, and forgiveth Sins, and saves in time
of Affliction. Woe to the fearful Hearts, and faint Hands, and the Sinner that
goes two ways. Woe to them that are fainthearted, who believe not God, and
therefore shall not be defended.

Res.] Teach us, O gracious Lord, to begin our Works with Fear, and to go on
with Obedience, and finish them with Love, and after all, sit humbly down in
hope, and with a cheerful Confidence look up to thee, whose Promises are
faithful, and Rewards infinite. All this we may do for Men, and yet they fail
us; we may fear and obey, and they forget our Service; we may love, and hope,
and yet they neglect our Affections; only thou, O Lord our God, whom we no way
can benefit, do every way oblige us.

Third Lesson.
BEcause Sentence against an Evil-doer is not speedily executed, therefore the
Hearts of the Sons of Men are fully set in them to do Evil. But though a Sinner
sin an hundred times, and his Days be prolonged, I know it shall be well with
them that fear the Lord. There are just Men to whom it happens according to
the Works of the Wicked, and there are Wicked to whom it happens according to
the Works of the Righteous. The Righteous and the Wise are in the Hands of God,
yet no Man knows either Love or Hatred by all that is before him; because all
things come alike to all, and there is one Event to the Righteous and to the
Wicked, to the Good, and to the Clean, and to the Unclean; as is the Good so is
the Sinner, and he that Swears as he that fears an Oath: Yea also the
Hearts of the Sons of Men are full of Evil, and Madness is in their Hearts
while they live, and after that they go to the Dead. I returned and saw under
the Sun, that the Race is not to the Swift, nor the Battle to the Strong,
neither yet Bread to the Wise, nor Riches to Men of Understanding, nor Favor
to Men of Skill, but Time and Chance happens to them all.

Resp.] And sure it is fit it should be so, for what can infinite Power and
Goodness do but that which is best? Lord, I adore thy Providence which scatters
these temporal things with a seeming Negligence, as Trifles of so little
importance, that they signify neither Love nor Hatred. Nothing indeed but
Heaven is considerable; nothing but Eternity deserves our Esteem. Fix thou our
Steps, O Lord, that we stagger not at the uneven Motions of the World; but
steddily go on to our glorious Home; neither censuring our Journey by the
Weather we meet with, nor turning out of the way for any Accident that befalls
us.

Antiphon.
I saw the bright Sun show his flaming Eyes, and behold a thousand Rays filled
the Air, and beauteously gilded the Earth. His glorious Face but masks it self
in a Cloud, and immediately they vanished away, and their Place was to be found
no more; and I said, Such, O my God, is the stability of every Creature.

V. Even the Line we now repeat must beg its breath from thee,

R. And stop if thou denyest it.

The Prayer.
O God, the eternal Source and Necessity of Being, on whose free overflowing
that of the whole Creation every Moment depends! strike, we beseech thee, our
Hearts with a continual Diead and Reverence of thy absolute Dominion, which
should it but never so little suspend thy Bounty, we should instantly vanish
into nothing; and grant that as we know thou preservest this World to grow
daily riper for the other, to which thou have ordained it, we may by thy Grace
so husband our Time here, as in the next Life to possess thy Eternity, through
our Lord Jesus Christ, who lives, etc.

Tuesday Lauds.
Praise our Lord, O my Soul, and all that is within thee, praise his Holy Name.

Psalm 31.
BE thou eternally adored, O God of our Salvation; and may thy Praises be sung
by thy Servants for ever.

When our first Parents had disobeyed thy Precepts; to the ruin of themselves
and their whole Posterity.

Thy Mercy immediately provided a Remedy; and graciously promised a powerful
Redeemer.

A Redeemer that should conquer Sin and Death; and crush in pieces the
Serpent's Head.

A Redeemer that should fully repair the Breaches of Mankind; and render our
Condition better than before.

Enlightening our Eyes with a clearer View of those excellent Truths that
belong to our Peace;

And supporting our Nature with a stronger Grace, to bear us safely on through
all Encounters;

Till we arrive at the Land of Rest; and be received for ever into that
glorious Kingdom.

O blessed Jesus! our Strength and Guide; who know and pitiest our weak
Capacities;

Who in thy tender Care have contrived such means; that nothing can undo us but
our own Perverseness;

How easy have thou made the Way to Heaven; how light the Burden thou layest
on thy Followers?

It Is but to love thee our greatest Benefactor; and we perfectly fulfill every
Branch of thy Law.

It Is but desiring to see thee, our supreme Beatitude; and we are sure to
possess an Eternity of Joy.

Blessed, O my God, be the Wisdom of thy Providence; which alone knows the way
to draw Good out of Evil.

Which not only restores us to our first degree; but makes even our Fall
rebound us to a greater height.

Lord, as thy Goodness turns all things to the advantage of thy Elect; O may
thy Elect praise thy Goodness in all things.

Glory be to the Father, etc.
As it was in the beginning, etc.
Psalm 32.
ADmirable, O Lord, were thou in thy merciful Promises; but infinitely more in
thy wonderful Performance.

Thou did not depute an Angel to supply thy Place; nor entrust so tender a
Work to the management of a Seraphin.

But thy Self did bow the Heavens, and come down; and with thy own blessed
Hands work our Redemption.

Thy Self did take upon thee our frail Nature; and vouchsafe to be born of an
humble Virgin

Condescending to the weakness of a Child; a Child whose Parents were poor, and
unesteem'd in the World.

Not declining the mean Entertainment of a Stable; O how unfit for the Birth of
the King of Heaven!

But contenting thy self with the Cradle of a Manger; and the uneasy Lodging
of a Bed of Straw.

Refusing the soft accommodation of the Rich; to undergo the Inconveniences of
a poor Stranger.

Only the faithful Joseph stood waiting on thee; and provided, as he was able,
for his helpless Family.

Only thy pious Mother dearly embraced thee; and wrapped thy tender Limbs in
little Clouts.

Wonder, O Heavens! and be amazed, O Earth! and every Creature humbly bow your
Heads.

Bow and admire this incomparable Mystery; The Word was made Flesh, and dwelt
among us.

But most of all we, who are most concerned, the banished Children of
unfortunate Adam.

Let us bow down our Faces to the Dust; and prostrate adore so unspeakable a
Mercy.

Behold thus low my Savior stoopt for me; to check the Pride of my corrupted
Nature.

Behold thus low he stoopt to take me from the Ground; and raise me to the
Felicities of his own Kingdom.

Lift up thy Voice with Joy, O my Soul; and sing Hosanna to the newborn Jesus.

Call all the blessed Angels to celebrate his Birth; and repeat afresh that
Heavenly Anthem;

Glory be to God on high, on Earth Peace, Good Will toward Men.

Lift up thy Voice aloud, O my Soul; and to the Quires of Heaven join the
Music of the Church.

Glory be to the Father, etc.
As it was in the beginning, etc.
Psalm 33.
Rejoice all you faithful Nations of the Earth; when you hear the sweet Name of
our dear Redeemer.

Rejoice, and with your bended Knees and Hearts, adore the blessed Jesus.

He is the Son of the Ever-living God; equally participating the Glories of his
Father.

He is that great Messiah whom the Prophets foretold; and all the ancient
Saints so long expected.

At length in fullness of Time he came; to visit in Person our miserable World.

He came with his hands full of Miracles; and every Miracle full of Mercies.

He made the crooked become straight; and the lame to walk, and leap for Joy.

He opened the Ears of the Deaf to hear; and gave sight to them that were born
blind.

He loosened the Tongues of the dumb to speak; O may he govern ours to sing his
Praise!

He cleansed the Lepers with a Word of his Mouth; and healed their Diseases who
but touched his Garment.

To the Poor he revealed the Treasures of his Gospel; and taught the Simple the
Mysteries of his Kingdom.

He cast out Devils by the Command of his Will; and forced them to confess and
adore his Person.

He raised the Dead from the Grave to Life; that was four Days buried and
corrupted.

Nay even himself being slain for us upon the Cross; and his Tomb made fast and
secured with a Guard:

He raised again by his own victorious Power; and carried up our Nature to the
highest Heavens.

All these stupendous Signs, O glorious Jesus! were done by the hand of thy
Almighty Mercy.

To witness thy Truth with the Seal of Heaven; and endear thy Precepts with
obliging Miracles.

That thus engaged we might believe in thee; and obeying thy Law, be eternally
saved.

O let not all this Love, dear Lord, be lost; by so many Tokens so kindly
expressed.

One Miracle more we humbly beg; but one as strange and hard as all the rest.

Soften our stony Hearts; into a tender Sense of thy great Goodness, and their
own true Duty.

Raise our dead Spirits from this heavy Earth; to dwell with thee in the Land
of the Living.

That as we here admire thy bounteous Power; and daily sing the Wonders of thy
Grace:

We may hereafter adore thy blessed Self; and sing eternally the Wonders of thy
Glory.

Glory be to the Father, etc.
As it was in the beginning, etc.
Jude 24, 25.
Now unto him that is able to keep us from falling; and to present you
faultless before the Presence of his Glory with exceeding Joy;

To the only wise God our Savior, be Glory and Majesty, Dominion and Power
both now and for evermore, Amen.

Hymn 10.
LET others take their course,
And sing what Name they please;
Let Wealth or Beauty be their Theme,
Such empty Sounds as these.
For me, I Will never admire
A Lump of burnisht Clay;
However it shines, it is but Dust,
And shall to Dust decay.
Sweet Jesus! is the Name
My Song shall still adore;
Sweet Jesus is the charming Word,
That does my Life restore.
Wherefore to thee bright Name,
Behold thus low I bow;
And thus again; yet is all this
Far less than what I owe.
Down then, down both my Knees,
Still lower to the Ground;
Whilst with mine Eyes and Voice lift up,
Aloud these Lines do sound.
Live glorious King of Heaven,
By all thy Heaven adored;
Live gracious Savior of the World,
Our chief and only Lord.
Live, and for ever may
Thy Throne established be;
For ever may all Hearts and Tongues
Sing Hymns of Praise to Thee.
Antiphon.
Behold, our faithful Lord has remembered his Word, he has raised up amongst us
the long-expected Prophet like Moses, and put his Word into his Mouth, and he
has taught us.

V. He has led us out of the Bondage of Egypt,

R. And made us a way to the true Land of Canaan.

The Prayer.
O God, who to preserve in reach of Happiness those whom thou preservest in
Being, sentest down in the fullness of Time, (as thy Mercy ancient, as our
Misery promised,) the true Messiah, to save the World from the Ruin into which
Adam's Fall had plunged it; fill our Souls, we beseech thee, through deep
Admiration at this thy excessive Bounty, with an overflowing Love of thy self,
infinitely fuller of thy Goodness than can be expressed; and grant that this Love
to may so powerfully endear to us our Heavenly Master's gracious Precepts and
Example, that our perfect observing them may raise reciprocally this thy Love,
till it fit us for our only Bliss, the eternal Enjoyment of thee, through our
Lord Jesus Christ, Amen.

Tuesday Vespers.
Psalm 34.
SPeak no more proudly, vain Dust; nor provoke any longer the living God.

Seal up thy Lips in humble Silence; and tremblingly remember his dreadful
Judgments.

Remember how the Earth opened it self; and swallowed up alive so many
Thousands.

Remember how the Clouds rained Fire and Brimstone; and buried whole Cities in
their own Ashes.

Remember how the general Deluge o'er-spread the World; and swept away almost
all Mankind.

Remember, and ask the Cause of all this Ruin; and tell it aloud to the bold
Offender.

Tell him 'twas Sin, and such as his, that drew upon them so swift Destruction.

Sin threw the Angels down from Heaven; and chained them up in Eternal Darkness.

Sin banished Adam out of Paradise; and turned that delicious Garden into a
Field of Weeds.

O God, how terrible is thy mighty Arm, when thou stretchest it to be avenged
on thine Enemies!

O Sin, how fatal is thy desperate Malice; that pulls on our Heads all the
Thunder of Heaven!

O my Soul, how dull and senseless are we; to sleep secure as if all were safe!

Can we repeat these amazing Truths; and not tremble at the Wrath of the Divine
Justice?

Can we consider the deplorable End of Sinners; and still go on in the ways of
Sin?

Even while we sing thy Praises, O glorious Lord! our very Duty should fear
before thee.

Still may our Consciences cry aloud within us; Dare you commit this Evil, and
sin against your God?

Dare you commit this Evil, and undo your selves; and plunge your own Souls
into everlasting Torments?

Forbid so rash a Madness, gracious Lord; and make thy Judgments on others
Mercies to us.

Glory be to the Father, etc.
As it was in the beginning, etc.
Psalm 35.
WIpe away the Tears from thine Eyes, O my Soul; and clear thy Heart from all
Clouds of Despair.

What Is thus infinite in Power to punish; is full as infinite in Goodness to
save us.

How often have we broke his Divine Commands? yet still his Earth sustains, and
serves us.

How often have we abused his fullness of Bread? yet still his Clouds shower
Plenty upon us.

Himself with his own Almighty Word confined the Waters; and sharply reproved
their officiousness to destroy.

Hitherto shall you come, and no farther; and here will I stay your proud Waves.

Only the Ambitions Angels find no forgiveness; because their Obstinacy refuses
to seek it.

Else could those Rebel Spirits disclaim their Crimes, and turn again to obey
their Maker;

His Clemency would soon revoke their Sentence; and restore them to shine in
their first bright Seats.

But O! the Excess of Bounty vouchsaft to Adam; and to us Dust and Ashes his
Posterity.

For whom the Sovereign King of Heaven humbled himself to descend upon Earth:

Leading a poor laborious Life; and suffering a painful ignominious Death.

Only to teach us how to live, and how to die; and what to do, and what to aim
at in both.

Thy Mercies, Lord, are above all thy Works; and this above all thy Mercies.

Glory be to the Father, etc.
As it was in the beginning, etc.
Antiphon.
Who is like unto thee, O Lord, among the Gods, who is like thee amiable in
Mercies?

Ant. Dreadful art thou, Lord, in the Terror of thy Judgments, but infinitely
more amiable in the sweetness of thy Mercies.

Psalm 36.
STill let us sing the Mercies of our God; and hold and shake a little longer
this sweet Key.

When we alas! lay buried in the Abyss of Nothing; his own free Goodness first
brought us into Being.

He fashioned our Limbs in our Mother's Womb; and filled our Nurse's Breast
with Milk.

He enlarged our little Steps when we began to go; and carefully preserved our
helpless Infancy.

Commanding even his Angels to bear us in their Hands; lest we dash our Feet
against a Stone.

How many Dangers have we happily escaped? and not one of them but was governed
by his Providence.

How many Blessings do we daily receive? and not one of them but proceeds from
his Bounty.

He provided Tutors to instruct our Youth; and plant in our tender Minds the
Seeds of Virtue.

He appointed Pastors to feed our Souls; and safely guide them in the Ways of
Bliss.

He founded his Church on an immovable Rock; to render our Faith firm and
secure.

He sealed his Love with Sacraments of Grace; to breed and nourish us up in the
Life of Charity.

All this thou have done, O merciful Lord! the Wise Disposer of Heaven and
Earth.

All this thou have done, and still go on, by infinite Ways, to gain us to
thy Love.

Thou command us to ask, and promisest to grant; thou invitest us to seek,
and assurest us to find.

Thou vouchsafest even thy self, to stand at the Door and knock; and if we open
thou enterest, and fillest our Hearts with Joy.

If we forget thee, thou renewest afresh our Memory; if we fly from thee, thou
still find some means to recall us.

If we defer our Amendment, thou patiently stayest for us; and when we return,
thou openest thy Arms to embrace us.

Surely, O my God! from all Eternity thou have cast thy gracious Eye upon us.

Surely thy merciful Hand has signed our Lot; and marked us out for thy
everlasting Favors.

We know thy Ways are in the deep Abyss; and none can sound the bottom of thy
Counsels.

Yet may we safely look on the flowing Streams; and gather this Comfort from
their gentle Course.

When we were not, thou dearly lovedst us; thou will not forsake us now we
strive to love thee.

When we had lost our Way, thou soughtest after us; thou will not refuse us now
we seek after thee.

Lord, all we have is derived from thee; all that we can expect can come from
none but thy self.

Accomplish thine own blessed Purpose in us; and finish these happy Beginnings
toward us.

Four our Hopes are great, thou have chosen us to thy Glory; since already thou
have so kindly disposed us by thy Grace.

Glory be to the Father, etc.
As it was in the beginning, etc.
Antiphon.
Dreadful art thou, O Lord, in the Terror of thy Judgments; but infinitely more
amiable in the Sweetness of thy Mercies.

Romans 13.
LET every Soul be subject to the higher Powers; for there is no Power but of
God: The Powers that be are ordained of God.

Whosoever therefore resists the Power, resists the Ordinance of God; and
they that resist shall receive to themselves Damnation.

For Rulers are not a Terror to Good Works, but to the Evil; will thou then not
be afraid of the Powers? do that which is good, and thou shall have Praise of
the same.

For he is the Minister of God to thee for good. But if thou do that which is
Evil, be afraid; for he bears not the Sword in vain: For he is the Minister
of of God, a Revenger to execute Wrath upon him that does Evil.

Wherefore ye must needs be subject, not only for Wrath, but also for
Conscience sake.

For for this Cause pay you Tribute also.

Tribute to whom Tribute is due, Custom to whom Custom, Fear to whom Fear,
Honor to whom Honor.

Owe no Man any thing but to love one another; for he that loves another has
fulfilled the Law.

Hymn 11.
FAin would my Thoughts fly up to thee,
Thy Peace dear Lord to find;
But when I offer, still the World
Lays Clogs upon my Mind.
Sometimes I climb a little way,
And thence look down below;
How nothing there do all things seem,
That here make such a Show.
Then round about I turn my Eyes,
To feast my hungry Sight;
I meet with Heaven in every thing,
In every thing Delight.
I see thy Wisdom ruling all,
And it with Joy admire;
I see my self among such Hopes,
As set my Heart on fire.
When I have thus triumphed a while,
And think to build my Nest;
Some cross Conceit comes fluttering by,
And interrupts my Rest.
Then to the Earth again I fall,
And from my low Dust cry;
'Twas not in my Wing, Lord, but thine,
That I got up so high.
And now my Lord! whether I rise,
Or still lie down in Dust;
Both I submit to thy blessed Will,
In both on thee I trust.
Guide thou my Way who art thy self,
My everlasting End;
That every Step or swift, or slow,
Still to thy self may tend.
To Father, Son, and Holy Ghost,
One consubstantial Three,
All highest Praise, all humblest Thanks,
Now, and for ever be. Amen.
Antiphon.
What Heart can resist the great King of Kings, terrible and amiable, and
mightily showing both, in glorious Miracles of Vengeance and Love?

V. His Right Hand holds out a Golden Scepter,

R. And his Left a flaming Sword.

The Prayer.
O God, who by Hopes and Fears, the main Swayers of our Nature here, have
graciously provided to counterpoise our Weight downwards, and sustain our faint
Progress up to thee in thy Kingdom! Grant, we humbly beseech thee, that the
many notorious Examples of thy dreadful Judgments on obstinate and incorrigible
Sinners, may strongly overawe our Vices and Impenitence, and thy many more
Instances of Indulgence and Mercy to the Penitent, and truly desirous of
Virtue, may encourage our Weakness, and make us effectually endeavor to gain
it, by the abundant and surely efficacious Grace, and Means thou have
vouchsafed us in thy Church, through our Lord Jesus Christ, who lives and
reigns with thee and the Holy Ghost, one God blessed for ever, Amen.

Tuesday Compline.
Antiphon.
Thou art, O Lord! all Goodness and Patience, and we alas! all Sin and
Disobedience.

Psalm 37.
GOod God! how extremely ungrateful are we! how strangely insensible of our
manifest Duty!

Every Creature hears thy Voice but we; every thing lives by Rule but we.

The Sun observes his constant rising; and sets exactly at his appointed time.

The Sun stands still if thou command; and even goes back to obey thy Will.

And yet the Sun pretends no Reward; nor looks to be placed in a higher Heaven.

We who expect those glorious Promises; and aim no lower than the Heaven of
Heavens:

Shall we forget the Law of our God; that only instructs us to perfect our
selves?

We, who are bought by the Blood of Jesus; and freely redeemed by his sacred
Cross:

Shall we neglect so gracious a Savior, whose only Design is to draw us to his
Love?

Shall we neglect so generous a Love; whose only effect is to make us happy?

O may thy Holy Will, dear Lord, be all our Rule; and thy gracious Hand our
only Guide.

O may thy infinite Goodness engage us to love thee; and thy blessed
Loveprepare us to enjoy thee.

Glory be to the Father, etc.
As it was in the beginning, etc.
Psalm 38.
WHat did I say, O Lord my God! we guide not our Lives by thy strait Rules?

It was too mild and gentle a Reproof for us, who quite contradict thy Laws.

What thou forbiddest we eagerly pursue; and what thou command our
Frowardness still resists.

We boldly converse with Temptation and Sin; which thy Charity advises us to
fly like Death.

We timorously fear a Loss or a Frown; where thou bidst us proceed with
undaunted Courage.

We govern our Actions by our own wild Fancies; and expect thy Providence
should comply with our Humors.

We would have thee relieve us when we list; and rain and shine as we think fit.

Pardon, O gracious Lord, this rude Perverseness; and fashion our Spirits to
submit to thee.

Make us exactly observe what thou requirest and prescribest; how bitter soever
it is to our Taste.

We are sure thy Wisdom knows our Infirmities; we are sure thy Goodness
delights in our Relief.

Glory be to the Father, etc.
As it was in the beginning, etc.
Psalm 39.
'TWas not alone to make the Day; that thou, O Lord, did make the Sun:

But to teach us these pious Lessons; and write them plain as its own Beams.

So shall our Light shine forth to others; and so our Charity warm our Coldness.

So when they say we are under a Cloud; we should like the Sun be really above
it.

And though we appear sometimes eclipst; or even extinguished in a Night of Sorrow.

Still we should shine to our selves and thee; and still go on the ways of
Light.

Still like the regular Sun, unchangeably expect the appointed Periods of Light
and Dark.

Only in this we gladly disagree; and blessed be our God who made the difference.

Not like the Sun that every Night goes down; and must at last be quite put out.

When we have finished here our Course; and seem to set to this dark Earth:

We hope to rise, and set no more; but shine perpetually in a brighter Heaven.

Glory be to the Father, etc.
As it was in the beginning, etc.
Antiphon.
Thou art, O Lord, all Goodness and Patience, and we alas! all Sin and
Disobedience.

Hymn 12.
BLessed, O Lord, be thy wise Grace,
That governs all our Day;
That to the Night assigns its place,
To rest us in our way.
If Works the laboring Hand impair,
Or Thoughts the studious Mind;
Both are considered by thy Care,
Both fit Refreshment find.
Fit to relieve their present State,
Fit to prepare the next;
While we are taught to meditate,
This plain and useful Text.
As every Night lays down our Head,
And Morning opes our Eyes;
So shall the Dust be once our Bed,
And so we hope to rise.
To rise, and see that beauteous Light,
Spring from those Eyes of thine;
Not to be checked by any Night,
But clear for ever shine.
All Glory to the sacred Three,
One Ever-living Lord;
As at the first, still may he be
Beloved, Obeyed, Adored. Amen.
Chap. 1. V. 7.
BUT the End of all things is at hand, be ye therefore sober, and watch unto
Prayer.

And above all things have fervent Charity; for Charity shall cover a multitude
of Sins.

Use Hospitality one to another without grudging.

As every Man has received the Gift, even so minister the same one to another,
as good Sewards of the manifold Grace of God.

If any Man speak, let him speak as the Oracles of God: if any Man minister,
let him do it as of the Ability which God gives, that God in all things may be
glorified, through Jesus Christ, to whom be Praise and Dominion for ever and
ever, Amen.

Antiphon.
The Sun runs its Course, or stands stili, or goes back as thou command; the
raging Sea grows calm, nay divides its Waves at thy Word. Only thine own Israel
resists the Voice of their God.

V. A Rod of Direction is the Scepter of thy Kingdom, swaying Man to observe
the Discipline of Life.

Let us pray.
O Gracious God, whose Laws are but necessary Rules of Soul-saving Love, and
whose Commands are but efficacious Advices of what our Nature requires to grow
happy, quicken, we beseech thee, the slackness of our Obedience to them, by
often reflecting on thy generous Goodness; and grant that the ready Observance
paid by all other Creatures to thy Holy Will in serving us, may so reproach our
perverse resisting the Guidance of thy sweet Spirit toward our own only Good,
which thou kindly call thy Service, that we may feel our selves confounded
with Shame at our notorious Follies, and be henceforth apter to learn, by all
the World about us, our Duty to thee, through our Lord Jesus Christ, Amen.

Wednesday MATTINS.
Invitatory.
Come let us Adore our God that governs us.
Come let us Adore our God that governs us.
HE is our great and sovereign Lord, the absolute King of Heaven and Earth; he
sees at once the whole Frame of all things, and thoroughly comprehends their
various Natures.

Come let us Adore our God that governs us. To every Creature he appoints a fit
Office, and guides all their Motions in perfect Order; till he had wrought his
glorious Design to finish the World in a beauteous Close.

Come let us Adore our God that governs us. All these he governs with infinite
Wisdom; and all for the good of them that love him; His Counsels are deep, and
beyond our reach, but all his Ways are just and merciful.

Come let us Adore our God that governs us. He governs his Enemies with a Rod
of Iron, and punishes their Wilfulness with eternal Miseries; but his Servants
he blesses with the Privilege of Children, and provides for their Duty a rich
Inheritance.

Come let us Adore our God that governs us. Glory be to the Father, and to the
Son, and to the Holy Ghost;

As it was in the beginning, is now and ever shall be, world without end, Amen.

Hymn 13.
OPen thine Eyes, my Soul, and see,
Once more the Light returns to thee;
Look round about, and choose the Way,
Thou mean to travel over to Day.
Think on the Dangers thou may meet,
And always watch thy sliding Feet;
Think where thou once have fallen before,
And mark the place, and fall no more.
Think on the Helps thy God bestows,
And cast to steer thy Life by those;
Think on the Sweets thy Soul did feel,
When thou did well, and do so still.
Think on the Pains that shall torment
Those stubborn Souls that never repent;
Think on those Joys that wait above,
To crown the Head of Holy Love.
Think what at last will be thy part,
If thou go on where now thou art;
See Life and Death set thee to choose,
One thou must take, and one refuse.
O my dear Lord, guide thou my Course,
And draw me on with thy sweet force;
Still make me walk, still make me tend,
By Thee my Way, to Thee my End.
All Glory to the Sacred Three,
One undivided Deity;
As it has been in Ages gone,
May now and ever still be done. Amen.
Antiphon.
The Day will come, it will infallibly come, when God will destroy all that
work Iniquity.

Psalm 40.
WHY do you laugh, unhappy Wretches! who tire your selves in the ways of Sin?

Ways that indeed seem smooth at first; but lead to Danger, and end in Ruin.

Why do you boast your pleasant Life; who lie a-sleep in the Arms of Death?

Awake, and chase the Dream away; that deludes your sickly Heads with empty
Fancies.

Awake, and fill your Eyes with Tears; and sadly look on your real Miseries.

Whither alas! will your Souls be hurried; when in cold Despair you sigh away
your last faint Breath?

They shall fly away amazed from the sight of Heaven; and hide their guilty
selves in eternal Darkness.

There shall they dwell with intolerable Pains; weeping, and wailing, and
lamenting for ever.

Their Understanding shall sit as in a deep Dungeon; and think on nothing but
its own Calamities.

Their Will shall be heightened to a madness of Desire; and perpetually wrackt
with Despair of obtaining.

Their Memory shall serve but to renew their Sorrows; and their whole Souls be
drowned in a Sea of Bitterness.

They shall wish the Mountains to fall upon them; and cry to the Hills to cover
them.

But nothing shall fall on them, but the Wrath of God; nor cover them, but
their own Confusion.

There every Vice shall have its proper Torment; prodigiously bred out of its
own Corruption.

The Lascivious shall burn with unquenchable Fire; perpetually flaming from
their own Passions.

The Glutton and Drunkard shall vainly sigh; for a Drop of Water to cool their
Tongues.

The furious Choleric shall rage like Mad-Dogs; and the spiteful Envious gnaw
their own Bowels.

The Riches of the Covetuous shall be as Thorns in their Sides; and the Proud
be thrown down to the bottom of Contempt.

The Slothful shall miserably deplore their lost Time; and languish with Grief
at their stupid Negligence.

But O, what horrid Pangs shall seize them all; and expand and pierce the very
Center of their Souls.

When they shall see themselves eternally deprived of the bright and blissful
Vision of God.

When they shall see themselves eternally banished, from the sweet and gracious
Presence of Jesus.

That God who made them to enjoy his Glory; That Jesus who redeemed them to be
Heirs of his Felicity!

Then shall they curse the Day of their Birth; and the unfortunate Companions
that inveagled them to Sin.

They shall curse the vain deceitful World; and cry out with a desperate
enraged Fury.

Are these the Effects of those fond Desires, whose Enjoyment we made our chief
Felicity?

Alas! what avails now our wanton Liberties; and the fugitive Pleasures we so
so eagerly pursued?

What Comfort receive we from those empty Honors; and faithless Riches we so
highly esteemed?

They all are vanished away like a Shadow; and as a Cloud of Smoke that is
scattered with the Wind.

But the Remorse and Punishment endure for ever; and torture our Spirits with
perpetual Anguish.

Thus shall they cry, and none regard to hear them; thus shall they mourn, and
none be found to pity them.

O sad Expectance of a Dissolute Life! O dreadful Consequence of an impenitent
Death!

Eternally to long for what they never can enjoy; eternally to suffer what they
can never avoid.

Blessed be thy gracious Providence, O God; that with such tender Care
forewarns us of our Dangers.

O save us, Lord, from all those Dangers; save us for thy Mercy's sake.

Save us, and make us fearful to do what when we have done will make us
miserable for ever.

Quicken our Apprehensions of the ruinous Effects of Sin; and with thy terrible
Threatenings check our unbridled Passions.

That if thy glorious Promises move not our Hearts; the fear at least of Hell
may fright us into Heaven.

Glory be to the Father, etc.
As it was in the beginning, etc.
Antiphon.
The Day will come, it will infallibly come, when God shall destroy all that
work Iniquity.

Ant.] The Day will come, it will infallibly come, that God will crown all that
love his Glory.

Psalm 42.
WHY do you mourn, ye Children of Light, to whom belong the Promises of Bliss?

Who feed on the pleasant Fruits of Piety; and the continual Feast of a good
Conscience.

Who taste already the sweetness of Hope; and hereafter shall be satisfied with
the fullness of Fruition.

What can molest your happy State; whom the God of Glory has chosen to himself?

Whom he has adopted into his Family; and designed for Heirs of the Kingdom of
Heaven.

That blessed Kingdom where all Delights abound; and Sorrow, and Fears are
vanished away.

Where none are sick, or grown old, or die; but flourish in Health, and Youth,
and immortal Life.

Where none are perplexed with Cares or Fears; but dwell secure, and free for
ever.

Where we no more shall be subject to Chance; no more exposed to the Danger of
Temptation.

Where we no more shall be crossed by others; no more disquieted by our own
Passions.

But a serene Tranquillity be perpetually within us; and innumerable Joys all
round about us.

Joy in the Excellencies of our glorified Bodies; Joy in the Perfections of our
enlarged Souls.

Joy in the sweet Society of Saints; Joy in the glorious Company of Angels.

Joy in the ravishing sight of our beloved Jesus; Joy in the blissful Union of
the adored Deity.

All shall be Joy, and Love, and Peace; and all endure for eternal Ages.

Let then the impenitent Sinner be frighted with Fear; and the obdurate Heart
break asunder with Grief.

But for the hopeful Penitents, let them always be glad; and the Servants of
Jesus rejoice and sing.

Sweet is the Yoke of thy Love, O Lord! and light the Burden of thy Commands.

But O! how far more rich are thy faithful Promises? how infinitely greater thy
glorious Rewards?

When every Virtue shall wear its proper Crown; and shine with a Diadem fit for
its own Head.

The Humble there shall be highly exalted; and the poor in Spirit preferred to
be Kings.

The Meek shall possess the Holy Land; and the Mourners be comforted with
eternal Refreshments.

The clean of Heart shall see the God of Purity; and the Lovers of Peace have
the Privilege of his Children.

They who hunger and thirst after Heaven, shall be filled; and the Merciful
entertained with the Embraces of Mercy.

They who suffer Persecution shall be abundantly rewarded; and the Enlighteners
of others shine bright as the Stars.

They who relinquisht any thing for God, shall receive a hundred fold; and all
the Just shall be in Glory for ever.

Then shall they bless the true Friend that reproved them; and the Charitable
Hand that assisted them to their Happiness.

They shall bless the provident Mercies of their God; and sing aloud the
Victories of his Grace.

Is this the effect of those little Pains they took? are these the Repairs for
those little Losses they suffered?

Happy we, who denied our selves Toys; and now are advanced to these high
Felicities.

Millions of Years shall pass away; and our Glory shall seem then but to begin.

Millions of Millions shall pass away; and our Glory shall be no nearer its End.

Thus shall they all rejoice, and none disturb them; thus shall they sing, and
all the Heavens join with them.

O sweet Expectance of a pious Life; O happy Consequence of a holy Death.

Eternally to be free from whatsoever can afflict; eternally to enjoy whatever
can delight.

Blessed be thy gracious Providence, O God; that with so large a Bounty wooes us
to our Happiness.

Wooes us in a way we are so apt to be taken; the love of our selves, and our
own great Interest.

As thou have prepared such Felicities for us; O may thy Grace prepare us for
them.

O may this best of Works take up all our Time; at least take up the best of
our Time.

At least every Morning let us renew our Hopes; and close the Evening with the
same sweet Thoughts.

Let us not faint, and we surely shall see a prosperous Issue of all our
Sorrows.

Still let us labor, still let us suffer; our Troubles are short, and our Joys
eternal.

Glory be the Father, etc.
As it was in the beginning, etc.
Antiphon.
The Day will come, it will infallibly come, when God will crown all that love
his Glory.

Ant.] What will it profit a Man to gain the whole World, and lose his own
Soul? or what shall we give in exchange for our Souls?

Psalm 43.
COme now my Soul, and choose; for Life and Death are set before thee.

Choose whilst thy gracious Lord allows thee Day; lest the Light of Darkness
overtake thy Neglect.

Choose, but remember thy Eternity is concerned; and examine well e're thou make
thy Resolve.

Call all the Pleasures of the World before thee; and ask if any of them be
worth such Pains.

Ask, if to satisfy some irregular Passion, can recompense the Forfeiture of
such Felicities?

Ask, if the vain forbidden Things thou love, deserve thy Affection better
than thy Maker?

Are they more worthy in themselves, or beneficial unto thee; that thou can
prefer them before thy Redeemer?

Do thou expect to be quiet by enjoying them; or everlastingly happy by their
Procurement?

Will they protect thee at the Hour of Death; or plead thy Cause at the Day of
Judgment?

O no, they but deceive me witha^ smiling Look; which I too often have proved by
dear Experience.

It Is Heaven alone that yields a true Content; it is Heaven alone that fills us
with Delight.

Take then away your Flatteries, false World; and leave me free for better
Thoughts.

Turn thou thy Face to me dear Jesus; and keep mine Eyes still turned toward
thee.

That I may look continually on thy glorious Beauty; and be ravished for ever
with the Charms of thy Sweetness.

It Is thee, chaste Spouse of Souls, ^tis thee alone I choose; and dedicate my
self entirely to thy Service.

Thou art my sole and absolute Lord; be thou my Part and Inheritance for ever.

But, O my dearest Lord, do thou choose me; and guide my uninstructed Soul to
choose thee.

O make me choose to love thee, till I come to see thee; and then I Am sure I
cannot choose but love thee, and be ravished with thee for ever.

Here we alas! move slowly in the Dark; led on by the Argument of things not
seen.

But did we clearly see what we say we believe; we should certainly change the
Course of our Lives.

Did we but see the Damned in their Flames; or hear them cry in the midst of
their Torments:

How should we fear to follow them in their Sins; which we know have plunged
them in all those Miseries?

How should we strive against the next Temptation; and cast about to avoid the
Danger?

Did we but see the Glories of the Saints; or hear the sweet Hymns they
continually sing:

How should we study to imitate their Lives; which we know have raised them to
all that Happiness?

How should we seek all Occasions of Improvement; and make it our business to
work out our Salvation?

Nay did our Faith but firmly believe the Truths we every Day recite in our
Creeds;

What would we do to attain those Joys? what would we not do to escape those
Sorrows?

Would half an Hour be too long to pray; or once a Week too often to fast?

Would the Pardon of an Injury be too hard a Law; or the making Restitution too
dear a Price?

Durst we return to our Sins again; or spend our Time in Idleness and Folly?

Yet is all this as sure as if we saw it; and would move us as much if we
seriously considered it.

If we considered what I Am sure we believe; we should never live as I Am sure we
do.

Which of us doubts but e're it be long we shall all be Dust; yet which of us
lives as if we thought to die?

Pity, O gracious Lord, the frailty of thy Servants; and suffer not our
blindness to lead us to ruin.

Supply our want of sight by a lively Faith; and strengthen our Faith by thy
powerful Grace.

Make us to remember it is no Childrens Sport, to gain or lose the Kingdom of
Heaven.

Make us choose wisely, and pursue our Choice; and as well use the Means, as
like the End.

O set thou right the Bias of our Hearts; that in all our Motions we may draw
off from the World.

That they may still incline toward thee; and rest at last in thy Holy
Presence.

Thou art our Lord, and we will serve thee in Fear; Thou art our God, and we
will love thee in Hope, and humble Confidence too of enjoying thee for ever.

Glory be to the Father, etc.
As it was in the beginning, etc.
First Lesson.
THE Fear of the Lord is the beginning of Wisdom. If Sinners entice thee,
consent not to them; for their Feet run to Evil, and make haste to shed Blood.
Nay themselves lie in wait even against their own Blood, and practice Deceit
against their own Souls. They have hated Knowledge, and did not choose the Fear
of the Lord. Therefore shall they eat the Fruits of their Way, and be filled
with their own Counsels. The Blessing of the Lord is on the Head of the Just,
but Iniquity covers the Mouth of the Wicked. The Memory of the Just is blessed,
but the Name of the Wicked shall rot. He that walks uprightly walks surely,
but he that perverteth his Ways shall be known. He that digs a Pit shall fall
into it, and he that lays a Snare for another shall perish in it. He that
gives wicked Counsel, it shall be turned upon himself, and he shall not know
whence it comes. He that will be revenged shall find Vengeance of our Lord, and
he will surely keep his Sin in remembrance. The Hope of the Just is Joy; but
the Expectation of the Wicked shall perish.

Res.] O sweet and admirable Providence! thou have commanded, and so it is,
That the inordinate Affection of every one shall be his Punishment: For as we
sow, so shall we reap, and as the Tree falls so shall it lie. Thy Grace, O
Lord, is the Seed of Glory, and Sin the Root of Misery. He that sows to the
Flesh shall reap Corruption; and he that sows to the Spirit shall reap Life
everlasting.

Second Lesson.
FOllow not thine own Mind and thy Strength, to walk in the Ways of thine
Heart; and say not, Who shall control me for my Works? for the Lord will
surely revenge thy Pride. Say not, I have sinned, and what harm has happened
unto me? for the Lord is Longsuffering, he will in no wise let thee go.
Concerning Propitiation, be not without Fear to add Sin unto Sin. And say not
his Mercy is great, he will be pacified for the Multitude of my Sins; for Mercy
and Wrath come from him, and his Indignation rests upon Sinners. Make no
tarrying to turn unto the Lord; and put not off from Day to Day. For suddenly
shall the Wrath of the Lord come forth, and in thy Security thou shall be
destroyed, and perish in the Day of Vengeance. Though Hand join in Hand, the
Ungodly shall not go unpunished.

Res.] My Soul, how many Thousands have been surpised in the midst of their
Sins, and hurried away to everlasting Sorrows? and we alas! how many times have
we been guilty? and yet our God has spared us. O my indulgent Savior, no other
Reason can I give, why I am not miserable, but that thou art merciful. Blessed
be thy Patience, that endures so long; and blessed be thy Grace that delivers
at last.

Third Lesson.
LEnd to thy Neighbor in the time of his need, and pay thou thy Neighbor
again in due Season. Keep thy Word, and deal faithfully with him, and thou
shall always find that which is necessary for thee. Do Good to the Just, and
thou shall have great Reward, if not from him, yet assuredly from the Lord.
Loose thy Money for thy Brother, and thy Friend, and let it not rust under a
Stone to be lost. Be not ashamed to say the Truth; for there is a Shame that
brings Sin, and a Shame that brings Glory and Grace. Accept no Man's Person
against thy Soul, nor let the Respect of any cause thee to fall. Be not hasty
in thy Words, and remiss in thy Deeds. Let not thy Hand be stretched out to
receive, and closed to give. Be not as a Lion in thy House, nor oppress those
that are under thee. Fear thou the Lord and the King, and meddle not with them
that are given to change: For their destruction shall suddenly come upon them.
He that uses much swearing shall be filled with Iniquity, and the Plague shall
not depart from his House. The Drunkard and the Glutton shall come to Poverty;
and Drowsiness shall cloth a Man with Rags. I past by the Field of the
sloathful Man, and by the Vineyard of the Man void of Understanding; and behold
it was grown over with Nettles. By what things a Man Sins, by the same he shall
be tormented.

Resp.] Blessed, O my God, be thy Providence for ever, which so plentifully
furnishes us with Rules of Virtue, and so safely guides all those Souls to
Happiness, who choose to live under thy sweet Government. As thou have shown us
the Way Lord, give us Strength to walk in it; and bring us in the End to thy
eternal Rest. Make us seriously reflect on every Line we read, and love the
Truth when it most reproves us. Make us labor to correct every Error of our
Lives, and always humbly implore thy gracious Assistance.

Glory be to the Father, etc.
As it was in the beginning, etc.
Antiphon.
Before Man is Life and Death, Good and Evil; that which he chooses shall be
given him.

The Prayer.
O God, whose wise Government reserves eternal Joys for those who observing thy
Discipline of Love, mortify their Affections here to all things but Thee; and
eternal Griefs for such as neglecting thy Law of Reason, indulge to their
Passions! Grant, we humbly beseech thee, that thy gracious acquainting us with
this indispensible Order and End of thy Providence, may continually sway our
Choice to leave the broad and flattering Road of present Ease, leading to
Death, and press resolutely forward in the rough and narrow Path, which leads
to true Life; through our Lord Jesus Christ thy Son, who with thee and the Holy
Ghost, lives and reigns, one God World without end, Amen.

Wednesday LAUDS.
Antiphon.
All my Life long will I praise my God; and lift up my Hands to his Holy Name.

Psalm 44.
LET them neglect thy Praises, O God; who never consider thy Mercies.

Let them be silent to thee, O gracious God; whose Mouths are full of
themselves.

But as for us who subsist by thy Gifts; and thankfully acknowledge the Riches
of thy Goodness:

Our Hearts shall continually meditate on thee; and our Lips shall delight to
sing thy Glory.

Blessed for ever be thy Name, O Jesu; and blessed be the sweetness of thy
Wisdom.

Whose infinite Charity has vouchsaft our Earth, such excellent Rules to guide
us to Heaven.

Thou taughtest us the happy Skill of finding our Lives; by a generous losing
them, to follow thee.

Thou taughtest us to love our true selves best; by wisely hating our mistaken
selves.

Thou taughtest us to trample this World under our Feet; and use it as a Step
to climb up into Heaven.

From thee we learn those glorious Mysteries; that exalt our Faith so high
above Reason.

From thee we derive those Heroic Counsels; that raise our Souls so far above
Nature.

From thee alone, and from thy School of Grace; all we know we learn, and all
we do we receive.

How long, alas! might we have wandered here, in the midst of Darkness and
Errors;

Had not thy Love and Pity, O merciful Lord! brought down thy self to become
our Light?

Never should we else have learnt to deny our selves; and take up our Cross,
and follow thee.

Never should we have known that great Secret; to forgive our Enemies, and do
good to those that despitefully use us.

On the unsatisfying things of this low Earth; should we blindly have set our
whole Affections:

Had thou not told us of the Kingdom of Heaven; and bid us lay up our
Treasures there:

Had thou not terrified us to fear thy Wrath; by declaring the Miseries that
attend our Sins:

Had not thou invited us to obey thy Commands; by proposing the Felicities of
a pious Life.

What have thou promised Lord to the Weepers here; to those that hunger and
thirst after Holiness?

How many Joys have thy Bounty prepared; for the Lovers of Mercy and Makers of
Peace?

How many Blessings for the pure of Heart; and those who with patience bear
their Crosses?

O thou All-seeing Wisdom of the Eternal Father; and sovereign King of Men and
Angels!

Who from thy glorious Throne did descend on our Earth; familiarly to teach
us the Oracles of Heaven.

Write thou these sacred Words in the Tables of our Hearts; and suffer not at
any time our Passions to break them.

Make us still study thee our Heavenly Master; and continually admire the
beauty of thy Law.

A Law, that so clearly shows us our End; and so plenteously furnishes us with
means to attain it.

A Law, that so safely cures our Infirmities; and so fitly supplies all our
Defects.

A Law, so exactly conformable to Reason; and so highly perfective of Humane
Nature.

A blessed Law, that makes even here our Life more sweet; and leads us
hereafter to everlasting Felicity.

Glory be to the Father, etc.
As it was in the beginning, etc.
Psalm 45.
NEver will we cease to exalt thy Goodness, O Jesu; since thou never ceasest to
oblige us with new Blessings.

Thy generous Charity could not thus be satisfied; to have only spoken to us
the Words of Life.

'Twas not enough for thy excessive Love, that thy Heavenly Sermons told us our
Duty:

But thou must urge, and provoke our Obedience; by the sweet enforcement of
thine own Example.

Thou forbidest thy Followers to affect Superfluity; and thine own Provision
was a few Barley-Loaves.

Thou command the Rich to give Alms with Cheerfulness; and bestowest on the
poorest Wretch even thy precious Self.

Thou bid'st us not fear them that kill the Body; and yieldedst up thine own to
the Death of the Cross.

Thou injoynest us to love our fiercest Enemies; and thy dying Breath prayed
for thy Crucifiers.

Thy perfect Soul needed not, as our weak Natures, the outward Forms and
Discipline of Religion.

Yet thou vouchsafedst to observe the common Feasts; and assist at the public
Offices of the Temple.

To watch, and pray, and fast with so fervent a Zeal; that thy Practice out-did
thine own Precepts.

This Life, and even Death it self, our merciful Lord undertook; to mark out
for us the Way to Heaven.

To beat it plainly by his own sacred Steps; and render our Passage thither
easy and secure.

Shall we not then, O my Soul, rejoycingly follow that Path; which we see our
Savior has trod before us?

Which we see, tho spread all over with Thorns; yet carried him directly to the
Glories of Paradise.

Shall we not confidently rely on so gracious a Leader; who promises if we
faint to look back and relieve us?

O dearest Lord, bow down thy gracious Eye; and pity the Frailties of our
imperfect Nature.

Reach forth thy Hand, and strengthen us with thy Grace; that nothing divert
our Advance toward thee.

But in this dangerous Labyrinth of the World; and the whole Course of our
Pilgrimage here:

Thy Heavenly Dictates may beour Map; and thy holy Life may be our Guide.

Glory be to the Father, etc.
As it was in the beginning, etc.
Psalm 46.
MAY every Age sing Praises to our God; and all Generations adore thy
Providence.

From the Beginning his Mercy has still laid Means; to raise us to those
blessed Objects above our Nature.

At first he created Adam with all necessary Knowledge; and then ordained the
Patriarchs to inform their Families.

Afterward he charged the Angels to bring us his Commands; and often inspired
the Prophets to declare his Will.

When he had done all this, and found it not enough; to guide untoward Man to
his true End.

What did he do then to save the perishing World? O strange excess of Divine
Goodness!

He sent even his own beloved Son to dwell amongst us; and teach us the Art of
working out our Salvation:

That sacred Art of training up our Souls for Heaven; and fitting them for the
blissful Union with himself.

But, O thou King of glorious Sweetness; whose flowing Tongue dropped Milk and
Honey!

We were not alas! so happy as to behold thy Person; nor our Ears worthy to
hear thy Voice.

Yet e're we were born thou had us in thy Thoughts; and did provide a
Method to supply that Defect.

Selecting a number of choice Disciples; and thoroughly instructing them in thy
Heavenly Doctrine.

That they might keep alive the Memory of thee; and witness to all Nations thy
stupendous Works.

Thou did verify their Mission with the power of Miracles; and enflamedst
their Hearts with the Fire of thy Spirit.

Over all the World they proclaimed thy Law; and undauntedly preached the
crucified Jesus.

Deep in the Breasts of thy Faithful did they write thy Gospel; and sealed it
before their Eyes with their own Blood.

Their Successors deposited the same precious Treasure; in the common Magazin
of the Universal Church.

Enjoining their Children to guard it with their Lives; and convey it unchanged
to future Ages.

Thus is the Catholic Faith descended on us; and thus shall continue to the
end of the World.

Blessed be thy Goodness, O gracious God; who have thus made known thy Will to
us.

Blessed be thy Power, O Lord; who by thy Apostles have wrought such Miracles
to confirm thy Faith, and inclined our Hearts to believe it.

How many Souls are unhappily seduced; and lose themselves in the Wilderness of
Error and Heresy?

While we are guided by thy Providence; and directly led the strait and only
way to Bliss.

How many Nations lie miserably involved in the Darkness of Barbarism and
Unbelief?

While we enjoy a clear Noonday; and safely walk in the Light of Truth.

O infinite Goodness! who freely chusest to pour forth thy Blessings on
unworthy us.

As it is alone from thee we receive these Favors; to thee alone let us return
our Praises.

Glory be to the Father, etc.
As it was in the beginning, etc.
1 Pet. Chap. 5. Ver. 10.
But the God of all Grace, who has called us to his eternal Glory by Jesus
Christ, after that ye have suffered a while, make you perfect, stablish,
strengthen, settle you.

To him be Glory and Dominion for ever and ever, Amen.

Hymn 14.
MY God, had I my Breath from Thee,
This Power to speak and sing?
And shall my Voice, and shall my Song,
Praise any but our King?
My God, had I my Soul from Thee,
This Power to judge and choose?
And shall my Brain, and shall my Will,
Their best to thee refuse?
Alas! not this alone, or That,
Have thou bestowed on me;
But all I have, and all I hope,
I have and hope from Thee.
And more I have, and more I hope,
Than I can speak or think;
Thy Blessings first refresh, then fill,
Then overflow the Brink.
But though my Voice and Fancy be
Too low to reach thy Praise;
Yet both shall strain, thy glorious Name,
High as they can to raise.
Glory to Thee immortal God,
One great coequal Three;
As at the first Beginning was,
May now, and ever be, Amen.
Antiphon.
I have planted, and fenced, and set Guardians over it, what more can I do for
my Vineyard? says our Lord.

V. Still it needs thine own continual Eye;

R. Still the Dew of Heaven to keep it fruitful.

The Prayer.
O God, whose Eternal Wisdom, the Word made Flesh and dwelling amongst us, not
only told the World with his own Sacred Mouth, the unthought on Steps which
lead directly to Heaven, but trod them out plain with his own Sacred Feet, and
ordained his Holy Scriptures through all Generations, to guide ours steddily in
them! let not, we humbly beseech thee, so much Love and Care be lost on us; but
vouchsafe us thy continually necessary Grace, not only to learn by Roat, and
profess with our Lips this precious Way, kept still open to our Eyes; but make
it our whole Life to walk diligently in it, even to Death, and beyond, through
our Lord Jesus Christ thy Son, who with Thee and the Holy Ghost, lives and
reigns ever One God, World without End, Amen.

Wednesday Vespers.
In the Name of the Father, and of the Son, and of the Holy Ghost.

Antiphon.
A good Conscience is a continual Feast; And a peaceful Mind the Antipast of
Heaven.

Psalm 47.
LOrd, how secure they live whom thy Grace preserves in Innocence!

The Day goes smoothly over their Heads; and silent as the Shadow of a Dial.

The Spirits of their Fancies run calm and even; and ebb and flow in obedience
to Reason.

All their Delight is to think of Heaven; and reckon over the Joys they shall
one Day possess.

Till some unruly Passion press to come in; and by its fawning Outside gain
admittance.

It promises at first all Joy, all Happiness; but soon discovers its pernicious
Effects and Intents.

Soon it grows bold to undermine their Repose; and open a Door to all their
Enemies.

So at a little Breach of a City Wall, a whole Army pours in their numerous
Body.

Enslaving all that submit to their Violence; and destroying all that make Head
to resist it.

And such, alas! is their Confusion; when once they have yielded to their first
Assault.

Immediately a Throng of tumultuous Spirits crowd into their Heads; and utterly
consume the little Remnant of their Peace.

O the Distraction of a Life led by Humor; and the miserable Thraldom of being
subject to our Passions!

How often do they engage us to contend with others; and imbitter all our Days
with Strife and Envy?

How often do they quarrel evenamong themselves; and raise a War in our own
Bosoms?

If they by chance agree in one Design; they many times vex us with their being
disappointed.

If they perhaps sometimes succeed; they seldom produce the expected Content.

If they delight our corrupted Taste; and we greedily swallow their unwholsom
Sweetness:

Then it is, alas! they most of all undo us; by feeding the Humor of our fatal
Disease.

Vain at the best, and short are the Enjoyments of this World; and after a
little Flattery, betray us into Ruin.

Save us, O blessed Jesus, or else we perish; awake and with thy speedy Mercy,
rescue thy Servants.

Send down thy powerful Grace to sustain us; and thoroughly reduce these unquiet
Disorders.

That we again may turn to our former Rest; and constantly enjoy an universal
Peace.

Peace with the Bad by bearing their Injuries; Peace with the Good by
conforming to their Virtues.

Peace with our selves by regulating our Desires by Reason; and with thee by
improving Reason with Religion.

Glory be to the Father, etc.
As it was in the beginning, etc.
Antiphon.
A good Conscience is a continual Feast; and a peaceful Mind the Antipast of
Heaven.

Thou art, O Lord, the only Anchor of our Hope; save us, O Lord, or else we
perish.

Psalm. 48.
THus are they miserably tossed up and down; who float on the Waves of their own
Passions.

Their wearied Souls soon faint within them; when they see their Lord has
withdrawn his Presence.

They seek him, but cannot find him; they call upon him, but he gives them no
Answer.

(O still seek on, still call upon your God; for his Mercy will surely awake at
last.

Though he may sometimes slumber for a while; to try our Duty, or punish our
Disobedience:

Though he may suffer a while the Fury of the Tempest; to show you your hopeless
State if left unto your selves:

Yet be assured he will hear your Prayers at last; he will not permit you to perish
for ever.)

And now when all their Fears were grown to the height; and no means appeared
to sustain their Patience:

When the proud Waves beat violently against them; and covered their little
Vessel with Despair or Ruin.

Behold his blessed Voice commands a Calm; and immediately the Sea and Winds
obey him.

Immediately his Sun arises in their Hearts; and with its gentle Beams revives
their Hopes.

Then is their Darkness turned into Light; and the Clouds dispersed into a
bright Day.

Then they recollect their scattered Thoughts; and range them again in their
ancient Order.

Often they look back on the Dangers they have escaped; and as often bless the
Mercy that delivers them.

Often they look forwards on the Course they were going; and as often sing with
Joy for their happy Change.

Welcome again, that easy Yoke of Christ; and the light Burden of loving your
Savior.

Welcome the Holy Offices of sweet Devotion; and that Soul-enflaming fervent
Prayer.

Now we discern this beauteous Truth; and O may we print it deeply in our Minds.

That the Pleasures of Virtue are pure and constant; and infinite Blessings
reward it.

But the pursuit of Vice is troublesome and intricate; and finishes its Course
in an Abyss of Misery.

Pity, O Lord, thou raiser of them that fall; and sole sustainer of them that
stand!

Pity thy Children's Weakness, who look up to thee; and dearly know we are
nothing in our selves.

Let us not lose this unhappy Experience; but teach us Wisdom from our own
Miscarriage.

Teach us to observe where our Error was; and fortify our selves against the
like Defect.

To suppress our Temptations in their first Approach; when their Power is weak,
and our Choice is in full Strength.

To remember how formerly their Flatteries have abused us; and when they
counterfeit again, be no more deceived.

Never to look on the Face of Pleasures, as they come dressed up, and smiling
toward us:

But always reflect how sadly they go off; and leave nothing behind but their
own venomous Sting.

So shall we gain the best of Victories; while we Master our own corrupt
Inclinations.

So shall we be honored with the noblest of Triumphs; whilst our conquered
Passions draw us up to Heaven.

Glory be to the Father, etc.
As it was in the beginning, etc.
Antiphon.
Thou art, O God, the only Anchor of our Hope; save us, O Lord, or we perish.

Ant.] All our Lots are in the Hands of God; and all our Safety in the
Assistance of his Grace.

Psalm 49.
LOrd! as thy All-wise Providence seems to sleep sometimes; and permits the
Storm to grow high and loud:

Yet never fails to relieve thy Servants; who faithfully call on thee in the
Day of Trouble:

So let thy favorable Hand still bear us up; when thou see us charged with
any dangerous Assault.

Leave us not then to our own Infirmities; lest the Enemy of Souls prevail
against us.

Forsake not our Misery when we are fallen; lest we lie for ever grovelling on
the Earth.

Suffer not our Frailties to become a Custom; lest we die impenitent, and
perish without Recovery.

Deliver us, O Lord, from the Occasions of Sin; and the Importunities of such
as delight in Folly.

Deliver us from the Snare of enticing Company; and the dangerous Infection of
ill Example:

Infection that spreads in every place its poisonous Air; and wherever it
enters, corrupts and kills.

Once more, my Soul, let us repeat this Prayer; and humbly implore again so
necessary a Blessing.

Deliver us, O Lord, from the Occasions of Sin; and the Importunities of such
as delight in Folly.

Deliver us from the Snare of enticing Company; and the dangerous Infection of
ill Example.

Set a strict Watch continually before our Eyes; and diligently keep the Door
of our Lips.

Govern all our Senses that they seduce not our Mind; and order every Motion of
our Heart and Fancy.

Perfect, O dear Redeemer, the Work thou have begun; and make even our Passions
Servants of thy Grace.

Change our rude Anger into a Severity against our selves; and a prudent Zeal
for others.

Convert our Fear into a Timorousness to offend; and an awful Reverence to thy
Sacred Name.

Let all our Affections be turned into Charity; that our Hearts may desire
nothing but Thee.

Whom we may safely love with our whole Strength; whose Heaven we may Covet,
and fear no Excess.

O Thou, whose blissful Vision is the Joy of Angels; and sovereign Happiness of
all Saints!

O that our Souls could love thee without Limits; as thou art in thy self most
infinitely amiable.

That we could fix all our Thoughts on Thee; and never take them off from the
Memory of thy Sweetness.

At least, O thou Fountain of eternal Blifs, and Bounty that flows so freely
with eternal Blessings!

Let every Day we receive of thee, still set apart some Portion of it self:

Seriously to meditate thy infinite Mercies; and heartily rejoice in thy
glorious Rewards:

Mercies that give us all we have; and Rewards that reserve for us all we can
wish.

Glory be to the Father, etc.
As it was in the beginning, etc.
Antiphon.
All our Lots are in the hands of God; and all our Safety in the Assistance of
his Grace.

Chap. Gal. 5. 19.
NOW the Works of the Flesh are manifest, which are these; Adultery,
Fornication, Uncleanness, Lasciviousness,

Idolatry, Witchcraft, Hatred, Variance, Emulations, Wraths, Strifes,
Seditions, Heresies,

Envyings, Murders, Drunkenness, Revellings, and suchlike; of the which I tell
you before, as I have told you in times past, that they which do such things
shall not inherit the Kingdom of God.

But the Fruit of the Spirit is Love, Joy, Peace, Long-Suffering, Gentleness,
Goodness, Faith, Meekness, Temperance, Patience, against such there is no Law.

Hymn 15.
LET others court what Joys they please,
And gain what ever they court;
For me I find but little Ease
In all their gayest Sport.
Be thou alone but with my Heart,
My God, my only Bliss;
I shall not murmur at my part,
Not envy their Success.
They talk of Pleasure, talk of Gain,
None must their Humor cross;
But well I know their Pleasure's Pain,
Their greatest Profit Loss.
Let them talk on: and have not we
Our Gains our Pleasures too?
Pleasures that spring more sweet and free,
Gains that more fully flow.
Nay well endured, our very Pains
To us a Pleasure are;
And all our Losses turn to Gains,
If Hopes may have their Share.
And sure they may, such Hopes that cheer,
The Heaven-espoused Breast;
Hopes that so strangely charm us here,
What will they be possessed.
All Glory to the Sacred Three,
All Honor, Power, and Praise;
As 'twas at first, still may it be,
Beyond the end of Days, Amen.
Antiphon.
When, O my Soul, did we ever follow our Passions, but they instantly wrought
our Disturbance, and threatened at last our Ruin? When did we ever turn our
Hearts to Piety, but it presently brought us Peace, and refresht our Minds with
new hopes of Felicity?

V. The Winds are often rough, and our own Weight presses us downwards.

V. Reach forth thy Hand, thy saving Hand, and speedily deliver us.

Let us pray.
O God, whose infinite Mercy has vouchsaft us the mighty Rescue of thine only
Son, from the desperate Rebellion of our Passions, which utterly confound the
Government and Peace of our Souls! Grant, we beseech thee, that our Experience
of the miserable Effects of yielding to their Allurements, may make us warier
in observing, and severer in repressing their first Motions; and let thy Grace
so strongly fortify us against all their furious and repeated Assaults, that
Reason may more and more recover its due force, and calmly join with Faith to
secure and exalt in our Hearts the blessful Throne of thy Love, through our Lord
Jesus Christ thy Son, who lives and reigns with thee and the Holy Ghost, One
God blessed for ever, Amen.

Wednesday Compline.
V. Our help stands in the Name of the Lord. Antiphon.
Repent now my Soul for the Evils thou have done, and bless thy God for the
Goods thou have received.

Psalm 50.
WELL! we are so much nearer our Grave; and all the World is older by a Day.

The Portion of the Wicked is so much less; and the time of their Punishment so
much approached.

The Sufferings of the Patient so much diminisht; and their hopes of
Deliverance so much encreast.

They who have spent this Day in Sin and Folly; see all their Thoughts now
vanish like a Dream.

They see all is past but a fear of Revenge; and the best that can follow is a
bitter Repentance.

But such as have wisely bestowed their Time; and made another new Step toward
Heaven:

They see their Joys come to meet them in the way; and still grow bigger as
they come.

Till by a Holy Death they join in One; and dwell together for Eternal Ages.

O thou blessed Author of all our Hopes; and perfect Satisfier of all our Wishes!

Do thou instruct us in this great wise Truth; and let every Evening renew it
in our Minds:

That the things of this World are of little import; since its Joys and Griefs
last but for a Time.

But the future State most infinitely concerns us; where Life and Death endure
for ever.

Glory be to the Father, etc.
As it was in the beginning, etc.
Psalm 51.
WE are nearer indeed the end of our Life; but what are we nearer the End for
which we live?

What have we done my Soul to Day; that is truly advancive to our last great
Home?

Have we encreast our esteem of Heaven; and settled its Love more strongly in
our Hearts?

Have we avoided any known Temptation; or faithfully resisted when we could
notavoid?

Have we interrupted our customary Faults; and checked the Vices we are most
inclined to?

Have we embraced the Opportunities of Good; which the Mercy of Providence has
offered to our Hands?

Have we industriously contrived Occasions, to improve, as we are able, our
selves and others?

Alas, dread Lord! what do we see; when seriously we look into our guilty
selves?

When we reflect upon our former Years; nay even the Follies of this one Day.

So many Hours misspent in nothing; so many abused in worse than nothing.

Pardon, O meek Redeemer, what our Passions have done, and favorably supply
what our Weakness has omitted.

Make us hereafter more carefully watch; that our Time unprofitably slide not
away.

Make us felect every Day some fit Retreat; to study the Knowledge of our
Selves and Thee:

Our selves to corect our many Infirmities; and thee to adore thy infinite
Perfections.

Glory be to the Father, etc.
As it was in the beginning, etc.
Psalm 52.
LIttle thou know, O Lord, is the Good we do; and every Grain of it derived
from Thee.

Great we confess are the Evils we commit; and all to be charged entirely upon
our selves.

Tell me, my Soul, when thou have well examined the innumerable Circumstances
that concern thy State;

Tell me, and let not Pride deny the Truth; nor any thing divert thy free
Confession:

Could we have saved our selves from any dangerous Temptation; unless our God
had powerfully sustained us.

Could we have carried on any pious Purpose; unless his Hand had blessed our
Endeavors?

No! to thy Self, O Lord, we give all the Praise; if thy Creatures have
performed the least good Work.

Give to thy self all the Glory, O Lord; if they have not committed the worst
of Sins.

Thy Hand alone directs us to do well; and the same blessed Hand restrains us
from ill.

It Is not in us to esteem those unseen Joys; and despise the Flatteries of this
deceitful World.

It Is not the Work of corrupted Nature to mortify our Senses; and patiently
bear the Crosses we meet.

Of our selves we are inclined to none of these; but the Grace of God enables
us for all.

Grace gives us Strength to overcome our Passions; and the World and the Flesh
shall be subject to us.

Grace gives us Faith to fortify our Reason; and Heaven it self shall be
conquered by us.

Glory be to the Father, etc.
As it was in the beginning, etc.
Antiphon.
Repent, O my Soul, for the Evil thou have done; and bless thy God for the Good
thou have received.

Hymn 16.
AND do we then believe
There is a World to come;
Where all this World shall summoned be,
To take their final Doom?
Is there a Heaven indeed,
To crown the Innocent?
Is there a Hell, and horrid Pains,
The Wicked to torment?
Are these Eternal too,
And never to have end?
Shall never these Delights decay,
Those Sorrows never mend?
Good God! is all this true?
And sure most true it is;
And yet we live as if there were
Nothing so false as this.
O quicken, Lord, our Faith
Of these great Joys and Fears;
And make the last Days Trumpet be
Still sounding in our Ears.
Still may this glorious Hope
Shine bright before our Eyes;
We shall at last go up to meet
Our Jesus in the Skies.
Come, Jesus, come, and take
Our banished Souls to thee;
Come quickly, Lord, that in thy Light,
Our Eyes thy Light may see.
Glory to thee, great God,
One coeternal Three;
As at the first Beginning was,
May now, and ever be, Amen.
Chap. Phil. 4. V. 8.
FInally Brethren, whatsoever things are true, whatsoever things are honest,
whatsoever things are just, whatsoever things are pure, whatsoever things are
lovely, whatsoever things are of good Report; if there be any Virtue, and if
there be any Praise, think on these things, and the God of Peace be with you.

Antiphon.
Every Night approaches nearer our last, which reserves for us Eternal Wages;
justly, yet with a vast and generous Bounty proportioned to the Works of our
Days.

V. The Wise will always keep their Lamps ready trimmed,

R. That the Bridegrooms Call may never surprise them.

The Prayer.
O God, whose merciful Providence sweetens and makes easy the laborious Course
of our Pilgrimage through this World with constant Conveniences and Seasons of
Repose! vouchsafe us, we humbly beseech thee, to make our due Advantage of this
thy Mercy, composing our Souls more satisfiedly to rest by a faithful
Recollection every Evening how we have kept our Way, and whether we are
advanced; and grant that reflecting with hearty Contrition on every Step we
have made awry, and with thankful Acknowledgments for those thou have led us
aright, we may henceforth be rendered more wary of our deviating Inclinations,
and more attentively obsequious to the steady Guidance of thy Grace, through our
Lord Jesus Christ; who with thee and the Holy Ghost, lives One God World
without end, Amen.

Thursday MATTINS.
Invitatory.
Come let us Adore our God that feeds us.
Come let us Adore our God that feeds us.
Psalm 53.
HE freely opens his bounteous Hand, and fills with his Blessings every living
Creature; he gives even Kings their daily Bread, and all the World's maintained
with his Provisions.

Come let us Adore our God that feeds us. He feeds our Understanding with the
Knowledge of Truth, and strengthens our Wills with his Holy Grace; he refreshes
our Memories with a thousand Benefits, and feasts our whole Souls with
Everlasting Hopes.

Come let us Adore our God that feeds us. With himself, and his sacred Body and
Blood, he feeds us, and nourishes us up to immortal Life; beginning even here
that blessed Union, which shall be fully perfected in his own Kingdom.

Come let us Adore our God that feeds us. Glory be to the Father, and to the
Son, and to the Holy Ghost;

As it was in the beginning, is now and ever shall be, world without end, Amen.

Hymn 15.
RIse Royal Sion! rise and sing,
Thy Soul's kind Shepherd, thy Heart's King;
Stretch all thy Powers; call if you can
Harps of Heaven to Hands of Man.
This Sovereign Subject sits above
The best Ambition of our Love.
Lo here the Bread of Life! this Day's
Triumphant Text, provokes thy Praise:
The Living and Life-giving Bread,
To the great Twelve distributed:
When Life it self at point to die,
Of Love was his own Legacy.
But lest that die too, we are bid
Ever to do what once he did;
And by a mindful, thankful breath,
That we may live, revive his Death,
By the mysterious Bread and Wine,
Blessed, Sanctified, and made Divine.
The Heaven-instructed House of Faith,
Here a peculiar Power has:
That what appears in form but Bread,
By Consecration's Holy made:
And is to us Christ's Flesh, if we
Receiv't with due Humility.
Thus too the Blood our dear Lord shed,
For us is there exhibited;
And he that eats and drinks by Faith,
Christ's Flesh and Blood, Salvation has.
In The mysterious Fruit of the Vine,
The Holy Sacramental Wine.
Lo the Life-Food of Angels then
Bowed to the lowly Mouths of Men;
Lo! the full final Sacrifice,
On which all Figures fix their Eyes.
The ransomed Isaac, and his Ram.
The Manna, and the Paschal Lamb.
Jesus! to thee we Sinners sue;
O thou our Food and Shepherd too*
Still by thy self vouchsafe to keep,
As with thy self thou feed'st thy Sheep.
Blessed be that Love, which thus makes thee
Mix with our low Mortality.
O may it raise, and set us up,
Partakers of thine own full Cup;
Coheirs of Saints, who shine most bright,
In Mansions of Eternal Light;
That we, for ever blessed, may sing,
Praises to thee our Lord and King, Amen.
Antiphon.
Upon this Rock will I build my Church, and the Gates of Hell shall not prevail
against it.

Psalm 54.
HE who made the Sun to enlighten our Steps, in the Pilgrimage of this short
Life:

Has he ordained no Guide to conduct our Souls, in the difficult way to their
Eternal Home?

He who feeds the Ravens that call upon him; has he not provided Bread for his
Children?

He has; and still his Mercy furnishes us with Means to perform whatever his
Justice commands.

Long since he espoused to himself an unspotted Church; and promised it His
Presence to the End of the World.

Establishing his Truth on a firm Pillar; a solid Foundation to sustain our
Faith.

That we waver no longer as Children; nor be carried away with every Wind of
Doctrine:

Nor consume all our Days with studying to believe; without ever proceeding to
Life and Action.

This Spouse, O thou glorious King of Heaven, and admirable Lover of poor
ruined Man!

This humble Spouse, thou came down to woo, and dearly purchase with thine
own Blood.

Thou have endowed her with eminent Prerogatives; above the rest of the
Daughters of the Earth.

Preserving her in the midst of Pagans and Jews; and the subtiler Enemies,
Politicians, and Heretics.

Preserving thy Truth in her, bright and conspicuous as the Sun; that every
open willing Eye may see her Light.

Preserving the Professors of thy saving Truths in perfect unity; while all
that divide from Truth are divided among themselves.

Thou have adorned her with the Beauty of Order, when thy Church is in
splendour; and with Peace and Patience under an Eclypse.

Thou did introduce her with the Power of Miracles; and cemented her with the
Blood of Martyrs.

Thou have given her the Keys of thy Treasures; and opened unto her the
Mysteries of Heaven it self.

Mysteries that free our Souls from the Dominion of Sense; and place them above
the reach of Reason.

These thy whole Church unanimously confesses and attests; as derived from thee
their Original Source.

Whence running along through every Age; they have always maintained their
constant Channel.

O may they still bear on their Course; and still spread wider their wholesome
Streams.

May all the World be watered with this Dew of Heaven; and bring forth Fruit to
everlasting Life.

We are almost now constrained to believe; Lord grant us Grace to hope and Love.

Glory be to the Father, etc.
As it was in the beginning, etc.
Psalm 55.
SAse in the Hand of the Apostolic Catholic Church, has our provident Lord
deposited the richest Treasures of his Kingdom.

Commanding his Bishops and Priests to conserve them with Reverence; and
dispense them to others with a prudent Charity.

Soon as we are born into this World of Danger, his vigilant Pastors are ready
according to their Offices; to dispense his Baptism to save us.

To wipe out the guilt of our Birth, and write our new Name in the Book of Life.

What all Eternity could not have worn off; a little sprinkling of Water washes
away.

When we are come to riper Years, and a fit Capacity of professing our Faith;

His holy Bishops impose their Hands; confirm and cherish our growing Belief:

That we may never be ashamed of the Cross of Christ; but to the Face of Death
freely confess him.

If in our Spiritual Combat we receive a Wound; he has appointed Persons
expressly to cure us.

Only he requires we should open our Sores before them; and heartily repent of
our wilful Rashness.

He requires we should satisfy the World and our own Souls; in repairing the
Damage they sustain by our Trespass.

Healed by the bitter Waters of Repentance; we are immediately invited to all
the Sweetness of Paradise.

To taste the delicious Bread of Angels; to eat the very Flesh it self,
spiritually and sacramentally, of the Son of God.

So to become entirely one with him; while we feed on his Body and Blood, and
are governed by his Spirit.

That the World may continue in a blessed Succession; he solemnly sanctified the
Rites of Marriage.

Exalting that State to the Honor of a Mystery; that we might the more regard
the Holiness of its Duties.

To prevent the failing of Governors in the Church; (the Church for which the
World continues;)

Themselves are empowered to kindle fresh Lights; who still may shine on when
the old ones are spent.

Yet is there one important Period of our Life; the Sickness that summons us to
the Bar of Death.

Nor has our Church forgotten this; but carefully provided a holy Office,

For the Visitation of the Sick; and Absolution for the dying Penitent.

To allay our Fears in that sad Hour; and strengthen our Hopes of everlasting
Felicity*

That we may finish our Course with Peace; and go up with Joy to receive our
Crown.

Thus by thy wise indulgent Care; O thou sweet Conductor of our Souls!

Every Station of our Pilgrimage has a fit Entertainment; and every Defect a
proper Remedy.

Glory be to the Father, etc.
As it was in the beginning, etc.
Antiphon.
How admirably, O Lord, has thy Wisdom contrived our Salvation, infusing even
by our Senses Grace into our Souls!

Ant.] We confess, we are bound to do many things against our Will; why not
believe some few above our Understanding?

Psalm 56.
THese are the seven Golden Candlesticks, the seven Golden Offices; set up to
enlighten, serve, and adorn God's Church.

But behold in the midst one like the Son of Man; but it is indeed the Son of
God.

Behold he comes to us by the Symbols of Bread and Wine; who is indeed both God
and Man.

He whom the Seraphims prostrate adore; and fly with all their Wings to perform
his Commands.

He who came down to die for us Sinners; and ascended again above the highest
Heavens.

Himself is there, and graciously stays our Coming; to receive our Prayers, and
send us home with a Blessing.

All the Faithful that approach him with prepared Hearts, feel the virtue of
Divine Love;

Going out of him to heal their Infirmities, and warm their Souls, and inflame
their Affections.

And thus a lively Faith passes through the Vail; and confidently enters into
the Holy of Holies.

A Faith that works by Love may enter; and fill it self with Celestial Manna.

But the uncharitable Faith shall be cast into Darkness; among them that
believe and tremble.

Behold, O Lord, we believe and hope; perfect by thy vigorous Grace our faint
Endeavors.

Quicken our half-dead Faith into a ready Assent, wherever thou art pleased
to engage thy Word.

Why should we doubt the Power of God can do something, that the Weakness of
Man cannot understand?

Which of us know how the common Bread we eat, is naturally turned into our own
Substance?

And shall we dispute the supernatural Efficacy of this Blessed Bread and Wine
in the Sacrament?

Shall we submit our Reason to the Secrets of Nature; and make it Judge of the
Mysteries of Grace?

Shall we rely upon the Reports of Men where we do not see; and distrust the
Word of God for that Reason?

No! let us now believe, that hereafter we may see; when our Eyes shall be
opened in the Kingdom of Light.

Where our dark Faith shall cease into Vision; and our Hope expire into full
Enjoyment.

Where all our Affections shall be contracted into Love; and Love shall be
extended to all Eternity.

Glory be to the Father, etc.
As it was in the beginning, etc.
Ephesians. Chap. 4. ver. 25.
CHrist loved his Church, and gave himself for it, that he might present it to
himself a glorious Church, not having Spot or Wrinkle, or any such thing; but
that it should be Holy and without Blemish. And Ephesians. 4. 11. He gave some
Apostles, some Prophets, and some Evangelists, and some Pastors and Teachers:

For the perfecting of the Saints, for the Work of the Ministry, for the
edifying of the Body of Christ.

Till we all come in the Unity of the Faith, and of the Knowledge of the Son of
God, unto a perfect Man, unto the Measure of the Stature of the fullness of
Christ.

That henceforth we be no more Children, tossed to and fro, and carried about
with every Wind of Doctrine, by the slight of Men, and cunning Craftiness,
whereby they lie in wait to deceive: But speaking the Truth in Love, may grow
up in him in all things, which is the Head, even Christ. And 1 Cor. 1. 10. Now
I beseech you, Brethren, by the Name of our Lord Jesus Christ, that ye all
speak the same thing, and that there be no Divisions amongst you; but that ye
be perfectly joined together in the same Mind, and in the same Judgment.

And 16. Romans 17. Mark them which cause Divisions and Offenses, contrary to the
Doctrine which you have learned, and avoid them. For they that are such serve
not our Lord Jesus Christ, but their own Belly, and by good Words, and fair
Speeches, deceive the Hearts of the Simple. 1 Jo. 4. 1. Believe not every
Spirit, but try the Spirits whither they be of God, because many false Prophets
are gone out into the World: And 2 These. 2. 15. Therefore, Brethren, stand
fast, and hold the Traditions which we have been taught, whither by Word or our
Epistle. And Heb. 13. 17. Obey them that have the Rule over you, and submit
your selves, for they watch for your Souls, as they that must give an account.

Second Lesson. Matt. 26. 18.
AND Jesus came, and spoke to them saying, All Power is given unto me both in
Heaven and Earth.

Go ye therefore, and teach all Nations, baptizing them in the Name of the
Father, and of the Son, and of the Holy Ghost.

Teaching them to observe all things whatsoever I have commanded you; and lo, I
am with you always, even unto the end of the World, Amen.

Acts 8. 14. Now when the Apostles, that were at Jerusalem, heard that Samaria
had received the Word of God, they sent unto them Peter and John.

Who when they were come down, prayed for them, that they might receive the
Holy Ghost.

For as yet he was fallen on none of them, only they were baptized in the Name
of the Lord Jesus.

Then laid they their Hands on them, and they received the Holy Ghost.

John 20. 21. As my Father sent me, so send I you;

And when he had this said, he breathed on them, and said unto them, Receive
you the Holy Ghost:

Whose-soever Sins ye remit they are remitted unto them, and whose-soever Sins
ye retain they are retained.

1 Cor. 10. 16. The Cup of Blessing which we bless, is it not the Communion of
the Blood of Christ?

The Bread which we break, is it not the Communion of the Body of Christ?

Acts 14. 23. And when they had ordained them Elders in every Church, and had
prayed with Fasting, they commended them to the Lord, in whom they believed.

Genesis 2. 24. Therefore shall a Man leave his Father and Mother, and shall
cleave unto his Wife, and they two shall be one Flesh.

Ephesians. 5. 32. This is a great Mystery; but I speak concerning Christ and his
Church.

James 5. 14. Is any sick among you, let him call for the Elders of the Church;
and let them pray over him, anointing him with Oil in the Name of the Lord.

Ephesians. 3. 20. Now unto him that is able to do exceeding abundantly, above all
that we can ask or think, according to the Power that works in us;

To him be Glory in the Church throughout all Ages, World without end, Amen.

Third Lesson. 1 Cor. 11. 23.
FOR I have received of the Lord that which also I have delivered unto you,
That the Lord Jesus the same Night in which he was betrayed, took Bread;

And when he had given Thanks he brake it, and said, Take, eat, this is my Body
which is broken for you; This do in remembrance of me.

After the same manner also he took the Cup when he had supped, saying, This
Cup is the New Testament in my Blood; this do ye as often as ye drink it in
remembrance of me;

For as often as ye eat of this Bread, and drink of this Cup, ye do show the
Lord's Death till he come.

Wherefore whosoever shall eat this Bread, and drink this Cup of the Lord
unworthily, shall be guilty of the Body and Blood of the Lord.

But let a Man examine himself; and so let him eat of that Bread, and drink of
that Cup.

For he that eats and drinks unworthily, eats and drinks Damnation to
himself, not discerning the Lord's Body.

Resp.] Blessed be thy Holy Name, O Lord, who have provided the Scriptures for
a Comfort of the Faithful; and blessed be thy gracious Wisdom who have left in
thy Church a Rule to interpret them, lest the Unwary and Unstable should
pervert them to their own Destruction. Renew, O merciful Lord, a right Spirit
in the World, a Spirit of Humility and Obedience, that in reading those Sacred
Books, none may prefer their private Fancies before the Testimony of the
Church-Universal; nor be obstinately perverse against their proper Pastors; but
all may readily submit to them whom he that hears, hears thee, and he that
despises despises thee.

Res.] Jo. 6. 48. I am the Bread of Life. And Jo. 6. 31. Our Fathers did eat
Manna in the Wilderness, as it is written, He gave them Bread from Heaven to
eat. v. 33. For the Bread of God is he which comes down from Heaven, and
gives Life to the World. Then said they unto him, Lord evermore give us this
Bread.

V. 51. I am the living Bread which came down from Heaven; if any Man eat of
this Bread he shall live for ever; and the Bread that I will give is my Flesh,
which I will give for the Life of the World: For my Flesh is Meat indeed, and
my Blood ^s Drink indeed. These, O my dearest Savior, are thy very Words, O
evermore give us this Bread.

Thursday Lauds.
Antiphon.
How great is the multitude of thy Loving-kindnesses, which thou have laid up
for them that fear thee?

Psalm 57.
WHere, O thou boundless Ocean of Charity! where will thy overflowing Streams
stay their Course?

We, and our Ingratitude strive to oppose thee; but nothing can resist thine
Almighty Goodness:

When the Impiety of Man was at the height, and their treacherous Heads
plotting to betray thee:

Then did thy Wisdom mercifully consult to overcome our Malice with thy Bounty.

Immediately thou contrivedst an admirable Way, to invite all the World to a
Feast of Miracles:

A Feast in which are continually wrought new Miracles of Love for us.

And as if it had not been Love enough, to have given thy self on the Cross for
us:

Thou have found out a Way to give thy self to us in the Holy Sacrament:

To unite us to thy self with the most intimate Union that its possible to
conceive; and which we can better feel than express.

For what greater Mercy, and Bounty can be extended to us poor Mortals, than
for our Redeemer to become the very Food of our Souls?

To become the Life, the Strength, the Support and Comfort of our Souls:

Nay to become even one with me, and be unto me the very Soul of my Soul?

O Lord my God, this is so unconceivable a Blessing; this is so Divine an Union;

That the very Angels, who so much desire to look into the great Mystery of our
Redemption,

Do crowd about our Altars, and with awful Admiration contemplate thy wonderful
Condescension in it.

Resp.] Pet. 1. 12. Ephesians. 3. 10. 1 Cor. 10.

What Thanks then, gracious Lord, can I return thee for those Wonders of Love
thou have showed to me a wretched Sinner; which those blessed Angels above, who
never sinned, so diligently attend, so much admire?

In this Feast thy whole All-glorious Self is freely given to the meanest, if
truly prepared Guest.

A Feast of Love and incomparable Sweetness, to which thine own blessed Mouth so
kindly calls us.

Come to me you that labor for Holiness, and are oppressed under the Weight of
your Sins.

Come to me you that hunger after Heaven, and thirst to drink at the Fountain
of Bliss.

Come to me, and I will refresh you with the Wine of Gladness, and the Bread of
Life.

Come you that are weak, that you may grow strong; and you that are strong lest
you become weak.

Come you that have Leisure, and here entertain your Time; Come you that are
busy, and here learn to sanctify you Employment.

Come all, and gather freely of this Celestial Manna, and fill your Souls with
the Food of Angels.

Glory be to the Father, etc.
As it was in the beginning, etc.
Psalm 58.
THus does our gracious Lord invite, and shall we go? shall Sinners dare to sit
down at his Table?

Thus he invite^ and shall we not go; shall Wretches presume to refuse his Call?

Rise then, my Soul, and take the swiftest Wings; and fly to the Presence of
this great Mystery.

Soon as thou come, bow low thy Head; and humbly adore thy blessed Redeemer:

Our God that comes so far to meet us; and brings along with him all his
Mercies and Merits to entertain us.

Arise, and leave the World behind thee; and run with Gladness to salute thy
Lord.

Enter the Palace of his most glorious Residence; the Place where his Honor
dwells.

There shall we see the Eternal Word, that descended from Heaven to become Man
for us;

Not only represented, but really conveyed to us, and made one with us.

There we shall see this Prince of Peace, not only Symbolically sacrificed for
us, but really giving himself to us.

Can we, O dear Redeemer, believe, and feel, and experimentally enjoy those
great Effects of thy Love;

And not be ravished with Admiration of that Love, which produces such wonderful
Effects.

Can we believe thy all-supream Veracity, and not believe all thou have said
and done?

What though our Eyes see nothing but Bread and Wine? Our Faith and Experience
too, assure us, that there is also our dear Savior.

For, O the Gusts of Joy, and Souls overflowing Comforts, the Just do find
herein!

Producing nothing but Praises, and Thanksgivings, and Love, and Joy, and Fear;

And Care of Offending this blessed and new-enter'd Guest.

What earnest Supplications do they make, that their Lord will keep possession
of their Hearts, and never depart from them more?

Let us not then refuse to believe our God, because his Mercies transcend our
Capacities.

No, no, it is thy very Self, O blessed Jesu; and it is thine own Light by which
we see thee.

And it is thine Holy Spirit the Comforter, by which we feel and find thee.

None but infinite Wisdom couldever have invented so strange, and high, and
prodigious a Mystery.

None but an unconceivable infinite Goodness, would ever have imparted so dear
and rich a Blessing.

Glory be to the Father, etc.
As it was in the beginning, etc.
Psalm 59.
LORD, who are we unworthy Sinners, that thus thou regardest our wretched Dust?

What Is all the World compared to thee; that thus thou seem to disregard thy
self?

It Is for our sakes, and to draw us up to thy Love, that thou thus vouchsafest
to dwell among us.

It Is for our sakes, and to spare the Infirmity of our Nature, that thy
Brightness appears not in its proper Luster.

Blessed are the Eyes that see thee by Faith, in this most Blessed Sacrament;
and blessed is the Mouth that reverently receives thee.

Blessed yet more is the Heart that desires thy Coming, and longs to see thee
in thy beauteous self.

O thou eternal Lord of Grace and Glory, our Joy and Portion in the Land of the
Living!

What have thou there prepared for thy Servants, who bestowest such Pledges of
thy Bounty here?

What do thou reserve in thine own Kingdom, who give us thy self in this
place of Banishment?

How will thy open Vision transport our Souls; when our dark Faith yields such
Delights?

Nothing on Earth so Sweet as to kneel whole Hours before thee, and One by One
consider thine innumerable Mercies.

What must it be in Heaven to shine continually before thee; and all in one
contemplate thine unspeakable Goodness and Glories?

O my adored Redeemer! when will that happy Day appear, that mine Eyes shall
behold thee without a Veil?

When will these Clouds and Shadows pass away; that thy Beams may shine on me
in their full Brightness?

Object not against me, dearest Lord, that none can see thy Face and live?

Those Fears thy Love has changed, and all my Hope is now to live by seeing
Thee.

Say not, O thou mild and gracious Majesty, if I approach thy Presence I must
die.

Rather instruct me so to die, that I may live for ever in thy Presence.

Glory be to the Father, etc.
As it was in the Beginning, etc.
Revel. 7. 10.
SAlvation to our God, who sits upon the Throne, and unto the Lamb, Amen.

Blessing, and Glory, and Wisdom, and Thanksgiving, and Honor, and Power, and
Might, be unto our God for ever and ever. Amen.

Hymn 18.
WIth all the Powers my poor Soul has,
Of humble Love, and loyal Faith,
Thus low, my God, I bow to thee,
Whom too much Love bowed lower for me.
Down busy Sense, Discourses die,
And all adore Faith's Mystery.
Faith is my Skill, Faith can believe,
As fast as Love* new Laws can give.
Faith is my Eye, Faith strength affords,
To keep pace with those gracious words;
And words more sweet, more sure than they
Love could not think, Truth could not say.
O dear memorial of that Death,
Which still survives, and gives us Breath!
Live ever, Bread of Life, and be
My Food, my Joy, my All to me.
Come, glorious Lord, my hopes increase,
And fill my Portion in thy Peace.
Come hidden Life, and that long Day,
For which I languish, come away.
Where this dry Soul, those Eyes shall see,
And drink the unsealed source of Thee.
When Glory's Sun, Faith's Shade shall chase,
And for thy Veil give me thy Face.
Antiphon.
He feeds the young Ravens that call upon him, and says, he esteems us much
better than they: Behold a full proof! He feeds them and all things else; but
to feed us: Behold yet a fuller, and O riddle of Bounty! even out of the Feeder
himself comes Food for us.

V. The Bread of Life which came down from Heaven,

R. Feeds us with the Bread of Knowledge and Understanding.

Let us pray.
O Bounteous Lord, the continual Supplier of thy Creatures, with all convenient
Sustenance to advance our Growth and Strength, fit to take Heaven by violence,
and rise at length eternal Enjoyers of thy self. Fix, we beseech thee, our Eyes
and Adoration on that open hand, which thus graciously gives us our daily
Bread: And grant that the wonderful Feast of thy Son's Body and Blood may duly
sanctify our Tastes to all other thy Bounties, that they may relish as they
are only thy great Love to us, and feed, as they ought, purely thy dear Love in
us, through the same our Lord Jesus Christ. Amen.

Thursday Vespers.
Psalm 60.
UNhappy Man! first created just; as every Work comes fair from the hands of
God.

At first endowed with Dominion over the Earth; and which was more with
Dominion over himself.

At first not only made sole Lord of Paradise; but Heir Apparent of the Heaven
of Heavens.

All this was lost by one rash Act; disobeying the Law of thy wise Creator.

All this, alas, we lost by Adam's Transgression; which brought in Sin, and
Death, and universal Misery.

Our Bodies were depraved by his Distemper; and our Souls made fit for such
depraved Bodies.

Our Senses quickly rebelled against Reason; and both together conspired
against Grace.

Dullness and Ignorance overspread the World; Error and Vice possessed Mankind.

The Law they observed was their own unruly Appetite; and the Deity they
worshipped, the work of their own hands.

Even the selected People of the true God; the favorite Nation of the Almighty
Providence.

They who were brought out of Egypt with so many Wonders; and seated in a
Country flowing with Milk and Honey.

They who had seen the Sea divide before them; and stand of each side as a Wall
to defend them:

They who had tasted the Quails and the Manna from Heaven; and drunk of the
Streams that came gushing out of the Rock.

Even they forgot their great Deliverer; and set up for their God a Golden Calf.

They could not worship what they did not see; they must have Gods to go before
them.

Thus lay the miserable World, all covered with Darkness, and the thickest
Mists of gross Idolatry.

Thus had poor Man quite been lost; and all he could do was to wander up and
down a while.

Till when his few vain Years were spent, he suddenly descended into
everlasting Sorrows.

This moved thy pity, gracious Lord! who often art found by those that seek
thee not.

Who never withdrawest thy Hand in time of need; but constantly suppliest us in
all our Necessities.

This moved thy pity to undertake our Relief; to come down thy self to dwell
among us.

That as our Nature used to worship what it saw; we should now see that God-Man
whom we might safely worship.

But thou again, dear Lord, must leave our World; and though it be good for us,
it is hard to part from thee.

Thou must again ascend into thy Father's Bosom, to prepare a place for thy
faithful Followers.

Yet even then, O thou wise and infinite Goodness! Thou did not utterly
forsake us.

But did both send thy Holy Spirit to comfort us; and give thy self in the
Sacrament to feed us.

Still thou art here to move us by thy Presence; and entertain our Devotions
without fear of excess.

We know it is impossible to adore and love our God too much; O that it were
possible to love and admire him, and adore him enough.

Glory be to the Father, etc.
As it was in the beginning, etc.
Antiphon.
Whither, O my God, should we wander, if left to our selves? Where should we
fix our Hearts, if not directed by thee?

Antiphon.
Blessed be thy Providence, O God! that so tenderly nurses up the World; still
growing on to new degrees of Perfection.

Psalm 61.
LORD what a happy change has thy coming wrought! What glorious effects has thy
coming produced!

Once in a populous City not ten that were Just; and on the whole Earth but
eight that were saved.

Now we see thousands with a strong and vigorous Love, run swiftly after thee
in the ways of thy Counsels.

Now we see Millions with a fair degree of Hope; walk constantly toward thee,
in the ways of thy Commands.

Now we see Kings and mighty Nations submit to thee; and hope e're long that
all the World will adore thee.

Whence could this strange Improvement come? whence could all those Blessings
spring?

But from thy holy Life, O blessed Jesus, and the infinite Merits of thy
painful Death?

Both which are united, and the Fruits thereof abridg'd, in this blessed and
holy Sacrament.

This, and our holy Baptism, are the two Breasts, that give Life and Spirit to
thy Church:

And that work all the Wonders which so highly adorn the World.

For these we build our great and samptuous Churches; to bestow on our God the
best Houses we have.

For these we beautify thy Temples; and entertain our Lord in the best way we
can.

These sacred things, thy Word and Sacraments; breed in us, not only profound
Veneration and Adoration to thee:

But also a great and due respect to thy Pastors and Priests; the Apostolic
Dispensers thereof.

These saving Mysteries keep alive our dear Redeemer's Death; and apply to our
Souls all the Merits of his Passion.

These fill our Hearts with Heroic Courage; to do, and suffer for the name of
Jesus.

These, in fine, are the food of Faith, and Hope, and Love; and these three fit
us for eternal Happiness.

O blessed Memorial of my Savior's Love; and faithful Seal of all his Promises!

If I forget to sing of thee; let my Tongue cleave to the Roof of my Mouth.

If I forget to meditate on thee, let my Head forfeit its Power to think.

All the short time that I remain in thy presence, I will wholly employ to
adore thy Majesty.

Thee will I bless, for all thy Mercies; to thee will I open all my Necessities.

Begging thy Pardon for my past Offenses; and thy gracious Assistance for the
time to come.

Imploring thy Grace, and preservation of thy Church; and thy Blessing upon all
the World.

O spotless Lamb, once slain for us on the Cross; and duly commemorated on, and
communicated to us at thy holy Altar.

Be thou our powerful Advocate with thy Heavenly Father; and solicit by thy
Merits, his Mercy for us.

Offer thy self before his Throne; and turn away the Wrath we deserve for our
Sins.

So Slaves are rescued from their Chains; and Prisoners from the doom of Death.

Whilst they appease their offended King, with the pleasing remembrance of his
beloved Son.

And so we hope, and infinitely more; from the infinitely greater Mediation of
Jesus.

If thou, O Lord, shall thus restore our Liberty; and cloth thy Servants with
the Robes of thy Righteousness:

Then shall we delight to be still in thy Presence; and where e're we are our
Hearts shall still be with thee.

Glory be to the Father, etc.
As it was in the beginning, etc.
Antiphon.
Blessed be thy Providence, that so tenderly nurses up the World, still going
on to new degrees of Perfection.

Ant.] This is the greatest Charity that God himself can bestow; since God can
bestow nothing greater than himself.

Psalm 62.
AND does our glorious Lord not only visit; but dwell perpetually with us Men
upon Earth?

He whom the Heaven of Heavens cannot contain; does he make his Residence in
our little Tabernacles?

Where are you holy Angels, that you fly not swiftly down to attend your Lord?

Where are you careless Men, that you run not quickly hither; and with your
lowest Homage bow to your King?

Who though he shines out clear to the Blessed above; and the Beams of his
Glory strike bright upon their Faces:

Yet have his Mercies to us far more of Miracle; far more of Care, and tender
Providence.

Whilst he not only is pleased to be among us; but condescends to become even
one with us.

While he is not only our God to go before us; but our very Food to enter into
us.

O Souls redeemed by the Blood of Jesus; and nourished with the Flesh and Blood
of his sacred Body!

Why melt you not into Tears of Joy, for being so regarded by the King of
Heaven?

Why not at least dissolve into Tears of Sorrow; for so little regarding him?

Who will not tremble with an amorous Reverence; that stands in the sight of so
great a Majesty?

Who can forbear to be transported with Joy; that thinks I Am going to revive my
God?

Who can contain the overflowings of his Heart; whilst his Breast can say here
I have my God?

My great and glorious God, who merely out of Love, thus gives me himself in
pledge of my Salvation.

O infinite sweetness! how good is it for us to be here; and behold our Lord
transfigur'd before us?

Hear let us make a thousand Tabernacles; one, O my Jesus, for thee, and one
for each of us.

That in our little Tent we may dwell about thee; and sing, and bow, and
rejoice before thee.

What should the Captive wish but Liberty; and the weary Pilgrim but to be at
rest?

What should the Sick desire but Health? and what can I, but to be with my God?

But stay, am I dressed like a Friend of the Bridegroom; that I safely may come
to this Marriage-Supper?

Have I considered how chaste the Eyes should be, which go to behold the God of
Purity?

Have I considered how clean that Mouth should be, which presumes to eat the
Bread of Heaven?

But how all-celestial that Soul should be; which aspires to an union with the
Body of our Lord?

Look, look my Heart, look well into thy self; and strictly search every corner
of thy Breast.

Alas! how poor, and dull, and empty are we! how infinitely unworthy of so
divine a Sacrament?

Yet are we called by him that can Command; by him that sees, and pities our
Miseries.

He bids us come, he will surely receive us; and with his bounteous fullness
supply our defects.

Go then my Soul, go to that sacred Table, and take thy part of that delicious
Banquet.

Go all enflamed with Love, and Joy, and Hope; and quench thy holy Thirst at
that spring of Bliss.

When thou have tasted the sweetness of thy God; and feel'st his heavenly
Streams How gently on thee:

Open thy happy Breast, and suck those Waters in; and let them freely run over
all thy Powers.

Let them soak deep to the root of thy Heart; and turn thy barren Heath into a
fruitful Land.

Fruitful in holy Thoughts, and pious Words; fruitful in good, and just, and
charitable Deeds.

Fruitful to thy self in thine own Improvement; fruitful to others in thy good
Example.

No more Ingratitude to so gracious a God; no more neglect of so glorious a
Majesty.

Away false Pleasures, Sin and Vanity; for the God of Holiness has touched my
Heart.

He has himself gone in and taken Possession; and sealed it up for his own
Service.

Glory be to the Father, etc.
As it was in the beginning, etc.
Chap. 1 Cor. 13.
THough I speak with the Tongues of Men and Angels, and have not Charity, I am
become as sounding Brass, or a tinkling Cymbal.

And though I have the gift of Prophecy, and understand all Mysteries, and all
Knowledge; and though I have all Faith, so that I could remove Mountains, and
have not Charity, I am nothing.

And though I bestow all my Goods to feed the Poor; and though I give my Body to be
burned, and have not Charity, it profits me nothing.

Charity suffers long, and is kind; Charity envieth not, Charity vaunteth not
it self, is not puffed up, does not behave it self unseemly, seeks not her
own, is not easily provoked, thinks no Evil!

Rejoices not in Iniquity, but rejoices in the Truth.

Bears all things, believes all things, hops all things, endures all
things.

Charity never fails; but whether there be Prophecies, they shall fail;
whether there be Tongues, they shall cease; whether there be Knowledge, it
shall be done away.

When I was a Child, I spoke as a Child, I understood as a Child, I thought as
a Child; but when I became a Man, I put away childish things.

For now I see through a Glass darkly, but then Face to Face: Now I know in part,
but then I shall know, even as I am known.

And now abides Faith, Hope, and Charity, these three; but the greatest of
these is Charity!

Hymn 19.
DO I resolve an easy Life,
Stored with Plenty, free from Strife?
When, dear Lord, thy Days and Nights
Passed in Poverty and Fights.
Do I design a gentle Death,
Singing out my aged Breath?
When, my Savior! Tortures tore
Thy dear Soul out, drowned in Gore.
May this our holy Sacrifice!
Acting in a sweet disguise,
Jesus Passions over again,
Such undue Conceits restrain.
Keep, keep, still lively in thy Mind,
How I ought to be resigned;
How this Pattern ought destroy
All my sensual Grief and Joy.
Are Sufferings ills? no; Wisdom chose
His, and our way to Bliss through those.
Are Pleasures Goods? no; Wisdom scorned
Their dalliance, and us forewarned.
This, Lord, this make my ditty be,
At least whenever thee I see,
Thee its ground so often repeating,
To prevent my Souls forgetting;
Jesu! thus armed, no Terrors shall
Make my virtuous Courage fall;
No Flatteries here my best hopes drown,
Since thy Cross led to thy Crown.
Live for ever, glorious Lord,
Live by Heaven and Earth adored;
O may both their Praises give,
They who see, we who believe.
Antiphon.
Thou art ascended, our glorious Redeemer, to prepare a place for us: Yet
continuest still here our gracious Emanuel, to prepare us for it.

V. Thy delight, O Lord, is to be with the Children of Men;

R. O make it ours to be with the God of Heaven.

Let us pray.
O God! who seeing the dullness of our Spirits, needs so often fresh impulses of
Sense, have wonderfully contrived our alone saving Object, thy sacrificed Son,
continually to solicit our Hearts, by his own dear Presence sacramentally
among us; Reclaim, we humbly beseech thee, all our wandering Affections, with
this Miracle of Goodness, and compose them into such a diligent and devout
Attendance on our gracious Lord, that we may daily feed our Adoration and Love
of him, and daily grow in our desires of seeing Eternally his glorious Face,
who with Thee, and the Holy Ghost, lives and reigns One God, World without
End. Amen.

Thursday Compline.
Psalm 63.
WHO will give me this happy Favor; that I may find my God alone?

That I may find him in the silence of Retirement; where the noise of the World
can no way interrupt us.

But that my God may speak to me, and I to him; as dearest Friends converse
together.

That I may unfold before him all my Wants; and freely ask the Charity of his
Counsel.

What shall I do, O my gracious Lord, to be happy here? what shall I do to be
happy hereafter?

Nature already has thus far taught me; that in all I undertake I seek my own
good.

Only I have cause to fear I may mistake that Good; and set up an Idol instead
of Thee:

Unless my God vouchsafe to instruct me; and show my Soul its true Felicity.

Hark! how the eternal Wisdom gives thee advice! and let every Word sink deep
into thy Soul.

Seek with thy first endeavor the Kingdom of Heaven; and all things else shall
be added to thy wish.

Love with thy whole Affections the Enjoyment of thy God; and all things else
shall conspire to thy happiness.

All these my Lips confess are excellent Truths; but when, O my God, shall my
Life confess them?

When shall I perfectly overcome my Passions? guide them so that they may draw
me to thy Light.

While they are mine, alas, I cannot govern them; behold, dear Lord, I offer
them all to Thee.

Check thou their lawless Motions with thy Grace; lest they violently carry me
away from my Duty.

Wean thou my Heart from the Follies of this World; and quicken its Appetite to
thy solid Joys.

That I may hunger and thirst perpetually after Thee; and those glorious
Promises thou have made to thy Servants.

That my whole Soul may seek Thee alone; since Thou alone art all my Heaven.

Glory be to the Father, etc.
As it was in the beginning, etc.
Psalm 64.
WHen, O my Soul, shall thy God find thee alone; free from those busy thoughts
that fill thy Head?

O with what ready Charity would he then instruct thee; and let thee into his
blessed Secrets!

Himself would become thy familiar Guest; and dwell with thee in perpetual Joy.

Lord, thou must enter first, and chase those Fancies away; and consecrate my
Soul a Temple to thy self.

Take Thou entire Possession, and hold it fast for ever; and suffer not the
Enemies of my Peace to return.

Sit Thou as Sovereign King, and absolutely Command; for thy Government is
mild, and thy Rewards are infinite.

What have Thou promised, Lord, to him that receives Thee with an humble Love?

All that is contained in those sweet and mystic words; he dwells in me, and I
in him.

O blessed words, if once my Soul can say, he dwells in me and I in him!

He is my Refuge in all Temptations; he is my Comfort in all Distresses.

He is my Security against all my Enemies; he dwells in me, and I in him.

What can an infinite Bounty give greater than it self? and what can an empty
Creature receive greater than his God?

O glorious God, my Life, my Joy; and the only Center of all my hopes!

Were my unsteady Soul once united to Thee; or once had relished the sweetness
of thy Presence:

How would all other Company seem dull and tedious; and the whole World be
bitter to my taste?

How would my Thoughts cleave fast to Thee; gladly seal this everlasting
Covenant?

If Thou, O Lord, wilt dwell with me, my Heart shall continually attend Thee.

Night and Day will I sing thy Praises; and all my Life long adore thy Mercies.

Glory be to the Father, etc.
As it was in the beginning, etc.
Psalm 65.
THou art my only hope, O blessed Jesu; and thy Favor alone is all things to
me.

In Thee I find the Providence of a Father; and the tender kindness of an
indulgent Mother.

In Thee I enjoy the Protection of a King; and the rare Fidelity of a constant
Friend.

In Thee I possess whatsoever I want; and thy Fullness exceeds even my utmost
Desires.

Thou art, O Jesus, my God, and all Things; what can I think, or wish for more.

Already enough is said for them that love, and know the value of those
precious words.

O sweet, and charming words, my God and all things! sweet in excess to those
that taste them.

Not to the corrupted Palates of the World, who relish nothing but the Food of
Sense.

Words that revive the fainting Mind; and fill its darkest Thoughts with Light
and Joy.

O may these blessed Words dwell on my Tongue; and live for ever in my faithful
Memory.

Where e're I am in this unconstant World; and whatever business entertains my
Hands;

Still let my inward Eye look up to Thee; and fix its sight on thy glorious
Face.

Still may I wish, and long for that happy Day; which opens to my Soul so blessed
a view.

Where I shall see, and no longer darkly believe, that thou, O Lord, art my God
and all things.

Glory be to the Father, etc.
As it was in the beginning, etc.
Antiphon.
What could thou say, dear Lord, more sweet than this! thy delight's to be
with the Children of Men.

Hymn 20.
COme my Thoughts, that fondly fly
At every Toy which passes by;
Spending so your Strength in vain,
While what you court you never can gain.
Come, fond Man, who sure must be
Quite tired with all this Life can see,
Losing often thy Hopes and Time;
Come take Advice of this plain Rhyme.
Seek no more abroad thy Rest,
But seek at home in thine own Breast:
Let thy Mind from Guilt be clear,
Then look for all thy Comforts there.
With thy self, and with thy God,
Delight to make thy chief abode:
There repose secure and free;
And no Mischance can trouble thee.
Should Death it self thy Walls assail,
Still thou art safe, and can not fail:
Still thy Soul's thine own; and she
To a new House removed shall be.
New and lasting there above,
All built and furnished with pure Love;
There shall this Mud-Wall of thine,
Repaired, the brightest Stars outshine.
There thy Lord that feeds thee now,
With his own Flesh, shall more bestow.
He came down to be like Thee,
Thou shall go up and like him be.
King of Glory, King of Peace,
May these our Praises never cease:
Still may we adore thy Throne,
Still bow, and sing to Thee alone.
1 Pet. Chap. 5. Ver. 6.
HUmble your selves under the mighty hand of God, that he may exalt you in due
time.

Casting all your Care upon him, for he cares for you.

Be sober, be vigilant, because your Adversary the Devil, as a roaring Lion,
walks about seeking whom he may devour.

Whom resist steadfast in the Faith.

Let us pray.
O God, whose delights are to be with the Children of Men, when thy Grace can
prevail with us to quit all other Company, and retire to Thee alone; Grant, we
humbly beseech Thee, that thy Providence, withdrawing every Night all the World
from our Senses, may efficaciously move us to clear our Heads and Hearts of all
its distractions; and thy holy Spirit finding our Minds happily vacant, may
fill them with the profoundest Love, and Reverence, and Adoration of Thee, as
our only God and all things, through our Lord Jesus Christ thy Son, who with
Thee and the Holy Ghost, lives and reigns One God blessed for ever. Amen.

Friday MATTINS.
Invitatory.
Come let us Adore our God that redeemed us.
Come let us Adore our God that redeemed us.
Psalm 66.
WHen we had sold our selves to Sin, and were all become the Slaves of Satan,
our blessed Jesu descended from Heaven, and brought a vast Price to buy out our
Freedom.

Come let us adore our God that redeemed us. The Price was no less than his own
dearest Blood, which he plenteously shed on the Holy Cross, depositing so his
inestimable Life, to rescue us Sinners from the Jaws of Death.

Come let us Adore our God that redeemed us. Let us consecrate this Day to his
sacred Memory, and tenderly Compassionate his unparalleled Sufferings,
repenting from our Hearts our many Sins, and thankfully admiring his infinite
Mercies.

Come let us Adore our God that redeemed us. Let us wean our Minds from
unbecoming Delights, and mortify our Senses with a prudent Restraint, that,
carried on the Wings of Fasting and Alms, our Prayers may mount up more swiftly
to Heaven.

Come let us Adore our God that redeemed us. Glory be to the Father, and to the
Son, and to the Holy Ghost;

As it was in the beginning, is now, and ever shall be, World without end. Amen.

Hymn 21.
COme, let us adore the King of Love,
A King of Sufferings too:
For Love it was that brought him down,
And set him here in woe.
Love drew him from his Paradise,
Where Flowers that fade not grow:
And planted him in our poor Dust,
Among us Weeds below.
Here for a time this Heavenly Plant
Fairly grew up and thrived:
Diffused its sweetness all about,
And all in sweetness lived.
But envious Frosts and furious Storms
So long, so fiercely chide;
This tender Flower at last bowed down
Its bruised Head, and died.
O narrow Thoughts, and narrower Speech,
Here your Defects confess;
The Life of Christ, the Death of God,
How faintly you express!
May he who from a Virgin Root,
Made this fair Flower to spring,
Help us to raise both Heart and Voice
And with more Spirit sing.
To Father, Son, and Holy Ghost,
One undivided Three,
All highest Praise, all humblest Thanks,
Now and for ever be. Amen.
Antiphon.
Take up thy Cross, and follow thy Lord; for his Yoke is easy, and his burden
light.

Psalm 67.
MY God, who can complain of doing too much; if they consider the Labors of
Jesus?

Those painful Labors he so freely undertook; and mildly stooped to his humble
Task.

When he might have flown on the Wings of Cherubims; he chose to walk with us
Worms in the Dust.

When he might have made the Angels his Footstool; he rather became the Servant
of his Parents.

Living with them in their little Cottage; and readily obeying even their least
Command.

There in that humble Privacy he increased in Wisdom; and grew in favor both
with God and Man.

Still by his pious Candor, gaining the Love of those happy few that saw his
Life:

That saw thy holy Life, O glorious Jesu; and heard with Joy and Wonder thy
incomparable Sayings.

That felt a gentle motion stir their Hearts, to love and imitate so blessed a
Pattern.

O that the same sweet Spirit of Grace might draw our Minds, dear Lord, to thee!

O that we could in every Passage of our Lives, actually reflect on the example
of thine!

Thy Retirements were filled with holy Speculations; and in the midst of
business thy Mind was free for Heaven.

Thy converse with others misspent no time, but bestowed every moment in
excellent Charity.

To instruct the Ignorant, to reduce the Deceived; to comfort the Afflicted,
and heal the Diseased.

To convince the Froward, and absolve the Penitent; and persuade all the World
to be truly happy.

It was thy Meat and Drink to do thy Father's Will; O make it ours to perform
thine.

Make us in every Action still think on Thee; what thou would counsel us to
do.

What thou thy self would do, O blessed Jesu; if thou again were here amongst
us.

And when we thus have learnt our Duty, Lord make us to do what thou have made
us to know.

Glory be to the Father, etc.
As it was in the beginning, etc.
Antiphon.
Take up thy Cross, and follow thy Lord; for his Yoke is easy, and his burden
light.

Ant.] He humbled himself for us, and became obedient to Death, even the death
of the Cross.

Psalm 68.
MY God, who can repine, as suffering too much, if they remember the
Afflictions of Jesus?

Those many Afflictions he so patiently endured, and bore with silence all
their weight.

Even from his humble Cradle in the Grot of Bethlehem; to his bitter Cross on
the Mount of Calvary.

How little do we read of Glad and Prosperous; how much of Pains and Grief, and
perpetual Affronts?

Sometimes abandoned by his dearest Friends, and left alone among all his
Discomforts.

Sometimes pursued by his fiercest Enemies; and made the common Mark of all
their spite!

Sometimes they plot to snare him in his words; and enviously slander his
miraculous Deeds.

Sometimes tumultuously they gather about him; to gaze and abuse this Man of
Sorrows.

Sometimes they furiously seize on his Person; and hale and drag him along the
Streets.

At last they all conspire to take away his Life; and condemn him to a sharp
and cruel Death.

Have you not seen a harmless Lamb stand silent in the midst of ravening Wolves?

So stood the Prince of Peace and Innocence; besieged with a Ring of Savage
Jews.

When they blasphemed him, he replied not again; and when they injuriously
struck him, he only observed their Rashness.

When they provoked him with their utmost Malice, he pleaded their Excuse; and
when they killed him, he earnestly prayed for their Pardon.

O strange Ingratitude of humane Nature; thus barbarously to Crucify the
World's Redeemer.

O admirable Love of the World's Redeemer; thus patiently to dye for humane
Nature!

Say now, my Soul, for whom thy dearest Lord endured all this, and infinitely
more.

Can thou complain of thy little Troubles, when the King of Glory was thus
afflicted?

Can thou complain of a meanly furnished House; when the Son of God had not
where to lay his Head?

We wear the Badge of a Crucified Savior; and shall we shrink back at every
Cross we meet?

We believe in a Lord, that was crowned with Thorns; and shall we abide to
tread on nothing but Roses?

Before our Eyes, O Jesu, we see Thee Humble and Meek; and shall thy Servants
be Proud and Insolent?

We see Thee travel up and down, poor and unregarded; and shall thy Followers
make it their chief aim to be rich and esteemed?

Thy charitable Labors were maliciously Slandered; and shall not our Faults
have the Patience to be reproved?

Thou disdain'dst not to be called in Scorn the Carpenters Son; and cannot our
vileness bear a little disparagement?

O how unlike are we to that blessed Original; who descended from Heaven to
become our Pattern!

How do we go astray from that sacred Path; which the Holy Jesus traced with
his own Steps?

Pity; O dear Redeemer, the Infirmities of thy Children; and strengthen with
thy Grace our fainting Hearts?

Arm us, O glorious Conqueror of Sin and Death! against all the Fears and
Terrors of the World.

Arm all our Powers with those celestial Virtues, of Faith, and Hope, and
invincible Love.

That we may still go on, and resolutely meet whatever stands in our way to
Heaven.

Since we must suffer as Christians, and deserve it as Sinners; Lord, let us
bear it as become thy Servants.

Glory be to the Father, etc.
As it was in the Beginning, etc.
Antiphon.
He humbl'd himself for us, and became obedient to Death, even the death of the
Cross.

Ant.] Unworthy are we, O Lord, of the least of thy Favors; O let thy Passion
make us worthy of the greatest.

Psalm 69.
MY God, when I consider what thou have suffered for us; and what we have done
against Thee:

I am amazed at the wonders of thy Goodness; and confounded at the vileness of
our Misery.

Our Sins were the cause of thy cruel Death, yet still we permit them to live
in us.

We entertain the worst of thy Enemies; and treacherously lodge them in our own
Bosoms.

Preferring a petty Interest before thy Heaven; a transitory Pleasure before
thy Felicity.

Many, we confess, are the Follies of our Life, and our Consciences tremble at
their own great Guilt.

Many are the times thou have graciously pardoned us; and still we relapse, and
abuse thy Clemency.

The memory of our Transgressions are bitter unto us; and the thought of our
Ingratitude extremely afflicts us.

But is there, O holy Jesus, any stain so foul, which thy gracious Blood cannot
wash away?

Is there any heap of Sins so vast, to exceed the number of thine infinite
Mercies?

O no; thou can Forgive more than we can Offend; but thou will not Forgive
unless we fear to Offend:

Unless we seek to Thee for Peace and Reconciliation; and humble our selves in
thy holy Presence.

Wherefore behold we fall down at thy crucified Feet; and there ask Pardon for
our perverse Affections.

Reverently we kiss thy pierced Hands; and implore Forgiveness of our wicked
Actions.

Humbly we salute thy bleeding Side, and supplicate thy Grace to purify our
Intentions.

All we can offer thy offended Majesty, to pacify the Justice of thy Wrath;

Is only an humble Eye bathed in Tears, and a faithful penitent Heart, broken
with contrition.

Only a firm resolve to mend our Lives; and even all this we must beg of Thee:

O thou our gracious and indulgent Lord, who freely pardon'st all that truly
Repent:

Who give Repentance to all that ask; and invitest all to ask, by promising
to give.

Make us look seriously into our own Breasts; and heartily lament our own
Failings.

Make us search diligently for our Bosom Sins; and strive to cast them out with
Prayer and Fasting.

Open thou, O Lord, our Lips, to accuse our Crimes; that we blush not to
confess, what we feared not to do.

Correct our past Sins with the works of Repentance; that the Stains they leave
may be quite taken away.

Preserve us hereafter with thy powerful Grace; that no Temptation surprise or
overcome us.

Extend thy Mercy, O Lord, over all our Works; since thy self have declared
it is above all thine own.

Glory be to the Father, etc.
As it was in the beginning, etc.
Antiphon.
Unworthy are we, O Lord, of the least of thy Favors; O let thy Passion make
us worthy of thy greatest.

First Lesson. Isa. 51. 14.
HEarken unto me, my People, give ear unto me, O my Nation, for a Law shall
proceed from me; and I will make my Judgment to rest for a Light of the People.

Isa. 50. 6. I gave my Back to the Smiters, and my Cheeks to them that plucked
off the Hair: I hid not my Face from Spitting.

Isa. 63. 3. I have trodden the Winepress alone, and of the People there was
none with me.

And Ver. 5. I looked and there was none to help.

Psalm. 22. 7. All that see me laugh me to scorn; they shoot out their Lips,
they shake the Head, saying, He trusted in the Lord that he would deliver him,
let him deliver him, seeing he delighted in him.

Psalm. 21, etc. I was as one that is Deaf, and heard not; as a Dumb Man that
opens not his Mouth.

They gaped upon me with their Mouths, as a ravening and a roaring Lion; for
Dogs have compassed me, the assembly of the wicked have enclosed me. They
pierced my Hands and my Feet. All my Bones are out of Joint. They part my
Garments among them, and cast Lots for my Vesture.

And Psalm. 96. 2. They gave me Gaul for my Meat, and in my Thirst they gave me
Vinegar to Drink.

And Psalm. 22. 15. My strength is dried up as a Potsherd; and my Tongue
cleaves to my Jaws, and thou have brought me to the dust of Death.

R. All this, O holy Jesus, thou taughtest by thy holy Prophets, to prepare the
World for thy Coming.

All this and infinitely more, thou verifiedst in thine own Person, with Pains,
and Sorrows, and Reproaches, able to make even Patience it self break forth
into this sad Complaint, Lam 1. 12. Is it nothing to you all ye that pass by?
Behold and see if there be any Sorrow, like unto my Sorrow, which is done unto
me, etc.

I was betrayed, and bound, and led away Captive; I was reviled, buffeted, and
scornfully spit on; I was stripped, scourged, and condemned to a cruel Death; I
was crowned with Thorns, and pierced with Nails, and crucified among Thieves. O
all ye that pass by the way, behold my Sorrow.

Second Lesson. Joel 2. 12.
THerefore also now says the Lord, Turn ye even unto me with all your Heart,
with Fasting, with Weeping, and with Mourning.

And rent your Hearts and not your Garments, and turn unto the Lord your God;
for he is gracious and merciful, slow to Anger, and of great kindness, and
repents him of the Evil.

Who knows if he will return, and repent, and leave a blessing behind him?

Isa. 59. 1. Behold the Lord's hand is not shortened that he cannot save;
neither his ear heavy that he cannot hear.

But your Iniquities have separated between you and your God, and your Sins
have hid his Face from you, that he will not hear.

Isa. 55. 7. Let the wicked forsake his Way, and the unrighteous Man his
Thoughts; and let him return unto the Lord, and he will have Mercy upon him;
and to our God, for he will abundantly Pardon.

Isa. 4. 16. Wash you, make you clean, put away the evil of your doings from
before mine Eyes; cease to do Evil, learn to do well, seek Judgment, relieve
the Oppressed, judge the Fatherless, plead for the Widow.

Come now, and let us reason together, says the Lord; though your Sins be as
Scarlet, they shall be as white as Snow; though they be red like Crimson, they
shall be as Wool.

Res. Oh that my Head were Waters, and mine Eyes a Fountain of Tears, that I
might continually weep, and mourn, and lament for my own Sins, and for my
Savior's Sufferings. O my adored Redeemer, make us heartily sorry to have
offended Thee; make us speedily amend, lest we ruin our selves; thou have
given us these holy Rules to guide our Lives, and enforced them on us by thine
own Example, Fasting, and Praying, and Weeping, and humbling thy self unto
Death, even the death of the Cross.

Third Lesson. Isa. 58. 3, 4, etc.
BEhold in the day of your Fast you find Pleasure, and exact all your Labors.

Behold you fast for Strife and Debate; and to smite with the Fists of
Wickedness, etc.

This is the Fast that I have chosen to loose the Bands of Wickedness; to undo
the heavy Burdens, and let the Oppressed go free; and that ye break every Yoke.

It is to deal thy Bread to the Hungry, and that thou bring the Poor that are
cast out unto thy House, when thou see the naked, that thou cover him, and
that thou hide not thy self from thine own Flesh.

Then shall thy light break forth as the Morning, and thy health shall spring
forth speedily; and thy righteousness shall go before Thee, the Glory of the
Lord shall be thy ^ere ward.

Then shall thou call, and the Lord shall answer thee; thou shall cry, and he
shall say, here am I.

Isa. 43. 25. I, even I am he that blotteth out thy Transgressions, for mine
own sake, and will not remember thy Sins.

I am the Lord thy God, who teach thee to Profit, and govern thee in the way
thou should go in, Isa. 48. 17.

Res. My God! never let me so rely upon any outward Performances, that I
neglect the improvement of my Mind; lest my Fasting become an unprofitable
Trouble, and my Prayer a vain Lip-labor. The Soul and the Body make one Man,
and the Spirit and Discipline make a Christian: Never let me so pretend to
inward Perfection, that I slight the outward Observances of Religion; lest my
Thoughts grow proud and fantastic, and all my Arguments but a cover for
Licentiousness.

Antiphon.
O ye foolish, when will you understand the gracious Providence of the Lord, in
chastening whom he loves, and scourging every Child he receives?

V. Gold is tried and refined in the Fire.

R. And the faithful Man in the Furnace of Affliction.

Let us pray.
O God, who by our great Masters dear Example, have taught us what Labors and
Sufferings Heaven deserves, and may require to take it by Violence: Confound,
we humbly beseech Thee, the nice tenderness of our nature in us, by this thy
more tenderly condescending Grace, and dispose us more easily to follow it by
this plain reflection, that since Flesh and Blood cannot enter into the Kingdom
of Heaven, whatever inures us practically to put them off here, by prudently
denying even their just Contentments, most certainly helps us in our way
thither; and is useful to perfect farther, even the perfectest, through our
Lord Jesus Christ, who lives and reigns ever One God, World without End.
Amen.

Friday Lauds.
Antiphon.
Come let us Glory in the Cross of Christ, in whom is our Life, and Health, and
Resurrection.

Psalm 70.
SHall we rejoice, my Soul, to Day? Shall we not mourn at the Funeral of our
dear Redeemer?

Such, O Lord, was the excess of thy Goodness; to derive Joys for us from thine
own Sorrows.

Thou forbadest thy Followers to weep for thee; and reservest to thy self alone
the Shame and Grief.

Thou invitest all the World to glory in thy Cross; and command us to
delight in the memory of thy Passion.

Sing then all you dear bought Nations of the Earth; sing Hymns of Glory to the
holy Jesus.

Sing every one who pretends to Felicity; sing immortal Praises to the God of
our Salvation.

To him who for us endured so much Scorn; and patiently received so many
Injuries.

To him who for us sweat drops of Blood; and drank off the dregs of his
Father's Wrath.

To the eternal Lord of Heaven and Earth; who for us was slain by the hands of
the Wicked.

Who for us was led away as a Sheep to the Slaughter; and as a meek Lamb,
opened not his Mouth.

Whither, O my God, did thy Compassions carry Thee? how did thy Charity so much
prevail with Thee?

Was it not enough to become Man for us; but thou must expose thy self to all
our Miseries?

Was it not enough to labor all thy Life; but thou must suffer for us even the
Pains of Death?

No, gracious Lord, thy Mercy still observed some Wants in our Nature to be
unsupplyed.

Thou saw our too much fondness of Life needed thy parting with it to
reconcile us to Death.

Thou saw our fear of Sufferings could no way be abated; but by freely
undergoing them in thine own Person.

O blessed Jesus, whose Grace alone begins, and ends, and perfects all our
Hopes!

How are we bound to praise thy Love; how infinitely obliged to adore thy
Goodness?

At any rate thou would still go on; to heal our weak and wounded Nature.

Even at the price of thine own dear Blood; thou would finish for us the
purchase of Heaven.

Glory be to the Father, etc.
As it was in the beginning, etc.
Psalm 71.
AWake, my Soul, and speedily prepare thy richest Sacrifice of humble praise.

Awake, and summon all thy Thoughts, to make haste and adore our great Redeemer.

For now it is time we should reverently go; to make haste and adore, and offer
our Hearts at his Footstool.

Thither let us fly from the Troubles of the World; there let us dwell among
the Mercies of Heaven.

Under the shadow of his Cross, let us kneel, and often look up to our dearest
Lord.

Let us remember every passage of his Life; and be sure that none escape our
Thanks.

Let us compassionate every stroke of his Death; and one by one salute his
Wounds.

Blessed be the hands that wrought so many Miracles; and were so barbarously
bored with cruel Nails.

Blessed be the Feet that so often traveled for us; and at last were unmercifully
fastened to the Cross.

Blessed be the Head that was crowned with Thorns; the Head that so industriously
studied our happiness.

Blessed be the Heart that was pierced with a Spear; the Heart that so
passionately loved our Peace.

Blessed be the entire Person of our crucified Lord; and may all our Powers
join in his Praise.

In thy eternal Praise, O gracious Jesu and the ravishing thoughts of thy
incomparable sweetness.

O what excess of kindness was this! what strange extremity of Love and Pity!

The Lord is sold, that the Slave may go free; the Innocent condemned, that the
Guilty may be saved.

The Physician is sick, that the Patient may be cured; and God himself dies,
that Man may live.

Tell me, my Soul, when first thou have well considered; and looked about among
all we know:

Tell me, whoever wished us so much good? whoever loved us with so much
tenderness?

What have our nearest Friends done for us; or even our Parents, in comparison
of Thee?

No less than the Son of God came down to Redeem us; no less than his own dear
Life was the Price he paid for us.

What can the Favor of the whole World promise, compared to this miraculous
Bounty?

No less than the Joys of Angels are become our Hope; no less than the Kingdom
of Heaven is made our Inheritance.

Glory be to the Father, etc.
As it was in the beginning, etc.
Psalm 72.
TO Thee, O God, we owe our whole selves; for making us after thine own Image.

To Thee, O Lord, we owe more than our selves; for redeeming us with the death
of thine only Son.

Nor were our Ruins so soon repaired, as at first our Being was easily
produced.

Thy Power to create us said but one word; and immediately we became a living
Soul.

But thy Wisdom to redeem us, both spoke much, and wrought more, and suffered
most of all.

To redeem us he humbl'd himself to this low World; and all the Infirmities of
this miserable Nature.

He patiently endured Hunger and Thirst, and the malicious Affronts of enraged
Enemies.

How many times did he hazard his Life; to sustain with Courage the Truths of
Heaven?

How many Tears did he tenderly weep; in compassion of his blind ungrateful
Country?

How many drops of Blood did he shed, in that doleful Garden, and on the bitter
Cross?

The Cross, where after three long hours of Grief, and Shame, and intolerable
Pains:

He meekly bowed his fainting Head; and in an Agony of Prayer yielded up the
Ghost.

So sets the glorious Sun in a sad Cloud; and leaves our Earth in darkness and
disorder:

But goes to shine immediately in the other World; and soon returns again, and
brings us Light.

And so do thou, dear Lord, and more; thy very Darkness is our Light.

It Is by thy death we are made to live; and by thy Wounds our Sores are cured.

O my adored Redeemer, who tookest upon Thee all our Miseries; to impart to us
thine own Felicities!

Can we remember thy Labors for us; and not be convinced of our Duty to Thee?

Can our cold Hearts recount thy Sufferings; and not be enflamed with the Love
that suffered?

Can we believe our Salvation cost Thee so dear; and live as if to be saved
were not worth our Pains?

Ungrateful we! how do we slight the kindness of our God? how carelessly comply
with his gracious Design?

For all his Gifts he requires no other return; than to hope still more, and
desire still greater Blessings.

For all his Favors, he seeks no other Praise; than our following his Steps to
arrive at his Glory.

O glorious Jesus! behold to Thee we bow; and humbly kiss the Dust in honor of
thy Death.

Behold thus low we bow, to implore thy Blessings; and the sure assistance of
thy special Grace.

That we may wean our Affections from all vain Fancies; and clear our Thoughts
from all Impertinencies.

Then shall our Lives be entirely dedicated to Thee; and all the Faculties of
our Souls to thy Service.

Our Minds shall continually study thy Knowledge; and our Wills grow every day
stronger in thy Love.

Our Memories shall faithfully lay up thy Mercies; and both Tongue and Heart
shall sing for ever.

Glory be to the Father, etc.
As it was in the beginning, etc.
Lesson. 2 Cor. 1. 31.
BLessed be God, even the Father of our Lord Jesus Christ, the Father of
Mercies, and the God of all Comfort, who comfort us in all our Tribulations,
that we may be able to comfort them which are in Trouble, by the comfort
wherewith we our selves are comforted of God: For as the sufferings of Christ
abound in us, so our Consolation abouneth by Christ.

Hymn 22.
TUne now your selves, my Hearts strings high,
Let us aloft our Voices raise;
That our loud Song may reach the Sky,
And there present to thee our praise.
To thee blessed Jesus, who came down,
From those bright Spheres of Joy above;
To purchase us a dear bought Crown,
And woo our Souls to espouse thy Love.
Long had the World in darkness sat,
Till thou, and all thy glorious Light,
Began to dawn from Heaven's fair Gate,
And with thy Beams dispel their Night.
We too, alas, still there had stood,
As common Slaves, in the same Shade;
But Mercy came, and with his Blood,
Our general Ransom freely paid.
Not all the spite of all the Jews,
Nor Death it self could him remove;
Still he his blessed design pursues,
And gives his Life to take our Love.
And now, my Lord, my God, and all,
What shall I most in thee admire;
That Power that made the World, and shall,
The World again dissolve by Fire?
O no, thy strange Humility,
Thy Wounds, thy Pains, thy Cross, thy Death:
These shall alone my Wonders be,
My Health, my Staff, my Joy, my Breath.
To thee, great God, to Thee alone,
Three Persons in one Deity,
As in past Ages was, be done,
All Glory now, and ever be. Amen.
Antiphon.
We are bought with a Price, even the most precious Sweat and Blood of Jesus,
henceforth to call him Master, whose Service is perfect Freedom; and give us
effectual Power to become the Sons of God.

V. The Chains fell off our Hands and Feet.

R. When thine, dear Redeemer, were nailed to the Cross.

Let us pray.
O Eternal Father, who sentest down thine only Son to redeem the World,
enslaved to Sin and Satan, by assuming (...) frail Nature, and powerfully
teaching us, both by Word and Example, its sole way to that Bliss for which we
are created! Grant, we humbly beseech thee, that the continual Memory of his
bitter Passion, and Death on the Cross, may beget in us an utter disvalue of
the Goods or Ills we meet with here, compared to the advancing our selves or
others, in the esteem of what we hope for hereafter, through the same our Lord
Jesus Christ thy Son, who with Thee and the Holy Spirit, lives and reigns
ever One God, World without End. Amen.

Lord have Mercy upon us,
Christ have Mercy upon us.
Lord have Mercy upon us.
Our Father, etc.
V. Have Mercy upon us, O Lord, have Mercy upon us;

R. For our Souls trust in thee.

And under the shadow of thy Wings will we hope; till our Iniquities pass away.

Have Mercy upon us, for we are weak; heal us, O Lord, for we have sinned
against thee.

Our Iniquities are gone over our Head; and like a sad burden sit heavy upon us.

Will not our God require an account of these things? Will he not examine every
Passage of our Lives?

He sees the Secrets of our Hearts and our darkest Sins are not hid from him.

Lord, make us judge our selves, lest we be condemned by thee; and chastise our
selves, lest we be punished by thee.

Make us mortify our Senses with discreet Austerities; particularly contrary
to the Passions that molest us.

That we may reduce our Bodies into subjection to our Minds; and our Minds into
subjection unto thee.

That as our too much Liberty brought us to Folly; our just Severity may bring
us to Pardon.

Pardon, O Lord, the Iniquity of our Sins; and graciously remove away all our
Punishments.

Enter not into Judgment with thy Servants, O Lord; for in thy sight shall no
one living be justified.

Our ruin, we confess, to be wholly from our selves; and all our hope is in
thy Salvation.

If we repent, and say now we'll begin, it is time now to arise from Sleep.

Behold Temptation stands at the Door, and our weak resistance lets it in.

Our corrupt Nature conspires with our Enemies; and our evil Customs prevail
against us.

Pity us, O Lord, thou who know whereof we are made.

Wean us from this World, thou who made us for a better.

Deliver us from the occasions that so often endanger us.

Deliver us from the occasions that so often overcome us.

Deliver us from all sudden and disasterous Mischances.

Deliver us from the Miseries of everlasting Torments.

Why art thou so sad, O my Soul? And why art thou disquieted within me?

Still trust in God, for we will still praise his Name; He is our Savior and
our God.

O praise the Lord, for he is good; and his Mercies endure for ever.

He will bring us hereafter to the Joys of Eternity; for his Mercy endures for
ever.

Let us pray.
O God, who did severely punish our first Parents, for eating the forbidden
Fruit, and have so often recommended to us the necessary Duties of Abstinence
and Fasting! Grant, we beseech thee, that by observing diligently thy holy
Discipline, proposed to us in the Laws and Practice of thy Church, we may
correct our Levities, and revenge our Excesses, and subdue our irregular
Appetites, and frustrate the Temptations of the Enemy, and secure our
Perseverance, and daily proceed to new degrees of Virtue and Devotion, till in
the end of our Lives, we receive the end of our Labors, the Salvation of our
Souls, through our Lord Jesus Christ, who with Thee and the blessed Spirit,
lives and reigns, One God, World without End. Amen.

Friday Vespers.
In the Name of the Father, and of the Son, and of the Holy Ghost, etc.

Psalm 73.
LORD, how the World requites thy Love? how ungrateful are we to thy blessed
Memory?

We negligently forget thy sacred Passion; or rather far worse, our Sins renew
thy Sufferings.

While we deprive others of their right; what do we but divest Thee of thy
Clothes?

While we delight in Strife and Schisms; what do we else but rend thy seamless
Coat?

If we despise the least of thy Servants, are we not as so many Herod's that
scorned thee?

If we for fear proceed against our Conscience, how are we better than Pilate
that condemned thee?

By forsaking thy Will to follow our own; do we not choose a Murderer before
Thee?

By retaining a sharp and bitter Malice, do we not give thee Vinegar and Gall
to Drink?

By showing no Mercy to the Poor and Afflicted, do we not pass by thy Cross, as
Strangers unconcerned?

Thus we again crucify the Lord of Glory; and put him afresh to an open Shame.

Is this, O wretched we! the Duty we pay to the Sacred Memory of our dear
Redeemer?

Are these the Thanks our Gratitude returns, to that strange excess of our
Savior's Love?

When we sat in Darkness he took us by the hand; and kindly led us into his
own Light.

We sought not him, but he came from far to find us; we looked not toward him,
but his Mercy called after us.

He called aloud in words of tenderness; why will ye perish, O you Children of
Men?

Why will ye run after empty Trifles; as if there were no Joys above with me?

Return, O ye dear bought Souls, and I will receive you; repent, and though you
had really Crucified me I will forgive you.

Behold, O blessed Jesus, to thee we come; and to thee, dying on the Cross,
fasten all our Confidence.

Never will we unclasp our faithful hold; till thy Grace has sealed the Pardon
of our Sins.

Never will we part from that Standard of Hope; till our troubled Consciences
be dismissed in Peace.

There will we stand, and sigh, and weep; and every one say to thy Mercy:

Jesus, my God, I suffer Violence; answer, I beseech thee, answer thou for me.

Glory be to the Father, etc.
As it was in the beginning, etc.
Antiphon.
O senseless we, that so little consider what we do against our Savior, or
what he suffered for us!

Ant] He is the Propitiation for our Sins; and not for ours only, but for the
Sins of the whole World.

Psalm 74.
BE silent, O my Soul, and thy Lord will answer for thee; be content, and he is
thy Security.

Be Innocent, and he will defend thee; be Humble, and he will exalt thee.

He will forgive thee all thou repentest; he will bestow on thee more than thou
ask.

Never let us fear the favor of our God; if we can but esteem and desire it.

He that so freely gives us himself; will he not with himself give us all
things?

Is not his painful Life, and bitter Death sufficient pledge of his Love to us?

Is not his infinite Love to us, sufficient motive of our Duty to him?

A Duty to which we are so many ways obliged; and wherein our Eternity is so
highly concerned.

Surely they have little Faith, and far less hope; who doubt the Mercies of so
gracious a God.

Mercies confirmed by a thousand Miracles; and dearly sealed with his own Blood:

That innocent Blood that was shed for us; to appease the Wrath of his offended
Father.

That Blood, whose every precious drop was worthy to save so many Worlds.

O blessed, and all redeeming Blood; which flowed so freely from the source of
Life!

Bathe our polluted Souls in thy clear Streams; and purge away all our foul
Impurities.

Cleanse us, O merciful Lord, from our secret Faults; and from those darling
Sins that most abuse us.

Wash off the Stains our Malice has caused in others; and those which our
weakness has received of them.

Let not them perish by our occasion; nor us be undone by theirs.

But let our Charity assist one another; and thy Clemency pardon us all.

Pardon, gracious Jesus, what we have been; with thy holy discipline correct
what we are?

Order by thy Providence what we shall be; and in the end crown thine own Gifts.

Glory be to the Father, etc.
As it was in the beginning, etc.
Antiphon.
He is the Propitiation for our Sins, and not only for ours, but for the Sins
of the whole World. Now is the accepted time, now is the day of Salvation; let
us demean our selves as the Servants of God, in Fasting, and Watching, in
Patience, and Charity.

Psalm 75.
Should thou, O Lord, have dealt with us in rigor; we had long since been
sentenced to eternal Death,

Long since our guilty Souls had been snatched away; and hurried down to
everlasting Torments.

But thy gracious Mercy has reprieved our Lives; and given us space to work out
our Pardons.

Now is the time of Acceptance with thee; now is the day of Salvation for us.

Now let us mourn our former Offenses; and bring forth Fruits meet for
Repentance.

If we, O Jesu, have hitherto persecuted thee; and with our Sins nailed thee on
the Tree of Death:

Now let our whole endeavors attend thy Service; and loyally conspire to
uncrucify our Lord.

Let us ascend the Mount of Calvary; and as often as we go, kiss thy holy Steps.

We kiss thy Steps when we love thy ways; and humble our selves, and follow
thee.

Let us there on our Knees approach thy Cross; and reverently cover thy naked
Body.

We cover thee, when our Charity clothes thy Servants; and hides the
Infirmities of thy little ones

Let us there with the tenderest care, unfasten the Nails; and gently draw them
out of thy Hands and Feet.

We draw them out when we freely obey thy Will; and loosen our Affections from
cleaving to the World.

Lord, when we have thus rescued thee, and placed thee again on thy Throne of
Glory:

Instead of thy self, nail thou us to thy Cross; who really deserve what thou
really enduredst.

Crucify our Flesh with the fear of thee; and give it our portion of Sorrow
here.

Crucify us to the World; that dead to it we may live in thee.

At least live thou in us, O holy Jesu; and fit our Souls for so glorious a
Guest.

Enter into our Hearts, and fill them with thy self; that no room be left for
any thing but thee.

One only hope we have, thy care of us; one only Fear, the neglect of our
selves.

Glory be to the Father, etc.
As it was in the beginning, etc.
Antiphon.
Now is the accepted time, now is the day of Salvation; let us demean ourselves
as the Servants of God, in Fasting, and Watching, in Patience, and Charity.

Lesson. Philip. 2. 1.
IF there be therefore any Consolation in Christ, if any Comfort of Love, if
any Fellowship of the Spirit, if any Bowels and Mercies,

Fulfill ye my Joy, that ye be like-minded, having the same Love, being of one
Accord, of one Mind.

Let nothing be done through Strife, or Vainglory, but in lowliness of Mind
let each esteem other better than themselves.

Look not every Man on his own things, but every Man also on the things of
others. Let this Mind be in you which was also in Christ Jesus.

Who being in the form of God, thought it not robbery to be equal with God; but
made himself of no Reputation, and took upon him the Form of a Servant, and was
made in the likeness of Men.

And being found in fashion as a Man, he humbled himself, and became obedient
to Death, even the death of the Cross.

Wherefore God has also highly exalted him, and given him a Name which is
above every Name:

That at the Name of Jesus every Knee should bow, of things in Heaven, and
things in Earth, and things under the Earth:

And that every Tongue should confess, that Jesus Christ is the Lord, to the
Glory of God the Father.

Hymn 23.
ANd now my Soul can thou forget,
That thy whole Life is one long Debt
Of Love, to him who on this Tree,
Paid back the Flesh he took for thee?
Lo, how the streams of precious Blood
Flow from five Wounds into one Flood:
With these he washes all thy Stains,
And buys thy Ease with his own Pains.
Tall Tree of Life! we clearly now,
That doubt of former Ages know;
It was thy Wood should make the Throne
Fit for a more than Solomon.
Large Throne of Love! royally spread,
With Purple of too rich a Red:
Strange costly Price! thus to make good
Thine own esteem with thy King's Blood.
Live, O for ever live, and reign
Blessed Lamb, whom thine own Love has slain;
And may thy lost Sheep live to be
True Lovers of thy Cross and Thee.
All Glory to the Sacred Three,
One undivided Deity;
As it has been in Ages gone,
May now and ever still be done.
Antiphon.
Our Lord dyed for us, that we may live in him, and putting off the Old Man
with all his Concupiscence, be renewed henceforth in the Spirit of our Minds.

V. Behold, dear Savior, thou art exalted from the Earth.

R. Fulfill thy Word, and draw all things unto thy self.

Let us pray.
O God, who at the price of thy only Sons last drop of Blood upon the Cross,
have won our Hearts from this Life, and all the Goods of it, to the sole
pursuit and hopes of thy self in Eternity. Possess, we beseech thee, and
absolutely dispose of what thou have so dearly paid for, mortifying us to this
World, and confirming our Courage, to fight manfully under the Banner of our
Crucified Savior, that we may be able to stand the shock of all Temptations,
and nothing either in Life or Death may ever separate us from thy Love, in him
our glorious Redeemer; who with thee and the Ghost, lives and reigns, One
God, blessed for ever. Amen.

Let us pray.
Lord have Mercy upon us.
Christ have Mercy upon us.
Lord have Mercy upon us.
V. Oh that my Eyes were Waters,

R. And my Head a Fountain of Tears, that I might weep Day and Night,

The loss of our time past, and the danger of our time to come;

That we might continually weep for our many Sins, and humbly confess our
grievous Offenses.

We have sinned with our Fathers, we have sinned.

We have done amiss, and dealt wickedly.

We have broken the Law of our Maker.

We have provoked the Wrath of our Judge.

We have despised the Goodness of our God.

What shall we do unto thee, O thou preserver of Men?

What shall we do, but appeal from the Bar of thy Justice.

To the mild and gracious Seat of thy Mercy.

Spare us, O Lord, for thy Mercies sake.

Spare the work of thine own hands.

Spare us whom thou have made for the enjoyment of thy self.

Spare us whom thou have redeemed with thy precious Blood.

Pardon, O Lord, our Sins of weakness and surprise.

Pardon our Sins of Wilfulness and Malice.

Pardon our relapses into the Sins we have repented of.

Pardon our lying in Sins without Repentance.

Make us so grieve for our Sins that we may hate them; and hate them so that we
quite forsake them.

Check our unruly Passions with thy holy fear; and guide our ways in thy
discipline.

That we may turn to thee with our whole Heart, in Fasting, Weeping, and
Mourning.

That we may humble our Souls in Prayer; and as much as we can, redeem our Sins
with Alms.

That we may root out our Vices with contrary Virtues; and bring forth Fruits
meet for Repentance.

Hear, O merciful Father, when we pray for our selves; hear us when we pray for
others.

Remember thy Congregation which thou have possessed from the beginning.

Defend and govern it, and increase it for ever.

Give to thy Priests the Spirit of Knowledge; the Spirit of Holiness, Zeal, and
Wisdom.

Give to thy People the Spirit of Docibility, the Spirit of Obedience,
Devotion, and Charity.

Reveal thy self to those who never knew thee; and bring home those who have
gone astray from thee.

Preserve, we beseech thee, our King, and his Council, and bless all the People
of this Nation.

Bless us with Health, and Peace, and Plenty; and make us use them with
Sobriety, Gratitude, and Charity.

Reward, O Lord, our Kindred, Friends, and Benefactors; and forgive our
Enemies, and all that hate us.

Comfort those that mourn, and are oppressed with Afflictions; or labor under
the burden of a troubled Mind.

Relieve the Poor who have none to help them; and defend the Cause of the
Fatherless and Widow.

Strengthen them who languish on the Bed of Sickness; and those who struggle in
the Agony of Death.

Have Mercy upon all the faithful who live in thy Grace; have Mercy upon all
Mankind.

Convert the Unconverted, and bring us all to thy Glory.

O Lord hear our Prayers; and let our Cry come unto thee.

Let us pray.
O God, who by thy holy Doctrine have taught us to Fast, and Watch, and Pray;
and by thy blessed Example, O holy Jesu, have powerfully engaged us to follow
thy Steps! vouchsafe, we beseech thee, by thy Grace, so to mortify our Bodies,
by withdrawing the Fuel from our unruly Passions, and reducing our immoderate
Sleep to the measures of necessary Refreshment, that our Minds may be better
disposed for Prayer and Meditation, devoutly to celebrate the Fasts and
Festivals of thy Church, and eternally to rejoice with thee hereafter, in the
Kingdom of thy Glory, where with the Father and the Holy Ghost, thou live and
reignest, One God, World without End. Amen.

Friday Compline.
Our help stands in the name of the Lord.

In Peace will we lie down, and take our rest;

For it is thou only that make us dwell in safety.

Psalm 76.
Come, let us now call off our Thoughts from ranging abroad; where they do but
lose themselves.

Let us diligently examine the Accounts of our Time; and sum up the Profit we
have made to day.

What have we gained by all that we have heard or seen; since nothing is so
barren but may yield some Fruit.

Had we the Art to cultivate it right; and fitly apply it to our own advantage.

If we have spied some good Example; which our gracious Lord presents to excite
us:

Did we immediately entertain the Motion; and resolve in our Hearts effectually
to follow it?

If we have fallen among vicious Company; which too often engages us to Folly:

Did the danger increase our Care; and the Sin of others breed Virtue in us?

We have heard perhaps some melancholy news, of sudden Sickness, or unexpected
Deaths:

But do we fear to be surpised our selves; and provide betimes for the day of
trial?

We meet with Accidents enough to disparage this World; but do we readily feel it
loses credit in our Hearts?

Does our esteem of the other World grow strong and high; and every one
faithfully tell his own Soul?

It Is not in this poor World thou must expect Content; nor hope to enjoy a
perfect rest.

Order thy whole Affairs with utmost Skill; and which is seldom seen, let all
succeed:

Still thou shall find something to trouble thee; and even thy Pleasures shall
be tedious unto thee.

Wherever thou go still Crosses will follow thee; since wherever thou
go thou carriest thy self.

Who then, my God, is truly happy? or rather who comes nearest happiness?

He that with Patience resolves to suffer; and glories to be like his crucified
Savior!

When thou art come to this, my Soul; that thy Crosses seem sweet for the love
of Jesus:

Think then thy self sublimely happy; for sure thou have found a Heaven upon
Earth.

At least the best Heaven this Earth can afford; and take it as a pledge of a
better to come.

Glory be to the Father, etc.
As it was in the beginning, etc.
Psalm 77.
MY Soul, when thou art thus retired alone; and fitly disposed for quiet
Thoughts.

Never let the Greatness of another molest thy Peace; nor his prosperous
Condition make thee repine.

Say not in thy Heart, had I that fair Estate; or were entrusted with so high a
place:

I should know how to contrive things better; and never commit such gross
Mistakes.

Tell me, how do thou manage thine own Employments; and fit the little room
thou hold in the World?

If thou have leisure, art thou not Idle, and spendest thy precious Time in
unprofitable Follies?

If thou art busy, art not thou so too much; leavest no time to provide for
thy Soul?

Do thy Riches make thee wise; and generously to assist the innocent Poor?

Does thy Poverty make thee humble; and faithfully to labor for thy little
Family?

Do thou in every State give thanks to Heaven; and contentedly subscribe to
its severest Decrees?

Can thou rejoycingly say to God; O my adored Creator! I am glad my Lot is in
thy hands?

Thou art all Wisdom, and see my Wants; thou art all Goodness, and delight'st
to relieve me.

Under thy Providence, I know I am safe; whatever befalls me thou guid'st to thy
advantage.

If thou will have me obscure and low; thy blessed Will, not mine be done.

If thou will load my back with Crosses; and imbitter my Days with Grief and
Sickness:

Still may thy blessed Will be done; still govern thy Creature in thine own
best way.

Place where thou please thy other Favors; but secure to my Soul a portion
in thy Love.

Take what thou will of the things thou have lent me; but leave in my Heart the
Possession of thy self.

Let others be preferred, and me neglected; let their Affairs succeed, and mine
miscarry.

Only one thing I humbly beg; and may my gracious God vouchsafe to grant it.

Cast me not away from thy Presence for ever; nor wipe my Name out of the Book
of Life.

But my eternal hopes, let them remain; and still grow quicker as they approach
to their end.

Glory be to the Father, etc.
As it was in the beginning, etc.
Psalm 78.
MY Thoughts, run over the Passages you have met to Day; or rather forget such
impertinent things.

What have we seen but distracting Vanities? and what brought home but
unprofitable Fancies.

How often have we selt our Minds disturbed? how often endangered by unhappy
Accidents?

Sometimes we frowardly throw our selves down; and like sullen Children will
not stand.

Sometimes the Tempest throws us down; and like weak Children we cannot stand.

Yet are we venturing still among the Snares; enticed by the appearance of some
present delight.

We weary our selves with running after Flies; which are hard to catch, and
Trifles when they are caught.

This we pursue, and follow that; but nothing that we can meet can fill our
Hearts.

Till we have found out thee, O gracious Lord! our only full all-satisfying
Good.

Till we have found out thee, not by a dark belief; but clearly as thou art in
thine own bright self.

Remember, O my Soul, this Truth of the World we live in; which our own
Experience too evidently proves:

The Eye is not filled with seeing its Vanity; nor the Ear with hearing all its
Harmony.

Remember this Truth of the World we hope; made sure to our Faith by the Word
of Jesus:

The Eye has not seen such beauteous Glories; nor has the Ear heard such
ravishing Charms:

Nor can the Heart it self conceive such incredible Joys; as our God has
prepared for them that love him.

As our blessed Jesus has purchased for his Servants; and even for thee, my
Soul, to crown thy Patience.

Wherefore in Peace lay down thy head, and rest secure in the Protection of thy
God.

Whose Mercy has so graciously singled thee out; and so strongly established on
himself thy hope.

Glory be to the Father, etc.
As it was in the beginning, etc.
Hymn 24.
It Is not for us, and our proud Hearts,
O mighty Lord, to choose our parts,
But Act well what thou giv'st;
It Is not in our weak Power to make
One step o'th way we undertake,
Unless thou us reliev'st.
What thou have given thou can take,
And when thou will new Gifts can make,
All flows from thee alone;
When thou did give it, it was thine,
When thou retook'st it, 'twas not mine,
Thy Will in all be done.
It might perhaps too pleasant prove,
Too much attractive of my Love,
And make me less love thee;
Some things there are, thy Scriptures say,
And reason proves that Heaven and they
Do seldom well agree.
Lord, let me then sit calmly down,
And rest contented with my own,
That is what thou allow'st.
Keep thou my Mind serene and free,
Often to think on Heaven and Thee,
And what thou there bestowest.
There let me have my Portion, Lord,
There all my Losses ^e restored,
No matter what falls here;
Is It not enough that we shall sing,
And love for ever our blessed King,
Whose Goodness brought us there?
Great God, as thou art one, may we
With one another all agree,
And in thy Praise conspire;
May Men and Angels join, and sing
Eternal Hymns to Thee their King,
And make up all One Quire. Amen.
Lesson. Gal. 6. 14.
BUt God forbid that I should Glory, save in the Cross of our Lord Jesus
Christ, by whom the World is crucified unto me, and I unto the World.

For in Christ Jesus neither Circumcision avails any thing, nor
Uncircumcision, but a new Creature; and whoever shall follow this Rule, Peace
be on them, and Mercy, and upon the Israel of God.

Let us pray.
O God, whose provident Mercy makes every day a new Branch of the Tree of
Knowledge to us, whence the Evening may gather fresh variety of Fruit, fit to
nourish those Souls whom thy Grace has brought to feed on the Tree of Life, the
Cross of Jesus! Grant, we beseech thee, that no experience of Good or Evil,
which this day has afforded, may be lost on us, but what ever of moment has
happened to our selves or others, may by seasonable and minute rumination be
fitted to render us more skilful in discerning the true value and use of this
Estate in all its Postures, and readier to resign (with our Savior) our whole
Concerns and Beings here to thy Will, and the sole advancement of thy Glory,
which at length will surely crown thy Servants with immortal Bliss, through our
Lord Jesus Christ thy Son, who with thee and the Holy Ghost, lives and
reigns One God, World without End. Amen.

Saturday MATTINS.
Introduction.
Come let us Adore our victorious Redeemer.
Come let us Adore our victorious Redeemer.
Psalm 79.
COme all you Powers of my delivered Soul, and pay your Homage to the Prince of
Peace, to the Prince of our Salvation; cast your unworthy selves at his sacred
Feet, and renew your Vows of following his Steps.

Come let us Adore our victorious Redeemer. He triumphed over Death in his own
Body, and enables us to conquer it in ours; imparting to us his Heavenly Skill,
and provoking our Courage with infinite Rewards.

Come let us Adore our victorious Redeemer. He changed the corrupted Government
of the World, and established a new and holy Law, that as we were Vassals to
Sin before, we might now become the free Subjects of Grace.

Come let us Adore our victorious Redeemer. Let us live and die in his blessed
Obedience, and no Temptation separate us from him; who, if we resist, will make
us overcome; and when we have overcome, will crown us with Peace.

Come let us Adore our victorious Redeemer. Glory be to the Father, and to the
Son, and to the Holy Ghost;

As it was in the beginning, is now and ever shall be, world without end, Amen.

Hymn 25.
LOrd, we again lift up our Eyes,
And leave our sluggish Beds;
But why we wake, and why we rise,
Comes seldom in our Heads.
Is it to sweat and toil for Wealth,
Or sport our time away;
That thou preserv'st us still in Health,
And giv'st us this new Day?
No, no, unskilful Soul! not so,
Be not deceived with Toys;
Thy Lords Commands more wisely go,
And aim at higher Joys.
They bid us wake to seek new Grace,
And some fresh Virtue gain;
They call us up to mend our pace,
Till we the Prize attain.
That glorious Prize for which all run,
Who wisely spend their Breath;
Who when this weary Life is done,
Are sure of rest in Death.
Not such a Rest as here we prove,
Disturbed with Cares and Fears;
But endless Joy, and Peace, and Love,
Unmixt with Grief and Tears.
Glory to Thee, O bounteous Lord!
Who giv'st to all things Breath;
Glory to Thee, eternal Word!
Who sav'st us by thy Death.
Glory, O blessed Spirit, to Thee
who fill'st our Souls with Love;
Glory to all the mystic Three,
Who reign one God above. Amen.
Antiphon.
This is, alas, the Land of the dying; but we hope to see the Glory of God in
the Land of the Living.

Psalm 80.
PRostrate before thy Tomb, O Lord! behold we freely confess our Misery.

And in the lowest Posture of afflicted Pilgrims, humbly implore thy Mercy.

Peacefully in the Grave thy holy Body reposed; and thy Soul went triumphing to
redeem thy Captives.

But we, alas, thy helpless Orphans; how are we left in the midst of our
Enemies!

To how many dangers are our Lives exposed? with how many Temptations are we
round besieged?

Temptations in Meat, Temptations in Drink; Temptations in Conversing,
Temptations in Solitude.

Temptations in Business, and in Leisure; Temptation in Riches, and so in
Poverty.

All our Ways are strewn with Snares; and even our own Senses conspire against
us.

Whither, O my God, shall our poor Souls go; encompassed with a Body so frail,
and a World so corrupt?

Whither, but to Thee, the Justifier of Sinner; and to thy Grace the sustainer
of the weak?

Thy Grace instructs us what we ought to do; and breeds in us the Will to
endeavor what we know.

Thy Grace enables us to perform our Resolves; and when all is done, thy Grace
must give the Success.

Govern us with thy Grace, O eternal Wisdom! and direct our Steps in thy safe
way.

Order every Chance to prevent our Falling; and still lead us on to our happy
end.

Give us the Eye and Wing of an Eagle, to see our danger, and fly swiftly away.

If we must needs engage our Enemy, and no means left to escape the Encounter.

Strengthen us, O Lord, to persevere with Courage; that we may never be wanting
in our Fidelity to thee.

Convince us, blessed Jesus, into this firm Judgment; and may our Memories
faithfully retain it.

Whatever our Senses say to deceive us; or the World to obscure so beauteous a
Truth:

That thy self alone art our chiefest Good; and the sight of thy Glory our
supreme Felicity.

Glory be to the Father, etc.
As it was in the beginning, etc.
Antiphon.
This is, alas, the Land of the dying; but we hope to see the Glory of God in
the Land of the living.

Ant.] Well done, thou good and faithful Servant, I gave thee two Talents, and
thou have gained two more, enter thou into the Joy of thy Lord.

Psalm 81.
HAppy, O Lord, are they who have so much Employment; that there remains no
room for Idleness.

Happy are they who have so little business; that they want not space to attend
their Souls.

Happy yet more are they who in the midst of their work, can think sometimes of
the Wages above.

Whom nothing diverts from their chief Concern, of seeking to make their
Election sure.

But while their Backs are bowed down with Labor; they freely can raise up
their Minds to Heaven.

And while they are tied to their Beds of Sickness; can yet move on to their
eternal Rest.

Often they rejoice with themselves alone; and silently say in their contented
Hearts.

Here we alas are narrowly confined; and our time entertained with trivial
Affairs.

But hereafter we expect an unbounded enlargement; and the same glorious Office
with the blessed Angels.

Here we are subject to a thousand Miseries; and the most prosperous Life is
vain and short.

But hereafter we expect an infinity of Joy, and the solid Pleasures of Heaven
for ever.

We too, O gracious Lord, who now adore thee; and in thy Presence sing these
holy words.

We humbly pray thee, guide us in the middle Path; that we never decline to any
vicious extreme.

Deliver us from the stormy Sea of business; and the dead Water of a sloathful
Life.

Lest we be cast away by forgetting thee; or become corrupted by forgetting our
selves.

Make us sometimes at least recollect our Thoughts; how much soever our
Condition distracts us.

Make us look up with Confidence in our God; how low soever our Afflictions
depress us.

Make us look up to the eternal Mountains; and feed our Souls with this sweet
Hope.

The day will come that out of this dark World, we shall joyfully ascend to
that beauteous sight.

The day will come, and cannot be far off; when we shall rest for ever in the
Bosom of Bliss.

Glory be to the Father, etc.
As it was in the beginning, etc.
Antiphon.
Well done thou good and faithful Servant; I gave thee five Talents, and thou
have gained five more.

Psalm 82.
HAppiest of all, O Lord, are they; whose very business is thy Service.

Who not only bestow an interrupted glance; but steddily and constantly fix
their Eyes on thee.

Who not only visit thy House sometimes; but Night and Day dwell in thy
Presence.

When the Sun rises it finds them at their Prayers; and when it sets leaves
them at the same sweet Task.

Every place is a Church to them, and every Day a holy Sabbath.

Every Object an occasion of Piety; and every Accident an exercise of Virtue.

Do they behold the beauteous Stars? they presently adore their great Creator.

Do they look down on the fruitful Earth? they instantly begin to praise his
Bounty.

Let War or Peace do what they will; and the inconstant World reel up or down:

They pass through all as unconcerned; and smoothly go on their regular course:

Looking still up to that glorious Life above; and entertaining this present in
Hope and Solitude.

If they depart sometimes from their proper Center; and forsake a while their
beloved Retirement.

It Is to approach and give Light to others; and inflame some cold or lukewarm
Heart.

While they are thus abroad, their Minds are at home with thee; and nothing can
divide them from thy dear Presence.

Yet do they wisely make haste to return; and enjoy thee alone in their little
Cell.

There thou receiv'st them as familiar Friends; and freely admittest them into
thy secret sweetness.

Thou give them a taste from thine own full board; and overflowest their
Hearts with the Wine of Gladness.

Often they feel a little Beam from Heaven strike gently, and fill their
Breasts with Light.

Often that gentle Light is kindled into a Flame; and chastely burns with pure
Desires.

Desires that still mount up and aim at thee; the supernatural center of all
their Hopes.

O happy state of reverend Discipline; free from the Cares and Tumults of the
World!

Free from the dangerous allurements of Sin; and perpetually solicited with
the engagements to Virtue.

Where they seldom fall, and quickly rise; and make swift advances in the way
to Heaven.

Where they live in Purity, and dye with an humble Confidence; and go to sing
among the Quires of Angels.

Blessed Providence, who govern'st all things in perfect Wisdom; and assignest to
every one his proper place!

If thou have pleased to dispose our Lives, in Circumstances less favorable
than these.

O let thy powerful hand supply our Wants, and leadus on in our low Path.

That at least afar off we may follow them, who strive to tread so near thy
Steps.

So shall we too, though slowly, arrive at the rich Inheritance of thy Holy
Land.

So shall we gladly enter those blissful Gates, and dwell for ever in the City
of Peace.

Glory be to the Father, etc.
As it was in the beginning, etc.
First Lesson.
HAve thy Thoughts in the Precepts of God, and let thy chief business be his
Commandments.

Deliver him that suffers Injury out of the hands of the Proud, and be not
fainthearted when thou sit in Judgment.

Be merciful to Orphans as a Father, and as a Husband to their Mother.

He that despises the Poor reproacheth his Maker; but he loves him that
pitieth them.

The Wicked shall be cast out in his Malice; but the Just has hope in his
Death.

Our Lord will not accept any Person against the Poor; and will hear the Prayer
of him that is wronged.

He will not despise the Prayer of the Fatherless, nor the Widow, when she
pours forth her Complaint.

Do not the Tears run down the Widows Cheeks? and is not her cry against them
that caused them?

Turn not away thine Eyes in Anger from the Poor; nor give him occasion to
curse thee.

Remember not every Wrong of thy Neighbor; nor do any thing by injurious
Practice.

The Great, the Judge, the Mighty are in Honor; but there is none greater than
he that fears God.

Resp. Lord, with what admirable Wisdom do thou govern the World! Thou make
the Poor, and appointest them their Task of innocent Work. Thou make the
Rich, and give them leisure for their better Improvement: And both Poor and
Rich to need and help one another. O give us Hearts to comply with thy blessed
Design, that every one may strive for the good of all. One God Created us, One
Savior Redeemed us, One Holy Spirit sanctified us, that we all may live in
Love, and Amity, and mutual Assistance.

Second Lesson.
BE not eager to grow Rich, but use moderation in thy Endeavors: Wealth
hastily got shall be diminished; but that which is gathered with the hand by
little and little shall be multiplied.

Lift not up thine Eyes to the Riches thou can not have; for they make
themselves Wings and fly away.

Let not thy Heart envy Sinners, but be thou in the fear of the Lord all the
day long.

A deceitful Balance is an abomination to the Lord; and an equal Weight is his
delight.

There is nothing more wicked than the Love of Money; for he that has it will
set even his Soul to Sale.

Riches will not Profit in the day of Wrath; but Righteousness shall deliver
from Death.

The Righteousness of the Righteous shall deliver them; and the Unrighteous
shall be caught in their deceitful Practices.

The Righteousness of the Simple shall guide his Way; and the Wicked shall fall
in his own Wickedness.

Better is a dry Morsel with Joy, than a House full of Victims with Brawling.

Better is a Poor Man walking in his Simplicity, than the Rich in crooked ways.

Sweet is the Labourer's Sleep, whether he eat much or little; but the fullness
of the Rich suffers him not to Sleep.

Some who have nothing are as if they were Rich; and others who abound in
Wealth, are as if they were Poor.

Some give of their own, and become Richer; others take what is not their own,
and are always in Want.

The Sincerity of the Upright shall direct them; and the deceitfulness of the
Perverse shall destroy them.

Resp.] Give me, O thou sweet disposer of all things, neither Poverty nor
Riches.

Feed me with Food convenient for me, lest I be full and deny thee, and say,
who is the Lord? Or lest I be Poor and Steal, and take the name of my God in
vain. Or rather, dearest Lord, give me what thou please, since thy Self have
taught me now a more perfect Lesson, to submit my Will entirely to thine. Only
I still beg that in all my ways, thy Providence may govern me; and in all my
Temptations thy Grace may preserve me.

Third Lesson.
IT is better to go to the House of Mourning, than to the House of Feasting;
for that is the end of all Men, and the Living will lay it to Heart.

If a Man live many Years, and rejoice in them all, yet let him remember the
days of Darkness.

Rejoice, O young Man, in thy Youth, and let thy Heart cheer thee in the days
of thy Youth, and walk in the ways of thy Heart, and in the sight of thine
Eyes; but know that for all these things God will bring thee unto Judgment.

Remember now thy Creator in the days of thy Youth, while the evil days come
not, nor the Years draw nigh, when thou shall say, I have no pleasure in them.

Of making many Books there is no end; and much Study is a weariness to the
Flesh.

Let us hear the Conclusion of the whole Matter; Fear God, and keep his
Commandments, for this is the whole Duty of Man.

Resp.] In all thy Works remember thy last end, when thou must bid a long
farewell to all the World. Remember that dreadful day of the universal Judgment,
when thou must give account for every Idle word; and thou shall not Sin for
ever. Remember the Joys prepared for the Innocent, and the Miseries that attend
the Wicked. Remember how nearly it concerns thy Soul, to have a good or bad
Eternity.

Antiphon.
Be sober and vigilant, for our Adversary the Devil goes about, as a roaring
Lion, seeking whom he may devour; whom resist steadfast in Faith.

V. We must resist Evil, that we may pursue Good;

R. And escaping Hell, may arrive at Heaven.

Let us pray.
O God, who see and pitiest the Infirmity of our Nature, surrounded on every
side with the worst of Dangers, Temptations to Sin; strengthen us, we beseech
thee, with thy all-powerful Grace, to stand continually on our Guard, resolved,
even to Death, either warily to avoid, or stoutly break through all that offers
to divert or stop the advance of thy Love in our Hearts. And grant us so wisely
to improve the Talents of Capacity, and Means, thy Providence assigns us in
this present Life, that at the great day of Account, we may every one be
received with those precious words; Well done thou good and faithful Servant,
enter thou into the Joy of thy Lord; through our Lord Jesus Christ thy Son, who
with Thee and the Holy Ghost, lives and reigns, one God, World without End.
Amen.

Saturday Lauds.
Antiphon.
When thou had overcome the sharpness of Death, thou did open the Kingdom
of Heaven to all Believers.

Psalm 83.
IF we rejoiced for our selves in the Sufferings of our Lord; let us now
rejoice for him that his Sufferings are ended:

Now that the Fowlers Net is broken; and the meek and innocent Dove is escaped:

Now that the Cup of Bitterness is past away; and never possible to return
again.

Never again, O dearest Jesus, shall those blessed Eyes weep; nor thy holy Soul
be sorrowful to death.

Never shall thy precious Life be subject any more, to the bloody Malice of
ambitious Hypocrites.

Never shall thy Innocence any more be exposed to the barbarous Fury of an
ungrateful Multitude.

But thou shall live, and reign for ever; and all created Nature perpetually
adore thee.

O happy end of well endured Afflictions! O blessed Fruits that spring from the
Cross of Jesus!

Look up, my Soul, and see thy Crucified Lord sit gloriously enthroned at the
right hand of his Father.

Behold the ragged Purple now turned into a Robe of Light; the scornful Reed
into a Royal Scepter.

The Wreath of Thorns is grown into a sparkling Diadem; and all his Scars
polished into Brightness.

His Tears are all now changed into Joy; and the Laughter of his Persecutors
into sad Despair.

Herod long since perished into miserable Contempt; and Pilate still trembles
with everlasting Fears.

The impenitent Jews are scattered over the World; to attest his Truth, and
their own obdurate Blindness.

But himself is crowned with eternal Triumphs; and the Souls of his redeemed
shall sing his Victories for ever.

Live glorious King of Men and Angels; live happy Conqueror of Sin and Death.

Our Praises shall always attend thy Cross; and our Patience endeavor to bear
our own.

Through fiercest Dangers our Faith shall follow thee; and nothing wrest from
us our hopes of enjoying thee.

We'll fear no more the sting of Death; nor be frighted at the darkness of the
Grave.

Since thou have changed our Grave into a Bed of Rest; and made Death it self
but a Passage unto Life.

We'll love no more the Pleasures of Vanity; nor set our Hearts on unsatisfying
Riches.

Since thou have opened Paradise again; and purchased for us the Kingdom of
Heaven.

Glory be to the Father, etc.
As it was in the beginning, etc.
Psalm 84.
BLessed be thy Name, O holy Jesus! and blessed be the Mercy of thy Providence.

Who have cast our Lots in these times of Grace; and designed our Birth in the
days of Light:

When we may see our ready way; and directly go on to our glorious End.

Soon as thine own Afflictions ended, thou did communicate thy Joys to all
the World:

All that esteemed so blessed a Sight; and stood prepared to entertain thy Coming.

As for the rest, whose Eyes are shut; or turned away by their own Malice:

Thy Presence yields them no more Joy, than Light to those that will not see.

But the Hearts that love thee thou fillest with Gladness; and overflowest them
with an Ocean of heavenly Delights.

Come happy Souls, to whom belongs so fair a Title to all these Mercies!

Come, let us now raise up our Thoughts, and continually meditate on our future
Beatitude.

Let us comfort our Labors with the hope of Rest; and our Sufferings with the
expectance of a quick Reward.

Now that the hand of our gracious Lord, has unlocked the Gates of everlasting
Bliss:

Now that they stand wide open, to admit such as press on with their utmost
strength:

Such as have wisely made choice of Heaven; for the only end and business of
their Life:

Rejecting all these false Allurements; to attend the pursuit of true Felicity.

O blessed Jesus, our Hope, our Strength; and the full rewarder of all thy
Servants!

As thou have freely prepared for us ready Wages; so, Lord, let thy Grace
enable us to work.

Make us to direct our whole Life to thee; and undervalue all things compared
with thy Love.

Seal thou up our Eyes to the illusions of the World; and open them upwards to
thy solid Glories.

That when our earthly Tabernacle shall be dissolved; and this House of Clay
fall down into the Dust:

We may ascend to thee, and dwell above; in that Building not made with hands,
eternal in the Heavens.

Glory be to the Father, etc.
As it was in the beginning, etc.
Psalm 85.
PRaise our Lord, O ye Children of Men; Praise him as the Author of all your
Hopes.

Praise our Lord, O ye blessed of Heaven; praise him as the finisher of all
your Joys.

Sing, O ye Reverend Patriarchs, and Holy Prophets; sing Hymns of Glory to the
Great Messiah.

Sing and rejoice, all you ancient Saints; who so long reposed in the Bosom of
Abraham.

Bring forth your best and purest Incense; and humbly offer it at the Throne of
the Lamb:

The Lamb that was slain from the beginning of the World; by the sprinkling of
whose Blood ye are all saved.

O still sing on the Praises of the King of Peace; and bless for ever his
victorious Mercy.

'Twas he dissolved the Power of Darkness; and brake asunder the Bars of Death.

How did your glad Eyes sparkle with Joy; to see at last your desired Redeemer!

How were your Spirits transported with Delights; to behold the Splendour of his
glorious Presence!

O glorious Preserver, when shall our Souls be filled with strong and constant
desires of enjoying thee?

When, dearest Jesus, shall our Desires be filled with the everlasting fruition
of thy self?

Henceforth for thee, and for thy sacred Love, O thou great and only comfort of
our Souls!

May all Afflictions be welcome to us; as wholesome Physic to correct our
Follies.

May the Pleasures of the World be rejected by us; as dangerous Fruits that
fill us with Diseases.

May we by thy Example, neither fear to die; nor refuse the Labors of this
Life.

But while we live, obey thy Grace; that when we die, we may enjoy thy Glory.

Glory be to the Father, etc.
As it was in the beginning, etc.
2 Pet. 3. 17.
BEware lest ye also being led away by the Error of the Wicked, ye sall from
your own stedfastness.

But grow in Grace, and in the Knowledge of our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ;
to him be Glory, both now, and for ever and ever. Amen.

Hymn 26.
MY God, to thee our selves we owe,
And to thy Bounty all we have;
Behold to thee our Praises flow,
And humbly thy acceptance crave.
If we are happy in a Friend,
That very Friend it is thou bestow'st;
His Power, his Will to help our end,
Is just so much as thou allow'st.
If we enjoy a free Estate,
Our only Title is from thee;
Thou made our Lot to bear that rate,
Which else an empty Blank would be.
If we have Health that well tuned Ground,
Which gives the Music to the rest;
It is by thee our Air is sound,
Our Food secured, our Physic blessed.
If we have hope one Day to view
The Glories of thy blissful Face;
Each drop of that refreshing Dew
Must fall from Heaven, and thy free Grace.
Thus then to Thee our Praises flow,
And humbly thy acceptance crave;
Since it is to Thee our selves we owe,
And to thy Bounty all we have.
Glory to Thee, great God, alone,
Three Persons in One Deity;
As it has been in Ages gone,
May now and still for ever be. Amen.
Antiphon.
It Is consummated; thou have, O Jesu, overcome in thy Body, all the Powers of
Darkness; Their Hour is past, but thy Souls eternal Bliss remains; and behold
that of thy triumphant Resurrection approaches.

V. Be not afraid of those that kill the Body.

R. And after that have no more to do.

Let us pray.
O God, who have submitted thine only Son our Savior Jesus Christ, to expire
on the Cross, and descend into the Grave, that he might destroy the Life of
Sin, and bury the Terrors of Death! Grant, we beseech thee, they may never
revive or rise again, to tempt us, or fright us from the ways of Virtue, nor
shake this sure and fundamental Truth, which thy Grace has laid in our Hearts,
that the greatest mischiefs our Salvation costs us here, are but momentary, and
work above measure in us an eternal weight of Glory, through the same our Lord
Jesus Christ. Amen.

Antiphon.
They who use this World, let them be as if they used it not; for the fashion
of this World passes away.

Saturday Vespers.
Psalm 86.
WHy do you so eagerly pursue the World; and seek its fond Enjoyments?

A World of Vanity and false Deceits; a World of Misery and sad Disasters.

Whose Crosses are solid, and Comforts empty; whose Sorrows are permanent, and
its Delights pass quickly away.

A World where the Innocent are condemned with Shame; and the Guilty are freed
with Applause.

Where often the wicked are advanced to Honor; and the virtuous are oppressed
with Disgrace.

Where Friends fall off, and Kindred forget; and every one minds his proper
Interest.

Yet are we taken with this crooked World; and blindly court its painted Face.

We make some ugly Passion Mistress of our Hearts; and neglect the pure and
amiable Love of Jesus.

Whose Goodness to us gives us all we have, whose Perfections in himself are
more than we can conceive.

Thou art, O glorious Jesus, the beauty of Angels, and the everlasting Joy of
all Saints.

Thou art the Heaven of Heavens it self; and in thy sight alone is the fullness
of Bliss.

All this thou art, and infinitely more; and yet, alas, how few esteem thee?

The World, we dearly know, too often has deceived us; and our rashness cares
not to be undone again.

Thou never, O Jesus, have failed our Hope; and yet our Dullness fears to rely
on thee.

The World distracts and embroils our Spirits; and wretched we delight in our
Misery.

Thou always, O Jesu, fill'st our Hearts with Peace; and senseless we are weary
of thy Happiness.

The World calls, and we faint in following it; Thou call'st, and we are still
relieved by Thee.

Yet is our Nature so ingratefully perverse; we run after that which Tires, and
abandons that which Refreshes with ineffable sweetness.

Sometimes our Lips speak gloriously of thee; O thou living Fountain of eternal
Bliss!

Some happy times we relish thy sweetness; and decry aloud the Poison of the
World.

But we are soon enticed by its gilded Cup, and easily forsake the Waters of
Life

O blessed Jesus, who took'st upon thee all our Frailties; to bestow on us
thine own Perfections!

Teach us to prize the Joys of Heaven; and part with all things else to
purchase that.

Make all the pleasures of this Life seem bitter to our taste; as they are
indeed pernicious to our Healths.

Let not their Flatteries any more delude us; nor superfluous Cares perplex our
Minds.

But may our chief delight be to think of thee; and all our study to grow great
in thy Love.

Glory be to the Father, etc.
As it was in the beginning, etc.
Antiphon.
We by a fond self-love blame every thing but our selves; whilst nothing can
hurt us but our own misplaced Affections.

Psalm 87.
ALL this is true, and yet the World is loved; and our Nature inclines to
affect its Vanities.

It Is loved, and so it justly deserves; did we understand its real value.

Our Life indeed seems mean and trivial; and all things about us seem
troublesome and dangerous.

Yet, O my God, are their consequences excellent in this; that they are our
only way of coming to thee.

This World, and this alone, is the Womb that breeds us; and brings us forth to
see thy Light.

This is alone the proper Machine, wherein thy Hand has set our Lives:

To learn the Art of managing it right; and wind up our selves to thy glorious
Heaven.

O that we had that happy Skill! how soon would every thing help forward to
advance us?

Whether we eat or drink, or whatsoever else an innocent Hand can undertake:

If we regard our happy end, and order all to the improvement of our Minds:

They instantly change their secular Name; and deservedly are preferred to
become Religious.

Riches themselves, and imperious Honor, have not so perverse and fixed a
Malice:

But a prudent use converts them to Piety; and makes them fit Instruments of
highest Bliss.

Our very Delights, O the goodness of God! may be so tempered with a wise alloy:

That his Mercy accounts them as parts of our Duty; and fails not to give them
their due Reward:

While they are entertained for the Health of our Bodies, or the just
refreshment of our wearied Spirits:

And both our Bodies and Spirits constantly applied, to gain new degrees of the
love of Heaven.

Thus, gracious Lord, every moment of our Lives may still be climbing up
toward thee.

Thus may we proceed in thy Service; even then when we most of all serve our
selves.

And then indeed we best serve our selves, when we are busiest in that we call
thy Service.

Thou sweetly vouchsafest to style that thy Glory, which in very truth is
nothing but our Interest.

Thou kindly complain'st we dishonor thy Name; when we only mischief our own
Soul.

O blessed Jesus, King of Clemency, and great Rewarder of every little improved
Grace!

Thou who by all we can do pretendest no Gain; but bestowest upon us all thy
self have done!

Thou who came down from Heaven, to show us a Pattern; and made us free to
work for our Profit!

Instruct our Gratitude to consecrate all to thee; since all by thy Bounty
redounds to our Profit.

Glory be to the Father, etc.
As it was in the beginning, etc.
Antiphon.
We by a fond self-love blame every thing but our selves, whilst nothing can
hurt us but our own misplaced Affections.

Ant.] It is decreed for all Men once to dye; and after Death to come to
Judgment.

Psalm 88.
THis Life indeed is the way we must walk; but this alone cannot bring us to
the end.

E're we arrive at our appointed home, we must be led through the Gates of
Death.

Where we shall be absolutely stripped of all we have; and carry nothing with us
but what we are.

Where we must not only quit the World; but leave behind us even a part of our
selves.

Have thou, my Soul, seen some Neighbor die; and do thou remember those
circumstances of Sorrow?

We are sure the Case e're long will be our own; and are not sure but it may be
very soon.

Have we our selves been dangerously Sick? and do we remember the Thoughts we
had then?

How we resolved to correct our Passions; and strive against the Vices that so
particularly endanger us?

'Twill come to this again, and no reprieve be found, to stay one single Minute
the hand of Death.

But he immediately will seize upon us; and bear us away to the Region of
Spirits:

There to be ranged in our proper place; as the course of our Life has
qualified us here.

Nor is this all to expire, and die, and dwell for a time in a state of
Separation.

We must expect another Day; a Day of public Accounts, and restitution of all
things.

Where the Archangel shall sound his Trumpet; and proclaim aloud this
universal Summons:

Arise you dead, and come to Judgment; arise, and appear before the Throne of
God.

Then shall the little heaps of Dust immediately awake; and every Soul put on
her proper Body.

Immediately all the Children of Adam shall be gathered together; from Heaven,
and Hell, and every corner of the Earth.

There they must stand and attend their Doom; but Oh with how sad and fatal a
difference!

The Just shall look up with a cheerful Confidence; and in their new white
Robes triumph and sing:

Alleluja, let us rejoice, for the Kingdom of the World is made our Lord's, and
his Christ's; and he shall reign for ever and ever.

Let us rejoice, for now our Redeemer is nigh; behold he comes quickly, and his
reward is with him.

Come, come, Lord Jesu, thou long desire of our Hearts; come quickly thou full
delight of our Souls.

Come, and declare to all the World thy Glory; come, and reward before all the
World, thy Servants.

Lo, where he comes aloft in Power and Majesty; attended with a Train of
innumerable Angels.

Behold where he sits enthroned on the Wings of Cherubims; and takes at once a
view of all Mankind.

Soon he commands his Angels to sever his Sheep; and gather them together on
his right Hand.

First then to them he turns his glorious Face; and shines upon them with these
ravishing words:

Come ye blessed of my Father; posses the Kingdom prepared for you, from the
beginning of the World.

O the Joys their Souls shall feel; when those heavenly Words shall sound in
their Ears!

Joys which the Wit of Man cannot conceive; Joys that the Tongue of Angels
cannot express!

Let it suffice, themselves shall taste their own Felicity; and feed on its
sweetness for evermore.

But O! with what dejected Eyes, and trembling Hearts, shall the wicked stand
expecting their Judge!

What shall they do, when wherever they look, their Eye can meet with nothing
but Despair?

Above the offended Judge, ready to condemn them; below the bottomless Pit
gaping to devour them:

Within the Worm of Conscience gnawing their Bowels; and round about all the
World in Flames.

What shall they do, when that terrible Voice shall strike them suddenly down
to the bottom of Hell:

Go ye cursed into everlasting Fire, prepared for the Devil and his Angels?

The Day of Man is past; when Sinners did what they pleased, and God seemed to
hold his peace.

It Is now the Day of God, when his Wrath shall speak in Thunder; and Sinners
suffer what their wickedness deserves.

Then shall they sink immediately into the Pit of Sorrows; and dwell in
Darkness and Torments for ever.

Whilst the Just shall go up in Joy and Triumph; and reign with our Lord in his
Kingdom for ever.

Thus shall the whole Creation be finally disposed; and Mercy and Justice
divide the World.

O my Soul, who now art here below; and read these dreadful Truths as things
afar off!

Know thou shall then be present, and see them with thine Eyes; and be thy self
concerned for all Eternity.

Know as thou live thou art like to die; and as thou die thou art sure to
be judged.

Think what a sad condition it will be, to find thy self on the wrong hand.

Think what thou then would give to have repented; think what thou would
give for a little time to repent.

Watch therefore now, and continually pray, for we know not the Hour when the
Son of Man will come.

O Son of God, God-Man, who came in Mercy to save us! bring the same Mercy
with thee, when thou come to judge us.

Mean while assist us with thy heavenly Grace, to stand perpetually with our
Accounts prepared.

That we may die in the peace of God, and his Holy Church; and go to live with
him and his blessed Saints for ever.

Glory be to the Father, etc.
As it was in the beginning, etc.
Antiphon.
It is decreed for all Men once to die, and after death to come to Judgment.

Titus, Chap. 2.
BUT speak thou the things that become sound Doctrine, that the aged Men be
Sober, Grave, Temperate, sound in Faith, Charity, Patience.

The aged Women likewise, that they be in Behavior as becomes Holiness, not
false Accusers, not given to much Wine, teachers of good things.

That they may teach the young Women to be Sober, to love their Husbands, to
love their Children.

To be Discreet, Chaste, keepers at Home, Good, Obedient unto their own
Husbands, that the Word of God be not Blasphemed.

Young Men likewise exhort, to be sober minded; in all things showing thy self
a Pattern of Good Works, in Doctrine showing incorruptness, with Gravity,
Sincerity.

Exhort Servants to be obedient to their own Masters, and to please them well
in all things; not answering again, not purloining, but showing all good
Fidelity, that they may adorn the Doctrine of God our Savior in all things.

Hymn 27.
LOrd, what a pleasant Life were this,
If all did do their Parts;
If all did one another love
Sincerely with their Hearts!
No Suits of Law, no noise of War,
Our quiet Minds would fright;
No Fear to lose, no Care to keep,
What justly is our right.
No envious Thought, no slandring Tongue,
Would e're disturb our Peace;
We should help them, and they help us,
And all unkindness cease.
But the All-wise chose other Laws,
And thought it better so;
He made the World, and sure he knows
What Is best with it to do.
It Is for our Good, that all this Ill
Is suffered here below;
It Is to correct those dangerous Sweets,
That else would Poison grow.
So Storms are raised, to clear the Air,
And chase the Clouds away;
So Weeds grow up to cure our Wounds,
And all our Pains allay.
How often, Lord, do we mistake,
When we our Plots design?
Rule thou hereafter thine own World,
Only thy self be mine.
Or rather, Lord, let me be thine,
Else I am not my own;
Give me thy self, or take thou me,
Undone if left alone.
To thee, great God of Heaven and Earth!
Each Knee for ever bow:
May all thy Blessed sing above,
And we adore below. Amen.
Antiphon.
Thou give us tastes of good here, to beget and feed in us an Appetite. Thou
give us but tastes here, to draw our Affections up to thy self; whose
fruition alone can only satisfy.

V. Vain and preposterous it is to expect our port at Sea:

R. Or to look for a Haven on Earth, but in Hope.

Let us pray.
O Merciful God, whose Providence disparages with shortness, and crosses, all
the enjoyments of the World, that they may become less tempting to us, and take
less hold of our Hearts! Grant us Grace, we beseech thee, wisely to discern,
and heartily praise Thee, for this most beneficial alloy of their Natures; and
since we cannot attain Thee, the Heaven of Heavens, if we do not fix our selves
entirely on Thee, nor yet be raised to this, if we are or may be satisfied with
any thing besides thy glorious Self; make us check and overcome the Repinings
of Flesh and Blood, with juster Adorations of thy infinite Mercy, for
qualifying so sitly this Womb of our Souls, that by its own uneasiness it may
more easily dispose them for a happy Birth, into thy blessed Eternity, through
our Lord Jesus Christ thy Son, who lives and reigns with Thee and the Holy
Ghost, One God, World without End. Amen.

Saturday Compline.
Antiphon.
Too often are we troubled about many things; when only the one thing is
needful.

Psalm 89.
REtire, O my Soul, into thine own Bosom, and search what thou aim'st at in all
thy Thoughts.

Where do thou place thy chief Felicity? and whither tend thy strong Desires?

Go to the Great and Prudent of the World, and learn of them to choose thy
Interests.

Do not they increase their Estates, where they mean to spend most of their
Life?

Do they project their Mansion-Seat, in a Country through which they pass as
Travelers?

No more, my Soul, should we build our best Hopes, on the Sandy Foundation of
this perishable Earth.

Where sure we are we cannot stay long; and are not sure we shall stay a very
little.

O thou eternal Being, who changest not; yet art the cause and end of all our
Changes!

Who still remainest the same rich fullness in thy self; the same bright Glory
to all the Blessed.

Teach us to use this transitory Life; as Pilgrims returning to their beloved
Home.

That we may take what our Journey requires; and not think of settling in a
Foreign Country.

But wisely forecast our Treasures so; to be happy there where we must always
be.

Glory be to the Father, etc.
As it was in the beginning, etc.
Psalm 90.
NOW thou have found thy happy End; and found it the only Good that lasts for
ever:

Study, O my Soul, to know still more; and still more value those Immortal Joys.

Strive for so glorious a Prize with thy whole force; and the utmost strainings
of all thy Faculties.

Purchase at any rate that blessed Inheritance; and wisely neglect even all
things else.

All that divert thee from thy holy Course; or but retard the speed of thy
Advance.

For though the least in the Kingdom of Heaven be happy enough; where every
Vessel is filled to the brim:

Yet to enlarge our Capacity to the least higher degree, deserves the busiest
diligence of our whole Life.

Shall the industrious Be endure no rest; but fly, and sing, and labor all
the day?

Shall the unwearied Ant be running up and down; to fetch and carry a few
Grains of Corn?

And we, for whom all Nature so faithfully Works; and tires it self in a
perpetual Motion.

For whom the tender Providence of God commands even his Angels to watch and
pray:

For whom the adored Jesus came down from Heaven; and spent a whole Life in
continual Labors:

Shall we sleep on in a drowsy Sloth; and not stir a Finger to help our selves?

Away my Soul, and chide thy fluggish Thoughts; and let their stupid Folly
plainly know:

We have a Store to provide as well as Ants; and infinitely richer than their
poor Hoard.

We have a Work to do as well as Bees; and infinitely sweeter than all their
Honey.

What can so nobly enrich an immortal Soul; as still to be gathering a Stock
for Eternity?

What can so highly delight one, that every Day improves; as daily to see the
exercise of his Hope?

O blessed Hope, be thou my chief delight; and the only Treasure I covet to lay
up.

Be thou the quickening Life of all my Actions; and sweet alloy of all my
Sufferings.

So shall I never refuse the meanest Labors; whilst I look to receive such
glorious Wages.

So shall I never repine at any Temporal Loss; whilst I hope to gain such
eternal Rewards.

Glory be to the Father, etc.
As it was in the Beginning, etc.
Psalm 91.
BUT Oh! it is not so much our Sloth undoes us; as the imprudent choice in
applying our diligence.

Many, alas, take pains enough; Many perplex themselves too much.

See how the busy Toilers of the World are chained perpetually like Slaves to
their Work.

How early they rise, and go late to Sleep; and eat the Bread of Care and
Sorrow.

See how the hardy Soldiers follow their Prince; through a thousand
Difficulties and Dangers.

See how the venturous Mariners expose their Lives, over Stormy Seas, into
barbarous Nations.

And why all this, poor ill advised Wretches! but to fetch perhaps a little
Fish or Spice?

To gain a few Pence, or some petty Honor; which others more share in than
your selves?

O bounteous Lord, how easy are thy Commands; how cheap have thou made the
purchase of Heaven!

Half these Pains would make us Saints; half these Sufferings canonize us for
Martyrs:

Were they devoutly undertaken for thee; and the higher enjoyment of thy
glorious Promises.

Thou bid'st us not freeze under the Polar Star; nor burn in the heats of the
torrid Zone.

But proposest a sweet and gentle Rule; and such as our Nature it self would
choose:

Did not our Passions strangely mislead us; and the World about us distract our
Reason.

Thou bid'st us but wisely love our selves; and attend above all things our own
Happiness.

Thou bid'st us value even this World, as much as it deserves; since it is the
School that breeds us up for the other.

Only we are forbidden to be wilful Fools; and prefer a short Vanity before
eternal Felicity.

O the mild Government of the King of Heaven! this we can do whatever else we
are doing.

This we can do, even whilst we sit still; and only move our Thoughts toward
Thee.

Yet let not this thy facile sweetness, Lord! be abused by us by a wanton
neglect.

But make us to love thee so much more; as thou more discoverest the excess of
thy Love.

Glory be to the Father, etc.
As it was in the beginning, etc.
Hymn 28.
MY Soul! what is all this World to thee,
This World of Sin and Woe;
Where only Sense can taste its sweets,
And those unwholesome too?
Truth is thy Food, Truth thy delight,
Which cannot here be free;
Thy Mind was born to know, and love,
What this Life never can see.
Malicious World! how do thou lay,
And cover thy false Baits?
Here those of Pleasure, there of Gain,
Each for our Ruin wait.
Unhappy we! it is our Fault,
It Is we our Life abuse;
The World presents a furnished Shop,
And we the Tools misuse.
So have I seen a little Child,
If Nurse but turn her Eye,
Instead of Haft, take hold of the Blade,
And cut it self, and cry.
This little Child, alas, am I,
Self-willed, self-wounded too;
But, Lord, turn not thy Face away,
Lest I my self undo.
O make me still so use this World,
That I the other gain;
O make me so the other love,
That this its end attain.
Its end to breed up Souls for Heaven,
Then be it self new dressed:
No more Corruption, no more Change,
But one perpetual Rest. Amen.
Antiphon.
The Day of the Lord comes as a Thief in the Night.

V. We have here no abiding City, but we seek one above.

V. Jesus came down to give us a glimpse of it,

R. And made his own Life the Chart to direct us to it.

Let us pray.
O God, whose eternal Providence has embarked our Souls in the Ship of our
Bodies, not to expect any Port or Anchorage on the Sea of this World, but steer
directly through it to thy glorious Kingdom! Grant us, we beseech Thee, that
daily reflecting with what Care and unwearied Diligence, the wretched
Adventurers for all sorts of Vanity pursue, round about us, their desperate
Courses, we may heartily feel our selves confounded with just Reproach, who
knowing our engagement on so important a Voyage, yet take so little Pains to
perform it. Preserve us, O Lord, from the Dangers that on all sides assault us,
and keep our Affections still fitly disposed to receive thy holy Inspirations,
that carried sweetly and strongly forward by thy holy Spirit, we may happily
arrive at last in the Haven of eternal Salvation, through our Lord Jesus Christ
thy Son, who with Thee and the Holy Ghost, lives and reigns, One God,
blessed for ever. Amen.

MATTINS for our Savior's OFFICE.
The Office of our Blessed Savior appropriated to all the Feasts of our
Redemption.
Invitatory.
Come let us Adore our God that Redeemed us. Psalm 92.
BRING to our Lord, all you his Servants; bring to our Lord the Sacrifice of
Praise; bring to our Lord all you Nations of the Earth, bring Hymns of Glory to
his Name.

To day let us Adore our God that Redeemed us. He is our God, and we his People,
created by his Goodness to be happy for ever; He is our Redeemer, and we his
Purchase, restored by his Death to a better Eternity.

To day let us Adore our God that Redeemed us. Let us learn of him, and he will
teach us his ways; let us follow him, and we shall walk in his Light; for the
Law, and its Types, were given by Moses; but Grace and Truth came by Jesus
Christ.

To day let us Adore our God that Redeemed us. Come, let us ascend to the House
of our Lord, where he is truly worshipped, and celebrate this Day with a holy
Joy, imploring his Mercies for all we need, and blessing his Bounty for all we
have.

To day let us Adore our God that Redeemed us. Glory be to the Father, and to
the Son, and to the Holy Ghost;

As it was in the beginning, is now and ever shall be, world without end, Amen.

To day let us Adore the God that Redeemed us.

Hymn 29.
JEsu, who from thy Father's Throne,
To this low vale of Tears came down,
In our poor Nature dressed!
O may the Charms of that sweet Love,
Draw up our Souls to Thee above,
And fix them there to Rest.
Jesu, all Graces Thee adorn,
Who wast with Joy conceived and born
Of a pure Virgin's Womb!
O may we breed and bring thee forth,
In our glad Hearts; for all is Mirth
Where thou art pleased to come.
Jesu, whose high and humble Birth,
In Heaven the Angels, and on Earth
The faithful Shepherds sing!
O may our Hymns, which here run low,
Shoot up aloft, and fruitful grow,
In that eternal Spring.
Jesu, how soon did thou begin
To bleed, and suffer for our Sin,
The Circumcising Knife?
O may thy Grace, by making good
Our Souls just cause against Flesh and Blood,
Cut off that dangerous Strife.
Jesu, who took'st that Heavenly Name,
Thy blessed Purpose to proclaim,
Of saving lost Mankind!
O may we bow our Heart and Knee,
Bright King of Names to glorious Thee,
And thy hid sweetness find.
Jesu, who thus began'st our Bliss,
Thus carried'st on our Happiness!
To Thee all Praise be paid.
O may the great mysterious Three,
For ever live, and ever be
Adored, beloved, obeyed. Amen.
Antiphon.
Blessed be the Mercy of our God, who has left no way untried, that could
possibly recover us.

Psalm 93.
COme now, and hear, you that fear the Lord; and I will tell you what he has
done for my Soul.

Hear, and I will tell you what he has done for yours; and the wonders of his
Bounty for all the World.

When we lay asleep in the Shades of Darkness, of nothing, his mighty Hand
awaked us into Being:

Not that of Stones and Plants, and Beasts, over which he has made us absolute
Lords:

But an accomplished Body, and immortal Spirits; little inferior to his
glorious Angels.

He printed on our Souls his own similitude; and promised to our Obedience his
own Felicity.

He endu'd us with Appetites to live well and happily; and furnished us with
means to satisfy those Appetites.

Creating a whole World to serve us here; and providing a Heaven to glorify us
hereafter.

Thus did thou favor us, O infinite Goodness! but we! what return did we
make unto thee?

Blush, O my Soul, for shame, at so strange a Weakness; and weep for grief at
such extreme Ingratitude.

We childishly preferred a trivial Apple; before the Law of our God, and the
safety of our own Lives.

We fondly embraced a little present Satisfaction; before the pleasure of
Paradise, and eternity of Heaven.

Behold the unhappy Source of all our Miseries; which still increased its
Streams as they went further on.

Till they at last exacted a deluge of Justice; to drown their deluge of
Iniquity.

And here alas had been an end of Man; a sad and fatal end of the whole World:

Had not our wise Creator seen the danger; and in time prevented the extremity
of the Ruin.

Reserving for himself a few choice Plants; to replenish the Earth with more
hopeful Fruit.

Yet they quickly grew wild, and brought forth sour Grapes; and their
Childrens Teeth were set on edge.

Quickly they aspired to an intolerable Pride; fortifying their wickedness
against the Power of Heaven.

Justice was now provoked to a second Deluge; and to bring again a Cloud over
the Earth.

But Mercy discovered a Bow in the Cloud, and our faithful God remembered his
Promise!

Allaying their Punishment with a milder Sentence; only scattering them from
the place of their Conspiracy.

Which yet his Providence turned into a Blessing; by making it an occasion of
peopling the World.

Still their Rebellious Nature disobeyed again; and neither feared his
Judgments, nor valued his Mercies.

But with a graceless emulation propagated Sin; as far as his Goodness
propagated Mankind.

Then he selected a private Family; and increased and governed them with a
particular tenderness.

Giving them a Law by the hand of Angels; and engaging their Obedience by a
thousand Favors!

But they neglected too their God and Heaven; and fell in love with the ways of
Death.

When thou had thus, O Lord, tried every Remedy; and found our Disease
beyond all Cure:

When the Light of Nature proved too weak a Guide; and the general Flood too
mild a Correction:

When the Miracles of Moses could not soften their Hearts; nor the Law of
Angels bring any to Perfection:

When all was reduced to this desperate State; and no imaginable hope left to
recover us:

Behold the eternal Wisdom finds a strange expedient; the last and highest
Instance of Almighty Love.

Himself he resolves to cloth with our Flesh; and come down among us, and die
to redeem us.

Wonder, my Soul, at the Mercies of the Lord; how infinitely transcending our
utmost Wishes.

Wonder at the admirable Providence of his Counsels; how exactly fitted to
their great design.

Had he been less than God, we could never have believed the sublimer Mysteries
of his Heavenly Doctrine.

Had he been other than Man, we must needs have wanted the powerful Motive of
his holy Example.

Had he been only God, he could never have suffered the least of those
Afflictions he so patiently overcame.

O blessed Jesu! both these thou art in thy self; be thou both these to us.

Be thou our God, and make us adore Thee; be thou our Leader, and make us to
follow Thee.

Glory be to the Father, etc.
As it was in the beginning, etc.
Antiphon.
Blessed be the Mercy of our God, who has left no means untried, that could
possibly recover us.

Ant.] Lord, thou not only offerest us Salvation, but layest in means
beforehand to make us accept it.

Psalm 94.
SOon as this blessed Decree was made of sending the Son of God to redeem Mankind:

Immediately his Goodness was ready to come amongst us; had our ungracious
World been ready to receive him.

But we were as yet too gross and sensual; and utterly incapable of so pure a
Law.

We were immersed in Cares and Pleasures; and wholly indisposed for so perfect
an Obedience.

While we were thus unfit for thee; O thou God of pure and perfect Holiness!

Thou graciously were pleased to stay for us; and all that time prepare us for
thy Presence.

From the beginning entertaining us with Hope; and through every Age confirming
our Faith.

How early, O my God, did thou engage to relieve us; The Seed of the Woman
should bruise the Serpents Head?

How often did thou repeat thy Promise to Abraham; In thy Seed shall all the
Nations of the Earth be blessed?

How many ways did thy Mercy invent; by unquestionable Tokens to give notice of
thy Coming?

Behold a Virgin shall conceive, and bear a Son; and his Name shall be called
Emanuel.

There shall come forth a Rod out of the Stem of Jesse; and a Branch shall grow
out of his Roots.

And the Spirit of the Lord shall rest upon him; the Spirit of Wisdom and
Understanding.

The Spirit of Counsel and Might; the Spirit of Knowledge, and the fear of the
Lord.

The Lord thy God shall raise up unto thee a Prophet, of thy Brethren like unto
me; unto him shall ye hearken.

But thou Bethlem Ephratah; though thou be little among the Thousands of Judah:

Yet out of thee shall he come forth unto me; that is to be Ruler in Israel:

Whose goings forth have been of old; even from the days of Eternity.

Hark how the Almighty Father introduces his Son, commanding all the Angels of
God to worship him.

Thou art my Son, my dearly beloved Son; this day have I begotten Thee.

Ask of me, and I shall give thee the Heathen for thine Inheritance; and the
uttermost parts of the Earth for thy Possession.

And is it a light thing that thou should be my Servant; to raise up the
Tribes of Jacob, and restore the preserved of Israel?

I will give thee for a Light to the Gentiles; that thou may be my Salvation
to the ends of the Earth.

Hark how the ancient Prophets rejoice in the Messiah; and in soft and gentle
words foretell his sweetness.

He shall come down as Rain into a Fleece of Wool; and as drops of Dew
distilling on the Earth.

He shall feed his Flocks like a Shepherd; and gently lead those that are with
young.

He shall gather his Lambs with his Arms; and carry them in his Bosom.

The bruised Reed shall he not break; nor quench the smoking Flax.

Righteousness and Peace shall flourish in his days; and of his Kingdom there
shall be no end.

Then shall the Eyes of the Blind be opened; and the Ears of the Deaf be made
to hear.

Then shall the Tongues of the Dumb be loosened; and the Lame Man shall leap as
a Heart.

Thus did thy Holy Prophets prophesy of Thee; thus did their Children sing thy
Praises.

Blessed be the Lord our God, who only does wondrous things; and blessed be
the name of his Majesty for ever.

His Dominion shall reach from the one Sea to the other; and from the River to
the ends of the World.

They who dwell in the Wilderness shall kneel before him; and his Enemies shall
lick the Dust.

The Kings of Tarshish, and of the Isles, shall bring Presents; the Kings of
Sheba, and Seba shall offer Gifts.

Yea, all Kings shall fall down before him; all Nations shall serve him.

He shall spare the Simple and Needy, when he cries; the Poor also, and him
that has no helper.

He shall redeem their Soul from Deceit and Violence; and precious shall their
Blood be in his sight.

And he shall live, and to him shall be given of the Gold of Arabia; Prayer
also shall be made for him continually, and daily shall he be praised.

O thou eternal King of Heaven! make good to thy Servants these happy
Predictions.

So rule us here, that we may obey thy Grace; so favor us hereafter, that we
may enjoy thy Glory.

Glory be to the Father, etc.
As it was in the beginning, etc.
Antiphon.
Lord! thou not only offerest us Salvation, but layest in means before hand to
make us accept it.

Ant.] All Is one to Thee, O mighty Love; whether Joy or Sorrow, so Mankind be
saved.

Psalm 95.
'TWas not thy Joys alone, O dearest Lord; that thou inspiredst into thy holy
Prophets.

But thou revealedst to them thy Sorrows too; and commanded'st to publish them
with tender care:

That they not only should speak thy words; but, the more to affect us, put on
thy Person.

O let our Eyes run down with Water; and our Hearts faint away with Grief:

While we remember the Sufferings of our Lord; and hear his sad Complaints.

I gave my Back to the Smiters, and my Cheeks to them that plucked off the
Hair; I hid not my Face from spitting.

My Enemies whisper together against me; and say, when shall he die, and his
name perish?

My familiar Friend, that did eat of my Bread, has lifted up his Heel against
me.

But thou upholdest me, O Lord, and set me before thy Face for ever.

I am poured out like Water, and all my Bones are out of Joint.

My Heart is like Wax; it is melted in midst of my Bowels.

My strength is dried up like a Potsherd, and my Tongue cleaves unto my Jaws;
and thou have brought me into the Dust of Death.

Our Fathers called to Thee, and were delivered; they trusted in thee, and were
not forsake:

But (...) a Worm and no Man; a reproach of Men, and despised of the People.

All that see me laugh me to scorn; they shoot out their Lips, they shake the
Head, saying:

He trusted in the Lord, let him deliver him; let him deliver him, seeing he
trusted in him.

Be not far from me, for trouble is near; for there is none to help.

The Assembly of the Wicked have enclosed me; they pierced my Hands and my Feet.

I may tell all my Bones; they look and stare at me.

They parted my Garments among them; and cast Lots upon my Vesture.

They gave me Gall for my Meat; and in my Thirst they gave me Vinegar to drink.

All these sad things, O Lord, thy Prophets foretold; but could there be found
such Wretches as would act them?

Yes, O my God, thine own selected Nation conspired against thee; and with
innumerable Affronts most barbarously murdered Thee.

This too, even this thy cruel Death thou plainly fore-shewed'st; the
Inhabitants of Jerusalem shall look upon me, whom they have pierced.

But, O ye holy Prophets, what was the dismal cause, that shed the Blood of the
spotless Lamb?

He had (they quickly answered) done no Iniquity; nor was ever Guile in his
Mouth.

He was smitten for the Sins of the People; and taken away from the Land of the
Living.

He delivered himself up unto Death, and was numbered with the Wicked; He bore
the Sins of many, and prayed for the Transgressors.

All we, like Sheep, have gone astray, we have turned every one to his way; and
the Lord has laid on him the Iniquity of us all.

He was wounded for our Transgressions, he was bruised for our Iniquities; the
chastisement of our Peace was upon him, and with his Stripes are we healed.

O blessed Jesu, who took'st upon thee our Infirmities; to bestow on us thine
own Perfections!

Heal us, thou great Physician of our Souls; and let us sin no more lest a
worse thing come unto us.

Heal us by the Mystery of thy Holy Incarnation; and the meekness of thy humble
Birth.

Heal us by the precious Blood of thy Circumcision; and the sweet and ever
blessed Name of Jesus.

Heal us by thy gracious manifestation to the Gentiles; and the powerful
Influence of all thy Miracles.

Heal us by the exemplary Obedience of thy Presentation in the Temple; heal us
by the sovereign Balsom of thy Passion.

Heal us by the Joys of thy victorious Resurrection; and the Triumph of thy
glorious Ascension.

Heal us by the memory of all thy Blessings; heal us by the memory of this days
Mercy.

Heal us thou great Physician of our Souls; and let us sin no more lest a worse
thing befall us.

Glory be to the Father, etc.
As it was in the beginning, etc.
First Lesson. Isa. 11.
AND there shall come forth a Rod out of the Stem of Jesse, and a Branch shall
grow out of his Roots.

And the Spirit of the Lord shall rest upon him; the Spirit of Wisdom and
Understanding, the Spirit of Counsel and Might, the Spirit of Knowledge, and of
the fear of the Lord.

He shall not judge after the sight of the Eyes; neither reprove after the
hearing of his Ears; but with Righteousness shall he judge the Poor; and
Justice shall be the Girdle of his Loins, and Righteousness the Girdle of his
Reins.

The Wolf also shall dwell with the Lamb, and the Leopard shall lie down with
the Kid; and the Calf and the young Lion, and the Fatling together; and a
little Child shall lead them.

For the Earth shall be full of the Knowledge of the Lord, as the Waters cover
the Sea.

And in that day there shall be a Root of Jesse, which shall stand for an
Ensign to the People; to it shall the Gentiles seek; and his Rest shall be
glorious, Isa. 2. 9, 10.

R. Thus, holy Jesus, did the ancient Prophets foretell thy Perfections, and the
blessed Changes thy Doctrine should produce, the Cruelty of the Proud should be
softened into Meekness, and the innocence of the Weak be protected by the
Strong, and Peace and Charity flourish over the World. This was thy wise and
gracious design to make us happy, by making us Holy. Thou have planted the
Seeds of all these effects. O give the increase that we may gather the Fruit;
defend the Good, and rebuke the Wicked; and fill the Earth with thy Knowledge,
that all Discord and Animosity may cease, and Justice and Equity govern our
Lives.

Second Lesson. Heb. 1.
GOD, who at sundry times, and in diverse Manners, spoke in time past to the
Fathers, by the Prophets,

Has in these last days spoken unto us by his Son, whom he has appointed Heir
of all things, by whom also he made the World.

Who being the brightness of his Glory, and the express Image of his Person;
and upholding all things by the word of his Power, when he had by himself
purged our Sins, sat down at the Right Hand of the Majesty on high; being so
much better than the Angels, as he has by Inheritance obtained a more
excellent Name than they.

For unto which of the Angels said he, at any time, Thou art my Son, this day
have I begotten thee; and again, I will be to him a Father, and he shall be to
me a Son.

And again, when he brings in the first begotten into the World, he says,
and let all the Angels of God worship him.

And of the Angels he says, who made his Angels Spirits, and his Ministers a
flame of Fire.

But unto the Son he says, thy Throne, O God, is for ever and ever; a Scepter
of Righteousness is the Scepter of thy Kingdom.

Thou have loved Righteousness, and hated Iniquity; therefore God, even thy
God, has anointed thee with the Oil of Gladness above thy Fellows.

And thou, Lord, in the beginning, have laid the Foundations of the Earth, and
the Heavens are the Works of thy hands.

They shall perish, but thou remainest, and they all shall wax old, as does a
Garment:

And as Vesture shall thou fold them up, and they shall be changed; but thou
art the same, and thy Years shall not fail.

R. Live, glorious Jesu, and reign for ever, eternal King of Heaven and Earth;
may all the blessed above perpetually adore Thee, and all thy Servants
continually praise thee; and every Tongue confess, that thou, O Lord, art most
high in the Glory of God the Father, Alleluja. Thou were obedient to Death,
even the death of the Cross, wherefore God has exalted Thee, and given Thee a
Name above every Name, that at the Name of Jesus, every Knee should bow, of
things in Heaven, of things on Earth, and of things under the Earth.

Third Lesson. Ephesians. 1. 3.
BLessed be the God and Father of our Lord Jesus Christ, who has blessed us
with all Spiritual Blessings, in Heavenly places in Christ.

According as he has chosen us in him, before the foundation of the World,
that we should be Holy, and without blame before him in Love.

Having predestined us to the Adoption of Children, by Jesus Christ to
himself, according to the good pleasure of his Will.

To the Praise and Glory of his Grace, wherein he has made us accepted in the
beloved.

R. Lord, what are we that thou should thus regard us? Thou have chosen us in
thy Son before the World began, and freely predestined us into the Adoption
of thy Children. Thou have made us Heirs of thy Kingdom, and Coheirs with
Christ? O happy we, if we forfeit not these Mercies, but labor by Good Works,
to make sure our Election! Thou have redeemed us by the Blood of Jesus, and
given us in him remission of our Sins. Thou have by him revealed to us the
Secrets of Heaven, and promised to restore us to Holiness, and replenish with
our Souls the vacant Seats among the glorious Angels.

Glory be to the Father, etc.
As it was in the beginning, etc.
Lauds for our blessed Savior.
Antiphon.
Praise the Lord, O my Soul, and all that is within me, praise his holy Name.

Psalm 96.
PRaise our Lord, all you Nations of the Earth; praise him with the Voice of
Joy and Thanksgiving.

Praise him with the well-tuned Strings of your Heart; praise him with the
sweetest Instrument, Obedience.

Let every one that pretends to Felicity sing immortal Praises to the God of
our Salvation.

He is our full and all-sufficient Redeemer; he has perfectly finished what he
graciously undertook.

For all our Trespasses he made satisfaction; for all our Forfeitures he has
paid the Ransom.

We by Disobedience were banished from Paradise; and he received us to his own
Kingdom.

We wandered up and down in the Wilderness of Error; and he has guided us into
the ways of Truth.

We were by Nature the Children of Wrath; and he has mediated our Peace with
his offended Father.

We were become the slaves of Sin; and he has bought our Freedom with his own
Blood.

We were in Bondage to the Dominion of Satan; and he has overcome him, and
confined his Power.

We were in danger of sinking into Hell; and he has saved us from that
Bottomless Pit.

The Gates of Heaven were shut against us; and He went up himself, and opened
them for all Believers:

Dissolving for ever the Terrors of Death; and rendering it now but a Passage to
Life.

O dearest Lord, who made us first of nothing; and restorest us again when we
had undone our selves:

Who would at any rate redeem us from Misery; at any rate procure our
Felicity!

How came we Wretches to be so considered? How came we Wretches to obtain such
Favor?

That from thy Throne of Glory, where Seraphims adored thee, thou should
descend to our Earth, where Slaves affronted Thee.

That thou should lead a Life of Poverty and Labor; and die a Death with
Shame and Sorrow.

That thou should do all this for such Worms as we; without the least concern
or benefit to thy self.

Only to raise us up from our humble Dust; and set us to shine with thy
glorious Angels.

O infinite Goodness, the bounteous Author of all our Hopes; and strong
deliverer from all our Fears!

What shall we say to thy excessive Charity? What shall we render for these
unspeakable Mercies?

We search over all thou have given us, and find nothing thou expectest; but
that we use thy Gifts to make our selves happy.

O may our Souls perpetually bless thee; and every Minute of our time be spent
in thy Service.

Let us not live, O Lord, but to love thee; nor breathe, but to speak thy
Praise; nor be at all but to be thine.

Glory be to the Father, etc.
As it was in the beginning, etc.
Psalm 97.
SIng on, my Soul, the Praises of thy Lord; sing on with fresh attention the
Mercies of thy God.

Whose Wisdom has contrived so compendious a Method, to redeem Mankind from
eternal Misery.

He saw the only cause of all our Ruin was our Love misplaced on this present
World.

He saw the only Remedy of all our Misery was to fix our Love on the World to
come.

This therefore was his great Intent; this was the great design of his
unspeakable Compassion:

To change the bias of our wrong set Hearts; by establishing amongst us new
motives of Charity:

Such as might strongly incline our Affections; and efficaciously draw us to
love our true Good:

Such as might gain by degrees upon all Mankind; and render Salvation easy and
universal.

For this he came down from his Father's Bosom; to teach us the Rules of
eternal Life.

That we might firmly believe those sacred Truths; which God himself, with his
own Mouth, has told us.

For this he conversed so long upon Earth; to encourage and provoke us by his
Example.

That we may confidently embrace those unquestionable Virtues; which God
himself, in his own Person, has practiced.

For this he endured those sharp and many Afflictions; and became at last
obedient unto Death:

That we might patiently suffer whatever should befall us; when God himself was
so treated by his Creatures.

For this he so often preached the Joys of Heaven; and set them before us in so
clear a Light:

That seeing so rich a Prize hang at the Race end; we might run, and strain our
utmost force to gain it.

For this he ordained the Mysteries of Grace; and left us a blessed Sacrament
to commemorate his Death.

That he might breed and nourish us in the Life of Charity; and ravish our
Hearts with the sweetness of his Presence.

For this he established a perpetual Church; and sent the Holy Ghost to inspire
and govern it:

That it might flourish for ever in Truth and Sanctity; at least be glorious
under all Eclipses:

That it might grow, increase, and spread, and plant the Heavenly Seed over all
the World.

For this he assumed those strange endearing Names, of Friend, and Brother, and
spouse to us Wretches:

Doing far more than all those Names import; far more than all our Hearts can
wish.

Blessed, O glorious Jesus! be the Wisdom of thy Mercy; that have found so
sweet and short a way for us (though painful to thee) to save us.

Thou art, O Lord, the cause of our Love; and Love the cause of our Happiness.

By Love we fulfill all thy Commands; and by making us Love thou fulfillest all
thy Father's.

By Love we are reconciled from Enemies to Friends; by Love we are translated
from Death to Life.

By Love we are delivered from the fear of Hell; by Love we are adopted to be
Heirs of Heaven.

By Love we are disposed for that blissful Vision; by Love we are secured of
the enjoyment of our God.

Who by the sole Perfection of his own free Goodness, can never deny himself to
any that Love him.

Thus, Lord, what ever thy holy Book records of Thee, in expressions suited to
our low Capacities.

What ever they say of thy restoring all things; and repairing again the Ruins
of all Mankind:

All is exactly verified by this one Line; which may our thankful Hearts repeat
with Joy:

Heaven's attained by Love alone; and Love alone by Thee.

Glory be to the Father, etc.
As it was in the beginning, etc.
Psalm 98.
STill, O my Soul, let us sing a few lines more to him, whose Mercies are no
fewer than Infinite:

To him, whose pity took us by the hand, and kindly led us into his own Light.

To thee, O blessed Jesus, our Lord our God, who alone art the source of all
our Happiness.

The World, till thou came, sat wrapped in Darkness; and few discerned so much
as a shadow of Thee.

They followed their Appetites of Sense and Humor; and placed their Felicity
in being prosperous here:

Little considering the Life to come, and less the Joys that entertain that
Life.

This was, alas! their miserable state; and worse than this, they had no power
to help it.

How could they believe what they never heard; or love what they never desired?

'Twas thou, O Lord, first taught'st us our true end; the blissful Vision of
the eternal Deity.

'Twas thou first taught'st us the true means to attain that End, by a hearty
Love, and desire after it.

O the blessed changes that thy hand has wrought; the happy improvements which
thy coming has produced!

Now every Woman, and illiterate Man can discourse familiarly of the highest
Truths:

The Creation of the World, the Fall of Adam; the Incarnation of God, and
Redemption of Man:

The Mystery of the Trinity, and Miracle of the Resurrection; the day of
Judgment and state of Eternity.

All these we know: but it was thou, O Lord, who taught'st us; and did by
thy holy Church and Word first spread them over the World.

Now thou have opened our Eyes, we plainly see, what unassisted Nature could
never have reached.

We see the framing right our Affections here, is both cause and measure of
framing our happiness hereafter.

If we supreamly esteem the Goods of the Future Life, we shall find them there
and be happy.

If we love Heaven with our whole Soul; and press on strongly with all our
Force:

We shall enter into its Glories with a strong surprising delight; and possess
them for ever in a perpetual ecstasy.

We see our Souls are made to know; and perfect themselves by the worthiest
Object.

We see their nature is free and unconfined; and nothing can fill them but that
which is infinite.

All other Knowledges enlarge our Faculties; and breed new desires to know
still more.

Which yet if unsatisfied we are miserable; since none can be happy who want
their desire.

Only the sight of God fills us to the brim; and infinitely overflows our
utmost Capacities.

It fills, and overflows all the Powers of our Souls, with Joy and Wonder, and
unconceivable Sweetness.

O blessed and glorious sight! when will the happy day appear; and open to my
Soul that beauteous Prospect?

When, dearest Lord, shall I see thee Face to Face? When shall I heartily, at
least, desire to see thee?

Thou art my full and high Felicity; and only, and alone sufficient for me.

O make me ardently love thee, that I may eagerly desire thee; and eagerly
desire thee, that I may transportedly enjoy thee.

Glory be to the Father, etc.
As it was in the beginning, etc.
Antiphon.
Bless the Lord, O my Soul; and all that is within me praise his holy Name.

Third Lesson. Ephesians. 3. 30.
NOW to him that is able to do exceeding abundantly above all that we can ask or
think, according to the Power that works in us; unto him be Glory in the
Church, by Christ Jesus, throughout all Ages, World without End. Amen.

Hymn 30.
SWeet Jesus! why, why do thou Love
Such worthless things as we?
Why is thy Heart still toward us,
Who seldom think of Thee?
Thy bounty gives us all we have,
And we thy Gifts abuse:
Thy bounty gives us even thy self,
And we thy self refuse.
And why, my Soul, why do we love
Such wretched things as these;
These, that withdraw us from our Lord,
And his pure Eyes displease?
Break off, and be no more a Child,
To run, and sweat, and cry;
While all this stir, this huge concern
Is only for a Fly:
Some silly Fly, that is hard to catch,
And nothing when it is caught:
Such are the Toys thou striv'st for here;
Not worth a serious Thought.
Break off, and raise thy manly Eye
Up to those Joys above:
Behold all those thy Lord prepares,
To woo, and crown thy Love.
Alas, dear Lord! I cannot Love,
Unless thou draw my Heart;
Thou who so kindly make me know,
O make me do my part.
Still do thou love me, O my Lord,
That I may still love Thee:
Still make me love Thee, O my God,
That thou may still love me.
Thus may my God, and my poor Soul,
Still one another Love:
Till I depart from this low World,
To Enjoy my God above.
To Thee, Great God, to Thee alone,
One coeternal Three,
All Power and Praise, all Joy and Bliss,
Now and for ever be.
Antiphon.
Blessed be thy holy Name, O glorious Son of God! and blessed be thy Mercy for
ever.

Thou have perfectly fulfilled all thy Prophets foretold; and infinitely
transcended all the Wonders they admired. Thou have done enough to convince us
into Faith, and suffered abundantly to inflame us with thy Love.

V. Blessed be thy glorious Name, O thou Son of God!

R. And blessed be thy Mercy for ever.

Let us pray.
MOst gracious God, who so loved'st the World, that thou gav'st thy self to
redeem it, and humbly took'st upon thee our low Nature, that thou might
familiarly teach us the Truth of our Salvation, and invincibly fortify us
against all Persecutions, and efficaciously draw us after thee into thine own
Kingdom, by thy holy Life, and precious Death, and glorious Resurrection!
Grant, we beseech thee, that we may so meditate on these infinite Mercies, and
so fill our Souls with the Memory of this Love, that we may live in thy
Obedience, and die in thy Favor, and rise again to rejoice with thee for ever
in thy Glory, who with the Father and the Holy Ghost, live and reignest, One
God, World without End. Amen.

Vespers for our Blessed Savior.
In the Name of the Father, and of the Son, and of the Holy Ghost, etc.
Antiphon.
Thy Judgments, O Lord, we confess are just: But deal, we beseech thee, with
thy Servants in Mercy.

Psalm 99.
LIft up thy Voice, Jerusalem, and be not afraid; say unto the Cities of Judah,
behold your God,

Behold the Lord your God is come with a strong hand; his Reward is with him,
and his Work before him.

He is come to bring Redemption to all the World; and graciously offers it
first to you his People.

Hark with how sweet and elegant a Compassion, thy kind Redeemer complains of
thy Ingratitude.

O Jerusalem, Jerusalem, thou that killest the Prophets, and stonest them which
are sent to thee!

How often would I have gathered thy Children together; as a Hen does her
Chickens under her Wings, and ye would not!

Hark with how tender and charitable a Reproof thy Lord unwillingly withdraws
from thee his Favor:

O had thou known, even thou, at least in this thy day, the things which
belong unto thy Peace.

Hearken once more, and if his kindness cannot move thy love, he will try how his
Anger will work upon thy Fear.

Hearken then, and tremble at those terrible Threatenings, with which thy
provident Lord forewarns thee of thy Danger:

Gird thee with Sackcloth, Jerusalem, and lie down in Ashes; cover thee with
Mourning, and bitterly lament:

For the days shall come upon thee, that thine Enemies shall cast a Trench
about thee; and shall compass thee round, and keep thee in on every side:

And shall lay thee even with the Ground, and thy Children within thee; and
they shall not leave in thee one Stone upon another, because thou knew not
the time of thy Visitation.

But O how long, Lord, holy and merciful; how long! will thou be angry with
them for ever?

Have thou not said, he that scatters Israel shall gather them again; and keep
them as a Shepherd does his Flock?

Remember thy ancient Promises, O Lord; and save the remnant of thy once
beloved Israel.

Take away the Veil from before their Eyes; that they may see thy Truth, and
embrace it.

Take away the hardness of their stony Hearts; that they again may be thy
People, and thou again their God.

Then shall they lay aside the Garment of Mourning; and put on the brightness
that comes from Thee.

They shall celebrate the Jubilee of this their great Deliverance; and every
one sing in that day of Joy:

Come let us ascend to the House of the Lord; let us learn his ways, and he
will teach us his Paths.

As it was our Wickedness to go astray from our God; so now being returned, let
us seek him ten times more.

Too late have we known thee, O thou ancient Truth; too late have we loved
thee, O thou desired of all Nations.

We were misled by the Error of our Forefathers; we were abused by our own
blind Passions.

The Kingdom we expected deserves not that Name; a short, a vain, and
troublesome Prosperity.

Thy Dominion, O Lord, is Holiness and Peace; and of thy Kingdom there shall be
no end.

Such was the Kingdom thou promised'st to David; thy Throne will I establish
for ever.

Such is the Kingdom thou give unto thy Servants; they shall live and reign
with thee for ever.

O make us love, dear Lord, this eternal Kingdom; and all things else shall be
added unto us.

O make us love this eternal Kingdom; though nothing else should be added to us.

Glory be to the Father, etc.
As it was in the beginning, etc.
Antiphon.
Thy Judgments, O Lord, we confess are just; but deal, we beseech thee, with
thy Servants in Mercy.

Psalm 100.
RIse, holy Spouse of the Son of God rise, and put on thy Robes of Joy.

Rise, shine, for thy Light is come; and the Glory of the Lord is risen upon
thee.

The Gentiles shall come to thy Light; and Kings to the brightness of thy
rising.

Lift up thine Eyes round about, and see; all they gather themselves together,
they come to thee.

Thy Sons come from far; and thy Daughters shall be nursed at thy side.

Then shall thou see, and slow together; and thine Heart shall fear, and be
enlarged:

Because the abundance of the Sea shall be converted unto thee; the Forces of
the Gentiles shall come unto thee.

The Sons of Strangers shall build up thy Walls; and their Kings shall minister
unto thee.

For in my Wrath I smote thee; but in my Favor, I had Mercy on thee.

Therefore thy Gates shall be open continually; they shall not be shut Day nor
Night.

That Men may bring unto thee the Forces of the Gentiles; and that their Kings
may be brought unto thee.

For the Nation and Kingdom that will not serve thee shall perish; yea, those
Nations shall be utterly wasted.

The Sons of them that afflicted thee, shall come bending unto thee; and all
they that despised thee, shall bow themselves down at the Soles of thy Feet.

And they shall call thee the City of the Lord; the Zion of the Holy One of
Israel.

A way shall be made direct and plain, that all Men may come unto thee.

And the Earth shall be filled with the Knowledge of the Lord; as the Waters
cover the Sea.

All this we read, all this we firmly believe; for the Mouth of the Lord has
spoken it.

Heaven and Earth shall pass away; but not one tittle of his Word shall pass
away till all be fulfilled.

Many of the Sacred Prophecies are already fulfilled; enough to assure us of
the rest.

Already a Virgin has brought forth a Son; and given him the gracious Name of
Jesus.

The wise Men of the East have been led to him by a Star; and offered him Gold,
and Frankincense and Myrrh.

His Holy Parents have presented him in the Temple; and the devout Simeon was
overjoyed to see him.

In his tender Infancy he fled into Egypt; and afterward returned again into
Canaan.

He passed his private Life in Peace and Meekness; and taught a contradicting
People in Patience and Humility.

He confirmed his Doctrine with innumerable Miracles; and defended the Truth to
the last drop of his Blood.

He rose again victoriously from the Grave; and ascended in Triumph to the
right hand of his Father.

And there, O glorious Jesu, may thou sit and reign; till all thy Enemies
become thy Footstool.

Nor has thy Judgment slept, O dreadful Lord! but with a swift and terrible
Vengeance crushed them into Ruin.

Jerusalem was long since made a heap of Stones; and the Children of thy
Crucifiers run wandering over the World.

Whilst thou art thus severe in the Predictions of thy Justice; thou have not
forgot those of thy Mercy.

Thousands of that Ungrateful People have acknowledged thee their Lord;
thousands of that perverse Generation have submitted to thy Scepter.

Whole Nations of the Gentiles have embraced the Faith; and remotest Islands
received thy Law.

Blessed for ever be thy Name, O Lord! and blessed be the sweetness of thy
Mercy.

Who revealest thy self to those that knew thee not; and art found of those
that sought thee not.

Who often followest those that fly from thee; and never refusest any that come
to thee.

Thou still exactly performest thy part; but we, ungrateful Wretches, how do we
comply with ours?

Where Is the Profit thou may justly require, to answer the care of thy
Providence over us?

Thou have planted us, O Lord, in thine own Vineyard; and fenced us about with
thine holy Discipline.

Where is the Fruit we should always be bearing; since good Works are never out
of season?

Of our selves, alas! we are dry and barren; and our Nature, at best, brings
forth nothing but Leaves.

O thou, in whom while we remain we live; and from whom divided we instantly
die!

Curse not, we humbly beg, these fruitless Branches; lest they wither away, and
be cast into the Fire.

Pronounce not against us that dreadful Sentence; cut them down, why cumber
they the Ground?

But mercifully cut them off from their wild Stock; and graft them in thy self
the only true Vine.

Water, O Lord, our Weeds with the Dew of Heaven; and bless our low Shrubs with
thy powerful Influence.

So Grapes shall grow on Thorns, and Figs be gathered on Thistles.

Glory be to the Father, etc.
As it was in the beginning, etc.
Antiphon.
Thou art, O Lord, the true Light of the World; they who follow thee, walk not
in Darkness.

Ant.] In thee, O Lord, is all our hope; have Mercy upon the work of thine own
hands.

Psalm 101.
REjoice in our Lord, all ye Children of Adam; rejoice in the bounty of his
Free Grace:

No longer now confined to a few choice Favorites; and the narrow compass of a
private Family.

He has thrown down that Partition Wall; and opened the way of Life to all
Mankind.

That all may believe, and love him here; and all enjoy, and be happy in him
hereafter.

But, O my God, what do we see; when we look abroad into the World?

We see the sad Effects, but cannot see the Cause; why so many Kingdoms lie
miserably waste.

We know, O Lord, thy ways are in the deep Abyss; and humbly adore thy secret
Counsels.

Only we cannot think of their lamentable Condition; without pitying their
Misery, and imploring thy Mercy.

Some have not yet so much as heard of thee; and others who have heard, refuse
to entertain thee.

Some who have once acknowledged thee, have quite fallen away; and others
reject what they list, and obey by halves.

Many of those who even rightly believe, abuse their holy Faith by a wicked
Life.

Thus the far greatest part of Mankind; whom thy Goodness created to thine own
similitude:

Whom thou have redeemed with thy precious Blood; and designed to so great and
long a happiness:

Still fail, alas! of their true end; and die in their Sins, and eternally
perish.

Look down, O Lord, and behold from Heaven; behold from the habitation of thy
Holiness.

Where Is thy Zeal, and the sounding of thy bowels of Mercy? Where are thy
Promises to thy beloved Son?

Have thou not said, all Nations shall adore him; and that all the People upon
Earth shall be blessed in him?

Have thou not said thy self, Lord Jesus! When I am exalted I will draw all Men
unto me?

Have thou not expressly commanded thy Apostles to go, and teach all Nations;
Baptizing them in the Name of the Father, and of the Son, and of the Holy Ghost?

And have thou not bid them, Go into all the World; and preach the Gospel to
every Creature.

Remember, O thou God of everlasting Truth; remember, O thou Author and
Finisher of our Faith:

Remember these thy dear engagements; and graciously accomplish what thou have
mercifully begun.

Visit, O Lord, thine own House first; and thoroughly redress what thou find'st
amiss.

Make our Lives Holy as thou have made our Faith; and perfectly unite us in the
bonds of Love.

Kindle in the Hearts of Kings, and the Great Ones of the World, an Heroic
Spirit to advance thy Glory.

Inflame the Hearts of the Prelates, and Priests of thy Church, with a generous
Zeal for Conversion of Souls.

Convince them all, it is the end and duty of their place; to improve Mankind
in Virtue and Religion.

One Mercy more we humbly beg; which O! may thy Providence favorably supply.

Prepare the Hearts of those that err: and make them apt to receive the Truth.

Then choose thy burning and thy shining Lights; and send them forth over all
the World.

Send them, O God of infinite Charity! but send them not alone; lest they faint
by the way, and miscarry in the End.

Go with them thy self, and guide them by thy Grace; and crown their Labors
with thy powerful Blessing.

So shall the humble Valleys be raised up; and the stubborn Mountains be
brought low.

So shall the crooked Paths be made strait; and the rough ways smooth and plain.

So shall the Glory of God be every where revealed; and all Flesh shall see it
together.

Happy the Times when this shall come to pass; happy the Eyes that shall see
these Times.

Come glorious Days, wherein that Sun shall shine; which enlightens all at once
both Hemispheres.

Come, Holy Jesus, and make those Holy Days; and let no Cloud over-cast them
for ever.

Come, and in the largest sense maintain thy Title; be effectually the Savior
of the universal World.

Glory be to the Father, etc.
As it was in the beginning, etc.
Titus, Chap. 2. Ver. 11.
FOR the Grace of God that brings Salvation, has appeared to all Men;

Teaching us that denying ungodliness and worldly Lusts, we should live
Soberly, Righteously, and Godly in this present World;

Looking for that blessed Hope, and glorious appearing of the Great God, and
our Savior Jesus Christ:

Who gave himself for us, that he might redeem us from all Iniquity; and purify
unto himself a People zealous of Good Works.

Hymn 31.
JEsu! whose Grace inspires thy Priests,
To keep alive by solemn Feasts
The Memory of thy Love;
O may we here so pass our days,
That they at last our Souls may raise
To feast with Thee above.
Jesu! behold Wisemen, from far
Led to thy Cradle by a Star,
Bring Gifts to Thee their King;
O guide us by thy Light, that we
May find the right way, and to Thee
Our selves for Tribute bring.
Jesu, the pure and spotless Lamb,
Who to the Temple humbly came,
Those legal Rites to pay!
O make our proud and stubborn Will
Thine and the Churches Laws fulfill,
What ever fond Nature say.
Jesu, who on that fatal Wood
Pour'dst forth thy Life's last drop of Blood,
Nailed to a shameful Cross;
O may we bless thy Love, and be
Ready, dear Lord, to bear for Thee
All Grief, all Pain, all Loss.
Jesu, who by thine own love slain,
By thine own Power took'st Life again,
And from the Grave did rise!
O may thy Death our Spirits revive,
And at our Death a new Life give,
A Life that never dies.
Jesu, who to thy Heaven again
Return'dst in Triumph, there to reign,
Of Men and Angels King.
O may our parting Souls take flight,
Up to that Land of Joy and Light,
And there for ever sing.
All Glory to the Sacred Three,
One undivided Deity,
All Honor, Power, and Praise:
O may thy blessed Name shine bright,
Crowned with those Beams of glorious Light,
Its own eternal Rays.
Antiphon.
Come all you Nations of the Earth, whom the Mercy of the Lord has redeemed;
come, and in Honor of the Divine Son, sing the Canticle of the blessed Mother.

V. My Soul does magnify the Lord;

R. And my Spirit has rejoiced in God my Savior.

Let us pray.
O Holy and ever blessed Jesus, who being the eternal Son of God, and most high
in the Glory of God the Father, vouchsafed'st for us Sinners to be born of an
humble Virgin, to be subject to the weakness of a little Child, to grow up in a
Life of Privacy and Labor, to declare thy self at last the Redeemer of the
World, by establishing a perfect Law of Grace, and confirming it with
innumerable Miracles, and suffering for it intolerable Persecutions, even to
Death it self! work in us, we humbly beseech thee, the happy effects of all
these Mercies, that believing in thee we may imitate thy Life, and obeying thy
Commands, may enjoy thy Promises, who with the Father and the Holy Ghost,
live and reignest One God, World without End. Amen.

Compline for our Blessed Savior
Antiphon.
Whither, O my God, should we go, but unto Thee? thou have the words of eternal
Life.

Psalm 102.
REtire now, O my Soul, from thy common Thoughts; permitted to entertain thy
less serious Hours.

Retire, and call thy wandering Fancies home; and speedily range them into
Peace and Order.

Come to me (says our blessed Savior) all ye that labor and are heavy laden,
and I will give you rest.

Take my Yoke upon you, and learn of me, for I am meek and lowly in Heart; and
ye shall find rest unto your Souls.

For my Yoke is easy; and my burden light.

Enough, dear Lord, enough is said; to draw all the World to thy Holy
Discipline.

What can be offered so agreeable to our Natures; (too much, alas, inclined to
Pleasure and Profit.)

What can be offered so powerfully attractive; as to make our work delightful,
and then reward it?

As to propose an employment like the Music of Churches; devout and sweet, and
gainful to the Performers?

Whither, O my God, should we go, but unto Thee? thou have the words of eternal
Life.

Thou art our wisest Instructor to know what to do; and only enabler to do what
we know.

Thou art the free bestower of all we have; and faithful Promiser of all we
hope.

Thou kindly call'st us; O make us glad to hear thy Voice; and constantly
follow it till we come to Thee:

There to be ravished with thy Holy Embraces; there to be feasted with the
Antepasts of Heaven.

O how unspeakable are thy sweetnesses, O Lord; which thou have hid for those
that fear Thee?

Which thou have partly revealed to those that love Thee; and keep their Tastes
uncorrupted with the World.

But O what are they then to those that see Thee; and in that sight see all
things else?

O beauteous Truth, which known, enforces Love; and loved begets Felicity!

Live thou for ever in my faithful Memory; and be my constant Guide in all my
ways.

Still let me think on those Joys above; and undervalue all things compared to
my Salvation.

Still let me think on my Savior's Love; that purchased for me all those Joys.

O thou, my adored Redeemer, be thou the Master-Wish of my Heart; the Scope and
End of all my Time.

Soon as I awake, let me look up to Thee; and when I rise first lowly bow to
Thee.

Often in the Day let me call in my Thoughts to Thee; and when I go to rest
close up mine Eyes in Thee.

So shall my Time be governed by thy Grace; and my Eternity be crowned with thy
Glory.

Glory be to the Father, etc.
As it was in the beginning, etc.
Psalm 103.
MY God, when I remember those words of thine; Repent, for the Kingdom of
Heaven is at hand:

When I consider, they were the first thine Inspired Prophet, St. John Baptist,
spoke in Public; and that it was the chosen Text of the eternal Wisdom:

Instantly I Am struck with the Importance of the Duty; and deeply affected with
the power of the Motive.

If what this Line says be not wholly true, but repeated in course as a Form of
Devotion:

Forgive, dear Lord, the deceitfulness of my Heart; and make me think, as well
as say my Prayers.

Make me apply those searching words unto my self; and bind them fast on my own
Soul.

Repent, O my Soul, for the Kingdom of Heaven is at hand; Repent, for the
Kingdom of Heaven depends upon thy Repentance.

Unhappy me! I cannot live without Sin, nor hope for Pardon without due
Repentance.

I cannot repent without the Grace of God; nor obtain his Grace without his own
free Gift.

O my sweet Savior, who came not to call the Righteous, but Sinners to
Repentance!

Since I am not strong enough to be perfectly Innocent; at least make me humble
enough to be truly Penitent.

Make me heartily sorry for what I Have done amiss; and not do again what will
make me sorry.

Woe to the Day and Hour wherein I sinned; woe to the Days and Hours I have
foolishly misspent.

Or rather woe be unto me, who have abused both Days and Hours; allowed by thy
Goodness to work out my Salvation.

Deliver me, O Lord, from the Punishments I deserve; deliver me from the Sins
that deserve those Punishments.

Teach me that safe and easy Method of censuring my self to be acquitted by
Thee.

Every Night let me sit as an impartial Judge; and call before me all my Day.

Let me severely examine every Thought and Word; and strictly search every Deed
and Omission:

Condemning my Offenses to their just Penance; and making more firm and wary
Resolutions:

Imploring for the past the Mercy of Heaven; and for the time to come the same
unbounded Mercy.

If I perhaps find some little thing well done; when weighed with the
allowances indulged our Frailty:

Let me return all the Glory to my God; and beg his Grace to continue and
improve it:

His is the Hand that sows the Seed; his is the Blessing that gives the
increase.

Thus let me once a day, at least, look home; and seriously enquire into the
state of my Soul.

What ever my Weakness or Malice may have done, let me now undo with a hearty
contrition.

Let not the Sun go down upon my Wrath; nor on any unrepented Sin.

Still let me write at the foot of my account; reconciled to my God, and in
Charity with all the World.

Then go to Bed with a quiet Conscience; and fall asleep in Peace and Hope.

Glory be to the Father, etc.
As it was in the beginning, etc.
Psalm 104.
LOrd, e're I take my leave of this Holy Day; which thy Church has Sanctified
in honor of thy Memory:

Let me repeat some few words more, of those incomparable many thou have left
amongst us.

Let me attentively meditate their substantial sense; and settle them as
Principles of my Life and Actions.

Lay not up for your selves Treasures upon Earth; where Moth and Rust does
corrupt, and where Thieves break through and steal.

But lay up for your selves Treasures in Heaven; where neither Moth nor Rust
does corrupt, and where Thieves do not break through and Steal.

For where your Treasure is, there will your Heart be also.

Go now you curious, and study what you please; for me, I Will stay and listen to
my Savior.

He Will teach me high, and sure, and useful Truths; he will teach me Truths that
will make me happy.

Hark but this one word more, and you will stay too; if that any sense of your
eternal Good can hold you.

Hark, how he tells us this new and glorious Secret; we shall hereafter be like
the Angels in Heaven.

O sweet and precious Word to them that relish it; we shall be hereafter like
the Angels in Heaven!

And what, O dearest Lord, are those blessed Angels; but Spirits that know, and
love, and delight for ever?

Such, O my Soul, we shall be, and that sweet Life we shall lead; we shall be
and live like the Angels in Heaven.

We shall know all that is True, and love all that is Good; and shall delight in
that Knowledge and Love for ever.

No Ignorance shall darken, nor Error deceive us; we shall be like the Angels
in Heaven.

No Cares shall perplex us, nor Crosses afflict us; we shall be like the Angels
in Heaven.

Our Joys shall be full, and pure, and everlasting; we shall be like the Angels
in Heaven.

Cheer thee, my Soul, and bless thy bounteous Lord; it is by him we shall be
like the Angels in Heaven.

Cheer thee, and raise thy hopes yet gloriously higher; we shall be like
himself, for we shall see him as he is.

Glory be to the Father, etc.
As it was in the beginning, etc.
Antiphon.
Whither, O my God, should we go, but unto Thee? thou have the words of eternal
Life.

Hymn 32.
LOrd, now the time returns
For weary Man to rest;
And lay aside those Pains and Cares,
With which our day's oppressed.
Or rather change our Thoughts
To more concerning Cares;
How to redeem our misspent Time,
With Sighs, and Tears, and Prayers.
How to provide for Heaven,
That place of rest and peace;
Where our full Joys shall never wain,
Our Pleasures never cease.
Blessed be thy Love, dear Lord,
That taught us this sweet way;
Only to love thee for thy self,
And for that Love Obey.
O thou, our Souls sweet hope,
We to thy Mercy fly;
Wherever we are, thou can Protect,
What ever we need, Supply.
Whether we sleep, or wake,
To thee we both resign:
By Night we see, as well as Day,
If thy Light on us shine.
Whether we live or die,
Both we submit to Thee;
In Death we live as well as Life,
If thine in Death we be.
Glory to Thee, great God,
One coeternal Three;
To Father, Son, and Holy Ghost,
Eternal Glory be. Amen.
1 Thessalonians. Chap. 5. Ver. 8.
BUT let us, who are of the Day be Sober, putting on the Breast Plate of Faith,
and Love, and for an Helmet the hope of Salvation.

For God has not appointed us to Wrath, but to obtain Salvation by our Lord
Jesus Christ; who died for us, that whether we wake or sleep, we should live
together with him.

Antiphon.
By seeking our selves in this World of Vanity, we lose, both Thee, O Lord, and
our own Souls.

By seeking our selves in Thee, and thy Love, we find both Thee and our own
Happiness, enjoying already a sweet Possession of Hopes, to end e're long in a
sweeter fruition in Glory.

V. Thou art the free bestower of all we have.

R. Thou art the faithful Promiser of all we expect.

Let us pray.
O Blessed Jesus, whose Sacred Body, after thou had finished in it the work
of our Redemption, was taken down from the Cross, and after a short repose in
the Sepulcher, wast raised again to a glorious Immortality! Grant us, we
beseech thee, so frequently to renew in our Minds the Memory of thy Grave, that
we may be always prepared for our own; and so seriously to reflect on the
Consequences of a Holy Death, that every day we grow less affected to this
Transitory Life, and more in love with thy eternal Joys, who with the Father,
and the Holy Ghost, live, and reignest, one God, World without End. Amen.

OFFICE for the Holy Ghost MATTINS.
Invitatory.
Come let us Adore our God that Sanctifies us.
Come let us Adore our God that Sanctifies us.
COme, let us humbly first implore his Grace; to make us fit to adore our
Sanctifier, who from the Father and the Son eternally proceeds, and with the
Father and the Son is equally glorified.

Come, let us Adore our God that Sanctifies us. He infuseth into us the breath
of Life, and brings us forth into our second Birth, a Birth that makes us Heirs
of Heaven, and gives us a title to everlasting Life.

Come let us Adore our God that Sanctifies us. Let us prepare our Understandings
to assent (...) his Truths, and our Will to follow his Inspirations; let us
fill our Memories with his innumerable Mercies, and our whole Soul with the
Glory of his Attribute.

Come let us Adore our God that Sanctifies us. Let us confidently address to him
our Petitions, who promises to help the Infirmity of our Prayers; let us not
doubt the Bounty of his Goodness, but hope he will grant what himself Inspires.

Come let us Adore our God that Sanctifies us. Hymn 33.
COme, holy Spirit, come, and breath
Thy spicy Odours on the Face
Of our dull Region here beneath;
And fill our Souls with thy sweet Grace.
Come, and root out the poisonous Weeds,
Which overrun and choke our Lives;
And in our Hearts plant thine own Seeds,
Whose quickening Power our Spirit revives.
First Plant the humble Violet,
That dwells secure by dwelling low;
Then let the Lily next appear,
And make us chaste yet fruitful too.
But O plant all the Virtues Lord!
And let the Metaphors alone;
Repeat once more that mighty word,
Thou need'st but say, Let it be done.
We can, alas! not be, nor grow,
Unless thy powerful Mercy please;
Thy hand must Plant, and Water too,
Thy hand alone must give th'encrease.
Do then what thou alone can do,
Do what to Thee so easy is;
Conduct us through this World of woe,
And place us safe in thine own bliss.
All Glory to the Sacred Three,
One ever living sovereign Lord,
As at the first still may he be
Beloved and praised, feared and adored, Amen.
Antiphon.
In those days, says our Lord, I will pour out my Spirit upon all Flesh.
Alleluja, Alleluja.

Psalm 106.
LOrd with how sweet and natural a Conduct does thy Providence govern the
Children of Men?

Leading them from one degree to another; till thou have brought them up to
their highest Perfection?

Thou put them to learn in the School of Virtue; and disposest their
Capacities into several Forms.

In the first Ages, when the World was young, thou gav'st them for their Guide
the Book of Nature.

There thy divine Assistance helped them to read, some few plain Lessons of
their duty to Thee.

They saw this admirable frame of Creatures; and as far as these could argue,
they could conclude:

Sure there is a God, the cause of all things; sure there is a Providence the
Disposer of all things:

He must be powerful that made so vast a World; he must be wise that contrived
such excellent Works.

He must be Goodness it self, that did all this for us; and we ungrateful
Wretches, if we will do nothing for him.

Thus far some few could say, and very few could do; with those slender
Assistances they then enjoyed:

After thou gav'st thy People a written Rule; which trained them up in a set
form of Discipline.

Which grew and spread into a public Religion; and uniformly professed by a
whole Nation.

They had some weak conceit of the Kingdom of Heaven; and some imperfect means
to bring them thither.

But for those high supernatural Mysteries; that so gloriously exalt the
Christian Faith:

They all, alas! were blind, or in the dark; and dangerously exposed to the
effects of their Ignorance:

Wanting those clear Instructions to know their ends; wanting those powerful
Motives to love their God.

Yet this prepared them for the times of Grace; to which thy Mercy, Lord,
reserved far greater Favors:

To which thou have promised by thy Holy Prophets; an effusion of Blessings
from thine own full hands.

I will put my Laws into their Mind, and write them in their Hearts; and I will
be to them a God, and they shall be to me a People.

I will pour out my Spirit upon all Flesh; and your Sons, and your Daughters
shall Prophesy.

They shall no more teach every one his Neighbor; for all shall know me from
the greatest to the least.

O merciful Lord, who have loved us from the beginning; be graciously pleased
to love us to the End.

Pity the unhappy state of all Mankind; which neither Nature nor Law could
bring to Perfection.

If any riper Souls came forward to the Birth; there wanted Spirit to bring
them forth.

But send out thy Spirit, O Lord, and they shall be created; and from their
nothing in Sin, raised to the Life of Holiness.

Send out thy Spirit, and renew the face of the Earth; and our Weeds and Thorns
shall be turned into a Paradise.

Glory be to the Father, etc.
As it was in the Beginning, etc.
Antiphon.
In those days, says our Lord, I will pour out my Spirit upon all Flesh.
Alleluja, Alleluja.

Ant.] When he ascended up on high, he led Captivity captive, and gave Gifts
unto Men. Alleluja.

Psalm 107.
LOok up, languishing World, look up; and see how punctually thy faithful Lord
performs his Word.

When he had finished here that glorious work; which his Goodness undertook for
our Redemption:

When he had told us what we ought to do; and what to suffer for the Kingdom of
Heaven:

When he himself had done more than he required of us; and suffered more than
our boldest hopes could expect from him:

When he had wrought our Salvation so far, that he saw his Absence more
expedient for us:

He first prepares the Hearts of his Disciples; and comforts their Sorrows with
these sweet words:

Children, I will not leave you comfortless; but will pray to my Father, and he
shall give you another Comforter:

Even the Spirit of Truth, and he shall teach you all things; and bring to your
remembrance whatsoever I have said unto you:

Peace I leave with you, my Peace I give to you: Let not your Hearts be
troubled nor be afraid.

I go to my Father, and to your Father; to my God, and to your God.

I go to prepare a place for you; that where I am you may be also.

This said, he led them forth together, and gave them his Blessing; and parting
from them went away into Heaven.

So loving Mothers, when the weaning time is come; withdraw themselves from
their beloved Children.

But while they thus deprive their tender little ones, of their most dear and
allsupplying Presence:

They still depute some faithful Friend to assist them; for though they leave
them they mean not to forsake them.

Such, and far greater was the care of their God; as his Love is far greater
than that of Mothers.

He saw it necessary for so mysterious a Faith to be shown in a clear and
supernatural Light, to the first Believers:

That they might confidently recommend to others, what they knew was so
infallibly certain to themselves.

He saw it necessary for so perverse a a World, to infuse into its first
Converts the fullness of Charity.

That with ardent Zeal they might instruct their Hearers; and with a patient
Courage overcome their Opposers.

He saw it necessary for such variety of Nations, to furnish their Preachers
with variety of Tongues:

That they might teach every one in their Native Speech; and understand their
Doubts, and satisfy their Objections.

Wherefore when the appointed time was come; as all the Works of God go forth
in their sit Season:

When his Disciples were gathered together in one Mind and Place; and so
excellently disposed for the visits of Heaven:

When they had long continued in ardent Prayer; and wrought up their Affections
to the highest pitch of Desire:

Suddenly there was a sound from Heaven; whence every good and perfect Gift
descends.

A vehement Wind filled the whole House; for the Grace of God is strong and
liberal.

Behold on the Head of each sat a Tongue as of Fire; the properest enablements
to Convert the World.

While they were all illuminated with one pure Light; and all enflamed with a
fervent Heat.

And to communicate both to every Nation; were all endu'd with the Gift of
Languages.

Thus was the Promise of our Lord fulfilled; thus were the Messengers of the
everlasting Peace prepared:

Miraculously baptized with the Holy Ghost, and with Fire; and perfectly
qualified for their great Commission:

To preach to every Creature this happy Gospel; He that believes, and is
baptized, shall be saved.

Glory be to the Father, etc.
As it was in the beginning, etc.
Antiphon.
When he ascended up on high he led Captivity Captive, and gave Gifts unto Men.
Alleluja.

Ant.] This is our Lord's doing, and it is mavelous in our Eyes. Alleluja,
Alleluja.

Psalm 108.
HOW glorious is thy Grace, O Lord! over all the World? how admirable the
Influence of thy Holy Spirit?

They that through dullness so slowly understood the often repeated Lessons of
their divine Master:

Now with the first swift Glance see through all; and no Mystery can pose them,
nor Error deceive them.

They who through fear forsook their Lord, and fled away all from the danger of
being his:

Now rejoice in suffering for his Name; and neither Life nor Death can forbid
them to confess him.

They who knew only their Mother Tongue; and that no better than as simple
Fishermen:

Now speak to every Nation in their several Language; and with their powerful
Eloquence ravish their Hearts.

They who even after our Savior's Resurrection shut fast the Doors for fear of
the Jews:

Now in the open Streets, and public Synagogues, confidently proclaim the Name
of Jesus.

These were new Bottles filled with new Wine; that made them quite forget their
former selves:

Wine that exalted them into a generous Spirit; of despising all things for the
love of Jesus:

Wine that in the midst of Racks and Prisons, made them often break forth into
that sweet ecstasy:

No Joy like the pain of Suffering for Jesus; no Life like the death endured
for his Love.

Oh! were there now such Tongues of Fire; to kindle in the World such divine
Flames!

Oh! were there now such Hearts in the World; to receive the holy Sparks that
fall from Heaven!

The great Apostle preached but one Sermon; and immediately converted three
thousand Souls.

He preached again, and wrought but one Miracle; and five thousand were added
to the Church.

Thus every day they increased in number; and which was better, their numbers
increased in Virtue.

They were inebriated with the same Heavenly Wine; and filled with the same
Heroic Spirit.

They sold all they had, and brought the Price, and laid it down at the
Apostles Feet.

They lived in common, and called nothing their own; and even in their Will and
Understanding they were all united.

Every one had enough, and that is to be rich; none had too much, and that is to
be free:

Free from the Cares that perplex the Wealthy; free from the Temptations that
wait on Superfluity.

Had thou been there, O my Soul! to have seen the flaming Ardors of those
first Converts!

Imagine at least, and know, thy utmost Fancy is far below what they really
practiced.

They fell upon their Knees, and adored and meditated; and prayed to him who
had done such great things for them.

They prayed, and mingled with their Prayers their Tears; they wept, and
mingled with their Tears their Complaints.

Ah dearest Lord! why were we not so happy, to be converted by Thee, while thou
dwelledst amongst us?

Why not to entertain Salvation, when thou broughtest it to our Homes, and
preferred'st our little Nation before all the World?

Unhappy we! how came this Misery to pass, that many of us looked on thy
Miracles, and saw them not?

Before our Eyes thou gave Sight to the Blind; and our Souls were darkened
with Sin and Prejudice.

Thou did cleanse the Leprous, and heal all manner of Diseases; thou did
raise the Dead, and cast out Devils by thy Word.

Yet we alas, how many of us blasphemed thy Name? how many conspired with thy
bloody Crucifiers?

Spare us, O Lord, have Mercy upon us, O Jesu! for we knew thee not to be the
Lord of Glory.

Blessed be thy Holy Spirit, who have opened our Eyes; and made us to see through
the Veil that eclipsed us.

Now we believe thee to be the Messiah we expected; now we acknowledge thee to
be the King of Israel.

Such were the Fervours of those happy Times; and O how happy were our Times
had we those Fervours!

But ours are become miserable by Schisms, and Heresies; and the Darkness that
covers a great part of the Earth.

Ours are become miserable by the unfruitful Lives; and scandalous Examples of
too many Christians.

Too many alas! yet even the Gates of Hell can never prevail against the Power
of God.

Still the same Spirit governs the World; and keeps alive the same primitive
Fire.

Still there are Hearts full of the Holy Ghost; full of that ravishing Wine of
divine Love.

Still there are Souls who readily deny themselves; and take up their Cross and
follow their Lord.

Still there are Fiery Tongues kindled by the Breath of Heaven; who carry their
sacred Flames into every Nation.

Still the Apostolic Church is true to its Name; and sends abroad her burning
and her shining Lights.

Still the Almighty Goodness is true to his Church; and conserves it against
all the Powers of the Enemy.

O keep us, blessed Spirit, in this thy fold of Grace; and bring the whole
World into one Flock.

That all may be of the same Mind here; and all enjoy the same happiness
hereafter.

Glory be to the Father, etc.
As it was in the beginning, etc.
First Lesson. John 14. 12.
VErily, verily, I say unto you, he that believes on me, the Works that I do
shall he do also, and greater Works than these shall he do.

And whatsoever ye shall ask in my Name, that will I do, that the Father may be
glorified in the Son, If ye love me keep my Commandments;

And I will pray the Father, and he shall give you another Comforter; that he
may abide with you for ever:

The Spirit of Truth, whom the World cannot receive, because it sees him not,
neither knows him; but ye know him, for he dwells with you, and shall be in
you.

R. Blessed be thy merciful Providence, O Lord, who when thou had finished
thy great Work on Earth, ascended'st up to Heaven, to draw up our Minds even
thither after thee, Allelajah; that where our Happiness is, there might our
Hearts be also. Blessed be thy infinite Goodness, O dear Redeemer, who when
thou had taught us the words of eternal Life, sent'st down the Holy Ghost to
make us observe them, and raise up our Affections to that glorious Kingdom,
whither thou art gone before us.

Second Lesson.
AND when the day of Pentecost was fully come, they were all with one accord,
in one place;

And suddenly there came a sound from Heaven, as of a rushing Wind, and it
filled all the House where they were sitting.

And there appeared to them Cloven-Tongues, like as of Fire, and it sat upon
each of them.

And they were all filled with the Holy Ghost, and began to speak with other
Tongues, as the Spirit gave them utterance.

And there were dwelling at Jerusalem, Jews, devout Men out of every Nation
under Heaven.

And when this was noised abroad, the Multitude came together, and were
confounded, because that every Man heard them speak in his own Language, the
wonderful Works of God.

R. Thus were the words of the Prophets fulfilled, and the Promises of our
Savior performed, and the Faith of the Christian Church miraculously begun.
Alleluja. O may it still go on, and increase, and multiply, till every Nation
speak in their own Tongue the wonderful works of God.

Third Lesson. Acts 4. 32.
AND the multitude of Believers were of one Heart, and of one Soul, neither
said any of them, that ought of the things that he possessed was his own, but
they had all things common.

And with great Power gave the Apostles witness of the Resurrection of the Lord
Jesus, and great Grace was upon them all.

Neither was there any of them that lacked; for as many as were Possessors of
Lands or Houses, sold them, and brought the Prices, and laid them at the
Apostles Feet.

O happy Life! O Heaven upon Earth! This is the blessed effect of the Fire of the
true Spirit, which warms without scorching, and flames without smoking, and
enlightens without consuming. Kindle, O Lord, in our Hearts, this holy Fire of
Meekness, and Peace, and Unity, that all the World may know whose Disciples we
are, by seeing us Love one another. Alleluja. But O deliver us from the
contrary Fire of the false Spirit, that Scorches without warming, and Smokes
without shining, and Consumes without enlightening: Deliver us from Schism and
Heresy, and every the least uncharitable Passion.

Glory be to the Father, etc.
As it was in the beginning, etc.
Lauds for the Holy Ghost.
Psalm 109.
COnsider now my Soul, the Mercies of God; consider the wonders he has wrought
for the Children of Men.

The eternal Father created us of nothing; and set us in the way of everlasting
Happiness.

The eternal Son came down from Heaven to seek us; and restored us again when
we had lost our selves.

The eternal Spirit sends and brings his Grace to sanctify us; and gives us
strength to walk that holy way.

Thus every Person in the sacred Trinity has freely contributed his peculiar
Blessing:

And altogether as one co-infinite Goodness, have graciously agreed to complete
our Felicity.

But, O ungrateful we! was it not enough to receive of our God all we have and
are?

Was it not enough that the Son of God should come down; and live to teach us,
and die to redeem us?

Was not all this enough to make us love? and Love is all he aimed at, and all
he desired.

Let us confess, O merciful Father! let us confess to Thee our miserable
Condition.

Such, alas, was the corruption of our Nature; and so many and strong the
Temptations that are round about us:

That without this thy last miraculous Favor; sending the Holy Ghost to guide
and quicken us:

We should still have remained in our old dull pace; slow to Understand, and
slower to Obey.

We should quickly have forgot our God that made us; and neglected the Service
of our Lord that bought us:

Had not thy fullness been readily furnished with one Blessing more, to bestow
on thy Children:

Had not thou providently reserved a better Blessing, than the Dew of the
Clouds, and the fatness of the Earth:

Better than plenty of Corn and Wine, or the multitude of Posterity, or
dominion over our Brethren.

These were the great Rewards of the old Law; but behold far greater than these
are here:

Divine Refreshment from the Heaven of Heavens; and the rare delicious Fruits
of the Holy Ghost:

Meekness, and Peace, and Joy diffused in our Breasts; Strength and undaunted
Courage kindled in our Hearts.

Fill us, O Holy Ghost, and our little Vessels; and as thou fillest us enlarge
our Capacities.

Make us, the more we receive of Thee, still to grow in desire of receiving
more.

Till we ascend to those satisfying Joys above; where all our Faculties shall
be stretched to the utmost.

Where they shall be filled to the Brim; and overflowed with a torrent of
Pleasure for ever.

Glory be to the Father, etc.
As it was in the beginning, etc.
Psalm 110.
BLessed be thy Name, O Holy Spirit; and blessed be the Bounty of thy Goodness.

When the eternal Father, by creating the World, had declared himself and his
Almighty Power:

When the in-created Word, by redeeming Mankind, had revealed himself and his
infinite Wisdom:

When now there remained but one Seal more, to be opened of the Book of divine
Mysteries:

Behold a strange condescension to our weak Nature; the invisible Spirit
visibly appears.

He descends from Heaven in the shape of a Dove; and gently lights on the
Prince of Peace.

Again he descends in the likeness of Fire; and miraculously sits on the Heads
of the Disciples:

Mingling thus in one blessed Compound, those chief Ingredients of excellent
Virtue:

Mildness to allay the heat of Zeal; and Zeal to quicken the indifferency of
Mildness:

Innocence to adorn the light of Knowledge; and Knowledge to direct the
simplicity of Ignorance.

O blessed and admirable Teacher! who can Instruct like the Spirit of God?

He needs no Years to finish his course; but with a swift and efficacious touch
consummates all things.

He entered the Soul of a young delighter in Music; and presently sanctified
him into a Composer of Psalms.

He took a poor Shepherd from following the Flock; and immediately raised him
to the degree of a Prophet.

He by one Lesson perfected the Disciples; and polished rude Fishermen into
Eloquent Preachers.

He touched the Heart of a Persecuting Pharisee; and instantly changed him into
a glorious Apostle.

All this thou have done, O infinite Goodness! and all we do is wrought in us
by thee.

By thee we are regenerated at first in our Baptism; by thee confirmed by the
Imposition of Hands.

By thee we are healed by a blessed Repentance; by thee prepared for that
Banquet of the Bread of Angels.

By thee thy choicer Servants are consecrated to be Priests; by thee our
Marriages are sanctified into Blessings.

By thee our Souls are comforted on the Bed of Sickness; and by thee all our
Life is governed.

If in the Church be any Wisdom of Knowledge; if any real Sanctity of decent
Order:

If any Faith of the Mysteries of Religion; if any hope of everlasting
Salvation:

If any love of God, as our sovereign Bliss; if any mutual Charity to one
another:

If any Miracles to convert Unbelievers; or quicken Devotion in such as faintly
Believe:

All flows from thee and thy free Grace; O thou boundless Ocean of eternal
Mercies!

All flows from thee; and may we all return our little Streams in tribute to
thy Bounty.

May every Favor thou offerest, be thankfully received; and every Talent thou
bestow'st diligently improved.

So shall we faithfully perform our Duty; and render to thy Grace its just
Glory.

While whatever we have we acknowledge from thee; and whatever thou give us
is not in vain.

Glory be to the Father, etc.
As it was in the beginning, etc.
Psalm 111.
STill let us sing, O blessed Spirit! to thee let us humbly sing these few
Lines more.

To thee the eternal Love of the Father and the Son; and glorious finisher of
that sacred Mystery.

To thee the quickening Spirit of regenerated Souls; in whom they live and move
and have their Being.

To thee the sovereign Blasom of our Wounds; and only Comfort of all our
Sorrows.

To thee our Refuge in this place of Banishment; and faithful Guide in this
wandering Pilgrimage.

To thee the sacred pledge of our free Adoption; and ensuring Seal of our
eternal Salvation.

What do we say, O thou adorable Spirit of God! what do we say when we utter
such words as these?

We say what we can in our low Capacity; but alas, how short of thy unspeakable
Excellencies!

O that we had the Tongues of Saints and Angels; O that we had thine own
miraculous Tongues.

Those which sat flaming on the Heads of the Apostles; and made them speak thy
Wonders in every Language.

Still all our Praises would be poor and narrow; still infinitely less than thy
more than infinite Perfections.

But if we cannot speak as our God deserves; shall we hold our Peace, which our
God forbids?

Woe be to them, O Lord, who are silent of thee; and spend the Breath thou
give them on any but thy self.

O thou that openest the Mouths of the Dumb; and make the Tongues of Children
Eloquent!

Inspire thy Servants, if not with Expressions suitable to thee; at least with
such as are profitable for us:

Such as may instruct us what we ought to do; such as may move us to do what we
say.

And let us, with the Holy Psalmist, not only praise him our selves; but call
upon all Spirits and Beings to praise him.

Praise him all you Quires of Angels; whose early Grace confirmed you in Glory.

Praise him you reverend Patriarchs, whose ways he governed; and by particular
Providence lead you to Felicity.

Praise him you ancient Prophets, whose Souls he inspired; to teach his chosen
People the mind of Heaven.

Praise him you glorious Apostles, whose Persons he empowered to be Ambassadors
of Peace between Heaven and Earth.

Praise him generous Martyrs, whose Spirits he encouraged; and gave you Victory
over the Terrors of Death.

Praise him ye blessed Confessors, whose Lives he Sanctified; and gave you
Victory over the World and your selves.

Praise him ye Holy Virgins, whose Souls he espoused; and consecrated your
chaste Bodies into Temples for himself.

Praise him all that live in his Grace, praise him all that hope for his Glory;
and let every thing that has Breath praise the Lord.

Praise him, O my Soul, for his Goodness to thee; praise him for his Goodness
to all the World.

Praise him on thy choicest Instrument, thy Heart; praise him in thy best
words, those of the Church.

Glory be to the Father, etc.
As it was in the beginning, etc.
Antiphon.
Kindle in our Hearts, O Lord, thy Holy Fire, that we may offer to thee the
Incense of Praise.

Romans 8. 12.
THerefore, Brethren, we are Debtors not to the Flesh, to live after the Flesh:

For if you live after the Flesh you shall die; but if ye through the Spirit do
mortify the Deeds of the Body, ye shall live

For as many as are led by the Spirit of God, are the Sons of God.

And if Children, then Heirs, Heirs of God, and Joint-Heirs with Christ; if so
be we suffer with him, that we may be also Glorified together.

Hymn 34.
COme, mild and holy Dove,
Descend into our Breast;
Do thou in us, make us in thee
For ever dwell and rest.
Come, and spread over our Heads
Thy soft all-cherishing Wing;
That in its Shade we safe may sit,
And to thee Praises sing.
If by the way we faint,
Thou reachest forth thy hand;
If our own Weakness makes us fall,
Thou make our Weakness stand.
Else there we still must lie,
And still sink lower down;
Our hope to rise is all from thee,
Our Ruin's all our own.
O my ungrateful Soul!
What shall our dullness do,
For him that does all this for us,
Only our Love to Woe?
We'll love thee then, dear Lord,
But thou must give that Love;
We'll humbly beg it of thy Grace,
But thou our Prayers must move.
O hear thine own self speak,
For thou in us do pray;
Thou can as quickly Grant as Ask,
Thy Grace knows no delay.
Glory to Thee, O Lord,
One coeternal Three;
To Father, Son, and Holy Ghost,
One equal Glory be. Amen.
Antiphon.
Come, holy Spirit, the free bestower of all Graces, visit the Hearts of thy
faithful Servants, and replenish them with thy sacred Inspirations; illuminate
our Understandings, and inflame our Affections, and sanctify all the Faculties
of our Souls, that we may know, and love, and constantly do the things that
belong to our Peace. Amen. Alleluja.

V. Our departing Lord promised he would not leave us comfortless;

R. But give us in his place the Holy Ghost.

Let us pray.
O God, who miraculously sent'st down the Holy Ghost to supply the Absence of
thy Son, and comfort his heartless Followers, and instruct them in all things
necessary to their great Work, the Conversion of the Word! Grant, we beseech
thee, that our devout commemorating those fiery Tongues, which sat upon each
of their Heads, and produced such glorious Effects, may increase the fervor of
our Hearts, to continue and attest by all fruits of Grace, the same Spirit
still abiding in us, through our Lord Jesus Christ, who with thee, in the Unity
of the same blessed Spirit, lives and reigns One God, World without End.
Amen.

Vespers for the Holy Ghost.
In the Name of the Father, and of the Son, and of the Holy Ghost, etc.

Blessed be the Holy and undivided Trinity. Amen.

Antiphon.
We are not our own, but the Temples of the Holy Ghost, let us dedicate our
selves entirely to him.

Psalm 112.
COme, let us now prepare our Hearts; and humbly offer this our Evening
Sacrifice.

Let us clear our Heads of all other Thoughts; that fill us, at best, with
nothing but emptiness.

Let us remember our God is a pure Spirit; and delights to dwell in a clean
Tabernacle.

He will not enter into a Soul that is subject to Sin; nor stay where he finds
his Grace neglected.

If he vouchsafe us the Blessings of a visit; and O how sweet and ravishing is
his Presence!

Let us open wide our Bosoms to receive him; and summon all our Powers to
entertain him.

Come my Understanding, and bring all thou know; all that enlightens thee in
the way to Felicity.

Come my Will, and call in all thy Loves; and contract them into one, and
settle it here for ever.

Come my Memory, with all thy swarms of Notions; and forget them all but what
concerns thy Eternity.

Come my whole Soul, with these thy Faculties about thee; and prostrate adore
the eternal Spirit.

Behold he is now with us, and sits in our Hearts, as on his Throne; to receive
our Petitions, and give us his Blessings.

He never will forsake us, if we chase him not away; but guide and comfort us
with his holy Inspirations.

Come then, and with devoutest Reverence attend; and hear what the Lord our God
will say.

He leads us thus into Retirement and Silence; and there familiarly speaks to
our Hearts.

Tell me, O you designed for everlasting Happiness! tell me now freely, for
none shall interrupt us:

What do you chiefly delight to think of? What do you aim at in all your
Thoughts?

Consider well the Question I propose; and when you have examined your selves,
give me your answer.

O thou our merciful, though offended, God! behold thus low we bow our guilty
Heads:

Blushing for Shame to see our Folly; and so much the more to see our Duty.

Happy were we, if we could be still thinking of thee; and raise all those
Thoughts into Desires to be with thee.

Happy were we could we always feel those Fervours; of which sometimes thou
inspirest a little Spark.

O were that Spark kindled into a Fire; and that Fire blown up into a continual
Flame.

But we alas are hot and cold by Fits; and which is worse, our cold Fit lasts
the longer.

Some few half Hours we spend in Prayers; and many whole Days in Idleness and
Vanity.

Sometimes we bestow a little on the Poor; and often throw away a great deal on
our Passions.

Sometimes we deny and mortify our selves; but far more obey our sensual
Appetites.

Sometimes we are drawn by thy Grace to do a good work; but seduced by our
Nature to a thousand Iniquities.

Thus we confess to thee, O Lord our God! who perfectly sees every corner of
our Hearts!

Thus we confess to thee, not that thou may know us, but that we may know
our selves, and thou may cure us.

Cure us, O thou great Physician of Souls! cure us of all our sinful Distempers.

Cure us of this aguish intermitting Piety; and fix us into an even and a
constant Holiness.

O make us use Religion as our regular Diet; and not only as a single Medicine
in a pressing Necessity.

Make us enter into a course of hearty Repentance; and practice Virtue as our
daily exercise.

So shall our Souls be endu'd with a perfect Health; and disposed for a long,
even an everlasting Life.

Glory be to the Father, etc.
As it was in the beginning, etc.
Antiphon.
Quicken us by thy Grace, O Holy Spirit, that we may thoroughly mortify the works
of the Flesh.

Psalm 113.
NOW we have begun, permit us, mighty Lord! to speak once more who are but Dust
and Ashes.

Let us go on, and confess to thee; and open before thee all our Miseries.

Such an occasion often endangers us; such a Temptation often overcomes us.

Our own Infirmities are too strong for us; and our ill Customs prevail against
us.

Every Day we resolve to mend; and every Day we break our Resolutions.

Have Mercy on us, O God of infinite Compassion! have Mercy upon us, O thou
Comforter of the afflicted Minds!

Have Mercy upon us, and pardon what is past; have Mercy upon us, and prevent
what is to come.

When ever thou see us unhappily engaged; and blindly running on in the ways
of Death:

O send thy holy Grace to check our desperate speed; and make us stay and look
before us.

Show us the horrid downfall into that bottomless Pit; where impenitent Sinners
are swallowed up for ever.

Strike our regardless Souls with Fear and Trembling; at the dreadful sight of
so sad a ruin.

Then turn our Eyes, and kindly set before them the beauteous Prospect of a
Pious Life.

Make us look long and steddily upon it; and make us look through, and see
beyond it.

Make us delight in the hope it enjoys; but incomparably more in the Joy it
hopes.

A Joy which none but thy self can give; none but thy self can make capable to
receive.

Give us, O gracious Lord, thou free beginner, and perfect finisher of all
virtuous Actions!

Give us a right Spirit to guide our Intentions; that we may aim directly at
our true end.

Give us thy holy Spirit to sanctify our Affections; that what we rightly
design we may piously pursue.

Give us an Heroic Spirit to confirm our Hearts; that what we piously
endeavor, we may courageously atchieve.

Suffer not the Flesh to deceive us any more; but fortify our Spirits against
all its assaults.

If the Flesh grow bold, and insolently demand, how can you live without these
Liberties?

Let the Spirit answer, their followers are Slaves; and the Service of God is
the only true freedom.

If the Flesh allege what Joy in suffering Ills; or doing contrary to our own
Inclinations?

Let the Spirit reply, That the Cross of Christ is sweet; and nothing so
glorious as the Conquest of our selves.

If the Flesh insist, What do you see, or hear, or exercise any sense in, but
in the things of the World?

Let the Spirit enter this protest; and may every experienced Soul subscribe
the Truth:

I see its Vanity, and feel its Vexation; and meet in every thing its falseness
and danger.

Away then Flesh and Blood, away deceitful World; you cannot enter into the
Kingdom of Heaven.

You were created only to serve us in the way; and set us down at our Journeys
end.

Away with all your fond deluding Dreams; be banished for ever from our
awakened Souls.

Come thou to us, blessed Spirit of Truth; and govern our Lives with thy holy
Maxims.

Subdue our sense to the dictates of Reason; and perfect our Reason with the
Mysteries of Religion.

Teach us to love and fear what we see not now, as at too great a distance for
our short sight.

But what we are sure will hereafter be our Bliss or Misery for ever.

Glory be to the Father, etc.
As it was in the beginning, etc.
Antiphon.
Quicken us by thy Grace, O holy Spirit, that we may thoroughly mortify the works
of the Flesh. Deliver us, O God, from every evil Spirit, and vouchfafe to give
us of thine own free Spirit.

Psalm 114.
LET not our Lord be angry, and we will speak yet once; for we have much to
ask, and he has infinite to give.

We have much to ask for our selves and all the World; who depend entirely on
his free Goodness.

Many, O Lord, are the Graces we want; and none can give them but by thy Bounty.

Many are the Sins and Miseries we are exposed unto; and none can deliver us
but thy Providence.

Deliver us, O Lord, from what thou know is against us; deliver us from what
we know will undo us.

Deliver us from the Spirit of Profaneness and Infidelity; from the Spirit of
Schism and Heresy.

Deliver us from the Spirit of Pride and Avarice; from the Spirit of Anger,
Sloth, and Envy.

Deliver us from the Spirit of Drunkenness and Gluttony; from the Spirit of
Lust, Wantonness, and Impurity.

Deliver us, O gracious God, from every evil Spirit; and vouchsafe to give us
of thine own free Spirit.

Vouchsafe to give us the Spirit of Fortitude; the Spirit of Temperance,
Justice, and Prudence:

The Spirit of Wisdom, and Understanding, and Counsel; the Spirit of Knowledge,
and Piety, and the Fear of thee:

The Spirit of Peace, Patience, Meekness, and Benignity; the Spirit of
Humility, Sobriety, and Chastity.

O thou, who never deniest thy Favors, except we deny our Obedience!

Thou who art often near us, when we are far from thee; often ready to grant,
when we are unmindful to ask!

Refuse not, O Lord, to hear us, now we call upon thee; and make us still hear
thee, when thou call to us.

Fill our Understanding with the knowledge of such Truths as may fix them on
thee.

Inure our Wills to embrace such Objects; as may unite them unto thee the
sovereign Goodness.

Show us the narrow way that leads to Life; the way that few can find, and
fewer follow.

Guide us still on in the middle Path of Virtue; that we never incline to any
vicious extreme.

Let not our Faith grow wild with superfluous Branches; nor be stripped into a
naked fruitless Trunk.

Let not our hope swell up to rash presumption; nor shrink away into a faint
despair.

Let not our Charity be cooled into a careless indifferency; nor heated into a
furious Zeal.

But above all, suffer us not, O thou blessed and holy Spirit! to be guilty of
the unpardonable Sin against thy self.

Suffer us not obstinately to persist in any known Wickedness; nor maliciously
impugn any known Truth.

Suffer us not to die in our Sins without Repentance: And, O Lord, have Mercy
upon us in that serious Hour.

Have Mercy upon us, and govern us in our Life; have Mercy upon us, and save us
in our Death.

Glory be to the Father, etc.
As it was in the beginning, etc.
Antiphon.
Deliver us, O Lord, from every evil Spirit, and vouchsafe to give us of thine
own good Spirit.

Lesson. Galat. Chap. 5. Ver. 19.
NOW the Works of the Flesh are manifest, which are these, Adultery,
Fornication, Uncleanness, Lasciviousness,

Idolatry, Witchcraft, Hatred, Variance, Emulations, Wrath, Strife, Seditions,
Heresies,

Envyings, Murders, Drunkenness, Revellings, and such like, of the which I tell
you before, as I have also told you in time past, that they that do such things
shall not inherit the Kingdom of God.

But the Fruit of the Spirit is Love, Joy, Peace, Long-suffering, Gentleness,
Goodness, Faith,

Meekness, Temperance, against such there is no Law.

And they that are Christ's have crucified the Flesh, with the Affections and
Lusts.

If we live in the Spirit, let us also walk in the Spirit.

Let us not be desirous of Vainglory, Provoking one another, Envying one
another.

Hymn 35.
COme, holy Spirit, send down those Beams,
Which gently flow in silent Streams,
From thy bright Throne above;
Come thou, enricher of the Poor,
And bounteous source of all our Store,
Come fill us with thy Love.
Come, thou our Souls delicious Guest,
The wearied Pilgrims sweetest rest,
The Sufferers best relief;
Come thou our Passions cool Allay,
Whose Comfort wipes all Tears away,
And turns to Joy all Grief.
Come thou bright Sun, shoot home thy Darts,
Pierce to the center of our Hearts,
And make our Faith love thee;
Without thy Grace, without thy Light,
Our Strength is Weakness, our Day Night,
We cannot move or see.
Lord, wash our sinful Stains away,
Water from Heaven our barren Clay,
Our many Bruises heal:
To thy sweet Yoke our stiff-necks bow,
Warm with thy Fire our Hearts of Snow,
Our wandering Feet repeal.
O grant thy Faithful, dearest Lord,
Whose only Hope is thy sure word,
The seven Gifts of thy Spirit;
Grant us in Life to obey thy Grace,
Grant us at death to see thy Face,
And endless Joys inherit.
All Glory to the sacred Three,
One ever-living Deity,
All Power, and Bliss, and Praise;
As at the first when Time begun,
May the same Homage still be done,
Till Time it self decays.
Antiphon.
Blessed be thy Name, O holy Spirit of God, who dividest thy Gifts to every one
as thou please, and workest all in all! In Thee our Sorrows have a Comforter
to allay them; in thee our Ignorances have a Guide to direct them; and our
Frailties a Confirmer to strengthen them; and all our Wants a God to relieve
them. Alleluja, Alleluja.

V. By thy precious Fruits thou art surely known,

R. Controuling all the wicked Works of the Flesh.

Let us pray.
O God, who by thy Holy Spirit did, at first, establish a Church, and
Sanctifying it by the same Spirit, do still preserve and govern it! Hear, we
beseech thee, the Prayers of thy Servants, and mercifully grant us the
perpetual assistance of thy Grace, that we may never be deceived by any false
Spirit, nor overcome by the vicious Suggestions of Flesh and Blood, but in all
our Doubts be directed in the ways of Truth; and in all our Actions guided by
thy holy Spirit, who with thee and thy Eternal Son, lives and reigns, One
God, World without End. Amen.

Compline for the Holy Ghost.
Antiphon.
The Spirit of the Lord has made me, and the Almighty has given me Life.

Psalm 115.
COme, my Soul, let us farther consider who this Holy Ghost is; that we may the
better adore him.

He is a spiritual divine Substance; the third Person in the Glorious Trinity.

He is distinct from the Father and the Son; in the unity of both, proceeding
from Both.

He is the Comforter, but Comfort presumes Sadness; therefore let us take
Comfort in him, notwithstanding our Sins.

For Sin does not make us wholly incapable of Comfort; though want of true
Repentance for Sin does.

So that we always carry away so much of the true Comfort of the Holy Ghost; as
we have true Sorrow for our Sins.

But deliver us all, O Lord, from all those Sins that exclude this Comforter.

Deliver us, O Lord, from Presumption and from Despair;

For Presumption takes away the fear of God; and Despair the Love and Goodness
of God.

Deliver us from all Impenitence, and from hardness of Heart.

For Impenitence excludes all Sorrow for Sins past; and hardness of Heart makes
us continue, and go on in our course of Sinning.

Deliver us from impugning a known Truth; or from envying those who embrace it.

Deliver us from resisting lawful Authority; for therein we resist thee our God.

Deliver us from Relapses and counterfeit Repentances; for though we cannot
deceive thee, yet therein we deceive and ruin our selves.

Deliver us from all Schismatical rending the Peace of the Church; and therein
destroying our selves.

Thus by removing these Obstructions of thy blessed approach, we may humbly
hope our Souls will be ready for thy Impressions.

Glory be to the Father, etc.
As it was in the beginning, etc.
Psalm 116.
THY Impressions, O Lord, who art Goodness it self; will make us good and able
to retain them.

They will make us good, in communicating those Gifts thou give us, unto
others.

It is thy holy Spirit, O Lord, that gives thy Priests Eloquence and Utterance
in Preaching.

It is thy Spirit engenders a burning Zeal in them for thy Glory; and makes it
more and more ardent.

It is thy Spirit that gives them a fiery Tongue to publish thy holy Gospel and
cheerfully profess the Truth in the Face of all the World.

And as our Savior says, It is not you that speak; but the Spirit of your
Father speaks in you.

By thee, O holy Spirit, and thy divine Instruction, the Holy Men of God spoke
as they were moved.

Thou were the mighty worker in the Conception; and Nativity of our blessed
Savior.

Thou art the worker of our Sanctification; and make us new Men in Jesus
Christ.

This Holy Spirit made a poor Shepherd a Princely Prophet; and a simple
Fisherman a chief Apostle.

He made a Persecuting Saul a faithful Paul; a chosen Vessel to preach the
Doctrine of Salvation to the Gentiles.

As his Person is great, divine, and for ever to be adored; so are his Works
great, and his Goodness transcendent and ever to be loved.

Glory be to the Father, etc.
As it was in the beginning, etc.
Psalm 117.
AS Man is known by his Voice; so the Holy Ghost has Particularities by which
he may be known.

He mollifies hard Hearts (if they resist him not;) and awakes them out of the
dead sleep of Sin.

He puts a holy Fire and Zeal into the Hearts of those that were cold and
frozen.

He gives strength to the Weak, and enables them to contemn the World and
worldly Things.

He mortifies the disordered Appetite, and more disordered Passions; and makes
both to become moderate and regular.

He illuminates the Understanding, he sanctifies the Memory; and makes it
retentive of those good things we have been taught by him.

He not only enflames our Affections with a holy Ardour; but sweetly draws them
off from all other things unto himself.

He makes the Heart of the Rash to understand Knowledge, and to become Prudent.

This blessed Spirit breeds an Alteration wherever it enters; it gives other
Actions and other Tongues, and gives other Hearts and makes a new Man.

And as our corporal Motion shows we have a Soul in our Body; so our holy Life
shows we have this holy Spirit in our Soul.

Glory be to the Father, etc.
As it was in the beginning, etc.
Antiphon.
It is the same wonder and Mercy that the Holy Ghost is sent from the Court of
Heaven to sanctify us,

Ant.] As that the blessed Jesus was sent from thence to Redeem us. Alleluja.

The Lesson.
FOR the holy Spirit of Discipline will flee Deceit, and remove from Thoughts
that are without Understanding.

For Wisdom is a loving Spirit; and will not acquit a Blasphemer of his Words;
for God is witness of his Reins, and a true Beholder of his Heart, and a hearer
of his Tongue.

For the Spirit of the Lord fills the World; and that which contains all
things has knowledge of his Voice.

Therefore he that speaks unrighteous things cannot be hid; neither shall
Vengeance, when it punishes, pass by him.

Hymn 36. A Hymn in the Language of our Church.
COme, holy Ghost, our Souls inspire;
And lighten with celestial Fire.
Thou the anointing Spirit Art;
Who do thy sevenfold Gifts impart.
Thy blessed unction from above
Is Comfort, Life, and Fire of Love.
Enable with perpetual Light
The dullness of our blinded Sight.
Anoint, and cheer our soiled Face
With the abundance of thy Grace.
Keep far our Foes, give peace at home;
Where thou art guide, no ill can come.
Teach us to know the Father, Son,
And thee of both to be but one;
That through the Ages all along,
This may be our endless Song:
Praise to thy eternal Merit,
Father, Son, and Holy Spirit.
Antiphon.
Show us the Light of thy Countenance, and we shall be whole.

The Prayer.
O Blessed Spirit of God, who by reason of thy eminent height can pray to no
body; and yet by thy Divine Wisdom and Godhead make all the World to pray to
thee, give us the Spirit of Prayer and Supplication; that we may adore thee in
Spirit, with Reverence, Stedfastness, and Perseverance. Confirm us who are
weak, reduce us when we go astray from thee; let thy Grace prevent our Falling,
or thy Power and Mercy lift us up when we are down; govern our Senses, inspire
our Thoughts, guard our Words, direct all our Actions to thy Glory; accept the
Offering of our whole Soul, Body, and all we are, and have, as being entirely
devoted unto thee; and keep us always safe from our visible and invisible
Enemies, in the Mercies of God the Father, in the Merits of God the Son, and in
the continual Grace of God the Holy Chost, to which Three Persons in one Divine
Essence be all Honor, and Glory, Power, Might, and Dominion, from this forth
and for evermore. Amen.

Antiphon.
How great is the Mercy of God, that only one Sin excludes it, even that
against the Holy Ghost? How unspeakably abominable is that Sin that excludes
that Mercy?

The OFFICE for the Commemoration of Saints, proper for All-Saints-Day, or any
of those Festival Days in which they are Commemorated.
Invitatory.
Come let us Adore the King of Saints.
Come let us Adore the King of Saints.
Psalm 118.
GReat is the Majesty of the King we serve, rich the Splendour of his Courts;
over all the World he sends his Commands, and none dare resist or dispute his
Power.

Come let us Adore the King of Saints. Great is the Clemency of our gracious
Sovereign, to pardon the Offenses of Repentant Sinners; great is the Bounty of
our glorious Lord, to crown with Rewards his faithful Servants.

Come let us Adore the King of Saints. Thousands of Saints attend in his
Presence, and Millions of Angels wait on his Throne, all beauteously ranged in
beauteous Order, all joyfully singing the Praises of their Creator.

Come let us Adore the King of Saints. Thou art our King too, blessed Jesus, and
we, alas, thy unprofitable Subjects; we cannot praise thee like those in thine
own bright Quires, yet humbly offer our little Tribute.

Come let us Adore the King of Saints.

Let us bow down low our heads to him, before whom the Seraphims cover their
Faces; let us bow low our Hearts to him, at whose Feet the Saints lay down
their Crowns.

Come let us Adore the King of Saints. Glory be to the Father, and to the Son,
and to the Holy Ghost;

As it was in the beginning, is now and ever shall be, world without end, Amen.

Hymn 37.
AWake, my Soul, chase from thine Eyes,
Thy drowsy Sloth, and quickly rise
Up, and to work apace;
No less than Kingdoms are prepared,
And endless bliss for their Reward
Who finish well their Race.
It Is not so poor a thing to be
Servants to Heaven, dear Lord, and Thee,
As this fond World believes.
Not even here, where often the wise
Are most exposed to Injuries,
And friendless Virtue grieves.
Sometimes thy Hand lets gently fall
A little drop that sweetens all
The bitter of our Cup;
O what hereafter shall we be,
When we shall have whole draughts of Thee,
Brimful and drink them up!
Say happy Souls, whose Thirst now meets
The fresh and living streams of Sweets,
Which sprang from that blessed Throne;
Did you not find this true, even here;
Do you not find it truer there,
Now Heaven is all your own?
O yes, the Sweets we Taste exceed
All you can say, or you can read,
They fill and never cloy;
On Earth our Cup was sweet, but mixed,
Here all is pure refined and fixed,
All quintessence of Joy.
Hear'st thou, my Soul, what glorious things
The Church in Heaven in triumph sings,
Of their blessed Life above?
Cheer thy faint hopes, and bid them live,
All these to thee thy God will give,
If thou embrace his Love.
Great God of rich Rewards! who thus
Have crowned thy Saints, and wilt crown us,
As both to thee belong;
O may we both together sing,
Eternal praise to Thee our King,
In one eternal Song. Amen.
Antiphon.
Happy are thy Saints, O Lord, who wisely chose their end, and constantly
pursued the means to attain it.

Psalm 119.
TELL me, you eager lovers of the World, what is it you aim at in all your
Pretenses?

You weary your Bodies with restless Labor; and afflict your Minds with
perpetual Care.

Day and Night you are still perplexed; still busily plotting to compass your
Ends.

Tell me what are those Ends you so long have sought? and I will tell you what
you soon will find.

While they are many they do but distract your Thoughts; and often engage them
to quarrel amongst themselves.

One End, and one alone's the way to peace; and on that one must all the rest
depend.

It Is true, and by that Rule we guide our Lives; whatever we undertake is only
to be happy.

It Is to be Happy, we strive to be Great; and enrich our selves by defrauding
others.

It Is to be Happy, that we run after Pleasures; and covet in every thing our
own proud Will.

But we, alas, mistake our Happiness; and foolishly seek where it is not to be
found.

As silly Children think to catch the Sun, when they see it setting at so near
a distance.

They travel on, and tire themselves in vain; for the thing they seek is in
another World.

Just so we judge, and just so are deceived; when we think to meet with Heaven
upon Earth.

This World, alas! has now no Paradise; but all its Fruits are Weeds and Thorns.

All dangerously mixed with occasions of Sin; all sprinkled over with the
bitterness of Sorrows.

What did we ever passionately love; but still in the end it made us repent?

Nay, the best end was to make us heartily repent; and learn by our falling to
Tread more sure.

It Is not then here we must expect our Happiness; and yet it is happiness we all
must seek.

Pity us, O Lord, who live below in the dark; still wishing for rest, but
finding none.

Scatter those Mists of Passion that blind our Eyes; and shine upon us with thy
beauteous Light.

Convince us thoroughly there is a better World than this; a happier People than
those we know.

That we may now begin our Journey thither; and fit our selves for that blessed
Company.

Glory be to the Father, etc.
As it was in the beginning, etc.
Antiphon.
Happy are thy Saints who wisely chose their End; and constantly used the means
to attain it.

Ant.] O how glorious is the Kingdom of Heaven, where our Lord reigns in the
midst of his Saints!

Psalm 120.
IF thus our Nature tend to Happiness; there is sure some happiness to content
our Nature.

Sure the All-wise Creator has provided means to satisfy the Appetites which
himself has made.

Doubt not, my Soul, the Bounty of thy Lord; but turn all thy fear to thine own
Unworthiness.

Look up, and see a rich delicious Land; that flows with sweeter Streams than
Milk and Honey.

Look up, and see a glorious City; incomparably braver than the Courts of Kings.

Behold the blessed Angels shining on their Thrones; and all the Holy Saints
triumphing with their Hymns.

Behold the Glory wherewith they are crowned; in the solemn day of their
espousals with himself.

Look up, yet higher, O my Soul! and see the sacred Humanity of thy dear
Redeemer:

That blessed Jesus, that died for us upon the Cross; and now invites us to
partake of his Crown.

See and rejoice in those eternal Honors; which Heaven and Earth pay to their
King.

Look up once more, and infinitely farther; and humbly admire the unspeakable
Mystery.

See, and adore the sovereign Deity, essentially full of its own blessed Light:

Full, and overflowing to all its Creatures; which shine as little Beams
derived from him.

When thou have seen all this, my Soul; and staid and dwelt a while among those
Wonders:

Turn down thine Eye to the Earth again; and see the petty things that
entertain our Minds.

What is a name of Honor, or momentary Pleasure, compared to the bliss of an
eternal Paradise?

What is a Bag of Money, or a fair Estate; if counter-balanc'd with the
Treasures of Heaven?

How narrow there do our greatest Kingdoms seem? how small a Circle the whole
Globe of the Earth?

Cities and Towns show like little Hills; and the busy World but as a swarm of
Ants:

Running up and down, and jostling one another; and all this stir for a few
grains of Corn.

O Heaven! let me again lift up mine Eyes to thee; and take a fuller view of
that glorious Prospect.

There let me stand, and fix my steady sight, till I have looked my self into
this firm Judgment:

All the prosperous Fortune we can here possess, or even the largest Fancy can
imagine;

All is an idle Dream to those real Joys; an absolute nothing to that sound
Felicity.

Glory be to the Father, etc.
As it was in the Beginning, etc.
Antiphon.
O how glorious is the Kingdom of Heaven, where our Lord reigns in the midst
of his Saints!

Ant.] In Thee, O Lord, is all our hope, in Life, and Death, and Time, and
Eternity.

Psalm 121.
IT IS true, I see a glorious State prepared above, for the Spirits of the
Perfect.

But how should we, poor Dust and Ashes, and laden too with the burden of our
Sins:

How should we hope to ascend those higher Regions; or claim a Portion in that
Holy Land?

Fear not, my Soul, ask the bright Angels, what made them happy; and strait
they will answer with a sprightful Voice:

We readily obeyed our great Creator; and he fixed us here to shine for ever.

Ask the blessed Saints, what brought them to Felicity; and immediately they will
tell you in the same glad tune:

We faithfully loved our dear Redeemer; and that love has placed us here.

Ask both together, what bred those excellent Virtues? and both together will
proclaim aloud:

Blessed for ever be the Grace of our God; which alone has wrought all our
Works in us.

Blessed for ever be the Bounty of our Lord; which gave us freely first, then
crowned his own Gifts.

Hear also how the Saints sweetly tell us; Fear not (say they) who dwell below,
and sigh under the weight of Flesh and Blood:

Fear not to ascend at last to this place of Joy; and take your happy Seats
among our Quires:

We too once lived in that Valley of Tears; and were set to strive with the
same unruly Passions.

He that made us Overcome, can as easily strengthen you; He that has crowned
our Victories will as surely glorify yours.

Fear not, the way is smoother than you are made believe; and the time shorter
than perhaps you wish.

It Is but to love your own true Interest, which seems no hard Command; and that
but while you live, which you seldom think too long.

This once well done, you have no more to do; but to come, and sing, and
rejoice with us.

And thou, O Sovereign Lord of universal Nature on whom the whole celestial
Court continually waits!

Command thy vigilant Angels to watch about us; and carry us strongly to the
place of our Desires.

Save us, O thou whom the Sea and Winds obey; save us, O merciful Lord, or we
perish.

Save us, who call on Thee in all our Distresses; save us, for whom thy
immortal self did die.

Save us, O Lord, we most humbly beseech Thee; and graciously receive us into
thine own blessed Arms for evermore.

Glory be to the Father, etc.
As it was in the beginning, etc.
First Lesson. Wisdom 3.
BUT the Souls of the Righteous are in the hands of God, and there shall no
Torment touch them.

In the sight of the unwise they seemed to die; and their departure is taken
for Misery;

And their going from us to be utter Destruction; but they are in Peace.

For though they be punished in the sight of Men, yet is their hope full of
Immortality.

And having been a little Chastised, they shall be greatly rewarded; for God
proved them, and found them worthy of himself.

As Gold in the Furnace has he tried them, and received them as a burnt
Offering.

And in the time of their Visitation they shall shine, and run to and fro as
Sparks among Stubble.

They shall judge the Nations, and have Dominion over the People, and their
Lord shall reign for ever.

They that put their Trust in him shall understand the Truth, and such as be
faithful in Love shall abide with him; for Grace and Mercy is to his Saints,
and he has care for his Elect.

Resp. Rejoice all you holy Saints, rejoice, and sing for ever the Mercies of
the Lord; his blessed hand has wiped all Tears from your Eyes; and now you
shall no more weep, no more complain, for the evening of Sorrow is past, and
the day of eternal Joy is come. Alleluja.

Now you no longer shall sigh to be delivered out of this dark and tedious
Prison, but dwell for ever in that glorious Light, which springs from the face
of God.

Second Lesson.
THough the Righteous be prevented with Death, yet shall he be in rest.

For honorable Age is not that which stands in time, nor that which is
measured by number of Years;

But Wisdom is the Gray Hair unto Men; and an unspotted Life is old Age.

He pleased God, and was beloved of him; so that living among Sinners he was
translated,

Yea, speedily was he taken away, lest that Wickedness should alter his
Understanding.

For the bewitching of Naughtiness, does obscure things that are honest; and
the wandering of Concupiscence does undermine the simple Mind.

He being made perfect in a short time, fulfilled a long time; for his Soul
pleased the Lord; therefore hasted he to take him away from among the Wicked.

This the People saw, and understood it not, neither laid they this up in their
Minds, that his Grace and Mercy is with his Saints, and that he has respect
unto his chosen.

Resp. O happy they whom our Lord shall honor on the day of his Triumph, and
rising from his Seat of Judgment, go gloriously before them; and with those
sweet and gracious words invite them to follow him, Come ye blessed of my
Father, possess the Kingdom prepared for you, from the Foundation of the World,
the reward of your Labors I will give you, I my self will be your Reward.
Alleluja.

You have firmly believed, you have readily obeyed, you have constantly
suffered.

Come, enter now into your Master's Joy.

Third Lesson.
THen shall the Righteous stand in great boldness, before the Face of such as
afflicted him, and made no account of his Labors.

When they see it, they shall be troubled with terrible Fear, and shall be
amazed at the strangeness of his Salvation, so far beyond all that they looked
for.

And they repenting and groaning for Anguish, shall say within themselves, this
was he whom we had some time in derision, and a Proverb of Reproach;

We Fools counted his Life Madness, and his End to be without Honor,

How is he numbered among the Children of God, and his Lot is among the Saints?

Therefore have we erred from the way of Truth, and the light of Righteousness
has not shined upon us, and the Sun of Righteousness has not rose upon us.

We wearied our selves in the ways of Wickedness and Destruction; yea, we have
gone through Deserts, where there lay no way; but as for the way of the Lord,
we have not known it.

What has Pride profited us? or what good have Riches, with our vaunting,
brought us?

All those things are passed away like a Shadow, and even as a Post that hasted
by;

Or as a Bird has flown through the Sky, and there is no token of her way to
be found; but the light Air being beaten with the stroke of her Wings, and
parted with the violent Motion of them is passed through, and therein
afterward no sign where she went is to be found:

Even so we, in like manner, as soon as we were born, began to draw to our End,
and had no sign of Virtue to show, but were consumed in our own Wickedness.

For the hope of the Ungodly is like Dust that is blown away with the Wind,
like a thin Froth that is driven away with a Storm.

But the Just shall live for evermore, their Reward also is with the Lord, and
the Care of them is with the most High.

Therefore shall they receive a glorious Kingdom, and a beautiful Crown from
the Lord's Hand; for with his right hand shall he cover them, and with his Arm
he shall protect them.

R. Deliver us, O Lord, from the sad deplorable End which thy Justice has
prepared for the Wicked; deliver us from those vain deceitful ways, that lead
us to that end.

O make us always fear thy Judgments, that we may never feel them; and always
hope in thy Mercies, that we never forfeit them.

Bless us, O Lord, with a happy Death; that our Souls may depart in Peace, and
go up to dwell among thy Saints and Angels. Amen.

Glory be to the Father, etc.
As it was in the beginning, etc.
Lauds for Commemoration of Saints.
Psalm 122.
COme, let us all bring forth our Psalms; and go together to the House of
Prayer and Praise.

There let us meet in Peace and Love; and join our Hearts and Voices into one
glad Song.

Come, let us sing, but who shall be our Theme? what worthy Subject shall our
Music choose?

No, it is not Conquerors we mean to admire; nor any of the great Ones that the
World applauds.

But you, blessed Saints, who bravely overcame your selves; and led in Triumph
your own Passions.

Who either wisely used this World; or to be safer scarce used it at all.

You are the illustrious Worthies we desire to Praise; and gild our Hymns with
your bright Names.

Sing then aloud, my Soul, the Glories of thy Saints; and let their sacred
Memories be always in thine.

Rejoice thou who feel these Miseries here; and often complainest of the
Miseries of this Life.

Rejoice at their glad delivery from all these Sorrows; and heartily
congratulate their secure Felicity.

Rejoice, and with thy best instructed Thoughts, admire the exquisite Wisdom of
the Divine Providence:

Who from such low beginnings can raise such great effects; yet every step
thrusts connaturally on the next.

Behold a little Seed that is buried in the Earth, shoot gently out its tender
Leaves:

And nourished on with the Clouds and Sun, climb up by degrees into a tall
great Stalk.

There it displays its full blown hope; and crowns its own Head with a Silver
Lily.

Such is the progress of Immortal Souls, even those which shine now amongst the
highest Seraphins.

At first shut up in their Mother's Womb; where they lie close Prisoners in the
dark.

Thence they come forth to see and hear; and slowly begin to walk and speak.

Next they advance to understand and Discourse; then learn to fly with the
Wings of Grace:

Till they get up beyond themselves; and believe and live above their own
Nature.

At last the kindly hand of Death gives them a stroke; and they instantly
become like the glorious Angels.

Instantly their dark and narrow Knowledge unfolds it self; and spreads into a
clear and spacious view.

Where they shall at once see all the Glories of Heaven; at once possess, and
for ever enjoy them.

Thus from the humble Seed of Grace connaturally spring the Flowers of Glory:

And from this Life's green Stem of Hope grow, just on the top, the Lilies of
Paradise:

Lilies that never fade, but still shine on; and fill the Heavens with their
beauteous sweetness:

Lilies, that Solomon in all his Glory was not arrayed like one of these.

Sing on, my Soul! but still among thy Hymns mingle resolves to imitate their
Lives.

Those are the Lauds most delightful to them, whose Charity rejoices at the
Conversion of a Sinner.

Those are the Feasts most profitable to us; whose Weakness needs the
Impressions of Example.

Learn but of them to be humble and meek; and submit all thy Wishes to the Will
of Heaven:

To govern thy Senses by the Rule of Reason; and thy reason by the dictates of
Religion:

To design thy whole Life in order to the end; and establish for thy end the
bliss of Eternity.

Saints like our service best, when our honoring of them becomes an occasion
of benefiting our selves.

Glory be to the Father, etc.
As it was in the beginning, etc.
Psalm 123.
O Praise the Lord, all you Powers of my Soul; praise the Immortal King of
Saints and Angels.

Praise him, the Author of all their Graces; Praise him, the finisher of all
their Glories.

Praise him in the mighty Hosts of Angels; whom he sets about us as the guard
of our Lives:

That they may safely keep us in all our ways; and carry us at last to their
own home

Praise him in the sacred College of the Apostles; to whom he revealed the
Mysteries of his Kingdom.

That they may teach us too those Heavenly Truths; and show us the same blessed
way to Felicity.

Praise him in the generous Fortitude of Martyrs; whom he strengthened with
Courage to resist even to Death.

That we might learn from them to hold fast our Faith; and rather lose this
Life than hazard the other.

Praise him in the eminent Sanctity of Confessors; whose whole design was a
course of Heroic Virtue.

That we might raise our Minds from our usual lazy dullness; and with a quick
and active Wing mount up to Heaven.

That they might kindle our Breasts with the same chaste Fire; the same fervent
Love to the Spouse of our Souls.

Praise him in the perfect Holiness of all his Saints; whose Lives he molded
into so various shapes:

That every size of ours might readily be furnished with a Pattern cut out, and
fitted for it self.

O praise the Lord, all you Powers of my Soul; Praise the immortal King of
Saints and Angels.

Praise every Person of the Sacred Deity; and give a hearty Joy to the whole
Court of Heaven.

Blessed be the eternal Father; who has fixed his Angels in so high a happiness.

Triumph bright Angels in your radiant Thrones; and shine continually in the
Presence of God.

Blessed be the eternal Son; who has so honored human Nature, as to exalt it
above the very Angels themselves.

Blessed be the eternal Spirit; who by his Grace and Sanctification, has made
us Joint-Heirs with Christ himself in the Kingdom of Heaven.

Blessed be the holy and undivided Trinity; whose sight alone is the Heaven of
Heavens.

Glory be to the Father, etc.
As it was in the beginning, etc.
Psalm 124.
BUT who are we, born here below in the Dust; and still kept down with the
thoughts of the World!

Lord, who are we, that our polluted hands dare offer unto thee the incense of
Praise!

We who so often disobey thy Commands; and so seldom weep for our many Follies.

Forgive, Great God, our boldness who so rashly presume; forgive our Frailties
who so weakly perform.

O praise our Lord, you pure unblemished Angels; who never displeased him with
the least Offense.

Praise him, O you freely pardoned Saints; who perfectly repented every little
Trespass.

Praise him with the highest Office of all your Feasts; praise him with the
loudest Music of all your Quires.

And so they do; look up my Soul, and see the innumerable multitude of
triumphing Spirits.

See how they stand all clothed in white Robes; with Palms in their hands, and
golden Crowns on their Heads.

Behold the glorious Angels fall down with their Crowns; and prostrate adore
him that lives for ever.

Hark how they fill that spacious Temple with their Hymns; while Night and Day
they continually sing.

Holy, holy, holy, Lord God of Hosts! Heaven and Earth are full of thy Glory.
Alleluja.

Glorious art thou in creating all things; glorious in preserving them every
moment of their Being.

Glorious in governing their several ways; glorious in appointing them their
several Ends.

Glorious in rewarding thy Servants above their hopes; Glorious in punishing
Sinners below their Demerits.

Glorious, O Lord, art thou in all thy Works; but infinitely more in thine own
self-blessed Essence.

Thus they rejoice above, thus they Triumph; and may their Joy and Triumph last
for ever.

But O! were we not made, as well as they, to serve and glorify our great
Creator?

We owe him all we have, and they can owe no more; they can but do their best,
and we should do no less.

Therefore every Day we will, with you, repeat those few short Ends of your
Seraphick Song:

Salvation to our God who sits on the Throne; and to the Lamb that redeemed us
with his Blood:

Blessing and Honor, Wisdom and Power be to him that sits on the Throne; and
to the Lamb for all Eternity. Alleluja, Alleluja. Amen.

Glory be to the Father, etc.
As it was in the beginning, etc.
Antiphon.
The Just shall be planted in the House of our God, and flourish in his
Presence forever.

Chap. Revel. 7. 9.
AFter this I beheld a great Multitude, which no Man could number, of all
Nations, and Kindreds, and People, and Tongues, stood before the Throne, and
before the Lamb, clothed with white Robes, and Palms in their Hands, and cried
with a loud Voice, saying, Salvation to our God which sits on the Throne,
and unto the Lamb.

And all the Angels stood round about the Throne, and about the Elders, and the
four Beasts, and fell before the Throne on their Faces, saying, Amen; Blessing,
and Glory, and Wisdom, and Thanksgiving, and Honor, and Power, and Might, be
to our God for ever and ever. Amen.

Hymn 38.
WAke, all my Hopes, lift up your Eyes,
And crown your heads with Mirth;
See how they shine beyond the Skies,
Who once did dwell on Earth.
Peace, busy Thoughts, away, vain Cares,
That clog us here below;
Let us go up above the Spheres,
And to each Order bow.
Hail, glorious Angels, Heirs of Light,
The high born Sons of Fire!
Whose Heats burn chaste, whose Flames shine bright,
All Joy, yet all Desire.
Hail, holy Saints, who long in hope,
Long in the shadow sat;
Till our victorious Lord set open,
Heavens everlasting Gate.
Hail, great Apostles of the Lamb,
Who brought that early Ray;
Which from our Sun reflected came,
And made our first fair Day.
Hail, generous Martyrs, whose strong Hearts.
Bravely rejoiced to prove,
How weak, pale Death, are all thy Darts,
Compared to those of Love.
Hail, blessed Confessors, who died
A death too, Love did give;
Whilst your own Flesh you crucified,
To make your Spirit live.
Hail, all you happy Spirits above,
Who make that glorious Ring,
About the sparkling Thorns of Love,
And there for ever sing.
All Glory to the Sacred Three,
One ever living Lord;
As at the first still may he be
Beloved, Obeyed, Adored. Amen.
The Prayer.
MOst gracious God, the Author of all Sanctity, and the lover of all Unity;
whose wisdom has established an admirable Communion between thy Church
Triumphant in Heaven, and Militant on Earth, as Members of the same mystical
Body; mercifully grant, That as thy Blessed pray to thee for us, we may
continually praise thee for them, and in correspondency to their perfect
Charity, with pious Observance celebrate their Memories, and imitate their Holy
Conversations, till we all meet before thy glorious Throne, and with one Heart
adore the Savior of us all. Amen.

Vespers for Saints Days.
In the Name of the Father, and of the Son, and of the Holy Ghost, etc.

Blessed be the Holy and undivided Trinity, now and for evermore. Amen.

Antiphon.
Pity, O Lord, the Infirmities of thy Servants, and quicken our Slowness by the
Example of thy Saints.

Psalm 125.
LOrd, what a lukewarm Life is this of ours; compared to the Zeal and Fervor
of thy Saints?

Often and long they Fasted to chastize their Bodies, and bring them under the
command of Reason.

On all their Senses they set a constant guard; to let nothing in, that might
disturb their Peace.

Part of the Night they watched, and most of the Day they labored; and both
Day and Night continually prayed.

All things about them went on in constant measure; just fit for their Pious
purpose and no more.

Their Clothes, their Food, their Sleep, their Recreation; all taught to serve
the improvement of their Mind.

Their Mind thus rectified, the only aim of all their Cares, the only scope of
all their Severities.

That disengaged them from the embroilments of this World; that they might
quietly consider, and prepare for the Felicities of the other:

That they might grow more enamored of their Lord; and more admire his
Perfections:

Till at last dissolved into those holy Fires; they melted away with longings
to enjoy him.

Sharp to themselves they were, but sweet to others; obliging all with their
candid Charity.

Whatever any wanted they gladly supplied; and gave away at once both Fruit and
Tree.

They studied not so much how to raise their Families; as to entail on their
Posterities the example of their Virtues.

'Twas not so much their Plot to leave a fair Estate behind them; as to benefit
the World with their useful Labors:

To instruct the Ignorant, to confirm the Weak; to comfort the Sorrowful, and
protect the helpless Innocent.

This was their constant Work, this their beloved Design, to promote with their
utmost strength the happiness of all.

Lord, what a little is it our Frowardness endures, compared to the Heroic
Patience of the Saints!

When they were reviled, they reviled not again; when spitefully scorned they
meekly held their peace.

When they were cursed they blessed their Enemies; when barbarously oppressed
they prayed for their Persecutors.

They served our Lord in Hunger and Thirst; and all the disadvantages of an
impoverished Life.

Often they were threatened, and they withstood the danger; often they were
enticed, and they withstood and repelled the Flattery.

Prisons and Chains they willingly accepted; Tortures and Racks they cheerfully
embraced.

Even Death it self they undauntedly encountered; Death furiously armed with
every shape of Terror.

All this they endured, and infinitely more; of which unmindful we keep no
remembrance.

All this they endured, and under all rejoiced; that they were counted worthy
to suffer for the name of Jesus.

How did these generous Souls conquer Heaven it self; and enter by force those
everlasting Gates?

Glory be to the Father, etc.
As it was in the beginning, etc.
Antiphon.
Blessed be thy name, O Lord, who have provided such great Rewards, and
strengthened our Hope with so many Witnesses.

Psalm 126.
LIttle, O Lord, we know, is the Good we do; little is the Ill we suffer with
Patience.

But what, alas! should we have done, or suffered, had we not seen such divine
Examples?

Had not thy provident Hand hung out those Lamps, bright as the Stars to shine
before us:

Had not thy self, the Sun of Righteousness appeared; to light and warm us with
thy cherishing Beams:

Our Faith had been dark, and our Charity cold; and the flower of our hope had
languish'd away.

Now we are sure the way to Heaven is easy; made broad and smooth by so many
Passengers:

Men clothed in Flesh and Blood, like us; and weakened with the same imperfect
Nature.

Now we are sure the Promises of our God are true; confirmed by as many
Witnesses as there are Saints in Heaven.

Who by their own experience are joyfully convinced; A happy Argument where
Heaven's the Question.

And by the ravishing Sweets they perpetually taste, are perpetually excited to
adore and sing:

Faithful is our Lord in all his words; and overflowingly bounteous in all his
Gifts.

While we lived, we received the hundredfold (in the ineffable Satisfaction of
his Service:) and now are translated to an infinity of Bliss.

What he freely promised he has fully performed; what he engaged to give us he
has abundantly paid.

He told us of Treasures, and golden Crowns; but the Joys we find are
incomparably greater:

Joys of a far more high and noble rate; which neither we can express, nor you
below conceive.

It is enough for us, that we feel them in our Breast; it is enough for you as
yet, that you see them in your Faith.

Can our lesser Happinesses infinitely surpass the greatest pleasures of your
dull World.

O how agreeable is the Company we enjoy! how delightful the meeting our
dearest Friends!

With whom we have prayed, and wept, and suffered; with whom we have spoke of
this day and place:

With whom we now can safely sing; free from the scorn and malice of our
Enemies:

Blessed for ever be the goodness of God; that has brought us hither to his own
Palace.

This is not like our Cottages of Clay; nor the loathsome Prisons where we lay
in Fetters.

This cheerful Melody is not like our old Complaints; nor the threatening words
of our old Oppressors.

The Scene is changed, and for our little Miseries, behold a Paradise of
endless Felicities.

Here we shall live, and ever live; here we shall praise our God, and ever
praise him.

Thus sings the Church triumphant, and thus shall we; if we practice diligently
the Lessons they have taught us.

If we inure our selves to the same blessed Notes; and live in tune with our holy
Songs:

We shall hereafter be admitted to their Quires; and sing as long, and as loud
as they.

Glory be to the Father, etc.
As it was in the beginning, etc.
Antiphon.
If God be for us, who can be against us? If he justify us, who can condemn us?

Psalm 127.
TAke courage now, my Soul, and chase away thy Doubts; far more are with us,
than against us.

God and his blessed Angels are on our side; Jesus and his blessed Saints all
take our parts.

Our great Creator looks up to excite us; our gracious Redeemer came down to
instruct us.

The Holy Spirit illuminates us, and is within us, to confirm our Hearts; and
the whole Trinity present to crown our Victories.

Whom then shall we fear, being thus safely guarded? who can resist so
invincible a Strength?

None but our own corrupted Nature dare contend; and the unlucky Accidents that
conspire with it against us:

Sometimes surprising our unwary negligence, sometimes defeating our strongest
Resolves.

Not that they can compel our Wills, unless we yield; or make the least wound
without our consent:

Much less prevail against the Power of Heaven; and frustrate the Purpose of
the Almighty Wisdom.

Whose Mercy has used more Arts to save us; than the craft of Vice can invent
to destroy us.

Such a Redemption, so miraculously wrought; such holy Sacraments so often
repeated.

Such glorious Promises so faithfully assured; and which revives our hope, so
easily attained.

O infinite Goodness! how generous is thy Love? how liberally extended over all
the World?

Thou invitest little Children to come unto Thee; and the Lame and the Blind to
sit down at thy Feast.

None are shut out of Heaven, but those that will not go in; none made unhappy,
but those who care not to be otherwise.

Cheer then thy self, my Heart, and let no Fears possess thee; nor even Death
it self abate thy Courage.

Death is a passage that was always short; and our Savior's Cross has made it
safe.

By the practice of the Saints it is grown familiar; and by their happy Success
become desirable.

Lose not thy hopes in so glorious an End; Eternity is at stake, and Heaven's
the Reward.

That Heaven for which the holy Confessors spent all their time; and inumerable
Martyrs laid down their Lives:

That Heaven where millions of Angels continually sing; and all the Blessed
make one glorious Quire:

That Heaven where the adored Jesus continually reigns; and the immortal Deity
shines bright for ever:

That very Heaven is promised to thee, my Soul; that blessed Eternity thou art
commanded to hope.

Raise now thy head, and see those beauteous Prospects; that ravish the Hearts
of all Beholders.

Yonder, far above the Skies, is thy Savior's Kingdom; yonder we must dwell,
when we leave this Earth.

Yonder must our Souls remove to rest; when the stroke of Death shall divide
them from our Bodies.

And when the Almighty Power shall join them again; yonder we must live with
our God for ever.

O bounteous Lord, the only Author of all we have; the only Object of all we
hope!

As thou have thus prepared a Heaven for us; O may thy Grace prepare us for
that Heaven.

O make us live the Life of the Righteous; and let our last End be like his.

That we may die the Death of the Righteous; and live for ever in their blessed
Society.

Glory be to the Father, etc.
As it was in the beginning, etc.
Lesson. Revel. 7. 14.
THese are they which came out of great Tribulation, and have washed their
Robes, and made them white in the Blood of the Lamb.

Therefore they are before the Throne of God, and serve him Day and Night in
his Temple; and he that sits on the Throne shall dwell amongst them.

They shall Hunger no more, they shall Thirst no more, neither shall the Sun
light on them, nor any Heat.

For the Lamb that is in the midst of the Throne shall feed them, and shall
lead them unto living Fountains of Waters; and God shall wipe away all Tears
from their Eyes.

Hymn 39.
TELL me, you bright Stars that shine
Round about the Lamb's high Throne;
How, through Bodies once like mine,
How are you thus glorious grown?
Hark, with one Voice they reply,
This was all our happy Skill:
We on Jesus fixed our Eye,
And his eminent Followers, still;
As we clearly saw their Mind,
Set and ruled, we ordered ours;
Both this State alone designed,
Up toward this we strained our Powers.
Taught by Temperance, we abstained
From all less, for greater Goods;
Slighting little drops, we gained
Full, and sweet, and lasting Floods.
Armed with Fortitude, we bare
Lesser Evils, worse to fly;
Mortal Death we durst out-dare,
Rather than for ever die.
Justice we observed, by giving
Every one their utmost due;
That in Peace, and Order, living,
All might freely Heaven pursue.
Prudence governed all the rest,
Prudence made us still apply,
What was fittest, what was best,
To advance great Charity.
On those golden Wheels of Grace,
That Loves fiery Chariot bear,
We arrived at this bright place;
Follow us, and never fear.
O sure Truth! O blessed Attesters*
O that all the World may prove,
Of both these such strong Digesters,
That both these may feed their Love.
Him who made us all for this,
Him who made himself our way,
Him who leads us into Bliss,
May all Praise, and all Obey. Amen.
Antiphon.
Worthy, O Lord, art thou to receive the Book, and to open the Seals thereof;
for thou were slain, and have redeemed us to our God with thy Blood, out of
every Tribe, and Tongue, and People, and Nation, and have made us to our God a
Kingdom. Alleluja.

V. Thou have made us to our God a Kingdom; may he reign in it for ever.

Res. Thou have prepared for us a Kingdom with our God; may we reign in it for
ever.

Let us pray.
O God, whose merciful Providence has still from the Beginning, sown the Seeds
of Grace in the Hearts of thy chosen Servants, which at the Resurrection of thy
Son, (the first Fruits of them that sleep) sprung up into Glory; and by his
holy Doctrine, and admirable Life, and precious Death, have infinitely
increased the means of Salvation, and number of thy Saints! Grant, we beseech
Thee, that we, whom thou have favored with so many Advantages, may obtain thy
Grace, to imitate them here, and rejoice for ever with them in thy Kingdom
hereafter, through the same our Lord Jesus Christ. Amen.

Compline for Saints Days.
Antiphon.
Precious in thy sight, O Lord, is the death of thy Saints; precious to Thee,
and themselves, and us.

Psalm 128.
THus we have past another Day; another Step toward our long Home.

We have seen the Sun a few Hours more; and our Day is lost in its own Night.

But is it lost? O careless we! O careless we! and all the holy Words we have
heard and read?

Leave they no mark in our Memories behind them? but make a little sound and
vanish into Air?

Have we not been at a solemn Feast? and do we so soon forget our Entertainment?

Could we see nothing among all those Rarities, that relished with us, and
stirred up our Appetite?

Was there no fit Provision for some Virtue we want? no proper Remedy for some
weakness we have?

Are we devout already as the Saints of God; and chaste and temperate as they?

Do we despise the World with a Zeal like theirs? and value Heaven at the same
rate with them?

Would we give all we have just now to be there? and part with Life it self to
die and go thither?

Alas! how short are we of those Perfections! how slowly do we follow those
excellent Guides!

O that we lived, I dare not say, blessed Souls, like you; whose aim was high,
and a generous heat glowed in your Breasts:

But that our Hearts desire were to live like you; and what you really did we
really wished to do.

O that we lived in some degree like you; and loved to think, and read, and
speak of you:

To sing and publish your Heroic Acts; and where we cannot imitate, at least
admire.

At least let us learn to humble our selves; and check the Vanity of our proud
Conceits.

Let us mourn and blush at our many Infirmities; and so much the louder call to
Heaven for relief.

Glory be to the Father, etc.
As it was in the beginning, etc.
Psalm 129.
LET us humble our selves; but not grow faint at the sight of others so far
before us.

Rather let us quicken our sloth by their swift pace; and encourage our selves
with their happy success.

We who profess the Religion of all those Saints; who lived and died in the
same Church with us:

We who partake of the same Holy Sacraments; and eat the same celestial Food:

Why should we fear one day to shine above; and rejoice together with you
glorious Saints?

Are we not all redeemed with the same rich price? and the same eternal Crowns
proposed to us all?

Are we not bred in the same Apostolic Faith; and nursed at the Breasts of the
same spiritual Mother?

The Lessons I see, and Teachers are the same; but the hand is dull, and the
Instruments out of Tune.

You lived indeed in a dangerous World, like this; and were tied to Bodies
frail as ours.

But by a constant vigilance overcame the World; and subdued those Bodies to
the service of your Minds:

You overcame with a joyful Heart; and we thus congratulate the Triumphs of
your Victories.

You overcame, but not by your own strong hand; you now triumph, but it is by
the Bounty of your God.

Cheer then thy self, my Soul, and raise thy Head; and open thy Bosom to the
hopes of Heaven.

Fear not, our God has a Blessing too for us; if we have a Love and Obedience
for him:

If we delight in Piety; and diligently attend the Offices of Devotion:

If we refrain from the Liberties of the World; and curb the loose suggestions
of the Flesh:

If we look on Gold and Honor; and their flaming Beams not dazzle our Eyes:

If we perform with them the part of faithful Servants; we shall surely with
them have the portion of Children.

Glory be to the Father, etc.
As it was in the beginning, etc.
Psalm 130.
PRecious in thy sight is the death of thy Saints; which finishes thy greatest
Work, the perfecting of Souls.

Whom thou esteemest as the Jewels of Heaven; and choicely gatherest into thine
own Treasury.

Precious to themselves, O Lord, is the death of thy Saints; which takes off
the dusky color that hides their brightness.

Which shapes and polishes them into a beauteous luster; and sets them as Stars
round about thy Throne.

Precious to us is the Death of thy Saints; which makes us Heirs of so great a
Wealth:

Which leaves us furnished with so great variety; that every kind of want is
abundantly supplied.

Some teach us courage to encounter Dangers; and not for fear make Shipwreck of
our Consciences.

Others instruct us to converse with Meekness; and patiently bear Neglects and
Injuries.

From some we learn how wisely to use this World; and make it serve us in our
way to the next.

From others more generously to renounce it; and pass our time in Peace and
Prayer.

From all, we learn the best of Arts, to live and die like Saints; and in the
best of Methods, their own Example.

O gracious Lord, whose Love still looks about; and searches every way to save
us Sinners!

Who came thy self, bright Sun of Glory! to enlighten our Darkness, and warm
our frozen Hearts:

Who with thy fruitful Beams still kindlest others; to burn as Tapers in thy
Churches hands:

And by their near proportionate distance, stand fit to shine in every corner
of our Lives:

O make us bless thy Name for all these Mercies; and let not one be lost by our
Ingratitude.

Let us not see in vain the Crown at the Races end; and sit down lazily in the
Shades of ease.

Let us not keep in vain these sacred Memories; to be only a reproach to our
unprofitable Lives.

But let us stretch out our selves, and pursue to the Mark; for the glorious
Prize that is set before us.

Still with our utmost speed let us follow them; whose travails ended in so
sweet a rest.

And when our Life's last Day begins to fall; and bids us hasten to prepare for
Night:

Then come ye holy Angels, and watch about us; and suffer not the Enemy to
disturb our Passage.

Come, and receive in Peace our departing Souls; and bear them safely to the
Presence of our Lord.

Then, O dear Redeemer of the World, and sovereign King of Life and Death!

Thou that despisest not the Tears of the Penitent; nor turnest away from the
Sighs of the Afflicted:

Thou that preservest all that rely on thee; and fulfillest the desires of them
that long to be with thee:

Hear thou our Cries, and pardon our Sins; and graciously deliver us from all
our Fears.

Call us to thy self in thine own blessed Voice; call us, O dearest Jesus, in
thine own blessed words.

Come ye blessed of my Father, inherit the Kingdom prepared for you from the
foundation of the World.

Then, O my happy Soul, immediately obey; and go forth with gladness to meet
thy Lord.

To live with him and behold his Glory; to rejoice with him, and sing his
Praise.

Glory be to the Father, etc.
As it was in the Beginning, etc.
Hymn 40.
NIght forbear; alas our Praise,
And our young beginning hope,
Set to grow on these blessed days,
Faint, and dull, requires more scope.
'Twill not hear; but sullen flies,
Summons all the World to Sleep;
Bids us close our Books and Eyes,
What we have gained content to keep.
Blessed Saints! this broken rate,
Bids our slowness ply its Wings;
While your quick and active state,
Always wakes, and always sings.
Yet even this your School too was,
And your, now unwearied, lays,
By this change of Sing, and Pause,
Here among us you learnt to raise.
Here you thus took often Breath,
Yet have climbed those Hills of Light;
O may your Success bequeath
Hope to reach that glorious Light.
Though our Notes be short and few,
And our rests too often and long,
If we keep in tune with you,
We at last shall sing your Song.
If our utmost humble Powers,
Here our daily Prayers attend;
These poor Psalms shall there, like yours,
In a nightless Compline end.
Glory, Lord, to Thee alone,
Here below, as there above;
May thy Joys, great Three in One,
Ever draw, and crown our Love.
The Lesson. Mat. 11. 28.
COme unto me all you that Labor, and are heavy Laden, and I will give you
rest.

Take my Yoke upon you, and learn of me, for I am meek and lowly in Heart, and
ye shall find rest for your Souls.

For my Yoke is easy and my burden is light.

Antiphon.
The just shall shine as the Sun in the Presence of God, and the light of the
Lamb illuminate thems.

Let us pray.
O God, who after thy Servants had spent the day of their Life in a course of
Piety and Heroic Virtue, did close their Evening with a holy Death, and
eternal Rewards! Grant, we beseech thee, thy Grace unto us, so to imitate thy
Servants, in the well bestowing of our Time here, that we may follow them in
their happy Passage out of this World, and be admitted to thy everlasting Glory
with them in the other, through our Lord Jesus Christ thy Son, who with Thee
and the Holy Ghost, live and reignest One God, World without End. Amen.

The preparatory OFFICE for Death, by way of Commemoration of the Faithful
departed.
Invitatory.
Come let us Adore our God, to whom all things do live. Psalm 131.
HE is the great Creator of the World, and sovereign Judge of all Mankind; he
sits above on his glorious Throne, and in his Hands are the Keys of Life and
Death.

Come let us Adore our God, to whom all things do live. Whatever he pleases he
brings to pass, and none can resist his Almighty Power; whatever he does is
still the best, and none can accuse his all-knowing Goodness.

Come let us Adore our God, to whom all things do live. All things do live to
thee, O Lord, thou sole preserver of universal Nature; the blessed Saints
rejoice in thy Glory, and the imperfect Souls are sustained in Hope.

Come let us Adore our God, to whom all things do live. Even the unhappy Spirits
declare thy Justice; and the rest of thy Creatures look up for Mercy, expecting
at last to be removed from Corruption, into the glorious liberty of the Sons of
God.

Come let us Adore our God, to whom all things do live. Lord! whilst we breath,
let us live to thee; and when we expire, depart in thy Peace; that whether we
live or die, we may be always thine, and after Death still live with thee.

Come let us Adore our God, to whom all things do live. Give all thy Faithful
eternal Rest, O merciful God, and may thy glorious Light shine upon them for
ever.

Come let us humble our selves in the sight of God, and spread before him all
our Complaints. Psalm 132.
UNhappy we, the Children of Dust! why were we born to see the Sun?

Why did our Mothers bring us forth to Misery; and unkindly rejoice to hear us
cry?

Whither, alas! has their Error lead us? in how sad a condition does our Birth
engage us?

We enter the World with weeping Eyes; and go out with sighing Hearts.

All the few Days we live, we are full of Vanity; and our choicest Pleasures
are sprinkled with bitterness.

The time that is past is vanished like a Dream; and that which is to come is
not yet at all.

The present we are in, stays but a moment; and then flies away, and never
returns.

Already we are dead to all the Years we have lived; and shall never live them
over again.

But the longer we live, the shorter is our Life; and in the end we become a
little lump of Clay.

O vain and miserable World! how sad and true is all this Story! And yet alas!
this is not all; but new Complaints remain, and more, and worse.

We begin our race in contemptible weakness; and our whole course is a progress
of dangers.

If we escape the Mischances of a Child; we pass on to the rash adventures of
Youth.

If we outlive these sudden Storms; we fall into far more malicious Calamities.

Our own superfluous Cares deliberately consume us; and the Crosses of the
World wear out our Lives.

Should we by strange Success overcome all these; and still bear up our
prosperous Head:

We are sure at last old Age will find us; and bow our Strength down to the
Grave.

The Grave, from which no privilege exempts; nor any Power controuls its
Command.

The Rich must leave their Wealth behind 'em; and the great Ones of the World
be crumbled into Dust.

The beauteous Face must be turned into Rottenness; and the pampered Body
become the food of Worms.

The busy Man must find a Time to die; though his full employment find no time
to provide for it.

Even the wise and virtuous must submit to fate; and the Heirs of Life it self
must be the Prisoners of Death.

This, when I see, I weep and am afraid; since we must all drink of the same
cold Cup.

All must go down to the same cold Grave; and none can tell how soon he may be
called.

To day we are in Health among our Friends and Affairs; to morrow arrested by
the hand of Death.

Nature may faintly struggle for a time; but must yield at last, and be buried
in the Earth.

At last we must take our leave of our nearest Relations; and bid a long
farewell to all the World.

Perhaps the People may talk of us a while; sometimes as we deserve, and often
as they please.

Perhaps our Bodies once laid out of sight; we are no more remembered than if we
had never been.

Only our good Works follow us to the Grave; and faithfully go on with us
beyond our Funerals.

Give us eternal rest, O merciful Lord; and may thy glorious Light shine upon
us for ever.

Glory be to the Father, etc.
As it was in the beginning, etc.
Antiphon.
Come let us humble our selves in the sight of our God, and spread before him
all our Complaints.

Antiphon.
It Is not for us, O Lord, to choose our Conditions; but to manage well what
thou appointest.

Psalm 133.
WHy do we thus bemoan our selves; and rashly utter such repining words?

Seems it so hard a Fate to tread the Path which all our Ancestors have gone
before us?

Adam the first of Men, and Abraham the Friend of God; David the Man after
God's own Heart, and the blessed Virgin Mother of our Lord.

All these have paid their Debt to Nature; and subscribed the Law of universal
Mortality.

Jesus himself, the eternal Son of God, expired on the Cross; and went to his
Glory through the Gates of Death.

And shall our fond self-love so blindly flatter us, to wish an exemption from
this general Rule?

Shall we be murmuring, still our Life is but a Span; and that exposed to
innumerable Sorrows?

Does not the very shortness abate its Miseries? Do not those many Miseries
commend its shortness?

Should we not rather rejoice at the sight of Death; that when ever it comes it
brings us advantage?

If in our Age it is a Haven of Repose; and ought to be welcome after so long a
Voyage.

If in our Youth it prevents a thousand Calamities; a thousand dangers of
ruining our Souls.

If by an ordinary Sickness, it is the course of Nature; if by an outward
violence, it is always the Will of Heaven.

What need we fear how many Deaths there are? we are fure there can be but one
for us.

Dying is an act that is to be done but once; and once well done, we are happy
for ever.

Lord, we confess thy Decrees are just; and our selves the cause of all our
Miseries.

We sacrifice our Youth to Sport and Folly; and our manly Years to Lust and
Pride.

We spend our Old Age in Craft and Avarice; and begin not to live, till we are
ready to die.

Then we bewail the shortness of our Time; when our selves have prodigally
thrown it all away.

We lead a loose and negligent Life; and then complain that Death takes us
unawares.

Our Days perhaps are too few to grow rich; or satisfy the ambition of a
haughty Spirit:

But to be taught the Love of God, and the meek and humble Life of Jesus,

Requires not so much the number of Years, as the faithful endeavors of a
pious Mind.

Could we bestow on the improvement of our Souls the time we so vainly trifle
away;

Our day would be short enough not to seem tedious; and long enough to finish
our appointed Task.

And what, O glorious God, is our business here; but to trim our Lamps, and
wait for thy coming?

But to sow the immortal Seed of Hope; and expect hereafter to receive the
increase.

No matter how late the Fruit be gathered; if still it go on in growing better.

No matter how soon it fall from the Tree; if not blown down before it be ripe.

O thou most just, but sacred Providence; who governest all things by the
secret of thy Will.

Whose powerful hand can wound and heal; lead down to the Grave, and bring back
again:

Behold, to thee we bow our Heads; and freely submit our dearest Concerns.

Strike, as thou please, our Health, our Lives; we cannot be safer than at
thy dispose.

Only these few Requests we humbly make; which, O may thy Clemency, vouchsafe
to hear.

Cut us not off in the midst of our Folly; nor suffer us to expire with our
Sins unpardoned:

But make us, Lord, first ready for thy self; then take us to thy self in thine
own fit time.

Give us eternal rest, O merciful Lord, and may thy glorious Light shine upon
us for ever.

Glory be to the Father, etc.
As it was in the beginning, etc.
Antiphon.
Come let us humble our selves before our God, and spread before him all our
Complaints.

Antiphon.
It Is not for us, O Lord, to choose for us our own Conditions, but to manage
well what thou appointest.

Only our Earth shall return to Earth; but our better part shall live for ever.

Psalm 134.

MY Soul, all these Complaints concern not thee; whom thy bounteous God has
made immortal.

Who when this House of Clay shall fall into Dust; and this narrow Cage shall
be broken down.

Shall soar aloft on thine own free Wings; and spread thy boundless Eye over
all the World.

If thou have happily trained up thy self, to aim still upwards at the highest
Heavens:

Swift as a Flash of quickest Lightning, shall thou instantly fly to those
blessed Objects.

But if thy Thoughts have flag'd below; and delighted to hover too near the
Earth:

If above all things thou have loved thy God; but not loved all things in order
to thy God:

Or if thy Tears have been too few; to wash away thoroughly the remaining Stains:

Unworthy as yet of that blissful Light; whose Beams endure not the least
Impurity:

Thou must sit down in the shades of Sorrow; and dwell in the vale of Tears and
Darkness.

There thou must sigh, and mourn, and wait, till the days of thy purifying be
fully finished.

O the dear Price that all Penitents must pay for ever being vicious!

How are their Souls inflamed with Anguish; and racked and tortured at the
sight of their Sins?

How do they sadly lament their careless Liberties; and the horrid Passions
they too much obeyed?

But much more miserable are they, who by deferring their Repentance, come not
to the sight of their Sins at all.

After this Life, their Repentance comes too late, to meet with that Mercy they
have so long abused.

O that the time of Darkness may be so dreaded, that it may never be felt by
any of us:

But the happy Day may dawn upon us, and clear up poor benighted Souls with thy
radiant Beams.

O may the Sun of Righteousness speedily arise; and disperse the Mist that
intercepts their sight.

Come, Lord, come quickly dearest Jesu; and rescue with thy Power thine own
Inheritance.

Thou who came once to redeem us Sinners; come gloriously now to deliver thy
Servants.

Deliver our Souls out of the Snare of the Enemy; and deliver all Captives out
of the hands of the Wicked:

That they may pass from Death to Life; and dwell with Thee in thy blessed
Peace.

Give us eternal rest, O merciful Lord, and may thy glorious Light shine on us
for ever. Amen.

Glory be to the Father, etc.
As it was in the beginning, etc.
Antiphon.
Only our Earth shall return to Earth, but out better part shall live for ever.

First Lesson. Job 14.
MAN that is born of Woman, is of few Days, and full of Trouble.

He comes forth like a Flower, and is cut down; he flees also as a Shadow,
and continues not.

And do thou open thine Eyes upon such a one, and bring me into Judgment
with thee?

Who can bring a clean thing out of an unclean? Not one.

Seeing his Days are determined, the number of his Months are with thee, thou
have appointed his Bounds that he cannot pass.

Turn from him that he may rest, till he shall accomplish as an Hireling his
day.

V. 14. All the days of my appointed time will I wait, till my change come.

Thou shall call, and I will answer thee; thou will have a desire to the work
of thine own hands:

For now thou numberest my Steps, do thou not watch over my Sin?

Res. Where shall I hide me from the fear of thy Wrath? Where shall I hide me,
when thou come to judge the living and the dead? I tremble at my own
unworthiness; I am ashamed, thus impure, to appear in thy Presence. Wash me yet
more from my Iniquities, and purge me thoroughly from my Sins. I know the Enemy
that obstructs my way; my Sins exclude me from thy Kingdom, where no unclean
thing can enter, nor any clean be denied admittance.

Second Lesson Job 7. v. 20.
I Have sinned, what shall I do unto thee, O thou Preserver of Men; why have
thou set me as a Mark against thee, so that I am a burden to my self?

And why do thou not pardon my Transgression, and pass by mine Iniquity? for
now I shall sleep in the Dust, and thou shall seek me in the Morning, but I
shall not be.

Job 10. v. 1. My Soul is weary of my Life; I will leave my Complaint upon my
self: I will speak in the bitterness of my Soul.

I will say unto God, do not condemn me, show me wherefore thou contendest with
me.

Is it good unto thee that thou should oppress? that thou should despise
the work of thine hands, and shine upon the Counsel of the Wicked?

Have thou Eyes of Flesh, or see thou as Man sees?

Ver. 8. Thy hands have made me, and fashioned me round about, yet thou do
destroy me.

Ver. 11. Thou have clothed me with Skin, and Flesh, and fenced my Bones with
Sinews.

Thou have granted me Life and Favor, and thy visitation has preserved my
Spirit.

R. Woe is me wretched Sinner, what shall I do? I have committed evil in the
sight of my God; I have offended the Eyes of His Majesty.

Whither shall I fly from the Justice of my Judge? Whither but unto the Mercy
of my Savior?

Have Mercy on me, O Lord, have Mercy on me, when thou come in Glory to judge
the World.

My corrupt Nature has brought forth Sin; and Sin has brought forth Sorrow.

Where shall I seek for Pardon? where shall I find relief? but in thee my God,
my Hope, and Portion in the Land of the Living?

Third Lesson. Job 19. 21.
HAve pity upon me, have pity upon me, O ye my Friends, for the hand of God
has touched me.

He has hedged my Path round about, that I cannot pass.

O that my words were written, O that they were printed in a Book, that they
were graven with an Iron Pen, and laid in the Rock for ever.

For I know that my Redeemer lives, and that he shall stand at the latter day
upon the Earth; and though after my Skin Worms destroy this Body, yet in my Flesh
shall I see God.

Whom I shall see for my self, and mine Eyes shall behold, and not another,
though my Reins be consumed within me.

Res. My days are consumed as a shadow, I am withered away as Grass; and
nothing remains but the cold Grave. O let me call back that uncomfortable word!
my days indeed are declined, but my Eternity is safe; I am withered away as
Grass, but the Spring will come and revive me into a Flower of Paradise: This
my hope is laid up in my Bosom, let then my Body be crumbled into Dust, and my
Soul be detained for a time in a lesser degree of Bliss. I know my Redeemer
lives, and at the last day I shall rise out of the Earth, and be compassed
again with my Skin, and that in my Flesh I shall see God, and in that blissful
sight shall be for ever happy. This my hope is laid up in my Bosom: Give us
then, O gracious Lord, give us when we die eternal rest; and may thy glorious
Light shine bright upon us for ever. Amen.

Lauds for this Office.
Psalm 135.
WHen we have shed our solemn Tears; and paid our due Sighs to the Memory of
our Friend:

Let us wipe our Eyes with the comfort of Hope; and change our Grief into a
charitable Joy.

The Friends we mourn for are delivered; from all the Miseries we so justly
deplore.

Their Bodies tremble no more with the Palsy; nor burn with the flames of a
scorching Fever.

They now cry out no more for want of Sleep; nor roll up and down upon their
uneasy Beds:

But quietly rest in the silent Grave; till they rise again to immortal Glory.

Which whilst they there expect in Peace; their Souls are enlarged to a
spacious Liberty.

No longer consigned to this Prison of the Body; but gone to dwell in the Region
of Spirits.

No longer exposed to these stormy Seas; but gladly arrived at their safe
Harbor.

Where though their Passage be stopped a while; they are free from all fear of
being cast away.

Though for a time they attend with hope; they are sure at last to rejoice for
all Eternity.

They are sure at last to behold their Redeemer; and live for ever with the
blessed Jesus.

O were it not for this sweet hope, who could endure these killing delays?

O glorious Lord, the free original source, and final end of universal Nature!

Since by thy Grace thou have thus begun; and sown in their Hearts the Seeds of
Glory:

O may the same blessed hand go on, to finish its own blessed work.

Ripen the Fruit thou reserv'st for thy self; and hasten the days of their
joyful Harvest.

Send forth thy Angels to reap thy Grain; and lay it up safe in thy heavenly
Magazine.

There to supply the place of those unhappy Tares, which thy Justice threw down
to everlasting Fire.

There to join with thy perfectly blessed; to sing eternal Hallelujahs unto
thee.

Glory be to the Father, etc.
As it was in the beginning, etc. Amen.
Psalm 136.
COme let us praise the goodness of our God; who orders every thing to the best
for his Servants.

Whose Providence governs us all our Life; and takes so particular care of our
Death.

He casts us down on our Bed of Sickness; and draws the Curtain 'twixt the
World and us:

Shutting out all its vain designs; and contracting our business to a little
Chamber.

There in that quiet Solitude, he speaks to our Hearts; and sets before us all
our Life.

There he discovers the Fallacies of the World; and invites us now at last to
prepare for the other.

Thither he sends his Messengers of Peace; to treat with our Souls, and
reconcile them to Heaven.

Thither he sends even his only Son; to secure our Passage, and conduct us unto
himself.

O! how quite other will our Thoughts be then; to what they were in our careless
Health?

How shall we freely censure what we once esteemed; and be easier convinced
into wiser Counsels?

When our unruly Senses shall be checked with Pains; and our rash Minds made
sober with Fears.

When the occasions of Sin shall be removed away; and every thing about us
incline us to repeat.

Blessed for ever be thy Name, O Lord! whose Mercy sanctifies even thy
Punishments into Favors.

Thou bring'st us low, to persuade us to be humble; and prescrib'st us a
Sickness to cure our Infirmities.

Thou command'st the Grave to dispense with none; but indifferently seize on
all alike.

That all may alike provide for that fatal Hour; and none be undone with
mistaken hopes.

Thou tellest us plainly that all must die; but kindly concealest the Time and
Place.

That every where we may stand on our Guard; and every moment expect thy Coming.

Thou teach the use of decent Funerals; and the Duty we owe to our deceased
Friends!

That we may often renew the Memory of our own Grave; and the wholesome Thoughts
of our future State.

That so with one act of excellent Charity we may do our Duty to our departed
Friends.

And may excite our selves, from the thoughts of our Mortality, the more
carefully to perform our Duty unto thee.

Let not, O Lord, these gracious Arts be lost; which thy merciful Wisdom
contrives for our sakes.

But whilst we thus remember the death of others, make us seriously reflect
upon our own.

And let every time we reflect upon our own, make us the more diligent in
preparing for it.

Glory be to the Father, etc.
As it was in the beginning, etc.
Psalm 137.
O Praise the Lord all ye Nations of the Earth; whom his Providence yet
sustains alive.

Whom he so long forbears to strike; though our Sins have so often provoked his
Wrath.

Whom he so graciously calls to repent; though our Passions have hitherto
neglected his Voice:

Making Experiments by the death of others; to advise his Servants into a
warier Life.

To clear this useful Truth, we too must die; and strictly account for every
Idle word.

We must appear before that great Tribunal; and tremblingly receive our
everlasting doom.

O praise the Lord all you faithful Souls; for his Mercy preserves the Just.

Though we lie below in the Valley of Death; and sit afflicted in the shades of
Darkness:

Yet he will bring us up to his eternal Mountains; and fill our Eyes with
glorious Light.

Though our Bones be bruised with Sorrow; and our Hearts made heavy with
faintness:

Yet we shall be clothed with Beauty; and placed to sing among the blessed
Saints.

O praise the Lord, all you blessed above whom his Bounty has already crowned
with Glory.

You who entirely were weaned from the Allurements of the World; and found ^o
unwillingness at your death to leave it!

You who, designing your whole Life ^or Heaven, departed with Joy to possess
^our hopes.

Millions of Angels meeting you in the ^ay; and carrying you directly to the
^resence of their King.

O praise the Lord all you glorious Angels; whose bright Felicity began so
early.

Stars that arose in the Morning of the World; and still maintain your
unchangeable luster.

Shining perpetually near the Throne of God; as the top and masterpiece of all
his Works.

O praise the Lord, all ye his Works; praise and magnify him for ever.

Praise his Almighty Power that gave you Being; and still preserves you from
relapsing into nothing.

Praise his All-seeing Wisdom; O ye Saints, that here directs your Steps, and
leads you on to your eternal End.

Praise above all his boundless Goodness; that pours into every thing as much
as it can hold.

And though our short sight now reaches not so far; but often mistakes and
repines at his Government:

Yet at the last great day we shall easily discern a perfect Concord in the
harshest Note.

When our adored Redeemer shall come in the Clouds; and summon all Mankind to
appear before him.

There to receive each one their proper part; exactly fitted to their best
Capacity.

There to behold the whole Creation strive, to express in it self the
Perfections of its Maker.

Whose admirable Wisdom shall guide that last universal Scene; and finish All
into a beauteous close.

Glory be to the Father, etc.
As it was in the beginning, etc.
Antiphon.
Return unto thy Rest, O my Soul, for the Lord has dealt graciously with thee.

V. Blessed are they that die in the Lord;

R. For their Works follow them.

Antiphon.
I am the Resurrection and the Life; he that believes in me, though he be dead,
shall live; and every one that lives and believes in me shall not die for ever.

Now say the 51st Psalm. Have Mercy, etc.

V. Turn not away thy Face from us, O Lord.

R. Turn not away thy Face in Wrath from thy Servants.

V. Behold our Humiliation and our Labor.

R. And forgive us all our Sins.

V. Behold how our Spirits are in Anguish.

R. And our Hearts troubled within us.

V. Our Iniquities have overtaken us.

R. Innumerable Evils have taken hold on us.

R. And now! what is our Expectation, but only thou, O Lord? and our Substance
is with thee.

V. Before thee is all our desire.

R. And our Groanings are not hid from thee.

V. As the Heart pants after the Water-Brook;

R. So do our Souls thirst after thee.

V. Our Souls thirst after thee, the living Fountain.

R. When shall we come and appear before thy Face.

V. Our Tears are our Bread Day and Night;

R. Whilst still its said to us, where is your God?

V. Convert us, O Lord, thou God of strength;

R. Lift up the light of thy Countenance upon us; and we shall be whole.

V. Bring our Souls out of Prison, that we may praise thy Name;

R. The just stand expecting till thou rewardest them.

V. How long will thou forget them for ever?

R. How long will thou hide thy Face from them?

V. Turn thee, O Lord, and deliver their Souls.

R. Save them for thy Mercies sake.

V. Save thy People, O Lord, and bless thine Inheritance.

R. Govern them, and lift them up for ever.

V. That their Souls may live and sing thy Praise;

R. While even thy Judgments lead them to their Bliss.

The Prayer.
ALmighty God, with whom do live the Spirits of them that depart in the Lord;
and with whom the Souls of the faithful after they are delivered from the
burden of the Flesh are in Joy and Felicity, we give thee hearty Thanks for
that it has pleased thee to deliver our dear Friends out of the Miseries of
this sinful World; beseeching thee that it may please thee to accomplish the
number of thine Elect, and to hasten thy Kingdom; that we, with all those that
are departed in the true Faith of thy Holy Catholic Church, may have their
perfect consummation in Bliss, both in Body and Soul, in thy eternal Kingdom,
through Jesus Christ our Lord. Amen.

Vespers for this Office.
Psalm 138.
COme let us make our Peace betimes with our God; before the Evening approach
too near.

Whilst it is called to day let us faithfully Labor; for the Night will come
wherein none can Work.

Let us implore his Favor, look into our own Breasts, and strictly examine
what passes there.

Least while we pray for the Salvation of others, our selves become everlasting
Reprobates.

Tell me, my Soul, how stand our great Accounts; are all things even between
Heaven and us?

Are we prepared to meet our Judge; whose Justice punishes every the least
voluntary defect?

Is there not still some restitution to be made; which the love of the World
tempts us to delay?

Is there not still some misaffection to rectify; which our own false Hearts
abuse us to connive at?

Not that we esteem, O Lord, any Creature more than thee; from which abhorred
Ingratitude defend thy Servants.

But that we esteem them more than they deserve; and busy our Thoughts too
eagerly about them.

Forgive, O sovereign Goodness, these our Imperfections; and fix our whole
Hearts upon nothing but thy self.

Why are we thus at best but good by halves; for whom there is a Heaven
prepared worth all our Labors?

Why do we mingle still with thy pure Grace, so much of our own Corrupted
Nature?

Deliver us, O Lord, from the Temptations of this World; and mercifully save us
from the Wrath to come.

That dreadful Wrath which we so justly fear; and which so many terribly feel.

Justly we confess! but yet upon our true Repentance, we hope in thy Clemency
to meet with pity.

Pity all poor Penitents Miseries, thou that hear'st their cries; relieve their
Sorrows who see their Tears.

Pity their fainting Eyes that so much wake; and wait till the long expected
day appears.

Pity their wearied Hands stretched out to thee; and send thy Holy Angels to
bring them unto thee.

That they may pass away to those Mansions of Joy; where Holy Souls shall rest
and weep no more.

Give all thy Faithful eternal rest, O merciful Lord; and may thy glorious
Light shine upon them for ever.

Blessed are the Servants whom our Lord shall find watching! he will surely
bestow on them the Mercies of Heaven.

Happy are they who are prayed for by others; but more happy are they who pray
for themselves.

Have thou not said, O God of Truth ^ that for thy Elect those Days shall be ^
shortened?

Have thou not said, O Lord of Glory ^ Behold I come quickly, and my Rewar^ is
with me?

Come, glorious Jesus, with all thy hol^ Angels, and the bright attendance of
re^joycing Saints!

Come, and redeem thy poor Captive^ and lead us away as Trophies of thy V^ctory.

Thus, dearest Lord, will we cry con^nually unto thee; and never leave we^ing
at the Gates of thy Palace.

Till thou art pleased to open those everlasting Doors; and graciously say to
our languishing Souls:

Behold I am come to pardon and refresh you; your Sighs and Tears have provoked
my pity.

Behold, I come to call you to my self; and give you possession of the
Inheritance I promised.

Come, come you blessed of my Father! receive the Kingdom prepared for you.

Come, come, ye faithful obedient Servants, enter into your Master's Joy.

Glory be to the Father, etc.
As it was in the beginning, etc.
Antiphon.
Gracious, O Lord, art thou in all thy Promises, and bountifully faithful in
all thy Performances.

Psalm 139.
LET the Faithful then comfort themselves with the Consideration, that ^hey are
Heirs of Hope; and not be cast ^own at their present distress.

If God defer a while, expect; for he ^rely will come, and bring them Relief.

He justly stays, to punish our neglect; ^hen he often called, and we would not
^me to him.

He mercifully stays till our Souls are refined; and able to bear the splendour
of his Presence.

Then will his glorious Light immediately appear; and open to our view that
blissful Prospect.

Then will he graciously unveil himself; and our Eyes shall see him Face to
Face.

Then will the eternal Deity shine brightly on us; and ravish our Hearts with
everlasting Ecstasies.

All our great Hopes shall be fully satisfied; and our long Expectation
abundantly rewarded.

We shall remember our Afflictions with pleasure; when we see they were the way
to our Felicity.

Even this very delay shall increase our ^oys; and every thing conspire to
Crown ^s with happiness.

Mean while we'll frame our Songs of Hope and Patience; and still close all
with these precious words taught us by ^ur Lord:

Thy Kingdom come, O glorious Lord; and yet, O Lord, thy will be done.

Antiphon.
Gracious art thou, O Lord, in all thy ^romises; and bounteously faithful in
all ^y Performances.

V. Blessed are the dead that die in the Lord.

R. They rest from their Labors, and their Works follow them.

Antiphon.
All that my Father gives me shall come unto me; and he that comes unto me I
will in no wise cast out.

Come unto me all that are weary and heavy laden, and I will give you rest.

Take my Yoke upon you, and learn of me, for I am meek and lowly in Heart; and
ye shall find rest for your Souls.

For my Yoke is easy, and my Burden light.

V. Out of the Depths have I cried unto thee, O Lord.

R. Lord, hear my Voice; let thine Ears be attentive to the voice of my
Supplications.

V. If thou, Lord, should mark Iniquties, O Lord, who shall stand?

R. But there is Mercy with thee tha^ thou may be feared.

V. I wait for the Lord, my Soul dot^ wait for him; and in his word do I hope.

R. My Soul waits for the Lord, mo^ than they that watch for the Morning, ^
say more than they that watch for t^ Morning.

V. Let Israel hope in the Lord; for with the Lord there is Mercy, and
plenteous Redemption.

R. And he shall deliver Israel from all his Sins.

Glory be to the Father, etc.
As it was in the beginning, etc.
In the midst of Life we are in death, of whom may we seek for succor, but of
thee, O Lord, who for our Sins art justly displeased?

Yet, O Lord most Holy, O Lord most mighty, O holy and most merciful Savior,
deliver us not into the bitter Pains of eternal death.

Thou know, Lord, the secrets of our Hearts, shut not up thy merciful Ears
unto our Prayers; but spare us, O Lord, most Holy, O God most mighty, O holy
and merciful Savior, thou most worthy Judge eternal, suffer us not at our last
Hour, for any pains of death to fall from thee.

The Collect.
O Merciful God, the Father of our Lord Jesus Christ, who is the Resurrection
and the Life, in whom, whosoever believes shall live though he die, and
whosoever lives and believes in him shall not die eternally; who have also
taught us not to be sorry as Men without hope, for they sleep in him, we meekly
beseech thee, O Father, to raise us from the death of Sin, unto the Life of
Righteousness, that when we shall depart this Life, we may rest in him, as all
thy faithful departed did, and that at the general Resurrection of our Bodies
in the last day, we may be found acceptable in thy sight, and receive the
Blessing which thy wellbeloved Son shall then pronounce to all that love and
fear thee, saying, Come ye blessed Children of my Father, receive the Kingdom
prepared for you from the beginning of the World. Grant this, we beseech thee,
O merciful Father, through Jesus Christ our Mediator and Redeemer. Amen.

The Motto proper not only for Ash Wednesday, but for our whole Lives.
REmember, O Man, that Dust thou art, and to Dust shall thou return.

All Flesh is Grass, and the Pride thereof is as the Flower of the Field, and
leaves the Naked Soul to Judgment.

O God, whose Providence introduces thy Church to the sober discipline of Lent;
we humbly beseech thee, that the Cross of our Redeemer may lay all our proud
Conceits in the Dust, and make Flesh and Blood feel it self highly honored, ^f
by whatever Crosses or Mortifications, ^t may be tempered and raised to become
a ^it Instrument for ripening the Soul in thy Love, through our Lord Jesus
Christ thy Son. Amen.

Antiphon.
Let us follow, as we may, our Divine Master, in his Forty days Retirement and
Fasting, who needed not (as we) the means of Religion, but all he did was for
our Example, (not of the Miracle but the Duty) that we might learn to fly from
^e danger of occasions to Sin, and take away the Fuel of our Passions, and by
using to contradict the Appetites of sense inure our selves to obey the
Commands o^ Reason.

V. Now let us take a holy Revenge on our Sins past.

R. And strive for the future to bring forth Works meet for Repentance.

Let us pray.
O God, whose gracious Providence ha^ ordained us to lighten the weight o^ our
corrupt Bodies, pressing down ou^ Souls by the long and solemn Abstinenc^ of
Lent, Grant us, we beseech thee, conscientiously to observe the wholesome
discipline now prescribed us; and with du^ Mortification of our Flesh, so to
join the quickening of our Spirits by frequent Devotions, that all our carnal
Appetites may be fitted for Burial in our Savior's Grave^ and all our
Affections ready to rise with him to Immortality, at those Sacred Feast^ for
which this season is to prepare us through our Lord Jesus Christ. Amen.

For Ember-Days.
THE Harvest is great, the Laborers are few; let us all therefore pray the
lord of the Harvest to send forth due La^ourers into into his Harvest.

How shall we hear without a Preacher; and how shall they preach except they be
^nt?

Let us pray.
O GOD, by whose Providence thy Church from the beginning has set ^ part
certain Times, for the solemnity of ^onfirming Sacred Orders, to supply still
^e Faithful with Sanctified Masters of her Doctrine and Discipline, and
enjoined us ^l, with extraordinary Devotions to im^ore thy special Assistance,
to a work so ^uch concerning us all; hear, we humbly ^eseech thee, the Requests
of thy Servants, ^ho, by the Mortification of our Bodies, de^re to increase the
fervor of our Prayers. and vouchsafe our Governors the Grace ^f discerning
Spirits, to Ordain only such ^s are indeed fit for their Sacred Functions; that
thy Church being always preserved from false Apostles, may be ordered and
^uided by faithful and true Pastors; and give us the Grace of Reverence, and d^
Subjection to those so Ordained, as tru^ sent by thee for our Edification,
through our Lord Jesus Christ. Amen.

In time of Persecution.
BLessed are ye when Men shall revil^ you, and persecute you and say al^ manner
of Evil against you falsely, for my Name sake.

Rejoice and be exceeding glad, for great is your Reward in Heaven.

V. Thus the Holy Prophets earned their Crown.

R. Thus the blessed Apostles climb'^ their Thrones.

Let us pray.
O Provident Lord, who permittest the Powers of Darkness to persecute the
Children of Light, that their Sufferings may evidence among themselves, and
attest to those without the utter disesteem of all Temporal Goods, in
comparison o^ our eternal Hopes, attainable only by pursuing the Doctrine and
Discipline of Salvation, in the Bosom of our Mother the ^ly Catholic Church;
sustain us, we ^mbly beseech thee, against being sha^, either in this Faith or
Practice, by ^ rage of our present Persecutors, and ^nt that in due Compassion
both of ^m and us, no Temptation may be able ^sway us, besides our Duty; either
im^iently to violate our Allegiance to ^ar, or cowardly betray thy Truth; ^d
the blessed occasions of gaining a ^le to thy Kingdom, which thy own ^ed Mouth
has securely entailed on ^se, who suffer Persecution for Righte^ness sake,
through our Lord Jesus ^ist. Amen.

Proper Festivals.
Sundays in Advent.
All as in the Office of our Savior, except Invitatory.
Behold the day of our Lord draws n^ come let us Adore him. 1. Antiphon.
BEhold our Lord will appear, and n^ fail to make good his Promises. he delay a
while, expect; for he sure^ will come, and deliver us. Alleluja.

2. Ant.] Come, O thou Son of Rig^teousness, and Fountain of eternal Ligh^
Come, and illuminate those that sit ^ Darkness, and in the shadow of Death, ^
guide our Feet into the ways of Peace.

3. Ant.] Come, O thou hope of ^ Gentiles, and the desired of all Nation^ Come,
and redeem us from the Vassal^ of Sin, into the only Liberty of serv^ thee.
Alleluja.

4. Ant.] Prepare now thy ways, O my Soul, before the Lord, make thy Paths
^trait before the Face of our God; for he will come again with Glory, to judge
^oth the quick and the dead; and blessed ^re they who are ready to meet him.
Alleluja, Alleluja, etc.

V. Our Lord will come to judge the World.

R. Our Lord is come to redeem the World.

Let us pray.
O GOD, by whose Providence thy Church has appointed the solemn Time of Advent
to fore-run the Commemoration of our Savior's Nativity, and prepare its way in
our Hearts! Grant us, we humbly beseech thee, so devoutly to employ this Holy
Season, in meditating on the Prophecies, and gracious Preparations of the
World, for the coming of the Messiah; and on the infinitely greater Mercies he
brought along with him, and has left behind him: that our Spirits may be
raised, to celebrate the great Feast of his Nativity with due Joy and
Exultation, and thereby better disposed to expect his Second Coming, who with
thee and the Holy Ghost, lives and reigns, One God, World without End. Amen.

Nov. 30. St. Andrew.
All as in the Office of Saints, except 1. AS soon as St. Andrew saw the Cross
afar off prepared for his Martyrdom, he was transported with Joy; and
triumphantly saluted it as the happy Instrument of his approaching Glory.
Alleluja.

2. O blessed Cross, on whom our Savior was offered up, for the Sins of
Mankind. Oh! that I may always be ready to embrace thee, as becomes the
Disciple of him who was Crucified upon thee. Alleluja.

Antiphon.
St. Andrew's sole Glory was in the Cross of our Lord Jesus Christ, in whom the
World was Crucified to him, and he unto the World.

Let us pray.
O GOD, whose Grace kindled in the blessed Apostle St. Andrew, so ardent a Love
of his Master, that it flamed out in vehement desires of his Cross; Grant that
our devout celebrating the Memory of his holy Race, and happy Reward, may
quicken thy Grace in our Hearts; and encourage us with Confidence and Joy, to
undergo whatever Sufferings thy Providence casts in our way, and grant they may
be serviceable to glorify thee, and advance thy Truth, and secure the
attainment of our eternal Salvation, through our Lord Jesus Christ thy Son, who
with thee and the Holy Ghost, lives and reigns, One God, World without End,
Amen.

Dec. 21. St. Thomas the Apostle.
All as in the Office of Saints, except, 1. THE other Disciples said to Thomas,
we have seen the Lord; but he said unto them, Except I shall see in his Hands
the print of the Nails, and put my Finger into the print of the Nails, and
thrust my Hand into his Side, I will not believe.

2. After eight Days Jesus came in, the Doors being shut, and stood in the
midst, and said, Peace be with you.

Then said he to Thomas, Reach hither thy Finger, and behold my Hands; and
reach hither thy Hand, and thrust it into my Side, and be not Faithless, but
Believing.

3. Thomas now no longer able to resist so clear an Evidence, cried out to
Jesus, My Lord, and my God!

Antiphon.
O admirable sweetness of our Savior's Spirit! Thomas was absent, and
incredulous, and peremptory; and our Lord forgives him All, and restores him to
his Favor, with the easy Penance of a gentle Reproof.

V. Because thou have seen, O Thomas, thou have believed.

R. Blessed are they that have not seen, and yet have believed.

The Prayer.
O GOD, whose condescendence, to convince the Incredulity of thy Apostle St.
Thomas, has turned his Hardness to Believe, into a means of facilitating more
the Faith of thy Church! Grant, Lord, we beseech thee, that this Festival
Memory of this glorious Apostle's attesting our Risen Savior, may quicken our
Hearts, not only in words, but in Life and Death, like him, exemplarily to
confess thy Son Jesus, our Lord and our God, to whom with thee and the Holy
Ghost, be all Honor and Glory. Amen.

Dec. 25. Christmas- Day.
All as in the Office of our Savior, except, Invitatory.
To Day, for us, our Lord was born; come let us Adore him. 1. O Joyful Tidings,
worthy of an Angels Mouth! Behold, to us was born, this Day, a Savior, which
is Christ the Lord. Alleluja.

2. Wonderful Signs, to seek the Newborn King of Heaven and Earth! you shall
find him wrapped in Swadling-cloths, and laid in a Manger. Alleluja.

3. O blessed Harmony of the Celestial Quires! Glory be to God on high, on
Earth Peace, Good Will toward Men.

Antiphon.
The Shepherds came to Bethlehem with speed, and found Mary, and Joseph, and
the Infant laid in a Manger.

V. This is the day the Lord has made, let us rejoice therein. Alleluja,
Alleluja.

R. This is the day in which the Lord was made; come let us rejoice. Alleluja,
Alleluja.

Let us pray.
O GOD, who every Year give a fresh Birth to the Devotions of thy Church, by
the welcome Festivity of our Savior's Nativity! Grant us, we beseech thee,
with such devout Affections, to entertain this first humble rising of the Sun
of Righteousness to us, as may better dispose, and stronglier engage us to
follow him through the whole painful course of his Life, which, like a Giant,
he rejoiced to run, enlightening the World with thy Truth, and inflaming it with
thy Love, till in the end we arrive at his eternal rest, through the same our
Lord Jesus Christ thy Son, who with thee and the Holy Ghost, lives and
reigns, ever One God, World without End. Amen.

December. 26. St. Stephen' s-Day.
All as in the Office of Saints, except, 1. ST. Stephen, full of Grace and
Courage, was so glorious a Saint in the sight of the People, that none could
resist the Wisdom and Spirit by which he spoke. Alleluja.

2. He cut their Hearts with undaunted Reproaches of them and their Fathers, as
Betrayers and Murderers of the Just One, and those that foretold his Coming.
Alleluja.

Antiphon.
When they gnash'd their Teeth at him, he looked steadfastly upon God, and
prayed, Lord Jesus, receive my Soul; and kneeling down, with a loud Voice,
cried, Lord, lay not this Sin to their Charge.

V. He saw the Heavens opened he saw and entered.

R. He saw by his Faith, and entered by Charity.

Let us pray.
O GOD, who in thy first Martyr St. Stephen, have vouchsaft thy Church an
eminent Example of perfect Christianity! Kindle in our Hearts, we beseech thee,
a zealous emulation of his Graces; that imitating his Constancy here in
assenting thy Truth, and his Charity in praying for our Persecutors, we may,
with him, hereafter, receive the Crown of eternal Life, through thy Son Jesus
Christ our Lord. Amen.

December. 27. St. John Evangelist.
All as in the Office of Saints, except, 1. THis is the Favorite Disciple that
leaned on our Lord's Breast, at his last Supper, and to whom were revealed the
Secrets of Heaven. Alleluja.

2. This is he in whom meet all those glorious Titles of Apostle, Evangelist,
and Prophet, of Martyr, Confessor, and Virgin. Alleluja.

Antiphon.
This was he who above all those glorious Titles, delights in this one
incomparably greater than them all, The Disciple whom JESUS loved.

V. The scalding Oil could not hurt his chaste Body.

R. Nor Banishment into Pathmos exclude his free converse with Angels.

Let us pray.
O GOD, by the Prerogative of whose special Grace, the Blessed Apostle St. John
obtained that transcendent Character of The Beloved of his Master, and after
became the great Doctor of mutual Charity over all the World! Grant, we beseech
thee, that his Sacred Memory may excite us also, and encourage us to have the
same purity of Body and Mind, and steady love of thee, and sincere Charity one
for another; and that we may aspire after some share in that blessed Title, and
its happy Consequents, thy Grace here, and thy Glory hereafter, through our
Lord Jesus Christ thy Son, who lives and reigns One God with Thee, and the
Holy Ghost World without End. Amen.

Dec. 28. Holy Innocents.
All as the Office of Saints, except. 1. GOD withdrew his only Isaac, and left
a thousand happy Lambs to be Sacrificed in his stead, and accepted for his
sake. Alleluja.

2. Herod meant to destroy, but behold he saved; his diligent Cruelty secured
the hazard of their Infant State, and by shedding their Blood, effected their
Baptism. Alleluja.

3. These were brought from amongst Men, the first Fruits of God, and the Lamb,
and in their Mouth was found no Lie; for they are without Spot before the
Throne of God.

V. Weep not for thy Children Rachel! behold they Are,

R. Be comforted, they are Kings, and reign with Christ for ever. Alleluja,
Alleluja.

Let us pray.
O GOD, who by the Martyrdom of the Holy Innocents, have taught thy Church,
that no Age, or occasion of Suffering for our Savior, is exempt from high
Reward! Grant, we beseech thee, that our celebrating their Festival, may make
us adore this gracious dispensation of thine, and however severely it may seem
at any time to treat us or our Relations, our Hearts may be confirmed in a
hopeful resignation to thy Will, and assured Trust, that all leads to eternal
Advantage, through our Lord Jesus Christ. Amen.

Jan. 1. New-Years-Day.
Invitatory.
TO Day our Lord was Circumcised, and received the sweet and saving Name of
JESUS. Alleluja. Come let us Adore him.

1. To Day our Savior, that was Lord of the Law, and by his perfect Purity
absolutely exempt, undertook for us the smart of Circumcision, and dishonor of
being reckoned among Sinners. Alleluja.

2. To Day was given the Name above every Name, that at the Name of Jesus every
Knee should bow, of things in Heaven, of things on Earth, and things under the
Earth. Alleluja, Alleluja, Alleluja.

3. O blessed Jesus! make good to us thy blessed Name, and save us from our
Sins, that now we may begin a New Year of Virtue, and cancel by Repentance all
the Failings of the Old. Alleluja.

Antiphon.
After eight Days the Child was Circumcised, and his Name was called JESUS, as
the Angel had appointed before his Conception in the Virgin's Womb.

V. Our Infant Lord endured the Knife.

R. To circumcise the Concupiscence of our Hearts.

Let us pray.
O GOD, who for our Example did command thy beloved Son to submit his pure
and Innocent Flesh, to the rigor of the Law, and for encouragement of our
Hope, made choice of that sweet and amiable Name JESUS! teach us, we beseech
thee with Readiness, and Humility to obey thy Sacred Laws, how cross soever to
our unmortified Passions, and in all our Necessities, with Joy and Confidence,
to call on that Holy Name, in which what ever we ask we are promised to be
granted, through the same our Lord Jesus Christ our only Savior. Amen.

Jan. 6. Twelfth-Day.
Invitatory.
TO Day the Wisemen brought Presents to our Lord, Alleluja. Come let us Adore
him.

1. Alleluja, Alleluja, Alleluja. This is the privileged Festival that comes
forth adorned with the Glory of three Miracles. To Day the Wisemen were led by
a Star to the Cradle of our Lord, and falling down adored him, and offered him
their Presents of Gold, Frankincense, and Myrrh, Alleluja.

2. To Day our gracious Redeemer vouchsafed his Presence at a Marriage Feast,
and there first published to the World his Divine Power, turning Water into
Wine. Alleluja.

3. To Day our blessed Savior was Baptized by St. John, and the Holy Ghost
descended visibly upon him, and a Voice was heard from Heaven, This is my
beloved Son, in whom I am well pleased. Alleluja, Alleluja.

Antiphon.
Now were the first Fruits of the Gentiles consecrated unto the Lord, and that
Sacred Prophecy happily fulfilled, The Gentiles shall come to thy Light, and
Kings to the brightness of thy rising. Alleluja.

V. The Sages entering found the Child with Mary his Mother;

R. And falling down adored, and offered him Gifts.

Let us pray.
O GOD, who by the guidance of a miraculous Star in the Heaven, did lead the
Gentiles to the sight of the more miraculous Sun of Righteousness, newly risen
to the World in a Stable! grant, we humbly beseech thee, that enlightened and
enflamed by the Memory of this wonderful Providence, our Eyes and Hearts may be
more lively fixed on thy Goodness, still as graciously working toward the
accomplishment of thy Promises, to call at length the Jews to the saving
Knowledge of thy Son Jesus Christ our Lord, who with Thee and the Holy Ghost,
lives and reigns ever One God, World without End. Amen.

Jan. 25. The Conversion of St. Paul.
All as in the Office of Saints, except, Invitatory.
THis Day was the great Apostle of the Gentiles miraculously converted to the
Christian Faith. Alleluja.

1. This Day did our Lord appear from Heaven, in a glorious Light, to the great
astonishment of the Persecuter Saul, and those that traveled with him, and in
a most stupendous manner brought him over to the Christian Faith.

2. So that henceforward he became a chosen Vessel to bear the Name of Christ,
before the Gentiles, and Kings, and the Children of Israel.

3. He undauntedly preached the Faith he had once destroyed, and labored more
abundantly for its Propagation, and at length laid down his Life in defense of
it. Alleluja, Alleluja.

Antiphon.
He has preached, and lived, and died.

R. And received his eternal Reward.

Let us pray.
O GOD, who have made the Light of thy Gospel to shine through the World, by
the preaching of thy blessed Apostle St. Paul, whose miraculous Conversion we
now thankfully Commemorate! Grant, we humbly beseech Thee, that we may always
keep in Mind, and diligently practice the Doctrines he taught, and may
resolutely follow his Example, and being faithful unto Death, may at last
receive a Crown of Life and Glory in the highest Heavens, through Jesus Christ
our Lord and only Savior. Amen.

Feb. 2. Candlemas.
All as in the Office of our Savior, except, Invitatory.
TO Day our blessed Lord was presented in the Temple. Alleluja. Come let us
Adore him.

1. To Day the Blessed and Holy Mother of God, in most humble obedience,
performed the common Rites of Purification, and presented her most Holy Child
Jesus in the Temple, and for the little price of five Shekels, redeemed the
World's inestimable Redeemer. Alleluja.

2. To Day the devout Simeon took our Lord in his Arms, and knowing nothing now
could make him happier but the Joys of Heaven; sung aloud this glad farewell to
all the World. Now let thou thy Servant depart in Peace according to thy
Word, for mine Eyes have seen thy Salvation. Alleluja.

3. To Day the Holy Widow, and Prophetess Anna, who had spent her Life in
Fasting and Prayer, and in the Service of the Temple, came happily in, and saw
our Lord, and spoke gloriously of him to all that expected the Redemption of
Israel. Alleluja.

Antiphon.
Behold the Lord, thy mighty Governor comes unto his Holy Temple; be glad, O
Sion, and rejoice to meet thy God.

V. He comes in the disguise of a poor Child;

R. Yet has he provided those that discerned and attest him.

Let us pray.
O GOD, who vouchsafest us this Day to commemorate the blessed Virgin's
presenting in the Temple her self to be Purified, and her Son to be Redeemed,
according to the Law! Give us Grace, we beseech thee, to adore and praise the
Condescendence of thy Providence, that by such great Examples teaches us our
Duty; and we beseech Thee grant us Grace so to follow them, that by our Lives,
as well as Words, we may confess our Lord Jesus Christ thy Son to be the Light
of the Gentiles, and the Glory of thy People Israel; who with Thee and the Holy
Ghost, lives and reigns One God, World without End. Amen.

Ash Wednesday.
All as in the Office of Wednesday, except, Invitatory.
COme let us Fast, and Mourn, and Pray; for our Lord is Merciful and Just.

Remember, O Man, that Dust thou art, and to Dust thou shall return.

Antiphon.
All Flesh is Grass, and the Pride thereof as the Flower of the Field, the
Flower fades, the Grass withers, the Body dies, and leaves the naked Soul to
Judgment.

V. Remember Man, that Dust thou art;

R. And to Dust thou shall return.

Let us pray.
O GOD, whose Providence introduces thy Church to the sober Discipline of Lent,
by the consideration of our Mortality, that Dust we were, and to Dust we shall
return! Grant that the Meditation of the Sufferings and Cross of our Redeemer,
may lay all proud Conceits in the Dust, and make our selves feel that we are
highly honored, if by whatever Crosses, or Self-denial, or Mortifications
here, we partake of thy eternal Glory hereafter, through the Merits of our Lord
and Savior. Amen.

The Annunciation.
All as in the Office of our Savior, except, 1. TO Day the Archangel was sent
from God to the Virgin Mary, and presented her this honorable Salutation:
Hail, full of Grace, our Lord is with thee; blessed art thou among Women.

2. Behold thou shall conceive, and bear a Son, and thou shall call his Name
Jesus; he shall be Great, and called the Son of the most High; and of his
Kingdom there shall be no End.

3. Then blessed Mary said, Behold the Handmaid of the Lord, be it to me
according to thy Word.

Antiphon.
To Day the Holy Ghost came upon he blessed Virgin, and the Angel said, The
most High shall over-shadow thee, etc. and Mary said, Behold the Handmaid of
the Lord, be it to me according to thy Word.

V. The Angel said, Hail, Mary full of Grace.

R. Holy Elizabeth says, Blessed art thou among Women.

Let us pray.
O Eternal God, who did send thy Holy Angel in Embassy to the Holy Virgin
Mother of our Lord, to manifest the Incarnation of thine eternal Son! Give us
all her Purity, Modesty, Piety, Prudence, and Obedience; That we may conceive
our blessed Savior in our Souls, nourish him with most ardent Affections, and
bring him forth in a Life of Piety and Obedience, that he may dwell in us, and
we in him, for ever.

Passion-Sunday.
All as in the Office of our Savior, except, Invitatory.
BEhold the Passion of our Lord draws nigh, Come let us Adore him.

1. O that my Head were Waters, and mine Eyes a Fountain of Tears, that Day and
Night I may weep for my own Sins, and for my Savior's Sufferings.

2. What, O my Jesu, could our Weakness want, that thou have not done? What
could our Malice invent, that thou have not suffered?

3. Far be it from us to Glory in any thing but the Cross of Christ, by whom
the World is crucified to me, and I unto the World.

Antiphon.
Look up, O my Soul, on thy crucified Lord, look up, and see the utmost
extremity of Divine Love; already he had carried on to a fair degree the Work
of our Redemption, in Fasting and Praying, in Traveling and Preaching, in
doing Miracles, and bearing Injuries; but now to finish all with an
incomparable Charity, he suffers even Death it self, and Death upon the Cross.

V. What, O Jesu, could our Weakness want, that thou have not done!

R. What could our Malice invent, that thou have not suffered!

Let us pray.
O GOD, who by the mortifying Discipline of Lent have graciously disposed us
for that solemn Season of closer Preparation to celebrate the Memory of our
Savior's bitter Passion! make us now, we beseech Thee, so devoutly attend to,
and thoroughly meditate every Circumstance of this dear Mystery, that it may melt
our Hearts with such tender Compassion, as may kill in us all Sin, the sole
cause of his Sufferings, and fit us by perfect Love of Him, for a happy part in
his glorious Resurrection, through the same Jesus Christ our Lord. Amen.

Palm Sunday.
All as in the Office of our Savior, except Invitatory.
TO Day our Savior entered Jerusalem in Triumph; Come let us Adore him.

1. Rejoice, O Daughter of Sion; shout for Gladness, O Daughter of Jerusalem!
behold thy King comes to thee Meek, and sitting upon an Ass, etc.

2. Strew the way with Triumph, and cry aloud Hosanna, blessed be he that
comes in the Name of the Lord.

3. Lift up thy Voice, and cry: This is the Lord whom we have long expected, he
himself is come to redeem us; Come let us rejoice in his Salvation.

Antiphon.
And the multitude that went before him, and that followed, cried, Hosanna to
the Son of David; blessed is he that comes in the Name of the Lord, Hosanna in
the highest.

V. The Stones would have cried, so should they have held their Peace.

R. And owned the divine Author of so many gracious Miracles.

Let us pray.
O GOD, who by this Day's Solemnities revivest to us the Memory of our
Savior's Triumph, ushering in his Passion, teach us, we beseech Thee, from
this perfect Instance, the fickleness of this World's chiefest Glories, and
mortify in us our esteem of its best deserved Applauses, and bring our Hearts
cheerfully to expect a Cross after them, as the highest way to our eternal
Glory with Thee, through the same our Lord Jesus Christ thy Son, who lives and
reigns with Thee and the Holy Ghost, ever One God, World without End. Amen.

Easter- Day.
All as in the Office for Sunday, except, CHrist is risen from the dead,
Alleluja, and become the first Fruits of them that slept. Alleluja.

2. The Lord of Life is risen again, and has clothed himself with immortal
Glory.

3. He that raised up Jesus, will also raise us up, Alleluja, and refine our
vile Flesh into the likeness of his glorious Body.

Antiphon.
Worthy is the Lamb that was slain, to receive Power, and Honor, and Worship,
Blessing and Glory, etc.

V. O Death, where is thy Sting?

R. O Grave, where is thy Victory?

Let us pray.
O GOD, whose gracious Providence restores to thy Church the Face, and Voice of
Holy Exultation by the Triumphant Festival of our Savior's Resurrection!
Grant, we humbly beseech Thee, that the Joy that shines in our Looks, may flame
in our Hearts, and by purifying them, make us by thy Merits, O Jesus, worthy of
those high and glorious Hopes, so firmly sealed to us by this Days experience,
of rising again at last from our Graves, and rejoicing thenceforth for ever, in
a state of blissful Immortality, through Jesus Christ our Lord.

Easter-Munday and Tuesday, and all Sundays after until the Ascension.
All as in the Office for Sunday, except, 1. OUR Lord that was dead and buried
rose again the third Day, loosing the Bonds of Death and Hell, as it was
impossible he should be holden of them.

2. He left his Grave, but not our Earth, till he had raised a cloud of
Witnesses to his Resurrection. Alleluja.

3. Every Day of Forty he appeared to some or other of his Disciples to confirm
their Faith, and open their Understandings, and to prepare their Hearts to bear
his Ascension. Alleluja.

Antiphon.
Christ the third Day rose again according to the Scriptures, and was seen of
Cephas; after that of the Eleven, then of more than Five hundred Brethren
together, moreover of James, and of all the Apostles.

V. Thy Testimonies, O Lord! are rendered most highly credible,

R. By so great a cloud of Witnesses encompassing us.

Let us pray.
O GOD, whose gracious Providence established the important Faith of our Lord's
Resurrection, by his frequent conversing with his Disciples and Followers, the
space of Forty Days after, in all convincing Circumstances! Grant, we humbly
beseech Thee, that by its proper Effects, our rising from dead Works may have
our Conversation every way worthy of firm Believers of it, that by this Faith
we may advance to that great Day, when no longer by Faith, but with these very
Eyes, we shall see him for ever; who with Thee and the Holy Ghost, lives and
reigns One God blessed for evermore. Amen.

St. Mark the Evangelist.
All as in the Office of Saints, except, BLessed art thou, faithful Writer of
the Gospel of Peace, and Doer of the Work of an Evangelist, planting the Church
of Alexandria.

V. How beautiful are the Feet of those,

R. That Evangelize the Gospel of Peace.

Let us pray.
O GOD, who most graciously summonest thy Church to special Devotions, by the
Feast of thy Sons Blessed Disciple and Evangelist St. Mark! Vouchsafe us, we
humbly beseech Thee, both in Heart to adore thy Providence for so glorious an
Instrument of propagating the History of our Salvation to us, and in our Lives
duly to copy out and show our Faith in his Gospel, through Jesus Christ our
Lord, who with Thee and the Holy Ghost ever lives and reigns One God, World
without End. Amen.

May 1. St. Philip and James.
All as in the Office of Saints, except, 1. NOW it suffices thee, Philip, our
Lord has shown thee the Father, and henceforth and for ever thou shall see him
Face to Face. Alleluja.

2. And thou holy James, Brother of our Lord, art gloriously happy in enjoying
for ever the same blissful Vision. Alleluja.

3. These are two of those precious Stones that Found and Adorn the Heavenly
Jerusalem. Alleluja.

Antiphon.
St. Philip, the powerful Apostle of the Scythians, both Crucified and Stoned,
ascended to his Master. And Blessed James, the long reverenced Bishop of
Jerusalem, thrown down from the top of the Temple, and brained with a Club,
breathed out his Soul in Prayer for his Murderers.

V. The senseless World thought their End dishonorable.

R. But behold their Lot is among the Blessed.

Let us pray.
O GOD, by whose Grace the Blessed Apostles St. Philip and St. James, watered
with their Blood the Heavenly Seed, which they had with long Sweat own over the
World! Redouble, we beseech Thee, the Devotions of thy Servants, by celebrating
together their happy Memories; and grant that our Faith, so gloriously
confirmed, may fructify into Holy Lives and Deaths, through Jesus Christ our
Lord. Amen.

Ascension-Day.
All as in the Office of our Savior, except, Invitatory.
TO Day our glorious Jesus ascended into Heaven, Alleluja. Come let us Adore
him.

1. I have finished the Work which my Father gave me to do; and now it is time
I return to him that sent me. Let not your Hearts be troubled, I go to my
Father, and your Father; my God, and your God. Alleluja.

2. Let not your Hearts be troubled, I go to prepare a place for you; and I
will come again and receive you to my self; that where I am, there you may be
also. Alleluja.

3. In the mean while, I will not leave you desolate, but will pray to the
Father, and he shall give you another Comforter, the Spirit of Truth, to dwell
with you for ever.

Antiphon.
And when he had spoken these things, while they beheld, he was taken up, and a
Cloud received him out of their sight.

V. This same Jesus, which is taken up from you into Heaven,

R. Shall so come in like manner as ye have seen him go into Heaven.

Let us pray.
O GOD, who have inspired thy Church to celebrate this Day the Memory of our
Savior's Ascension, when having finished on Earth the great Work of our
Redemption, he carried up his glorified Humanity above the Clouds, to its
eternal Rest! Grant, we beseech Thee, that taking off our Eyes from these
Vanities here below, we may stand continually looking after him into Heaven;
and heartily expecting his Appearance thence again at the last great Day, may
be always ready to obey his Call, and meet him in the Clouds, and follow him
into those blissful Mansions, which he went to prepare for us, at thy
Right Hand for evermore, through the same our Lord Jesus Christ, who with Thee
and the Holy Ghost lives and reigns One God, World without End. Amen.

Whitsunday, Monday, and Tuesday.
All as in the Office of the Holy Ghost. Trinity-Sunday.
All as in Sunday' s Office, except, Invitatory.
Come let us Adore the Sacred Trinity, Three Persons and One God. Alleluja.

1. THere are Three that bear Witness in Heaven, the Father, the Word, and the
Holy Ghost, and these Three are One. Alleluja.

2. The Father is God, the Son is God, and the Holy Ghost is God, yet not Three
Gods, but One God. Alleluja.

3. In this Adorable Trinity none is before or after other, none greater or
less than other, but all the Three Persons are coequal, and coeternal. Alleluja.

V. Holy, Holy, Holy, Lord God of Sabbath;

R. Heaven and Earth are full of the Majesty of thy Glory. Alleluja.

Let us pray.
O Eternal Father, who by the visible descent of thy Son to redeem the World,
and of thy Holy Spirit to sanctify the Elect, have wonderfully made thy
Church's own Experience facilitate our Faith of the Incomprehensible Trinity!
Grant us, we beseech Thee, in Heart and Voice, to profess this high and
supernatural Truth, and rejecting all the fallacious Suggestions of short
Reason, humbly to Adore Thee, Three coequal Persons, in the same indivisible
Deity; till we come hereafter to thy blissful Presence, and see the Mystery
revealed in thine own glorious Face, through our Lord Jesus Christ thy Son, who
with Thee and the Holy Ghost, lives and reigns ever One God, World without
End. Amen.

June 24. St. John Baptist.
All as in the Office of Saints, except, 1. THis is the great Precursor of the
World's Redeemer, the miraculous Son of Age and Barrenness. Alleluja.

2. In his Mother's Womb he was sanctified, and in his Nativity many shall
rejoice.

3. This is that shining burning Light, who, despising the Pleasures and
Conveniences of the World, chose his Garments of Camels Hair, a Leathern
Girdle about his Loins; and his Meat was Locusts and wild Honey. Alleluja.

Antiphon.
This is that Prophet, and more than a Prophet, of whom our Lord said, Among
them that are born of Women, there has not risen a greater than John the
Baptist, yet he that is least in the Kingdom of Heaven is greater than He.

Let us pray.
O GOD, whose gracious Providence summons us this Day, to celebrate the
Nativity of the great St. John Baptist! Grant, we beseech Thee, that as we
fulfill the Prophecy of thy Holy Angel, by rejoicing in his Nativity, we may
improve both our selves and others, by imitating his Life, while every one of
us in our several Capacities faithfully endeavor to learn of him, those
excellent Lessons of Retir'dness, Mortification, Humility, and Self-denial,
Zeal for Justice, and Courage in defending the Truth, and a generous Industry
of Charity in all our Actions, through our Lord Jesus Christ, who with Thee and
the Holy Spirit lives and reigns ever One God, World without End Amen.

June 29. St. Peter.
All as in the Office of Saints, except, 1. THis Day was the Apostle St. Peter
put to Death upon the Cross, after the Example of his Blessed Lord and Master.

2. This Pattern he left us of suffering for the Doctrine he taught, and in the
Service of the same Lord whom he had Preached.

3. For him did Christ our Redeemer pray, that his Faith might not fail; him
did he commission to feed his Sheep, and admonished him, when he was Converted,
to strengthen his Brethren.

4. And he both preached the Gospel, and died for it, confirming with his Blood
the Truths he had delivered. Alleluja, Alleluja.

Antiphon.
To Day Simon Peter ascended the Cross, and faithfully finished the Course of
his Apostleship.

V. He faithfully finished the Office whereto he had been Ordained,

R. And went to receive his great Reward. Alleluja.

Let us pray.
O GOD, who sentest forth thy Apostle St. Peter to feed thy Flock, enabling him
moreover to seal the Truth with his Blood! Grant, we beseech Thee, that all the
Bishops and Pastors of thy Church may duly imitate both the soundness of his
Doctrine, and his steady Zeal for thy Glory, and the Salvation of Men, and that
we, and all thy People, may diligently attend to, and practice what they teach,
through Jesus Christ our Lord and only Savior. Amen.

July 25. St. James.
All as in the Office of Saints, except, 1. NO sooner was James the Son of
Zebedee called by our Lord, but he immediately obeyed; and left Nets, and
Boats, and Father, and all to follow Jesus.

2. He frankly professed the Divinity of his Savior, and by his cheerfulness
to lose his Head for him, bare such Testimony to him, that King Agrippa sent
him the first of the Apostles, a Martyr, to his Master. Alleluja.

V. Blessed James now enjoys his Mother's desire,

R. Seated at the Right Hand of Jesus in his Kingdom.

Let us pray.
O GOD, who by the Feast of the Holy Apostle St. James, revivest in us the
Memory of thy great Mercy to the World, in so glorious an Example of readily
following our Savior, both in this Life, and out of it! Grant us, we humbly
beseech Thee, at the Call of thy Grace, the same readiness to quit our Nets,
and all Intanglements of worldly Affections and Interest, and apply our selves
wholly, both to become our selves, and render others also worthy Disciples of
our Lord Jesus Christ, who with Thee and the Holy Ghost, lives and reigns
ever One God, World without End. Amen.

Aug. 24. St. Bartholomew.
All as in the Office of Saints, except, 1. HIS Skin, and all he had, and even
Life it self, St. Bartholomew freely gave for the Testimony of the Truth, and
for the Love of Jesus. Alleluja.

2. At the last Day he shall rise, and be clothed again with his Skin, and in
his Flesh he shall see God.

Antiphon.
This is that wise Apostle, who gladly put off his Skin, and quitted his Head
it self, to receive a Crown of Glory. Alleluja.

V. He now Triumphs with those who come out of great Tribulation;

R. Clothed in Robes washed white in the Blood of the Lamb.

Let us pray.
O GOD, who by the Martyrdom of thy Blessed Apostle St. Bartholomew, refreshest
in our Memories the glorious Attestations which thy Providence has vouchsafed
the World for confirmation of thy Truth! Grant us, we beseech Thee, with such
concern to reflect on the excessive Pains he took and suffered, for propagating
the Gospel, and the superabundant Reward he now enjoys in thy blissful
Presence, that our Faith may be strengthened, and more actively applied, to
carry us on in the same Race, to the same happy End, through our Lord Jesus
Christ, who lives and reigns with Thee and the Holy Ghost ever One God,
World without End. Amen.

Sept. 21. St. Matthew.
All as in the Office of Saints, except, 1. BE not discouraged, O my Soul, nor
make thy past Offenses unpardonable by Despair.

2. This is he who of a Sinner became a Preacher; and of a Publican was called
to be an Apostle.

3. Fear not the Power of the Grace of God, but take heed of delaying to
embrace it; take heed of refusing to obey it; take heed of relapsing into the
Sins of which thou have repented.

Antiphon.
St. Matthew, the Publican, busy at his Office, called by Jesus, but in
passing by, straight arose, left all, and followed him. A wise Example to
Sinners! And Jesus vouchsafed to Feast at his House with a great Multitude of
Publicans for encouragement to Converts.

V. Our Lord came not to call the Righteous,

R. But Sinners to Repentance.

Let us pray.
O GOD, whose powerful Call drew Matthew the Publican from the very receipt of
Custom, to become an eminent Apostle and Evangelist in thy Church! Grant us, we
beseech Thee, in celebrating the Blessed Memory of his Life and Death, worthy
his high and extraordinary Vocation, to advance thy Praise for so glorious an
Example of thy Grace; and that complying readily and faithfully with it, we may
forsake all to follow Thee, through our Lord Jesus Christ. Amen.

Sept. 29. St. Michael.
All as in the Office of Saints, except, Invitatory.
Come let us Adore the King of Angels. 1. HE has commanded his Angels to
minister for our good. They shall bear us in their Hands, lest at any time we
dash our Feet against a Stone.

2. Take heed that you despise not one of these little Ones, says our Lord,
for their Angels continually behold the Face of my Father. Alleluja.

3. In the sight of thy Angels will I sing unto Thee, O my God, Alleluja. I
will Adore in thy Holy Temple, and confess unto thy Name. Alleluja.

Antiphon.
Praise our Lord all you Angels, Archangels, and Thrones; Praise him all you
Dominations, Principalities, and Powers; Praise him all you heavenly Hosts, ye
Cherubims and Seraphims; Praise him all you glorious Quires of Blessed Spirits,
praise him and magnify him for ever.

Let us pray.
O GOD, who by the Feast of St. Michael the Archangel, summonest us to
commemorate all the glorious Host of Heaven, who by thy appointment assist thy
Elect against the Powers of Darkness! Grant us Grace, we beseech Thee, to
admire and praise Thee for so high a Providence, and that we may with firmer
hope pursue the holy ways of increasing their Joy, by advancing our own Bliss,
through our Lord Jesus Christ thy Son, who with Thee and the Holy Ghost, lives
and reigns ever One God, World without End. Amen.

October. 18. St. Luke.
All as in the Office of Saints, except, 1. WE commemorate this Day the great
St. Paul's Disciple, and constant Companion in all his Travels. Alleluja.

2. We celebrate his Glory, who deserved to be divinely Recorded, Luke the most
dear Physician and Brother, whose Praise is in the Gospel, throughout all the
Churches. Alleluja.

3. To his Inspired Pen we owe the Gospel, and a faithful History of the
beginning of the Church, whom the Doctor of the Gentiles chose one of his
Instruments to build it.

Let us pray.
O GOD, whose special Grace rendered Luke the Physician a glorious Disciple and
Evangelist, first curing himself, and then happily applying all his Life and
Power to the Cure of others Souls! Grant us, we beseech Thee, by his Blessed
Memory, encouragement to emulate the better Gifts, sanctifying, if not
changing, our Temporal Vocations, to the highest Spiritual advantage of our
selves and others, through our Lord Jesus Christ thy Son, our alone Savior,
who with Thee and the Holy Ghost lives and reigns ever One God World without
End. Amen.

St. Simon and Jude.
All as in the Office of Saints, except, 1. THese are they that planted the
Church of God with Preaching, and settled it with Miracles, and watered it with
their Blood. Alleluja.

2. They ventured their Lives among barbarous Nations, and converted vast
Regions to the Faith of Christ.

3. They rejected the Flatteries of the World, and despised the Menaces of
their Persecutors, and now for all they did, and for all they suffered, are
eternally Rewarded. Alleluja.

Antiphon.
The Disciple is not above his Master, nor the Servant above his Lord; it
suffices the Disciple if he be as his Master; and the Servant as his Lord.

V. If they have blasphemed and slain the Master of the House,

R. How much more them of his Household.

Let us pray.
O GOD, who by a glorious Martyrdom called'st the Blessed Apostles, Simon and
Jude, from their eminent Labors in thy Vineyard, to blissful Rest in thy
Kingdom! Grant us thy Grace, we beseech Thee, to improve this devout
Opportunity of celebrating their Memories, both by praising Thee for such
excellent Masters, and pressing more lively on our selves their saving Doctrine
and Examples, through our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ.

All Saints.
As in the Office of Saints.

On the Saints Eves, which are kept with Fasting.
Invitatory.
BEhold the Feast of -- is at hand, let us timely prepare our Hearts to
^tertain it, that so gracious a help to De^otion be not lost upon us.

1. In vain we commemorate the Joys ^f the Saints, when we do not imitate ^eir
Virtues.

2. In vain do we keep their Feasts, those Self-denials, Mortifications, and
^sts we do not imitate, which brought ^em to Bliss.

Let us pray.
O GOD, who inspirest thy Church, to fill and sanctify the Year with ^stival
Memorials of our Savior, and ^ most exemplary Followers, and to excite and
introduce our Devotions to ou^ Feasts, by the wholesome Discipline of ^
Religious Fast! Grant to thy Servants, w^ most humbly beseech thee, by this
Day^ obedient Mortification of our carnal Appetites, to call in and purify our
Soul^ and fitly dispose them for the fruitful Celebration of to Morrow's great
Solemnity through our Lord Jesus Christ thy Son who with Thee and the Holy
Ghos^ lives and reigns ever One God Worl^ without End. Amen.

Ember-Days.
Antiphon.
THE Harvest is great, but the Laborers are few; pray ye therefore the Lord of
the Harvest, that he would sen^ forth Laborers into his Harvest.

V. How shall we hear without a Preacher?

R. And how shall they preach unle^ they be sent?

Let us pray.
O GOD, by whose Providence thy Church from the beginning has set apart
certain Times for the solemnity of conferring Holy Orders, upon fitly prepared
Persons, to supply still the Faithful with sanctified Masters of her Doctrine
and Discipline, and enjoined us all with extraordinary Devotions, to implore
thy special Assistance to a work so much concerning us all! Hear, we most
humbly beseech Thee, thy Servants, that by the Mortification of our Bodies we
may increase the fervor of our Prayers, and vouchsafe our Governors the Grace
of discerning Spirits to Ordain only such as are indeed fit for their sacred
Functions; and give us the Grace of Reverence, and due Subjection to those so
Ordained, as truly sent by Thee for our Edification, through our Lord Jesus
Christ thy only Son, who with Thee and the Holy Ghost, lives and reigns ever
One God, World without End. Amen.

Rogation-Days.
Antiphon.
IF you ask the Father any thing in my Name, he will give it you, says our
Lord; whose Word cannot fail. If you ask and receive not, it is because you ask
amiss, says St. James.

V. Father, thou know we need all these things;

R. But more, by these our Needs to be drawn to look up to Thee.

Let us pray.
O GOD, by whose Holy Spirit thy Church ordains this a solemn time of
Supplication for all our Necessities! Open, we beseech Thee, thy gracious Ears
to the Prayers thou inspirest and drawest from our Hearts, and by granting us
those Goods which thy Children with Humility and Resignation ask of Thee their
Heavenly Father, so encourage our Devotion and Obedience, and so increase our
Hope and Love, that transcending all Particulars, as safely to be trusted in
the Hand of thy Providence, our whole Souls may thirst after Thee thy self
alone, who art our All in All for ever, through our Lord Jesus Christ thy Son,
who with Thee and the Holy Spirit lives and reigns, One God blessed for
ever. Amen.

FINIS.

