DIALOGUE.
M. WHY am I daily thus perplexed?
Why beyond Woman's patience vexed?
Your Spurious Issue grow and thrive;
While mine are dead ere well alive.
If they survive a nine days wonder,
Suspicious Tongues aloud do thunder;
And straight accuse my Chastity,
For your damned Insufficiency:
You meet my Love with no desire,
My Altar damps your feeble fire:
Though I have infinite more Charms
Than all you ever took to your Arms.
The Priest at the Altar bows to me;
When I appear he bends the knee.
His Eyes are on my Beauties fixed,
His Prayers to Heaven and Me are mixed;
Confusedly he tells his Beads,
Is out both when he Prays and Reads.
I traveled farther for your Love
Than Sheba's Queen, I Will fairly prove.
She from the South, it is said did rome,
And I as far from East did come.
But here the difference does arise,
Though equally we sought the Prize;
What that great Queen desired she gained,
But I soon found your Treasury drained,
Your Veins corrupted in your Youth,
It Is sad Experience tells this Truth:
Though I had caution long before
Of that which I too late deplore.

J. Pray, Madam, let me silence break,
As I have you, now hear me speak.
These stories sure must please you well,
You're apt so often them to tell.
But, if you will smooth your brow a while,
And turn that Pout into a Smile,
I doubt not, but to make it appear,
That you the great'st Aggressor are.
I took you with an empty Purse,
Which was to me no trivial Curse.
No Dowry could your Parents give;
They Would but a Competence to live.
When you appeared, your charming Eyes
(As you relate) did me surprise,
With Wonder, not with Admiration,
Astonishment, but no Temptation:
Nor did I see in all your frame
Ought could create an amorous flame,
Or raise the least Desire in me,
Save only for Variety.
I paid such Service as was due,
Worthy my self, and worthy you:
Caressed you far above the rate
Both of your Birth and your Estate.
When soon I found your haughty mind
Was unto Sov'reignty inclined;
And first you practiced over me
The heavy Yoke of Tyranny,
While I your Property was made,
And you, not I, was still obeyed:
Nor durst I call my Soul my own,
You managed me as if I Would none.
I took such measures as you gave,
All day your Fool, all night your Slave.
Nor was Ambition bounded here,
You still resolved your course to steer:
All that oppose you, you remove;
'Twas much you would own the Powers above.
Now several Stratagems you try,
And I Am in all forced to comply.
To Mother Church you take Recourse,
She tells you 'tmust be done by force;
And you, impatient of delay,
Contrive and execute the way.
When mounted to the Place you sought,
It no Contentment with it brought:
One Tree within your Prospect stood
Fairest and tallest of the Wood;
Which to your Prospect gave offense,
And it must be removed from thence.
In this you also are obeyed,
While all the Fault on me is laid.
Now you was quiet for a while,
As flattering Weather seems to smile,
Till buzzing Beetles of the Night
Had found fresh matter for your spite,
And set to work your busy Brain,
Which took Fire quickly from their Train.
Some Wise, some Valiant, you remove,
'Cause they your Maxims don't approve;
And in their stead such Creatures place
Which to the Employments brings Disgrace:
While whatsoever you do I own,
And still the dirt on me is thrown.
Strait new Chimera's fill your Brain,
The humming Beetles buz again;
A Goal Delivery now must be,
All tender Consciences set free;
Not out of Zeal, but pure Design
To make Dissenters with us join
To pull down Test and Penal Laws,
The Bulwark of the Heretics Cause.
The sly Dissenters laugh the while,
They see where lurks the Serpents guile;
And rather than with us comply,
Will on our Enemies rely.
The Cheiftains of the Protestant Cause
We did confine, though against the Laws;
But soon was glad to set 'em free,
Fearing the giddy Mobile.
Now all is turning upside down,
Loud Murmuring's in every Town;
We Have Foes abroad and Foes at home,
Armies and Fleets against us come:
The Protestants do laugh the while,
And the Dissenters sneer and smile;
But no Assistance either sends;
They Are neither Enemies nor Friends.
Now pray conclude what must be done,
Consult your Oracle of ROME,
For next fair Wind besure they come.

FINIS.

