A DIALOGUE BETWEEN The Bishop of El -- y and his Conscience.
Cons. IT IS time to speak, I can no longer hold,
Though bribed by largest Sums of foreign Gold;
Truth is my Office, and how e're oppressed,
I Am Heavens Vicegerent in a Mortals Breast,
Observe each Action, and remark each Thought,
Know all designs e're to perfection brought,
Long though I Have stifled been -- But now it is time,
Aloud to mind a Prelate of his Crime.
Tell me then, Reverend Sir, O tell me why,
Did you by force thus make me to comply,
Against the Dignity of Holy Lawn,
On a French Power so doatingly to fawn?

Bp. E. What croaking Thing art thou? What canting Cheat,
That stops me in the Road of being great?
I on Ambition's Wings so long have flown,
Must I by thy dull Lure be whistled down,
What art thou Slave -- who make so vile a stir?

Cons. Too well you know me, I Am your Conscience Sir.


Bp. E. Conscience -- Alas! I Have heard of such a Wight,
Fit only Fools and Schoolboys to affright;
I Have long since lost it, if I e're had one;
Interest is all the Conscience I will own.

Cons. Think not, vain Prelate, by that feigned disguise
To hide thy doings from my prying Eyes;
Not only I observe what ere you do,
But I have registered thy Actions too;
Yet my Severity I Will once forbear,
If you and I may like two Friends confer.

Bp. E. I find, it is but in vain, to make pretense
To rid my self of this Impertinence;
I Will humor it for once -- for to the Devil
A well bred Man ought sometimes to be civil.
Well -- now Sir Gravity, I Will be at leisure
To hear your prating, therefore speak your pleasure.

Cons. Are you a Bishop?


Bp. E. I have long been so.


Cons. But to what Church do you Allegiance owe?


Bp. E. The Church of England I esteem my Mother,
And no respect I pay to any other;
Her Liturgies, as best of Prayers allow,
Live by her Rules, and at her Altars bow,
Chief Pastor once of E -- y's holy See,
Until deprived --

Cons. How happened that to be?


Bp. E. Though former Oaths I took, I could not those,
Which on us now the Government impose;
They are so harsh, so crabbed, and severe,
An Hedg-Hog I could swallow sooner far.

Cons. Hold not those Monarchs which now fill the Throne,
The Church of Englands Faith?

Bp. E. I think theyve' none,
They else their banished Father would recall.

Cons. Stop there, e're you too loud your Treason bawl:
Are you the Rudder that must guide the State?
Were they all Fools, who in Convention sat?
When to its Crisis was the Kingdom come,
When Ruin s^^m'd to threaten Christendon,
Their wiser Methods stopped the raging Flood,
Which beat down all in opposition stood.

Bp. E. Who were the wiser, either Fools or Knaves,
In this they all agreed to make us Slaves.

Cons. What strange Chymera's fill thy pious Brain?
What Whimsies does thy fancy entertain?
Hagg-rid thy Thoughts, and take such mighty pains,
To form thy self imaginary Chains?

Cons. Know you these Letters?


Bp. E. I have seen the Hand,


Cons. Come, come, too well the Plot you understand;


Bp. E. I in a Plot? Think you I Would so disgrace,
The Function in my Apostolic place,
To plot or countenace a foul Design,
Which should my Countries Quiet undermine?
Fanatics only plot, our Church disowns,
And excommunicates her plotting Sons.
A civil Letter may, I hope, be wrote
To Friends abroad, and yet no harm in that.

Cons. Although to Mr. Redding's the pretense,
King J -- s is still the Mythologick Sense.

Bp. E. Bless me! He does my Bosom Secrets know,
And yet to shun him still I know not how.

Cons. In open Field, at Noon as soon you may
Your Shadow from your own dear self convey,
As think by Riddles to secure your sense,
From my all seeing true Intelligence
Unhappy Man, and more unhappy I,
Who thus am doomed to keep thee ^ompany;
Think -- had thy Plot succeeded, what a Scene
Of Misery had thy poor Country been?
When a French power, assisted by the rage,
Which does all Bigot Catholics engage,
Had ravaged Towns, and laid whole Counties waste,
And ruin like the Plague through Albion past:
Strange Riddle of a cursed Plot it is sure,
The Protestant Religion to secure;
'To crave Assistance from the Gallick Shore,
What Lunatic in Bedlam could do more?
Reflect once more thou most unthinking Man,
What Mischief to thy Mother Church is done?
When Heretics and Atheists for thy sake,
Shall of Religion a mere Foppery make,
Thy Holy Function be exposed to scorn,
And in sad Tear the poor C. of (...).
Eusebia mourn,
Consider how --

Bp. E. Dull prating thing no more,
How dare thou thus my Frailties to explore,
If within bounds thy self thou do not keep,
I Will with Church Opium quickly make thee sleep;
But hah! What noise is that?

Cons. Your guilty Fear,
Still sounding Trumpets in your Lordships Ear,

Bp. E. A Proclamation out, and out for me;
Then, then by all my hopes it is time to flee,
Could I this peevish Conscience leave behind,
Or with strong Cords his noisie Nonsense bind;
How safe were I -- But hark more noises run,
Come Brother Pen -- It Is time we both were gone.

FINIS

