A DIAOLOGUE BETWEEN THE E. of Sh -- and L. Bell -- In the Tower, concerning
the PLOT.
S. MY Lord,


B. Who Is there?


S. A Melancholy Peer:


B. Your Name?


S. It Is S -- ry.


B. Then come not here.
Yet hold, methinks though, I am pleased to see
Your Lordship in such Honest Company.
It Is long since you and I exchanged a Word,
But it is to you I owe the Thanks my Lord.
Why should you make our Plot a Female one?
And Copulating with her get a Son.
Is It thus you Signalize your Fame and Worth,
To let your Plots from ours have their Birth?
My Lord, I thought you more your Honor prized,
Than to endure to be thus Scandalized.

S. Saving your Lordships Favor, you must know,
That I have as much right to Plot as you.
I took more pains then ever you yet did,
But all my pinking could not keep it hid.

B. This Plaguey Justice is a bitter thing:


S. And so is Law, Religion and a King.


B. But hark you Sir, do you take us for Fools,
To rail against us, and yet use our Rules?
Cannot we sow Division in a State,
But you must do it too at any Rate?
Cannot we broach Maxims for Deposing Kings,
Trample on Crowns, and use Ambitious Wings,
But you must act. the same great Noble things?
Is It not enough for us to do what is evil,
But you must also give your self to the Devil?

S. Nay pray Sir, I beseech you ben't uncivil:
Perhaps in him I claim as much as you;
I for Religion wear the truest Blew.
There wants a Reformation in the State,
And the True Protestants I would make Great.
The Duke of York I would Exclude in Season,
And set up M -- without Sense or Reason.
I with the Godly ones will once more Join,
To darken and destroy the Royal Line.

B. Now it is you have a Zealous Rebels Fate,
Thus Fairly Suffering for the Saints of the State.
But yet my Lord, I do not understand,
Why you should take our Plot out of our Hand,
And rob us of that Honor we should have.
Pray good my Lord, let me your Reasons crave.
I say 'twas perfect Theft.

S. You went about
The grand Affair as if you would never get out.
It was but Bunglingly you made a show,
Our Plot from Sounder Politics does grow.
Our Cause the Godly's is, who would once more,
Make Eighty One dance back to Forty Four.
Faction and Tumult I will still prefer,
For I Am secure by being Popular.

B. And what did Fate at last upon you shower,
But Bungle you with me here in the Tower?
Suppose you should be made in each degree,
To be a greater Traitor far than me;
You that have set three Kingdoms in a Flame,
By the Grand Magic of a Triple Name.
You that have riggled in as many Shapes,
As Proteus, or a Colony of Apes.
You that have headed Factions, still appeared
Like the great Northern Star by which they stear'd.
You that have been so Treacherous to a King,
So constant to the many-headed thing.
So False to Princes, so unjust to Peers,
How durst thou venture to profane my Ears,
With your old Grievance, Jealousies and Fears?
You dug this pit for us, but Justice shows,
He that is a Foe to Friends, and Friend to Foes,
Though spared a while, yet never unpunisht goes.
How free from Plots I lived, let time declare,
But for your wiles I might have breathed elsewhere;
Though now (like you) I Am forced to take this Air.
Oh! that since Justice has been yet so kind,
To spare you, you would be Popishly inclined;
And let this space (how short the Heavens know)
That Is now vouchsafed you to consume below,
Be spent in Prayers and Tears, that this blessed place,
You like your Purgatory may embrace.
Disgorge your Ape-sick Soul of all that is past,
Speak Truth, and that once spoken, speak your last.
Farewell.

S. But hold my Lord, one word for me,
Pray let me show you my Integrity.

B. Begone, I Will hear no more, but this I Will leave,
The poor unthinking Crowd to undeceive.
He that would write a second part of thee,
Must dip in Gall, and work with Tragedy.
Abandon Conscience, break, not fear the Laws,
Throw off Allegiance to support the Cause.
Be this, or that, or any thing that is Ill,
Make Plots, then find 'em out, Forswear and Kill,
And frame a Magna Charta of his Will.
Side with the growing Faction; ridicule
All but the patient Ass and plodding Mule.
Vail with Religion, that is a certain Mask,
The Godly party 'll give before you Ask.
But his Meanders cannot be expressed,
Words are too mean, I blush to think the rest.

LONDON, Printed for A. T. Anno Dom. 1681.


