TWO LOOKS OVER LINCOLN, OR, A view of his Holy Table, name, and thing,
discovering his erroneous and Popish Tenets and Positions; And under pretense
of defending the cause of Religion, shamefully betraying the truth and
sincerity thereof. A Petition exhibited in all humility to the judgment of the
most worthy Defenders of the Truth, the Honorable House of COMMONS in
PARLIAMENT, against the said Book, and especially 51. Tenets therein.

By R. DEY, Minister of the Gospel.

Holy Scripture contains all things necessary to salvation: so that
whatsoever is not read therein, nor may be proved thereby, is not to be
required of any man, that it should be believed as an Article of the faith, or
be thought requisite or necessary to salvation.

Artic. 6. of the Convocation at London, 1562. Acts 24. Verse 14. So worship I
the God of my Fathers, believing all things which are written in the Law and
the Prophets.

Acts 26.22. Having obtained help of God, I continue unto this day, witnessing
both to small and great, saying none other things then those which the Prophets
and Moses did say should come.

LONDON, Printed in the year of Hope, 1641.

TO THE HONORABLE. The Knights, Citizens and Burgesses of the Commons House in
PARLIAMENT now assembled.
The humble Petition of RICH. DEY, Minister, showing, that
WHereas there has been printed and published a Book (entitled, The Holy
Table, Name, and Thing, etc.) containing certain Positions and Tenets, of
doctrine, discipline, the worship of God, and the Kings power, and rights in
matters Ecclesiastical; and many of them proved only by Popish Writers
Jesuits, and forged Authors, and some of them barely asserted; which Book was
most probably written, but most certainly approved, allowed, and licensed to be
printed and published; ( as most Orthodox in Doctrine, and Consonant in
Discipline to the Church of England; and to set forth the Kings power and
rights in matters Ecclesiastical truly and judiciously) by John Williams,
Bishop of Lincoln.

That your Honors will be pleased to take the said Book, and especially
certain Tenets and Articles thereof, hereunto annexed, into your grave
considerations; and that the said Bishop may be put to answer unto the said
Book, and Tenets, according to the Word of God, and the Laws of this
Kingdom; the only rule and prescript of our Religion, and the Kings right,
whether divine, or humane.

And your Petitioner (as in duty bound) shall ever pray, etc.
The Preface for the Readers intelligence.
SECTION I. Of the Letter of the Vicar of Grantham.
WHen as the Prelates were busied, and mightily turmoyled in their brains, to
introduce daily some Innovation, or other to set up Popery, and to endeavor a
reconciliation to Rome, it happened that about the year 1627. as appears, Holy
Table p. 7. that the Vicar of Grantham in the Dioces of Lincoln, being set on
by some in authority, hol. tab. p. 9. perhaps by some of Lauils agents, or else
by Dr. Heylin (one of his Majesty's Chaplins) began to remove the Communion
Table, and to place it altarwise, whereupon Mr. Wheatley an Alderman, and some
other townsmen opposed him, as having no law nor warrant so to do, and the
contention (thus begun) growing hot amongst them, it came at last before the
Bishop who somewhat pacified the matter beween the Vicar and tovvnesmen, and
calling the Vicar aside, was overheard to importune him to declare who were
his instigators to those innovations which (as was conceived) he did; and the
Bishop causing the Vicar with his neighbors to sup there that night, said* I
have supt already upon that you tell me; And if all the books I have be able
to do it, I will find some satisfaction for my self, and you in all these
particulars, before I go this night to bed. And I will provide a letter, as
written to you* M. Alderman, to show to your Brethren, and some notes to be
delivered to the Divines, of the lecture at Grantham. And both these (if the
fault be not in my servant) shall be ready by seven a clock in the morning. h.
tab. p. 9. The Bishop and his Secretary, sitting up most of that night in his
study, and his Secretary fetching up the Book of Martyrs and borrowing from
the Parish Church. B Jewels Works. And in the morning (as the Bishop promised
over night) between 7 and 8. of the clock, was delivered to the Alderman a
letter sealed up. The form whereof, you may see, ho. tab. p. 10. And at the
same time, there was delivered also by the Secretary, a sheet of paper closed
up, to be conveyed to the Divines of the Lecture of Grantham upon their next
meeting-day, with direction from his Secretary, that if they approved of them,
to impart them to the Vicar, to give him satisfaction which they did. Now the
true copy of these notes or letter, though neither subscribed, nor superscribed
(yet, as appears by the premises, and the contents thereof* indicted and
framed by the Bishop, though penned by the Secretary) is expressed, in Holy
Table page 12.

SECT. II. Of the Coal from the Altar.
IN answer to this Letter (which belike the Vicar imparted (perhaps in excuse
of his desisting his former Innovations, and resting now satisfied with this)
to him, who probably was his first inciter to those proceedings; Dr. Heylin, an
intimate friend of his, whom the Vicar miserably mistook for a judicious
Divine) there was published a vaporous and smoakie piece of work called A Coal
from the Altar, which, though it was kindled from some Smithfield-faggots in Q.
Marys days, and tended to the same purpose, if it had found fuel enough to
have kept it alive; yet consisting of ignorance, misquotations, and bad
wrestings of good Authors, more than of any pure ignean Element, it flamed not
as the Colliers intended it.

SECT. III. Of the Holy Table, Name and Thing.
THis Coal was luckily, though unlikely quenched, not by holy water, but with
holy wood (a new kind of miracle) for the holy Table, Name and Thing, falling
flat and heavy upon it, smothered it in it is own smoke, or rather the Bishop
of Lincolnes Crosier, that Episcopal instrument made of an Altar-raile, did so
bastinado and batterfang Dr. Heylins coal, that it broke the Coal to cinders,
metamorphosed the holy Altar, into an holy Table, name and thing in appearance,
yet an holy Altar still, in reverence, adoration, place and situation, and
(which is yet more miraculous) did not quench the Romish fire of the coal, but
rather by a politic dexterity transubstantiate, or rather pseudangelically,
transform the fire of the coal, into a more modificated fire, though no less
penetrating, and more spreading, for the Coal, coming in, blustering and
sparkling like an old fashioned Devil, with a Romish Altar in the front* for
all his heat was likely to meet with some gre^n wood, which would not admit the
fire at first view; but the holy Table coming like a disguised spirit, (though
alike Babylonian) under pretense of the holy wood, and sweet fuel, would dry
the green logs, and by moderate degrees draw in as much Romish heat, if not
more than the former, as appears plainly by the subsequents, and so deceived
many thousand readers, and also would me, if I had but only once looked over
Lincoln.

SECT. IV. Of Heylins Antidotum Lincolniense.
TO this Holy Table, Doctor Heylin took no care to provide holy coverings and
furnitures, nor bossed Books, guilt* Candlestickes, Virgin wax-tapers,
Embroydred hangings, carved Rayles, precious Plate, no, nor so much as a massy
Crucifix, to pray unto for help against this Prelate; but seeing his credit
lie at stake, his Coal extinguished, his Altar sore wounded, his Learning
(though weak) lie a bleeding, and his Religion poisoned; he thinks it no
time to sit playing at Tables with an idle Bishop, but presently provides a
salve for all these sores which he called Antidotum Lincolniense, but as his
Divinity was gone to travel in strange countries, and was but newly come
home, weary, weak and feeble, when he kindled his Coal to warm it; so his
physique lay asleep in a warm nightcap, (and could not suddenly be awaked)
when he composed his Antidote, so that it would neither cure his credit, salve
his Altars sores, selve to expel the poison of his opinion, nor preserve his
repute of learning, although he graced it with his name in public, thereby
bewraying himself to be the author of the Coal.

SECT. V. Of the Author of the Letter, and Holy Table, etc.
THat the Bishop of Lincoln was the Author of the Letter to the Vicar of
Grantham, and Divines of that Lecture (though his Secretaries pen might set
down the words) is manifest by the premises in the first Section; and that
he was likewise the Author of the Holy Table in defense of the Letter against
the Coal from the Altar, is not only probable, but plainly manifest and
undeniable; for although in the Title page, and in the license he call him a
Lincolneshire Minister, and page 5. a neighboring Minister, employed in some
of the maine passages, and page 11. one of the Lecturers of Grantham, saying
(We met accordingly, and perused these Letters, etc.) And page 21 and 114. one
of the Lecturers that approved of the Letter* yet all this proves him not a
Lecturer, both because he might purposely personate another man whom he was
not, and also because that by the same reason, we may as well think him to be
a Country Joyner; for he says, Holy Table page 45. I that am but a poor
Country Ioyner, can set you up a Table, etc. and yet he could not be a
Lecturer and Joyner both; besides, the Lordly style, the Bishoply phrase, the
Prelaticall disdain of the Doctor the Chaplin, although the Kings, his mocking
him with a Bishopric, his slight of a Vicaridge, his disdain of the Vicar of
that Lecture, do speak him no Lecturer at Grantham, his leisure to read
Histories; besides English, French, Italian and Spanish, unlikely in a
Lecturer; his dexterity in the civil, Common and Canon laws, the Lord
Keepers office, Acts of Parliament, Acts of Council, Prerogative Royal.
Episcopal policy, and experience, and many such reasons bewray him to be no
Lecturer, his skill in the tongues not usual in a Lecturer, his Promptitude
and readiness in the Popish Canons, Decrees and Decretals, his skill in so
many several Masse-bookes, and frequent quotation of Masse-mongers, his
notorious ignorance in understanding and applying the Scriptures, as appears,
page 78. upon Acts 6.2. and his rare quotation of Scriptures, the whole Book
(I think) scarce affording five several Texts among many hundreds of Jesuits
Masse-bookes, and other Authors frequently quoted: in all which regards I
appeal to any rational man, whether this can be a Lecturer; but above all
this, we have himself confessing, (and one confession of the party accused or
suspected, the Law takes hold of, not regarding a hundred denialls) for, says
he, Holy Table, page 206. I dare not determine, being as you say, none of the
ablest Canonists in the Church of England, here he takes the words as spoken of
himself, which in the Coal from the Altar, page 50. and quoted, Holy Table,
page 54. It is manifest that Heylin speaks it, and Lincoln takes it as spoken
of the writer of the Letter, so that it cannot be denied, but that one man was
writer of both; and that he was the Bishop appears plainly, Holy Table, page
58. saying, This Pamphleter, whose whole Book is but a Libell against a
Bishop, etc. Now it is evident that Heylin writ the Coal in answer to the
Letter, and the Writer thereof; therefore the Writer of both Letter and Book
was the Bishop: And if this plain confessing can be shifted off with juggling
barbara celarent, page 64. adieu Grammar and Logic, Mood and Figure; and Mood
and Tense too, and vous avez Doctor Holdsworth, who (they say) corrected it at
the Press, and Master Bourn who had the Manuscript, and also vous avez the
Bishop of Lincoln himself, who licensed and approved it for Orthodoxal and
consonant, and subscribed his Name.

A Preamble to the Tenets.
BEcause the Prelates are so subtle and politic, and so selfe-conceited, and
(to use Lincolnes own words) do make their own works above all humane and
equal to the Laws divine; Holy Table, page 4. and such is the partiality of
them, that they make their own case, make their own evidence, make their own
law, and make their own authorities and all out of their own conceits; and
endeavor what they can, to give a fair cause a foul face; Holy Tab. page 5.
so that when we have that great advantage which Tully speaks of, Confitentem
reum, the guilty confessing, we can scarce be sure to tie a knot upon a
Bishop, for he is a slipperie youth; as Plaut. in pseudolo.

Quid cum manifesto tenetur? Anguilla est elabitur.
Holy Table page 40. When you think sure an Eele is tied:
He Will slip the string, and not abide.
So that a man cannot imagine what evidence to provide, to give satisfaction to
so hautie a companion: who, Iura negat sibi nata, nihil non arrogat armis:
page 5. His native laws he will deny:
The Prelates power to deify.


And because it is possible a Prelate may propose unto himself some peevish,
wrangling, waspish humor of his own, in stead of a Canon; Holy Table, page
65. and therefore no Ecclesiastical Judge whatsoever, is to guide himself by
his own sense, page 65. although this Prelate would have his courteous
Readers* (the poor country people) to swallow many a Gudgeon, without so much
as champing or chewing on it, Holy Table, page 146. I have therefore proposed
before his Tenets, to avoid cavillations, and Prelaticall evasions, three
rules, and one compass* which, if they were mine own, being reasonable, it
were as great reason this Prelates Opinions and Tenets should be ruled and
squared by them; as that Heylin and others should be regulated by, and
compassed within his rules and compass: But because I would deal with all
reason and integrity; the three Rules shall be none but his own, which in
reason he cannot for shame deny. And the compass shall be his own
Metropolitanes, which by all Prelaticall Laws, and his own Oath at his
consecration, he is bound to keep within and to obey.

The Rules are these.
I. That which is in writing before our eyes, is no more by a Disputant indeed
to be wrigled and wrested, but to be taken as it is set down, holy tab. page 2:

II. That words should be taken, sensu currenti, for use and custom is the
best Expositor, both of laws and words. If of all laws and words, then most
of all of the words of the laws. holy tab. page 54.

III. That we must take heed of quillets and distinctions, that may bring us
back again to the old error, reformed in the Church* holy tab. page 102.

The Compass is this.
That the Church of England grounded her positive Articles upon the Scripture,
and her negative do refute there where the thing affirmed by the Papists, is
not affirmed by Scripture nor directly to be concluded out of it* and here not
the Church of England only, but all Protestants agree most truly and most
strongly in this; that the Scripture is sufficient to salvation, and contains
in it all things necessary to it: The Fathers are plain* the Schoolmen not
strangers in it, and have not we reason then to account it as it is, the
foundation of our faith? (...) Relation of a Conference. page 52. Sect. 15.
numb. 1.

Note that the Writer of the Letter to the Vicar of Grantham, and the Writer of
the Holy Table, in defense of the Letter, are both one Person, and that one the
Bishop of Lincoln as it appears in the Preface.

Lincolnes Tenets.
I. That the Writer of the Letter does both approve in the Vicar, and imitate
in his own practice* the forms and ceremonies of Chapels and Cathedrals,
holy tab. page 182.

II. That the Writer conceives the Communion Table to stand Altar wise, ^. (in
the place where the Altar stood) to be the most decent situation when it is not
used; and for use too, where the Quire is mounted up by steps, and open, so as
he that officiates, may be seen and heard of all the Congregation, holy tab.
p. 14.98.

III. That it was well done, that the Vicar of Grantham did president himself
with the forms in is Majesty's Chapel, and the Quiers of Cathedral
Churches; These things (I the Writer of the Letter) do my self allow and
practice, holy tab. page 13.

IV. That, the Writer of the Letter says clearly, he likes that fashion of
Altar-wise situation of the holy Table, he allows it, and so uses it
himself, ho. tab. page 98.20.

Lincolnes own Rule.
That every word has that operation in construction of Law, that we may draw
our arguments from the words, as from so many topic places, Holy Table, page
75.

Considerations upon the Tenets, worthy to be regarded. Upon the four first
Tenets.
I. Whether it was not his own authority over the Vicar, who presumed to alter
the Table without his leave, and his own cause and credit, against Heylin, who
provoked him in print, that the Bishop maintained rather than the Cause of
Christ, or his Church, or true Religion, whereas he, not only shows himself
as bad as they, both in judgment and practice, but also yields basely, more
than they durst require; And so rather betrays, than defends the cause.

V. That, the Vicar of Grantham observed (as he said) that the Table in his
Lorships (the Bishop of Lincolnes) private Chapel, to be so (Altarwise)
placed, and furnished with Plate, and Ornaments above any he ever had seen,
in this Kingdom, the Chapel Royal only excepted, holy table page 12.

Consid. 1. Whether other Bishops can justly be taxed with Innovations, and be
spared, whereas it appears, that be exceeded them all.

VI. That, to call (the Table) Altar, in a metaphorical and improper sense,
you know the Letter does every where allow, holy table, page 141.

Consid. 1. W^^ther Heylin could desire any more, but to call it so commonly,
though metaphorically whereby the people not able to distinguish it, by
custom, would take it properly.

VII. That, the Writer would not have blamed the Vicar, if he had in a
quotation from the Fathers, or a discourse in the Pulpit, named it an Altar, in
a borrowed sense, holy tab. page 75.

Consid. 1. Whether Bishop Williams dislike any thing in the Doctor and Vicar,
but only their want of skill to excuse their words, by saying they meant it
metaphorically; whereas he allows them more, then they durst desire, the
Pulpit where the people expect them to speak, truly, plainly, and properly.

2. Whether he defended the true doctrine, who affords them the pulpit, or
rather his own authority.

VIII. That, throughout all the Dioces, I (the Writer of the Book) live in
(which is Lincoln) being no small part of the kingdom, there is* whether the
Epistoler like it or no, Railes, and Barricadoes, etc. page 136.

Consid. 1. Whether the Bishop did either dislike or seek to reform it,
whereas his own practice and example, went beyond all others.

IX. That the Coal, i. (Doctor Heylin) does feign a Tenet to be maintained,
which is opposed in all the Letter, that the Communion Tables should not stand,
or be placed toward the East, whereas the writer of the letter is but too much
for it, not allowing the ordinary exceptions of Bellarmine, Suarez, or
Walafridus Strabo before them, that it might be otherwise when the conveniencie
of the building does require it, ho. tab. pab. 230.

Consid. 1. Whether he be not more superstitious then Heylin, whereas he
confesses himself to exceed the archpapists themselves.

X. That the writer of the letter, (had he any ground given him by his
Majesty's Laws to turn him about) seems unto me (the writer of the Holy
table) fully as forward, and far more able to defend old Ceremonies then you
(Doctor Heylin) are, holy table, page 46.

Consid. 1. Whether does he not confess his heart to be as bad as Heylins,
and to desire to exceed him, if he durst for the Laws.

XI. That the writer of the letter does cite, and approve, the Appellation of
second Service, ho. tab. page 3.

Consid. 1. Whether That Appellation of second Service be Orthodox, and
Consonant to the Church of England, or rather to the Masse-booke.

XII. That, the writer of the letter does commend, allow and practice bowing at
the Name of Jesus, Holy table, page 2.13.00.

XIII. That, an accustomed lowly reverence to this blessed Name we received
from all antiquity, as appears by the Canons and Injunctions: and good reason
we should entaile it on our Posterity, Holy tab. page 101.

Consid. 1. Whether, that bowing be Orthodox, and grounded upon Scripture,
whereas Doctor Fulke, an Orthodox Writer affirms, that it is neither commanded
nor prophesied in Phil. 2.10. and what Scriptures do prove it?

2. Whether, that Antiquity be any elder than the Papacy.

3. Whether by so much pretense of antiquity the Prelates have not entailed
(...).

XIV. That (Doctor Heylin) may bow as often as he pleases so he do it to this
blessed name, Jesus, or to honor him, and him only in his holy Sacrament; this
later, although the Canon does not allow, yet reason, piety* and constant
practice of antiquity does, page 99.

Consid. 1. Whether Corporal bowing to Jesus in the Sacrament, do not imply
and intimate a corporal and real presence.

2. Whether Bishop Williams his reason must prescribe Religion and worship to a
Church or Kingdom* without either Canons, Laws or Scriptures.

XV: That* if there be any proud Dames that practice all manner of courtesies
for Maskes and Dances, but none by any means for Christ, at their approach to
the Holy Table, Lincolns Legacy.
take them Donatus for me, I shall never write them in my Calendar of the
children of this Church, ho. tab. page 99.

Consid. 1. Whether all that refuse to bow at the Communion Table, be no better
than Maskers and Dancers.

2. Whether Christ must he worshipped like Maskers and Dancers, and his worship
be patterned like, And grounded upon dancing and masking gestures.

3. Whether those that will not bow to the table, because women bow in dancing,
are therefore as Heretical Donatists, to be excluded out of the Church, and
given up to the Devil.

4. Whether none are true Christians, or Children of this Church, except they
be Canonized in Bishop Williams his Calendar.

XVI. That it is not enough to obey a Canon ^n the matter if we obey it not
likewise in the manner; not to make a courtsie, if it be not a lowly courtsie,
nor so neither, unless it be, as hertofore has been accustomed, ho. tab.
page 100.

Consid. 1. Whether Prelaticall hypocrisy be not spun with a fine thread.

2. Whether a Bishopric will not serve his turn, without just four corners
in a square Cap. and more ado than needs.

XVII. That these (...), or adorations, are there (in the Rubrickes of the
Greek Lyturgies) required to be made, and decently, as I think, before the
Holy Table, but no mention at all in any of those Rubricks of (...), of the
Altar, in any good or authentical copy, page 193.

Consid. 1. Whether an Orthodox and judicious Prelate, do think (...).
three ^^inges to the Table in the briers Greek Musse-booke to be decently
done, and consonant to the Church of England.

2. Whether those Greek Masses, fabled upon the Fathers, are good and
authentical copies.

XVIII. That into this column (to wit the fourth column (of notorious and
debauched people) in the diptycks, or two-leaved-tables of commemoration of the
dead, to be read in time of high Mass) I could be willing, if the Church
approve thereof, this railing Doctor might be inserted promising that if ever I
hear those diptychs read in the time of the Communion at the holy table,
(though laid Altarwise, and all along at the East end wall) yet shall it not
deter me in my devotions from saying thereunto a hearty Amen, ho, tab. page
234.

Consid. 1. Whether Bishop Williams could yet be willing, if the Church of
England should approve thereof, to have tables of commemoration of the dead in
time of high Musse read at the table laid altarwise.

2. Whether (...) be resolved to keep his promise when be shall be
Archbishop, to say Amen heartily to such Masses at the Altar.

3. Whether he think that Heylin, Shelford, Pocklington, or Laud himself ever
made the Pope and the Jesuits so free and hearty a promise.

4. Whether he think this to be orthodox in doctrine, and consonant in
discipline to the Church of England.

XIX. That the form that Christ left, the Apostles used, and the Fathers
delivered the Lords Supper in, is never taken by judicious Divines, in a mere
Mathematical and indivisible point of exactness; but in a moral conformity,
which will admit of a latitude, and receive from time to time degrees of
perfection: holy table page 150.

Consid. 1. Whether Bishop Williams do think, that judicious Divines do not
take the form that Christ left of administration of the Communion to be
Mathematically exact and perfect, but that Christ's form left to the Apostles
did so admit of a latitude, that the Apostles might mend Christ's form; the
Fathers mend the Apostles, the Papists mend the Fathers, Bishop Williams mends
the Papists, and Heylin mends Bishop Williams, that so the form that Christ
left imperfect, admitting a latitude, may at last be perfect.

2. Whether does not rather some cranle in his own brain admit of a latitude,
and want some conformity to the form that Christ left.

3. Whether does he not ignorantly speak he knows not what; that the form
that Christ left will admit of a latitude and degrees of perfection: and
therefore in the next page 151. his second thoughts being better, and growing a
little wiser, he runs clean counter to what he said before, and confutes
himself, and says, not the form that Christ left, but the Service-bookes
agreeableness to Gods Word, or Christ's form there expressed, admits of degrees
of perfection, which is more agreeable to the truth.

XX. That, there is just that difference between the shewbread and the body
of Christ in the Sacrament, as there is between the shadow and the body, the
representation and the verity, the patterns of future things, and the things
themselves prefigured by those patterns, Holy tab* page 125.

Consid. 1. Whether this do not imply a real presence.

1. Because he says not between the shewbread and the body of Christ
absolutely, but his body in the Sacrament, as if he should say, between the
shewbread and the sacramental bread.

2. Because it speaks of the body of Christ and the Sacrament, as of one only
indistinct thing, answering to the shewbread: whereas they are two several
things, and cannot be one, but only by a real presence and transubstantiation.

3. Because the Sacrament it self, as well as the shewbread, is the shadow,
the representation, the pattern; and the body of Christ is the body, the
verity, the thing it self: and therefore the shewbread must needs be either a
representation of a representation alone, or of the body absolutely, both which
are contrary to the express words, or of both body and Sacrament, as one thing
by real presence which is most likely to be the sense of the words; and so it
implies a real presence, and so it seems in the 14. Tenet.

4. Whether the Papists themselves do not pretend the authority of the
Fathers, and some as ancient as S. Jerome for most of their tenets.

XXI. That for our kneeling in the Church of England at our receiving of this
blessed Sacrament: now he must have a knee of a c^mell, and heart of oak that
will not bow himself, and after the manner of adoration and worship say Amen,
as S. Cyril speaks to so patheticall a prayer and thanksgiving made by the
Minister unto God in his behalf, page 135. see 132.

Consid 1. Whether all men are camels and oaks, beasts, and blocks, that will
not bow and make adoration (not to Christ, but) to the Ministers prayer.

XXII. That here in England this worse conclusion of the Doctors to desire to
sit at the Communion, is more to be feared from the opposers of our Lyturgie,
who brag of their cousinship and coheireship with Christ, then from us who are
ready to live and die in defense of the same* page 149.

Consid. 1. Whether this Orthodox Prelate do quake for fear lest people sit
at the Communion, and yet confess himself that the Apostles used a table
gesture: Holy tab. p. 132.

2. Whether the Bishops hold their Miters in tenure of a Service-booke, that
they will live and die in defense of the same.

XXIII* That it was well done by the reformed Church in Poland, first by
monitions, in the year 1573, and then by Sanctions, in the year 1583. ne in
usu sit, that the usual receiving of the Communion in those parts should not
be by sitting round about the table* page 133.136.

Consid 1. Whether Bishop Williams was then a privy Councellor of Poland, to
know all their circumstances, whether they did well or ill.

2. Whether he have ground in Scripture to prove that they did well, that did
either directly against the institution, or against their own consciences
enforcing weak consciences in a thing at the most but indifferent.

3. Whether they did well to go beyond Rome it self, which as this Bishop
confesses, did not absolutely condemn this Ceremony of sitting, Holy table,
p. 133.

XXIV. That it has been always, as the practice, so the doctrine of this
Kingdom, that both in every part, and in the whole, Laws do not make Kings,
but Kings Laws, which they alter and change from time to time, as they see
occasion, page 31.

XXV. That the Kings of England have a power from God himself, not only to
make laws, but to alter and change laws from time to time, for the good of
themselves and their subjects, ho. tab. p. 41.

Consid. 1. Whether it be not manifest in the holy table, that he speaks this
of the Kings power, to make and change laws absolutely without expressing in
or with the Parliament.

2. Whether he thinks it needful for Bills propounded by the King to pass
the upper and lower House, or that the Regal power absolute is as sufficient
of it self to make and change Laws, or that the privileges of the Houses
being necessarily requisite to passing Bills be any encroachment upon the Regal
power Jure Divino, or any wrong unto the supreme Majesty.

3. Whom does he think must be judge what is good for them and their Subjects.

4. Whether he think the honorable House of Commons may not justly take
these things into serious consideration, though another man dare not meddle
with so stout a Prelate.

XXVI. That the power in matters Ecclesiastical is such a Fee-simple, as was
vested in none but God himself before it came (by his, and his only donation)
to be vested, in the King: and being vested in the King, it cannot by any power
whatsoever (no, not by his own) be divested from him, ho. tab. p. 24.

Consid. 1. Whether does he think that the Parliament has no power at all in
matters Ecclesiastical, but that the same power was in the King absolutely
before the Parliament made the Statute of primo Elizab. as it was after, as his
former words seem to affirm: if it was, what needed that or any Act to be
passed, but an arbitrary government, if not in all things, yet at least in all
matters Ecclesiastical, which is the only desire of the Prelates, whereby
they by flatteries and insinuations may do what they list.

2. Whether does not this deny the King himself to have power to invest his
son and heir in part, or in whole, of his power, if he please, as some Kings
have done, and as David did.

3. Whether does not this tenet deny the Kings power to be divested from him to
his officers for execution of his Laws, seeing it ties all so upon his own
person, that it seems to deny him power to unburthen himself.

4. Whether does not this deny the King to have power to make Acts of
Parliament in matters Ecclesiastical, because in such Acts the King obliges
himself to that Law; or whether does not this tenet nullify all such Laws,
ipso facto, if the Kings power cannot by himself be divested from him.

XXVII. That the Kings Declaration is therefore in the letter called a kind of
Law, because it was neither act of Parliament, nor a mere* Act of Council,
but an Act of the King sitting in Council, which (if not in all things else)
without all question in all matters Ecclesiastical is a kind of Law: Holy
tab. p. 188.

Consid. 1. Whether the Prelates could not wish there were no other kind of
Law, neither Acts of Parliaments, nor Acts of Council, but mere Declarations,
and those only by their own directions, as in all things else, so especially
in all matters Ecclesiastical.

2. Whether the Prelates have not labored to reduce all kinds of Law to an
arbitrary government.

XXVIII. That the Kings Majesty may command a greater matter of this nature,
then that the holy Table should be placed where the Altar stood, and be railed
about for the great decency, and that although the Statute of primo Eliz. had
never been in rerum natura, page 32.

Consid. 1. Whether the Prelates have not always persuaded that the greatest
affairs of Church and State might be managed and performed, not only by
mere commands without, but contrary to Acts of Parliament.

2. Whether Bishop Williams do not prove elsewhere that railes and Altar-wise
placing are directly contrary to Laws and Acts of Parliament.

3. Whether a subject is not guilty of laesae Majestatis* that by flattery
betrays the Kings judgment into the manifest breach of the Laws established.

XXIX. That the Act of primo Eliz. concerning Ecclesiastical jurisdiction* was
not a Statute introductory of a new Law, but declaratorie of the old;
Parliaments are not called to confirm, but to affirm and declare the Laws of
God. Weak and doubtful titles are to be confirmed: such clear and indubitate
rights as his Majesty has to the Ecclesiastical jurisdiction, are only
averred and declared by Acts of Parliament. And all Declarations of this kind
are as the stuff they are made of to last for ever. page 25.

Consid. 1. Whether every part or parcel of Ecclesiastical jurisdiction be
perpetual, because the whole is such, so that Parliaments cannot change them.

2. Whether the High Commission is therefore to last for ever, contrary to the
same authority that stablished it first.

3. Whether this tenet do not deny the power and privilege of Parliaments, if
all Ecclesiastical Laws so once declared, are to last for ever (to please the
Prelates) so that the Parliament cannot repeal the Statutes themselves do
make.

4. Whether do not Parliaments rather affirm and declare the full consent of
the King subjects in such points wherein they doubt what the Law of God is.

5. Whether some particulars in Ecclesiastical jurisdiction, which before were
doubtful whether they ought to be by Gods Law obeyed or no, may not be
confirmed by the full consent of the parties whom they most concern in Acts of
Parliament.

XXX. That, whatsoever by the Laws of God, the Prince or the Church is once
constituted, is no longer to be mooted upon, but absolutely obeyed by all
inferiors. And what God, the King, and Church have directed, is not to be put
to deliberation, but execution, Holy Table, page 66.67.

Consid. 1. Whether all the Prelates Canons are constituted by God, the Prince,
or the Church.

2. Whether it will suffice that it be constituted by God and the Prince, or
else by the Church alone without them.

3. Whether by the name of Church here be not meant the worst members of the
Church, the Prelates in Convocation.

4. Whether no deliberation is allowed to know whether God has constituted it
or no.

XXXI. That all commands of the King that are not upon the first inference and
illation, without any prosyllogismes contrary to a clear passage in the Word
of God, or to an evident sun-beame of the Law of nature, are precisely to be
obeyed, page 68.

Consid. 1. Whether a command contrary to the word of God upon the second
inference, may not be as unlawful as upon the first.

2. Whether a command which is truly contrary to an obscure passage in the
word of God, may not be as unlawful in it self as to a clear.

XXXII. That it is not enough to find a remote and possible inconvenience that
may ensue therefrom, which is the ordinary objection against the Book
Lincolnes ^^^reations.
of Recreations, page 68.

Consid. 1. Whether Bishop Williams do not here allow the Book of
Recreations, because he admits not the ordinary objection against it.

XXXIII. That every good subject is bound in conscience to believe, and rest
assured, that his Prince (environed with such a Counsel) will be more able to
discover, and as ready to prevent any ill sequel that may come of it, as
himself possibly can be, Holy Table, page 68.

Consid. 1. Whether is a good subject bound to believe and rest assured that
the Council are such as they should be, though they be not, and so be bound in
conscience to believe a falsehood.

2. Whether is a good subject bound in conscience to believe and rest assured
upon other men's goodness, for the safety of his own conscience.

3. Whether the Papists do not so think of the Pope and his conclave of
Cardinals, be they good or bad.

XXXIV. That the Table (without some new Canon) is not to stand Altarwise, and
you at the North end thereof, but tablewise, and you must officiate on the
North side of the same by the Lyturgie, Holy Table page 20.

Consid. 1. Whether this do not imply that by a new Canon it may stand
Altar-wise, though by the Lyturgie authorized by Parliament it may not.

2. Whether this do not prefer a Canon before a Statute, and the
Convocation before the Parliament.

3. Whether this did not give the first hint for the new Canons, and lay the
first foundation for the late Convocation to make the Canon.

XXXV. That whether the Altars may soon be mounted up by steps, that the
Minister may be seen and heard of the Congregation, I cannot tell you without
new directions. For the orders made, 1561. require plainly, that if in any
Chancell the steps be transposed they be not erected again, and these were
high Commissioners, grounded upon the Act of Parliament, who set forth these
orders. Which how far they bind, I dare not determine being* as you say,
none of the ablest Canonists in the Church of England, Holy Table, page 206.

Consid. 1. Whether this do not intimate, that by new directions the Bishops
may cross the orders authorized by Parliament.

2. Whether he doubt how far orders, grounded on Parliament, may bind, and
yet affirm in the next Tenet, that the Convocation makes strong and binding
Canons.

3. Whether it be not undenyably manifest here, that the writer of the Letter
to the Vicar, and the writer of the Holy Table, are both one man, because those
words of the ablest Canonists in the Church of England, which here he takes to
himself. Doctor Heylin spoke only of the writer of the Letter, and so it is
plane they are both one man: and Holy Table, page 58. he says this Pamphleters
whole Book is but a libell against a Bishop, but that Book ( as Coal from the
Altar) was written only against the writer of the Letter, therefore both the
writer of the Letter, and of the Holy Table, were both one, to wit, the Bishop
of Lincoln: for both in the Title page, and in the license, it is said to be
written by a Minister of Lincolneshire.

XXXVI. That the reverent house of Convocation is not convened or licensed by
the King to make permissions that men may do what they list, but to make, when
they are confirmed by the King, strong and binding Canons, to be obeyed by the
Subjects, and to be pursued by all the Ordinaries of the Kingome: Holy tab.
page 205.

Consid. 1. Whether it was not a brave world for Prelates, to make what Laws
they pleased, if they could but get the Kings consent.

2. Whether he do not aggravate the strength of Canon, and arbitrary
commands, but extenuate the power of Parliaments.

XXXVII. That the Bishop or Ordinary, if he command according to the Laws and
Canons confirmed (for otherwise he is in his eccentricks, and moves not as he
should do) why then in such a case as we had even now, that is a case of
diversity, doubt, and ambiguity, he is punctualy to be obeyed by those of his
jurisdiction, be they of the Clergy or of the Laity: holy Table: page 68.69.

Consid. 1. Whether the Bishop expecting obedience if he command according to
the Laws and Canons in cases of doubt and diversity, being learned, and
knowing his grounds, may not better show his grounds and evidence of the
lawfulness, to satisfy the weak consciences, then to force obedience against
their consciences without any ground.

XXXVIII. That in matters of doubting and ambiguity the inferior shall be
approved of God for his duty and obedience, and never charged as guilty of
error for any future inconvenience, holy tab. page 69.

Consid. 1. Whether there be any ground in Scripture to warrant the committing
of wilful and presumptuous sins.

2. Whether any Scripture teach that men shall be approved of God for sinning
against God to please a Bishop, and not rather severely punished.

3. Whether this does not bewray Bishops, that they seek more their own pride
and vainglory, then the glory and service of God.

4. Whether this doctrine be not divellish and Popoish, and clean contrary to
S. Paul, who says, that he that doubts is damned if he eat, because he
eats not of faith; For whatsoever is not of faith is sin, Romans 14.23. and
verse. 5. Let every man be fully persuaded in his own mind.

XXXIX. That Elders are no elder then Calvin and Beza: Holy Table, page 79.

Consid. 1. Whether Calvin and Beza were as old as Saint Peter, who was also an
Elder, 1 Pet. 5.1.

2. Whether the Bishops translated the Bible false, who translated Presbyter an
Elder.

XL. That a single Priest, qua talis, in that formality and capacity only as
he is a Priest, has no key given him by God or man, to open the doors of any
external jurisdiction: Holy Table, page 73.

Consid. 1. Whether Bishop Williams have known any double Priests except one
double dealing Priest, who promised the Duke to marry his kinswoman, and so got
a Bishopicke, meaning only to play the Priest.

2. Whether a Priest have not as much power as he confesses a Deacon has, as
in Tenet 45.

3. Whether he ever knew Priest that was not first Deacon, and whether he
loses his Deaconship in taking Priesthood, and then why does not a Bishop lose
his Priesthood as well in taking a Bishopric.

4. Whether he will hold the same position in case a Bishop and a Priest
should be both one.

XLI. That he has a Consistory within in foro penitentiae, in the Conscience
of his Parishioners, and a key given him upon his institution to enter into it.
But he has no Consistory without in foro causae in meddling with
Ecclesiastical causes, unless he borrow a key from his Ordinary, holy Table,
page 73.

XLII. That although they be the same keys, yet one of them will not open all
those wards, the Consistory of outward jurisdiction being not to be opened by a
key alone, but (as you may observe in some great men's gates) by a key and a
staff, which they usually call a Crosier, holy Table, page 73.

Consid. 1. Whether there be any need to tie the keys of Christ to staves for
fear of losing them in corners, as the keys of great men's gates may be lost.

2. Whether Christ forgot to give the Crosier staff with the Keys, and wanted
Bishop Williams to put him in mind, as he says, page 207. of Alfonso the
wise, who blasphemously wished to have been at Gods elbow at the creation of
the world, to have put him in mind of some things to have made them better.

3. Whether this staff do fit well the key hole, and will turn naturally
upon all those words, or rather does it not properly break open the door, as
Bishops use to do by violence.

4. Whether the key given the Priest, and only without the use, be not given
him in mere mockage, being the very same with the Bishops key given him in
consecration.

5. Whether Bishop Williams think in his conscience, that the Parliament of
England, and the Doctors their Chaplains, who adhere to this doctrine, and
allow the Popish Schoolemens double power, or the other professed Puritanes (as
he calls them) who adhere to the only Word of God, teach the more orthodox
doctrine.

XLIII. That it is a thing unreasonable, and altogether illegal, that a
Christian man laying open claim to his right in the Sacraments, should by the
mere discretion of a Curate be debarred from it, Holy Table, page 177.

Consid. 1. Whether it be not a thing unreasonable, and altogether illegal,
and illevangelicall too, that a godly and discreet Curate should be forced by
the mere discretion (nay bribing) of a Bishops Chancellor, to administer the
Sacrament to one that his own eyes has seen drunk, his own ears has
heard swear, and his own knowledge has known to be most lewd and damnably
wicked, and yet to his own further damnation will lay open claim to the
Sacrament.

2. Whether the Prelates be not unreasonable, and their doings altogether
illegal, who will admit into the Ministry of the Word and Sacraments, and to
have cure of hundreds of souls, such men as have not discretion to put back a
drunken dog, and swearing rogue from the Sacrament, and to admit an honest
Christian to the same.

XLIV. That it is against the practice all of antiquity, that the Priest
should offer of his own head, to keep off any Christened and believing man
from the sacred mysteries, Holy Table page 178.

Consid. 1. Whether it be not against the practice of all Antiquity, that a
Bishops Lay Chancellor should force a Minister to deliver the Sacrament, where
he thinks in his own conscience it is unworthily received.

2. Whether Bishop Williams his head piece be in right temper, when he
confesses the Deacon may do this, and yet the Priest may not, whereas the
Deacons power was ever less than the Priests, etc.

3. Whether Bishop Williams, for all his wit, have not a bad memory, who
forgets that all Priests are now Deacons.

XLV. That it was the Deacon (whose power our Archdeacons now by collation of
the Bishop, and prescription of time have incorporated in their jurisdction)
that always executed this severitie, holy Table, page 178.

Consid. 1. Whether it was ever heard of, that Deacons had more power then
Priests, when as every greater includes the less.

2. Whether Bishop Williams confess not here, that Archdeacons power is not by
Divine right, but by collation of the Bishop and prescription of time.

XLVI. That the Curate is but to present to the Ordinary; and to admonish the
offender and that in private only, page 179.

Consid. 1. Whether the Prelates pride and covetousness do not appear
herein, that they will suffer the Curate to do nothing, and yet will proceed
themselves upon his presentment.

2. Whether they do not the Devil great service, who seek to conceal and
hide gross and public sins.

XLVII. That from the time that the Apostles appointed the first Deacons to our
present Archdeacons, (in whose office the ancient power of the Deacons is
united and concentred) incumbents have been excluded from meddling with the
utensils of the Church or ornaments of the Altar: Holy Table, page 79.

Consid. 1. Whether Bishop Williams wits were not gone a wooll-gathering, when
he would prove out of Acts 6.2. that because the Apostles were not able to
preach the Word, and also to provide for, and dispose of the maintenance of
all the power of many Nations, both Jews and Gentiles, the Church daily
increasing from three to five thousands, and from five to many thousands ergo,
a Parish Priest who may tell all his parishioners in an afternoon, may not
meddle with the Communion Table, and Church utensills.

2. Whether the Altar had such ornaments from the time that the Apostles
appointed the first Deacons.

XLVIII. That, so far were the Ancients from making a Parish Priest a
stickler in vestry affairs, that a Council says clearly that the Priest can
boast of nothing he has in general, but his bate name; not able to execute
his very office without the authority and Ministry of the Deacon, holy Table,
page 79.

Consid. 1. Whether the Ancients were not as far from making a Bishop a
stickler in Parliaments.

2. Whether besides the bare name of Priests, they have not likewise the name,
office and power of Deacons, and so have all the power that Bishop Williams for
want of good memory denies to the Priests, and gives to the Deacons.

3. Whether the Priests make Deacons, and Deacons make Priests, and whether
this be not a brave riddle indeed like, Matter me genuit, quae eadem mox
gignitur ex me.


XLIX. That in old time, as one observes, they were not borne but made
Christians, made by long and wearisome steps and degrees; and forced to creep
on with time and leisure to the bosom of the Chnrch, page 117.

Consid. 1. Whether this old time was so old as the Apostles time, when there
were converted and baptized three thousand on a day, rather for their faith,
than for their long steps and time.

2. Whether Christians are made by long steps and wearisome, rather then by
their new birth and faith.

3. Whether unbelievers may not by time and leisure come to the bosom of the
Church, and true believers be kept out for a long time.

4. Whether this do not savor of Anabaptisme.

L. That the children of this Church be those in the writers style that will
give ear to the voye and Canons of this Church: the children of this
Commonwealth are such as obey the wholesome Laws and reiglement of this State
and Kingdom. But base sycophants that slight the Canons of their Bishops, and
undertake to refute the reiglement of their Princes, though they hope by
flattery to prey upon either, are, as the writer thinks, no true children of
the one or the other: Holy tab. page 191.

Consid. 1. Whether an ear to the Canons of Bishops rather then an heart to
believe the Gospel, does make true Children of this Chruch.

2. Whether all are base sycophants, and no true children of the Church, that
slight the Canons of their Bishops.

3. Whether do any hope by flattery to prey upon Church or Commonwealth, more
then Bishops.

LI. That the irregular forwardness of the people (in taking down Altars in
King Edward the sixth days) the writer of the Letter does no more approve of
then I (the writer of the Holy Table) do of your stickling in this sort for
table-altars, upon pretense of the piety of the times, and running before the
declaration of your Prince, and the chief Governors of the Church, Holy
Table, p. 188.

Consid 1. Whether does the writer of the Letter disapprove of peoples
forwardness to take down Altars in King Edwards time, or the writer of the
holy table approve of the Arminians stickling for table altars; for one it must
needs imply?

2. Whether did Bishop Williams expect or advise a declaration of the King and
chief Governors of the Church for such purposes.

3. Whether did not Bish. Williams in three several places, viz. tenet 34.35.
and in this 51. lay a foundation for the new Canons of the last convocation?

General Notes.
1. How well he defended the cause of Religion.

Now, let any indifferent man judge (that does well weigh these tenets, and the
authors whence he proves them) whether he defend the cause of Religion (as he
by the title pretends) when as in all things for matter of Idolatrous worship
and bowing; for innovations, for Prelates power over other Ministers for making
new Canons and Declarations; for forcing obedience to them; for subtle
policies to introduce common and frequent new appellations, by metaphorical
excuses for teaching them to load all their innovating trumperies upon the
Kings power and prerogative; it is manifest, that he yields more than the
others did demand; he tells them that which they did not understand; he
teaches them the way to effectuate their designs; he lays the plot for their
further proceedings.

For instance, among many things, Heylin desires the table may stand Eastward;
the Papists say if the building permit; but Lincoln says, yea, though it will
not; he allows not Bellarmines exception. h. table p. 230. or tenet 9. The
Vicar would call it an altar to his parishioners in his ordinary talk; the
Bishop denies not, but that the name has been long metaphorically in the
Church, and so he will not blame the Vicar to call it, not only frequent in his
talk, but even in the Pulpit, holy table, p. 75. or tenet 7. Heylin cannot
ascend to discourse of the altar without bowing; Lincoln says, let him bow as
often as he pleases, so he do it to this blessed name, etc. Nay more, let the
very women that refuse to bow, be as Donatists, thrust out of the Calendar of
this Churches children etc. Nay more yet their bowing shall not serve the turn,
except they make a lowly courtesy; Nay, more than all this, (I hope he will have
cringing enough at last) such a lowly courtesy as has been accustomed. holy
table, p. 99.100 and tenet. 16. the Vicar would bow to the name of Jesus, hol.
table page 13. Lincoln will not only practice bowing himself, but also
intaile it upon our posterity, tenet 13. holy table p. 101. The Vicar and
Heylin would feign use the appellation of second service, yea, that you may,
says Lincoln, and justify it too by regal authority, out of the book of
Fast. 1. of the King. holy table page 15. ten. 11. Heylin believes, that by
virtue of the Statute 1. Elizab. c. 2. the Kings Majesty may command the table
to stand altarwise, or any way to please the Doctor, and to be railed about
too, holy table p. 23. but Lincoln is a little bolder than Heylin (who durst
but only wrest Laws, not overthrow fundamentalls) alas man (says he) you
come short, you write nothing like a (Prelaticall) Divine, you deserve but a
simple fee, you are but a bungler, and slubber it up like a base Coal; you
animal, I tell thee, the Kings power in matters Ecclesiastical cannot by any
power whatsoever, no, not by his own, be divested from him; you speak most
derogatorily to his Majesty's right and prerogative, that that Statute of 1.
Elizab. was a confirmative of the old Law; it was but declarative, and all such
declarations (for the good of the Prelates, and upholding the miters) are to
last for ever; they are no Ionahs gourds, to serve a turn or two, and so
expire (for then Bishops were undone) and therefore Master Coal I shall yield,
that the Kings Majesty may command a greater matter than that the table should
stand where the Altar stood, and be railed about (what though the Statute
confirming the Service-booke be flat against it) he may do this, and more,
though the Statute of primo Eliz. had never been made; For Stephen Gardener,
an honest Prelate, who burned up the puritanes, whom we Bishops may follow and
belieye, says, that by their calling King Henry the eighth, the head of the
Church (a title of Christ, Col. 1.) their will was to express clearly the
power pertaining to a prince by that sounding and emphaticall compellation,
holy table, cap. 2. page 22. to 26. and 32. Heylin and other Prelaticall
persons, hold, that the setting of the table altarwise being exacted by the
Ordinary, requires more of men's obedience, then curiosity, and that they are
not to demurre upon commands, till they be satisfied in the Grounds and
Reasons, holy table, page 61. For they take it as granted, that the people
should think themselves excusable, if they obey upon command; but Heylin comes
short, and wants skill; for Lincoln affirms, that the inferiors shall not
only be excusable, but more yet, even approved of God for their duty and
obedience, and never charged as guilty of error for any future inconvenience,
holy table page 69. and this were brave for the Prelates, if Lincoln could but
show Gods charter for it, from his own mouth, if not, we must take the Bishops
honest word. And lastly, Heylin having now got an altar, must needs have a
sacrifice, and though he can find never a one proper for his purpose, yet,
rather than fail, any improper parcel of matters (which though they be as
weak with the learned, as Claudius Gillius, or lame Giles, p. 172.) yet will
serve to plunder the poor ignorant people, who take all things as properly
which are spoken commonly, and for this Lincoln helps him out and fits him
supererogatorily: I do grant freely (says he) that in the Scripture, and the
ancient Fathers, we do meet wi^h not only these few which you reckon up, but
a great many more duties and virtues that are usually termed sacrifices, holy
tab. 107. I will likewise allow you (which you forgot to call for) that all
these improperly called sacrifices, are not only stirred up with the
meditation, but many times sown and first engendered by the secret operation
of this blessed sacrament. Nay, yet further, in contemplation of all these
special graces of the spirit wrought in our souls by means of the Eucharist,
you shall not reasoonably expect any outward expression of reverence and
submission to the founder of the feast, which I will not approve of, and bring
the ancient Fathers along with me to do as much, p. 108. and so having
furnished Heylin with many sacrifices and more altars, some half a score at
least, he concludes* Now consider with your self, whether it were fitter to
make use of these altars for your unproper sacrifices, and have all these
Greek and Latin Fathers to applaud you for the same, rather than to rely upon
some miracle of a good work in hand, or some poor dream of the piety of the
times, ho. tab. p. 107.108.112. And now by these few instances, among many
others which might be alleged, it will appear to any rational man what
manner of Champions for the truth the Prelates are indeed; so that I may well
conclude with his own greek proverb, holy tab. p. 227. that as the Fox has
many tricks, but the Hedge-hogge, (...), though but one, yet a great one, to
wind up himself toward a combat; so that his adversary shall have nothing
but prickles to fight against: so Heylin, Shelford, and his old Chaplain
Pocklington had many tricks, like Foxes, to nibble at Popery, but Lincoln,
like an Urchin (for so he compares Bishop Jewel) had but one trick, but that
was a great one, yet not to set his adversary the sharp to fight against, but
to yield up into his hands, Totum quaesitum, all the whole controversy, and
more than all too; so that it was not Religion, or the true worship of God,
that he defended.

Note.
2. What cause he did defend.

But though he would not speak a word for the Truth, and true Religion; though
he be content to intaile Jesuiticall bowing and holy-table-cringing upon his
posterity; though he will uncalendar his children from the Church that will not
bow; though he yield unto the Doctor that the King may do any thing, with or
without a Parliament; that the inferiors are to obey all things and yet be
approved of God* that the table may be changed to an altar, in altar-wise
situation, so it be not fixed to the wall; and an altar in appellation, so it
be metaphorically excused; and an altar in adoration, so they pretend to honor
him, and him only in his holy sacrament; and at this altar a commemoration of
the dead in time of high mass, to which himself will say Amen; though he
yield all this and much more, which the Papists never enjoined, which Heylin
forgot to call for, and I forgot to reckon up; yet there is one thing so
sticks in his stomach, that he will never yield* no, not an inch, not an
haires-breadth* come what will, and that is, That Mounsieur the halfe-Vicar,
should have a power to remove of his own head, the Communion table* to call
that an altar (without his leave) which the rubricke of the service-booke calls
not so; and to be enabled to this by the Canons, and to be a Judge of the
conveniencie of the standing thereof, yea, a more competent Judge than the
Bishop and his surrogates, and not to permit the Church Officers to do what
they are enjoined by the Prelate; this is such a piece of policy as (if it
were but countenanced) would quickly make an end of all discipline in England.
Here is not only I. C. John Cotton, but T. C. Thomas Cartwright, up and down,
and new England planted in the midst of old, holy table, p. 70. this is
Jesuitical in the highest degree: for, to impair the power of Bishops is no
little sin (which is strange, for no man defends Bishops more then the Jesuits)
and therefore (says he) there were some Priests in France and Germany who
presumed to erect altars in the absence of their Bishops, about the time of
Theodosius the younger, but Leo the great tells them plainly, they had no more
power to erect than to consecrate an altar; and not many years after, about
Justinians time, Hormisdas made an absolute decree to inhibit Priests to erect
any altars under pain of deprivation, p. 72. which (says he) I press only
historically, to let you see what severity they would have used eleven hundred
years ago to chastise his insolency, if such a rumor had been raised, as
this Vicars behavior raised in the neighborhood; and therefore (says he) I
press this for doctrine, that a single Priest has no key of any external
jurisdiction given him by God or man; for the consistory of outward
jurisdiction is not to be opened by a key alone, but by a key and a staff,
(for Bishops will needs be bang beggars) and this ancient doctrine (of the
Pope) is opposed by none, but professed Puritanes, p. 73. they say indeed* that
the Bishops power was the poisonous egg out of which Antichrist was hatched.
p. 74. But (though he cannot confute this, yet before he will yield an inch of
this authority he would hazard a hundred miters; but for matter of worship or
doctrine, popery or Idolatry, he will easily yield any thing; and if God will
not permit Prelaticall Arminians to hypocritize a little, and pretend to
worship him, when they worship an altar (if no man else will speak) let him
strike the Churches with thunder, the people with pestilence, the Land with the
sword, and the kingdom with all manner of judgments rather than a Bishop
should say any thing to offend his Grave metropolitan (or miter of policy)
and so incur his displeasure, and break his oath of consecration, being
sworn to obey him.

Note.
3. What Authors he quotes to prove his opinions and tenets.

And as he denotes his whole forces to be employed in stickling for his own
Prelaticall power and authority, and to maintain his own popish opinions and
erroneous tenets; so in nothing does he more manifestly bewray his corrupt
mind than in his few quotations of Scriptures, and his full stuffing both text
and margin with the very worst trumpery he can find in all the rabble of
Popish forgeries, and that without the least show of dislike of the matters
contained, or any touch of discovering of their counterfeit writings, most
nefariously betraying the simple mind of the unlearned reader into a
favorable opinion of so bad and plainly forged works, as the more judicious
sort of Papists themselves do utterly dislike and disclaim; I speak not by
supposition, but my better opinion of him and his judgment in authors, had
almost wrested from me a more slender dislike of many his quotations, had I not
trackd him in some, for all were too tedious, ex ungue Leonem, and to speak
freely, among the more ingenuous Papists, we may find much more plain
deading. Well fare old Bellarmine, he might have made a good English Bishop,
in respect of Bishop Williams, for Bellarmine told us honestly, that the Mass
attributed to S. James, had so much added and augmented by the later priests,
that it was hard to say which part was S. Iameses, Bellarmine de Script. Eccl.
we may say none at all. Bishop Williams would have us think just all, for he
quotes him without disclaiming any part once ho. tab. 204. and again. page
234. and lest English readers should mislike it, he calls it not Mass, as the
Papists do but Lyturgie, as Prelates use to call English Masse-bookes, and so
makes it S. James his Lyturgie, as if it were all Gospel, although it be as
unlike S. James, as Bishop Williams an honest Minister; for he may remember
that therein they pray pro iis qui in monastertis degunt, for those who live in
Monasteries, which prayer sure he will not say S. James composed; again, it
says, commemorationem agamus benedictae Dominae nostrae matris Dei and semper
virginis Mariae, let us make comemoration of our blessed Lady the mother of
God, and a perpetual virgin: again, it calls the sacrament incruentum
sacrificium, a bloodlesse sacrifice, and says, dimitte spiritum sanctissimum,
ut efficiat hunc panem corpus sanctum Christi tui, send down thy most holy
spirit, that it may make this bread the holy body of thy Christ: and again,
memento Domine sanctorum patrum, fratrum and episcoporum, be mindful O Lord of
our holy fathers, Friars and Bishops, Martyru^, confessoru^, doctoru^, Martyrs,
Confessors and Doctors, Ave Maria gratia plena, hail Mary full of grace, etc.
And moreover, it calls the altar supercoeleste, mentale, and spiritale altar
suum, his more than heavenly, mental and spiritall altar. Now, if Bishop
Williams have the brow to do it, let him say all this mass is S. James his,
or, let him say (which Bellarmine honestly confesses he cannot) which part of
it was made by S. James, and yet in an English book, which both learned and
unlearned are to read, he quotes it twice or thrice, as Saint James his
Lyturgie, not denying, nor so much as giving the least hint of questioning the
antiquity and authority of it. Another of his Masses, which likewise he quotes
at least thrice, as in ho. tab. p. 175.214 and 234. is no worse a man's but S.
Peter's, and this a man would think were good Gospel indeed, for p. 175. in a
question of our service he quotes it, saying, I will not undertake to make good
S. Peter's Lyturgie, as if he should imply, that he could do it, and yet it was
published by his popish cousin William Lindan Bishop of Gaunt, and if we will
take it upon the honest word of these two Bishops, Lindan and Lincoln, we
must not doubt but that S. Peter himself does pray, pro patre and patriarcha
nostro venerando, N. for our reverend father and patriarch, such a one: and
again, gubernare dignare omnes terrarum fines una cum servo tuo papa and
patriarcha nostro N. meque misero and indigno, vouchsafe to govern all the
ends of the earth, together with thy servant the Pope, and our patriarch, N.
and me a miserable and unworthy sinner, Ave Maria gratia plena, etc. hail Mary
full of grace, etc. Nay which is yet more sport, we find in this Mass Saint
Peter reverencing his own long-dead memory, as memoriam venerantes beatorum
Apostolorum Petri, Pauli, Andreae, Iacobi, Ioannis, Thomae, Philippi,
Bartholomaei, Matthaei, Simonis, Thaddaei, Lini, Cleti, Clementis, Xisti,
Corneili, Cypriani, Laurentii, Chrysogoni, Ioannis, and Pauli, Cosmae and
Damiani, and omnium sanctorum tuotum, quorum intercessione and precibus concede
ut in omnibus tua protectione muniamur, reverencing the memory of the blessed
Apostles, Peter, Paul, Andrew, James John, Thomas, Philip, Bartholomew,
Matthew, Simon, Thaddeus, Linus, Cletus, Clement, Xistus, Cornelius, Cyprian,
Laurence, Chrysogon, John and Paul, Cosmas and Damian, and of all thy Saints,
for whose intercession and prayers, grant that in all things we may be guarded
by thy protection. See now whether all this good stuff be not S. Peter's, or
else say Lincoln twangs: nay, here is still more, such, nobis peccatoribus,
etc. portionem aliquam and societatem largiri dignaris cum sanctis Apostolis
tuis, and martyribus, cum Ioanne, Stephano, Matthaeo, Barnaba, Ignatio,
Alexandro, Marcellino, Petro, Felicitate, Perpetua, Agatha, Lucia, Agnete,
Cecilia, Anastasia, Barbara, Iustina, etc. Vouchsafe to give us sinners etc.
some portion and fellowship with thy holy Apostles and Martyrs, with John,
Stephen, Matthew; Barnabas, Ignatius, Alexander, Marcellinus, Peter, Felicitas,
Perpetua, Agatha, Lucia, Agnes, Cicely, Anastasy, Barbara, Julian, etc. Now,
let Lincoln, if he have the face, say that this is all S. Peter's own
Lyturgie. A third of his Masses and which is not once slipped in by chance, but
quoted at least twice, as p. 175. and 204. and this he calls Saint Marks
Lyturgie or service-booke, and yet he has not the honesty to tell us (as the
Papists ingenuously do) that edita est a Cardinale Sirleto sub hujus nomine
Lyturgia quaedam, there is a certain Lyturgie under Saint Marks name, set
forth by Cardinal Sirlet. And here pax omnibus is reiterated at least nine or
ten times; and S. Mark, if we may believe Lincoln, enjoynes them to pray pro
Rege, Papa and Episcopo, for the King, the Pope and the Bishop: and again, he
mentions beatissimum pontificem N. reverendissimum episcopu^, the most blessed
Pope, the most reverend Bishop, and prays for all Bishops, Priests, Deacons,
Subdeacons, Readers, Singing-men and Laymen, and he calls the Altar, Sanctum
coeleste and rationale altar, the holy heavenly and reasonable altar, and
enjoynes to pray for the City, saying, prolege civitatem istam propter martyrem
and Euangelistam Mareum, Protect this City for thy Martyr and Evangelist S.
Mark his sake, and these are Saint Mark his own words, we never question what
Lincoln says: and again, the Deacon reads the Diptychs or holy Tables
containing a catalogue of the dead, and the Priest bowing prays for them,
saying, Horum omnium animabus dona requiem, dominator Domine Deus noster, give
rest O Lord God our governor, to the souls of all these; and again, animabus
patrum and fratrum nostrorum dona requiem memor maiorum nostrorum,
patriarcharum, Prophetarum, Apostolorum, martyrum, Confessorum, Episcoporion,
sancti iusti, etc. and sancti patris nostri Marci, Apostoli, and Euangelistae;
and give rest to the souls of our fathers and brethren, remembering our
forefathers, the Patriarchs, Prophets, Apostles, Martyrs, Confessors, Bishops,
Saints, just men, etc. and our holy father Saint Mark, the Apostle and
Evangelist, etc. Now, all these must needs be Saint Marks words; for Lincolnes
ipse dixit, whose words are all demonstrations, and therefore never distrust
him, but take at it all adventures. His fourth Mass is Saint Ambrose Lyturgie,
page 275. which he says (and you may believe him) all the world (not an old
horse excepted) knows to be very ancient, it is wonder he derives not its
pedigree (like Episcopacy) from Adam; but he says enough, and we must take his
word wit^out any more ado: His fifth Mass is Saint Basils Lyturgie, which as
the former was of great antiquity, so this is of as great authority, and must
needs be some Gospel-like piece; for he musters it up to defend his cause, no
less than six or seven times, as holy tab. p. 178 193.196.211.214.234.
wherein it appears how exactly he conned these masse-bookes, and had them ad
unguem, ready even to words and syllables: The sixth Mass he makes use of, is
Saint Chrysostomes Lyturgie (as he calls it) though all the world know that he
was more frequent in the Pulpit than in the reading pew, and more laborious in
sermons, then Masse-bookes, as his sweet Sermons yet extant, taken by ready
writers from his own mouth in the pulpit, Socrates Eccles. hist. lib. 6. cap.
5. do declare him a gold-mouthed preacher, yet Lincoln quotes this Lyturgie,
as if it were Chrysostomes indeed (though it make mention of Chrysostom
himself) no less than eight times, as in p. 99.100.174.178.193.196.214.234.
His seventh Mass, or Lyturgie, is that of the Patriarch Severus, set forth in
siriack and latin, by Guido Fabritius, this he brings in ho. tab. page 196.
His eighth Lyturgie, is the Ethiopian, which he rouzes up from a dead sleep
to help him twice, h. tab. p. 178.196. His nin^h is the Mozarabick Liturgy
likewise twice brought in, to wit, p. 37. and 232. so that these nine masses or
Lyturgies, like nine worthies, or invincible Champions, he musters up no less
than thirty times, stuffing the margin with such like Authors, thereby
bringing an English reader into a good opinion of Masses and Lyturgies, and
drawing him to think, that if these Apostles and Fathers were not their
Authors, such a learned bishop would be ashamed to cite them in their names,
but he does more than that; for when these do not serve his turn, he makes
use of Pope Pius quintus new missall, as p. 35. and if this fail, the maine
authority be relies upon is, the Roman Pontifical, h. tab. p. 220. and p.
197. so that he will never want authors to his purpose, so long as any Friars
and Monks of Italy, France and Spain, who have naught else to do, can but
forge any pamphlet on the Fathers.

Note.
4. How he respects popish Writers, and how the Protestants.

And as his principal grounds lie upon Popish Authority, and his chief
strength consists in Jesuits and Schoolmen, and Masse-bookes, so he cannot but
respect those to whom he is so much engaged; and therefore it is no wonder to
hear him call, Lindwood, our learned gl^s^^t* holy Table, page 178. and Austin
(the black Monk of Canterbury) the Apostle of the Saxons, page 223. Gratian
the Father of all the Canonists, page 65. other Papists learned Pontifician
writers. page 218. Rome and Constantinople the two great Mother Churches of the
world, page 224. Nay, that impe of Satan's subtilty, Julian the Apostate, he
terms a witty Prince, page 157. And those that follow the popish School men,
judicious Divines, page 74. but contrariwise, those that embrace the only Word
of God, he calls professed Puritanes* page 74 and nothing but puritan, page
191. and downright puritanes, p. 189. and sectarie or puritan, page 138. and
Knave puritan, page 139. and puritanes in France, page 77. and these are his
general terms, and he uses particular persons no better; Calvin is but a
polypragmon, or busie-body, page 144. and pragmatically zealous, page 145. an
active man 147. And Beza hopes, or else his heart would burst, page 78.
Aynsworth and Broughton are derided, page 128. Master Cotton is but a foolish
Vicar of Boston, page 70. and Master Moulin is never termed otherwise, than
Mounsieur Moulin, page 196. which, though it be his native title in his own
Country, yet in English it sounds with as much grace, as if we should call the
Bishop of Lincoln, Shon ap Willom, which if he should never be otherwise
called, would not be much for his credit; and as these persons, so assemblies,
he preferres the Prelaticall Convocation before the Parliament, at least
twice, page 24. and 35. which agrees with what he says of their authorities,
tenet 35. and 36. compared, and lays the foundation for the late Convocation
in three several places, as appears, tenet 34. of a new Canon, and 35. of new
directions, and 51. of declaration of the Prince and chief goverenours of the
Chrurch, so that it is hereby evident what manner of man he is; the
consideration whereof moved me, though before I respected no Clergie-man in
England more than he, and though neither he nor any of his ever did me in
particular* any wrong, to exasperate me against him* and though I might rather
have petitioned (in respect of personal injuries and sufferings for a good
cause) against one of Canterburies Chaplains, who heavily afflicted me in the
Universitie, the cause whereof he could not declare, unless it were for not
cringing to the altar, or against Londons Officers, who have injuriously
wronged me of my living, unto which I was entitled by ordination; yet
disgesting mine own injuries, I have rather become an humble supplicant to the
Honorable Court of Parliament in behalf of the truth and doctrine of Christ*
beseeching them to defend both it and me; and if any man make a doubt of what
has been said, let him seriously (as I have done twice) cast a third look
over Lincoln.

The Nicene Creed or Faith was found to be a true Faith by the Truth it self,
and plain testimonies of holy Scripture: Constant. mag. Epist. ad Eccles.
Alexand. Socrat. hist. lib. 1. cap. 6. FINIS.
Errata.
GEntle Reader, to avoid titubations, correct these errors with a pen, before
you read the Book: in some books for fol. 8. is set down 4. for fo. 9.
there is 5. for fo. 12. there is 8. for fo. 13. there is 9. and for fol. 15.
there is none at all. In tenet 22. for p. 139. there is 149. In tenet 23. for
136. see 133. there is 133, 136. In the 19. tenet, Consid. 3. for second
thoughts* there is counter-thoughts, if any other faults appear, I desire thy
Christian charity.


