THE SKILFUL PHYSICIAN: Containing DIRECTIONS for the Preservation of a
Healthful Condition, AND Approved R^medies for all Diseases and Infirmities
(outward or inward) incident to the Body of Man.

With A right manner of applying them to the several Humors, Constitutions,
and Strength of every Patient, for their better and more successful Operation.

Whereunto is added, Experimented Instructions for the compounding of PERFUMES.

ALSO For the Choosing and Ordering of all kinds of WINES, both in preserving
the Sound, and rectifying those that are Pricked.

Never before imparted to Public View.

London, Printed by Tho. Maxey, for Nath. Ekins, at the Began near the West end
of Paul's, 1656.

The PREFACE.
IT is the Physicians care to recover Health: but it ought to be every ones
care to preserve their Health; and if we were careful to keep out Diseases, we
should not be so troubled to drive them out. Reason tells us, that it is better
to keep out an Enemy, then to let him in, and then to beat him out. So
doubtless, if men in the government of their Health would use Reason more,
they would need the Physician less: For Intemperance, which is the great enemy
of Reason, is the chief Cause of those Maladies, wherewith the bodies of men
and women are afflicted; and they must needs act contrary to Reason, who do any
thing that is contrary to the course of Nature; as to eat, or drink, or sleep,
or stir the body more then Nature requires, or less then Nature requires. The
good old Physician Hypocrates says, That fullness or emptiness, or any thing
else which is otherwise then Nature would have it, should be shunned as
hurtful. For this is the thing that makes work for the Physician; and he is
more employed in helping the bad Effects of too much, then of too little; and
the Cause of this is the abuse of Reason; when we make it the work of our
Reason to find out ways of Intemperancy; and we make Reason a Slave to
Appetite: where as if we would live like Rational People, we should rather
employ our Reason in observing our own Nature, and observing what is agreeable
to it, and what is not agreeable to it. And so we might by our own experience
find out many things, which would make much both for the preserving of our
Health, and prolonging of our Life. Certainly, we might easily keep our selves
in Health, if we were as careful to keep when we have it, as we are to regain
it, when it is lost: and it is a strange oversight not to prize our Health
until we are tormented with Diseases; to throw away our Health unreasonably or
carelessly, and then to lament our loss too late, and to be in long torture, and
at great charge before we can regain. Therefore those who rightly prize their
Health, which is indeed a great Treasure, let them live temperately, observe
diligently their own Natures, and follow exactly these Rules for the
preservation of Health, which have been found out by the great industry,
judicious inquiry, and long experience of Learned Men: the which Rules you have
set down here as follows, in some few and plain Directions.

The DIRECTIONS for the Preservation of HEALTH.
I. Of DIET.
1. Oppress not your stomach with immoderate or unseasonable eating or
drinking. If you be in Health, do not eat or drink unless you have an appetite
to it, and be sure that you have an empty stomach before you eat, and to eat
to fullness and overcharging of the stomach is not good. It is better to rise
from Table with an appetite to eat more, then to sit down to Table without an
appetite.

2. Judge those meats most agreeable to your body, which you desire most, and
digest best, without any trouble to you; but eschew those meats as hurtful to
you, which you have eaten upon an empty stomach being in health, if after the
eating of them, they cause sour and ill savoring belchings, with heaviness in
your stomach.

3. Observe this order in eating, if you have several dishes before you, first
eat that which is of easiest digestion, and then eat that which is of harder
digestion.

4. If any do ch^nge their course of Diet which they have used for a long time,
as they who by high feeding and continual fullness, come to have a very fat and
gross body, they resolve to use a more sparing Diet; or they who have been
accustomed to a very sparing and low Diet, if on a sudden they come to have
fullness and variety of Diet; or they who have much used any thing, as Tobacco,
etc, which they resolve to forbear, let them observe these following

Cautions: 1. Not to do it suddenly, but by little and little; for all sudden
changes are hurtful to nature.

2. That they do it not, but in time of perfect health, because they are then
best able to undergo such change.

3 That they do it not when they are much disturbed with business or
otherwise; because when the mind is much disturbed, Nature is easily drawn to
irregulate working to cause Diseases, and especially by a sudden change from
that which has been accustomed.

4. If a man has accustomed himself to any thing the most part of h^s life
time, howbeit this custom is bad, yet he cannot safely begin a change in his
old age.

5. Fasting from meat and drink in some cases is good, as in the increasing of
acute Diseases, or if there be much crudity in the stomach; but

fasting unadvisedly used is hurtful; as to those who have melancholic or
choleric dry bodies, much fasting is very injurious; but to those who are
phlegmatic, plethorick, fat, full of moist humors, temperance in their Diet,
with often and seasonable fasting is very good. Likewise those who drink so
much as to be distempered thereby, if they eat before that drink be well
digested, they undoubtedly wrong their bodies: and howbeit they are not then
sensible of it, having a strong Constitution; yet certainly this will be a
foundation of the decaying of nature. Extraordinary drinking does very much
diminish the strength of Nature; and much more, if you add eating to excessive
drinking. Experience makes it appear to us daily in many, that excessive
drinking or eating does oppress Nature, and causes the decay of Nature even
in the strongest constitutions. This is certain, that excessive fullness, or
too great want of what we should have, or any thing else which is not according
to the course of Nature, is hurtful.

6. Some use only one meal in a day, which is not to be commended, unless
their digestive faculty be very weak and slow in its operation. Some use two
meals in a day, others take three meals in a day, the which custom, as it is
most generally received, so indeed it is most to be approved of, if it be done
with Discretion; viz. if you take such things as are most agreeable to you, and
so much at a meal as may be easily digested before the next meal. It is a good
rule of Diet, to eat often and little at a time, not to let the stomach be long
empty, nor to eat again before it be empty; for to eat or drink (when we have
meat in our stomach half digested, or almost digested) before the digestion be
finished, it does much disturb the digestive faculty, pervert its operation,
and so is the cause of many Diseases: but to keep the stomach always in
working, and to give it that whereupon it can work most easily, and to give it
so much work as it can quickly perform: this does encourage Nature to follow
its work, it strengthens the digestive faculty, and preserves it in its
strength. By this rule, every one may order their own Diet well, if they
rightly consider their strength and constitution, and condition of life. As
those who stir much may feed oftener then they who use a fitting life; and those
who have hot, choleric, slender bodies, may feed oftener then those who have
gross, fat or phlegmatic bodies. For they who have gross and full bodies ought
to use a sparing Diet, and to use such meats and drinks which are of little
nourishment and of a drying faculty. But if you would know what time of the day
you may feed most largely. I answer, In the forenoon or in the morning, if you
purpose to sup at night, that it may be well digested before supper time; for
they who dine largely at noon, it is not probable that their dinner can be well
digested before Supper time, unless they be of a choleric, hot constitution,
for such have a quick digestion, and cannot eat much at a time. Now whereas
many p^t the question, whether it is better to sup largely or dine largely? or
if it be better to dine largely, and not to sup at all, whereas the common
custom is to dine largely, and to use a light supper. I answer, If your
stomach be not empty, if that which you have eaten before be not well digested,
it is better not to sup at all, for the reasons already mentioned: but if your
stomach be empty, and you have a good appetite to your supper, you may sup as
largely as you may dine, so as you refrain from going to bed three or four
hours after.

7. To eat of one sort of meat only at a meal, is best; but if you eat of
several dishes, let them be such, as are near of a Nature: for to eat of
several dishes of disagreeing Natures, as to eat fish and flesh at the same
meal, etc. it overthrows the digestive faculty, fills the body with
discordant humors, and produces strange bad Effects.

8. To drink too sparingly at meals does very much hinder concoction, to drink
great draughts and seldom, does weaken the stomach, which then is in
concoction, and drives down the meat too hastily, and corrupts the whole
body with overmuch moisture and crudity; wherefore it is best to drink often at
meals and little at a time, and to swallow it down, not hastily, but leisurely;
for the drink being mixed with the meats, by diverse little draughts leisurely
taken, tempereth them well both for concoction and distribution. Ordinary

Beer is best at meals, and at the ending of your meal take some strong drink,
viz. Wine or strong Beer to help concoction. Drink not betwixt meals, if you
can possibly forbear it, unless great thirst and drought of the stomach
require it, and then only a little is to be taken.

As for that custom commonly used, to drink fasting in the morning, it is not
good for any but those who have a hot and dry constitution, or subject to
obstructions, to allay the drought of the stomach, and to cleanse away slimy or
obstructive humors, whieh are in the Stomach, Liver, Veins or Reins.

9. It is a common custom and commendable, to set first on the Table bread and
salt, and to take them last away, thereby showing the necessary use of them at
meals; and indeed they are to be reproved who use not (as some do) bread or
salt at their meals. For Salt helps concoction much, and preventeth the
crudities of the stomach, and therefore it is good to eat much salt with fresh
meats, or to have your meats powdered.

As for Bread, we may very well give it the first place at meals, for it
yeildeth a nourishment very familiar to our Natures. Let your bread be of the
flower of the best Wheat, let it be fitly leavened: for so it is more easily
digested, and yeildeth better nourishment; but if it be too much leavened, it
is of heavy digestion, and of no commendable nourishment. Let it be temperately
seasoned with salt, let it be light, well wrought, well baked, and eat it not
over new, nor too stale. When you eat flesh, eat twice so much bread as flesh.
When you eat fish, eat thrice so much bread as fish, especially if the fish be
of the moister sort, that the superfluous moistnre of it may be tempered by the
dryness of the bread; for they who eat little bread with their meats, commonly
are troubled with windy crudities, watrish and impure stomachs.

10. That you may know what kind of meats is best for you, take this general
rule, use such meats as are most agreeable to the constitution of your body, to
your age, and season of the year. Those who are of a hot choleric
constitution, should use meats of a moistning cooling nature. Those who are of
a cold, dry, melancholic constitution, should use meats and drinks of a
moistning and heating faculty. Those of a phlegmatic constitution, should use
meats and drinks of a heating and drying faculty. Those of a sanguine
complexion, should use a Diet of a temperate nature. And to those who have
strong stomachs, meats of strong nourishment, and of slow concoction are most
agreeable: but to them who have weak stomachs, as old or sickly people, etc.
meats of lighter substance and of easier concoction are best.

In respect of the season also, you must alter your Diet; in the Spring and
Summer use a more sparing Diet then in Harvest or Winter. In the Summer use
meats and drinks of a cooling and moistning faculty, in the Winter let them be
heating and drying; in the Spring let them be of a temperate nature, and not
too nourishing; in the Harvest, let them be moistning, and moderately heating.

I cannot here show you particularly what things are cooling, or moistning, or
heating, etc. because I must be short being in a Preface, and I refer you to
those who have treated largely of these things; viZ. Muffets Improvement of
Health.

Of Sleep and Watching.
Life cannot continue without food, and Health cannot be preserved, without
moderate sleep; for this refreshes the wearied spirits, and repaireth the
decayed spirits, it furthereth concoction, and is a present help for Crudities;
but if it be immoderately used, it is hurtful, it causes defluxions, heaviness
of the head, dullness of wit; cold phlegmatic Diseases, etc. therefore that you
may use sleep comfortably and profitably, have a care, that your sleep be
seasonable, for as you should not watch when you should fleep, so you should
not sleep when you should be aw^ke; and therefore es^hue noonsleeps, and too
long morning-sleeps, as great enemies to health; for whatsoever is not
according to the course of Nature, is contrary to Nature, and so will by little
and little weaken Nature, and in the end overthrow it. Now we see it natural to
all living and sensitive creatures to observe this rule, To sleep in the night
time, and in the day to be provident to supply their wants; and therefore they
who do contrary to this rule, are contrary to the course of nature, and wrong
themselves, howbeit they are not at present sensible of it. And without doubt
these two (which are both contrary to Natures rule) viz. unseasonable sleeping
or watching, and unreasonable eating and drinking are the great causes which
deprive us of Health, and shorten our lives, as those especially who are rich
find it by experience, who stay out of bed very late, and lie long in the
morning, a bad custom: but as you tender health, sleep not in the mornings too
long, unless honest occasions, or an ill disposition of body causes much
watching in the beginning of the night; then it is needful that you make amends
by sleeping so much the longer in the morning: neither should you sleep at
noone, for sleeping after dinner (if it is constantly used) causes superfluous
moisture of the brain, and causes cold Diseases of the brain, as Palsies,
etc. puffs up the Spleen with wind, prepares the body for Agues,
Imposthumes, etc.

Yet in some extraordinary cases sleeping after dinner may and ought to be used;

1. If you have not slept well in the night nor in the morning.

2. If you be faint with excessive heat of the Season.

3. Old people, because of their weakness, may sleep after dinner, or any
other time when they can.

4. Those who have slender and dry bodies, receive great benefit by sleeping
after dinner; for it moistneth their bodies, and refreshes their spirits. But
those who have full gross bodies, or who are of a sanguine or phlegmatic
complexion, let them beware of sleeping after dinner.

Now those who would sleep at noon must observe these things following.

1. That they sleep not immediately after Dinner, but an hour after, or half an
hour at least.

2. That they sleep not lying, but rather sitting with the body upright.

3. That they-sleep not over long, not above half an hour, or an hour at most.

4. That they sleep not in a place too hot (especially in the Summer time) but
rather enclining to cold: the most convenient place for any to sleep in at any
time, is that which is not too hot nor too cold, not too close nor too open;
and above all, it must not be dampish, for that is very hurtful to the body,
especially to the head: you must have a care to keep your head and neck well
from the cold when you sleep.

When you sleep, lie upon your right side; and not upon your left side, unless
it be to ease your body, when you are wearied with lying upon your right side:
lie upon your left side as little as you can; for to lie upon the left side,
hinders concoction, increases the Diseases of the Spleen, causes
troublesome Dreams, etc. So likewise to lie upon your back when you sleep, is
very unwholesome; it causes troublesome sleeps, it causes the Nightmare, it
occasioneth the Lethargy, Palsies, Cramp, it heateth the Raines; it is very bad
for those who are troubled with the Stone, or are inclined to it.

Now if you would know how long you ought to sleep, observe this rule, That you
should sleep, until you find the concoction of the stomach and liver be
finished, the spirits well refreshed, and you find a lightsomnesse in the whole
body, especially in the stomach and head. But if you find heaviness in the
body, head, and eyes, or stomach, or if you have ill savoured belchings, or
etc. they signify that you have not yet slept enough.

Again, the time of your sleep must be determined according to your strength
and constitution; as those who are weak and sickly, or aged and children, must
take longer time of rest, then those who are strong, or young, for whom seven
or eight hours sleep is enough. And those who have dry, choleric or
melancholic bodies, need longer sleep then the phlegmatic or sanguine, or
those who have gross fat bodies; for it very much refreshes and moistneth dry
bodies, to whom there is nothing more hurtful then too much watchfulness. But
too long sleep to phlegmatic, gross bodies is very hurtful.

It is a custom to warm the bed before we go to bed, which should not be used
by those who are healthful and strong (unless fresh sheets be laid upon the
bed) for it weakneth their bodies, and makes them tender. But it is good for
them who are aged, or are weak by Nature, or lead a tender course of life, for
such cannot well endure a cold bed, it may wrong them much: weak or tender
Natures, are by very small occasions overcome and put out of their right
courses.

I conclude concerning sleeping and watching with this, That immoderate and
unseasonable Sleeping weakeneth the natural heat, fills the body with bad
humors, and enclineth the body to cold, phlegmatic Diseases, dulleth the
spirits and wit.

And immoderate Watching dries the body too much, it turns a sanguine
constitution to be choleric; and it turns a phlegmatic constitution to be
melancholic, it overdryeth the brain; it wastes the spirits, it weakneth the
digestive faculty, enclineth the body to consumptions, etc.

Of Exercise.
The stirring of the body by walking, riding, some pastime, etc. If it be
moderate and in fit time; it increases natural heat, refreshes and quickneth
the spirits, makes the body lightsome and nimble, helps concoction,
furthereth the expulsion of the Excrements and bad humors, etc. In any
stirring industrious course of life, for the most part they live longer and
healthier then those who use a sitting restful life.

But you must have a care, that you use not too much stirring or motion of the
body to weary your self too much; for this will consume the natural moisture,
and waste the spirits, incline the body to a Consumption, etc.

Those who would use any kind of Exercise only for their Healths sake, let them
not do it upon a full stomach, or immediately after eating, for the most part
of Physicians do agree in this, that we should not go about any exercise of
the Body until the first and second digestion is completed, when the stomach
is light and almost empty.

It will be good also to disburden your selves of the excrements of the belly,
and of urine, before you begin your Exercise, lest the Excrements by the
violence of the heat of the Exercise, be drawn into the veins, or etc. whereby
the blood may be corrupted, Obstructions caused, etc. And if you use any
exercise or violent motion of the body immediately after meals, or while there
is meat in the stomach not digested, it marreth digestion, and causes
crudities and bad humors; whereupon will follow Scabs, Ulcers, Imposthumes.
This is to be understood chiefly of those who use a restful life, and live
tenderly. But those who live in continual exercise of their body, as laboring
men, they need not be so cautious for the time or manner of their Exercise (for
that to which our Natures are constantly accustomed, will not do us harm,) if
men keep themselves to one constant course of Exercise, and not at any time to
exceed their ordinary custom: but if they do things rashly and immoderately,
otherwise then they use to do; as if they fall upon any work upon a full
stomach; or if after violent hot working they are careless of themselves, and
keep not themselves warm, etc. Thereupon certainly will follow alterations of
the body and Diseases. For that to which we are not accustomed, if it be
violent and oppresserh Nature, it must of necessity work dangerous alterations
in us. You must be very cautious in the doing of any thing to which you are not
accustomed, until by tonstant use it becomes familiar to our Nature, and then
it may be used safely, howbeit at first perhaps it was dangerous, if not used
with great caution.

A constant custom in any thing prevails much with Nature, so that a man may
safely do that to which he has been accustomed, which would be very dangerous
to another. And therefore violent stir^ing of the body to those who have a
restful life, or untimely exercise immediately after meals, is hurtful; but to
rise up after meal, to stand or to walk softly is good: and if it be in cold
seasons of the year, let the place be temperate, not too hot nor too cold; if
it be in the hot seasons of the year, walk in the open fields, nigh to some
pleasant rivers after supper; but after dinner in some shadowed place, or some
cool Arbor, etc. Observe this general rule concerning the place, after meals
to stand or walk in, That it incline more to cold then to heat. For as the heat
of Exercise immediately after meals, so the heat of a hot place by drawing our
natural heat from the inward parts of the body to the outward, it marreth
digestion, and fills the body with crude humors, therefore after meals let
your place be pleasant and moderately cool, your exercise gentle walking and
pleasant discourse with merry company; spend an hour so, and thereby you
shall find digestion furthered, your body much refreshed, natural heat and
strength cherished and increased. But when you use great motion of the body, as
in travel, pastime, etc. do it moderately, so as you do not weary your selves
too much, and oppress the strength of nature: and in this moderate beneficial
stirring of the body there may be several degrees observed, according to the
constitution of the body, and season of the year.

1. Those who have a gross or phlegmatic body, should use much exercise, and
should exercise themselves so, as thereby to provoke sweat; but they must have
a care that they provoke not sweat immoderately, nor proceed to extreme
weariness, for thereby the spirits and good humors of the body will be too
much wasted, and the fat of the rain^s melted.

2. Those who have dry slender bodies, must use e^si exercise: They must stir
their bodies no longer then the color and flesh is somewhat ruddy, and the
sweat begins to come out; too much motion of their bodies will bring them to a
Consumption.

Again, your Exercise must be according to the season of the year; for as the
season is colder, so you may use stronger and more laborious exercises, and
oftener: and as the season inclines more to heat, so the exercise or motions of
your body must be more moderate and calm.

One thing I will add here, viz. Rubbing of the Body, which is much commended
to us by all Physicians, and is found by the experience of all who have used
it, to be a thing very beneficial to the body, and it may well stand in stead
of all other Exercises or motions of the body, to those who cannot have such
Exercises, either because of their weakness, or etc. It stirs up and
increases natural heat, it quickneth the blood, it strengthens the parts, it
draws humors from the higher parts of the body to the lower parts, it
concocteth crude humors, it strengthens digestion, it draws bad humors
from the principal parts of the body; there is not any one thing which may be
more commended then this, for the preservation of the strength of Nature. But
as all other Exercises of the body, so rubbing of the body must be used with
caution, viz. That those who have gross or phlegmatic bodies must rub over
their bodies until they provoke sweat; but those who have hot bodies, or dry
slender bodies, they must rub their bodies until the flesh begins to swell,
and grows ruddish, and no longer. So likewise according to the Season, we
must use rubbing more or less; as the season is colder, so must we use rubbing
more, and less in hot seasons.

The manner how it is to be done, is thus. Rub with your hands, or rather with
a warm linen cloth your shoulders, arms, breast, sides, thighs, Legs and
feet; but the belly, stomach and back, especially near to the reins must not
be rubbed. If you can your selves do it, and not to have another to do it, it
will be so a great deal better. You must do it when you lie down at night, but
then more gently; but in the morning before you rise do it more strongly; and
when you rise, have a care to keep your selves well from the cold. Begin your
rubbing easily and softly, afterward faster and harder; and while you are
rubbing, lay a double cloth warmed to your stomach and belly. After you are
risen, and have combed your head well backward, then rub your head and your
neck with a warm linen cloth, and (if it be a cold season) before the fire,
remembering the Cautions concerning rubbing before mentioned. This rubbing of
the Head and Neck, is especially to be commended to those who have moist heads,
Students, and such as are troubled with Rhumes, Palsies, etc.

Of Excrements.
1. To go to stool twice or once in the day at least, preventeth those many
inconveniences which are caused by the too long stay of the Excrements in the
body; but if you cannot do so by reason of costiveness, which is very hurtful,
and has many inconveniences following it, therefore drink much, especially at
meals, that thereby the stomach and in^estines may be well moistened: this will
keep the Excrements soft, and make the passages slippery. But if Nature is dull
and slow to evacuation, it will be good to use some gentle loosening thing, at
first once in two days for some time, then use it once in a day: and when you
have accustomed your self to go to stool so once in the day, Nature it self
will afterward observe that custom.

2. Sweating is very good for gross phlegmatic Bodies; but those who have dry
slender bodies, must use it very moderately; and those whose bodies are too
much drved by a Disease, or are enclining to a Consumption must eschew sweating
as much as they can.

3. Keep not Urine or Wind in your body, when Nature would void them, for they
are very hurtful, if they be kept long in the body; and if you cannot break
wind upward when it is in the stomach, or break it downward when it is in the
belly, then use something which is good against the wind: let it stay in your
body as little time as you can, especially if it be bred (as most commonly it
is) of Crudities; but when your body is free from Crudities, do not accustom
your self to break wind, refrain from it then as much as you can; for if we
bring Nature to a custom to break wind much, it is the way to make it breed
wind.

4. To use any thing to provoke the evacuation of phlegm at the mouth or nose,
is not to be approved of; it is best to let Nature follow its own course,
unless those Excrements of the mouth or nose be obstructed: or abound
exceedingly by reason of a cold, or some other Cause.

Of Passions of the Mind.
Eschew all excessive Passions, as excessive joy, excessive anger, excessive
fear, etc. for they oftentimes cause weakness of the body, and Swounings, and
often times sickness, and sometimes sudden death. Likewise envy, extreme cares,
continual fear and continual sadness, are great enemies to health and shorten
life: but a quiet contented, cheerful mind, free from all these Passions, is a
great supporter of Health and prolonger of Life.

Of the Choice of Air.
The best Air is that which is pure, clear, and temperate, not too hot nor too
cold, nor too moist, nor mixed with gross moisture, or corrupt no some
vapors. Therefore shun that Air which 1. Evaporateth from corrupt Ponds
standing Pools, impure places, as nasty Ditches which are full of impurities,
etc. 2. Which is in Valleys or low places, which are shut up about with Hil^s,
so as no wind can come to it to purify it. 3. Shun the Air of Marish and
moorish grounds. 4. Shun foggy mists. 5. Stay not in the night Air; nor in any
moist or dampish Air, as a moist Easterly Air, or a moist Westerly Air.


An impure Air which arises from corrupt impure places, infecteth the body,
and causes dangerous Diseases.

An Air which is too moist, or a Night air increases phlegm, and causes
Rheumes.

The Air of low and marish places, fill the body with gross phlegmatic
humors, causes pain in the joints, Cramp, Palsy, and other cold Diseases of
the brain, etc.

An Air extreme cold (if we continue long in it) it weakeneth the brain and
sinews, causes Rheums and Coughs, weakneth natural heat; etc.

An Air too hot spends our spirits, weakneth concoction, dissolveth and
draws out natural heat, it burns the blood, etc.

That, Air then is most wholesome which is temperate and clear; and therefore
those dwellings are commended as the best, which are seated on high dry grounds
in open Air, far from low, marish or filthy places, for there the air is most
pure, subtle and temperate.

REader, I have here given thee some plain useful Directions for the
preservation of thy Health, as fully to this business as the bounds of a
Preface permits. I now proceed to give thee Remedies for the regaining of
thy Health if lost; and I assure thee they are such as are not taken upon
trust, but often tried and approved. In the publishing of them, I have taken
care 1. of interfering with any others, and 2. lest I might delude and deceive
thee with impertinencies, or any thing picked out of others of the same nature;
and 3. that I might avoid that general defect of all that has hitherto come
forth of this useful Subject, especially in the Cure of Internal Distempers, by
varying the Administrations according to the Complexion, Strength, and
Constitution of the Patient. And that thou may not be much troubled in
finding out what thou desire for thy present condition, I have put them in
such an order, that thou may easily find every thing under its proper Letter,
the several Letters of the Alphabet referring either to the Diseases, the
Remedies, or the parts of the Body Affected. If these shall be successful and
acceptable to thee, I trust ere long, to gratify thee with more complete
Directions for the Preservation of Health, and to impart such Secrets, as few
in the world have been acquainted with to this day.

In the mean time, I have here presented to thee (toward the latter end of this
Treatise) a few Instructions for the Choice of all sorts of Wines, and how to
Order them, both for the preserving of those that are Sound, and to choose such
as will last; as also how to recover and restore those that through defect of
Substance, or by long keeping are decayed and pricked. I think I may truly
affirm, they are the first of that kind that have come to public view.

A Hearty Well-wisher of thy Health, D. D.

The Names of the most Eminent Persons, whose Skill has contributed any thing
to this Book.
Dr. POWEL. Dr. DEODATE. Dr. CADAMAN. Dr. HILL. PARACELSUS. Dr. CRANMER. Dr.
BUROUGHS. Dr. BUTLER. ALBUCENSES. Dr. STEVENS. Dr. WHEAD. Mrs. BILL, Mrs.
WING:
THE SKILFUL PHYSICIAN.
ACHES.
A Sovereign Medicine for any Ache.
TAke Barrowes grease, a lap full of Archangel leaves, flowers, stalks and all,
and put it into an earthen pot, and stop it close, and paste it; then bury it
in a horse dunghill nine days in the latter end of May, and nine days in the
beginning of June, then take it forth and strain it, and so use it.

A Receipt for all cold and raw Humors; and Aches in men's bones. Proved by
Doctor Powel.
Take two ounces of Mastick, two ounces of Vermillion, half a pound of
Frankincense, one penny worth of Rosen, beat every one of these into fine
powder by it self, then mingle them altogether; and if they look not red
enough, put in more Vermillion; and when you will use this Medicine, take a
spoonful of this Powder, and put it into a chasing dish of quick coals, and let
the Patient sit on a stool close covered, and the Chafingdish put under the
stool, which must be shifted three times before the Patient rise from the
stool; and the Patient must sit Evening and Morning upon the stool (as
aforesaid) all naked, saving a sheet about his neck to cover him before, even
to the feet, and another behind him of like length, and upon the sheets two
blankets; and by that time two spoonfuls of the Powder be spent, the Patient
will sweat and be faint, and when the Patient has sat out the third
Chafingdish, he must go to bed, and lie in the same clothes, and never change
them in three days. He may eat and drink what he lift, so his Drink be warm.

For all manner of Aches, and the Sciatica.
Take a handful of Herb-grace, and bray it small in a Mortar, then take one
ounce of Frankincense, and one ounce of Commin, and beat them to Powder
severally; then take one pound of black soap, and sees it on the fire till it
be melted, then put in the aforesaid things, and let them boil together, till
it be thick; then take and spread it like a Plaster upon a cloth, and lay it
to the Grief as hot as may be suffered, and so let it continue twelve hours,
then take it away, and if the place be blistered, lay that to it no more, but
prick the blisters with a needle; and if it be not blistered, then lay on a
fresh plaster, and let it ly twelve hours more, and keep the place grieved and
the Patient very warm. Probatum est.

For any Ache whatsoever,
Take two great Onions, and make holes in the tops, and put into each one dram
of Camphire, so much of Frankinsense as a Walnut, one pennyworth of English
Saffron; roast the Onion in the fire; then pill it, and strain it to an Oil,
and put thereto so much of the marrow of a dead horses haunch bone, and mingle
it well together, and anoint the place pained therewith.

A precious Remedy for any extreme Ache.
Take a Whelp that sucketh (the fatter the better) and drown him in water,
then take out his guts clean, and fill his belly with black Soap, and put him
on a spit and roast him well, and take the dropping thereof, and put it in a
Vessel, and then lay the Patient in a sweat, and anoint him therewith, and
cover him warm with clothes, that he may sweat well, then make a fire of
Charkcoals in a pan, and lay thereon a good handful of Sage, and let him take
the air thereof in a close room; and do this five times.

For all manner of Aches in Bones, Joints, or Sciatica.
Take Balm and Cinqfoil; but most of all Betony, Nep and Fetherfew, stamp
them, and drink the juice with Ale or Wine. Prebatum.

A very good Plaster for any Ache or swelling in the Joints.
Take of Stipticum Paracelsi, and Calcithers, of each alike, spread it upon
Leather and make a Plaster thereof, then anoint the place grieved with Oil of
Roses, and after lay on the Plaster. Mr. Smart.

For an old Ache or Sciatica.
Take Hartshorn, and chop it in reasonable small pieces, then put it in a
Pipkin, cover is with water, and stop it close, and set it in an Oven with
Bread, and when it is baked, take out the Pipkin, and when it is cold, it will
be a Jelly; then warm some of it, and anoint the grieved place with a warm
hand, and chafe it in often.

For an Ache.
Take Aqua composita and Neatsfoot Oil, warm them, and anoint the place
therewith, and lay warm clothes thereon.

Another.
Take Pa^sly and Wormwood, of each a handful, and seethe them in a quart of
Ale, with a quantity of sweet Butter, and wash the place therewith, and bind
the Herbs to the place, as hot as may be suffered.

Another.
Take Smallage stamped, and put it into Aqua vitae, and strain it, and put
thereto Boars grease, and strain them together, and anoint the place
therewith morning and evening.

For an Ache or the Sciatica.
Take Neats foot Oil and Aqua composita, and anoint the place therewith, then
take wool newly taken from the Sheep and put thereon with warm clothes.

Another.
Take the juice of Smallage, Sorrel, and of Woodbind leaves, of each alike,
then take Honey and the white of an egg, of each alike, and mingle it together
till it be thick, and lay it on cold without any boiling at all.

Another.
Take as fat a Goose as you can get, and when she is ready dressed, then take a
couple of the fattest young sucking Cats you can get, and flay them, and cut
them into gobbets, and put them into the belly of the Goose, and so roast it as
long as it will drop, then take the liquor and anoint the place pained
therewith, and bathe it well before the fire, as hot as you can suffer it, and
dip a brown paper therein, and lay it hot thereunto with warm clothes bound
fast to it all night. Do this for the space of three or four nights together.

AGUES.
For a Quartain Ague.
Take a quart of Ale, one ounce of Cene, half an ounce of Licoras, half an
ounce of Anniseeds, a few Raisons of the Sun, boil these together till your Ale
be more then half consumed, then give it to the Patient to drink, as warm as
he may, when his Fit is upon him, and go to bed, and keep him warm. This is to
be used three several times, if his Fit go not away at the first. Probatum.

For an Ague.
Take the Root of a blew Lilly and scrape it clean, and slice it, lay it in
soak all night in Ale, and in the morning stamp it and strain it, and give it
the Patient luke warm to drink, an hour before the Fit comes.

For the Fever Cake.
Take Barley meal, or else the flower of wheat, and make a cake and bake it,
and then take the juice of Hemlocks, and anoint the belly with it: Also you
may take Oil of Exceter, or Sallet Oil, and fry a few Oats therein, and lay it
to the Patients stomach as hot as he can suffer it. Probatum.

For a hot Burning Ague.
Take Succory roots and leaves, Parsley roots, Endive leaves, Borrage leaves
and Sorrel leaves, seethe all these together in a pottle of running water, and
when it is well sodden, strain the water from the Herbs, then put to it a good
piece of Sugar to make it pleasant, and two spoonful of Vinegar, that it may be
somewhat sharp: you may also put in Buglos.

An excellent Medicine for an Ague.
Take a handful of good Bay Salt, and put it into a Mortar and bray it very
small, then put thereto as many of the biggest Cobwebs that you can get, as the
quantity of four fingers, and beat them a good while, then put into them a good
handful of Smallage clean picked, and so beat them all together very well into
one substance; then take it out of the Mortar, and put thereunto two ounces of
the best Venice Turpentine unwashed, and temper them well together, and two
hours before the Ague fit comes, divide it into two parts, and bind it equally
to both wrists on the place where the Pulse beats, and roll it up well with a
linen cloth, that it stir not from the place, and tack it fast with a needle
and thread, and so let it lie four and twenty hours, and it will alter the Fit
of the Ague and drive it away; but if not, try the second time and no doubt but
it will help. A little fresh butter will get off the Medicine from the wrists.

A good Medicine to remove or avoid a Burning Fever.
Take of Dragon Water, of Angelica Water, of Red rose Water, of each three
spoonfuls, three grains of Bezar Stone, the quantity of a Nutmeg of
Mithridatum, or else a spoonful of Jean Treakle, half a penny worth of English
Saffron; Mingle all these together, and take it fasting, and sweat after it,
and use this two or three mornings together.

For the Ague.
Take one penny worth of Gore Turpentine, of Rye Leaven the quantity of a Hasel
Nut, being somewhat stale, a little course Mastick, and a little bay salt, both
beaten small, one handful of Smallage, and a few Cobwebs shred small; mingle all
these with the Turpentine, and spread the same upon a plece of white Sheeps
leather on the rough side, being pricked full of holes, and three hours before
you think your Fit will come, bind it to your wrists, and let it continue nine
days or more.

Another.
Take a pottle of Ale, seethe it, and skum it, then put to it the tops of
Centory, Mints, Sage, Wormwood and Hysop of each a handful; boil all in the
Ale, till half be consumed, then take the Herbs out with a spoon, then put a
quantity of Sugar into the Ale, to allay the bitterness of it, and so let it
boil a little while again, then strain it through a fair cloth; that done, put
thereto as much Treakle as the bigness of a bean and then keep it in a fair
glass, and let the Patient drink thereof first and last, and drink not after
for the space of an hour.

For all Fevers and Agues of sucking Children.
Take powder of Crystal, and steep it in wine and give it the Nurse to drink:
also take the root of Morsus Diabili with the Herb, and hang it about the
Child's neck.

For an Ague.
Take Bur-roots and red Nettle crops, and seethe them in stale Ale, and
clarifient, let the Patient drink it a little before the cold fit comes, and
when he beg n^eth to swear, give him a posset of Ale made with Marigolds, and
Fennel being clarified, and it helps in four or five Fits.

Another.
Take of Smallage and Fetherfew, of each a handful stamp them, and strain
them, and take half so much (as the juice thereof) of small Ale, being mixed
together, drink it in bed before the Fit comes, and cover your self warm.

Another.
Take Endive, Sowthistle, Dandillion, Lettice, Sorrel, of each alike, still them
altogether, and the water thereof is very good for an Ague.

Another.
Take Soot. and yolks of Eggs, and bay Salt, and Pepper, being mingled well
together, and lay it to both the wrists, and drink warm Ale.

Another.
Take three cloves of Garlic, and bruise them, a penny worth of Aqua vitae,
and half a pint of Ale, seethe them together; and drink it before the Fit
comes, as hot as you may.

Another.
Box leaves dried and made into powder, and Sheeps trecklings put in soak in
strong Ale, and drunk, is very good.

An approved Medicine for an Ague.
Take a red Fennel root, and cut it very small, and take six and fifty corns of
Pepper beaten very small, and mingle them together, and bind them to your
wrists half an hour before your Fit comes.

AQUA COMPOSITA.
How to make a Special Aqua Composita to take for a Surfeit or cold stomach.
Take a handful of Rosemary, a good root of Enula campane, a handful of Hysop,
half a handful of Thime, six good crops of Sage, as much Mint, and as much
Penniroyal, half a handful of Horehound, two ounces of Liquorice well bruised,
and as much Anniseeds; Then take two gallons of the best strong Ale, and take
all the Herbs aforesaid, and wring them asunder, and put them into an Earthen
pot well covered, and let them stand a day and a night; from thence put all into
a brass pot, and set it on the fire, and let it stand till it boil: then take
it from the fire, and set your Limbeck on the pot, and stop it close with paste
that there come no air out of it, and still it out with a soft fire. There is
to be added to it by a new counsel, one handful of red Fennel.

A Receipt of G. K. to make Aqua composita.
Take of the best strong stale Ale, three gallons, of Licoras clean scraped and
bruised half a pound, of Aniseeds clean dressed and bruised one pound.

Of each small cut one ounce.
Fennel seed Carraway seed Sassafras seed Piony seed Winter savory seed Seed of
Anodinum Seed of Ameos
Of each one ounce.
Ginger Nutmegs Gallingal Great Gallingal
Bruised, of each half an ounce.
Cloves Long Pepper Cubebes Callamint aromaticus
Of each two ounces.
Cinnamon bruised Ivy roots sliced Enula campana roots dried and thin sliced
Roots of Tussilage.
Of Bay berries bruised, first blanched, one ounce.
Of each a quarter of an ounce.
Setwal Spiknard Mace Lignum Aloes
Of each a handful.
Roots of Angelica sliced, and of the seeds bruised Ligna Cassia sliced.
Juniper berries bruised, or the Wood thin sliced Red Rose flowers Flowers of
Sticardue Saint John's wort The Herb Canapitis Diptamnus Cretius. Pimpernel
Phillipendola Scabious Betony Egrimony Plantane Oamomile flowers
of each an ounce.
The Wood or Tree called Tamariscus The roots of Sassaparilla bruised The roots
of Orpine
The Roots of Gentian sliced two drams.
one ounce.
Of the Gum of Mirrh Of Olibanum Of Mastick Of Alkanite
Of Sugar four ounces.
The order of drawing this Aqua Composita.
Half your Cinnamon, your Lignum Adlo^s, the roots and seeds of Angelica must
be reserved out of the Brass pot, and knit in a linen bag, and laid in the
Receiver, whereinto your Liquor must run; and by and by the Alkanite must be
put into the Receiver. Also receive out of your brass pot all your Herbs and
Flowers until the last draught come; your other Spices, Seeds, Roots and Gums
must be put with your Ale into your brass pot, then set on your Limbeck, and
close it fast with paste, and keep the head thereof always cool with cold water,
and draw it so long as it will run good, which is tried by casting a little of
it into the fire, if it burn, it is good; if not, take off your Limbeck
charily, and power out all your stuff that is in your linen bags in the
Receiver, and all the rest of your flowers and herbs, and put to them a gallon
and a half of fresh Ale, and set on your Limbeck again, and draw it as before;
and the Cinnamon and the Sugar that is left, must be put into the Receiver
again: and when all is drawn out, put your first draught and your last
together, and keep it for your use.

The best way to make Mrs. Bells Aquacomposita.
Take six gallons of the best strong Ale, the Ale wort must be so strong, that
it will bear an Egg, and the Ale must be at least a week old, then take two
pound of Anniseeds, two pound of Licoras scraped and bruised, Fennel seeds,
Coriander seeds, Carraway seeds, Parsley seeds and Gromel seeds, of each a good
handful, and (for any other Seeds or Spices use your discretion) then take of
Lavender, Rosemary, Sage, Hisop, Savory, Sweet Marjerom, Standing Time,
Mother-Time, Running Time, Burrage, Buglos, Succory, Endive, Lettice,
Violet-leaves, Strawberry-leaves, Mugwort, Red Fennel, Peniroyal, Red Mints,
Herb-grace, Germander, Avens, Wormwood, Bay Leaves, Nep, Clary, Horehound,
Comfrey, Marigold leaves, Mercury, Sowthistle, Sorrel, Plantane, Ribwort,
Angelica, Carduus Benedictus Wood-Betany, Scabious, Balm, Liver-wort,
Long-wort, Saint John's Wort, Saint Peters-worts, Parsley, Dandillion, Basil,
Lavender Spike, Bloodwort, Egrimony, Burnet, Garden Gallingale roots,
Setwal-roots, Polipodium of the Oak, Pimpernel, Clivers, Shepherds-flowers,
Knot grass, Cinqfoil, Long debeeff, Sparragus, Watercresses, Spinach, of each
of these two handfuls, two or three heads of Houseleek. Put all the Seeds,
Herbs and Roots to the Ale, and let them lie a steeping, all night, then still
them in a Limbeck and draw of it so long as it runs good; which is tried by
casting a little of it into the fire; if it burn, it is good, or else not.

To make another Aqua-composita.
Take a brass pot of four gallons, and rub it very clean within side, then take
three Gallons of good strong Ale, and a gallon of Wine lees, so that your pot
be not full by three fingers with your Herbs and Spices, as follows. Take a
pound of Anniseeds well bruised, and half a pound of Licoras scraped and
bruised, and put it into the pot, then take a handful of Rosemary, a handful of
Hisop, a good root of Enulacampana and scrape it well and slice it; half a
handful of Unset Time, half a handful of Mints, a handful of red Fennel, a
handful of red Sage, six good crops of Marjerom, and as much Peniroyal, a
quater of a handful of Hartstongue, half a handful of Horehound; gather not the
Herbs till the dew be off them, then wring all your Herbs asunder, and put your
Spices and all in your pot, and let them stand all night, then set your pot
upon a fire of Charcoals, and set on your Limbeck upon the pot; and stop your
pot round about with paste, so that no air come forth; then make a little fire
under the pot, and put cold water in the top of the Limbeck, and be sure you
keep it always full with cold water; and as soon as it begins to drop into the
Receiver, abate the fire a little, and keep it so that it drop not too fast nor
too soft; for if it drop too fast, it will be too hot of the fire; and if too
soft, it will be too weak: you can draw but a quart of the best, and a quart of
the second.

Another way.
Take three gallons of Claret Wine with some Lees amongst it; for want of Wine,
take very strong Ale, then take two pound of Anniseeds bruised, and four pound
of Licoras clean scraped and bruised, one pound of great Raisons stoned;
Parsley and Fennel roots, of each a good handful, scraped and the pith taken
out, with a root of Angelica, then stop it very close, and let it stand three
days and three nights, then still it in a Limbeck, and keep the best by it
self, and you must put as much Sugar candied into the glass as is worth a
shilling, and hang two grains of Musk in a cloth in it.

AQUA VITAE.
To make Aqua Vita for a cold stomach.
Take Rosemary and Hisop, of each a handful, Sage and Horehound, of each half a
handful, one root of Enula campane, Marjerom and red Mints, of each six crops,
Licoras and Anniseeds well bruised, of each two ounces; then take three gallons
of strong Ale grounds, and set all these on a fire in a pan til it begin to
seethe, then take it from the fire, and put it in a brass pot, and set on your
Limbeck, stopping it close with paste, and keeping a soft fire under it.

To make Aqua-vitae to avoid Phlegm.
Take of Peniroyal a handful, of Strawberry leaves two handfuls, and Pimpernels
three handfuls, and add these to the former Receipt.

AQUA MIRABILIS.
How to make a precious Water, called, Aqua Mirabilis.
Take Gallingale, Cloves, Squills, Ginger, Melilot, Cardomons, Mace, and
Nutmegs, of each one dram; of the juice of Cellendine half a pint; mingle all
these made into powder with the said juice and a pint of Aqua-vitae, and three
pints of good White Wind, and put all these into a Stillatory of glass, and
let it stand all night, and on the morrow still it with an easy fire.

This Water is good, for by a secret nature it dissolveth the grief of the
Lungs without any pain, it purges Melancholy, it expels the stopping of the
Urine, and it marvellously profits the stomach, conserveth Youth in his own
state long, and preserves memory. destroys the Palsy: it being given a man
or woman laboring for life, one spoonful relieveth him: Of all Artificial
Waters I think none better: In Summer use one spoonful thereof, in Winter two.

BACK.
A good Medicine to strengthen the Back.
Take Oaken leaves and buds, Knotgrass, Comfrey, and Clary, of each alike, and
still them: this must be taken every morning two spoonfuls, but let it be a
fortnight old, or else the fire will not be out of it.

Another.
Take Comfrey, Knot-grass, and the flowers of Archangel; boil them in a little
milk of a brown Cow, and drink of it every morning; it is very good.

For the Rains of the Back and Stomach.
Take of Fern that grows on a house, and Camomile of each a handful, two or
three slips of Unset Hysop, bruise (...) these together, and sees (...) them
in a quart of Rhenish or White Wind, with a handful of Currants, till it come
to a pint; and after it is sodden, put into it an ounce and a half of white
Sugar candied, and let it melt of it self, then strain it through a fair
cloth, and give it the Patient to drink warm morning and evening.

To strengthen the Back.
Take a handful of Knot-grasse, a handful of Archangel flowers, nine branches
of Gromel, and stamp it with a pint of Ewe milk, and warm it blood warm, and
let the Patient drink it an hour before he rises for nine days together.

For the Raines of the Back.
Take your own water, and boil it well and scum it well, then take a quarter of
an ounce of Oil of Bays, and an ounce of Oil of Roses, and boil it from a
pottle to a pint or a quart, and anoint therewith the rains of the back, and
also the Spleen vain in the foot.

For the pain of the Back, and heat of the Back.
Take Rose Water, and put thereunto Sanders and Rose leaves, and lay them in
steep in your Rose Water one whole night, and it (being drunk) will take away
the heat, and greatly comfort the Reins: or wash the back therewith.

To cleanse the Back, and purge the Raines.
Take one Fennel root, and two Parsley roots, and pick out the piths of them,
and put thereto one handful of Pellitory of the wall; and all these things being
washed clean, sees them in posset Ale, and drink thereof when you go to bed,
and if you awake at midnight, drink of it also.

A good Medicine to strengthen a weak Back.
Take a good handful of the pith of the back of a young Ox or Heifer, slice ^t,
and take out the stuff in it, and put it in a fair dish, put thereunto one, two
or three of pure Dates, the skin within side taken off, and minced as fine as
may be; then boil them in two or three spoonfuls of Rose Water, then look what
quantity of Dates, so the like of Raisons of the Sun, and red Currants, your
Raisons must be minced small, and the stones taken out, then boil your Raisons
and Currants and Rose Water together till they be tender, and put in some
crumbs of Bread, Cinnamon, and Sugar, and Saffron small beaten to powder, then
temper all these together in a fair dish, and have ready Pastionel, which is
made of Sugar and yolks of Eggs, fine flower and butter, these work together
into paste, and roll it as thin as you can, and make it into pieces, the
fashion of a Pease cod, and bake them slenderly, and reserve them to your use,
and when you list to eat of them, take one and heat it by the fire side in the
morning, and eat it, and another (...) noon.

For the Back.
Take some Comfrey roots, Knotgrasse, Clary and Shepherds purse stamp them and
strain them, with a little Muskadine, and put thereto the rest of a pint of
Muskadine, one Nutmeg grated, and two yolks of Eggs, and so drink of it cold.

To cleanse and comfort the Back and Reins.
Take a pottle of fair Spring Water, and put thereinto half a pound of Eringo
roots, as new as you can get them, and merely of themselves as they grow,
without any candying or confectioning, only bruise them very well before you
put them into the pipkin of water, then take three good sticks of Licoras, and
bruise them, and put them into the same water: let all these boil together over
a temperate fire until half be consumed, then take it off, and every morning
drink a pretty draught thereof for seventeen or eighteen days together.

A Conserve to strengthen the Back.
Take Eringo roots, and conserve them, as you do Damask white and red Roses, in
every respect, the pith being taken out, one pound and a half of Sugar is
enough for every pound of Roots, and three pints of water, and stew them
closely at the first, as you do your Roses; if you will add to them five or six
grains of Ambergreece beaten to fine powder, it will be much more cordial.

A good Drink against the heat of the Back.
Take Fennel, Comfrey and Plantane, of each a handful, Anniseeds, Fennel seeds
and Licoras, of each an ounce, Mastick two drams, Lapis dactilus two drams,
boil these in two quarts of new milk till half be consumed, then strain it and
drink of it morning and evening. After this drink, the space of an hour, take
on the top of a knife this Electuary:

Diatragacanth. frigid. one ounce, of Sirrup of Violets one dram, mix them
together, and take it as aforesaid.

For pain and heat in the Back.
Take Sage, Rosemary, Camomile and Maudlin, of each one handful, stamp them
together, and frye them in May butter, and anoint the back with it warm.

Of the pain in the Back.
This pain proceeds of Rheumes that fall into the sinews of the Muscles, or
of great labor, and such like occasions.

Sees Nep in your broth, which draws the noisome and grieved matter out of
the neck, and drives away all pain in the shoulders and back bones. Also
silver Mountain seeds sod in water and drink thereof twice a week every time
three or four ounces. It is very good against all weakness of the back and
raines.

BALM.
To make an excellent Balm.
Take a pottle of the best White wine, three pints of Oil of Saint John's Wort,
of the blossoms of Saint John's Wort, Carduus Benedictus, Sage, Valerian, of
each two pound, of Marjerom and Comfrey one pound, chop them, and stamp them
small, and put them into the Wine and Oil; then take new Wheat four ounces,
dry it well and bruise it, and put it into the Wine and Oil, stir it well and
sees it four and twenty hours upon the embers close covered, sometimes
stirring it, then boil it and stir it well, and when you perceive the wine is
almost consumed, take it off and strain it, then set it on a soft fire, and
take Venice Turpentine, Mirrhe, Incense and Mastick, of each four ounces,
Ohbanum five ounces, Sanguis Draconis one ounce, beat all these to fine powder,
and searse them through Lawn, put in the Turpentine a little before the rest,
stirring it exceeding well, then set it a little on the fire, and off and on,
keeping it stirring till it be almost cold, then put it in a glass bottle for
your use. It is good for all manner of wounds.

BELLY.
For a swelling in the Belly.
Take Sassafras, Hartstongue, Betony, Centory, of each two handfuls, Pelitory
of Spain, Cinnamon, Ginger, Cloves, of each one ounce, Licoras two ounces,
Spiknard one ounce, put all these in a gillon of White wine; and let it stand
three days, and then drink of it the space of eight days.

Another.
Take a quart of Spring Water, and about some twenty leaves of a weed called
Dithander, and put thereinto some ten or twelve Cloves, and boil all these
together till it come to a pint, and drink thereof.

An Ointment for a great belly, whether it be by reason of an Ague, or Worms,
or the Spleen.
Take Roman Wormwood. common Wormwood, Garden Tansie, Fetherfew, Sowthernwood,
Unset Leeks, Peach leaves, Herb-grace, of each one handful, wash them, and
wring them, then take a pound of Barrowes grease or May butter, stamp all the
Herbs in a Mortar very small, then mingle them with the grease, and make it up
into balls as big as Tennis Balls, then put them in a Cellar seven or eight
days till they be all hoary, then break them into an Earthen pot, and boil
them on a soft fire till the juice be consumed, then take it up and strain it,
and keep it for your use: And when you use it, warm some of it, and anoint the
belly before the fire morning and evening.

For a pain in the Bowels through hot Choler.
The party must be purged with Sir^ups which do cool, and Glisters. For a
Purge, take eight and twenty damask Pruins, and five or six Figs, sees them in
water, and take of this Decoction three or four ounces, temper Cassia therein,
and the Oil of Sweet Almonds five or six ounces tempered with Sugar, and drink
the same at once. It looseneth the body very gently, and may be given to
children newly born. Likewise Manna decocted with sour Dates, Pruins and
Sugar, is good to give a stool.

BITING.
For the Biting of a Mad Dog.
Take Garlic, Salt and Rue, stamp them altogether, and in the manner of a
Plaster lay it to the sore, and give the Patient Treakle to drink three times
in a week till the danger be past. Prebatum.

Another.
Take a handful of Box, and stamp it, and strain it with a draught of milk, put
into it a pretty quantity of Lobsters shell beaten to powder, and some Unicorns
horn, if you can get it, and drink thereof and wash the wound therewith.

Another.
Take Betony, Wild Sage, and Night Shade, of each a good handful, and a pint of
running water, stamp the Herbs, and strain them therewith, and put thereto a
penny worth of Treakle, and give the Patient to drink two or three mornings
fasting.

BLEEDING.
To stanch the bleeding of a Cut.
Take Hysop, and cut it as small as you can, and put it into the wound, and put
Cobwebs thereupon, or a linen cloth clean washed and dried and burnt to tinder
and laid to the cut, does stanch it without doubt.

To stanch the Bleeding, and to heal.
Take Mastick and the hair of a Hare mixed with the white of a new laid Egg, and
make a Plaster thereof, and lay it to the wound.

Another for the same.
There is not a better thing then the powder of Bole Armoniack for to stanch
the bleeding of a wound, the powder to be laid upon it; or for the Nose, to be
put in with the blast of a quil.

Another for the same.
Take the shavings of Parchment, and lay it to the wound, it stancheth and
heals.

Another.
Take dried Vervain and make it into powder, and so lay it in the wound.

To stanch bleeding at the Nose, Vein, or Wound.
Take a little piece of linen cloth, and a Spider, kill it not, but wrap it in
the piece of linen cloth, and put it up in the Patients Nostrils.

Another.
Take Orpine, which is chief of all Herbs to stanch blood, beat the Herb in
your hand, chasing it till it be warm, it will stop all manner of bleeding.

Another to stop bleeding at the Nose, mouth, wound or bloody flux.
Take the juice of red Nettles, with a little red Wine, and a little Vitriol,
burnt or unburnt, and drink it.

Another for the same.
Take a little lint, and make it round like a pease, and dip it into ink, and
put it into the Nose, and it will stanch bleeding straightwayes.

Another.
Take the Moss of a Crab tree, and let the Patient smell to it as it comes
from the tree.

Another.
Take a quantity of green Coperas, as much Bole Armoniack beaten to fine powder
and cast it into the wound.

Another.
Take Wine Vinegar and the white of an Egg, and beat them together, and spread
them on a linen cloth, and for a man lay it on his privy members, and for a
woman on her breast.

Another for a Wound.
Take wild Tansie and bruise it small, and lay it on the wound, or make powder
of it, and fill the wound full of it.

For bleeding at the Nose.
Take Betony and stamp it with as much salt as you can hold between your two
fingers, and put it in your Nose.

To stanch Blood.
Take the lean of salt Bief, so much as you think will go into the wound, and
lay it in the Embers of the fire, and let it roast till be red hot, and thrust
it into the wound hot, and bind it up fast, and if the wound be in the foot,
bind him about the Anckle; if in the leg, about the knee, if in the knee, bind
the thigh; if in the hand, about the wrists; if in the arm, about the bought
of the arm with a g^od list or Garter two or three times about, and it will
stanch bleeding.

To stop Bleeding:
Take Centory, green Rue, and red Fennel and stamp and strain them and drink it
warmed.

Another.
Take an old clean linen cloth, and wet it well in Vinegar, then burn it, and
take the powder thereof, and if it be a wound, cast it therein, and it will
stop the bleeding immediately; but if the Nose bleed, then snuff up the powder
into the Nose, and it helps.

Another.
Take the crops of Southernwood, and crush them in your fingers and put it into
the nose.

Another.
If your Nose do bleed unmeasurably, then tie your little finger very hard
about the lower joint, and for the most part, it fails not, but stays the
same.

For spitting of Blood.
Take the juice of Betony, and temper it with Goats milk, and give it the
Patient to drink three days together.

Another.
Take Smallage, Rue, Mints and Betony, and sees them well in good milk, and
sup it warm.

To stanch blood.
Take an Herb called Periwinkle, and hold it between thy teeth, and it helps.

For pissing of Blood.
Take Ambrosia and Bursa pastoris of each a handful, Parsley seeds the like,
stamp them together, and drink the juice thereof with Goats milk.

The cause of pissing of blood may be superfluity of Humors, sharpness of
Urine, Winds, Tumors, Impostumations, debility of the Kidneyes and Bladder,
then is there a pain about the Privities, and the blood is congealed and
separated from the Urine: In case the blood be much, and runs out swiftly,
then it signifies a broken Vein, otherwise an Ulcer; but if the Urine be like
water that flesh is washed in, then it is of a weak liver; but if from
superfluity of blood, then it is to be seen by the fullness of the body; if
through sharpness of Humors the Patient is ever burning, therefore he must
avoid all sharp, tart and salt things.

Of letting Blood.
Phlebottomie is needless to those that be of so strong a nature, that (being
over laden) are able to expel all superfluity through natural passages, as by
bleeding at Nose, etc.

Quest. But why is Phlebottomie used?

Ans. When blood abounds, it is commonly in those that have a hot liver, full
veins, a high color and brownish, and not fat and corpulent: Also in those
that eat and drink abundantly, live at ease, and use meats that engender much
blood, which when Nature cannot digest, it corrupts the brains, from which
issues dangerous Diseases; and in these cases, this is a more sure remedy,
then to admit of inward Physic.

Also letting of bloed does strengthen the brain, comfort the sight, warmeth
the marrow in the bones, freeth the inward parts of many infirmities, stays
vomiting, oftentimes helps the flux or lask, cleereth the senses, restores
sleep, r^neweth the spirits, because melancholy blood is thereby diminished,
cures deasness reduces lost voices, augmenteth the powers and virtues of all
the body, being thereby rid of superfluities; the abundance of blood is known
no less by the thickness and troubled matter consisting of the Urine, then by
the signs before mentioned. And though the blood be not inflamed, but
superabundant, it causes many dangerous diseases; and if any in the morning
about the dawning of the day do commonly sweat, it is a sign of Superfluity in
the Veine^.

Thirdly, Where cold and bad blood is, there must be a Purgation precede
Phlebottomiae, or else the cold blood will remain.

Lastly, Its good sometimes to be let blood that the blood may be led or drawn
from one place to another.

BONES.
How to use Fractured Bones: four kinds of Factures.
First, when it is broken in length: Next, when it is broken overthwart.
Thirdly, when it is oblick and crooked. Fourthly, when it is girded, and
broken, and shivered in diverse pieces, either legs or arms.

Albusences, and others later Writers, make the difference of Fractures; not
according to the bone fractured, but after the place affected; as if the Nose
be broken, brain-pan, jaws, ribs, backbone, arms, legs, or other parts, which
be not differences of Fractures, but of the place affected, according to nature.

Four Directions in the Cure of Fractures, according to the place fractured.
First, to respect, that the bones be put again in their former place.

Secondly, to be reduced to their natural, and so conserved and kept without
motion or hurt.

Thirdly, That the bone broken may be engendered and conglutinated together by
ingendring of Callus.

Fourthly, To correct the Accidents that do come after the Fracture of the
bones.

How the Bones out of joint ought to be put together.
Be sure of help to hold the party at need; for the Leg or Arm let him sit in
a Chair, and with anointing draw it out till the place be met, as tenderly as
you may, having respect to the party grieved his complexion and nature.

How Bones may be conserved after they be set in their natural place.
Look well to your rolling. First, it is very good to take the white of an egg
and Oil of Roses mixed together, and wet therein the linen Clothes which may
cover the place broken, and somewhat more of the other, and roll it not. hard,
for it may cause dolor and flux of humors.

How the Rollers must be used.
The first Roller upon the Fracture three or four times, and so to the second
part upwards; the third Roller leek downward, and it must be half as low as the
first; these Rollers should be wet in water and wine before you use them. If
the pain be vehement, then the member would be wrapped about with fine wool
well carded, or else with stuff wet in Oxicrotium.

A defensive Medicine.
Take Unguentum Populeum two ounces, Bole Armoniack one ounce, mix these
together with Oil of Roses, and a little Vinegar.

If the place appear blistered.
Take half a pint of running water, and set it on the fire, and put in fine
Wax, a little Oil of Roses and sine Barley meal, seethe them altogether, but not
very thick, then make thereof a Plaster or Cere-cloth; strike it upon the
cloth, upon the bottom of a Pewter dish, over a Chafingdish and coals, and lay
it lukewarm to the arm or leg, a night and a day and it will assuage the humor
of boyning.

For the Wound of Broken Bones.
Take lukewarm Mell Rosarum, and Oil of Roses, and a stamp of flax dipped in
the Whites of Eggs, and so bind it upon the sore; Also apply about the place
Bole Armoniack, Sanguis Draconis, and Olibanum, beaten with a little Oil of
Roses, Barley meal and Vinegar round about the sore, and so comfort the Patient.

A Defensive against Boyning of a broken Bone in the Leg.
Make your Plaster of Oil of Roses and Oil of Myrtle melted together with a
little wax, and when it is cold, put to it Bole Armoniack and Pompuleon, of
each one ounce, of Wine two ounces, and lay it a handful broad upon the hurt
and let it lie.

A Poultice for any Boyning inward.
Take a pint of new Cowes milk, a pint of Rye-bread crumbs, a handful of French
Poppy leaves shred small, two ounces of Oil of Roses, three yolks of new laid
eggs, and as much Saffron as the weight of a Groat, First boil the milk, the
crumbs and the Poppy together a good while, and then put in the rest, and
spread it upon a fair linen cloth.

To assuage the swelling upon any broken Bone or out of joint.
Take Unguentum Pompuleum one ounce, Bole Armoniack one ounce, mix them
together with a little Oil of Roses, and a little Vinegar.

For the Bone ache.
Take the leaves and flowers of Henbane, and put them in an earthen pot with
May butter, and close the pot, and set it in a dunghill three months, then
anoint the grieved place therewith.

BODY.
To distill a Cock, good for any weak Person.
Take a red or black Cock, and pluck him quick, and whip him alive with small
twigs a pretty while, then cut off his head and gut him, and cut him in
quarters, and wipe him very dry with a fair cloth; then take an earthen pot and
lay four or five splints to keep it from the bottom of the pot; then lay in the
four quarters upon the splints, and lay between every quarter some of these
Roots and Fruit following, Fennel roots, Parsley roots, Succory roots of each
two or three, two or three slips of Rosemary, two or three Dates quartered,
half a handful of Raisons of the Sun the stones taken out, six spoonfuls of
Rhenish Wine, Malmesey or Muskadine, three or four whole Mace, cover the pot,
and stop it close with paste, and set it in a pot or kittle of hot water, and
let it boil softly with a temperate fire sour hours, then take it up and let it
run through a fair cloth without any forcing, then put it in a fair glass or
pot, and keep it close covered, and give to the Patient two or three spoonfuls
at once, or in quantity as the stomach is able to take it, in some broth made
of Mutton or Veal, first in the morning, and as often in the day besides as he
has a stomach to take it.

To preserve the Body.
Take a pottle of fair water and six Calves feet, and put therein Betony,
Long-wort, Liver-wort, Knot-grasse, Clary, Balm, with a quantity of Mace,
Cinnamon and Ginger, and six Dates; let all these be sodden together till it
come to a Jelly; and then take a quart of White Wind, or very pure claret, and
put therein, and eat it at your pleasure.

Another.
Take the marrow of Venison, a pint of running water, three leaves of Clary,
three leaves of Comfrey, one handful of Archange, a handful of Charnel, theree
Dates, a handful of small Raisons, sees altogether till it come to half a pint,
then strain it, and put thereto a pint of white Bastard, and a quantity of
Manus Christi.

Another.
Take a pint of Muskadine, and put thereto Hemp Seed and blanched Almonds, and
Cap Dates, two or three whole Mace, and a Nutmeg, and three crops of Rosemary,
and a little Saffron and red Rose Water, and boil them all together till half
be boiled away, and after they be boiled, put thereto Mithridatum about the
quantity of a hasel Nut, but let it not seethe after, and let the party drink
thereof at his going to bed at night.

Another.
Take a pottle of water, and a Chickken, and two Fennel roots, two Parsley
roots, three Dates, a handful of Currants, and boil them altogether, from a
pottle to a pint, then take two spoonfuls of Hasel Nut kernels, and eight
blanched Almonds, stamped together with the Nuts, and strain them into the
broth, and so drink it morning and evening.

For avoiding gravel in the Body.
Take a couple of eggs, and boil them hard, then take the shells only, and stamp
them very small, then take six Dates stones, and one Nutmeg, and stamp them
likewise, then take of Cene as much as the two former things do weigh, then
searse it through a very fine Searse, then take the weight of four pence or six
pence and drink it in a quantity of White Wine, Ale or Beer, in the morning as
long as the things do last, and it will break it away, with hot broth within
one hour after.

A Medicine for a weak Body.
Take a Leg of Veal, and wash it very clean, and put it into a gallon of fair
spring water, set it over the fire, and skumme it very clean, and then put in
a quarter of a pound of the best red Currants you can get, and half a handful
of the Roots of Orpine, the skin being clean picked off, and some grated bread
to thicken; let it boil softly over the fire till it comes to a pottle, and
then put in half an ounce of Coral very finely beaten, and half an ounce of
Cinnamon finely beaten, and let it be stirred when the Spices be put in; and
this you must drink three times a day, being boiled three or four walmes after
the Spices be put in. You must drink it in the morning fasting, and an hour
before Dinner, and an hour before Supper. It must be very warm when you drink
it, and in the morning fast two hours after you have taken it. This is good for
a weak back, for the Mother, and for the Whites, and for the running of the
Rains.

To comfort the Spirits of one that is weak.
Every two or three hours give the Patient a spoonful of Syrrup De Corticibus
Citri, and therein three or four drops of Aqua Coelestis.

A very good Glister for a weak body that is troubled with the Cholick.
Take a piece of a knuckle of Veal, set it on the fire in a convenient quantity
of water, one Fennel root scraped, and the pith taken out, one Parsley root
scraped the pith taken out, Camomile, Penniroyal, Burrage and Bugloss, of each
a handful, Raisons of the Sun stoned, three pieces of large Mace, and a piece
of Cinnamon bruised a little, one Nutmeg quartered: Let these boil till it has
a good taste of the meat, then strain out a pint of this Broth in a Basin, and
put to it four spoonfuls of Oil of Rue, the yolk of one new laid egg, three
penny worth of Sugar candied; stir all these well, and give it with a
Glister-pipe blood warm, about eight of the Clock in the morning and four in
the afternoon.

BRAINS.
A Gargarism to purge the Brains. By Dr. Deodate.
Take six spoonfuls of Wine Vinegar, and twelve spoonfuls of water, and two
spoonfuls of Honey, clarify them together, and add thereto one spoonful of
Mustard.

BREAST.
To heal a sore Breast when it is broken.
Boil Lillies in new milk, and lay it on to break it, and when it is broken,
tent it with a Mallow stalk, and lay on it a Plaster of Mallows boiled in
Sheeps tallow. These are to be used if you cannot keep it from breaking.

For a woman's Breast not broken.
Take Oil of Roses, Bean flower, the yolk of an Egg, a little Vinegar, temper
all these together, then set it before the fire that it may be a little warm,
and then with a feather strike it upon the Breast morning and evening or any
time of the day when she feels the pricking.

A Drink for a sore Breast or Wound.
Take of Avens, Plantane, Ribwort, Bugloss, Primrose leaves, Cuckoe Sorrel,
Bramble leaves, and a yellow flower like to Dandillion, but somewhat less,
Daisies, roots and all, Sanacle, Wormwood, Strawberry leaves, Herb Robert,
Egrimony, Cinqfoil, of each a good handful, not too much wormwood, for making
it bitter; boil all these in a pottle of White Wind, and make it somewhat sweet
with Honey, then strain it and wring out all the juice as near as you can, then
drink a good draught thereof in the morning and at night till it is done, and
lay to the sore a Primrose leaf, or a Plantane: And when the breast is sore or
hard, take Polipodium, Plantane and great Raisons, beat them small, and lay it
all about the Breast upon a cloth.

For an Ague in the Breast.
Take Groundsel, Daisie leaves and roots, course Wheat chessel, make a Poultice
thereof with the parties own water, and lay it warm to the Breast.

A Drink to purify the Breasts from Rheum.
Take Hysop, Figs and Honey boil them in Wine, from a pottle to a quart, drink
it in the Evening hot and in the morning cold.

For a sore Breast, or to dry up a woman's milk, or to assuage the hard swelling,
if it lie not too long.
Take stale strong Ale or Beer grounds, a small piece of Allome, and a little
Honey, and boil them together, then take a piece of woollen cloth, and cut two
holes in it for the two nipples, and dip it in the liquor, and lay it to the
breasts very hot, lay a piece of black wool upon the nipples.

For stopping in the Breast.
Take Rue and seethe it in Verjuice, and so drink it.

For a heat and swelling in a Woman's Breast.
Take the whites of two new laid eggs and beat them very well; also take a
handful of Violet leaves, and pound them very fine, and put them to the whites
of the Eggs, and take as much wheat flour as will make it as thick as a
Plaster, and temper it well altogether and spread it upon a cloth, and lay it
upon the breast, and it will ease the pain, and take away the swelling. Also
Snowwater and Sallet Oil, etc. Probatum.

If a woman want milk in her Breasts.
The cause may be of heat or drowth, or of some cold quality of the breast, that
the blood which should alter into milk be dried out.

Again, the want of milk, may be for want of meat, or use of such meats as may
dry the blood; or by bad digestion of the stomach, etc. use a good Diet, and
eat green Marjerom in the morning fasting.

BRUISE.
For a Bruise.
Take running water a gallon, Fern roots scraped clean, and sod in the water
till it be half consumed, and then stamp them and strain them, and then put it
between a linen cloth, and lay it to the bruise or squat as hot as may be
suffered, and it will help: you may wash the place pained with the liquor so
that the skin be not broken.

A sovereign Medicine for bruised blood congevled in the body.
Take Lions Claw, that is, Predalian or our Ladies Mantle, and Sage, and
Parsley, of each one handful, of Auniseeds, Fennel seeds, Hysop seeds, and the
root of Elicampane about two ounces, seethe them in two pound of water until
the third part be consumed; drink this, and it loses all congealed blood in
the body, and expels it in the Urine.

An excellent Balm to cure any bruise, though Bones be broken therein, and it
is very good to cure wounds.
Take of Scala Coeli one pound, Rosemary flowers four ounces, Pomgranat rinds
two ounces, Sallet Oil two pound, White Wine half a pint, bruise the Scala
Coeli and the Pomgranate rinds, and in the Oil and the Wine with the Rosemary
flowers, infuse them ten days in the Sun; after that, boil them till the Wine
be consumed, then strain it, and unto the Oil being strained, put these things
following, Mastick, Olibanum, of each four ounces, Aloes one ounce. Cassia four
ounces, Venice Turpentine twelve ounces, Verdigrease one ounce; boil these in
the Oil until the Gummes be dissolved, then strain it, and keep it to use,
and remember that in the end of the boiling the Verdigrease be put in, and let
the Turpentine be put in last, not letting it boil after, but only with the
heat dissolve it self.

For any Bruises, Aches, or any such like pain.
Take Rosemary tops, Toutswaine leaves, Plantane leaves, of each two handfuls,
Stone pitch and Turpentine, of each one pound, a pint of Sallet Oil, a quarter
of a pound of Wax, two ounces of Olibanum; the Herbs must be beaten very small
in a Mortar, and then boil them together in a Pipkin six or seven hours till
it come to be as stiff as Soap, and when it is so boiled, it must be strained
through a linen cloth, and so put up in to Gally pots, the Olibanum must not
be put in till the other be boiled sufficiently.

For a Bruise, or Strain, or Green Wound.
Take half a pint of Sallet Oil, a quarter of a pound of White-lead, two ounces
of Cerus. First, set the Oil on the fire in an earthen pan, and when it is
ready to boil, put in the White-lead, being in fine powder, so let it boil a
quarter of an hour, then put in your Cerus being beaten small, and stir it
while it seethes, then drop a drop in cold water, and if it will roll, it is
boiled enough; then power it all into a Basin of cold water, and when it is
cold enough to touch, anoint your hands, and roll it up in little rolls.

An excellent Remedy for Bruises and Aches which come of cold.
Take young Bay Leaves and Wormwood, of each a quarter of a pound, a pound and
a half of Suet of a Loyne of Mutton, a quart of Oil Olive, of Oil of Spike
two ounces, shred your Herbs small and your Suet, then put them in a stone pot,
and power the Oils upon them, and cover it very close, and so let it stand
close covered two days; then boil it till the Liquor be very green, that the
goodness is out of the Herbs, then strain it, and reserve it for your use.

Another.
Take a pound of Butter out of the Charn-milk, and set it on the fire, and
clarify it, then take a handful and a half of red Sage, as much Camomile, as
much Herb-grace, and half as much Smallage, some young Bay Leaves, chop all the
Herbs small, and put them into the clarified butter, and boil them on a soft
fire, stirring it until it be green, then strain it, and keep the Liquor for
your use.

For a Bruise or Strain.
Take the grounds of Ale or Beer, Wheat Bran and Chickweed, and lay it to the
grief three or four times a day upon a red cloth.

For a Bruise or Sore unripened.
Take Oatmeal and seethe it in sweet Cowes milk, until it be as thick as pap,
and put it into a pan with a quantity of Sheeps suet, and boil them well, and
then make a Plaster thereof, and lay it to the grief as hot as you can suffer
it.

BREATH.
A good Medicine for a stinking Breath.
Take two handfuls of Cumin seeds, and sees them in good Wine from a pottle to
a pint, and then drink of it fifteen days together morning and evening.

Of a stinking Breath, how it comes.
This Infirmity proceeds, First, when the Gums are putrified: Secondly, from
hallow teeth: Thirdly, Stinking humors that fall down from the head to the
Pannicles of the mouth, and make the spettle to stink. Fourthly, Stinking slime
of the stomach. Fifthly, the corruption of the Lights. Sixthly, Stinking matter
and purulency. Seventhly, stopping in the Nose, or some exulceration of the
same.

If it be from any of these causes proceeding from the Head, then it is of
heat; then purge the head, and wash the mouth often with Plantane water.

Also take green Oaken leaves, and dry them, and beat them to powder, and take
one dram sod in Wine.

BURNING.
An excellent Medicine for Burning or Scalding.
Take Sage and sees it in running water, and wash the wound with the water as
hot as you can suffer it, and it will take away the heat immediately, then take
Sage, and Hartstongue leaves, and Sheeps dung, and fry it with Sheeps suet, and
anoint the place therewith with a feather, and let it lie still; then take
Sheeps dung and dry it to powder, and strew it twice a day, and anoint it
twice a day; but take heed of picking any of it away, left there be holes in
the skin ever after: And to assuage the stiffness, when you can abide it no
longer, then bathe it a little in Sage water; but the less bathing, the sooner
it will be whole.

For a scalding or burning with fire.
Take black Soap, about the bigness of the sore, and spread it upon a linen
cloth like a Plaster, and so lay it upon the sore, and within half a day it
will draw out the fire, and then lay healing Salve to it.

The Oil of Cream and Snow water, is good to wash the place so hurt.

For Burning or Scalding.
Take the whites of two Eggs, and one yolk, and beat them well together and
scum off the froth, then melt three spoonfuls of Barrowes grease, and take
three spoonfuls of the juice of Sage, and put thereto, and stir it well
together till it be cold, then make thereof a Salve.

To heal a Burning or Scalding.
Take the fat of dried Bacon, and hold it between a pair of Tongs red hot, and
let it drop into a pot of fair water, and of the dropping make your Plaster.

For Burning in the fire.
Take the second pill of a young Elm tree, and lay it in fair water the space
of twelve hours or more, then fill out the water and warm it on the fire, and
anoint the Patient therewith, and let it drink in the water, and when it is
dry, then take new with the juice of Plantane as much of the one as of the
other, and then anoint it therewith after the first water.

To make Oil of Cream for Burning or Scalding.
Take a quart or a pint of new Cream, and boil it in a clean Vessel, and ever
stir it till it become curdy, and that it turn into an Oil, then strain it
through a cloth, and the Oil will come from the curd.

For Burning with Fire, Gunpowder, Scalding or the like.
Take Snow water, or running water, and put thereinto fine Sallet Oil, and
beat them well together, so done, bathe the place grieved twice or thrice, and
so rest that the fire may be taken out: then make this Ointment following: Take
of Daisies, roots and leaves, of Balm, and of Alehoofe, of each two handfuls,
of Valerian and Orpine leaves, of each one handful, beat all these together
very fine in a stone Mortar after they have been well washed and dried, then
take of fresh Butter unsalted two pound, of Barrowes grease one pound, and a
pint of Neats foot-Oyle; boil all these together, till the water of the Herbs
be consumed, by which time it will be a perfect Ointment, then take it from the
fire, strain it, and pre^^ it well out, and keep it well in an earthen pot, it
will last seven years, and when you use it, take Primrose leaves and pare away
the ribs, and after the sore place is well anointed, lay the smooth side upon
the place grieved all over, and so lay on fine linen, and change it often.

For a Burning.
Take half a pint of Cream, two handfuls of Wild Daisies, with their roots, a
few Rosemary tops, and a little Sugar, boil them together till they become an
Oil, then strain it, and anoint the place therewith; but first wash it with
Whey.

For a Burning or Scalding.
Take Maiden wort and stamp it, sees it in fresh butter, and strain it, and
anoint the place.

Another.
Take one handful of Barrowes grease, and two handfuls of Groundsel and two or
three handfuls of Houseleek, stamp the Herbs together, then put to them new
sheeps dung two handfuls, of Goose dung two handfuls, and stamp them
altogether, and being hot, strain them through a cloth into an Earthen pot, and
with the liquor anoint the burned place.

Another.
Take Plantane, Waybred, Daisies, and the green bark of Elder, and green Goose
dung, and Oil Olive, stamp them together, and wring them through a cloth, and
bath the hurt with a fether.

CANKER.
To kill the Canker.
TAke Herb-grace, Ribwort, Fether-few, Groundsel, Parsley, Sorrel, leaven,
Boares grease, of each a handful, and a little bay salt; shred all these
together, and sees them in the dregs of Ale with some Verjuice.

For a Canker in a woman's breast.
Take the dung of a white Goose, and the juice of Cellendine, and bray them
well in a Mortar together, and lay thereof to the sore, and this will stay the
Canker, and heal it.

For a black Canker in a woman's breast.
Take pild Garlic and Rye meal, beat them together, and boil them in Wine
Vinegar till it be thick as pap, then lay it on the fore, and change it three
times a day till it be white, then take Pimpernel and stamp it with a little
Honey, and lay it to the breast, and it will heal it.

For a Canker in the Nose, Mouth, or Throat.
Take of Rosemary stripped from the stalks, and of red Sage leaves, of each a
like; dry them, and burn them in a clean chafingdish, then rake a pretty piece
of Allome, and burn it very fine, and make your Herbs very small, and then with
some Honey temper it altogether; and make it pretty soft, and anoint the place
with it three times a day, in the morning fasting, after dinner, and after
Supper; let the water out of your mouth if you can, but if it go down it will
not hurt you; and before you anoint it, wash it with Orange pills out in
pieces, and laid in water; if you make it bleed it is the better. This Medicine
will look very black, but it is very good.

For a Canker in the mouth.
Take six spoonfuls of honey clarified, with as much water, boil it over the
fire till the water be consumed, still stirring it; and when it is clarified,
put to it a pint of the best and strongest White Wine, and a piece of Roch
Allome of the bigness of a Hasel Nut, and a spoonful of Bay salt, let all these
sees together the space of a quarter of an hour, then take dry Rose leaves,
Woodbind leaves, and Sage, of each a handful, and let them sees a quarter of
an hour more together upon a Chafingdish and coals, and let the Patient wash
the sore with the liquor, and lay the leaves upon it, and if the Liquor be too
thick to wash your mouth, take fair running water, and White Wine Vinegar, and
a spoonful of Honey to be sodden together with the Herbs aforesaid.

For a Canker or Itch over the Body.
First take of Quicksilver, of Sallet Oil, of Oil de Baies, of each two
pennyworth, a quantity of Quicksilver; to kill the Quicksilver, add a little bay
salt, or Salt peter, mingle all these together and so use it.

CAUDLE.
To make a Caudle of great virtue.
Take a pint and a half of the strongest Ale may be gotten, twenty Jordan
Almonds clean wiped, but neither washed nor blanched, two Dates minced very
small, and stamped, then take the pith of a young Bief, the length of twelve
inches, lay it in water till the blood be out of it, then strip the skin off it
and stamp it with the Almonds and Dates, then strain them all together into the
Ale, then boil it until it be a little thick; give the party in the morning
fasting six spoonfuls, and as much when he goes to bed.

CHILDREN.
For a child that is Jaw fallen, or Roof fallen.
Take a handful of Chickweed, and lap it in a red Cole leaf, or else in a
linen cloth, and roast it in hot embers, and it will be a green Salve, then
lay thereof to the bone in the neck, as hot as may be suffered. Also take sow^
leaven of white bread, and crum it on the mould of the Child's head as a
Plaster, and by Gods grace it will raise up the bone or mold within nine hours.

For scowring of a Child that will take nothing inwardly.
Take a handful of Pimpernel, and dry it between two tiles, and lay it to the
soles of the feet.

An approved Medicine to cure Children that are weak limbed, and cannot go. By
Dr. Deodate.
Take Sage, Sweet Marjerom and Dane wort of equal quantity, beat them a long
time together, and strain the juice out of them, which juice put into a double
Vial glass, so that the glass be full of it; then stop it with paste very
close and cover it with thick paste all over, then set it in an Oven, and there
let it stand so long as a great loaf requires time to be thoroughly baked, then
take it out and let it be cooled, then break the paste round about it, and if
the juice be grown thick, break the glass and take it out in another dish, and
keep it in a gally pot, and when you will use it, take of it the quantity of
two spoonfuls at a time and as much marrow of an Ox leg. m^^t it together and
mingle it well, and morning and evening anoint, (as warm as can be suffered)
the hinder parts of the Child's thighs and legs, and also his knees, chafing
it well with your w^rme. hands; and in a short time his limbs shall be
exceedingly strengthened, and be enabled (by Gods blessing) to go and walk.

To loosen the Belly of young Children.
Tie a Nutshel full of the Salve of Mallows on the Navel, and let it lie
thereupon til it be soaked in. Do this once, twice, or thrice, till it be
amended.

The Salve of Mallows is thus made: Take Mallow leaves and pound them, then
melt fresh Butter, and boil the Mallow leaves therein till it be green, then
strain and use it.

Or give the child Sirrup of Violet^, being heat, or Sirrup of Damask Roses, a
quarter of an ounce at a time.

For the Lask of young Children.
Give to the child both morning and evening a spoonful of Plantane water to
drink; if the Child be old, give it the more, and give it no drink but such
wherein Gold has been three times quenched, Also anoint the stomach with the
Oil of Mastick and Oil of Mints, toward his Navel downwards.

Also take the juice of broad Plantane, and Wine Vinegar, of each a like
quantity, and mix therewith Barley meal till it be somewhat thick, then cool it
a little, and spread it upon a woollen cloth, and apply it upon the belly warm
and when it is cold, heat it again.

Also take a new laid egg, and take a way the threeds (as some call it) the two
white spots that are joining to the yolk, and beat it a good while, then with
meal make a Cake and bake it in a pan, then beat it in a Mortar, and put powder
of Cinnamon unto it, and bake it again, and let the child eat thereof now and
then.

COLIC.
For the Colic. and Stone.
Take a handful of Stone crop, Wild Time, Garden Time, Parsley, Saxifrage,
Pellitory of the wall, of each a handful, four or five Rhadish roots, a little
of Philip Pimperlow, scrape the roots, and slice them, and put all these into a
gallon of new milk of a red Cow, and let it stand twelve hours, and then distill
it with a soft fire, and take five spoonfuls of this Water, and put it into a
good draught of Rhenish or White Wine, then warm it milk warm, and with the
juice of a Lemmon and some Nutmeg and Sugar, drink this fasting in the morning,
and fast four or five hours after, and walk up and down; take this every third
day. Probatum.

A good Medicine for the Wind Colic.
Take a flint stone, and cast it into the fire until it be red hot, then put it
into a pot of drink, and there will arise a great foame, let the Patient drink
thereof.

Another.
Take the Herb Eve, and Holly without prickles, dry them by the fire upon a
paper, and being well dried, make them into a powder, and drink so much thereof
at a time as will ly upon a Gro^t in White Wine or Ale, it is exceeding good.

For the Colic in the stomach.
Take a quantity of Conserves of Red Roses, three Pepper corns, and beat them
small; also take the seeds of U^^set Time, with Anniseeds, beat them small, and
put them into the Conserve of Roses, and mingle them well together, then put it
into a Gally pot, and when your pain first comes upon you, take the quantity
of a small Walnut, and presently after as much Green Ginger as a Hasel Not.

For the Colic and Stone.
Take Parsley, Pellitory of the wall, Saxifrage, Wild Time, Eyebright, of each
two handfuls, twenty Rhadish roots scraped and sliced; steep all in a pottle of
Red Cowes milk all night, then distill them in the hottest of May, and use it as
follows, Take nine spoonfuls of the water, and nine of Rhenish Wine, the
juice of a Lemmon, half a Race of Ginger finely minced, and sugar it as you
please for a draught: drink this thrice a week fasting, and use presently
moderate exercise.

A Preservative against the Colic and Stone.
Take a quantity of Parsley roots about two handfuls, boil them in running
water till they be soft, then take out the pith and stamp them well, and put
them in a pottle of stale Ale, then strain them from thence, and drink thereof
for the space of nine days at the least.

Another.
Take a quart of White Wine, and boil it in an earthen pot, and when it begins
to boil, put into it a handful of Mother Time, and let it boil half a quarter
of an hour, then put unto it a head of Garlic stamped in a Mortar, then boil
them together a little space, then strain it, and give the Patient to drink,
and let him drink as much as he can when the grief is upon him; but if it cease
or break not, then take about a penny worth of Honey unto half a pint of the
Drink, and by Gods grace it will help.

For the wind Colic.
Take a good quantity of Wormwood and tops of Rosemary as much, and boil them
in Sack, and put them in a linen cloth, and lay it warm to the belly where
the grief is, and (by Gods grace) it will help presently.

Another for the same.
Take a spoonful of the powder of Holland, which is to be had at the
Apothecaries, and put it into a good quantity of stale drink, and make it luke
warm, and so drink it. Or else take the weight of a French Crown thereof in
some warm broth after the manner of a Purgation; for it is not only good to
break the wind presently, but it will purge also, and cause some stools.
Probatum.

To break the Wind Colic.
Take Wormwood and Tansie, of each three branches, seven or eight leaves of
brown Sage, stamp all these together and strain them into a quantity of Ale,
and then drink it luke warm twice if it be need.

For the Colic, and Stone, and burning Fever.
Take some leaves of the Herb called Dandillion, and pound them small and
strain them into stale Ale or Beer, and so drink some three or four times: It
is not only good against the Colic and Stone, but also against a hot burning
Fever.

An approved good Medicine for the Colic and Stone.
Take Coriander, Caraway, Fennel, Spicknard and Anniseeds, of each one ounce
and a half. of Grome^ seeds and Licoras one ounce; beat all these into fine
powder, and let the Patient drink a scruple in White Wine a little warmed, and
walk one hour after it fasting, and do this every morning and evening; and put
thereto six drops of the juice of Juniper berries, and you shall find it
excellent in operation. Probatum.

Another.
Take Parsley roots, Marsh Mallow roots, and red roots, of each alike, stamp
them, and put them into a pint of White Wine, and strain it, and let the
Patient drink a good draught for three mornings together, and it will cause the
Stone to break, and provoke Urine abundantly.

For the Stone Colic.
Take a half penny worth of Summer Savory seeds, and of Parsley seeds, of Bay
berries, of Gromel, of each a half penny worth, and boil them in a posset of
White Wine, and drink.

For the wind Colic.
Take the water of Heraff and the root of a red Dock, the inner pith taken
away, and the nether bark of an Ash of one years growth, and pound them, and
strain them with the said water, and so drink it first and last.

Another.
Take Parsley seeds and bruise them, and sees them in Sack, and drink it warm
when you have your pain. Also Carduus Balsam is excellent.

An excellent Medicine for the Colic or S^one.
Take Pellitory, Unset Leeks and Mallows, of each a like, stamp them, and put
thereto a pennyworth of Neats foot Oil, and fry them well together in manner of
a Plaster, put them in a linen bag, and apply it to the Raines of the back,
but for the Colic apply it to the Navel, and it will help within an hour.

CONSUMPTION.
For a Consumption.
Take a couple of Marrow bones and sees them, and put in a great handful or
two of Unset Leeks cut small, with the roots and blades fair washed, and when
they be washed and sodden, take them forth and strain them, and take out the
Marrow, and put it into the broth, then take a half penny worth of Ginger, as
much Pepper, a penny worth of Cinnamon, a half penny worth of Cloves and Mace,
a quarter of a pound of Sugar; let all be very small beaten, and put into the
broth, and drink it warm morning and evening as the stomach will bear it.

A Sovereign Medicine for man or woman in a Consumption.
First take a red Cock and kill him, and flea him, and cut him in four
quarters, but wash them not, then take six cap Dates and cut them in four
quarters, and take half a score of large Mace, and six whole Cloves, then put
in three or four pieces of old Gold, and stamp the bones of the Cock, then take
a pewter pottle pot, and lay in one quarter, and lay upon it some of every
Spice, and a piece of old Gold, and so upon every quatter until the last be put
in, and you may (if you will) put to the said Ingredients, Amber, Coral and
Pearl, but no kind of Licoras neither first nor last, and when it is perfectly
boiled, put thereto a dozen or sixteen Raisons of the Sun, the stones taken
out; Then take so much Rye dough as will stop the pots m^u^h close, and thick
enough of the paste, so that no water may enter into it; then take a good great
brass pot, and set it on the fi^e, that the pewter pot, and the Ingredients
that is in it may stand covered with water at least two handfuls, and put some
heavy weight upon the pewter pot that it be not overthrown in the boiling, and
let it sees continually from five of the clock in the morning, until eight of
the Clock at night; then take it off and open the Pewter pot, and let the
Patient take of that Syrrup a spoonful at a time.

And when you make it for a woman, you must use these Herbs, Hartstongue,
Motherwort, Mugwort, Mother Time and Comfrey, but no Herbs must be used for a
man. And if the woman be hot in the liver, take Liverwort; and if troubled with
the Stone, take a little Pellitory of the Wall.

A very excellent Water for a Consumption.
Take a red Cock, and pluck him alive, then quarter him and take out his bowels
very clean, and wipe him very dry with a linen cloth; then put the quarters
into a pottle of the best Sack, and p^t into them Rosemary, Time, Penni^oyal
and Pimpernel, of each of these one small handful, of Dates, the stones being
taken out, half a pound, of Currants one pound, let them lie and steep in the
Sack two hours, then still them in a Stillatory, and of the Water thereof use
two spoonfuls one hour before you go to Dinner, and so likewise before Supper,
and it will much restore your body. This was used by the Lord Chief Justice
Popham.

For a Consumption.
Take a pound and half of Prok, fat and lean, and boil it in water, and put in
some Oatmeal, and boil it till the heart of the meat be out, and then put in
two penny worth of milk, and boil it a quarter of an hour, and give the Patient
a draught in the morning, in the afternoon and at night, and now and then some
Barley water, and by Gods grace it will help.

Another.
Take a fair earthen pot, and put therein a gallon of Claret Wine, and then
take a Capon well fleshed. but not fat, and gut him, and put in his belly half
a handful of Mace, and as much Raisons and Currans^, then cover the pot and set
it on the fire, and let it sees till the half be consumed, then put the Capon
into a Mortar, with some of his broth, and bray his bones and all, then let it
seethe one walm after, and pass it through a Jelly bag into a close Vessel,
then take a Goblet full, and put thereto the yolks of six new laid Eggs, the
strainet taken away, and seethe it well, and then give the Patient to drink as
hot as he can suffer it, in the morning fasting, likewise before noon, and
before he goes to bed; and ere three Capons be spent, by the grace of God he
shall be much amended.

To restore one that is in a Consumption.
Take three pints of new milk, and one pint of very good Red Wine, and four
yolks of Eggs, beat them with the milk, and Wine, and put to it as much fine
Manchet crumb^ as will make it thick like thin batter, and put in one quarter
of an ounce of beaten Mace, and distill all these with fire, and draw a pint of
water out of it, and take one spoonful of the water in Pottage or drink morning
and evening.

To nourish one in a Consumption.
Take a Chicken, and take out his bones, and wash it in White Wine, and put it
into a pipkin without liquor, with a few Current, and then still it five on six
hours upon Embers without coals, then take a spoonful thereof and drink with
thin broth.

For a Consumption.
Take Coltsfoot, Burnet leaves, Wood-Betoby leaves, red Rose leaves, Comfrey
roots, of each one handful picked and sliced, boil them in running water, from
three quarts to three pints, then strain them, and put into the liquor two
pound of good Sugar, and the whites of two new laid eggs, then boil it a
quarter of an hour, and take off the skum, and take of this Sirrup seven
spoonfuls in the morning fasting, and at night to bedward. Probatum.

For a Consumption or Cough of the Lungs.
Take three spoonfuls of English Honey, and three of fair water mixed together,
set it on the fire till the skum arise, then take off the skum, and take it
from the fire, then put thereto the powder of Coltsfoot, and make it as thick
as Conserves of Roses, which use at your pleasure.

A precious Water for a Consumption.
Take a quart of Rosewater, as much of woman's milk, Goats milk, or Cowes milk,
put unto it twenty yolks of Eggs, and mix them well together, and thereof
distill a Water, and give the Patient thereof to drink first and last, with a
Cake to eat made with Gold and Pearl.

A Water good for a Consumption or weakness.
Take a gallon of new milk of a red Cow, and the yolks of twenty eggs, beat
them very well together and put thereto a pint of good Red Wine and two Manchets
sliced; so mingle all these things together, and put them in a plain Still, and
still it with a soft fire, and now and then stir it, or else it will have a
crust on it; the Water may be taken at any time three or four spoonfuls with
some Sugar, the oftener the better.

COUGH.
For the Cough, be it never so extreme.
Take a quart of new milk, and a pint of strong Ale, and make a posset thereof;
then take off the curd, then take a quarter of a pound of Raisons of the Sun
stoned, and two big sticks of Licoras, and two spoonfuls of Anniseeds bruise
them, and sees all in the posset Ale, until half be sodden away, then take it
from the fire, and put therein so much sweet Butter as the bigness of a Hasel
Nut, but let it not sees after; and let the party drink thereof evening (...)
or eight spoonfuls at a time as hot as he can. Probatum.

For the Cough.
Take a head of Garlic, and prick it full of Cloves, then take half a handful
of three leaved grass, and as much Goats grease, put the Garlic head therein,
and wrap it in russet paper, and so roast it in the ashes till it be soft, then
beat it in a Mortar and strain it, then drink it in some Ale or Beer, it is
good for the Cough.

A Tisan for the Cough.
Take a quart of good old Ale, and set it on the fire and skim it clean, then
take half a dozen of good Fennel roots, and scrape them, and take out the
pithes, and bruise them in a Mortar, and put them in the Ale; then take a
quantity of Licoras scraped and bruised and put it to the rest, then take a
handful of Anniseeds, and sift them clean, and bruise them in a Mortar, and
put it into the Ale, and let it sees together a pretty while, and take a
handful of small Raisons, wash and pick them clean, and bruise them in a Mortar,
and put it into the Ale and let it sees a walme or two after, then take a
penny worth of Sugar candied and put into it, when it is almost sodden from a
quart to a pint; and when it is full sodden to a pint, take it off and strain
it, and drink it at times convenient, and put to this Tisan, Sugar, Honey, and
Powder of Elicampane root, of each a little, and some great Raisons, the stones
taken out, and Parsley roots, and two or three Figs.

For the Cough, if it be of the Lungs.
Take half a pint of Aquavitae, of Anniseed^^ half penny worth, and as much
English Licoras, scrape it and slice it thin, run the Anniseeds very well, and
fan the dust out of them, and put them in together, and let them boil on a soft
fire till half be consumed, then strain it out, and wipe the pot, and put it in
again, and put to it three ounces of brown Sugar candied, and set it against
the fire till it be melted, then take it off, and use as often as you will
drink.

For the Cough or Cold.
Take a quart of Ale, and put thereto a good sprig of Rosemary, and boil it,
then put to it a spoonful of Sugar, and as much butter as an egg, and brew them
together, and let the Patient drink thereof to bedward, and keep warm.

For the Cough.
Stamp two handfuls of Centory, and sees it in three quarts of Ale to the
half, then stamp it again and sees it, and put thereto a pint of honey, and so
take every morning thereof three spoonfuls.

Another.
The Cough is a Messenger of all Diseases of the Lights and Breast, through the
grosness, drought, moisture, spittle, and other excrements; for the Cough is a
motion of the Lights the which by the air and moving virtue of the Muscels
that are within the breast is meet, and made for to cough up all that which
hurts the lights, and the Rhume provokes the Cough most of all. There are
often perilous Coughs through Rhume that falls down out of the head upon the
lights, and into the breast, which is very ill to get out. It is good to purge
the head with Cochia Pills, and to drink sometimes a draught of Barley Water in
the morning, and eat something after it. Then take this Potion, Take Syrrup of
Endive, Honey of Roses, and Sirrup of Steches, of each half an ounce, Water of
Succory and Endive of each one ounce and half, tempered together.

This Powder is approved to stay the Rhume; Take Spica of the Indies one
quarter of an ounce, Cinnamon one quarter of an ounce, of the Scull of a man
that dyed through violence, three quarters of an ounce: take every time it
comes, one dram after meat in Wine or any decoction.

Physicians do commend Barley Water mixed with Julip of Violets.

CORNS.
For to take away Corns.
First cut away the Corn and root him out, then drop into the hole a drop or
two of a black Snail, and put thereto the powder of Sandyfer, and it will wear
the Corn away.

Also cut your Corns away, and lay a little piece of the red Cerecloth upon
the hole, and in three months it will wear it clean away.

CRAMP.
For the Cramp.
Take the little bones of the Hares hinder legs which are in the knee joints,
if you touch the place grieved therewith it helps.

Also take Hollioaks, Oil of Violets and of Swines grease of each a little
quantity and make an Ointment of them and anoint the place.

Another.
Take the Flank wool of a sheep carded in flakes, and dipped in Sallet Oil,
and wrap it about your legs, or where it takes you, and it will heat the
Cramp and ease it.

DEAFNESS.
For Deafness an excellent Medicine.
TAke the juice of Betony with the most part of Camomile, wet in it a lock of
wool, and stop it in the deaf ear: and Water stilled of the same Herbs, to be
powered into the ears, is a help for deafness.

For the Hearing.
Take Oil of Roses and White Wine Vinegar, of each alike, and mingle them
together, and at night in bed put one drop into the ear, and stop it with black
wool, and lie on the other side.

DROPSY.
A very good Drink to cure the Dropsy.
Take of Peperitis Roots, otherwise called Horse Rhadish, three ounces, slice
them by the length very thin, of Licoras scraped and bruised two ounces, Winter
Savory, Time, Penniroyal, the tops of Nettles of each a small handful; of
Smallage roots, Fennel roots, of each one ounce, of sweet Fennel seeds bruised
three ounces, infuse all these things one night in two quarts of fair water,
and three pints of Canary Wine, then boil all together the next day one quarter
of an hour, then take it from the fire and let it run through a clean cloth and
so drink a small draught thereof in the morning fasting, and as much in the
afternoon at three a clock and fast two hours after it, and so continue taking
it until you be well. Mr. Smart.

An excellent Medicine for the Dropsy.
Take Scruvey grass otherwise called Sold Mella, and stamp it and strain it
with White Wine, drink every morning some four or five spoonfuls blood warm,
and fast one hour or two after it, and do the like every evening; this you must
do two or three months together, taking now and then a little Mithridatum upon
the point of a knife, and keep your self very warm, and wash those parts of
your body that are swelled with this that follows: Take Watercresses and
Brooklime, and boil them, and wash the places therewith that are detected, and
let it dry in.

For the Dropsy.
Take a pitcher full of two gallons of new Ale, then take Setwal, Calamas
Aromaticus and Gallingale, of each two penny worth, of Spiknard four penny
worth, stamp all, and put them into a big, and hang it in the pot, and when it
is four days old, then drink it morning and evening.

A Diet Drink for a Dropsy, Timpany, or other Swelling.
Take one ounce of Sassaparilla, cut in small pieces, a quarter of an ounce of
Sassasrasse, Hermodactulus half an ounce sliced, Anniseeds and sweet Fennel
seeds of each half an ounce beaten, Licoras one quarter of an ounce, Raisons of
the Sun two ounces, the stones taken out; boil all these in three quarts and a
pint of fair water, Wine measure; then take it off the fire, and put to it one
ounce and a quarter of Cene, and let it stand twelve hours, then strain it, and
take at your rising in the morning, and a little before Dinner, and a little
before supper, and at going to bed, a quarter of a pint to a draught, and use
it three days together, or more if need require.

DRINK.
Dr. Deodates Scurbuttical Drink.
Take Roman, Wormwood, Carduus Benedictus, Scurvy-grasse, Brooklime,
Watercresses, Water Trifoil, of each one handful, Dodder, Cetrach,
Scolopendria, Burrage, Buglos, Sorrel, Vervain or Speedwel, of each half a
handful, Elicampane root one ounce, Raisons of the Sun three ounces, slices of
Oranges and Lemmons of each fifteen, boil, or rather infuse these in a double
glass, with so much white Wine, as will make a pint and a half of the liquor
when it is done.

An excellent Drink for the Stomach and Breast, grief of the heart, the Palsy,
Jaundies, the Rhume, the soreness of the Throat, the Ptisick, all faintness
about the Heart and Stomach, and to make a good digestion, and to be of a good
color.
Take the Powder of Pellitory of Spain and of Centory, Anniseeds, Licoras,
Grains of Paradise, Callamus, Ginger, Cinnamon, mix all these, and use them
evening and morning the quantity of half a spoonful in Wine or Ale.

A Diet Drink to be taken in the Spring.
Take a quarter of a pound of Madder roots, two ounces of red Dock roots, of
Scabious, Egrimony, Carduus Benedictus, Liverwort, of each a handful, of Cene
two ounces, of Licoras, Anniseeds, Sassaparilla, Sassafrass wood, Lignum vitae
and Hermodactilus, of each one ounce, put all these together into a rundlet of
two gallons; bruise all the Herbs and Spices, then put to it two gallons of
Beer or Ale, and let it lie five or six days; then take Rubarb the weight of a
Groat, and put it in a cloth, and steep it in a draught of Beer all night, and
wring it into the Beer before you drink it.

A most excellent Diet Drink for the French Disease.
Take of good White Wine ten quarts, of good strong Beer as much, put thereto
of the Bark Guacum, two pound of Cene, one pound of Licoras scraped and heaten
to powder, one pound of the root of Sassaparilla scraped and cut in pieces an
inch long, and slit in the midst, one pound of Apples of Colliquintida, the
kernels taken out; put all these things together into ordinary stone pots such
as their mouths may be so little, as may be stopped close with corks or dough,
and being so stopped, boil them in such a Vessel, as they may be hanged in, and
not touch the bottom in the boiling, and so let them be kept boiling
continually without ceasing for the space of four and twenty hours from the
time they begin to boil, which you may do by having seething water ready in
another vessel, and being so well bruised, strain the liquor from the dregs,
and put therein one ounce of pure Mithridatum, and so let the Patient drink so
much as he can possible, and no other drink till he has made an end of it, and
let him not eat any bread but biscuit made without salt, and every day a few
Raisons of the Sun, and nothing else for the space of ten days; then if the
Patient has not drunk all this potion of drink, let him (if he be weak) eat of
a Chicken roasted, or a rib of a neck of Mutton dry roasted once in four and
twenty hours, until he has made an end of this quantity of drink, the which
being drank, the Cure (by Gods help) is perfectly wrought; This quantity of
Drink has been drunk in six days, and it has done the Cure: after the Cure
is done, in any case keep a good Diet for a quarter of a year, and abstain from
women, and over much drink.

An Excellent Drink to prevent Physic, being taken and used in the Spring and
Fall, and approved by many who have found the success to be accordingly.
Take a gallon of Wort made of Malt, and put into it a good handful of
Egrimony, and as much Goose-grasse, let them sees in the Wort almost an hour,
then strain it out, and put into the Wort of good Cene clean picked, and
Anniseeds, both bruised, of each one ounce and half, and let them sees one
hour, and remain in the Wort, after take a good pot full of the Wort, and put
into it ten penny worth of the best Rubarb thin sliced, then close up the pot
with paste, and let it stand to infuse upon embers twelve hours, then put it
again to the rest of the Wort; and tun it up as other Ale, and at the bunghole
put in a good handful of red Dock roots scraped and sliced; Drink of this in
the Spring and Fall of the leaf, a draught or two in the morning, and fast
after it two hours, and use it for three weeks or a month at both times of the
year as you see cause, and take it every day or second day as you find it work.

A Diet Drink to heal Wounds.
Take of Egrimony two handfuls, of Daisie leaves and roots, Wild Angelica,
Ribwort, Mugwort, Wormwood, Comfry, Mints, Canapit, Speedwel, Avens, Bramble
leaves, Arcamilla or Sincle, Scabious, Betony and Dandillion of each of these a
handful, boil them all together in two gallons of running water some three
hours till half be consumed; then put into it a pint of White Wine, and half a
pint of honey, then strain it out, and so keep it, letting the party drink
thereof two or three times a day.

EYES.
A good Medicine to preserve the Eyesight.
TAke green Barley before it be eared, and distill it, and use daily now and
then, to lay a little on your eyes of that Water, and it will continue the
sight.

A special good Poultice for sore Eyes, that be much swelled and comes by the
Rheum.
Take a quantity of Bean flower, some of an Apple finely scraped, a little
woman's milk, of Sorrel Water, red Role-Water, Plantane Water, of each a little
quantity, mix all these together, and make a Poultice thereof, then spread it
upon a fine linen cloth somewhat thick, and put it to the Patients Eyes cold.

A Plaster for sore eyes.
Take of the pap of a roasted Apple two spoonfuls, the like quantity of new
laid eggs, of Saffron thirteen chives dried and made into fine powder; work
these together to one substance, and put thereto of Woman's milk of a maiden
child one spoonful, of Rose water the like quantity; of these make your
Plaster, and lay it to your eyes morning and evening, and have in a readiness
the powders of these stones following, Lapis Calaminaris quenched nine times in
White Wine, Aloes Hepatica, white Sugar candied, Tucia prepared, Camphire, of
each of these half a dram, made fine to powder, sow these in a fine cloth or
fine silk, and put it in a glass of water, and of this Water drop into your
eyes morning and evening and lie upon your back when you drop it into your
eyes. Make your Water as follows, Take Roses, Marigolds, Plantane, brown
Fennel, Eyebright, Cellendine, Tormentil, Betony, Scabious Fumetory, Oaken
buds, of each of these two ounces, mix all these in a glass, and put in the
powders above said.

A very good Medicine for Eyes that be troubled with Pin or Web, or other
dimnesse.
Take the yolk of a new laid egg or two, and beat it well until it comes unto
a great froth, then let it stand so a little while, and let the Oil run into a
sawcer, and put the juice of Daisies, with the blossoms, leaves and roots
being stamped and strained, into the Oil of Eggs, and put a little clarified
honey unto it, and mix all these well together, and let the Patient take every
morning and evening into the ey that is grieved, a drop put in with a feather,
let this be used so long as the pain lasts.

Another for sore Eyes.
Take a little Rosewater and woman's milk, and mix them together, whereof the
Patient may use a drop at a time as above said. And if the Patient be a man the
woman's milk must be of her that has a daughter; and if the Patient be a woman
she must have the milk of her that has a son sucking upon her.

For a Pearl, Pin or Web in the Eyes.
Take a little Honey clarified as it comes from the Hive, and so drop it into
your eye evening and morning, and it will help. Probatum.

A very good Medicine for sore eyes that comes of the Megrim.
Take the white of an egg, and beat it well, then skim it, and put to the Oil
some case Ginger finely beaten, and some White Wine Vinegar, then take flax and
dip it in the Oil, and lay it on your Temples, and take heed that no part
thereof come into your eyes. Do this four or five nights or more, when you go
to bed, and every time wash your eyes with the water that comes of cutting of
Vines. Probatum.

A Water very comfortable for the Eyesight.
Take of Rose leaves, red Fennel, Vervain, Rue, Cellendine, and Eyebright, of
each a handful, and so still them all together, and you shall have a good Water
for the eye sight. Probatum.

To recover the Eye sight.
Take Smallage, Rue, Fennel, Vervain, Egrimony, Betony, Scabious, Avens,
Houndstongue, Eyebright, Pimpernel and Sage, of each a like quantity and distill
all these together with a little Urine of a man-child, and five grains of
Frankincense, and drop of this water every night into the eyes, and the sight
will recover by Gods grace. Probatum by Mr. Whaley.

For sore eyes and blind.
Take the white of a new laid egg, strained from the yolk, beat it well to an
Oil, and take off the froth, and put to the Oil a spoonful of good White Wine
Vinegar, and a spoonful of Rose water, beat them all well together, and with a
little flax, lay to each temple a Plaster, but take heed it touch not the
eyes; use this three or four times to bedward, it has brought them to sight
that were seven weeks blind. Probatum.

For red Eyes.
Take a new laid egg or two, and roast them very hard, then without taking away
the shells cut them in sunder, and take out the yolks, and scrape a little white
Copperas, and put it where the yolks were, as much Copperas as a little pease
is enough for one egg, then strain the whites with the shells through a cloth
into a sawcer, and with this Oil anoint your eyes when you go to bed.

For Eyes that be Bloodshed, or have Pushes in them.
Make a toast of fine leven bread, and lay it in Wine till it be soft, then put
it in a cloth, and to bedward lay it in the cloth to the eyes, and it will heal
them.

For an Eye that has been hurt, so that the Ball was ready to fall out, being
swollen as big as an egg.
Take a rotten Apple that is thoroughly rotten, and take it from the core, then
bear the white of an egg well, and drop the juice of the Apple therein, and
bind it with a cloth to the eye, and so dress it twice a day till it be whole.

The gall of a Heart and clarified Honey well mingled together is very good for
the Web in the eye; it must be laid on with a feather.

For a Pin or Web in the eye.
Take White Wine and put it in a Basin that is bright; and put Bay salt unto
it, and let it stand for nine days, two of the days shake the Basin, and at
the ninth days end put it into a glass and keep it for your use; it is also
good for red eyes.

An excellent Water for sore Eyes, by Pearl, Pin and Web, Lash or Prick.
Take of Cellendine, Herb-grace, Betony, brown Fennel, Eyebright, red Rose
flowers, Maidenhair, or as many of those as you can get, distill of each alike
much apart by themselves, and not altogether, then take of each water a like
quantity, and put them together in a glass, and let the party grieved lie
upright one half quarter of an hour in the morning at noon and at night, and
drop into his eyes at each time one or two drops, and close the eyes afterward.

For sore Eyes.
Take a rotten Apple that is thoroughly rotten, and cut out the core, and then
strain it through a fine cloth into some fair thing, and of the juice of that
Apple drop into your eye that is sore morning and evening.

A precious Water to clarify the Eyes, and to take away the Pearl in the Eye.
Take red Roses, Smallage, Rue, Vervain, Maidenhair, Ewfrace, Endive, Seagreen,
red Fennel, Hillwort, and Cellendine, of each like quantity, then wash them
clean, and lay them in good White Wine the space of a day, and then distill
them, the first water will be like Gold, the second like silver, and the third
like Balm for any sore, and it is precious for Ladies in stead of Balm water.

For heat in the Eyes.
Take a new laid egg, open the top, and let out all that is in the shell, and
divide the yolk from the white, and then put in the white again into the shell,
and put thereto as much of the juice of Houseleek strained, as there is of the
white of the egg, and so much Roach Allome as a hasel nut; then set the egg
shall with the things aforesaid in it, upon some embers, and so let it boil,
and when it is boiled, the white will be smewhat hard; then take it off, and
let all the water run from it, and that water drop into eyes that be sore
morning and evening.

The juice of Slowes, being dropped into the eyes, is as good a Medicine as may
be, and so is the juice of Cellendine; but they must be severally used.

A very good Water for a Blast or Rheum in the Eyes.
Take Callaminaris stones, and burn them well in the fire, and when they be
very hot, quench them six or seven times in pure White Wine and Rosewater, then
leave the stones in the liquor two or three days, and after apply it to your
eyes. Mrs. Meggs Receipt.

An Ointment for sore eyes, and such as be blasted.
Take the powder of Callaminaris, and put thereunto the grease of a fat Pullet
that never laid egg, and some White Sugar candied finely beaten to powder, and
some Oil of Almonds, mix all these well together, and use it as occasion is
offered. Mrs. Meggs.

For a Pearl in the Eye.
Take a quantity of Pearlwort, as much Heyhowd, and a less quantity of Ground
Ivy, and stamp them, thereto put a spoonful of life Honey, and about two or
three drops of Rosewater, strain these, and drop the juice often in the eye.

Another for the same.
Take white Hemlock, and Ground Ivy a little quantity, sour leaven and a
little Bay salt, and stamp them, then put thereto a little Vinegar, and thereof
make a Plaster upon Sheeps leather, and lay it to the wrist of the contrary
side.

To stay the hot Rheum in the Eye.
Take Bole Armoniack powdered, the white of an egg well beaten, and thereof
make a Plaster, and lay it to the temples.

Another for the same.
Wet a Cloth in the juice of Houseleek, and lay it upon the brow.

For heat in the Eyes.
Take White Wine, wherein Lapis Callaminaris has been seven times quenched,
and drop it into the eyes when you go to bed, with a feather.

For the black or white Pearl in the Eye.
Take a handful of Ground Ivy, and stamp it, and strain it with some fasting
spettle, and temper it with a little clarified Honey, and drop it in your eye.
Take Sugar candied, and beat it small, and searese it fine, and blow it with a
quill into your eye. Take Coperas, and beat it very fine, and blow it in the
eye. Take Wormwood and beat it, then take the white of an egg and beat it, and
take off the froth, then make a pellet of flower, and wet it, and warm it, and
lay it to the eye,

For sore Eyes.
Take the whites of two eggs, and beat them with a spoon till they be as thin
as water, then take away the skum with a feather, then take a piece of rough
canvass, as broad as ones forehead, and put upon your canvass Tow or Flax, then
power your egg upon it, then take Bole Armoniack with Terra Sigillata, and so
bind it fast to your Temples when you go to bed, but lie not upon the sore eye
side, and in the morning when you rise take it off suddenly, but soak it first
with fair water, lest it grieve you when you take it off. Do this three nights
together.

Another.
Take the Oil of a Goose wing, a little English Honey, and beat them well
together in a sawcer, then strain it through a clean cloth, and drop it into
the eye with a feather. Probatum.

For heat in the Eyes.
Take a piece of a new white loaf, and put it into running water, and wrap it
in a linen cloth, and lay it to the Eyes.

For a Pin or Web in the Eyes.
Boil in egg-shell water, the stones of Raisons of the Sun, and Goose dung new
taken and strained therein is very good.

Capons grease washed in Plantane water, and Tutia prepared mixed in it is very
good for a sore eye.

For Bleare Eyes.
Take the juice of Wormwood and mingle it with the water aforesaid, and put
into your eye will take away the blood and aching.

For Blood-shotten Eyes.
Take the blood of a stock Dove, or for want of it, of a Pigeon, and drop a
little into your eyes, and wet a cloth therein, and lay it on the Eye, helps
the blood shotten eye, whether by stroke or otherwise. Sometimes the pain
comes of Choler, and then the patient feels great heat, sharp prickings,
much pain, and commonly there appears no gum in the Eye; if there do, it
is yellow: therefore the Patient ought to be purged, as has been said in the
Remedies of the head proceeding of the cause of Choler: And in the beginning of
the redness, lay Tow or Flax dipped in the white of an egg well beaten with
Rose Water and Plantane water.

To recover the sight.
Take three drams of Tuttie made into very fine powder, as much of Alge Epatum,
or Epaline in powder, two drames of fine Sugar, six ounces of Rose Water, as
much of pure White Wine mixed all together, and put it into some clean Vessel of
Glass; and being well closed and stopped, set it in the Sun a month together,
stirring it once every day; then take four or five drops of the same water, and
put it into the Eyes morning and evening; this in short space will cause the
sight to come again as fair as ever before.

For swelling of the Eyes.
Take a Quince, and sees it in water til it be soft, then pare it, bruise it,
and mingle it with the yolk of an egg and the crumbs of white bread dipped in
the fame Water, and put thereto a little woman's milk, and two penny worth of
Saffron, bray them together, and lay it over your forehead and the eyes.
Sometime such pain chances because of phlegm, and then the Patient feels
great pain and heaviness in the eyes, and in this case you must purge the
phlegm, as has been said in the Remedies of the head grieved with the excess
of phlegm.

To clarify the sight, or for redness of the eyes.
Take Salt and Ginger, and make it in fine powder, and temper it in White Wine,
and set it so stand a day and a night, then take of the thinnest, and wet your
eyes with a feather, when you go to bed: to resolve the Gum, you must wash your
eyes with houselee; sometimes the pain comes because of ventosity or wind, and
then the Patiene feels such pain as it were beating between the ears with a
Hammer, for which it is good to make a Decoction of Camomile flowers, Mellilote
and Fennel seeds in water and White Wine, and therein wet a fourfold linen
cloth well pressed down and lay it upon the eyes often. Otherwhiles there
chances pain in the eyes by outward accidents, as wind, dust or heat; milk
well beaten with the white of an egg is good: and sometimes the same pain
comes of striking, and then drop in your eye the blood of a Pigeons wing,
which blood will take away spotted marks and redness of the face.

For a great pain in the Eye.
Take half an ounce of Oil of Roses, the yolk of an egg, and a quarter of an
ounce of Barley flower, and a little Saffron mixed together, and put it between
two linen cloths, and lay it to the pain; or else take the crumb; of white
bread one ounce, and sees it with Nightshade, and Morral water, then mix with
the same bread yolks of eggs, Oil of Roses and Camomile of each an ounce and a
half, of Linseed one ounce, and use it as aforesaid.

A very good Water to strengthen the sight and to prevent a Catherick.
Take Eyebright, Vervain, Tormentill of each two pound, Cellendine, Egrimony,
Wood Betony, Honey suckle flowers, White or Red Roses, Vine leaves, Pimpernel,
Fennel, Rue, Oculus Christi, Chickweed, Smallage and Clover, of each a pound,
beat them small, and steep them in a gallon of White Wine twelve hours, then
fill your Still reasonable full, and put to it three great spoonfuls of Honey,
a pint of new milk, and half a pint of Urine of a man child, then still it, and
draw about a pint and a half of a Still.

For an Eye that is very full of pain.
Take of Violet leaves a quarter of a handful, of Daisies roots and all, half
as many, wash them and dry them very well in a cloth, then stamp them, and put
to it a spoonful of red Rose water, and strain it, then take the white of a new
laid egg well beaten, and take away the froth, then put that to the things
aforesaid with half a quarter of a spoonful of Honey, and drop this in the eye
morning and evening, and twice or thrice a day; and at night lay on the eye the
pap of a roasted Apple, or of a rotten Apple, and put a little juice of
Houseleek amongst it, and a little fine Sugar candied, lay it upon the Eye two
or three nights; if the pain be great, lap upon it a piece of fresh Bief, two
or three hours, and so again as you see cause. Lay to your neck behind, Elder
leaves and Woodbetony dried between two tiles sprinkled with a little Vinegar,
and strew on good store of beaten Pepper; when it is hot, lay it on a thin
cloth, and so lay it to the neck night and morning four or five times. Also
make blisters behind the ears if you see cause. If there grow a skin upon the
eye, put in Allome Water with the juice of Cellendine in it, or if it be much,
the juice of Ground Ivy; drop this in twice a day, and the white powder once a
day.

For Blood-shotten Eyes.
If the Violet Water will not help take five or six corns of Cummin seeds
bruised, as many blades of Saffron put in a fine rag, let it soak in a spoonful
of red Rose water, strain it, and put to it a spoonful of Woman's milk, and drop
this often into the eye.

For a very great Pearl in the Eye.
Put in the Eye a little clarified Honey, and a little fine Ginger in it, and
sometimes the powder of white Sugar candied: half an hour before you put in
either, put in a little fresh grease.

For a Rheum in the Eyes.
Make Eggshell Water, with the juice of Houseleek, as much white Copperas as a
pease, twice as much Honey; this is good if you perceive the Humor to be very
hot; also it is good with Snow water: and if the Humor be cold, make it with
half stilled water, and half Eyebright Water; if between both, make it with
fair water.

To stay the Rheum in the Eyes.
Take Woodbind bruised, and lay it to your Temples.

For a Pin or Web in the Eye.
Take Herb Christopher, stamp it, and strain it, and put in a little honey,
drop it in twice a day; also lay on his eye white bread, milk and Violets made
in a Poultice; also take Cellendine, Daisies, roots and all, brown Fennel,
Cliver, Betony, Plantane, Sorrel twice as much as the rest, there must be of
each a handful, a pint of new milk, a dram of white Coperas in powder, two
great spoonfuls of Honey, do not draw it dry: drop it in the eye three or four
times in two hours, and lay a wet cloth upon the eye.

To bring away the Rheum from the Eye.
Set the feet in Camomile sod in water two hours if you can, then lap them in
a blanket two hours, keeping it warm with warm clothes.

For any spot in the Eye.
Take the scraping of a whetstone and Bay salt made very fine, and put thereof
twice a day into your Eye.

For a Pin and Web.
Roast an egg, and put in a piece of Copperas as big as a Pease, and nine
Cummin seeds, strain it, and put in a little Honey; Alloes Sicatrina made in
powder, and strained with a little Rose water, is very good for any sore eyes.
Capons grease washed with Plantane water, and Tutia prepared and mixed together
is very good for sore eyes to anoint them with it.

To stay the Rheum in the Eyes.
Make water seething hot, and wet a good big cloth in it, and lay it all over
the forehead, when it begins to wax cool, wet another, and lay to it hot,
and do so half an hour together against the fire.

For a prick in the Eye, with a thorn, and to drive out the thorn or stubble.
Take he treddle of an egg, and put it in your eye and biod it in.

For a B^^i^^ in the Eye.
Lay to the Temples a piece of raw fresh B^ef, and to the eye put in Violet
water, and lay on the Eye the pap of a^ Apple, with some of that water, a
little Sugar, and the yolk of an egg boil a together.

For an Ague in the Eye.
Lay on the eye a piece of fresh Bi^^ two hours, and drop on the Eye Allo^^
water, and lay in the Temples leaver^ Rosewater, Vinegar and Nutmeg to st^^ the
Rheum.

For a Pin and Web.
Take Ground Ivy, stamp and stra^ with red Rose water, and drop it o^ in the
eye.

A very good Powder for a spot in the Eye.
Take of Alloes Sicatrina, Sugar candied, or very good Sugar, of each a like
quantity, make it into fine powder, and put it often into your eyes when you go
to bed, and Eyebright water in the morning, and once more in a day.

For red or yellow Eyes.
Take the juice of Parsley and the white of an egg mingled together, and a
little Rosewater, dip flax therein, and lay it over your eye, and it will help
you.

For Eyes that be blasted.
Take Plantane Water and the white of an egg, mix them well together, and wash
your eyes therewith, and lay it on (...) our eyes.

To clear the sight.
Take Cellendine, Eyebright, red Fennel, Roses, Seagreene, Maidenhair and Rue,
of each two ounces, then put thereto half an ounce of Alloes, stilling all
these in a Stillatory, then wash your eyes therewith.

For red Eyes, and for the Pearl.
Take white Ginger, and rub it on a whetstone into a dish; then take as much
salt as you have powder, and put them in White Wine, and let them stand a day
and a night, then take the juice and liquor thereof with a feather, and anoint
your eyes.

To take away the Web in the Eye.
Take the gall of a Hare, and a little quantity of purified honey, temper them
well together, then take a feather, and anoint your eyes therewith.

A Water for the Eyes.
Take of Tutty and Alloes Sicatrina, of each six ounces made in fine powder,
four drams of fine Sugar in powder, of white Rosewater, and of the best white
Wine unchanged, twelve ounces mixed all together in a glass, stop it close, and
let it stand in the Sun a month, let not your glass be full shake it once a day,
turning the bottom upwards, then strain it through a fine cloth from the dregs,
and when you use it, one drop is sufficient at a time use it morning and
evening, and if one drop be too little, take two.

For sore Eyes.
Take the whites of two eggs; and beat them with a spoon till they be as thin
as water, then strike away the froth with a feather, then take a piece of rough
canvass tow or flax, then power your whites on it, then take Bole Armoniack with
Terra Sigillatum, and scrape them both upon it and with a knife spread it
Plaster wise, as much of the one as of the other, and so fast bind it to your
forehead, and in the morning when you rise take it not off suddenly, but take
it off with fair water. Do this three nights together.

For Blood shotten Eyes, Rheum or sore Eyes.
Take four spoonfuls of Rose water, of white Copperas as much as a pease, and
of Allome and Sugar candied, of each as much as a pease all in powder,
sometimes drop of this in the eye, and sometimes wash the eye with it, and lay
Herbs to the wrists. Also Rosewater, Sugar, and Saffron is very good, Sugar
candied is the best.

For a spot or itching in the Eyes.
Take Ground Ivy, Cellendine and Daisies, stamp them and strain out the juice,
then put to it a little Sugar and Damask Rose water, and drop in the eye twice
a day.

For sore eyes, or for any part inwardly disquieted by any Ache, Swelling,
Wound or Stroke.
Take the leaves of Woodbind and Plantane, of each one handful, also three or
four Dittony leaves, of Roach Allom well washed, the quantity of an egg, as
much Verdigrease, three spoonfuls of pure honey, put all this into a vessel to
be kept only for that purpose, put to it a pottle of fair running water, and
after it has boiled one quarter of an hour let it stand four or five hours;
power out the clear, and bury the grounds; if it be too sharp, put in some
white Rose water. If the lids be sore with Rheum, or the eyes be red or
burning, drop in, and wash the lids often with the white of an egg; if it be
for a horse, put in more Verdigrease and Honey.

Another.
Take the Water of Roses, Saxifrage and Fennel, of each alike, and put to them
a small quantity of Verdigrease, and boil it a little on the fire, and when it
has settled, take the clear, and see you wash. Auxungium Poecati seven or eight
times, and of that put in to your eye a little when you go to bed.

For Eyes blasted or swollen.
Anoint them with rape Oil, and lay to a Plaster of Flower, Cream, Hogs
grease, Rose water and Violet leaves bruised small, and boil all to a Poultice,
and lay it to warm, change it as waxes dry. Capons grease washed, and Tutia
prepared and mixed with it is very good to anoint sore eyes.

For Ache, Strain or pain in the Head by sore Eyes.
Take of Plantane, Wood Betony and Ragweed, of each one handful, put as much
flower to it as will make it a paste, the Herbs being first beaten small, make
it in a Cake, and make it through warm on a Gridiron, and lay it to the nape of
the neck, and let it lie twelve hours, and lay fresh as you see cause.

A Purge for Choler, when there is Pain in the Head, or Rheum in the Eyes.
Take of Cene and of Ginger sliced one ounce, two ounces of Cassia, and six
ounces of Sugar, stamp them all together, and boil them in a pint of Rose water
till half be consumed, then put in two ounces more of Sugar, beat it well, and
keep it close: Take of this Confection a quarter of an ounce in the morning and
fast three hours after, putting it into a draught of White Wine warmed, strain
it, and so drink it, and use it in the Spring and Fall once in ten days for two
months or six weeks. If you make but for one, you need make but half this
quantity. It purges very gently.

For Eyes that be troubled with soreness and redness.
Colewort leaves boiled in White Wine and Plasters made of them, and laid one
the eyes, is good for sore eyes that water much.

To wash them with the Water of Plantane is very good.

Also skivers or pricks of any kind boiled in fair water with red Roses amongst
them, save the fat and drop it in your eyes morning and evening is very good.

To take away spots of Blood in the Eye.
Take red Roses and sees them, and let them be set warm to your Eye, it takes
away spots of blood; it is good also for all Diseases in the Eye; for redness
in the eye that comes with a blow or any other violence; you must lay to it by
and by Towe wet in Rosewater and white of eggs, juice of Wood-betony and
Egrimony, and after the pain is mitigated you must lay a Plaster upon it made
of a raw egg, Barley flower and the juice of Mallows. If that do not help it,
take wheat flowers, the juice of Mallows, Mints, Smallage, and the Oil of an
egg, and make a Plaster thereof, and lay it to.

For hardness that has been long in the Eye.
Take a Scruple of Alloes, and melt it in Water of Cellendine at the fire, then
put of it in the eye.

Or take powder of Cummin mixed with Wax like a Plaster, and lay it upon the
eye: Or take Roses, Sage, Rue and Cellendine, of each alike, mixed with a little
salt, and distill it, and thereof put a drop or two evening and morning in your
eye. In stead of that water, it is good to take the juice of Vervain, Rue, and
a little Rose water.

For the Pin or Web.
Take tops and crops of Herb Christopher, stalks and leaves a good quantity in
the beginning of May, stamp them very small, then take a good quantity of May
Butter, and stamp them together in a vessel, and strain it out, and set it in
the Sun, and put of these into your eyes, it must stand a month in the Sun.

For a hurt in the Eye, that comes by a stroke.
Take Pimpernel Cellendine and Plantane, and put thereto the white of an egg,
and woman's milk of a male child, and Oil of Roses, and put it in your eye
going to bed; use this three or four times in a day.

Or take Egrimony and bray it, and temper it with White Wine and an egg, and
make a Plaster, and lay to the outside of the eye.

For a Pearl at the beginning.
Take a Race of good Ginger, pare it clean, and rub it on a Whetstone, and make
powder of it, and put the same powder into some Gascoin Wine, then strain it
through a fair cloth, and put it into a glass or Viol, and after nine days
you may use it, when you go to bed, lying upright, and likewise in the morning:
Do this six or seven times.

For eyes that are full of Rheum, and bleared.
Take the juice of Rue four spoonfuls, and two of honey, mix them together, and
when you go to bed put some in your eye.

Or take two or three roots and leaves of red Fennel, a branch of Cellendine,
and a good race of white Ginger pared and beaten; if one serve not, take two,
put all these into half a pint of water, cover it; and put of it in your eye
when you go to bed, and an hour before you rise, strayning it when you use it.

To preserve the sight long.
Take a crop of Rue, and another of Camomile, and eat them fasting with a Figg
two or three days in a week.

To clear the sight.
Take the white of an egg made as clear as water, and a spoonful of clarified
Honey, and some fine Sugar; and mix them together, and keep it in a close
vessel seven or eight weeks, then take Cotton and dip it in the liquor, and rub
the eyelids therewith within and without.

For sore Eyes, and Megrim in the Head.
Take the whites of new laid eggs, and beat them to Oil, then take a spoonful
of Rose water, as much fine Sugar, and as much strong Vinegar made of Malmesey
or White Wine, put them to the Oil and beat them together; then take Flax as
much as will make a Plaster, dip it in the Medicine, and bind on each Temple
one with a cloth, but take heed the Medicine do not touch the eyes. Do this
three or four nights, and every morning the eyes will cleave together with Gum.

For the Megrim in the eyes.
Take new milk, and sees it, and put it into a basin, and cover it with a
platter, and with the dew that comes wash your eyes and brows.

Or take three drams of the juice of Rue, and put in your eyes and ears, and
stop your ears, and lie down on that side.

For a Pearl and Web.
Take Veinfrage, Ivy, Daisies, Sickwort, red Fennel, Seagreene, Pimpernel, May
butter, bruise them in a Mortar, and let them lie in the froth five ^ayes, then
make an easy fire, and set (...) over till it be melted, then strain it
through a fair cloth, and put is into a Vial, and put thereof into your eye the
quantity of a wheat corn. It will destroy the Web, and when your eye cleaves
together, wash it with Rose water.

Another.
Take the leaves of Sage, Hysop oculus Christ^ puiled downward, drink the juice
of this with Monks pease otherwise called Wood-lice, stamped with the Herbs,
and strain it in some Bee^, and let the Patient drink it first and last three
or four days together.

Or take the juice of Avens, Southernwood, and put this juice into Fen^^^
water, and put it in your eye.

For Eyes that be fair to look on, and naught to see with.
Take Smallage Fennel, Rue, Vervai^ Betony, Pimpernel, Eyebright, Sag^ and
Cellendine, of each alike, wash the^^ clean and stamp them, then take the
powder of fifteen Pepper corns, and (...) pint of good White Wine, three
spoonfuls of good Honey, and fifteen spoonfuls of the Urine of a man child that
is young; then put all these together, and let it boil over the fire a little,
then strain it, and keep it in a vessel or glass, and put of it into your
Eyes; and if it dry up in the glass, put to it a little White Wine. This is
good for all kind of sore eyes, in fifteen days it helps.

For the Small Pocks in the Eyes.
Take the strained juice of Pimpernel, and drop into your Eye morning and
evening. This is good also for the Pin and Web, or Pearl in the eye.

For a Pin and Web.
Take Ivy leaves that grows upon Ash trees, wipe them clean with a cloth,
^hen stamp and strain them with woman's ^ilk, of a Girl for a man, of a boy for
(...) woman; the sorer the eyes be, take the ^ore juice, and the less milk.
Drop this ^^to your eye with a feather evening and ^orning, and twice in the
afternoon.

For sore Eyes that comes of a hot cause, at of a Rheum.
Take Elder leaves, and chase them between your hands, and lay them to the nape
of the neck.

For Bloodshotten Eyes.
Take a toast of leavened Bread, Houseleek and woman's milk, a spoonful o^
Rosewater, the pap of an Apple roaste^ the yolk of a new laid egg, and boil^
them, take the toast, and lay it in re^ Wine not mingled, and let it ly^ half
an hour, till it be soaked, they put it into a fine cloth of two pieces, for
each eye one, and the cloth must be between the eye and the toa^ and dress it
thus when you go t^ bed.

For Watering Eyes, and darkness sight.
Take May Butter and Honey, of (...) alike, and boil them together, and (...)
in the white of an egg, and when it (...) cold, put it into your eye, and it
will clear up your fight.

Or take the leaves of red Roses, and temper it with the whites of eggs, and
lay it to your eye when you go to bed.

For an excessive pain in the Eyes, when the Flux of Humors be sharp in them.
Take milk hot as it comes from the Cow, cover it with a Basin, then take the
dew from the Basin with a feather, and put it in a glass, and therewith dress
your Eyes.

For sore Eyes that be in the morning, full of pain and water, so that they
will not open without great washing.
Take a new laid egg and roast it hard, then take a little white Copperas, and
a little roach Allome, and a little Sandifer, then strain the juice, and drop
thereof into your eye evening and morning, and wet a linen cloth, and lay over
your eyes.

For Eyes that have skins over them, or great pain in them.
Take black Snailes, and make an Oil, and put thereto White Sugar candied, and
Lapis Calaminaris, being first burned five or six times, and thus prepared, put
in your eyes evening and morning with a feather.

Or take Daisie roots, Betony, flowers of Pimpernel, red Fennel, stamp and
strain them with stale Ale, and drink thereof evening and morning; and lay
outwardly to your eyes Rose water, woman's milk, and the white of an egg, wet
Tow or Flax therein, and lay it to your eyes; the Drink will be the better, if
you put in the juice of Clestocks, a worm so called.

A Medicine that helped one that had a thrust in the Eye.
Take the right ground Ivy and Cellendine, and the green of a Goose turd, and
woman's milk, put them all together in a glass, and when it is settled, put the
clearest in your eyes.

An Oil for burning of the Eyes.
Take the white of an egg well beaten together with the juice of Daisie roots
and Houseleek, put them into an eggshell and roast it hard, and thereof will
come an Oil, wherewith anoint the place pained.

Dr. Cademans Water for the Eyes.
Lapis Tutiae prepared half an ounce, white Vitriol half a scruple, red Rose
water, Plantane water, of each one ounce, Egrimony water half an ounce, mingle
them together, and let them boil gently, then clear it very well.

An excellent good Eye Salve.
Take a pound of May Butter, and set it in the Sun, to clarify; and always
when it is melted power the clear butter from the curds and whey that will be
in the bottom; thus do from day to day, until no more will come out, then put
as much of the Herb Christopher, small chopped, as will be steeped in it, then
set it again in the Sun in a glass for the space of a month, in which time it
will be rotten, then strain it through a fine linen cloth, and so keep it in
some Gally pot or Glass that will not drink it up, and every evening as much
as a small Wheat corn being put into the eye, will destroy any speck or Pin
and Web, or any scale or thickness.

For, and of the Eyes in general.
In all causes of the eyes, observe the Nature of the person, his age, the time
of the year, the sickness he has had before, etc. It is always good in all
pains of the Eyes, that the Patient keep in a dark place, free from air, lie
high in bed, that the Rheum tarry not in the Eyes, but may fall down to the
cheeks, seasonable sleep does digest and congeal the matter; all vexatio is to
be avoided, as sorrow, anger, ill favors, etc. Also all vaporous meats. And
this is a general rule, that so long as the pain lasts, you shall lay upon
the Eye the white of an egg, brayed with Oil of Roses, for it stays the
course of the humors, and asswageth all pain: or the white of an egg braied
with woman's milk, if the eye be red.

Of the Vthalmia of the Eyes.
This Disease is caused from the Flux of certain humors be they mixed or not,
as from Choler, Phlegm, Blood or Melancholy, the signs whereof are these:

If it proceed of blood, then are the Eyes and their veins puffed up red, the
Temples of the Head do beat, the uppermost Eyelids do swell, the Eyes are
moist, yet with little pain, but so moist, that in the sleep the Eyes do bake
up.

If it proceed of Choler, then is there much pricking, burning with great pain
and swelling, and not so red as the former, but moist and burning, that thereby
sometimes the Apple of the eye is perished:

If it proceed of phlegm, then is there a compression and ponderosity in the
Eyes with great pain, without heat or redness. and by reason of the great
moistness, some soreness and swelling.

If of Melancholy, then is there also great ponderosity with a sallow color,
with redness or compression: they do not bake together in their sleep, for
that the Catarrhe or Rheum is too dry.

For the redness of the Eyes.
Take half an ounce of Tutia, make it glowing hot, and quench it fifteen times
in Rose water, then bruise it small, and put into it a quarter of an ounce of
Callamint stones, three cloves, and half a pint of Malmesey, and mix them
together.

This Collyria is for all redness of the Eyes.

Of Watery and running Eyes.
If the Cause be inward from any disease of the brain, and not through heat,
you may perceive by this, viz. The Patient always feels some heavy puffing up
of the vains in the forehead and Temples of the head, and this reflux is for
the most part augmented by neesing, falling both into the Eyes, and sharpness
in the throat.

But if this humor be through heat, it bites the eyelids, and makes the hair
to fall off; but if through cold, then contrary. In case it be through heat,
the party must be purged with Pills of Cochi^ A^^^ with Succo Rosarum, or with
Pills of the five kinds of Mirabilans, and keep a good Diet.

If his grief come of a cold Cause its very convenient to eat a good deal of
Fennel seed every morning, and chew Rue and Valerian in the mouth, and anoint
the eyes with the spittle.

Also if it proceed from the brains, this is excellent, Take prepared
Bloodstone, one quarter of an ounce, Roses, burnt Ivory, red and white Curral,
Amber, yellow Mirabilans, of each one dram, the juice of the Spirits of
Frombois four ounces, temper them together, and keep them close stopped, put
thereof daily into your eyes, and anoint your Eyelids therewith. This dries
the Rheum marvellously, and strengthens the eyes from taking any moisture.

Also take the juice of Fennel and of Rue, of each one ounce, and of a child's
Urine half an ounce, Alloes three drams, let it sees a little, then strain
it, and put a drop thereof into your eye. It cleanses, dries, and sharpneth
the sight.

Also roast three Apples, take away the skin and cores, then temper them with
the yolks of three new laid eggs, and lay it warm to the eyes.

Also if deflux cause much pain, take unwashed sheeps wool, burn it to ashes in
a close stopped pot, bruise it as small as may be, and mix it with the white of
an egg, and lay it on your forehead and temples. This asswageth the Catarrhe
very quickly, and abateth the pain.

A Plaster for the Temples, or sore Eyes.
Take Alloes, Mirrhe, Myrtle leaves, Acatia, of each one dram, Mastick and
Frankincense, of each half a dram beaten small together, and make it to a
Plaster with the white of an egg.

Likewise he ought to purge with Pills of Cochia, which be sharpened with the
Trocisies of Alhandaly.

Also with the Confection of Hier^, and such like. Oil of linen being made
thus, is very good for sore Eyes; viz. set it a fire with a candle, and lay the
linen upon an even piece of iron, tin or silver, and put it out quickly, and
you shall find a drop of Oil, the which take up with a feather. This heals
marvellously well the Imposthume of the eyes, takes away the pain, and is good
for a Fistula and Wounds in the Eyes.

FACE.
To take away the Scars, or Pockholes, or redness in the Face.
TAke a good quantity of Lemmons, and slice them rinds and all, and distill
them, laying them on fair sticks, that they touch not the bottom of the Still,
and with the Water that comes thereof, anoint the face, and it will soon take
away the redness and scars of the face.

For a saucy Face.
Take a pottle of White Wine and a quarter of a pound of Cinnamon clean rubbed
and winnowed, then sees it in the White Wine, till it be half sodden away, and
then put it into a pot, and drink it evening and morning till the Patient be
cured. Probatum.

An approved good Medicine to cool and repel the redness of the face that
proceeds of heat.
Take a quantity of running water, and a quantity of Brimstone, and as much
Allome beaten small together, put them with the water into a glass fast
stopped, and so let it stand, and every morning and evening take a little out
into a sawcer, and with a linen rag wash your face therewith, and so let it
dry in with wiping.

For Spots in the Face.
For a man's or a woman's face that seems as they were drunken, take
Watercresses, and cut them small, and put them in a small earthen pot, and put
fair Spring water thereto, and let them boil together, and drink of that water
morning and evening.

To make the Face fair.
Take the flowers of Beans and distill them, and wash the face with the water.

Some say, that the Urine of the party grieved, is very good to wash the face,
and to keep it from blemishing.

If the face be washed with the water that Rice is sodden in, it takes away
the Pimples, and cleanses the face.

For heat in the face.
Sees white Copperas in running water, and let it stand till it be cold, and
then put in a little Camphire, and every morning and evening take a little of
that water in a sawcer, and with a little cloth dipped in it, wash and bathe your
face therewith, and let it dry in of it self.

A Drink for the Heat or Redness in the Face.
Take four handfuls of Wild Tansie, and boil it in two Gallons of small wort,
let it stand until it be almost cold, then put to it a little Barme, and let it
work, and when it is ripe, put it in a close vessel, and so let it stand three
or four days; then you must drink of it every day twice, so long as you use it.

An excellent Water for the same.
Take twelve Lemmons, and pare them to the very juice, four new laid eggs,
shells, whites and yolks beaten all together, six spoonfuls of pure English
Honey: Temper all together, and distill them with a very soft fire, and receive
the water thereof in a glass for your use, putting thereto a little Mercury to
make it keep, and continue.

An excellent Lac Virginis to make the Face, Neck or any part of the Body fair
and white.
Take of Alumen Plumosi half an ounce, of Camphire one ounce, of Roach Allome
one ounce and a dram, Sal gemmi half an ounce; white Frankincense two ounces,
Oil of Tartar one ounce and a half; make all these into most fine powder and
mix it with one quart of Rosewater, then set it in the Sun, and let it stand
there nine days, often stirring it, then take Littarge of Silver half a pound
beat it fine, and fearse it, then boil it in one pint of White Wine Vinegar,
until one third part be consumed, ever stirring it with a stick while it
boileth, then distill it by a Filter, or let it run through a thick Jelly bag,
then keep it by it self in a glass Vial, and when you will use these Waters,
take a drop of the one, and a drop of the other in your hand, and it will be
like milk which is called Lac Virginis, wash your face or any part of your body
therewith. It is most precious for the same. Probatum Dr. Walmesley.

For the Pimples in the Face.
Take Wheat Flour mingled with honey and vinegar, lay it upon them, and it
cleanses them.

To dry up any Pimples or heat in the Face.
Take Virgin Wax one ounce and a half, May Butter three ounces, me^^ them, then
put to them Cerus half an ounce, Bole Armoniack a scruple, a little Rose water
to wash it; after these are melted together, anoint the Pimples with it twice
a day.

FELLON.
To ripen a Fellon or Boil.
Take Rue, Sage, and the fat of rusty Bacon, of each a like quantity, and stamp
them all together, and lay it on a linen cloth warm to the Grief.

Another.
Take an Onion roasted, put thereto Honey and Wheat flower, and so beat it all
together, and lay it to the sore.

To kill a Fellon.
Take an egg and roast it hard, and take the yolk thereof, and take an Onion
and roast it soft, and beat the yolk and the Onion together, and lay it to the
sore, and it will kill the Fellon.

A Sovereign Salve to heal the Fellon.
Take of the Soot of a house that is on the Beams, and break it to powder, and
take the yolk of an egg, and bray them together, then lay it on a clean cloth,
and lay it on the sore, and this will heal it.

An excellent Poultice to take away the anguish of a Fellon, and to break it
speedily.
Take milk, and put therein crumbs of White Bread, and boil them together very
tender to a Poultice, then take it from the fire, and put therein the yolk of
an egg, and have ready some white Lilly roots, wrapped up in a brown paper, and
roasted very tender, first bruise the roots into a pap, then mingle them well
with the other things and so apply it warm to the grief, and when it is
broken use healing Salve.

For a Fellon.
Take Verjuice and crumbs of brown bread, and kernels of gray Soap, and sees
all together till it be somewhat thick, then spread it upon a cloth, and lay it
to the Fellon, and it will both kill the Fellon, and heal it.

For a Fellon in the Joint.
Take Bay salt, and beat it, then take the yolk of an Egg, and beat them
together, and lay it to the joint.

Another for a Fellon.
Take twelve Snailes in the Garden, and beat them shells and all until they come
to be a Salve; then lay them to the fore, and it will both kill, draw and heal.
Also bruise Raisons, and lay them to the fore.

Another.
Take the biggest and fowlest Spider you can find, and a quantity of black
Soap, and one clove of Garlic, and bray them all together, and lay it to the
Fellon as near as you can, where you think it will break, and so let it lie
four and twenty hours, then take it off, and heal it with some other Salve.

Also take Sage, Rue, Bay salt, Snailes and Bacon, and beat them together, and
then lay it to the Fellon, and it will help.

Also make a Poultice of Bean flower, or of Wheat flower and honey, and apply
it every morning and evening.

FISTULA.
Against a Fistula or hollow Ulcer.
First mingle the milk of Wortwort. with fresh Hogs grease, and boil them
together a little, and incorporate them, and put thereto powder of Mirrhe, and
anoint a Tent therewith, and put it into the hole of the Ulcer.

For a Fistula.
Take the seeds of red Coleworts, the feed of Tansie and Cabbage, of each a
like quantity, and of the great Madder, and make it into Pills and give thereof
to the Patient thrice a day, and keep a Colewort leaf upon the Sore.

To heal a Fistula or Ulcer.
Take Figs and stamp them with Shoomake^s Wax, and lay it to the sore on
lea^^er, and it will heal.

FLESH.
To kill dead flesh.
Take a pint of Malmesey, and a pint of Aquavitae, and flower, pound Parsley,
and strain the juice into it, and drink it. And take Allome and Withy leaves,
and boil them together in running water, and wash the wound therewith.

To try whether there be dead flesh in a Wound or no.
Take posset curd made of strong Ale, lay it to the wound; and if it look
yellow, then there is dead flesh.

A Water to abate proud flesh, and to clear a corrupted wound.
Take a quart of Ale or strong Beer, and a handful of Sage, and a piece of
Allome, as much as a Walnut, and let it sees till it come to a pint, and
therewith wash the wound.

To clear a Sore or Wound of dead flesh.
Clarify some Honey, and put it into the sore, and lay a Plaster over it, and
in two or three dressings it will clear the Sore, and take out the dead flesh.

To take out dead Flesh.
Take of Honey, of Oil Olive, and of Wheat Flour, of each a spoonful, and the
yolk of an egg, and mix them well together, and spread it on a cloth, and so
lay it on the sore, and it will draw and cleanse it.

FLUX.
For the white Flux.
Take the powder of the flowers of Pomegranats, and drink it in red Wine.

For the red Flux.
Take Sperma Caeti and drink it, and truss up your self with a piece of black
Cotton.

To stop the Flux.
Make a Caudle of Oatmeal, and put to it scraped chalk, brown Pepper finely
beaten, then boil them together, and let the Patient drink thereof three or
four times, and it will help.

For the Bloody Flux.
Take four or five eggs, and roast them hard until they be blue, then take a
pint of Red Wine, and mix the yolks of the eggs with it, then sees it, and
after it is sodden, put an ounce of Cinnamon into it, and let the Patient drink
thereof two or three times in a day, and it will help.

Another.
Take Camock roots, make them in fire powder, and drink them in posset Ale, or
put it into a cake as you do Spice, and eat it.

Another.
Take linen cloth, and make it like a Pill, and steep it in Aquavitae, and
convey it into the Fundament, and in three or four dressings it helps.

For the Bloody Flux or Scouring.
Take a great Apple, and cut out the core, and put therein pure Virgin Wax,
then wet a paper, and lap it therein, the^ rake it up in the Embers, and let it
ro^^ till it be soft; then eat of it as your stomach will give leave.

PHLEGM.
To loose Phlegm.
Take an ounce of Ingibus Sirrup, one ounce of Sirrup of Violets, half an ounce
of Sirrup of Roses, and half an ounce of Hisop.

A Drink to avoid Phlegm.
Take an Onion and core it, and put therein a little Mithridatum, and bruised
Pepper, and then roast it soft, then take a pint of White Wine, and sees it
with a little white Sugar, and then strain it with the Onion, and give it the
Patient to drink.

A Powder to break Phlegm.
Take of fine Ginger the weight of eight pence, of Elicampane roots, the weight
of four groats, Anniseeds and Licoras, of each the weight of seven groats, and
of Sugar candied four ounces; make all these into powder, and eat ^t dry
morning and evening.

FORGETFULNESS.
Against Forgetfulness.
Apply Rue and red Mints with Oil of Roses, and very strong Vinegar to the
nostrils, and it helps.

Also burn thine own hair and mingle it with Vinegar, and a little pitch, and
apply it to the nostrils.

GOUT.
For the Gout.
TAke Snailes with shells on the^^ backs, Barrel Soap, leaven, Bay^ salt and
Honey, and pound them all to gether, and lay it to the grieved place.

Sundry Medicines for the Gout.
Take the grease of a fat Cat, of a Goose, of a Gray, of a Fox, and the marrow
of a Hearts horn, Ivy, Sage, Rue, Virgins Wax, Frankincense, the yolks of
roasted eggs and Snailes, put them all in an earthen pot with a hole in the
bottom for that purpose, and close it above with paste that no air issue out,
and put under the same pot another whole pot, and close them together, and put
the neathermost in the ground, and compass it about with fire, and there will
distill a wonderful good Ointment out of the uppermost pot, which will be good
for the cold Gout.

Another Ointment of great force for the Gout.
Take the juice of the wild Cowe^mber roots, green Grapes and Pellitory, the
leaves and Berries of Ivy, Juniper berries, Euforbium Castorium, the fat of a
Graye, of a Goose, of a Heron, of a Fox, of a Bear, then take a fat Cat, and
pull off her skin, and take out her guts, and fill her with all the aforesaid
things; and let it roast well upon a spit, and save the dripping, and resolve a
little Wax therein, and use it.

Also a dog killed of thirty days old, and anoint the grief with the blood of
the dog, it is very good.

Also take a fat Cat, and flea her, and pull the flesh from the bones, stamp it
well, and put it into the belly of a fat Goose, and put salt grease thereunto
with Pepper and Mustard seed, of Pellitory, Dragon, Wormwood, Garlic, and
Bears Suet, of each two ounces, of Wax two ounces, oast it, and keep the
dripping.

Also mingle the ashes of Colewort leaves burnt, with fresh Hogs grease, and
anoint the Gout therewith, and it will ease it in three days.

For the Gout.
Take Tansie and Wormwood of each alike, Sheeps Suet according to your Herbs,
fry them till they be green, and when you will use it, put a spoonful of
Linseed therein; and if it be the hot Gout, lay it cold; if the cold Gout, lay
it hot.

Another.
Take Tobacco leaves a good quantity, and put them into your own Urine, or
milk, and set it on the fire till it be hot, then bathe the pained place
thoroughly a good space, then lay some of the leaves thereon, and bind it up,
and lie down.

For the Gout and the Palsy.
Take dead Horse bones, dried in the fields, and wash them clean, and feeth
them long, and take the fat of them, that seethes aloft, and swims on the top,
and therewith anoint any Gout or Palsy, of what cause soever it come, and it
will help.

For the Gout.
Take the juice of Broom flowers, and the juice also of Scala Coeli and Honey
of each a like quantity, seethe them together, till it be of the thickness of
Honey, and therewith anoint the place. One in London got much money by this
Medicine.

For the Gout and Palsy.
Stamp Pellitory of Spain or Mastratia and sees it in wine, and apply it, but
if it be green then stamp it, and soak it eighteen days in Wine, and then
boil it well, and put thereto Oil and Wax, it is a special remedy.

GUMMES.
For Ulcers or any Infection of the Gums.
Take Labdanum, Frankincense, Mastick and Curral, of each a like quantity, and
make them into powder, and lay them to the place infected, it confirms
hardneth, and cleanses the Gums and Jaws, and when the sore is well
mundified, then it does also incarnate and engender flesh.

Also this is highly commended, Take Cipresse leaves or Mints half an ounce, a
pint of well water, boiled to the one half, dip a cloth in it, and apply it to
the grief, and this defends the Gums from all bad Rheumes.

HEART.
For Faintness at the Heart.
TAke the flowers of Centory, a good handful, clean picked from the green of
Cene leaves clean picked from the stalks, a dram and half, and of pure Cinnamon
well bruised a quarter of an ounce, of White Wine a pint, and some Sugar as you
lift; put all these in a pot close covered, and set it in another pot of hot
liquor for the space of an hour, then let it stand all night, and in the
morning strain it into a fair pot, and put good store of Sugar to it, and let
it simper til it come to a Sirrup, of this you may take two or three spoonfuls
at a time in the morning fasting.

A very Sovereign Medicine for one that has taken cold at the Heart.
Take the Oil of bitter Almonds and Wax, Capons grease and Rose Water, boil all
together; then take black wool, newly plucked off the Sheeps neck, and wet it
in the liquor, and put it in a quilted bag, and lay it very hot to the stomach
when you go to bed.

HEAD.
A Medicine for the Headache.
Take Elder leaves, and a good quantity of Bay salt, and stamp them together,
and lay it to the nape of the neck, and by Gods help it shall take away the
pain.

For pain in the Head.
Take Camomile, Rosemary and Betony, of each a like quantity, and as much
leaven as Herbs, beat them together, then take a Nutmeg beaten very small, and
so much Wine Vinegar, as will incorporate into a paste, which you must apply
warm unto the hinder part of the head, and to your forehead, changing it
evening and morning.

For Head Ache.
Take a piece of leaven, the bigness of an egg, and put to it two spoonfuls
of White Wine Vinegar, and two spoonfuls of red Rose Water, and a few red Rose
leaves, mix them together, and warm them; then take them, and spread them on
two brown papers, then grate Nutmeg upon it, and lay it upon a fire slice on
the coals till-it be very hot, then take it, and lay it to the parties temples
at night when he goes to bed.

For the Head Ache sundry Medicines.
The juice of Ground Ivy cast into the nostrils purges the head and takes
away the pain.

If the Rheum come of a cold cause, lay hot Callamint or running time bruised
to the head.

Hisop boiled on embers, and laid to the head, stops the Rheum.

The juice of Coleworts cast into the nostrils cleanses and purges the head.

The juice of onions cast into the nostrils, also does the like.

This Plaster was proved for dizziness in the head, and is good for any ache
in the head: Take of Opium and of Saffron, of each one dram, of Roses four
drams, and thereof with Vinegar make a Plaster.

He that uses to take three Pills of Alloes, and the juice of Coleworts the
bigness of a bean, shall never have the Head ache.

For the Head Ache.
Take an Herb called Alehoofe and fill a frying pan therewith, heat it hot, as
you are able to endure it, and lay it to the aching place, and it will remove
the pain; then take more, and lay it to the place that aketh, and at last it
will drive it clean away.

Another.
Take the whites of two new laid eggs, a little Aquavitae, and the juice of
Houseleeks, beat all together, and therein wet some fine tow, and then lay it
upon the temples.

Of giddiness in the Head.
This Disease is caused by much frequenting the Sun, and the head being over
heated, as also from the stomach, if it be overcharged with any superfluity
whereby the mouth of the stomach is hurt, and so sends bad vapors to the
head; but if it proceed from blood, which may be known by the redness of the
eyes, the fullness of the veins, then the party must have the vein opened
behind the ear, and bleed four ounces, and purge with seven drams of Reb
steeped in Whey all night.

Of the pain in the Head.
For the most part this pain of the Head proceeds of the intemperature of the
four humors; namely, of Blood, Phlegm, Choler and Melancholy.

If it proceed from Choler, the sign is evident, viz. belching or breaking of
wind upward with loathsomeness and thirst, dryness of the mouth, tongue, and
nostrils, the pain is pricking, sharp, and rather in the right, then in the
left side of the head, heat over all the body, but especially in the nostrels,
no appetite, no sleep, the Pulses quick and lusty, the Urine reddish, the face
yellow; the surest notes are, if the time of the year be hot and dry, the
Patient young and has used hot and dry things, to use cooling Medicines, and a
good cooling diet.

Of heat in the Head through Melancholy.
It is described thus, It is not so great as the former, but with a dryness
and sadness the heat is more evident in the left side of the face, then in the
right, it causes disquietness and unnatural sleep, it causes fearful
faintheartedness, and carefulness, the color of the face is red and blue, with
a sour taste in the mouth, if the Patient be old, and if it be about Autumn,
then the signs are more sure. Glisters are good in this case.

Of the pain in the Head caused by cold.
The signs are wearisomness of all parts, as if the body were beaten and
broken to pieces, the pain is not extreme without any swelling or thirst,
sleepiness, much spitting at the mouth and moisture at the nose, palenesse of
color, and somewhat sullen, the eyes run, and the mouth out of taste. In such
cases use warm and dry Medicines, and purging, is very needful in this
Infirmity.

Also this Wine following is excellent for this purpose. Take Rosemary two
handfuls, Nutmegs one ounce, dried Betony two ounces, Cloves two drams, being
cut very small, put thereto eight quarts of good Rhenish Wine, let it stand
three days; then for a weak stomach, drink a good draught at the beginning of
meals, but for the Head ache at the latter end.

This Wine is very good for a cold, and moist brain, and hurtful for young
folks and hot complections.

The Diet must be strong Wine, but very little, left it disturb the Head, once
in eight days, wash the head with the decoction of Camomile, Marjerome and
Steches, and before meals, rub the head with warm clothes, and after meals
take a little Marmalade to hinder the vapor in ascending to the head. But
because the Laxative Medicines, through their own power, do not expel all
humors for which they be given, without such things as convey their operation
toward some certain members which one desires to purge, therefore take this
Oximil following; and if you put thereto Nutmegs, Piony seeds or Cubebs, then
does it only purge the head, and no other part of the body; and if you put
thereto Tamariscus and Caper roots, then it purges the Melt, and so for all
the rest, but because we speak now only of the head, these are the Simples, or
Herbs that do conduct the Medicines thereto; viz. Nutmegs, Cubebs and Piony,
Penniroyal, Marjerom, Balsome wood and Seeds, Frankincense, Beaver Codd,
Labdanum, Mellilot, Squils, Spicknard, Hisop and Pepper.

Oximel, that is called at the Apothecaries Compositum, or Diareticum, Take
Fennel roots, and roots of Smallage, of each two ounces, the seeds of Parsley,
of Butchers broom, Sparage, Smallage and Fennel, of each one ounce, take out
the pith or core of the roots, chop them and sees them in a quart of water
till they be mellow, then strain them through a cloth, and add the Decoction of
three ounces of sharp Vinegar, twelve ounces of Honey, let them sees to a
Sirrup; it does attenuate all tough slimes, it drives them out of the members,
opens the obstructions of the Liver, Melt, and the Kidneys, and expels them.

A very good Medicine for Pain or Wind in the Head, which much hinders the
Hearing.
Take one Clove of Garlic, pill it and make three or four holes in it, then
dip it in fine English Honey, and put it in your ear, (and lie on the other
side, and put in black wool after it, and continue this eight days, and it
will expel the pain, expulse the Humor at the nose, and restore the Hearing.

For a White Scurf, or Scabbed Head.
Take White wort, Cellendine, Ground Ivy. Mercury, Wormwood, and an Herb called
Dead men's Bells, growing in Woods like Leek blades, of each of these alike, and
stamp them, and mingle them with fresh grease.

And burn green Ash to ashes, and mix it with fresh grease, and anoint the
place eherewith.

To heal a Scald Head.
Take Lie that is made with the bark of an Ashen tree, and wash the head
therewith, and anoint it with Quicksilver, killed in Barrowes grease, and
fasting spittle.

Another.
Take yolks of eggs, and put thereunto as much Turpentine, then fry them in
Swines grease, and stir them well together in the frying to a Salve, and so lay
it to the sore head.

Another.
Take the roots of the small reeds that grow in ditches, burn them to ashes,
and apply the ashes wet in Vinegar to the sore Head. This heals the sore, and
makes hair to grow.

The bark of an Ashen tree being well boiled in water, with the Lie thereof,
sometimes wash the Head to cleanse it, whiles the other Medicines be applied to
the same.

Another.
Take black Snailes, and stamp them very well, and in stamping them, there will
be an Oil come from them, and with the same Oil, anoint the sore head.

For a sore Head.
First wash the head with piss, and then anoint it with the dripping of a
wild Duck, being roasted guts and all.

HOARSNESSE.
Against Hoarsnesse.
Put Sugar and the powder of Hisop in figs, and roast them on the coals, and
eat them, and it will open the pipes.

JAUNDIES.
A good Medicine for the Black Jaundies.
TAke the Berries of Ivy, that grows upon a tree, and of the whole leaves of
Ground Ivy and Mugwort, and put them in a woollen cloth, and then put it into
an Oven when the Bread is drawn out; and when it is dry, make powder thereof,
and take Saffron and powder of Gallingale, and use all these in pottage, and
eat thereof.

Another for the Black Jaundies.
Take the gall of a Raven grated into powder, take some of it in a spoonful of
Ale or Beer, temper it together, and drink it in the morning fasting.

A Medicine for the yellow Jaundies.
Take a little Athanatia, and eat it in the morning fasting, three mornings
will be enough. It is much like Mithridatum.

Another.
Take a handful of red Nettle crops, and feeth them in a pint of Ale, and drink
the same three or four days together in the morning fasting.

IMPOSTHUMES.
For an Imposthume.
Take powder of Cene Alexandria one ounce, Ginger, Cinnamon, Mace, Coliander
seeds, Anniseeds and Licoras, of each the weight of eight pence, of Sugar two
ounces, of Spurge seeds blanched twelve, beat them all small to powder, and put
them into a quart of Claret, and let it be brewed out of one pot into another,
oftentimes in a day by the space of three days before you use it, then let it
run through a Jelly bag, then take half a pint of the said Drink, and when you
shall have need to use it, warm it at the fire, and drink it after your first
sleep, and so ly still till it work, and offer to come; and then go to a close
stool til it be clean come away, and then make a Plaster of red Mints, red
Fennel, Wormwood and Sage, of each a handful, and a good handful of Cummin
seed, and beat them small together, put thereto a good sawcer full of Wine
Vinegar, and set them all on the fire in a pan, and so stir them till they are
almost dry, and then put them into a bag, and lay the same to your stomach, so
that your stomach be not full of meat.

JULIP.
A most excellent Julip to refresh and cool any body distempered with heat or
drougth in Agues or hot Diseases.
Take of Barley water a quart, and put it into a fair bottle of glass, and let
drop into the same some Oil of Vitrio^, or for want of that, Oil of Sulphur,
and then shake it well all together to disperse the Oil, and when you have
perfectly tempered it, then take two very good Pomgranats, and cut them in two,
and squeece all the juice of them into it through some Colender or Strainer to
keep out the kernels or husks; or for want of Pomgranats, as much Sirrup of
Violets, or Sirrup of Lemmons, as the juice of two Pomgranats may be; then take
six penny worth of white Sugar candied, and beat it very small, and put it also
in the Barley water, and let it dissolve therein, and drink thereof as need
requires. It is the best Julip that ever was made by the Art of man.

ITCH.
To take away, or kill the hot Itch.
Take Brimstone, and as much Allom, with a spooneful of white lead, beat them
small into powder, then take a quantity of Cream, and put the powder therein,
and beat them well together, and therewith anoint the place that itches.

For an Itch.
Take a pint of Borus, two penny worth of Quicksilver, and four penny worth of
Frankincense, put these together, and stir them with your finger, and so
anoint the hands and feet.

KIDNEYES.
Of the Kidneyes.
THe Kidneyes are fastened very strongly to the Back bone, and that on the left
side is right under the Melt, and that on the right side a little higher, so
that sometimes it does touch a great part of the liver, and they have sundry
veins from the liver, whereby they draw blood with water, and also some part of
the gall unto them, separating the same blood from the water, and keeping so
much of the blood as suffices for sustenance, and vents through the Conduits,
whereof each Kidney has one by it self, descending into the Bladder.

The Diseases of the Kidneyes are diverse, as Imposthumes, Ulcers, etc. which
appears by pissing of Blood, or like blood, as if flesh were washed in it,
which Diseases arise either of heat, cold or gravel, etc.

The signs of cold Diseases are these, There is no great pain, nor heat, nor
thirst, neither is the water high colourred, but much in quantity, because it
is not wasted through unnatural heat, which Agues, Winter and the Gravel
augmenteth; for these Diseases a good Diet must be kept, all gross and slimie
meats being avoided, and likewise all cold Herbs; exercise presently after meat
is very hurtful.

Pain of the Kidneyes through Wind, which spreads it self abroad, and the
pain is more after one has eaten then before, and is augmented through windy
things, when the meat is half digested, therefore all windy things are to be
avoided, and anoint the back with Oil of Rue and Oil of Lillies; likewise
Conserve of Betony, and the confected roots of Pimpernel, Erinringo roots and
Callamint is very good.

Pain in the Kidnyes through heat is, when the Patient has great thirst and a
bad stomach, makes very little Urine, and high colored, and sometimes there
is fat swimming upon it, and the rather in young, choleric, hot men, this is
most dangerous, for through the heat which is mixed with a tough thick
phlegmatic matter, the stone of the Kidney may grow; therefore the Liver Vein
must be opened, and Glisters administered whereby the gots may be cleansed, use
cool Herbs, and purge with Manna and Succo Rosarum. Also use Saxifrage,
Parslye, Cantharides, roots of Fennel, Butchers broom, etc. which are of a
secret quality to convey the Medicine to the Kidnyes. Also Sirrups of Water
Lillies and of Vinegar, and all things that cool the Liver and Spleen.

KNEES.
For pain in the Knees.
Take a Sheeps head newly killed, and slit it, and put into it a good handful
of Plantane, as much Camomile, and so much Sage, and so much Rosemary, boil all
well together until it be very tender, then take out the bones very clean, and
chop all the flesh and herbs well together; then put in a handful of Oatmeal
gr^ts, and so boil it again until the Oatmeal be very tender, and so lay it to
the Knees as hot as you may suffer it, and so use it as you see cause.

For ache in the Knees.
Take Rue and Lovage, of each alike, stamp them, and mix them with Honey, and
fry them together, and lay a Plaster thereof warm to the sore.

For swelling in the Knees and Legs.
Take Lilly roots and red Cole, of each alike, sees them in clean running
water, and strain the Herbs, then take the milk of a Cow and Wheat meal, and
temper it with the aforesaid Herbs, and let it over the fire, and stir it well
till it be thick, and then lay it on with a cloth.

For Aches and Swelling in the Knees.
Take a quart of Malmsey, of Time one handful, and boil it together, and when
it is half boiled, put in a piece of sweet butter, and let it boil together
from a quart to a pint, and when you go to bed bathe your knees therewith, and
let a cloth be wet therein four or five times double, very warm, and lay it so
warm to your knees six or feven times.

LAMENESSE.
For such as be stiff in their Limbs, or Lame.
TAke five black Sheeps heads, a lapful of Arsemart, as much Mallows as much
Balm, two good handfuls of Herb grace, four handfuls of Fetherfew as much
Lavender Spike, two handfuls of Wormwood, two handfuls of Savage, one handful
of Smallage, and two handfuls of Rosemary; all these will be as much as will
fill a good sheet, put them all into a Lead, into running water a great deal,
and pull off the stalks of the Herbs, and let them sees a whole day; you must
not skin the sheeps heads, but cleave them in sunder, and let the wool be on
still, cutting off the horns, and sees the Heads until the bones fall
asunder, then take out the bones, and skim off the fat, and keep it to anoint
the Patient withal, and the Patient must sit in the water up to the breasts, and
wash and bathe himself therein, and when he has so done by the space of an
hour, or as long as he can endure it, then lay him in a hot sheet into his bed,
and there let him sweat; and so keep him close from the air two or three days.

A Sovereign Medicine for Lamenesse in the Joints, to supple any sore, and to
bring it into Joint, which has been long out; and for aches.
Take four or five young Swallows out of the Nest being Flege, and put them
into a stone Mortar, and stamp them feathers and all, then take Lavender
Cotton, Wild Strawberry leaves, Camomile and Setwal, of each a handful, stamp
them all together very small, then take a pint or more of May Butter, and half a
pint of Neats foot Oil, stir them all together, and then put them into a
Pipkin or liltle earthen pot with a cover; and close it well with Paste that no
air issue out, then put that earthen pot into a brass pot with water in it,
and boil them two hours, then take them out, and set them as deep as you can in
a muckhil two days, then take them up, and boil them two hours again, then
take them out, and let them cool, and strain them through a linen cloth, and
when they be settled, power out the watrish blood from them, and keep them pure
and clean, and lay them warm to the place grieved.

LEPROSY.
For curing the Leprosy.
Take half a pint of English Honey, and a good handful of Herb-grace, beat it
very small, and put it into the Honey, and boil them very well together till the
one half be consumed, then strain it through a clean cloth, and with a feather
anoint the sores therewith.

A Drink belonging to the same Medicine.
Take an ounce of Elicampane roots, one ounce of Fennel roots, when they be
picked and pithed, one ounce of Burrage roots picked and pithed, one ounce of
Niprial picked and pithed, then take a pottle of stream water, and boil all
these roots till one half be consumed, then put in so much English Honey as
will sweeten it to your taste, then strain it, and put it in a glass bottle,
then take a penny worth of Quicksilver, and kill it well with fasting spittle,
and then put it into the Drink when it is through cold, and let the Patient
drink thereof five spoonfuls in the morning fasting, and so much when he goes
to bed, and by Gods help it will cleanse him.

LASK.
For a Lask.
Take a good quantity of Wheat flower, and put it in a bag, sees it very well,
then take the same, and put it out of the bag, and so much as is soft, scrape
away with a knife, the rest will be very hard, scrape it, and make pap with
milk, and give it to the Patient twice or thrice a day, and it will help.
Probatum.

To stay a Lask or Bloody Flux.
Take a sew old Beans, and parch them over the fire in a pan, and then beat
them into a powder, then make an Aleberry of Sack or Ale, and put some of the
powder therein, and sees them well together, then let the Patient drink
thereof warm, and with twice drinking, it will help.

Another.
Take milk somewhat hot, and put it in a dish, then take Red Wine, and put it
in another dish, and let the Patient suck it out of both dishes with two quils
or reeds both together, and in so doing it turns into a curd, and stops
the Flux.

To stay a Scouring.
Take a handful of Rice, wash it in red Rose water, and dry it well, and beat
(...) powder, and make pap of it, and bod it with Cinnamon, and eat it.

Another.
Take Virgin Wax, and make it into Pills, and give it in the pap of an Apple,
three at one time.

For a Lask or Flux.
Take the nether Jaw of a great Pike, and beat it into fine powder, and drink
it in Beer or Ale or in your pottage, and it will help.

To procure Looseness.
Sees Mallows and red Nettles in fair water, and let the Patient sit over the
hot fume thereof.

LIVER.
For cooling of the Liver.
Take French Barley, and boil it in a quart of fair water, when it is boiled,
take it forth of that water, and put it in three pints of fresh water, then
take of Violet leaves, Strawberry leaves, of each a handful, Succory, Bugloss,
Borage, of each half a handful, one good stick of Licoras, half a handful of
Raisons of the Sun stoned, one spoonful of Anniseeds, let all these boil from
three pints to a quart, then take the Liquor and strain it, and put a handful
of Almonds into it, and when you drink of it, take a spoonful of Rosewater and
drink with it, and take it two hours before you eat in the morning at the
least, and likewise two hours before Supper.

For the heat of the Liver.
Infuse and steep Bread reasonably leavened in water, and a little Vinegar, and
eat thereof fasting an hour or two before other meats, and use Sallets of
Succory roots sodden till they be tender.

Doctor Hills counsel for cooling the Liver.
Take Barley one handful, of Sorrel, Succory and Endive, of each one handful, a
stick of Licoros bruised, Raisons of the Sun one handful, Anniseeds half a
handful, sees all these in a quart of fair water till half be wasted away,
then strain it, and drink of it in the morning three times in a week at least.

A Drink to cleanse the Liver.
Take a quart of Rhenish Wine, and put thereto one ounce and half of Cene,
sees it from a quart to a pint; then strain it, and put thereto three branches
of white Mint, three penny worth of white Rose water, two Nutmegs sliced with a
knife, six penny worth of white Sugar candied, and four penny worth of Angel
Gold, and sees it a little, and let the Patient take it morning and evening.

A good Medicine for the Liver.
Take Ivory, and burn it in a clean earthen vessel, and when it is burnt, take
sweet Barley Wort, and put therein of the Ivory as you please, or put it into
Ale, and drink it nine days together. Also drink the juice of Liverwort.

A Drink to mitigate all heat of the Liver and Spleen.
Take of Liverwort, Maidenhair, Endive, the flowers of Winter Gilliflowers
picked clean from the stalks, great Comfrey, Tarragon, of each four ounces, of
Spinach Water a pottle, of Licoras clean scraped and thin sliced two ounces,
of Ginger clean scraped and thin sliced, one ounce, boil all these together,
stirring it now and then, and then put in fine Sugar candied one ounce and
half, finely beaten to powder, then let it boil half away, always stirring it,
and put it in some close glass, and reserve it to your use: of this you must
take a good draught every morning, and fast an hour after it.

A Broth to cool the heat of the Liver.
Take Violets, Time, Parsley, Watercresses, red Nettle Crops, and Clivers and
red Fennel, of each alike, but somewhat ^esse of the Water cresses, red Nettle
crops and Fennel then the rest; shred all the Herbs, and make broth with
Chicken, Capon or Mutton.

For the heat of the Liver.
Take three pints of Whey, Egrimony, Bo^age and Bugloss, of each one handful
boil all together half an hour, then stram it through a fine linen cloth;
drink a good draught of this in the morning fasting, and at three of the clock:
b^^ before you drink thereof, take Smallage, and stamp it and strain it, and
take two spoonfuls of the juice thereof, and put it into your drink before you
drink it.

Against the stopping of the Liver, Lungs and Spleen, and to comfort the
Stomach.
Take two or three roots of Succory and Parsley, Sage of Jerusalem, Folefoot,
Violet leaves, Scabious, Egrimony and Scurvigrasse, of each half a handful,
Conserve of Red Roses one ounce, of Saffron one penny worth, and a Date or two
sliced and the pill taken away, put all these into a Pullets belly ready dressed,
and sow up the open places, but put not in the roots, boil it in sufficient
water till the flesh be sodden from the bones, and when it is half sodden, put
in the roots steeped before in Wine Vinegar, put in also three or four large
Mace blades, of Raisons of the Sun one handful stoned, and a few Currants; and
when it is sodden as aforesaid strain it, and drink every morning a good
draught thereof fasting.

For all Griefs of the Liver.
Take the leaves, flowers and roots of Betony in Drink, Conserve, Electuary,
Sirrup, or Potion, or Powder, is singular good for all Diseases of the stomach,
Liver, Melt, Kidneys, Bladder, the Obstruction of the Matrix, the consumption
of the Lungs, Coughs, Dropsies, continual Fevers, boil the leaves and flowers
in Honey water, to have present Remedy.

Also sees the Herbs and Flowers of Camomile in Wine, and drink it to help
stopping of the Liver and Melt, to purge Choler, to expel Terms, to help the
torments of the small guts, for Griefs of the Kidnyes or Bladder, for
difficulty of Breathing, Sighing, Wheezing, to warm a cold stomach, and to
drive away any inward grief.

For the Liver, and to comfort the Stomach.
Take a branch or two of Ciprus, otherwise called French Wormwood, and a little
Barme, and boil them in Ale and Drink it fasting.

LIPS.
For chopped Lips.
Take new Wax, Mastick and white Frankincense with Oil of Roses, all made into
an Ointment, and anoint the lips, and it will cure them presently.

LUNGS.
A Preservation for the Lungs
Take a pint of Wormwood Water, and Liverwort almost a handful, and of Longwort
a handful, Sugar one ounce; boil them all together till one part of four be
sodden away, and let the patient drink thereof three spoonefulls in the morning
fasting, and last at night, always warmed. Probatum.

LEGS.
For a sore Leg, or old ulcer.
Take Littarge of gold two pound, of Galbanum one ounce, Verdigrease four
ounces, Bdelium one ounce, Mastick one ounce and half, Opoponax and Aristologia
of each one ounce, old Oil Olive one pound and half. You must dry the gummes
that they may be powdered, and fry them with your Oil, then strain it and put
thereto your Littarge, Verdigrease and Aristologia, one after another always
stirring it, lest the Littarge sink to the bottom, and so let it simber over
the fire easily, then put to it three peniworth of turpentine, and of wax three
ounces, and so make it up for your use in a Plaster.

It has cured the Lord Wharton and diverse others with two or three dressings
when no Chirurgian could find a Cure for them.

For a sore Leg.
Take stone lime, and slake it, and put it in running water, and put thereto of
Quicksilver, white lead, and Bores grease of each one penny worth, mingle all
together, and so anoint it.

To kill the Itch of the same, and to skin it.
Take a gallon of good Ale, and boil it to a pint, and then a linen cloth, and
wet it therein, and wash the sore withal.

Another.
Take of Ale, Allom, of each one half penny worth, and boil it together, and
melt a quantity of fresh Butter therein, and anoint it therewith.

A Plaster for festered Legs, being long sore.
Take March, and Wild Tansie, Plantane Morrel, Honey, and the white of an egg,
and the milk of a Cow of one color, and Barley flower, bray the Herbs in a
Mortar, and mingle all together, and lay it on the sore.

A Plaster for sore Eyes, broken or not.
Take a pint of Sallet Oil, one pound of unwrought Wax, half a pound of white
Lead, boil all these together in a brass pan with a soft fire till it be as
thick as pitch, stirring it with a stick, then dip in it a piece of Lockrum,
and make thereof a Plaster.

MEGRIM.
For the Megrim.
TAke a handful of Wormwood, and a handful of Betony, and a handful of
Archangel, sees them all together in a quart of good Ale, and a pint of White
Wine Vinegar, the space of half an hour, and lay it to your forehead as hot as
you may suffer it, and the longer you keep it thereto it is the better.

Another.
Take half a handful of the leaves of Rosemary, and sees them in Vinegar till
they be sour, then lay them upon a linen cloth, and cast thereon a little
Rosewater, and lay it to your sorehead; as hot as you may suffer it.

A Plaster for the Megrim.
Take the Oil of an egg, and some Cummin seed, and Frankincense and wheaten
flower, and two Nutmegs beaten all small and mingled with the Oil of the egg,
and make a Plaster thereof as big as a groat, and lay it to the temples of the
head.

MOTHER.
For the Mother and green Sickness.
Take great Garden worms, and slit them, and wash them clean, and then lay
them in White Wine half an hour, then take them out, and lay them in an Oven to
dry, and when they are thoroughly dried, beat them into fine powder, and drink
it in White Wine in the morning fasting, and fast two hours after it.

MOUTH.
For a sore Mouth.
Take the waters of the tops and leaves of red Brambles, Rosemary, Sage and
Woodbind leaves, all severally distilled, of each a like quantity, and put them
all together into a great glass, th^n put as much Allom small beaten into the
same as will make it sharp, and so keep it to use as occasion serves either
for a Canker in the mouth, rankness of the Gums, or any other soreness.

Another.
Take Treakle, English Honey and burnt Allome, of each alke, then take tops of
Rosemary, red Sage, Honey suckle leaves, Bramble leaves and Fennel of each a
handful, stamp and strain the Herbs, and take the juice and boil with the other
things til it be somewhat thick, then rub your mouth therewith.

For a sore Mouth or Throat.
Take Rue and red Sage, of each one handful, Groundsel and Sorrel, of each a
little, cut them small, and then stamp them, then take as much Allome as a
Walnut, and as much Copperas as a small Nut, and burn them to powder in a
frying pan, then take a like quantity of each of them unburnt, and beat them
small, then take a pint of running water, and put them all in it, and boil it
half away, then take it from the fire, and strain it, then put to it three
spoonful of English Honey, and so keep it in a glass, and warm a little of it
every time you use it, dipping a cloth in it upon a little stick; and so wash
the mouth twice a day, or more as you see occasion.

NOSE.
For stinking Nostrils.
TAke the juice of lake Mints, and the juice of Rue, each a like quantity, and
put it into the Nostrels when you go to bed, and it will help.

NAVEL.
For the Navel coming out.
Take beaten Mastick, and mix it with the white of an egg to a paste, and
spread some of it upon a cloth, then thrust down the Navel, and apply it
thereto, and when it is dry, renew it again.

NIPPLE.
For a chopped Nipple.
Take a white Lilly leaf out of his Oil, and apply it, its very good.

OILS.
To make Oil of Mallows for Imposthumes, and Ripenings, and to mitigate Aches.
TAke of Garden Mallows two handfuls, stamp them small, and put to them a
quart of Oil Olive, and let it stand nine days, then boil them till it wax
green, then strain it, and keep it in a box for your use.

This keeps open, draws and assw ageth the pains of Imposthumes, and
mollifieth, it being laid hot with moist wool, then take a fine linen cloth,
and dip it in the Ointment, and lay it warm to the sore, and bind it fast.

Also Mallows made in a Plaster ripeneth greatly, and mitigath the pain of
Imposthumes, and especially in ripening of women's breasts.

To make Oil of Poplar buds.
Take of Poplar buds half a pound clean picked, and stamp them small, and weigh
them, and look what they weigh put the like weight of pure Hogs grease, and
half the weight more, then stamp them together in a stone Mortar to one
substance, and then put it in an earthen pot, and cover it close that no air
come to it, and let it stand so six days till it be hoary, then take it forth,
and put it in a clean pan, and let it boil on a soft fire, always stirring it
till the Herbs be parcht, then strain it, and keep it for your use. It will
allay all the heat about a man's body, and procure sleep.

In like manner make Oil of Marsh Mallows.

To make Saint John's Oil.
Take the flowers of Saint John's wort, and pick away the green husks very
clean, and take a quart o^ the purest Sallet Oil, and put it in an earthen
pipkin, and put in it as many of the flowers as will make it thick, then set it
on hot embers and there let it boil very softly, and when you think the
strength is boiled out, strain out the flowers very hard, and if they be boiled
enough they will be as harsh as herbs f^ied in a frying pan with butter, and
when you have strained out all very clean, put in as many fresh flowers as you
did before, and let them boil in the like manner, and so shift it till your Oil
look as red as a Ruby, then strain out all the flowers, and put it in a glass,
and keep it close stopped,

This Oil is very good for any green Wound or any bruise in any part of a man's
body; you must take heed you do not over boil it, and it is good for any ache.

A very good Oil or Balsom for any green Wound.
Take a quart of White Wine, four pound of Oil Olive, two pound of Turpentine,
the leaves and flowers, or seeds of Saint John's wort two great handfuls, and
bruise them, and put them with the other things into a great double glass, and
set it in the Sun eight or ten days, then boil the same glass in a kettle of
water with some straw in the bottom, which done, strain the liquor from the
Herbs, then put into the liquor the like quantity of Herbs, flowers and seeds,
as you did before, but no more Wine not Oil, use it as you did before, and then
you have a great Secret.

To make Oil of Hypericon.
Take of the best Oil Olive three pound, of the best Turpentine three pound,
white Frankincense half a pound, Wheat sweet and clean picked, Hiperico and
Saint John's wort, of each half a pound, Valerian four ounces, Carduus
Benedictus four ounces, of White Wine or Sack a quart, take the Herbs and cut
them small, then put them into a tinned pot that has as narrow a mouth as may
be, then power in the Wine, and let them stand in sleep six hours, then power
in your Oil, and stop up your pot very close that no air can get forth, set
the same on a soft fire of coals without smoke or flame, let it boil very
softly, stirring it now and then with a wooden slice, and having stirred it,
stop it up again, and so let it boil till the Wine be consumed, which you shall
know in this manner, by dropping the Oil into the hot coals, the which Wine
being not consumed, will hiss in dropping on the coals, and being consumed it
will not hiss but burn very clear. And so the Wine being consumed, take it
from the fire, and strain the liquor through a thick canvass cloth: then make
clean your pot, and put the liquor (that ran through the canvass) therein, and
set it on the fire again, then put in your Turpentine and Frankincense, the
Frankincense must be beaten and searsed, and let them boil very softly,
stirring it with your slice the space of a quarter of an hour, then take it
from the fire, and strain it through another strainer. This Oil must be put
into a Glass bottle, and the mouth stopped very close.

How to cure with this Oil.
First you must wet a fine linen cloth in White Wine, and wash the wound with
the Wine being warm, and the blood and corruption being cleansed, fill the
wound with the Oil, as warm as the Patient can suffer it, then lay a linen
cloth wet in the Oil upon the Wound, and upon that another cloth wet in the
White Wine, and so dress it morning and evening. If the Wound be deep, take a
Sirenge, and spurt in the Wine to cleanse it. And thus may you cure deep Wounds
without any Tent. The Wound being come to a Plaster, to skin it, take of the
said Oil one ounce, of Turpentine one ounce, of Virgins Wax one ounce, boil
them together till the Turpentine and Wax be melted, and thereof make a
Plaster to skin the Wound and keep it in a pot very close stopped for your
future use.

To make Oil of Adderstongue.
Take a quantity of Adderstongue, chop it small, and in the chopping of it,
sprinkle on it some White Wine, then put the Adderstongue into a quantity of
Sallet Oil, according to the quantity of your Adderstongue, and boil it very
well, then strain out the Herbs, and put in fresh Herbs so prepared as
aforesaid, and boil it again. Thus do three several times, and keep it for your
use.

OYNTMEMTS.
An Ointment for a Bruise.
Take a gallon of sweet Butter unsalted, well washed in the month of May, and a
handful of Broom flowers, and bruise them in a Mortar, set the Butter and them
over the fire, and boil them well, and strain them into a Gally pot. This is
good for a woman in her Childbed, and it is good for a sore Breast, before it
be broken.

A very good Ointment.
Take Rosasolis, Sallet Oil and Neats Foot Oil, and boil them all together over
the fire.

To make the green Ointment.
Take one pound of Sheeps suet, and melt it, and skim it, and put thereto one
ounce of Verdigrease, and half an ounce of Sal gemmi in fine powder, and stir
it well together, then take it from the fire, and put it into a clean box, and
keep it, for it may be kept many years. It is good for Cankers, and to heal old
Wounds, and to fret away dead flesh, and it will keep a Wound from festering.
It is good for Morphew and for Scabs, and there is no Ointment that works so
strongly as this does. Probatum.

To make another green Ointment.
Take of Sage, Rue, of each a pound; of Wormwood, Bay leaves, of each half a
pound, of Mellilot Herbs, and flowers, of Camomile flowers, of Spike, Rosemary,
red Rose leaves, Saint John's wort and Dill, of each one good handful, of Marsh
Mallows two handfuls, chop these Herbs and Flowers as small as may be, and
stamp them and weigh them, and put thereto the weight of pure sheeps suet, chop
it small, and mince your Herbs and it together, and stamp it in a stone Mortar
to one substance, that there be no suet seen, but all green, put it in some
fair pot or pan, and put thereto a pottle and a pint of Oil Olive, and work all
these together in the pan with your hand to one substance, and cover it close
with some clay or paste about the edges that no air come in nor out, and let it
stand so seven days, then undo it and take it forth, and put it a clean pan;
and set it on a soft fire, always stirring it till the Herbs begin to wax
parched, and then strain it into some ^air pan, and then put into it these Oils
following; Oil of Roses, Oil of Camomile; Oil of White Lillies, Oil of Spike,
and Oil of Violets, of each one ounce, stir them all together, and resurve them
to your use.

The Infirmities that this Ointment is good for, are these; for Stiches,
Bruises, Aches, Palsies, shrinking of Sinews, Gouts, and Sciaticaes, the Ache
of the Back, Lamenesse, Plurisies, the Cough, the soles of the feet being
anointed; for extreme pain in the head, make a cap for the crown of the Head
of linen cloth, and lay in it the wool of a quick Sheep, plucked from the
flanks and cods, pick out all the moates, and make it clean and card it, then
strain it with this Ointment, and baste it, and lay it some what warm to your
Head. It is good for the Cholick, and for the Spleen, and for the cold Dropsy
of the Liver. If you will have it to be more pleasant of sent, and more
nourishing, add thereunto of the Gums of Labdanum one ounce and a half bruised
fine to powder, of the Gum called Storax Cremitie three quarters of an ounce
beaten well to fine powder, mingle the other stuff and this together, and
strain it, and keep it to your use.

An Ointment for the heat of the Raines, or elsewhere in the Body.
Take Oil of Roses six ounces, of clear white Wax, two ounces scraped as fine
as may be, dissolve these together on the fire, and skim them as clean as may
be, then have a dish full of Rose water, and three spoonfuls of Rose Vinegar
mixed together, strain your other stuff into it, and labor it a long time in
the liquor, and last of all have ready Camphire a dram in fine powder, and work
it till it be cold. This is a good Ointment for the back, head or eyes.

An Ointment for a Bruise or Ach.
Take of Dill, Vervaine, Mugwort, Henbane, the tops of Camomile, Lavender, of
every one a like quantity, then take May butter, and shred the Herbs small, and
put them in the May Butter and stamp it well in the Butter, then let it stand a
fortnight, and then fry it well, but take heed you burn it not, and then
strain it, and keep it to your use.

A very good Ointment for all Aches and shrinking of Sinews, for blasting of
the Face, and for green Wounds.
Take of Mellilot, white Dothet, Adderstongue, Valerian, of each three
handfuls, May butter well clarified in the Sun four pound, your Herbs must be
shred small, and then stamped very well by themselves, and after stamped again
with your clarified butter, and so let it stand six or seven days, then boil
it over a temperate fire until the Butter be green, stirring it always till it
be taken from the fire, then strain it, and keep it to your use.

The white Dothet does grow in moorish grounds where Rosasolis grows, and
grows very near the ground like a Plantane, but a more yellowish green leaf,
it bears a blue flower on a tall stem and small; no Herbal makes mention of
this Dothet.

An Ointment for any Swelling or Sore. It is good for many things.
Take three good handfuls of Rosemary, and as much of Hisop stripped, Rosen as
much as a Walnut, and one pound of fresh May butter, boil them all together
until it be green, then strain it into pots.

A very good Ointment for any Ache.
Take two pound of fresh new butter, and clarify it till it be clear, then
take a handful of the youngest Bay leaves, of Camomile, red Sage and Herb
grace, of each two handfuls, chop the Herbs, then boil them in the clarified
butter a pretty while till it be green, then strain it, and keep it for your
use, and when you use it, let the place pained be well chafed therewith against
the fire. You must also put in it with the rest a handful of Smallage.

An Ointment for a Wrench or Strain.
Take the white of an egg and a spoonful of Honey, and beat it to an Oil, then
boil Bove wort with Sallet Oil or Butter to an Oil, and mingle it together.

An excellent green Ointment for a strain or Bruise.
Take a handful of Camomile, of Bay leaves four handfuls, of Smallage four
handfuls and a half, of red Sage four handfuls, of Herb grace three handfuls,
chop the Herbs and stamp them, then take five pound of fresh Ewes Butter, and
boil it, and when it rises, take it from the fire, and let it stand, then take
off the skum clean, and then put in the Herbs together, keeping it stirring,
and when it is well boiled take it off, and let it stand till it be cold, then
strain it into an earthen pot well glazed, and keep it to your use, it will
continue a year or two.

An Ointment for Legs that itch with heat, or to cool or heal any Sore running
of a hot humor.
Take a handful of Houseleek, stamp it very small, and migle it with thick
Cream, and anoint the sore therewith.

A Sovereign Ointment to strengthen Sinews, and good for Lameness.
Take half a pound of Swines grease, half a pint of Sack, Camomile and Betony,
of each a handful, as much Sage, half a handful or Bay leaves, half an ounce
of Cloves, chop the Herbs small, and beat the Spice small, and let it boil all
night on the Embers, then strain it out, and use it.

An Ointment for all Aches, Lamenesse of Sinews, Stitches, Bruises, Plurisies,
or Gout.
Take Sage and Rue clean picked of each a pound, of Bay leaves and Wormwood of
each half a pound, of Rosemary three handfuls, Camomile flowers one good
handful, Dill and Spike of each a handful, of sheeps Suet, the skin picked off,
three pound, of sweet Sallet Oil three pints and a half, the Herbs must be
chopped small, and the Suet minced as fine as may be, then beat the Herbs and Suet
together into one substance, put it into an earthen pan, and put thereto your
Sallet Oil, and work it with your hands until it be well mingled together, then
cover it with a dish, and close it with paste, and and so let it stand six or
seven days, then take it forth, and put it into a broad pan, and put thereto
one ounce of Mace small beaten, then boil it with a soft fire, and stir it well
till the leaves be parched, put into it three ounces of Oil of Licoras, two
ounces of Oil of Spike, then strain it, and put it into a glass for your use.

An Ointment for any Ache or Bruise.
Take the leg bones of a male Deer, and break them, so as the marrow may be
taken out, and put it in a Posnet, then put to it a pretty quantity of Daisie
roots, and the l^ke of Elder buds or leaves, as much Camomile and a little
Balm, all clean picked, then put in the marrow, and let them boil a pretty
while, then strain it, and keep it for your use.

An Ointment for a Strain.
Take a pound of Rosemary leaves and flowers, one pound of running Mallows
leaves and flowers, and a good handful of Camomil^, but wash them not, gather
them when the dew is off the ground, chop them very small, and stamp them with
a wooden pestle, put to them a quart of May Butter well clarifi^d in the Sun,
stamp them all together til they be all well mingled, then put them in an
earthen pot and stop it close, and let it stand nine days, and then feeth it
on the fire, and stir it well for burning, and when it is green, strain it
through a Canvasse cloth, and keep it for your use.

A green Ointment to be made in May, an approved good one for diverse things.
Take young Bay leaves and Wormwood, of each half a pound, red Sage and Rue,
of each a pound, all must be gathered in the heat of the day, pick them clean,
but wash them not, beat them very small in a great Mortar like green sauce,
then take three pound of new Sheeps suet, clean picked and shred small, beat all
these together til they be well incorporated, then put to them a pottle of the
best Oil Olive, work it well with your hands til it become all of one substance
and color, put it into a new earthen pan, and let it stand there close covered
in some cool place eight days, then boil it on small coals almost a whole day
stirring it well, and after it has boiled four hours or more, put to it four
ounces of the best Oil of Spike; and to know when it is thoroughly boiled, take
a drop thereof in a sawcer, and if it be a fair green color, take it off, and
strain it through a new piece of course canvass, and put it up in Gally pots,
it will last seven years.

It cures all Strains, Swellings, Aches, Kibes, Cramps, Scaldings, Burnings
of all sorts, all outward pains or griefs, eases the Sciatica and Gout, with
all kinds of swellings in the face or throat.

An Ointment for an Ache.
Take Camomile, Bays, Mary gold, Dill and Mallow leaves of each a like, chop
them, and boil them in fresh butter or Sallet Oil, and so strain it forth, and
when you use it, warm it, and so anoint the place.

To make Flos Unguentorum, the flower of all other Ointments.
Take of Rosen and Perosen, Virgin Wax and Frankincense, of each a quarter of a
pound, of Mastick one ounce, Hearts Tallow or Deers Suet one ounce, of Camphire
two drams, Olibanum four ounces, the Rosen, Perosen, Frankincense, Mastick and
Olibanum must be beat apart in a Mortar into very fine powder, and searsed,
then melt your Wax and Deers Suet, being first cut in small pieces together,
stirring them very well with a clean stick for fear of burning to, then put in
your powder of Rosen when they be thoroughly melted, shaking it in by little and
little, and likewise your powder of Perosen, Frankincense and Mastick, one
after another, stirring it continually together till all the Powder be melted,
in no wise suffering it to boil, but so soon as you perceive it to be thoroughly
melted, take it off and strain it through a strong course cloth into a pottle
of White Wine boiled seething hot, so long as any thing may be gotten through
the cloth, and so stir it till it be no warmer then blood warm, then put
thereunto a quarter of a pound of Turpentine and your Camphire, still stirring
it, and when it is cold, make it up into rolls of a reasonable size, and put it
up in parchment to keep, and so you may keep it a long time, if you keep it
dry; if you find any knots in it in the rolling of it up, by reason of the
negligent stirring of it, take them out. And for a Fistula, put therein four
ounces of Mirrhe. In the Mortar before you do grind the Camphire, you must
grind three or four Almonds, and take them out with a feather, and stamp your
Camphire therein, and grind it very small, and take it out with a feather, etc.

The Effects of this Ointment.
It is good for old and new Wounds, for amongst all others it is most cleansing
and will engender good flesh, and it heals more in a night, then any other in
a month, and suffers no corruption in a wound, nor any ill flesh to be
engendered. It is good for a Festure and Canker. It draws all manner of ache
out of the Liver, Spleen and Reins of the back. It breaks Imposthumes, it is
good for the Head ach and for the singing in the brain, and for all manner of
Imposthumes in the head or body, for blowing in the ears, or for sinews that be
strained or shrunk. It draws out any thorn or broken bone, or any evil thing
that is in a wound; it is good for the stinging or biting of any venomous
beast; it rotteth all manner of Botches, and heals the same without fear; it
is good for the (...) of the Members, the Flux, the Menstrous, if it be laid to
a woman's Navil; it helps the Emrods, and is very good to make a Cerecloth for
the Gout, all Aches and Pestilent Botches. If you lay this Plaster to a little
Sore or Wound, one Plaster will serve twice, if it be clean wiped; also if you
lay it to any place where the skin is not broken, you may let it lie thereunto
til by the moisture that it draws from the sore place it falls off; and so
from time to time you must do it til you find release of pain, and being driven
thin upon a cloth you must lay it that it may cover all the sore.

PALSY.
For the Palsy.
TAke half a pound of sweet butter, a pint of new Cow Dung, and boil them both
together till it come to a Salve, then lay half of it upon a woollen cloth, and
lay it to the nape of the neck, and when it is cold apply the other half warm.

Another.
Take White Wine and Sider, and take a good deal of red Sage, and boil them
well to the one half, and wash the Patient where he shakes, and if his Head
shakes, wash the neck as hot as may be suffered, and keep his neck warm and
his joints at all times.

Against the Palsy.
Take a handful of Sage, of Southern, wood, Spike of Lavender, of each alike.
boil these in a gallon of running water, and strain it into a stone pot when
it is boiled away to a pint and half, then every morning take three or four
spoonfuls thereof luke warm, and gargarise therewith, and put it forth again.
Also take some of the same water warm, and chafe the place with a sponge.

Of the Palsy.
This shaking is a continual strife of natural powers, which are raised without
ceasing. It happens; first by looking from a great height, by sudden fear or
sudden joy, or much cold or great heat, or much bleeding; for remedy, use three
leaved grass, Cummin and Steches by Glister or otherwise; of Oils, use Oil of
wild Cow^umbers, Oil of Dil, of Clivers Artico, which Herb is very good against
the shaking Palsy.

PLAGUE or PESTILENCE.
For the Pestilence.
Take half a handful of Rue, as much of Fetherfew, and one handful of
Marigolds, a handful of Burnet, a handful of Sorrel, a quantity of Dragons,
either the root or the crop, as the time of the year requires; and then take a
pottle of running water, and let them boil over the fi^e till half the water be
consumed, then take it from the fire and let it cool, and when it is almost
cold, strain it through a fair linen cloth, and then let the sick body drink
thereof, and if it be too bitter, put thereto a quantity of loaf Sugar, or else
powder of Licoras.

This has been proved of a certain by great men, and has helped almost an
hundred Persons in diverse places; and where there were three persons in one
house sick, two of them drunk thereof, and the third would not, and he dyed,
and the two that took it lived, and this was proved of a certain. This Medicine
must be given betimes before the Purples do appear, and it will cease by the
grace of God.

A Medicine against the Plague.
Take a handful of Sage virtue, a handful of Hens grease, a handful of Elder
leaves, a handful of red Bramble leaves, and stamp them all together, and
strain them with a fine cloth into a quart of White Wine, and then take a
quantity of Ginger, and mingle them all together, and drink thereof a spoonful
every day fasting for ten days together, and for the first spoonful you shall
be safe for four and twenty hours, and after the ninth spoonful you shall be
safe for all the year after. And if it shall happen that any be stricken with
the Plague before this Medicine be taken, then take water of Scabious and water
of Betony, and a quantity of fine Treakle, and put them together, and drink it,
and it will put out all the Venom, and if the Sore do appear, then take leaves
of Elder, and make a Plaster thereof with Mustard seed stamped together, and
lay it to the Sore, and it will draw out all the Venom, and (by Gods grace)
recover the party.

A precious Water good against all Poisons and Pestilences.
Take Turmentile, Scabious, Dittony, Pimpernel of each a like quantity, distill
them all together, and drink of it.

An approved Medicine for the Plague.
It takes one like the Ague, with cold: as soon as it takes them and complain
of it, take five, seven or nine leaves of Garden Spurge, nine is the most,
stamp them small in a dish, and put to it warm milk or Posset Ale, and let the
sick body drink it, and presently go to bed and sweat; then take a great Onion
and take out the core, and put into it Mithridatum, then lay on the top again,
and roast it very soft, then beat it very small in a dish, and put to it three
spoonfuls of White Wine Vinegar, and as much Sugar as will make it pleasant to
take, and as soon as the stomach is purged, give him of the Onion as much as
you can, for that will draw out ^he Sore in four and twenty hours (by Gods
grace) and keep the Patient very hot and warm, and give him hot Broths and
Drinks, and keep him in a sweat four and twenty hours, and after keep him very
hot, and when the Sore is come out, roast an Onion with Treakle and Viegar, and
lay it to the Sore to draw it out, and have a Surgeon to lance it.

For the rest of your household, give them every day Mithridatum and Treakle,
and take Centory and Madder, and boil it in Beer, and let them drink now and
then thereof.

An excellent Drink against the Plague, Small Pox or Meazels, and for the cure
and prevention thereof.
Take a pint of Dragon water, three pints of the best Malmesey or Muskadine,
boil therein of Rue and Sage, of each a handful, and let it boil till one pint
be boiled away, then strain it, and afterward set it on the fire again, and
put thereto long Pepper, Ginger and Nutmegs beaten to powder, of each one
ounce, boil all these a little more, and then take it from the fire, and put
therein of the best Mithridate one ounce, of London Treakle two ounces, and a
quarter of a pint of the best Angelica Water, and use it as follows. If you
think your self to be infected, take one spoonful of this at a time morning and
evening lukewarm, but if not infected, take it but once or twice a week at the
most, half a spoonful at a time, in any Plague time; and when they that are
infected take this, let them lie down and sweat two or three hours in the bed;
and when they be well dried, and warm kept, let them drink none but warm
Drinks or Caudles, and so by Gods assistance they shall be well. This Drink
will keep good half a year if it be close kept.

A good Drink against the Plague.
Take of White Wine one quart, and put therein the juice of these Herbs
following, of Elder leaves, Rue leaves, Wormwood and Scabious, and put in a
spoonful of good Treakle, and the powder of a good Race of Ginger, stir all
together, and drink three spoonfuls of this every morning for the space of nine
days together: This preserves you from the Plague, and if you be infected, it
will expel it; and if it come to a Botch, stamp the leaves of red Brambles with
Mustard and Honey, and make a Plaster, and lay it to the Sore. Probatum.

An excellent thing to defend the Plague.
Take twenty leaves of Rue, two Walnuts, and two figs, and a grain of Salt in
the morning fasting with a little Wine.

A good Preservation against the Plague.
Take of the best Hung^ria or Roman Vitriol, with a little Amber, and dissolve
it in Vinegar of the best, then take a little Rosewater, and mingle therewith,
and every morning take half a spoonful thereof, and cast it on a brick made hot
in the fire, and let the chamber where any abide be perfumed every day, and t
will take away all corruption and poison out of the Chamber, so that the
Spiders will nor endure; of all outward Medicines, there is none better then
this, by the advice of Doctor Matthias a Germane, and Doctor Butler of Cambridg.

A Water for the Plague.
Take Turmentile, Scabious, Betony, of each a like quantity, distill them
together, and they will make the best water for a Surfeit or any manner of
poisono^s Disease, if you drink it in the morning fasting.

A Water to be made in May, good against the Plague or Surset.
Take Cellendine, Rosemary, Rue, Pellitory of Spain, Scabious, Angelica,
Pimpernel, Wormwood, Mugwort, Betony, Egrimony, Balm, Dragon, and Turmentile,
of each half a pound, shred them somewhat small, and put them into a narrow
mouthed pot, and put to them five quarts of White Wine, stop it close, and let
it stand three days and nights, stirring it morning and evening, then take the
Herbs from the Wine, and distill them in an ordinary Still, and when you have
distilled the Herbs, distill the Wine also, wherein is virtue for a weak
stomach. Take of either of these three or four spoonfuls in the morning or any
other time, as occasion serves, walking after it till you shall feel your
self inclining to sweat, then go to bed, or betake your self otherwise to rest.

An approved Medicine for the Plague.
Take a root or small handful of Saxifrage or Meadow Parsley, one good spoonful
of Sassafrass wood small beaten, one half root of Tormentile or Setwal, Elder
berries one good spoonful, or a handful of the leaves of Rue, red Sage, and red
young Bramble leaves, of each a handful, two spoonfuls of old black Ivy
berries, Hearts horn scraped very small as much, eight Figs dried, eight Races
of white Ginger, and two Oranges, stamp them all together in a Mortar, steep
them all at least twelve hours in a quart of White Wine, and half a pint of
White Wine Vinegar, then strain them through a fine cloth, and drink every
morning a spoonful fasting, and take nothing in two hours after, and as much at
night; if you be to go abroad into any infectious place, carry in your mouth
one half root of Tormentil, taking the wind as much as you can of all
infectious persons and places. This is to be done before you be infected, and
when you are infected, you must keep your self warm and out of the air for
twelve days, drinking this as before; and if there be any great danger, you
may drink a spoonful every three or six hours, and it will with Gods blessing
bring the Infection out in Sores, which being done, the worst is past; only
take heed of cold to drive in the Sores again, and use warm Poultices which may
draw them to a head, ripen, and so break them.

A Preservative against the Plague.
Take of Sage, Rue, Elder leaves and red Bramble leaves, of each a handful,
stamp them all together, and strain them through a cloth with a quart of White
Wine, then take a quantity of Ginger, and mingle it together, and drink thereof
morning and evening a spoonful nine days together.

For the Party Infected.
If you be infected before you have drunk the aforesaid Medicine, then take a
spoonful of Scabious Water, as much of Betony, and a quantity of fine Treakle,
put it together, and drink it, and it will expel the Venom.

To break the Botch.
Take Bramble leaves, Elder leaves and Mustard seed, and stamp them all
together, then make a Plaster thereof, and lay it to the Sore.

A Medicine for the Plague.
Take three slips of Herb grace, and siz spoonfuls of Vinegar, and beat them
together, then strain them, and put thereto one ounce of Treakle, and one ounce
of Sugar, and stir them together, and set it on the fire and make a Sirrup
thereof, then take a Sage leaf, and every morning take as much as a bean upon
the same leaf, and eat it.

A Drink against the Plague.
Take one ounce of Sorrel Water, as much Dragon water, and a dram of Treakle,
and put thereto a dram and a half of Powder Imperial, and give it to the
Patient in Ale within four and twenty hours after he is infected.

Another.
Take a handful of Savory, and boil it in a quart of Wine Vinegar with a
spoonful of grains beaten being put therein, and drink it every morning with
Sugar fasting.

Another.
Take in the morning fasting one dry Fig, one Walnut, and four or five leaves
of Rue chopped all together, and eat it, and after drink a cup of Wine.

PILES.
A good Medicine for the Piles or Emrods.
Take a very old and hard white Dogs turd, which will be on the top of
Molehills, and sees it in Sallet Oil very thick and so put up the Piles
therewith, and it will help very quickly.

A Plaster to mitigate the pains of the Piles and Emrods.
Take the pap of an Apple, and put thereunto the yolk of a new laid egg, work
them well together, then put in nine cleaves of Saffron small ground, of
Linseed twenty corns finely ground, these boil all together on the Embers
always stirring it, of this make a Plaster and lay it to your grief.

A Medicine for the Piles.
Take a good handful of Mullet leaves, and a good handful of Elder leaves, and
stamp them very small in a Mortar, and boil them in fresh butter very well, so
that it may be very strong of the leaves, then strain it, and keep it for your
use.

For the Piles.
Take a fair great Pippin or other Apple, and cut off the top, and take out the
core, then fill the same with Capons grease and the powder of Saffron, and
roast the apple in the Embers till it be soft, then stamp it, and make thereof
a Salve, and spread the same upon a piece of leather, and lay it on the Sore
being well warmed.

Another.
Take a pint of Sallet Oil, Rosemary tops, Sowthernwood, Hisop, Lavender,
Camomile and Costmary, of each almost a handful, and a good handful of red Rose
buds, stamp all these herbs in a stone Mortar, then put them into the Oil, and
let it stand nine days, then boil it half an hour, and when it is almost
boiled, put into it a quarter of a pint of Aquavitae, and so keep it to your
use.

Another.
When they come forth and swel much, bathe them (with the water that Mallows
Fenicrick and Onions have boiled in) very warm, and after the bathing, apply
unto it this Plaster following, Take the finest and inner part of a roasted
Onion, beat it in a wooden dish with May Butter, and a little powder of
Saffron, and anoint the Sore.

To heal the Piles and Emrods.
Take the leaves of green Elder, and boil them in a pint of water, and four
spoonfuls of White Wine, then take a piece of cloth three fingers broad, and
take the leaves so boiled as hot as you can suffer them, and so apply it a good
while, then rub it with a little May butter. Probatum.

For the Piles or Emrods. Mrs. Wing.
Take Oystershels, as thick as you can get them, and the newest, and burn them
in the fire till they be red hot, then take the inner white of those shells, and
beat them in a Mortar very small, then sift them through a piece of Lawne, then
take some Linseed Oil in a sawcer, and warm it, and anoint the Piles first
with that Oil, then strew the powder thick upon the Piles, then take a clean
rag and dip it in the Oil, and lay it upon the Piles, and dress it so twice
every day, this is a sure and an approved Medicine, and fails not to help.
Probatum.

PLASTER.
To make the Black Plaster.
Take a pint of Oil Olive, and half a pound of red Lead, and boil them
together, and stir them with a slice of wood continually until it be black,
then take it from the fire, and put in a pennyworth of red (...), and a quarter
of a pound of Rosen, and set it on the fire again, the fire may not blaze, and
stir it, then power a little of it on the side of a dish, and if it stick to
the dish it is enough, then let it stand until it be cold, and then make it up
in rolls for your use. It is good for any ache, new wound that bleedeth, or an
old Sore, and to stanch blood.

An excellent Plaster.
Take Hearts suet four ounces, Rosen and Perosen, of each half a pound, white
Wax and Frankincense, of each four ounces, first melt the Suet and Wax
together, and then powder the Gums, and put thereunto, and when they have
relented together, strain them through a canvass cloth into another vessel, and
put thereunto a pottle of White Wine, and set it on the fire again, and boil
them to the consuming of the Wine clean away, stirring it with a staff, then
take it from the fire, and when it is almost cold, put to it four ounces of
Turpentine well washed in White Wine, two drams of Camphire well powdered, then
make up your Rolls, and lap them in Parchment. This Plaster is good for Wounds
both new and old for Bruises and for Aches; and it does mundifie Ulcers and old
Sores without pain, and comfort the members that it lies on. It is good
both for Fistulaes and Cankers that are ulcerate.

A drying Plaster.
Take Oil of Roses eight ounces, white and red Lead, of each three ounces,
Cerus six drams, Littarge of Gold, Sanguis Draconis and Bole Armoniack, of each
one ounce. Camphire one dram, make all these into fine powder, and mix it with
the Oil, and set it on a soft fire always stirring it, and let it boil til it
be Plaster like. This Plaster is good to dry all Sores in the legs.

An excellent Plaster for any Sore old or new.
Take the yolk of an egg, as much ordinary Turpentine, and as much Herb grace
chopped and stamped, mingle all these well together, and spread them on a cloth
and lay them to the Sore.

A Plaster for all manner of Swellings in any place.
Take Parsley, Herb Christopher, and crumbs of sour bread, beat them small
together, and boil them in White Wine, and make thereof a Plaster, and lay it
to warm.

To make Parracelsus Plaster.
Take Gum, Galbanum and Opoponax, of each one ounce, Amoniacum and Bdelium, of
each two ounces, beat them small, and put them in an earthen Pipkin glazed, and
power on them as much White Wine Vinegar as will serve to steep the Gums in, so
let them stand one day and one night, the next morning boil them in the same
Vinegar on a gentle fire of coals, and when they be thoroughly melted, pour them
out hot into a bag, and wring them well, and cast away that which remains in
the bag, then take the liquor so strained, and let it boil in a pot till the
Vinegar be consumed clean away, and in boiling you must stir it continually
lest the Gums burn to the bottom. Then take Oil Olive one quart, new Wax half
a pound, put them into an earthen pot glazed, such a one as is of sufficient
bigness, and set it over a fire of Cozls, and let it melt softly, then put into
it one pound of Littargy finely beaten into powder, stirring them continually
with a wooden slice, and when they be all well mixed together, and of the
color of tawny, then take it from the fire, then take of the aforesaid Gums
that were first boiled, the quantity of a nut, and put thereto, and so by
little and little put in all the Gums, and being well mixed together, then set
it over the fire again, take heed withal, lest the matter be over heated and
run into the fire, for it is very hot of it self; then put into it these things
following, Take of the two kinds of Astrology rotunda. Calaminaris, Mirrh and
Frankincense, of each of them one ounce, beat them into powder, then put them
into the said matter, and power upon the same one ounce of Oil of Bays, and
last of all put into it four ounces of the best Turpentine, then boil all
together, and stir it continually; and when you would know whether it be sodden
enough or no, put a little thereof into cold water, if it be not soft that it
will not cleave unto your fingers it is enough; but if it cleave it is not
enough, but let it boil until it is enough, then take it from the fire, and
pour it into a Basin of cold water, then anoint your hands with Oil of Roses,
and work it well with your hands two or three hours, and make it into Rolls and
keep it.

It is good for old and new Sores, it draws and cleanses it will not suffer
any Sore to putrify, but if there be dead flesh in the Sore before it be laid
on, it will not take it away. It is good for sinews cut or pricked with
thorns, it will draw out of Wounds, Iron, Wood or Lead, and it is good for the
biting of venomous Beasts, it is also good for Biles, Fistulaes, Cankers,
Shingles, and for Saint Anthonies fire. Sir Thomas Porter has found by often
experience a speedy help for bones out of Joint, so that laying on two or three
of these Plasters, has healed in fifteen days Arms out of Joint; when you
do lay up this Salve, keep it in an Oily paper.

PLURISIE.
A good Medicine to ripen a Plurisie.
Take a fair Costard, and cut off the crown, and pick out the core, but make
no hole through, and then put in all these powders, of Bores tooth the weight
of four pence, of the Powder of Rubarb grated fine as may be, the weight of
three pence, of Cinnamon the weight of a penny, of the powder of white Sugar
candied the weight of two pence, put all these into the Apple, and cover him
again, and lay him on a tile on the Embers, and roast him till he be soft as
may be, then cut it in sunder, and give the sick party in the morning half of
it to eat, and fast two hours after it, then eat some good broth, and take the
other part of the Apple the next day, so that both the days are good to take a
Medicine on.

An approved Medicine for the Plurisie.
Take a quantity of Horse dung which is kept in the Stable, strain it with Ale,
then put to it a good quantity of Treakle and some Ginger, and let the Patient
drink thereof morning and evening lukewarm as much as he can endure.

A Plaster for the same. Probatum.
Take a good handful of Brooklime, and shred it very small, and boil it in fair
water till it be very tender, then take a quantity of Sheeps suet and wheaten
bran, and boil them together till it be thick, and so lay it to his side where
the pain is, as hot as may be endured.

For the Plurisie.
Take a quart of White Wine, put to it two handfuls of Cummin, as much Oaten
bran newly bolted, bruise the Cummin, and boil all to a Poultice, and put it in
two bags hot, lay one to the side pained, and when it cools, lay to the
other, and so continue changing them three or four hours.

Or take Earth-wormes and fry them in Vinegar, and spread them, and lay them to
the pained side.

Another.
The Plurisie comes of cold humors, therefore beware you take not much cold
or any cold thing. Malmesey sod with Camomile is very good.

A sweet Apple roasted, and eaten with powder of Licoras and Sugar candied, is
good to be eaten in the morning and at night. A sweet Apple also is best with
Olibanum. Also a Plaster of Pitch is very good laid to the side.

Another.
Anoint the place where the pain is with the Oil of Linseed.

For the Plurisie.
Take four Spanish Balls newly gathered from a Horse, stamp them and strain
them with a pint of White Wine, and as much beer, and put to that a penny worth
of Treakle being first melted, and give the party to drink thereof twice a day,
and not to eat nor drink one hour before nor after: if you be sure it is the
Plurisie, let him blood within three days, but if he be longer before he be
let blood, be sure you let him blood on that arm on that side where the pain
is. Also if when after blood letting he fall worse again, this Drink is a very
good Medicine for that Sickness taken by overmuch labor or lying on the
ground.

There must be laid also to the side that the stitch is on, for the Plurisie,
this following:

Take a pint of new milk, make batter of it with wheaten flower, as thick as
you do Fritters, put to it three spoonful of Honey, and a groats worth of
Saffron, boil it to a Poultice, and spread half, and then grate it over with
Nutmegs, and lay it warm to the side, and when it has been on twelve hours,
then lay to the other half, and make more if you see cause.

Also if you boil a piece of leaven, as big as a good Apple, in Vinegar, the
quantity of four spoonfuls, and as much Rosewater, and a few Rose leaves to a
Poultice, spread it, and grate it thrice over with Nutmegs, and lay to the
pained side: It is also very good for the Plurisie, or for any pain in the side.

If you take two handfuls of Horse-dung, two Races of Ginger powdered, boil
them in a quart of White Wine being bound in a cloth, boil it to the one half,
then drink a good draught morning and evening, and after you have drunk it,
cover your self warm and sweat; this way is also very good. If the party be
costive, give him gentle Purgations, as Cassia Fistula, or use Suppositories or
Glisters.

For this Sickness Tessers are good, and the water of Mallows, Violets,
Borage or Bugloss, Sugar candied also.

Take also of the Water of Broom flowers, Scabious and Carduus Benedictus, of
each three spoonfuls, put in Sugar candied, and let the party drink so much
morning and evening, and anoint the side with Oil of Broom flowers.

To know whether one have the Plurisie or no.
Hold in thy breath as long as possibly thou can do, and then if thou can
not let thy breath pass from thee without coughing, assuredly thou either have
it, or art in danger of having it forthwith.

For the cure of the Plurisie.
Thou must be let blood forthwith, then take the quantity of a Walnut of
Carduus Balsom, and eat it upon a knifes point, and take again presently the
like quantity of the same Balsom, and melt it in a sawcer at the fire, and with
a soft clean linen cloth dipped in the Balsom, wash and bathe thy left side
well, as hot as thou art able to suffer it, then warm the said cloth, and lay
it double over the place pained, and bind it on, and ly down to rest, and by
Gods blessing thou shall find it a present Cure.

For a hot Plurisie.
When any get a pricking pain about the ribs with a Cough and an Ague, then use
this Glister, Take sixteen ounces of Broth wherein a Lambs head or Calvs feet
have been sodden, put therein one ounce of Sugar, the yolk of one egg, two
ounces of Sallet Oil, salt one dram and half, temper them well together and
use it.

PRICKING.
For the pricking of a thorn, Swelling or Ancomb.
Take Birdlime and spread it on a piece of Glovers leather on the Allome side,
and lay it on as far as the swelling goes, and let it lie four and twenty
hours, and then renew it again.

Another for the pricking of a thorn or needle in any joint.
Take fine boulted flower, and temper it with White Wine, and boil it together
till it be thick, then lay it on the Sore as hot as may be suffered, and it
will open the hole, and draw out the anguish, help the aching, and heal it: for
want of White Wine take Ale or Beer. It is good to heal a Boil or Whitlow.

POULTICE.
To make a Poultice for Wounds or Swellings.
Take a good quantity of Marsh Mallows, or of other, if you cannot get them,
and boil them in clean water, then cut them small, and take White Wine dregs,
and of good Ale as much more, your Mallows being shred, put it into your
dregs, and put in some Deers Suet and Sheeps Tallow melted, and crumbs of brown
bread, boil all these together till it be thick, always stirring it to keep it
from burning, then lay it warm every dressing upon a woollen cloth, it
dissolveth hardness and swelling. The Lady Farnchams Poultice.

Another Poultice to mollify and dissolve.
Take the crumbs of white bread, sees them in milk, and put to it Oil of
Camomile and a little Saffron, then take it from the fire, then put to it the
yolks of two new laid eggs, and so make of it a Poultice, and lay it to the
sore.

An approved good Poultice to lay to an Ache or Pain.
Take a good handful of Mallows, another of Smallage, a handful of Linseed, as
much of Oatmeal grets pounded together, a pottle of well water, half a pint of
milk, and Deeres Suet as much as an egg, or else so much of Sheeps Tallow,
then boil all these together till it be thick, then lay it to the Patient where
the pain is, being spread upon a linen cloth.

A very good Poultice for Wind gotten into joints.
Take Wormwood and Dill dried and beaten to fine powder, of each one handful,
of Sheeps dung three handfuls, of Camomile flowers half a handful, of Cummin
seeds two ounces, sees them all in Lie, and let it boil together until it be
very thick, then spread it upon leather, and lay it upon the place grieved
warm: but first anoint it with Oil of Rue. Mr. Smart.

A Poultice for a Bruise or Strain.
Take Claret Wine, Balm and Roseleaves, boil them together till they be thick,
then lay them to the Sore as hot as the Patient can suffer it.

A Water to wash the place before you apply the Poultice.
Take Mallows and Smallage, of each a handful, boil them in a quart of Vinegar
to a pint, then wash the place pained as hot as you can suffer it.

An excellent Poultice for the Ague in a Woman's breast or Legs.
Take Houseleek, Smallage and Mallows, of each two handfuls, shred them small,
then take a handful of Linseed, and bruise it finely in a Mortar, take also a
handful of Oatmeal or wheaten bran, some Roses of a Rose cake, every leaf
pulled from another, Sheeps Tallow one pound, shred it well, then put all these
into a gallon of running water, and boil them together till they become thick,
then put thereto a quart of Cowes milk, and let it boil stall till it be as
thick as a Plaster, ^tirring it often, then when the leng or breast is washed
with the water also ^ said, spread the Poultice on a cloth all abroad, and lay
it to the leg or breast a^ hot as may be suffered, and let it lie so till it be
dry and hard, and then renew it, but if the leg or breast be not very hot and
red it shall not need.

A Poultice for any Swelling.
Take of Violet leaves and Groundsel, of each a handful, of Mallows and
Chickweed, of each half a handful; shred them small, and let them sees well in
running water, and thicken it with Barley meal being finely sifted, and spread
it on a cloth, and so lay it on the place pained, and bind it fast, and shift
it twice a day till it be cured.

PURGE.
The Manna Purge.
Take half an ounce of the best Cene, lay it in soak in a pint and a half of
Posset Ale on the Embers in a close covered pot two hours, then put it into a
posnet, and put to it a Parsley root or two, one Fennel root, two spoonfuls of
Anniseeds, a stick or two of Licoras scraped and bruised, a few Raisons stoned,
boil all together to half, then strain it, and put into it one ounce of Manna,
and four penny weight of Rubarb being grated and put in a clout, and laid in
soak in the aforesaid liquor with the Manna one hour, when the Manna is melted
wring the Rubarb, strain it, and put to it three spoonfuls of the Sirrup of
Roses, and drink it blood warm in the morning, and eat a mess of Mutton pottage
after it.

To Purge, the Moon being in Scorpio, Cancer or Pisces.
Michocanum two drams, which is two six penny weights, grate at with a Grater,
and pound it small, steep it in a penny pot of White Wine all night, and in the
morning about six of the Clock, warm it milk warm, and drink it off and half an
hour after take eight or ten spoonfuls of Mutton broth, with a few Raisons or
Currants in it, and it will work downwards, and purge away moist humors
causing Phlegm to breed in the body.

Of Catapusia being small seeds, you must take two and twenty or four and
twenty of them in quantity, and take off the outer hulls, and beat the inner
grains small in a Mortar or pewter dish, then mingle it with a little Ale, or
White Wine which is best, warm it a little, and take it as abovesaid, and it
will void as the other.

And if you should at any time have any continuing Lask by occasion of Medicine
or otherwise, sees a little Rice without any salt or butter, and eat it with a
little Cinnamon, and it shall presently stop it.

Another to purge Phlegm.
Take a handful of Groundsel, wash it clean, and boil it in a pint of Ale, skim
it, then put in half a handful of Raisons or Currants, and two ounces of Sugar
candied, boil all together again to half a pint or less, then strain it, and
drink it milk warm fasting at six a Clock, and fast till eleven, then take
some Mutton broth.

Another.
Take Encampane roots, and make Conserves of it, use it in this manner, first
wash the roots clean, then slice them in pieces as big as your little finger,
sees them in fair water until they be tender, then take them up, and pound
them, and strain them through a hair sieve, then set them over the fire, and
put to them the double or trebble weight of Sugar, and when it is perfectly
incorporated or mingled, take it off, and keep it in a Gally pot. The time to
gather the roots is when the leaf falls away.

A Diet Drink to Purge withal.
Take Anniseeds, Licoras, Cene, Hermodactilus, of each one ounce, of
Sassaparilla five ounces, scrape away the outside of it, and bruise it a
little, and cut it the length of an inch, then bruise your Licoras, and put
your Anniseeds to it, and put them in a pot to steep in two gallons of Conduit
or running water four and twenty hours, then boil them until a third part be
consumed, then put in your Cene, and half an hour after put in your
Hermodactilus, the outside being pared away, and slice them as you do a Race of
Ginger, and withn an hour after take it from the fire, and let it rest in the
pot two hours, then strain it in a bag as you strain Hypocras, so let your
first draught in the morning be lukewarm fasting, and at Dinner and at Supper
what you think good, for you must drink no other Drink till that be spent.

A Purging Ale.
Take of the juice of Scurvigrass four pound, of Watercresses two pound, of
Brooklime one pound, of Water Mints half a pound, of dry Wormwood four
handfuls, of the roots of Madder four ounces, of the roots of Monks Rubarb
three ounces, roots of Horse Rhadish one ounce and a half, the roots of
Saxifrage one ounce, of Cene four ounces, of Juniper berries half an ounce, of
Anniseeds, Coriander seeds and Ginger, of each six drams.

Another.
Take a pint of the Whey of Goats milk, of Cene half an ounce, of Ginger clean
scraped and thin sliced, Anniseeds and sweet Fennel seeds well dusted and
lightly bruised, of each of weight of four pence, let them stand one hour, or
one hour and half on warm embers in insuling; the next morning to a draught
hereof put a spoonful of Sirrup of Roses, and as this agrees with you, so take
it three or four days together, or every other day.

Another.
Take a pottle of the same Whey, boil therein of Betony, Colts foot and Hisop,
of each one handful, and drink there of as you have occasion.

A very easy Purgation.
Take half a pint of Malmesey, or somewhat more, and half a quarter of an
ounce of Cene, and two Races of Ginger sliced, then put them both into the
Malmesey, and stir it well a good while, and let it stand all night, and then
strain it, and drink it, and keep your Chamber, and you shall have four or five
stools.

Another.
Take clarified Whey, and put into it a handful of Violet leaves, and half a
handful of Polipodium of the Oak called Oak fernes, and drink a good draught of
it lukewarm, and wash after it.

To procure Looseness.
Sees Mallows and red Nettles in fair water, and let the party sit over the
hot fume thereof.

A Purge.
Take Aron or Wakerobbin, one dram of the powder thereof with two drams of
Sugar, is good to cut gross humors, to purge the stomach of Phlegm and
Melancholy.

Or else the root either green or dry, one dram thereof being taken in drink
with as much Treakle, is a very special good Purgation.

To purge Phlegm and Melancholy.
Fetherfew dried into fine powder, and two drams thereof taken with Honey or
sweet Wine purges by the stool Phlegm Melancholy, and Sadness.

Also take Peniroyal with Honey and Aloes to purge Melancholy, and for the
Cramp.

To cleanse the Stomach from rotten Phlegm and Melancholy.
Drink the Seeds of Hollioaks.

Also Cene the cods and leaves in powder one dram, does purge Phlegm and
Melancholy.

To purge Phlegm and Choler.
The great Garden Dock leaves drunk in Wine, purges Phlegm, Choler and Water.

A Purging Drink.
Take two gallons of new small Ale, and put unto it a good handful of English
Madder, a handful of Dock roots bruised, two handfuls of Scurvigrasse, a
handful of Scabious, two ounces of Cene, two ounces of Anniseeds, two or three
sticks of Licoras finely scraped, and all those things bruised, then put them
into the new Ale, and let them work therein, so let it stand two or three
days, and then drink thereof morning and evening.

PAIN.
For pain in the Joints.
Take a pennoworth of Aquavitae, Oil of Exeter, three ounces of Sage, of Herb
grace, Clerk Robert, of each a handful, stamp them small in a Mortar, then take
your Aquavitae, and strain them together a good while, then take a spoonful
thereof, and anoint the Sore place against the fire.

For the pain under the side.
Take the toast of a Wheaten loaf, and butter it, and toast it again, and
butter it twice more, then toast it again and butter it with Soap, and hold it
against the fire till it lather, then lay it to the side where the pain is.

For pain in the side that comes of Wind.
Take one handful of Cummin seeds, as much of Anniseeds, two handfuls of Rue,
sees these together in running water from a pottle to a quart, put to it half
a pint of White Wine Vinegar before it be cold, dip a Sponge in it, and wring
some of the liquor out of it, and lay it to the Patients side as hot as may be
suffered, and when it begins to wax cold take a new.

POISON.
For the Poison of a Toad, or other Poison.
Take a handful of Plantane, and a handful of Parsley, and stamp and strain
them into a little raw Cream, and mingle it well together, and anoint the
place grieved therewith.

PISSING.
For pissing a bed.
Take a Boares pisle, and dry it, and make powder of it, and drink it in Ale or
Beer.

POCKS.
A Medicine for the Small Pocks.
Take two handfuls of Salt, and put it into a pint and half of water, and stir
it well together, then set it upon the fire and let it boil well, and in the
boiling you must skim it, so that there be not any skim seen, and when the
Small Pocks are come well forth, and that the Swelling does assuage you must
take a fine cloth, and both them with this Brine, being warm, three times a
day: And when they begin to grow brown, use this Ointment, take a piece of
Bacon, and roast it upon a spit, and set a dish of fair water under it, putting
thereto some Rose water, and let the Bacon drop into it as it does roast, and
when it is roasted, take the dripping and the water and work it well together,
and it will be a very white Ointment, then put it into a Gally pot, and twice a
day anoint the places with a feather, but in any case lay not on too much, for
that will make them moist, and make them stay on the longer.

Another to take away the Redness.
Take fair water in a Posnet, and put thereto half a pound of Butter, then set
it on the fire, and let it boil softly, and skim off all the froth very clean,
then take it off the fire, and let it stand till it be thoroughly cold, then
power the water from it and put it in clean water, and set it upon the fire
again skimming it very clean, and do this nine times together, but every time
your butter must be cold before you put it into a new water, and the last time
being very cold, take it clean away from the water, and put Rosewater to it,
and work them very well together, and put it up into a Gally pot, and with a
feather twice or thrice a day anoint the redness of the face; and if these
Medicines be used as they should be, it will take away the redness, and make
the face not to have any holes in it.

For the Small Pocks in the Eyes.
Take red Rose water, white Sugar candied beaten very fine, and breast milk, and
temper these very well together, and with a feather dress the eyes, and it
will keep them from the Small Pocks If it be for a man, you must take the milk
of a Girl; if for a woman the milk of a boy.

For the Small Pocks or Meazels.
When the Pocks are white at the first coming out, let a woman (that gives
suck) milk some of her milk upon them, and apply a paper thereupon and do this
every day, and they will not pit.

Also take a new laid egg, and it in fresh butter, and then pour it into cold
water, and being cold put it into a pot, and put Rosewater thereunto, and stir
it so long till it become like an Ointment, and with it anoint the sace, and
the eyes especially, and it will preserve the sight from the Pocks; and when as
any one has Pockholes, anoint them with Barrowes grease betimes, and it will
help.

Also for them that have the Small Pocks fallen into the eyes, let them take
Pimpernel and stamp it, and strain it, and take the juice thereof and drop it
into the eyes where the Small Pocks are with a feather morning and evening,
this is a special good Medicine for a Pin and Web or Pearl in the eyes.

Also for the Small Pocks or Meazels take Dragon root, it purges all the inner
parts, or the distilled water given to drink with Treakle is very good to drive
them out.

Also Figs eaten before meat, provoke sweat, and thereby expel all stinking
humors, and therefore are good for the Meazels or Small Pocks, and to be given
to Children to bring them out speedily.

Also an excellent Medicine to drive them out, sees Fumetory in Rue water, and
drink it.

Also to heal the Pocks or any Scabs, sees Houndstongue in Red Wine, and drink
thereof, and also apply it to the Sores.

Also to drive out the Small Pocks, drink a spoonful of Sallet Oil with three
spoonfuls of Malmesey, and the quantity of a Hasel nut of Treakle in it.

Also to take the print of the Small Pocks out of the Sore, take one ounce of
Sperma Ceti, and as much Deers Suet, and melt them together, and when the Small
Pocks are ripe, anoint the face therewith with a feather, and if the Pocks be
in the throat, then give the Patient a little Sirrup of Blackberries, such as
grow upon Briars, but take them when they are red, and pound them, and strain
them, and put as much Sugar thereunto as there is of the juice, and sees them
together till they be boiled away to the one half, then give the Patient a
little in a spoon three or four times in a day, and that by Gods help will cure
them; and the very like may be done with Gooseberries before they be too ripe,
and these may be taken and made into Sirrup, and kept seven years if you will.

A Drink to put out the Small Pocks.
Make a Posset with Ale and milk, and take away the curd, then take a red
Fernel spout, and boil it well together, then strain it, and put thereto a
quantity of Nutmegs and Treakle, and English Saffron mingled warm together.

QUINZIE.
For the Quinzy.
TAke milk and a flint stone, and make it red hot, and quench it twice in the
milk, and take Vervain and Collombine leaves, and sees it in the milk, and
fine Honey, and so give it to the Patient to drink,

Another.
Take the paring of the threshold and Sallet Oil, and fry them together, and
lay it warm to the Patients throat.

RAINS.
An excellent Medicine for the running of the Rains.
TAke a good handful of the inner rind or bark of the Sloe-bush, the outermost
black skin or rind being cut or scraped away; then put the same into a quart of
the purest and strongest Ale you can get, and let the same boil well from a
quart to a pint, when it is so boiled, take the rind out of the Ale, and let it
stand until it be cold, then divide it into two parts, and drink it two
mornings together, and fast after it every morning two or three hours. Probatum.

For the Raines of the Back.
Take half an ounce of Venice Turpentine, and let it be well washed in Plantane
Water or Rose water (...) and then mix it with fine white Sugar, and make
thereof four or five balls, of which you must eat three in a morning fasting,
and drink White Wine or Rhenish Wine immediately after.

RHEUM.
A good Medicine for the Rheum distilling down the throat, and causing pain in
the Teeth.
Take two handfuls of Hisop, strip it from the stalks, roll it in a brown
paper somewhat wet, then lay it to roast under embers until it be roasted very
soft but not burned, then take it off, and lay it upon a linen cloth, and so
lay it upon the mould of the Head as hot as may be suffered, and so put it
fresh three or four times, letting it lie from the evening to the morning.

For the Rheum distilling into the Eyes or Lungs.
Take of Rosemary, red Sage, sweet Marjerom, of each a handful, of Betony half
a handful, sees them in a quart of Balm Water until it comes to a pint, then
strain it, and make up the Decoction with Sugar; and for the Lungs you must put
in some Hysop, and a few Anniseeds and Licoras before you boil it.

An approved Receipt to be Drunk first and last for a Months space, good for
Rheums and Aches.
Take of Licoras one ounce, of Cassia in the Cane, and Cena Alexandrina of each
four ounces, sweet Fennel seeds one ounce, Madder roots two ounces, of large
Mace ten pence in weight, of Cinnamon fourteen pence in weight, Hermodactilus
three ounces, of Polipodium three ounces, of Coriander seeds three ounces
prepared, two or three yellow Dock roots, use but the rind; a good hand full of
Scabious, a handful of Egrim^ny; All these are to be used thus, the Polipodium
scraped, the Licoras scraped and bruised, the Madder roots scraped and sliced,
the Hermodactilus sliced, Mace bruised in a Mortar with the Cinnamon and
Licoras.

Then put all these Simples together in a bag, with a pound weight to cause it
to sink, but let it not touch the bottom, then tun four gallons of good Ale,
and about a week after you have tunned it, drink thereof first and last and
continue it a Month or six weeks together.

For a Rheum in the Head.
Take the roots of white Beets stamped and strained, and put the juice of them
into a glass, and snuff up thereof into your nose with a quill every morning
twice in a Month, and it will help.

Of Rheum.
Rheum is nothing else but a defluxion that falls from the head into the
throat or breast, which does otherwhiles so stop the pipes of the Lights and
throat that its ready to choke, also these Rheumes fall into the nose, and
cause the pawse.

These Rheums are caused diverse ways; as from gross meats which cause vapors,
or of cold, or from a sharp North wind which blows suddenly after a South
wind.

The cold Rheumes are known by these signs following, as weariness,
heaviness of the whole body, sleepiness, heaviness of the head and forehead,
palenesse with full veins, stuffing of the head or nose, swelling of the eyes,
pain in the throat, motion to vomit, swelling of the Almonds; the Remedy, is to
use dry and warm Herbs, as Sage, Fenn^^, Mints, Rosemary, Marjerom, Time, etc.
and after meat use something to close the stomach, as prepared Coriander,
toasted Bread, etc. and walk in a morning fasting.

Hot Rheum, the signs thereof are these, viz. the face is red, mixed with a
pale or black color, great heat in the nose with itchings, when the mouth and
the throat is full of bitterness and sharpness, and if the head be hot in
feeling, its thus to be cured, he must be let blood, and use this Gargarism.

Take Sirrup of Jaunbes, of Violets and Poppy seeds, of each alike, temper them
with Barley water: Or take Jaunbes, Sebestians, Violets, white Poppy seeds and
Quince kernels decocted in Barley water, use it in the evening after meat, it
is passing good.

Also take Sirrup of Poppy seeds Sirrup of Mulberries, of Roses, and well water
of each three ounces, of Wine of Pomgranats one ounce, make it warm, and gargle
therewith.

RICKETS.
For the Rickets in Children.
Cut the middle gristle of both the ears, and with the blood anoint the belly
and the Navel with a little Cotton wool, then boil Harstongue and Liverwort in
Milk or Broth for their usual Diet.

Another.
Take Bay berries bruised and sweet Marjerom, of each a handful, and boil it in
Beer, with three or four blades of Mace, and so drink it often.

Another.
When the former will not help, take Fennel seeds and Dill seeds, of each
alike, but most of Dill, boil them in Beer and strain it, and sweeten it with
Sugar and drink often. Probatum.

RUPTURE.
A Plaster to keep up the Rupture,
Take Knotgrass and Shepherds Purse, of each one handful, of Comfrey and
Solomon's seal, of each half a handful, beat them into an Oil, and thereof make
your Plaster. This Oil will be preserved all the year in a Gally pot.

A Drink for the Rupture.
Take long Plantane, Yarrow and Knotgrass of the redest color, of each a great
handful, Daisie roots, Dovef^ot, Mousear and Borage, of each a small handful,
wash them very clean, and shred them gross, then take three quarts of milk,
and two quarts of White Wine, set the milk on the fire, and when it does sees
put in the Wine, and as the Curd arises take it away, and being clean, put in
the Herbs, and let them boil gently a quarter of an hour, then take it off and
strain it; and preserve it in Glasses, and let the Patient drink thereof in
the morning fasting, and so in the evening almost a pint at a draught, and do
so one week.

Another.
Take Comfrey roots, Daisie roots, and Pollipodium of the Oak, make them into
fine powder, and drink thereof every morning the weight of six pence the space
of a fortnight, fasting an hour after it.

For the Rupture in Children.
Take Frankincense half an ounce, Aloes a quarter of an ounce, beat it small
and mix it with the white of an egg unto an Ointment, and therewith anoint the
child upon his Rupture morning and evening.

Also take the root of Aron half a pound in powder, and give thereof unto the
child every day for nine days together, one dram with water of Parfoliata, and
tie the Rupture with a Boulster close upon it, and unto it.

RESTORATIVE.
A Restorative.
Take Treakle, Sallet Oil Sugar candied, Cinnamon, powder made with Licoras and
Sugar, of each a penny worth, mingle all these together, and take a quantity
thereof as much as a Nut both morning and evening.

Another.
Take a quantity of Ale or Beer, and put therein over night three or four
sprigs of Rue, and drink thereof evening and morning for a good space, and it
will keep your stomach in good order.

A restoring Medicine for any decay of the inner parts.
Take Live Honey, and put thereto tops of Balm, Cowslip flowers, Borage
flowers, Bugloss flowers, and tops of Gilly flowers, and set this remain in the
Honey the space of a Month, stopping the pot very close that no air come in,
let it stand all the said time in some warm place, either in the. Sun or by the
fire side then distill it in a glass Still, with a little water, and drink
thereof every morning a good draught.

A Restorative made of an Herb called Ros^solis.
This Herb grows in the Meadows in low Marish grounds, and in no other
places; it is of Horseflesh color, and grows very long and flat to the
ground with a main long stalk growing in the midst of six branches springing
out of the roots round about the stalk with a hoar color, and a main breadth
and length; and I do warn you in any wise not to touch this Herb when you
gather it, with your hands, for then the virtue is gone: you must gather it by
the stalk, and so pluck it out of the ground, and put it in a glass or pewter
pot; the leaves of this Herb are full of strength and virtue.

Take of this Herb as much as will fill a pottle pot, but wash it not in any
wise, then take a pottle of Aqua vitae, and put them both together in a large
vessel, and let it stand (being chopped) just three days and three nights, and
on the fourth day strain it through a clean cloth into a glass or pewter pot,
and put to it half a pound of Licoras beaten to fine powder, and half a pound
of Dates, take out the stones of them, and cut them into fine slices, and
mingle all these together, and stop the glass or pewter pot close that no Air
come into it, and drink of it at night to bedward half a spoonful with Ale, and
as much in the morning fasting, for there is not the weakest man or body in the
world that wants nature or strength, or that is cast into any Consumption,
but it will restore them again, and cause them to be strong and lusty, and have
a mavelous hungry stomach, and that very shortly; for he that uses this
Medicine three times shall find a great change, and comfort in it, and as he
feels himself, so he may use it.

It cured one Mr. Stubbs who dwelt in Westminster, and was in a great
Consumption, and very near unto death, being sick continually for eighteen
weeks, and all the Physicians in London had forsaken him; and these things were
sent him to drink from an outlandish man, and in three times drinking of it he
walked upon his feet.

RULES for Health.
A very good Rule for Man's Health, to be used in every Month of the Year,
written 1607.
In January use no Physic but warm clothing, cat warm meats, and drink White
Wine fasting, it is wholesome.

In February forbear Physic and letting of blood, take no cold for fear of
Agues, which are easily gotten.

In March forbear gross feeding, purge by Potions, Bathing or Blood-letting.

In April Physic is good upon occasion, except Nature will remedy of it self.

In May rise early and walk in the fields with a light breakfast, and use
Physic upon occasion.

In June, if Physic, take it early in the morning with small diet; clarified
whey with cold Herbs is very good.

In July use cold herbs, cold meats, no Physic, no extreme exercises, use
Rivers rather then Bathes.

In August use moderate Diet, beware of surfeiting or cold after heat for fear
of Plurisies, sleep not in the day.

In September use Physic if need require, and bathe or bleed, and use fruits
if they be sound and ripe.

In October use hot meats and drinks to nourish blood, and beware of cold for
fear of Agues.

In November use hot meats and drinks and wholesome Wine, provide warm clothing,
and go dry foot.

In December use none but Kitchen Physic and warm clothing, use merry company,
and good Hospitality.

SALVE.
To make an especial good Salve.
TAke Sallet Oil one ounce, fresh and unwasht Butter one ounce, Sheeps Suet one
ounce. Virgin Wax one ounce, Rosen beaten to very fine powder four ounces;
Mastick four drams beaten very fine, Olibanum one ounce beaten to very fine
powder, honey half an ounce, boil them all together till they come to six
ounces, and then put it into a Gally pot, and put thereto some reasonable
quantity of Venice Turpentine.

To make a very good Balsom.
Take bal fa pint of the best Aqua vitae, a quart of the best Wine Vinegar
four, ounces of Storax, Mirrh one ounce, Galbanum one ounce, Gum Dragon one
pound, eight grains of Musk, as much of Ambergreece, three pound of the best
Sallet O^le old and sweet, half a pound of Oy^e of Laurel of the best, Oil of
Sp^ke one ounce, Oil of Hypericon and Oil of Juniper berries, of each two
ounces, Oil of Peter one ounce, half a pound of Virgin Wax, four ounces of red
Saunders, and a quarter of an ounce of Saffron.

An approved Salve for any Green Wound.
Take a pound of Butter, half a pound of Sheeps Suet, a penny worth of Rosen of
Frankincense and Turpentine, of each two penny worth, boil all together a good
while except the Turpentine, for that must be put in afterward, and boil but
little, then strain it into a Basin of fair water, and then strain it out for
your use.

A white Salve to heal a cut or green Wound.
Take a quantity of Mutton Suet, and almost half as much Rosen, shred the Suet
very small, and melt it on a soft fire, and when it is well melted, beat the
Rosen, and put it in, and let it boil together, stirring it continually till it
be cold.

To make an excellent Salve.
Take the roots of Marsh Mallows, wash and pick them clean, then slit them and
take out the inner part of the pith, and cast it away, and take the outer part
that is fair and white, and cut them into small pieces, bruise them in a
Mortar, and take of them half a pound, and put it in a new earthen pan, and
then put thereto Linseed and Fenicreek of each two ounces a little bruised in a
Mortar, then take Malmesey and White Wine of each a pint, and stir all these
together, and let them infuse two or three days, then set them on a soft fire,
and stir it well till it wax thick and like a skum, then take it off, and
strain it through a new canvass: and thus have you ready the Mustellage for
Plaster; T^en take fine Oil of Roses a quart, and wash it well with White Wine
and Rose water, then take the Oil clean from the water and Wine, and set it on
the fire in a brass pan always stirring it, and put thereto Littarge of Gold
and Silver, of each eight ounces, Cerus six ounces, red Coral, Bole Armoniack,
and Sanguis Draconis, of each two ounces, and let them be finely powdered and
searsed, then put them into the Oil over the fire always stirring it, and let
not the fire be too big for burning of the stuff, and when it begins to wax
thick, put in ten ounces of the aforesaid Mustellage by a little at ounce, or
else it will boil over the pan, and when it is boiled enough you shall perceive
by the hardness or softness of it, dropping a little of it on a sawcer or
cold stone; then take it off, and when it is cold, make them in Rolls, and lap
them in parchment, and keep them for your use. This Plainter resolves humors
in swollen legs.

To make a Salve for all manner of Wounds.
Take the juice of Smallage and Plantane, of each alike, honey and the white of
an egg alike, put Wheat flower to them, and stir them till they be thick, and
let it come to no fire at all, and so lay it to the Sore, and by Gods grace it
will heal it.

A good Salve for green Wounds or old Sores.
Take half a pound of Sheeps Suet, as much Barrowes grease, as much Wax, as
much Rosen, and a pint of Sallet Oil, set them all on a soft fire and when they
be melted, put in the Rosen finely beaten, boil them all together and skim
them, then put in two pennyworth of Verdigrease, and last of all two ounces of
Turpentine, and so let them boil a walm or two more, then take it up and keep
it for your use; if it be an old Sore, put four pennyworth of Verdigrease, and
three ounces of Turpentine,

SCIATICA.
For the Sciatica.
First take as fat a Goose as you can get, and when she is ready dressed, then
take a couple of the fattest young sucking Cats you can get, and flea them, and
cut them into gobbets, and put them in the belly of the Goose, and so roast it
as long as it will drop, then take the liquor and anoint the place pained with
it, and bathe it before the fire as hot as you can suffer it, and dip a brown
paper therein, and lay it hot to the place with warm clothes to keep it fast
to all night. Do thus for the space of three or four nights together.

For the cold Sciatica orbenumnesse of the Thighs or Legs.
Take a pint of Aqua vitae, a pint of Wine Vinegar, a quarter of a pound of Oil
of Bays, the juice of four or five handfuls of Sage, a Sawcer full of good
Mustard, the Gall of an Ox bladder, and chafe them in the bladder, an hour or
more, that the Oil may be well mingled with the rest, and anoint the place
therewith against a good fire, and let the Patient go warm into bed and sweat.
Probatum.

A Sovereign Medicine for the Sciatica.
Take half a pint of Aqua vitae, half a pint of White Wine Vinegar, and one
Ox Gall, almost a handful of Bay salt, and a handful of the tops of Rosemary,
and shred them very small, and put them in a little Pipkin all together, and
let it be ready to boil up, and then take it off, and chafe the place pained
with it, with your hand so long as the Patient shall be able to endure it, and
do it very warm against the fire, and then take Nerve Oil, and anno^^^ it and
then take a Scarlet cloth, and bind it up or cover it warm, and this do morning
and evening.

CERECLOTH.
To make a Cerecloth.
Take Virgin Wax, Deers Suet, Rosen, Pitch, and Barrowes grease, of each alike,
and boil them together until they be half consumed, then do it abroad upon a
linen cloth somewhat thin, and lay it to the place grieved as hot as may be
suffered.

A singular Cereeloth for all Bruises, Aches and Wounds whatsoever.
Take a pint of Sallet Oil of the best you can get, and half a pound of red
Lead, and as much Rosen as a Walnut, boil all together upon a soft fire till it
be somewhat black, stirring it continually, and when it is cold roll it up,
and keep it for your use. You may keep it seven years, and it will be exceeding
good if you keep it from the hear of the fire. Probatum.

To make a Cerecloth for an Ache.
Take Olibanum and Sallet Oil with Wax, Rosen and Stone Pitch, and boil them
together.

A Cerecloth for all Members that be out of Joint-or any consuming member and
grieved with cold moistness that consumes, it brings the Member again to his
natural place.
Take six ounces of Wax, three ounces of Rosen, two ounces of Mastick,
Armoniacum, Galbanum and Olibanum of each one ounce, of Fenicreek, Wormwood,
Camomile and Cummin, of each of these in powder one ounce, Oil of Castorum and
Oil of Camomile flower: of each one ounce, of Vinegar five ounces; melt the
Rosen, and Wax, and the Oils together, and then put in the Galbanum and
Armoniack steeped in Vinegar and strained, and so put in the powder last of
all, stirring it together, and thereof make your Cerecloth.

To make a good Cerecloth.
Take one pound of Galbanum finely beaten to powder and searsed, as much fine
Rosen beaten and searsed, as much Pitch, of Sheeps Suet four ounces, of Cummin
two ounces, Labdanum one ounce, of Cloves one ounce, of Mace one ounce, of
Saffron half an ounce.

SORE.
For a new cut or Sore.
Take Brimstone and scrape it fine and mingle it with May butter, and anoint a
Tent or a little lint thoroughly, and put it into the Sore or Cut, and it
helps.

To dry up and to heal a Sore.
Take the burned Ashes of a Rhadish and strew it upon the Sore, and it will dry
and heal.

To break a Sore that is swollen.
Take Spurge and shred it small, and boil it in Whey, and thicken it with
Oatmeal, and lay it warm to the Sore, it is also good for a woman's breast.

Also for the breaking of a Sore or Boil, take Coriander seeds made into fi^e
powder, and mix it with Honey, and this being implaistered upon a Boil or a
Carbunkle will in a short time destroy it. Or take a little of a Calves curd.

STONE.
A Water for the Stone.
Take Ashen Keys, Stitchwort, Saxifrage, Mother-time, Broom flowers, Hawes,
Hips, Bramble leaves, Pollipodium of the Oak, Pellitory on the wall, put all
these together of each alike, and Still them, then to every pottle of water put
half a pound of Anniseeds, and so let them stand four and twenty hours, then
put them into the Still again, and still them all together, then drink of it as
you need, and if it happen that the gravel come too fast and will not avoid,
then still Ivy berries and Parsley, and drink two spoonfuls of it, and it will
avoid the stone if it be never so great.

A present Remedy to avoid the Stone.
Take a handful of Pellitory on the wall, a handful of Parsley, and a handful
of Parsley seeds a little bruised, boil these things in a quart of White Wine
until a third part be wasted, then strain it, and wring into it the juice of a
Lemmon or two, then with this Wine and some milk make a Posset as clear as you
can, and drink thereof a good draught twice or thrice a day, but not with meat,
nor when the stomach is empty from meat.

When the Stone is avoided and the pain ceased, to preserve you from the like
again, make a Broth, and break fast three days every week thus.
Take a Chicken or a piece of Veal, three young Mallows, Marsh Mallows are the
best if you know them, one handful of Violet leaves, or of Mercury, or of
Pellitory of the wall, one handful of Apothecary Barley scalded, half a handful
of great Raisons stoned, boil these in water until the meat be enough, then
take of this broth, without thickning or seasoning with a little Sugar, three
hours before dinner.

For the Stone, and to provoke Urine.
Take a quantity of Normandy glass being clean without rust or canker, burn it
in the fire a good space, then beat it in a Mortar, then take an old Cambrick
cloth, and sift it very fine, and give the Patient a spoonful or two of the
same powder to drink in Malmesey, being pained, and it will help by Gods grace.
Probatum.

An approved Medicine for the Stone.
Take a gallon of new milk from the Cow that is all red, and thereinto put one
handful of Pellitory of the wall, wild Time, Saxifrage and Parsley, of each a
handful, two or three Rhadish roots sliced, steep all these in milk one night
together, and in the morning distill them with a moderate fire, then take of
that Water six spoonfuls, and six spoonfuls of Rhenish or White Wine, and a
little Sugar, and some slices of Nutmegs, make it lukewarm, and drink it
fasting, and fast after it three hours, using temperate exercises. Take this
two or three days together every fortnight or oftener if need require. The best
time to distill this Water is toward the end of May.

For the Stone.
Take two or three unset Leeks, and stamp them, and strain them, and drink it
in Malmesey in the morning, strain as much as the Patient will drink at twice;
after this, to bedward take some Sack and Sallet Oil, and beat it, and drink
it hot, that will make the Stone slide.

A present Remedy for the Stone in the back or Bladder.
Take Saxifrage, Philippendula, Peniroyal and Parsley seeds, and stamp them
together, and strain them into a clean Vessel, and let the Patient drink
thereof with racked Rhenish Wine. Probatum.

A Medicine for the Stone.
Take Ivy berries, and stamp them well, and put it is White Wine, and give the
Patient to drink thereof, and let the Patient make Water through a cloth, and
you shall see the avoiding of Stones and Gravel.

For the Stone.
Take Foxes blood and Hares blood of both alike quantity, and dry them in an
Oven, then beat it to powder, and sees it in a little White Wine, and drink it
as warm as you can suffer it.

To make a Glister for the Stone.
Take a good handful of Mallows, as much of Camomile, and as much Pellitory of
the wall, three or four crops of Herb-grace, a quantity of Beets, and a
quantity o Mercury, one ounce of Coriander seeds, one ounce of Cummin seeds,
bruise the seeds and sees them and the Herbs all together in a pottle of
running water, and let it sees till half be consumed, then strain it, and
take three spoonfuls of Sallet Oil, and three spoonfuls of Honey, and half a
handful of Bay salt bruised, so put it into a Glister pipe and use it.

For the Stone.
Take the inner bark of Elder, and sees it in Beer or Ale til it have a good
strength of the Elder, then strain it, and drink it morning and evening, and it
will break the Stone.

A very good drink for the Stone.
Take a pint of White Wine, and half a pint of Ale, and make thereof with milk
a pottle of posset drink, and take away the curd very clean, and boil in it two
or three roots of Mallows, Marsh Mallows are the best, and some Licoras till
a quarter be boiled away, then drink half in the morning, and the rest at night.

For the Stone or strongurion.
Take half an ounce of Anniseeds, a quarter of an ounce of Licoras, Calamus
Aromaticus, French Gallingal, Mirrh, Gum Arebeck, Gum Traganthum, Diatria
Papira, or Piperion, Pine Apple kernels, white Orris roots, Storax, Benjamin,
Cipresse and Labdanum, of each a small quantity, then beat them all together,
take also half an ounce of large Mace, white Archangel, Mead Parsley and Garden
Parsley, Camomile, Mallows, Fennel and Spiere Mint, of each half a handful,
then take three quarts of White Wine, and put them together in a brass pot or
a Posnet, and boil them a pretty while, then take it off, and strain it through
a cloth, and put it in earthen vessels, and keep it cool it will drink the
better, and take six spoonfuls morning and evening for three days together
when you find your self ill, and do not foreslow the taking of it. Probatum.

A Plaster to apply to the side for the Stone.
Take Mallows, Herb grace, Pellitory of the wall, the green tops of Fennel and
Camomile, of each two handfuls, sees them in water till they be tender, then
press out the water from them, then stamp them very small, and put in Oil of
Lillies, Oil of Camomile, Oil of Dill, Oil of sweet Almonds, and Oil of
Scorpions, of each one ounce, let them boil on a Chafingdish and coals a good
while, then put to it as much wheat flower as will make it thick like a
Plaster, spread it between two cloths, and apply it to the Patients side as
hot as may be endured.

For the Stone.
Take the weight of a French Crown of Pulvis Hollandi, drink it in a quantity
of White Wine, stirring it well in the cup that it may not curd, drink it in
the morning betimes, or at what time the Patient pleases keeping himself warm
in his chamber all that day, for it will give him three or four stools, and
drink some warm broth after it, and use this once a Month.

More belonging to the former Medicine.
Take once a week after the former, eight spoonfuls of Deal Wine, and eight
spoon fuls distilled from the berry of the Hawes, make it sweet with Sugar, and
slice half a Lemmon into it, and some sliced Ginger.

For the Stone in the Kidneyes.
There is great pain in the raines of the back, which draws downwards;
stirring increases the pain, they are much inclined to vomiting, the body is
bound, Urine raw and watrish, often provoking to piss, but not without pain,
the Urine avoids with gravel, sand and slime, yea sometimes mixed with blood.

To know it from the Chollick, first its not so sharp as the pain of the
Chollick.

Secondly, The Chollick does appear beneath on the right side, and stretches
from thence upwards toward the left side, but the pain of the Kidneyes begins
above, and stretches downwards, and a little more toward the back.

Thirdly, the pain is most of the Kidneyes fasting, the Chollick otherwise. All
Saxifrage and other things good for the Stone, are good for the Kidneys, but
not for the Chollick.

Lastly, there is found in the Urine gravel or sand, and not in the Cholick or
pain of the guts.

To restrain the growing of the Stone or Gravel.
Take Turbith one dram and an half, Hermodactilus one dram, Diagridy six
grains, Salt of India two grains, Ginger half a scruple, Annis and Mastick, of
each three grains, Sugar Pellets one ounce, white Sugar half an ounce, steep
them together in three ounces of Water of Smallage or Maidenhair all night, and
wring it out well, and drink it; if the matter be in the stomach, then take a
Vomit that it run not toward the Rains. This Vomit may be made of reddish
Orange seeds, the middlemost rind of Elder and Nux Vomica.

SIRRUP.
To make a Sirrup for one that is short winded.
Take a good handful of Hisop a handful of Horehound, and sees them in a quart
of running water to a pint, then strain it through a fair cloth, and put in
Sugar to make it pleasant. Use this morning and evening with a Licoras stick
some three spoonfuls at a time.

To make Sirrup of Roses.
Your liquor must be ready to sees, then put therein as many Roses as will be
well steeped in the same water, and cover it close, and when the Roses be
thoroughly white, then strain it, and set it on the fire again, and so you must
use it thirteen times, and to every pint of your water or liquor you must put
into it a pound of Sugar, and let it stand together for the space of one night
steeping, and skim it clean, and sees it over a quick fire a quarter of an
hour, then take the whites of eggs, and beat them well together, then take the
pot off the fire, and put into it the whites of your eggs, and then set it on
the fire again, and let it sees a good space, then let it run through a Jelly
bag, til it will stand still upon your nayl.

To make a comfortable Sirrup.
Take a handful of Egrimony, and sees it in a pint of Water till half be
confumed, then take out the Egrimony, and put in a good handful of Currants, and
sees them till they be ready to break, then strain them, and make a Sirrup of
them, then set it on a chafingdish and coals, and put thereto a little white
Saunders, and drink it either hot or cold.

Sirrup of Sugar candied.
Take S^gar candied, and put it into a clear bladder, and tie it, but so as it
may have some vent, then put it into a basin of water, so that the water come
not over the top of the bladder, and cover it with a pewter dish, and let it
stand all night, and in the morning take of it with a Licoras stick.

Doctor Deodates Scorbuttical Sirrup.
Take of the juice of Garden Scurvigrass, Brooklimes and Watercresses, of each
six ounces, and after it has stood till it be clear, take sixteen ounces of
the clearest, and of the juice of Oranges and Lemmons, of each four ounces,
make it to a clear Sirrup with so much fine Sugar as will serve the turn.

STRAIN.
For a Strain.
Take of Elland leaves, Sage, Fennel, Fetherfew and Mallows, of each a
handful, and sees them in thick milk till the milk be almost consumed, and
then lay it to the place very warm.

SUPPOSITORY.
To make Suppositories for such as be bound and costive.
Take English Honey, white Soap and some Salt mixed together, and fried, then
make a roll or peg thereof, and put it in the Fundament, it will make the
Patient go to stool within an hour and a half, for so long or until it work, he
must keep it in his body.

Another.
Take a long piece of Coperas, being white, and smooth it, and anoint it with
some butter, and so minister it to the Patient, and let him keep it in his body
an hour and half, if it work not before, and he shall find great ease and help^
These kind of Suppositories will serve twice or thrice at the least.

SINEWS.
A good Medicine for Sinews that be shortened or shrunk.
Take the head of a black Sheep, Camomile, Barley, leaves of Sage, of each one
handful, and bray them together in a Mortar, and then boil them all together
till they be well sodden, then let it stand to cool, and then draw it through a
Strainer, and lay it on the place grieved, and by Gods grace it shall soon
amend.

For shrinking of Sinews.
Take Hogs dung and half a pound of Oil of Roses, sees it in a new earthen
pot, and apply it as hot as you can endure it.

The Composition of a Cerot to mollify Sinews an^^ Joints that have been long
displaced.
Take the leaves of Mallows clean picked from the stalks eight handfuls, of
Gentian three handfuls, of Archangel one handful, then take of Oil Olive a
pint, of Oil of Roses, Oil of Camomile and Oil of Dill, of each half a pint,
boil all together, and in boiling of them, strew on one ounce of Anniseeds, and
one ounce of grains beaten into fine powder, and when they be well sodden,
beat them in a Mortar with yolks of eggs.

For a Sinew that is strained.
Take Groundsel, Brooklime, Fitch, Bruisewort, Nepe, Petty Morral and Hemlock
of each alike, stamp them, and boil them in a pan over the fire and lay it to
the Sore as hot as the Patient may suffer it, and it will case the aching and
swelling, and heal it in a little space.

For Sinews that be shrunken or grown together.
Take the water of shell Snailes and Shoomakers Oil, of each alike, and temper
them well together, then take new Snailes and sees them in running water, and
gather off the Oil and put it to the other Oil; and temper them well together.

STOMACH.
For the pain in the Stomach.
Take Mackerel Mints two handfuls, and of sour leaven one handful and an half,
stamp them very small, and put to it a good quantity of Mace beaten to fine
powder, and so much Wine Vinegar as shall incorporate all into a liquid paste,
which you must spread upon a linen cloth; apply it warm to the Stomach twice a
day.

For heat in the Stomach.
Take a pint of stale Ale, and half a pint of Endive Water, and put thereto as
much Sugar as will make it sweet, then set it on the fire, and skim it clean,
then take a piece of a white loaf as much as an apple, the crust taken away,
and three or four whole Mace, then let it sees one walm after, and then take
and drink it duke warm (the bread taken away) whenever you feel the heat in
your stomach.

To make one have a stomach to his meat.
Sees Centory in fair water, and let the Patient drink it lukewarm fasting,
three days, each day three spoonfuls, it purifieth the stomach and breast also.

A good Powder to digest well.
Take Centory and Pellitory of Spain, Anniseeds, Licoras, Grains of Paradise,
Ginger and Cinnamon, of each alike, beaten and searsed into fine powder, and
drink thereof morning and evening half a spoonful in Wine or Ale.

To make Hipocras for a weak Stomach.
Take a pint of Aqua vitae, and put it in a glass, then take two ounces of
Cinnamon and one ounce of Ginger, of Cloves and of Grains, of each two penny
worth, of Nutmegs one Penny worth, beat them all together, into gross powder,
and put them all into the glass to the Aqua vitae, and shake it very often for
nine days together, and then drink it with Wine or Ale, half a spoonful or a
quarter with half a pint of Ale.

To cleanse the Stomach from rotten Phlegm and Melancholy.
Drink the seeds of Hollioaks.

Also the cods and leaves of Cene in powder, one dram taken with broth of a
Chicken or Mutton, does purge phlegm and Melancholy.

For a cold and stopping in the Stomach.
Take one handful of sweet Marjerom, a few Marigold flowers, a penny worth of
Caraway Comfits, a penny worth of Parsley seeds, two penny worth of Dates, a
half penny worth of Raisons of the Sun, boil all these in a quart of White Wine
till half be boiled away, then put in two ounces of brown Sugar candied, and a
little Mithridate.

SHINGLES.
For the Shingles.
Take the gteen leas of Colts foot stamped and mingled with Honey and apply it,
and it will help.

SPOTS.
To cleanse the skin from allscars and spots.
Make balls of a little bigness of the juice of the inner parts of a Pumphin
and bean flower, dry them in the shadow and wash therewith before the fire.

SWELLING.
For a Swelling.
Take two handfuls of Wheaten meal, and a pint of Cow milk, and a handful of
Rue, and shred it small with a spoonful of fresh grease, and boil them all
together till they be thick, then lay it on the swelling.

For Swelling in the Legs.
Take a handful of Archangel, a handful of red Fennel, and two handfuls of
Mallows, and a handful of Brooklimes, then sees all these Herbs together in a
gallon of running water to a pottle, then bathe the legs with the water hot,
and lay the Herbs on.

For all Swellings and Wrenchings, etc.
Take a pint of Milk, Oatmeal, dried Rose leaves, Mellilot flowers, of each a
handful, and a little Deers Suet, and sees it till it be as thick as pap, then
lay it to the hurt as hot as may be suffered:

For swelling in the Legs.
Take Wormwood, Parsley, Camomile, Cummin and Ash rods, of every one a handful,
and sees them in the Patients Urine, and make a plaster, and apyly it.

For swelling of Sinews.
Take Smallage, Lovage, Groundsel, Brooklime, Seng^een and Bruisewort, stamp
them, and put thereto a little wheaten bran, Sheeps Tallow, and some Barrowes
grease, fry them well together and make a Plaster thereof, and lay it to the
place grieved.

For Swellings or Bruises.
Take milk, wheaten meal, red Roses and Camomile, of each a handful, sees all
these together until they be thick, then spread it on a cloth, and lay it to
till it heal the Patient.

For swelling in the Joints.
Take Groundsel, Daisies, Brooklime, Chickweed, Petty Moral, Herb Bennet, take
of each of these alike, and fry them with Sheeps Suet, and put thereto crumbs
of sour wheat bread, and so bind it to with a cloth warm.

For any Swelling that look^th red, or for the Ague fallen into any part of the
Body.
Take Houndstongue, Camomile, Daisie leaves and roots, Plantane leaves and
roots, and Adderstongue, of each a handful, pick them clean, but wash them not,
chop them small and stamp them, then take a pound of fresh butter, of Sheeps
Suet half a pound, set them over the fire, and so let them boil until it look
green, then strain it out, and keep it in an earthen vessel to use all the
year.

For a Swelling.
Take three handfuls of Mallows, and a pottle of running water, and boil the
water and Mallows together, then bath the swelling therewith a good while then
take a good quantity of Suet of the Kidney of a fat Sheep chopped, and so boil
that together with the Herbs again, and being hot, lay it on a red piece of
cloth all night, and the next morning renew it, and so from time to time till
it be assuaged.

Another.
Take two quarts of Barley, and two gallons of running water, a pound of Boars
grease, four new laid eggs a handful of Bay salt, of the tops of Rue, Sage,
Camomile, Rosemary, of each a handful, a quart of new Barm, chop all the Herbs
together, then let it boil to two quarts, and when it is boiled sufficiently,
then stop it close until it be in good case to lay to the place pained on a
piece of new red cloth, and renew it as occasion shall require.

It is called by the name of the Jews Bath, and is an excellent thing for this
purpose.

For a white Swelling.
Take Woodbind flowers, Water, and Wheat flower, and make thereof a thin paste,
first anoint the Swelling with Oil of Linseed, then lay on a plaster of paste.

FALLING SICKNESS.
Diverse and sundry Remedies for the Falling Sickness.
Take powder of Hawthorne, and drink it with Wine, it heals the Falling Evil.

The brains of a Fox unto Infants, cures this Disease.

Also Powder made of Opoponax, Castorum, Antimonium and Dragons is a most
Sovereign Medicine.

The like virtue has Antimonium alone with Castorum.

Or Antimonium alone received with water.

The ashes of a dead man's skull drunk is wonderful good.

Five leaved grass drunk three and thirty times together, does perfectly heal
this Disease.

The red stone found in a Swallow heals the falling Evil.

It has been proved that Mistletow drunk heals this Disease.

Piony tied about the Patients neck keeps him from falling.

Also cut a Frog through the midst of the back with a knife, and take the
liver, and fold it in a Colewort leaf, and burn it in a new earthen pot well
stopped, and give the ashes thereof unto the Patient in his sickness to drink
with good Wine, and if he be not healed at once, do so by another Frog or more,
and without all doubt it will heal him.

A Rhadish stamped and bound to the brains will heal one of this Disease.

The blood or gall of a Lamb drunk with Wine cures it.

The stone that is found in a Hearts head stamped and given to the sick party
does the like.

The brains of a Camel mixed with Oil of Roses, wherewith anoint the Patient
before and behind over all his body does heal it, which is a wonderful
experiment, and true.

The dung of a Peacock taken in drink does the same also.

Take Mares piss new made, and heat it, and let the party grieved drink thereof
as warm as he may, this will help by Gods grace with three or four (...)
^aking. Probatum.

A good Medicine for the Falling Sickness.
Take young Ravens when they be fledged before they touch any ground, flea the
skin and feathers off clean, and pull out all the guts and entrels, and wipe it
very clean, and then put it into an Oven, and dry it that you make powder
thereof, then beat flesh and bones together very fine, and searse it, and take
a quantity as you think good, and let the Patient drink it with Ale or Wine
when the Fit begins, and by Gods grace it will help. Probatum.

STITCH.
For the Stitch in the side.
Take Camomile, Spieremint, Wormwood and Southernwood, of each a handful, then
put a few cold ashes in the bottom of a pewter dish, and upon them hot embers,
then clap the dish, Herbs and all over with a linen cloth, and lay to the side
somewhat higher then the pain is, and it will drive away the pain downwards.

For the Stitch of the Stomach or Heart.
Take young Broom of one years growth, distill it, and drink it, and it will
help the Stitch; and if it be in such time of the year that you cannot get the
water, then take Broom and make powder thereof, and drink it in Ale or Beer.

For all manner of Stitches in any part of the Body.
Take Mousear and She Holm, Stitchwort and Spieremint, of each alike, and dry
them upon a tile, and make powder of them, and drink it with Ale or Beer.

Another.
Take some wool, and baste it on a piece of linen cloth, then take Oil of
Camomile, and warm it, and sprinkle it thereon, and lay to the pained place,
being first anointed with the Oil.

SWEAT.
To cool a Sweat withal.
Take a Chicken and boil it in fair running water, then take Burnet, Burrage,
Marigold leaves, Parsley and Sorrel, of each a handful, then boil all these
together with a little salt, then take the yolk of a new laid egg, and put to
half a pint of the broth, and drink it hot.

To abate too much sweating.
Take Balm, Burrage and Rosemary, of each alike, and steep it four and twenty
hours or more in Ale or Beer, and drink thereof evening and morning.

Also the water of the Decoction of Strawberries is good to be drunk for
overmuch heat or sweating.

SLEEP.
To make one sleep.
Take a handful of Betony, a handful of Rosemary, and a handful of red Rose
leaves, brown bread crumbs, two spoonfuls of woman's milk, two spoonfuls of
Rosewater, a spoonful of Vinegar, and boil all them together, and lay it to the
temples of the Head.

Another.
Take an Onion and roast it soft, and take Camomile and shred it, and lay it
upon the Onion, and so bind it upon the nape of the neck.

A good Medicine to make one sleep.
Take a pint of Milk and sees it, and let it cool, then take the Cream thereof
and the white of an egg, and a little woman's milk, and a little Rosewater,
beat them all together, and spread them on a cloth, and so lay it to the
forehead.

A Medicine of Doctor Cranmers to bring sleep.
Take twenty or thirty Almonds or more, and beat them with a spoonful of Poppy
seed that is white, then take two handfuls of white Poppy leaves, and as much
of Lettice leaves, and sees them from a quart to a pint, and with that water
strain the Almonds to make Almond milk to drink, and let them that cannot
sleep, drink of it last to bedward.

For one that cannot sleep in sickness, but raves.
Take the juice of Houseleek, a good quantity, as much woman's milk, and as much
Rose vinegar or else Rose Water and vinegar, and mix them well together, and
then wet flax in it milk warm, and bind it to the temples of the Patient, and
also wet flax therein, and make round together like a ball, and bind it in the
palms of the hands, and it will give great ease.

Another to make one steep.
Take the white of a new laid egg, and beat it with a spoon until it comes to
an Oil, then let it stand a while, and take the froth of it from the Oil, and
put thereto Rose Water, Vinegar and woman's milk, and lay it to the Patients
forehead in a linen cloth, and when it is dry lay on more. Probatum.

Another for one that cannot sleep.
Take Oil of Roses, and put thereto a little good Vinegar, and heat them well
together, and put it on a Cloth, and bind it to the forehead, it is a
comfortable Remedy.

TASTE.
Loss of Taste.
THe signs of the Humor that causes this Infirmity; viz. The Blood yeildeth
a sweet taste: Phlegm also somewhat sweetish with much spettle, humidity of
the head, of the tongue, and of the whole body. Choler causes bitterness,
saltness, and a salt phlegm; if no taste, then is the mouth of the stomach
troubled with many superfluous humors; If Melancholy, then is the taste tart.
There may also be sure signs taken from the tongue; if it be white, its not
only a sign of cold, but also that the stomach, head and liver are full of
phlegm; if red, then the malady is of blood and hot Rheumes; yellowness is a
sign that choler is the cause of all; if a blackish lead color, it signifies
Melancholy, unless in hot Fevers, then must the Patient be dyeted according
to the grief.

TEETH.
For Tooth ache.
Take running water, and put into it a Rosemary branch, a branch of Sage, and a
branch of Rue, and let it lie three or four hours, and then wash your mouth
with the water.

For a swelling in the cheek or Tooth ache, and good for the Stomach.
Take a handful of Bay salt, a quantity of Cloves, Mace and Nutmegs, and put it
in a bag and warm it good and hot, and lay it to the place grieved.

A Powder to keep Teeth clean and without Ache.
Take dry Sage, Allom, Pepper and Bay Salt, of each a like weight, and make all
these in powder, and preserve it in a box, and take a Sage leaf with the
Powder, and rub your gums with it when you please.

A Medicine for the Tooth ache.
Take Fetherfew, and stamp it, and strain it, and drop a drop or two into the
contrary ear to the pain, and then lie still a half hour after.

To make a Tooth fall out.
Take the roots of Marigolds, and put it in thy mouth on that Tooth that aketh.

For any Swelling that comes by Tooth ache.
Take a quantity of Sage and Woodbind leaves, and sees them very tender in
White Wine and a little Honey, then wash the inside of your mouth with the
water thereof, and lay the Herbs to the outside of the grief very warm.

For the Tooth ache.
Take every night a little salt, and let it malt in your mouth, and when it is
melted, gargarise it well in your mouth, then spit out, then take five leaves
of Rosemary, and chew it well, and hold it to your teeth.

A hollow Tooth cured for ever.
Lint shaved and dipped in Oil of Camphire, then roll it in Bole Armoniack, and
burnt Allom, being beat very small, and make it into balls like paste and stop
the hollow tooth, and lay lint thereon, and let it remain in the Tooth four our
five hours, then take it out, and wash the Tooth: cured for ever.

To keep Teeth from rotting.
Take white salt, and in the morning fasting hold it under your tongue till it
do turn to water, and with that water wash your Teeth.

To make the Teeth white.
Take one drop of the Oil of Vitriol, and wet the Teeth with it, and rub them
afterward with a course cloth, although this Medicine be strange, yet fear it
not.

Of the Teeth.
Some men have thirty two Teeth, some eight and twenty, and some have thirty.

The Physicians write, that the foremost Teeth are engendered of pure and
superfluous moisture of the Scull, the midst of a reasonable good humor, and
the hindmost of a gross humidity.

All Imposthumes or Corruption of the Gums or Teeth, if there be much blood and
moisture with it, then that part is to be purged with yellow Marabus and sour
Dates according to his ability, and wash the mouth with this water, viz. Take
blossoms or pills of Pomgranats, Acorn cups and Roses, of each one ounce, and
boil them in water, and wash the mouth with Vinegar and Allome.

For loose Teeth.
The cause is blows, thrusts, defluctions that fall out of the head into the
Teeth, which loosen their roots, or of great drowth after long sickness, the
corruption of the mouth and teeth may also cause the same.

The Remedy is, Take half an ounce of Allome, Rose buds half an ounce, Bedegar
Red Wine one pint, boil them unto the one half, and take this into your mouth
warm often, and hold it a good while therein, for it is very good.

Also to wash the mouth often with Rosemary and Wine is very good.

TYMPANY.
For the Tympany in a Woman.
Take a handful of the blossoms of the Marygold that is yellow, stamp it and
strain it, and give the juice thereof to the sick in a draught of Ale, and
drink the same fasting.

An Ointment for the same.
Take the herbs, stalks and leaves of the said Marigolds chopped small, and fry
them Goose grease, take the liquor that comes of the frying of the herbs, and
anoint the Patient all over the belly, and in short time the Disease will
vanish away.

A Plaster for the same.
Then take the Herbs so fried, and lay on a Plaster of black wool, and bind it
over all the belly, which will help likewise.

The like for a Man.
Take the Marigold that has black grounds, and use them for a man, as the
other in all respects.

TETTER.
A good Medicine to kill a Tetter.
Take Lemmons and distill them rinds and all, and with the water thereof wash
the Tetter, and sometimes anoint it with the juice of Ribwort.

TONGUE.
For a sore Tongue.
Sees five leaved grass in Vinegar, and gargarise therewith to help a sore
mouth, tongue or throat.

Of the Tongue.
The swelling of the Tongue is of blood or of phlegm that falls out of the
head:

If it be of a cold phlegm, the tongue and face is always white, and the
mouth full of moisture, then rub the tongue with Sirrup or Wine of Pomgranats,
and Dates boiled in sweet Wine, of each alike, and purge the Head, and use
Barley water boiled with Pruines, Barberries, Cinnamon, use this as a cooler.
Also preserved Raspices, or any thing made of them is to be used.

THIRST.
To abate excessive thirst.
Take a pottle of fair water, Endive, Succory, Violet leaves and Borage, of
each a handful, Lillies half a handful, two Fennel roots, two Parsley roots,
and sees them from a pottle to a quart, and put a little Sugar to it, and
drink it as you shall see cause.

Also sees the leaves of Rosemary in well water, and drink it cold with a
little of a Pomgranat.

Also hold Purslain under the tongue.

VEINS.
To knit Veins.
TAke Frankincense one pound, Mastick one ounce, Bole Armoniack two ounces,
beat all into fine powder, and mingle it with the white of an egg, then spread
it on a linen cloth, and apply it.

To mollify Veins that be dry and stiff.
Take Oil of Camomile, and Oil of Linseed, and mingle it with Capons grease
finely tried, mix them together, and this will open the Veins.

For straining of a Vein.
Take half an ounce of Coral and beat it fine, and drink it in red Wine morning
and evening.

For a broken Vain in the Stomach to knit it, or for any inward bleeding and
casting of blood, etc.
Take the leaves of Plantane, Shepherds Pouch, of each one handful, of
Hartshorn half a handful, of Nettles and Mints, of each of them as much as you
can hold betwixt two fingers of Barley, (the outer skin taken off,) three
spoonfuls, of Yarrow half a handful, and one quarter of an ounce of Cinnamon,
boil all these in two quarts of fair water till half be consumed, then strain
it, and put to the liquor strained as much Sugar as will make it sweet: let it
boil a little again, then put thereto as much White Wine Vinegar as will make
it sharp, and let the Patient take three or four spoonfuls ever in time of
thirst; boil an equal quantity with a black Hen drawn and washed, but not
pulled, and then put an equal quantity of the broth and the juice of Mutton
half roasted, and boil them between two dishes, until there remain no taste of
rawness. And if the Patient cast any more, presently take two spoonfuls of the
juice of Mints, one spoonful of White Wine Vinegar, and as much sour leaven as
two Walnuts, boil them to the consumption of the juices; then make thereof a
slat cake, and strew upon it fine powder of Nutmegs, and apply it hot to the
breast, and give the Patient two spoonfuls of the Cordial following about three
of the Clock, and between nine and ten at night, and at eight in the morning,
and fast one hour and an half before, and two hours after at the least. And
give a Suppository made with two Positives of Honey, and one of falt, every
day, if the Patient cannot go to stool.

Diacatholicon half an ounce, Consectionum de Hameck half an ounce, comixt in
a penny pot of White Wine.

Lotian water good for a heat.

A little Cinnamon and Ginger and Venice Turpentine made into Pills, and take
three every morning.

Ising-glasse and Saffron boiled in a red Cowes milk, and drunk three times for
the same.

Churchyard worms washed and sliced, dried and drunk in Beer five several
times or mornings, is good for a sore throat, as the Kings Evil, etc.

VOMIT.
A Vomit for the Green Sickness.
Take one handful of Groundsel, and one ounce of Currants, boil them in a quart
of Ale, until it come to the quantity of a draught, then strain it, and drink
it blood-warm, and fast two hours after it, and when the Patient has once
vomited, drink Posset Ale between every Vomit until it cease.

To stay Vomiting.
Take Mint Water and Carduus Benedictus, of each a pint, bruise two Nutmegs,
and let them boil to a pint, and make it sweet with Sugar, and drink it first
and last.

Another.
Take Cloves, and boil them in fair water or beer, and put Sugar thereto, and
drink it.

A Vomit.
Take an ounce of Green Ginger, as much of Treakle, and as much of Malmsey, put
these together, and drink them blood warm.

UFULA.
For falling of the Vfula.
Roast an egg hard, then cut it long ways, and take out the yolk, and fill
the place full of Cummin seed fine beaten, and lay it to the nape of the neck
as hot as may be endured, then take a good quantity of Sage, and boil it in
milk, and so drink it warm as can be suffered keeping the head warm.

For a child that is Jaw fallen and Roof fallen. See before in Children, A
Water for a sore Mouth, or the falling of the Vfula.
Take Bramble tops, Ivy berries, green Rose leaves, and some Allome, sees all
these in drink, and make thereof a Lotian, and gargarise therewith.

For the falling of the Palate of the Mouth.
Take of Cummin in powder two great handfuls, of white salt four, of the powder
of Camomile flowers three, and the powder of three Nutmegs, mingle these
together, and put them into a bag of linen cloth cut round, and then quilt it,
and use to lay it on the mould of your head all the day and night, if need so
require.

URINE.
To make a man's or woman's water run strong from them.
Take of Gromel seed half an ounce, of Cene clean picked from the stalks, a
quarter of an ounce, of Ginger scraped and sliced thin, of Cinnamon scraped and
bruised of each one dram, of Damask Pruines the stones taken out seven, of
White Wine a pint, put all in the Wine, and cover it close, and stop it with
paste, and set that in another pot of hot liquor for the space of one hour or
more, that the pot may be hot, then take it forth, and when it is cold strain
it, and after put in Sugar to make it toothsome, and then drink it.

For one that cannot hold his Water.
Drink Ne^e a little before Supper, and also for pissing a bed in a cold cause,
drink three drams of the powder of Frankincense in Ale.

An excellent approved Medicine for the hard and slow passage of Urine in man
or woman.
Take two quarts of good Wort, and boil it in a skillet by it self without any
Hops, till it come to a pint and a half, then when it is cold take it and put
Barm to it till it be ripe drink, and ready to cleanse, then take drink, barm^
and all, and boil it again, and boil in it the quantity of two Nutmegs of
Civil Soan, then skim it very clean, and drink thereof at night when you go to
bed, and in the morning when you rise; when it is done make more.

To cleanse the Vreters or Conduits of Urine, and to open them. See before in
Stone.

WATER.
A Water to cure all manner of Wounds and Sores be they never so stinking; and
all manner of Cankers in the nose, (...), throat or elsewhere.
TAke a handful of red Sage, a handful of Cellendine, and as much Woodbind
leaves, take a gallon of running water, and put the Herbs into it, and let it
boil to a pottle, then strain it, and take the liquor and set it over the fire
again, then put thereto a pint of English Honey, and a good handful of Roach
Allome finely beaten, a penny worth of grains grossly bruised, and let them
hoil all together three or four walmes, and then skim it off with a feather,
and when it is cold, put it in an earthen pot or bottle, so as it may be kept
close: and for a green wound take of the thinnest of the water, and for an old
wound the thickest, the Water first being well shaken together, and after you
have well cleansed the old sore with White Wind, then take fine lint and wet it
in the water, and often times bathe the wound, and with the lint cover the wound,
and if there be any holes in the wound, fill them with lint made like a Tent,
and so cover the wound with a piece of bladder, the more better to continue
your lint with moisture, and dress your wound twice a day.

To make Barley Water.
Take a penny worth of Barley, a penny worth of Raisons of the Sun, a penny
worth of Anniseeds, a half penny worth of Licoras, two quarts or more of water,
boil all together till half be consumed, then strain it, and when it is cold,
drink it, your Licoras must be sliced into small pieces.

To make Doctor Stephens Water.
Take a gallon of good Gascoigne Wine, then take Ginger, Gallingal, Cinnamon,
Nutmegs, Grains, Cloves, Mace, Anniseeds, Fennel seeds, Carraway seeds, of
each a dram, then take red Mints, red Rose leaves, Garden Time, Pellitory of
the wall, Small Marjerom, Rosemary, Peniroyal, Sage, Wild Time, Camomile,
Lavender, Avens, of each one handful, then bruise them all in a Mortar, and
beat your Spices small, and then put your Spices and Herbs into your Wine, and
let it stand twelve hours, stirring it oftentimes, and then still it in a
Limbeck. The first pint is the best, the second is good.

The Virtue of this Water.
It comfort the spirits, and preserves greatly the youth of man, it helps
the inward Diseases coming of cold, it helps the shaking of the Palsy, it
cures the distraction of the Sinews, and helps the Tooth ache; it
comforreth the stomach very much, it cures the Raines of the back, the Canker
and cold Dropsy; it helps forth the Stone in the bladder, also it helps a
stinking breath, and the Conception of a woman that is barren; a spoonful of
this Water to some is sufficient, to others two or three once in ten days
suffices.

A Water for a green Wound.
Take a gallon of fair running water, a pottle of White Wine, of Wormwood,
Motherwort, Bramble buds, Hawthorn buds, Basil, Mints, Avens, Egrimony,
Bovewort, Wood Bugloss, Woodbind, Plantane, Ribwort, Daisie roots, Betony, Wild
Angelica, Sanicle, White Bottles, Scabious and Dandillion, of each one handful,
and put them into the Wine and water, and let them boil together till the half
be consumed, then strain out all the Herbs, and boil the liquor with a quart of
English Honey very softly till it be clean skimmed, then take it from the fire,
and when it is cold put it into a glass, and keep it for to wash any green
wound, which it will care, although never so dangerous, drinking also at a time
three spoonfuls of it.

A Water to heal a Wound.
Take Woodbind leaves and Sage, of each a handful, boil them well together in a
little water, and put in a piece of Allome and a little Honey, and wash the
wound therewith, laying a little lint to it, and it will heal it.

An excellent Water to wash any Sore withal, and will be a means to gather
skin. Doctor Wheads Water.
Take brown Sage, brown Fennel, Rosemary, Violet leaves, Liverwort,
Hartstongue, Bryar leaves, Plantane leaves, Woodbind leaves, five leaved
grass, Egrimony, Wild Tansie, of each one handful; take all these Herbs, and
boil them in an earthen pot with a pint of White Wine, and three pints of
running water till it comes to a quart, then take the Herbs and strain them in
a basin, then take as much Allome as three Walnuts, and put it in the water,
and let it boil up, then take it, and put it in a basin till it be almost cold,
then put in a quarter of a pint of live Honey, and presently put it in bottles,
and stop it very close.

To make a cordial Water.
Take of the tender leaves of green Angelica four handfuls, of the like leaves
of Carduus Benedictus two handfuls, of the like leaves of Balm and Sage, of
each one handful and an half; let all be shred small, Licoras bruised five
ounces, the seeds of Angelica two ounces, the seeds of sweet Fennel three
ounces, let both be bruised well, the Spices of Aromaticum Rosarum, and
Diamoschum Dulce, of each half an ounce, infuse them all in six quarts of good
Sack four and twenty hours, then distill them in a Limbeck with a soft fire
according to Art, and draw forth of the best water a pottle: whereunto after
two days put half a pound of the finest Sugar, dissolved in half a pint of
good red Rose water in a fair pipkin on the fire, when the Rosewater is hot
with the Sugar, then put in your hot water, and let it stand over the fire till
it be thoroughly hot, then take it off, and put it in glasses, and keep it as
excellent to comfort the spirits, and against infection, you may draw forth of
good smaller water a quart.

A very precious Water made of Cinnamon.
Take one pound of good Cinnamon, and bruise it a little, and lay it a soaking
four and twenty hours in four pints or four-pound of Rosewater, a pint and half
of Muskadine or white Wine, then put it into a Limbeck glass to distill upon hot
ashes, or else in a pot of hot water.

This Water is good against the pain of the Spleen, the pain in the head, the
Mother, to provoke Urine, to stay vomiting, to expel all venomous colds. You
may take four pints of White Wine, putting to it half a pound of Cinnamon, and
use it as aforesaid.

WEN.
A Medicine to put away a Wen or Curnel.
Take black Soap, mixed with unslaked Lime made into powder, lay it to the Wen
or Curnel, and by Gods grace it will help.

A Medicine for an unbroken Wen.
Take the crumbs of Barley bread, the bigness of an egg, and as much White
Wine Vinegar as will make it into a soft paste, and spread it upon a cloth,
then take an old wooden ladle, and set it against the fire and it will sweat,
then take a feather and wipe the sweat off the ladle, and anoint the Wen
therewith, then take a plaster of the paste and lay it on the Wen, and dress
it three times a day after the Sun is risen, and before the going down of the
same, every time fresh paste, and diverse times the ladies sweat. Probatum.

For the drawing and healing of a Wen when it is broken,
Take a handful of Marigolds blown, of them that have black in the midst, and
half a handful of Rosemary leaves stripped downward, and half a handful of
Pellamountain, half a handful of Hysop, half an handful of Valerian, all
stripped downward as before, and all these Herbs must be boiled in six ounces
of unwasht Butter over a soft fire till the one half be confumed, then strain
the Ointment through a clean cloth, then put the Ointment over the fire, and
put in an ounce of Be Wax, and hoil it again half a dozen turns, then put it
in a fair pot, and keep it to your use.

WOMAN.
To make a Woman to be soon delivered, the child being dead or alive.
Take a good quantity of the best Amber, and beat it exceeding small to powder,
then searse it through a fine piece of Lawne, and so drink it in some broth or
caudle, and it will by Gods grace presently help the Patient to be delivered.

To make a Woman's Disease to come to its right course.
Take young Southernwood, Betony, Caunapitum, Centory, the roots of Cellendine,
St John's wort, with the stowers, of each of these as big as your thumb, yet put
but one root of Cellendine, of White Wine a pint and half, of Raisons of the
Sun (the stones taken out) half a handful cut in pieces, these boil until a
third part be wasted, then strain it, and put to it three and forty blades of
Saffron made to powder, of Grains the weight of two pence beaten, then boil it
a little again; and of this drink a draught in the morning fasting, with as
much Treakle as a Hasel Nut, and at night a draught without Treakle.

For the green Sickness.
Take fasting every morning of one Cowes milk, one pint hot from the Cow with a
few Mints bruised in it, and let the party stir about after it.

An approved Medicine for the green Sickness or the yellow Jaundies.
Take seven or nine Lice out of a clean bodies head, and put them into bread
and Butter, or Conserves of Roses, or into Ale or Beer, or any other thing you
shall think fit, so that the party grieved may eat them all alive, and know not
of it for loathing the Medicine.

A Medicine for the Green Sickness, and also to scowre the body.
Take three sticks of a fig tree, and three sticks of a Walnut tree, and a
handful of red Sage, and a good handful of Peniroyal, a pound of Raisons of the
Sun, stones and all, three Cap Dates, stones and all, bruise them all together,
and put them all in a pottle of White Wine, and sees it from a pottle to a
quart, then strain it, and put into the drink o^e ounce of the best Sugar
candied, and drink thereof morning and evening: it is good. Probatum.

A Medicine for a woman that is in travel.
Take seven or nine leaves of Dittony, a pretty quantity of Germander, a branch
or two of Peniroyal, three Marigolds, a branch or two of Hisop; take all these
and boil them together in a pint of White Wine, or a pint of Ale, and after it
is boiled, put into it Sugar and Saffron, and boil it a quarter of an hour
more, and give it the Patient to drink warm.

For the after Burden.
Take one little branch of Motherwort and six blades of Saffron, pound them
together, and then put to it six spoonfuls of Ale, and then drink it blood
warm all at one draught, and fast after it half an hour.

A good Medicine to provoke the Terms in a Woman.
Take Wormwood and Rue, of each one handful, five or six Pepper Corns, sees
them all together in a quart of White Wine or Malmsey, strain it, and drink
thereof.

Mallows sod in Wine, and drunk is very good.

Also take Sage half an handful, of Cloves, Mace and Saffron, of each half a
scruple, stamp them all together, and bind it in a fine cloth, and hang it a
night and a day in a pint of good Wine, wringing it oftentimes out into the
Wine, then divide it into three parts, and take one part five hours before
meat, the second part in the afternoon, and the other part after supper; but
this is to be done in the wane of the Moon, and eat very little.

A Medicine for the Green Sickness.
Take the weight of a French Crown of Rubarb, of French Wormwood and Egrimony,
of each half a handful, steep them over night in a quart of Ale, and slice a
Nutmeg and put therein, and so take it three several mornings at three
draughts; and this being done, you must make more, and use it in that sort six
mornings more. See before amongst the Vomits for a Vomit for the Green
Sickness, which is to be taken before this Medicine.

To procure the red Menstrues.
Take of Clary leaves and of Hisop, of each one handful, of Parsley half a
handful, stamp them and strain them, and put part of the juice thereof into an
empty eggshel, and put thereto the yolk of an egg only with a little Sugar
candied in powder, then stir it, and set it on embers, and when it is through
hot, sup it up, and fast after it two hours, and this do three mornings
together in the beginning of the Moon, within five days of the Change.

To stop the White Menstrues.
Take a pottle of running water, of pure Cinnamon half an ounce, half a
Pomgranat Pill, of Knotgrasse half an handful, boil these together till the
water come to a pint, and thereof make a caudle (...) three mornings.

Also (...) Sassaparilla six ounces, Pollipodium of the Oak, Cene and Fennel,
of each four ounces, of Caraway seeds one ounce, of Licoras scraped and bruised
two ounces, Egrimony and Maiden hair of each two handfuls, Liverworn one
handful, Scurvigrasse two handfuls, new Beer or Ale three gallons; these
particulars must be stamped to powder, and all put into a bag together with the
Scurvigrasse stamped, then hang the bag in the vessel of Ale or Beer, the yeest
being first taken away, and so stopped very close that no air get in, then
drink thereof the quantity of a pint two hours before dinner, and so at Supper.
It purges all humors in the body; it will not suffer the blood to putrify,
nor phlegm to have Dominion, nor Melancholy to have exaltation; it purges the
wind, it defends the stomach, it nourishes, profits and preserves the
Heart, it ingendreth a good color, it comfort the sight, it nourishes the
mind, and is good against the Stone.

To stop the red Menstrues.
Take a good handful of Lavender tope and boil them in a quart of Posset
drink, till it come to a pint, and drink it off bot with some Sugar, if your
please.

For the Green Sickness.
Take half an ounce of the powder of steel, as you have it at the Steel-makers,
but the Needle makers have the best; wash it in three or four waters, and dry
it, one ounce of Cremer Tartary, two Nutmegs, Licoras the weight of fix pence,
make all into fine powder, and mix them; take every morning the weight of six
pence in broth, and fast two hours after, and after this Receipt has been
taken, let the party be purged once or twice.

WOUNDS.
For great Wounds in the head.
Take dry Wormwood or green (green is the best) and a new laid egg, shell and
all, and beat them together very fine, and make a Salve thereof, and lay it to
the place hurt very thick, and let it lie four and twenty hours; and if the
party be much pained, change it, if but a little pained, let it lie four and
twenty hours more, and then dress it with other Salve as need requires.

A Medicine for any Cut, Wound or Sore.
Take of Rosen and Perrosen of each half a pound, of Olibanum four ounces, of
Hearts Suet four ounces, of Mastick two ounces, of Mirrh one ounce, of Comfry
half an ounce, of White Wax four ounces, let your Rosen, Perrosen, Olibanum,
Mastick and Mirrhe be made into fine powder and searsed each by themselves,
then take your Suet, and Wax, and dissolve them upon a soft fire, when they be
melted, put in all your searsed powders, always stirring them till they be all
melted, then have ready a pottle of White Wind hot in a fair pan, and strain
all your stuff through a Canva^ cloth into it, then put in two ounces o^ good
Turpentine, and then your Comfry beaten to fine powder, always stirring it
till it be cold, and then make in up in rolls, and keep it for your use. This
Ointment is very good for new Wound and for the Bloody Flux, and the Wind
Cholick, being spread upon a cloth, and laid to the Navel. It is called, Flos
Vnguentorum, The flower of Ointments, of which see more at large in Ointments.

WIND.
To make one long winded.
Take half a pound of Almonds, and lay them in cold water till they blanch of
themselves, then beat them very small in a Mortar, Licoras three ounces, scrape
off the bark or rind, and beat it fine in a Mortar, and take as muck Anniseeds,
two ounces of Sugar, and beat them small as before, and work them together and
use it.

For the avoiding of Wind.
Take the juice of red Fennel, and make a posset of Ale therewith, and drink
thereof.

Another to expel Wind.
Take of pure Sugar four ounces, of Rose water as much as will moisten your
Sugar, put it in a possnet, then have ready these Spices following, White
Pepper, Black Pepper, of each half adram, pure Gallingale sliced and finely
minced, Ginger pared and minced fine, of each of these one scruple and a half,
pure Turbit white and gummy clean scraped, thin sliced and minced very fine two
scruples, skim your Rosewater and Sugar clean as may be, and let them boil on a
soft fire, then put in all your Spices, and stir them well, then take it from
the fire, and stir it till it be cold and thick, then put it into a gally pot,
and reserve it to your use: of this you may take at a time the quantity of a
pennyworth or two pence.

For the Wind of the Stomach.
Take a handful of Tansie, and a handful of Sorrel, and beat them together, and
strain them, and make a posset of White Wine, and put in it the juice of the
Herbs, and drink it in the morning, and fast after it a while.

WORMS.
For a Ring-worm.
Take a Dog berry, and with the juice thereof rub the Ring-worm, and it will
help it.

For the running Worm that eats the flesh.
Take a handful of Wormwood, and a handful of Herb grace, a handful of
Fetherfew, a handful of Vervain, a handful of Herb-Robert, a bandful of Wild
Bugloss, boil these Herbs in half a pound of unwasht butter, then strain it
through a clean cloth and anoint the place with a feather, and lay upon the
wound Oak leaves with the smoothest side next the wound, the leaves must be
withered, and so bind up your fores with linen clothes, dressing it twice a
day after the same manner, but remember your herbs bestamped before you boil
them in your butter.

To kill the Canker and Worm that eats the Teeth.
Take an egg that is laid on a thursday, and empty it, and fill it with salt,
and so set it on the fire, until it may be made in powder, and rub the Cankered
teeth therewith, and it both kills the Canker, and destroys the worms that eat
the Teeth. Probatum.

For Worms in a Child, to rid them away, if they be almost past Remedy.
Take of Wormwood and of Walnut leaves, of Rue and unset Leeks, of each one
handful, and put to an Oxgall, and fry them all over the fire, and lay them on
a cloth, and lay them on the child's navel all night; and that will help them:
and on the morrow, take half a pint of Malmsey, and put into it four or five
spoonfuls of Wormwood Water, and as much Mint water, and warm them toger there
and drink it one or two days, and this will help without doubt. Probatum.

For the Ring-worm.
Take a handful of Violet leaves, an handful of Columbine leaves, and a handful
of Rosemary leaves, stamp all these together, and boil it in a quarter of a
pound of unwasht butter, and a little Deer Suet, and when it is half boiled
away, strain it, and put it over the fire again, and let it boil two or three
turns, then put it up for your use, and strike a Plaster therewith, and lay
it on the Ring-worm, dressing it twice a day, and washing it every two days
with White Wine.

For the Worms.
Take Curraline in powder as much as will lie on a groat in new Milk three
mornings, three days before the Full or New of the Moon. It will help old
folks and sucking children; it is a groat an ounce.

For the Ring worm.
Take black Soap, and almost as much Ginger in powder, and mix them well
together, and anoint the place therewith four or five days together, and this
will cure any Tetter or Ring-worm.

WHITES.
For the Whites.
Take a quarter of a pound of Isingglasse, and boil it in a pottle of milk to
a pint and half, then put to it Nutmeg, Cinnamon and Sugar and red Rose water,
and so make it to a Gelly.

WOOD BETONY.
The Virtues of Wood Betony.
It saves men's bodies by the virtue it has in it, and by Gods help, for who
so bears this Herb about him, preserves him from Evil Spirits, and this Herb
must be gathered in the Harvest time, early in the morning before Sun rising.

Also he that drinks of the juice of Betony, it will break the stone, and
cast it with the Urine.

Also if it be drunk with honey, it is good against the Dropsy.

Also it is good against the outrage of wicked blood.

Also the juice of Betony mingled with Rose Water put in the ear, amendeth the
hearing.

Also the powder of Betony sodden with honey, helps them that have the bloody
Egestions, and marvellously comfort the stomach.

Also the leaves of Betony mingled with salt, and make a Plaster thereof, is a
great help to green Wounds being laid thereto.

And the leaves of Betony with Rue evenly proportioned, sodden together is good
for akings in the eyes, and the blood of the Egestions, it puts away that
which annoyeth the Eyes.

Also it draws away all venom in the body of man.

Also take four handfuls of Betony, and three cupfuls of Red Wine, and
seventeen Pepper corns, and break them small, and sees it, and drink it, it
purges the veins.

Also take an ounce of Betony, and an ounce of Plantane, and drink it with warm
water, and it will destroy the Quotidian Fever.

Also take powder of the root of Betony, and drink it with lukewarm water, it
will purge phlegm.

Also take the weight of a Bean of the powder of Betony mingled with honey, it
will comfort the stomach, and the digestion.

Also make a Garland of Betony, and lay it about an Adder, and he will kill
himself within it.

Also take Betony well warmed by the fire, and then bound to the forehead, it
provokes sleep, and puts away wicked blood, and destroys the heat of the
eyes.

Also Betony sodden in Wine, and held in the mouth, helps the Tooth ache.

Also Betony sodden in Wine, purges the veins, the spleen, and the stomach.

And the juice of Betony mingled with salt, and put into the nostrils purges
the Evil savor of the nose.

THE KNOWLEDGE AND ORDERING OF WINES.
A true Receipt to fine any piece of Wine Spanish or French.
TAke Isinglass half a pound, and steep it in as much of the hardest French
White Wine, let the Wine cover it, and let it stand four and twenty hours, then
pull the Isinglasse in pieces, then put a little of the same Wine to it, then
let it lie, and three or four times a day squeeze and break it with your hands
(...) it come to ^^ clear Jelly, and as it thickens, put more of the same Wine
to it, then when it is come to, a perfect clear Jelly, take a pint or a quart
to a Hogshead, and so according to that quantity as you have occasion, overs
draw the same piece of Wine that you beat up, three or four gadons, then put in
the same quantity of Isinglass into the Can of Wine you everdraw, then stir the
Isinglass, and break it very well together into the Wine, then put it up into
the same piece of Wine, and beat it with a staff exceeding well together, then
fill it up top full, and so let it lie. And for the French Wine Bung it up very
tite and full. Spanish Wine you may bung up or leave open as you please.

To fine any piece of Brown Wine that is quailish and brown, be it Spanish or
French.
Take a pint of the same Jelly of Isingglass, and a quantity of milk, as you
shall find the piece of Wine in brownesse, and so put the Ising-glasse and the
milk together, and stir it very well, ^llen overdraw the piece of Wine eight
gallons, then with a parting staff, stir it two or three blows, then suddenly
put ^^ both milk and Ising-glass into the Buty or Hogshead, then (...) it up
(...) well, fill it up very full, and this will fine it in a day or two.

For French Wine that comes (...) the Lees, that is brown and (...).
Take one pound of Alablasted (...) sifted, and over draw the Hogshead (...) or
four gallons, then put this dry dust into the bung of it as it is upon the Lee,
then take a staff, and give it si^ good strokes, then fill it up rop full, the
more you stir it, the better it will be upon the Lee, and nothing will be seen,
but grew perfect good, (...) longer it dies the (...) it is, and when you see
good you may (...) it.

How to make any piece of quailish: Spanish Wine fine.
Take half a quarter of a pound of (...) Starch, and about a quart of (...)
writing sand, and a pint of Ising glass, and one handful of (...), and the
whites of two eggs, and heat them with a little Brum very well, then over (...)
the Wine, and put it in all together, and so beat it up all together (...)
well, and fill it up, and this will make it perfect fine.

To make Wine sweet that stinketh or is (...) savory or Musty.
If the fault be in the Cask, you must draw it out into a fresh Cask and Lees,
and let none of the old Lees come out of it, therefore draw it not too near:
then thus use him, Take twelve eggs, both whites and yolks, and beat them
short, then take of Ginger, Cloves, Orras, Grains, of each two pennyworth, and
one pennyworth of Long Pepper, put the eggs into a quart of Damask Rosewater
well mingled together, and put it into the Wine then beat the Butt half an
hour; let all the Spices be grostly beaten, then take two grains of Musk, and
bruise it well in four spoonfuls of Damask Rose water with the back of a spoon
and put that into the Butt, then beat the Butt again gently a quarter of an
hear, then take Ambergr^^ce, Manns Christ's, of each two grains, and beat them
well, and put them among^ he Spices, and put all into a beg and tie at saft to
the B^ng, and let it hang almost to the bottom two days; then draw it up
softly to the middle, and there let it hang two days; then draw it almost to
the top, and let (...); then take it out, and roll the Butt a little, and in
two days broach it, and it will be very (...).

If Cla^tt or (...).
First draw him out into fresh Lees, and put into him four or five gallons of
the best Allegant, then turn him over twice in the Lees, and let him lie with
the Bung upright a week before you broach him; and it shall have both a good
color and taste.

For Wine of any sort that grows lang.
Take two penny worth of Roach Allom in powder, and draw your Hogshead four or
five gallons, then strew in your powders, and shake it well half an hour, then
fill it up, and broach it within three days, being well and close stopped.

If White Wine or Sack has lost its color.
Take four gallons of skimmed milk, over draw the Hogshead six gallons, then
take the yolks of sorm eggs, beat them, and put them into the milk, and after
beat them together, then put them into the Wine, and beat the Wine well, then
stop it close, and in five days you may broach it.

To keep Wine frish and sound all the year.
You must fill your Vessels once a month or six weeks, fill your Red and Claret
with the best Red Wine, I for Red does preserve the Clarret, as White does the
Malmsey and Bastard, and fit White with White. And so all other Wines with the
same; and those you intend to preserves give them their Lees all in one day,
then that night, (...) them all upright, and be careful to keep them right. If
they (...) in any (...), they will (...) and spoil, (...) and August are most
dangerous to keep the said Wines sweet.

For Sack that has Flying Lees in it.
Draw it out into a fresh Butt with flesh Lees, and make a good Parel with the
whites of eight eggs, and beat them with a handful of Bay salt, and put it
into the (...), and if it be any whit (...), put thereto two gallons of new
milk, and (...) the Wine well, then lay it upright, stop it close, and in two
days Broach it.

A Note of all kind of Wines that prick with their perfect Remedies.
Imprimis, For every Pipe take half a pound of Whiting to flavor your Wine,
Long-Pepper one ounce, Cinnamon half an ounce, the eight^^ part of an ounce of
Orras, as much Cloves, a little Anniseeds the which must be bearch to powder,
and put them into a bag, and hang it in the Wine with a piece of Lead to sink
it, two days, and then take it out, and see, if it do not change let it hang
one day long or, then put four or five, gallons, of Bastard Sirrup, which must
be (...) into it.

How to make Sack white, being otherwise colored.
Take two pound of white (...) and two gallons of milk boiled together the
space of two hours, then take it from the fire, and let it be cold, and ^^aff
it, and put it into at Butt that is clean and sweet, then beat the Starch and
milk together with two handfuls of white Salt, and put into the Butt, and beat
it with a staff, and it will fine and white.

To help Claret that is tawny.
Rack it, and take half a pound of Turnsil, two gallons of Red Wine, one of
Allegant, two ounces of Red-wood small ground, mingle them together, and put
them into the Hogshead, and stop it close, and in three days it shall have a
most perfect color.

For Sack that (...) to be long.
Take three pennyworth of Roath Allome, burn it, then beat it small, then take
a p^nt of Burrage water, and wring into it the juice of four Lemmons, then beat
the Allom and liquor together, till it be (...), and put it into the Sack and
beat the Butt well, and stop it close and in three days it shall be perfect.

For Malaga that pricketh.
Overdraw the Pipe two Gallons, then put in the Pipe half a peck of Limestones,
and chalk, and three pennyworth of Roach Allome, burn it and strew it in the
Pipe with a handful of white Salt, and beat that gently, and this only shall
help it.

To give your Muskadine, Malmsey, Sack or Bastard a pleasant sweet taste, and
sent, although it be very faulty.
Take a ^^arter of a pound of Coriander seed, Cloves, Nutmegs, of each half an
ounce, two pennyworth of Orras, one pennyworth of Callamus, Musk, Manus
Christi, of each one grain, beat them all well, and put them into a bag, then
put a pint of Rosewater into a dish, upon a Chasingdish of co^^^, and when it
is hot, let the outside of the bag drunk it up, then first put into the Butt or
Pipe, one gallon of Spanish Cute, and roll it well, then hang the bag into the
Pipe, near to the bottom one day and night, then draw it up toward the middle,
and let it hang there two days, then draw it within a foot of the top for two
days more, then take it out, and stop it close, then roll it gently, and in
two days broach it.

To make good Hyppolgas.
Some make it of Sack; so me of White Wine, some of Rhemish Wine: Take to every
gallon of White or Rhenish Wine two pound of Sugar, the worst is good enough,
three ounces of Cinnamon, two ounces of Ginger, one ounce of Lung Pepper, three
ounces of Licoras, half a grain of Musk, a half a p^nt of Damask Rose Water
two pennyworth of Orras, one pennyworth of Callam^s (...) of Auniseeds.

The use and preparative of Hyppocras.
You must beat all the said things like gross Pepper, save the Musk, and
Rosewater, which use thus, Take the Musk, and with the back of a silver spoon,
bruise it in a little of the Rose water, then mingle it with the roast of the
Rose Water and shake it well together, then if you will, you may boil the
Spices with two gallons of the same Wine you purpose to make it of, and when it
is cold, strain it into the (...) of your Wine, and boil it (...) an (...),
ever stirring it, then after put in your Rose Water and Must when it is blood
warm, then stop it close, and roll it well together, then take Raisons of the
Sun and Figs, of each half a (...) put them (...), and hang it in them do^e of
the Butt till the Wine be out, and as the Wine shrinketh; let that bag down.
Or you may put the same into the Hippocras bag, and hang at aforesaid, then put
the Rose Water and (...) by it self into that Wine, and roll it gently, and
this is the easier and quicker way, but the other will be sooner and readier to
broach.

Note that if it should want of pleasantness put to every gallon a pint of
Spanish Cute, and that will help it, and make it perfect.

The Knowledge and Choice of Wines, with their Marks of their Gountries.
Muskadine.
See that your Muskadine be sweet and strong and of color like Amber as (...).

(...) and Bastard.
See that your Malansey be perfect and pleasant, at the first well (...),
swo^^, fine, quick and strong. But let your Bastard be only quick and (...).

White Wine.
Must be fair and short, and though that want color, if it be quick and not
full, it is not to be refused, for it is easily helped.

Clarret.
See that your Clarret be very well colored, fair, fine and (...), for if they
be long at the first, meddle not with them, for they will not hold for burnings.

Red Wine.
Your Red Wine you must use as you do your White and Clarret.

Sh^rry Sacks.
(...) are white at the first, and you (...) them by their work upon their
B^ng, where you shall see the picture of a Cock burned, and the longer they
lie, the better they are.

Graves Wine.
Great Royst out ^^ the best take of them to Mich (...) Potty Royston is the
next, take of (...), the Cask is hooped with half Hoops, and the mark of the
Bung is like three O's, with a stroke through the middle, the first being
greater then the other two, having a little (...) the top to the middle, (...)
three Daimonds.

Spain.
In Spain there is Bastard, Sacks, Hollocks and Spanish Cute, that is the best
to keep for all the year.

Gascoyne Wine.
There goes four Hogsheads to the Tun, and every Hogshead is sixty and three
gallons, and observe how (...) the Gallon (...), and so (...) pound the (...)
is worth.

Wines of (...),
Are good for all the your, and they are Red, White and (...), you shall know
them by their round half (...) and the Wines do grow in (...) Country, and
therefore the stronger and sounder.

Wines of (...)
Take no Clarret nor White, the Red is only good, and will not fail; for your
Red is of a sontrary nature to White and Claret, you shall surely know them by
their Marks, they have Willow hoops, and the (...) i^ marked with three O's,
and a stroke through the middle.

Rave Wines.
They (...) of Wines Sack is the (...) year, and they are full gage, and the
Bung is marked with G having a little ^roak through the head, being burnt in.

Wines Gatierel.
It is over against Bourdeux, of which take none except it be a very dry year,
they have Willow hoops, and quarter barred and they be faint and weak.

Boynin Wines the best for all the year.
They are entraordinary for all the year; you shall know it by the taste, for
in sharp and tart, ready to edg the teeth, and they be three Punchons to a Tun,
and are full gage; and Malmsey and Candy Cute very good is made there.

Wines of Steave.
Then have you Wines of Steave, very good Muskadine, and that Vessel is not
like the other, for they are longer greater and broad, and more Gage by three
at four C^^tornes.

The Countries of Rhenish Wines.
There is a place called Boallefficer, that is the worst Wine, you shall know
it by the Fat, for it is double barred over the head, and twenty six gallons
make a Line.

Wines of Krab (...).
That is better then the former, and they be in certain stripes and Cren^^, and
they be three po^tles and two gallons, and that is called Vage, and nine
gallons are a Line.

Rhenish Wine.
There is Rhenish Wine of Barba Musk, and that is the best, and is fingle
barred in the fat, with a broad bar; they be full gage, and the Bars for the
most part are marked at the edges, with five figures of ^, and a stroke through
them near the bottom.

If Rhenish Wine fail and grow faint, take a pound of Brimstone, melt it in a
pint of Damask Kosewater, then dip^innen clothes in it, and burn it in an empty
vessel, then Rack your tainted Wine into the vessel so prepared, then take one
ounce of Coriander seeds, Call^mus, Benjamin, Storax, Damask powder, of each
three pennyworth, beat them all, and put them in a bag, and hang them four
days in the Fat, and beat the Wine, and roll and stop it close, and at four
days end, it will be perfect.

To shift Wines, and rid away your Lugs.
If you have any Lugs of White Wine, (...) or Sack, that will not sell, take in
two Butts of pleasant Malmsey, which you may make three with your Lugs, and the
Malmsey will be pleasant and good.

Batew Wines.
They are in very long Pipes, and very hard, they are not very good to keep all
the year, yet good for present sale, they want two Cisterns and a half of Gage.

Wines of Angway.
The most part of it is in Pipes, and that is very good Wine, and strong, and
lacks very little of Gage, and is quarter burred.

Wines of Orbious and (...).
Four Hogsheads make a Tun, they be good for half the year, they have half
hoops, and one broad bar at the head, with foun pins on either side toward the
end of the bar, thus. ^

(...) Wines.
It will be sick most part of the Summer, and topeth long, when it so thangeth,
keep him close from vent, and fill him over, then stop him close, and ^^rne him
over in his Lees two or three times and it will amend him.

Note that all such Wines that are so hooped with half hoops; grow in the
dryest and highest Countries and are the best and soundest, and those with the
Willow hoops grow in the West Countries, and the smallest are unsound.

A Remedy for shifted Wines.
To every Butt take two gallons of Red Wine, for that will preserve the Malmsey
as well as Cute does the Bastard, and (...) shall save the more. Or in stead of
the Red, take three or four (...) or Cure, if it be Spanish Cure, one (...) it
as good, and will go further then three of Cundy Chee, so that you pot into the
But^ two gallons of Red Wine, and one gallon of Spanish Cute, you shall make it
perfect; if it be not pleasant enough, you must put in the more Cure.

How is make or divide Malmsey^
If you have three Butts of Malmsey you may make four, of two you may make
three, of one you may make one and a half with such Lugs as you have of
Clarrer, White W^^ or Slick that is old, with two gallons of Spanish Cute to
every Butt, and so you may rid away your Lugs and old Seeks: and the Art
follows that must be used.

Take to every Butt six eggs, both yolks and whites, and one handful of Bay
salt, beat them well to other mixing therewith a pint of old Seek, and put them
all together. If it want color, then take two gall^^^ of Red Wine, and a
^^arter of a pound of Coriander seeds heaten very small, (...) them well
mingled together (...) the Butt, then give six or eight strokes (...) and stop
it close, and in three or four days broach him.

To ^^^ke Muska^ine.
Take a pleasant Butt of Malmsey called Ratnew, and draw it half out, and fill
it up within four or five gallons with fat Bastard, then Parrel it with six
yolks of eggs, and one handful of Bay salt, and a pint of Conduit water, beat
them well together, and then put them into the Butt, and if the color be too
deep or too high, th^n take three gallons of skimmed milk, and eight whites of
eggs, and mingle them well together with the milk, and put them into the Butt
and they will mood it; and for the p^^asant taste thereof, take four pennyworth
of Sugar, Long Pepper and Cloves, of each two pennyworth, bruise them, and put
them all in (...) the Butt, then heat the Butt (...) and, stop it close, after
lay it up three days, and then you may broach it. Or you may put the Spices
into a little bag and sink it with a piece of lead into the Butt.

For Allegant that grows hard and faint.
First draw it into fresh Lees, then take three gallons of stone Honey well
clarified, scum it well, and let stand till it be cold, then take four yolks of
Eggs, a pint of Rose Water, and one ounce of Lemmon^, beat them well together
with the honey, and then put them into the Pipe, and then roll or beat the Pipe
half an hour and then stop it close, and three days after you may broach it.

If Bastard prick.
Draw him presently from his Lees, if he have any, and put the Wine into a
Muskadine Butt, to the Lees of M^knsey, and then put to the Bastard three or
four Gallons of the best wort of the first tap, but let it be cold before you
put it in, then take two handfuls of Fordy Almonds, blaneh and bruise them, and
mingle them with a gallon of Cute and put them into the Bastard, and roll it
well for half an hour, and lot woe days, you may broach it, and it will be
perfect good.

A Parrel to the same Basturd.
First Parrel him with the whites of eight new laid Eggs, beat them well with a
handful (...), and a pint of the same Bastard, and put them into the Bastard
then beat it an hour with a parting staff, then-take one pennyworth of Allome,
and burn it, and mingle it with a pint of running water, and put it into the
Pipe, and then give it a stroke more, and roll it well, and a dozen upon the
Bung, stop him close, and broach him, if you have occasion two hours after.

To make Tire that is excellent.
Take a good Butt of Malmsey, and overdraw him one quarter, and then fill him
with fat Bal^ard, and two gallons of Cute, then Parrel him as you did the
Malmsey with the same things and after the same manner, and ^o beat him, and
keep him close; and in two or three days you may broach him.

To make Muskadine of Jane.
Take a Burt of Jane or good Malmsey and fill him up with sat Bastard and
Parcel him as you did the Malmsey, and beat him well one hour (...) he be fine.

A Parrel for the Muskadine.
When it comes to be fine, within four hours after, take six new laid eggs,
beat them shells and all with one handful of Bay salt, put to them a quart of
old Sack, one handful of white Sugar candy beaten small, then beat them all
together very well, then overdraw the Butt eight or ten gallons, then bear the
Butt an hour, then put in the Parrel, and then bear him again gently half an
hour, and stop him close, and broach him within twenty four hours.

A Parrel for Malmsey.
It must be Parrel'd as your Muskadine, saving only you must take yolks in
stead of Whites, or also use them all (...) alike.

For (...)
Overdraw him one (...) fill him up with pleasant sat Bast and (...) gallons of
R^d (...) two gallons of (...) it well, and it shall help it presently.

For Bastard that drinks hard.
You must put in it three or four gallons of running water, and as much skimmed
milk, then beat them well, and give him a Parrel of the yolks of six eggs, with
a pint of water, and put it into the Wine and beat the Butt well half an hour,
and when he is fine, you shall rack him into a clear Pipe, and put into him two
gallons of Honey water, and stop him close and roll him, and within two days
broach him.

To make a Pipe of Ossey.
Take a Pipe of Eager Bastard, then take a Butt of small Sack, but first you
must roll the Pipe of Bastard, and dra^^ him half into another Pipe, then take
your small Butt of Sack, fill up your Bastard therewith within ten or twelve
inches; if your Bastard be but small, take the less Sack, for the Ossey must
drink somewhat fat; then to take away the eagerness which is a principal
thing, take five gallons of new milk, and two gallons of water, and that shall
make it white and well colored, and well in drinking, and then you must beat
it, or else it will faint in the Pipe; then take half an ounce of Orris, and two
ounces of Cloves, and beat them small, and bang them in a bag three days in the
midst of the Pipe. and that shall give it a right sent and taste, and at three
days end withdraw him from his Bastard Lees to good Sack Lees, and parrel him
thus; Take twelve whites of eggs, and a handful of White Salt well beaten
together, with a gallon of White Wine, which is in the Trace, then put it into
the Butt with your beating staff and fill him up, and let him lie til he show
fine, and then it will seem for Ossey, which is excellent. Or with the two Pipes
you may make or draw, mingled together, four Butts of exceeding good Malmsey.

To shift Wines and Malmseyes, and put off your ill Wines.
If you have two principal good Butts of Malmseyes, you may make two and a
half, with eight gallons of pleasant fat Bastard, and with the Lugs you have of
Clarret. White and Sack, and if you put a gallon of Red Wine to every Butt it
will do well, and you shall have the more Cute; or you may use Cute, (two
gallons of Spainsh Cute will go further then five of Candy Cute; but Candy Cute
is more natural for Malmesey then the other) then Parrel him with eight whites
of eggs and a handful of salt beaten together, then put them into the Wine, and
beat the Butt half an hour, and stop him very close, and in two days you may
broach him.

A pleasant Sent for Red Wine.
Take two ounces of Brimstone, half an ounce of Callamus, mix them together
with half a pint of Burrage water, melt the Brimstone into a pan, and let the
rest be with it therein, then put in so many Cloves as will soak it up, and
burn the Cloves in the Cask, throw away the ashes, then your Wine being rackt
put into it a pint of Damask Rose Water, then roll it well half an hour; stop it
close, and let it lie two days, then broach it. This shall give it or any other
Gascoin Wine a most pleasant sent and taste.

For to make Match.
Take one pound of Brimstone, half a pound of Coriander seeds. Anniseeds two
ounces, of Cloves and Nutmegs one peniworth, Orris one penniworth, one
penniworth of Cammomile, grate them, and beat all these together. Also for
parrelling a Hogshead of White Wine, take two gallons of milk, and the whites
of four eggs, and a handful of Bay salt, these being well parrelled, and put
into the Hogshead, will do the work.

Also if you have a Butt of Sack that does begin to be long, take two
pennyworth of Roach Allom, burn it, then beat it small with the whites of six
eggs and one handful of Bay salt, if it begin to boil, give it the Parrel
aforesaid.

Also if you have a Pipe of Malaga that pricketh, over-draw it ten gallons, and
put in Chalk, in this manner you may help it away: Roll it well, and put
therein two gallons of Stone-Honey clarified and beaten, with a quart of
Conduit water, and that shall fine the Wine again, and in two days close
stopped it shall be perfect.

For Bastard that pricketh.
First draw it out into a fresh Pipt, and fresh Lees, then take three gallons
of the best Stone Honey, clarify it, and beat it with a quart of the same
Bastard, then take a peck of Frumety well boiled, as for pottage, then mingle
the Honey, and beat it together, then put it into the bag, and let the bag be
long, that it may reach almost to the bottom, then put into another little bag,
one pennyworth of Anniseeds, of Coriander seeds and Licoras, of each two
penniworth, bruise them well, and put them into the little bag, then line him
to the side of the other Bag, and sink them, and put into the Pipe a branch of
Rosemary, then stop it close, and at two days end draw it up to the middle,
and there let it hang two days, then leisurely take it out, and stop it close,
and in one day after broach it.

PERFUMES.
The Kings Perfume boiled.
TAke six spoonfuls of Rose water, and as much Ambergreece as weighs two
Barley Corns, as much Civet in weight, as much Sugar as weighs two pence
beaten in fine powder. All these boiled together in a Persuming pan, is an
excellent Perfume.

The Queens Perfume.
Take four spoonfuls of Spike water, and four spoonfuls of Damask water, thirt,
Cloves, and eight Bay leaves shred as much Sugar as weighs two pence, All
these boiled make a good Perfume.

To keep your house apt to take Perfumes, and to take away gross Ai^es.
Take Cypress wood, or Juniper in chips, and throw them on a fair pan of
coals, deck your house with flowers, and brush and Iprinkle it with vin^gar
and Rose water, and keep your windows and doors close till the house be
perfumed, and then set up your Perfumes.

King Edwards Perfume to make your house smell like R^semary.
Take three spoonful^ of perfect Rosemary, and as much Sugar as halt a Walnut
beaten in small powder. All these boiled together in the Perfuming pan upon hot
embers with a few coals, is a very sweet Perfume.

Such Herbs as are good for Perfumes.
Sweet Basil dried in the Sun, Sweet Marjerom, young red Mints, the Pills of
Lemmons dried and powdered. All these are good for Perfumes, every one will
smell severally.

A sweet Perfume to burn.
Take Benjamin three ounces, Labdanum one ounce, Ambergreece three ounces,
Civet one ounce, mingle all these together with Gumdragagant, and roll it, and
make it three square with Fusses dissolved in Rosewater, mingle with the same.

Another Perfume to boil and burn.
Take Benjamin and Storax of each an ounce, Labdanum and Fusses, of each an
ounce, and half a dram of Civet: to be burnt, beat them in a white Mortar; and
to boil; put them in Rosewater. It is also a good Perfume for Gloves.

A fine and sweet Oil.
Take Musk twelve grains, Civet six grains, Ambergreece eight grains,
Benjamin six grains, a few Cloves, Storax, Callamint three grains. Grind all
these together with Oil of Sweet Almonds. First wash your Gloves with Fusses
dissolved a day in Damask water.

A Perfume for Gloves.
Take your Gloves, and wash them well in Damask water, then stretch them fair
and softly, and lay them in a fair linen cloth or sheet folded eight folds,
that the Rosewater may dry in by leisure. Then take Oil of Sweet Almonds upon a
store, and with your hands anoint your gloves, and rub them well over, and
stretch them forth by little and little, and before they be thoroughly dried
take the powder of Sanders mixed with a little Ambergreece, and strew the
powder finely fearced upon them, and let them lie in a box in a sheet of white
paper.

Another Perfume for Gloves.
Take your Gloves or any other leather, and wash them well in Rose or Damask
water, then wring them out of the water, and dry them. Do so three or four
times, then take Gumdragagant, and steep it in fine Damask water all night and
so strain it, and mingle it with a quarter of an ounce of Ambergreece, and as
much fine Musk. First, grind your Ambergreece with the Oil of Trobyn, and then
mix all together, within and without, and lay a paper betwixt the Gloves, Glove
by Glove, and dry them under a feather bed.

A Perfume in Powder.
Take Ireos, Storax, Callamint, Lignum Aloes, Laudanum, grains or seeds of
Juniper, as much of each sort as you will, beat together as much of one sort as
of another. Cast the Perfumes into the fire, and then you shall see whether it
will smell well or not.

To make an Oil Perfume for Gloves that shall never out.
Take Benjamin two ounces, of Storax and Calamint of each an ounce, the powder
of Benjamin and Storax must be finely beaten by themselves; that done, take a
pound of sweet Almonds, and mingle it with the Storax and Benjamin upon a
Marble stone, and then put it into an earthen p^t with mo^e Oil; then put in
your gloves powdered, and so let it stand very close covered. And when you will
perfume a pair of Gloves, take a little fair water in a spoon, and wipe your
Gloves very fine with it. Take another spoon, and dip it in your Oil, and rub
it on your Gloves, and let them dry^ this is excellent.

Perfumes sweet and good.
Take Gumdragagant, and lay it in Rosewater, until it be dissolved and liquid,
then powder the things hereafter written, Take Laudanum an ounce, Benjamin an
ounce, Lignum Aloes a quarter of an ounce, Coals of Willowes two^ ounces and
half, beat all these together, and make paste of it with the Gum, and make as
many balls or cloves as you will, then dry it in the shadow.

A Receipt to make a Perfume to preserve mankind from the Infection of the
Plague^ and also to burn in Chambers, Chests, and Presses for preserving of
clothes, bedding and hangings.
Take pure old Juniper, shave it thin as may be, one ounce, of the flower or
herb of Saint John's wort half an ounce, of the Gums of Olibanum, Mastick, and
pure chosen Mirrhe, of each one ounce, your Gums grind great, your Saint John's
wort hack it small, your shavings of Juniper in like sort, then mix them all
together, and put them in so me convenient vessel; then add thereunto pure
Venice Turpentine, as much as will make it like a piece of paste, then use it
at your pleasure, taking the quantity of half a Nutmeg at a time, and burn it
on a tile stone in your Chamber when you go to bed, and in the morning when you
rise.

A Receipt for a Perfume.
Take Musk, Ambergreece, and Civet, of each a quarter of an ounce, of Orange
flowers one ounce, grind all these things very small on a stone, then mingle
them well together with half a^ ounce of Oil of Beans, and for want thereof,
one ounce of sweet Almonds, and then apply it to the leather or other use you
will put it to.

FINIS.

