DEVOTIONS FOR THE Help and assistance OF ALL CHRISTIAN PEOPLE: In all
occasions and necessities.

Printed in the Year, 1644.

A Prayer against wandering thoughts, to be said at the beginning of our
devotions.
ALmighty God, who have commanded us to pray unto thee without ceasing, and
have added many glorious promises for our encouragement, let thy holy Spirit
teach me how to pray; give me just apprehensions of my wants, zeal of thy
glory, great resentment of thy mercies, love of all spiritual employments that
are pleasing unto thee; and do thou help mine infirmites, that the Devil may
not abuse my fancy with illusions, nor distract my mind with cares, nor
alienate my thoughts with impertinencies, but give me a present mind, great
devotion, a heart fixed upon thy divine beauties, and an actual intention and
perseverance in my prayers, that I may glorify thy Name, do unto thee true and
laudable service, and obtain relief for all my necessities. Hear me, O King
of Heaven, when I call upon thee, for thou have promised mercy to them that
pray in the Name of our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ. Amen.

Penitential Prayers, and a Form of Confession of sins to God, to be said
upon days of public or private humiliation.
O Lord God of mercy and pardon, give me a just remembrance and sad
apprehensions of my sins; teach me to bewail them with as great an
indignation and bitterness, as I have committed them with complacency and
delight. Let my prayers and my confession come into thy presence, and obtain a
mercy for me and a pardon. Let not thy justice and severity so remember my
sins, as to forget thine own mercy; and though I have committed that for
which I deserve to be condemned, yet thou can not loose that glorious
attribute whence flows comfort to us and hopes of being saved. Spare me
therefore, O merciful God, for to give pardon to a sinner that confesses his
sins, and begges remission, is not impossible to thy power, nor
disproportionate to thy justice, nor unusual to thy mercy and sweetest
clemency. Blessed Jesu, acknowledge in me whatsoever is thine, and cleanse me
from whatsoever is amiss. Have pity on me now in the time of mercy, and
condemn me not when thou come to judgment* for what profit is there in my
blood? Thou delightest not in the death of a sinner, but in his conversion
there is joy in Heaven; and when thou have delivered me from my sins, and
saved my soul, I shall praise and magnify thy Name to all eternity. Mercy,
sweet Jesu, Mercy.

Lord have mercy upon us.

Christ have mercy upon us.

Lord have mercy upon us.

Our Father which art in Heaven, etc.

I am not worthy, O Lord, to look up to Heaven, which is the Throne of thy
purity, for my sins are more in number than the hairs upon my head, and my
heart has failed me.

Lord be merciful to me a sinner.

I have not lived according to thy will, but in the vanity of mine own
thoughts, in idle, sinful, and impertinent language, in foolish actions, in
blindness of heart, in contempt of thy holy Word and Commandments: I have not
loved thee my God with all my heart, nor feared thee with all my soul, nor
served thee with all my might according to thy holy precept, nor loved my
neighbor as my self.

Lord be merciful to me a sinner.

I have been unthankful to thy Divine Majesty, forgetting that thou made me
and preservest me; to thy Son my blessed Savior, forgetting the bitter pains
he suffered for me; and to the holy Ghost, forgetting how many gracious
influences I have received from him for my help, comfort, and promotion in the
ways of holy Religion, but have rebelled against thee my Maker, have sold my
self to work wickedness from whence by the passion of thy holy Son I was
redeemed, and have resisted the holy Ghost.

Lord be merciful to me a sinner.

I have offended thee my God in an inordinate estimation of my self, in vain
complacencies, and desires to be esteemed as much or more than others, in not
suffering with meekness, indifference, and obedience, the humiliations sent to
me by thy divine providence, in haughty deportment toward my superiors,
equals, and inferiors, and in accepting such honors as have been done to me
without returning them to thee the Fountain.

Lord be merciful to me a sinner.

I have offended thee my God in impatience, in anger intemperate in degree,
inordinate in the object, growing peevish and disquieted by trifling
inadvertencies of others, and slight accidents about me.

Lord be merciful to me a sinner.

I have offended thee my God, by being envious at the prosperous successes and
advantages of my neighbors, and have had resentments of joy at their
displeasures and sadnesses.

Lord be merciful to me a sinner.

I have been negligent in performance of my charge, idle in doing my duties,
soft and effeminate in my life, indevout in my prayers, slothful in the
exercises of Religion, weary of their length, displeased at their return,
without advertency in the execution of them, and glad at an occasion of their
pretermission.

Lord be merciful to me a sinner.

I have been diligent and curious in pleasing my appetite of meat, and drink,
and pleasures, loosing my time, pampering my flesh, quenching the Spirit,
making matter both for sin and sicknesses, and have not been sedulous in
mortifying my body for the subduing mine own intemperances and inordination.

Lord be merciful to me a sinner.

I have been an improvident steward of the good things thou have given me, I
have loved them inordinately, sought them greedily, and unjustly, dispensed
them idly, and parted with them unwillingly: I have not been so charitable to
the poor, or so pitiful to the afflicted, or so compassionate to the sick,
or so apt to succor and give supply to the miseries of my neighbors as I
ought, but have too much minded things below, not setting mine affections upon
Heaven and heavenly things, but have been unlike thee in all things, I have
been unmercifull and unjust.

Lord be merciful to me a sinner.

Mine eyes, O Lord, have wandered after vanity, beholding and looking after
things unseemly without displeasure, despising my neighbors, prying into their
faults, but have been blind not seeing mine own sins, and infinite
irregularities.

Lord be merciful to me a sinner.

I have not with care kept the door of my lips, nor bridled my tongue, but
have been excessive in talking, immoderate in dissolute and wanton laughter,
apt to lie, to deny truth, to accuse others, to scoff at them, to aggravate
their faults, to lessen their worth, to give rash judgment, to flatter for
advantage, to speak of thy Name irreverently, and without religious or grave
occasions, our discourses have been allayed with slander and backbiting, not
apt to edify, or minister grace unto the hearers.

Lord be merciful to me a sinner.

Mine ears have been greedy after vanity, listening after things unprofitable,
or that might tend to the prejudice of my neighbors, and have not with holy
appetite listened after thy holy words and conveyances of salvation.

Lord be merciful to me a sinner.

I have offended thee by the entertainment of evil thoughts, thoughts of
uncleanness and impurity, and have not resisted their first beginnings, but
have given consent to them explicitly and implicitly, and have brought them up
till they have grown into idle words and actions.

Lord be merciful to me a sinner.

I have made my self guilty of the sins of others by consent, by approving,
by not reproving, by cooperating, by encouraging their ill actions, so making
mine own heap greater by pulling their deformities upon mine own head.

Lord be merciful to me a sinner.

I have employed all my members and faculties both of soul and body in the
ways of unrighteousness, I have transgressed my duty in all my relations, and
in all my actions and traverses of my whole life, even where I might have had
most confidence I find nothing but weakness and imperfections.

Lord be merciful to me a sinner.

I have broken my vows and purposes of obedience, and holy life, I have been
inconstant to all good, refractory to counsels, disobedient to commands,
stubborn against admonition, churlish and ungentle in my behavior, mindful
and revengfull of injuries, forgetful of benefits, seeking my own ends,
deceiving my own soul.

Lord be merciful to me a sinner.

My secret sins, O Lord, are innumerable, sins secret to my self through
inadvertency, forgetfullnesse, wilful ignorance, or stupid negligence; secret
to the world, committed before thee only, and under the witness of my own
conscience. I am confounded with the multitude of them, and the horror of their
remembrance.

Oh Jesu God, be merciful unto me.

I.
SOn of Daivd, Blessed Redeemer, Lamb of God, that take away the sins of
the world have mercy upon me. O Jesus, be a Jesus unto me, thou that sparedst thy
servant Peter that denied thee thrice, thou that did cast seven Devils out
of Mary Magdalen, and forgavest the woman taken in adultery, and did bear
the convert thief from the Cross, to the joys of Paradise, have mercy upon me
also; for although I have amassed together more sins, then all these in
conjunction, yet nor their sins, nor mine, nor the sins of all the world
can equal thy glorious mercy, which is as infinite, and eternal as thy self.
I acknowledge, O Lord, that I am vile, but yet redeemed with thy precious
blood; I am blind, but thou art the light of the world; I am weak, but thou
art my strong rock; I have been dead in trespasses and sins, but thou art my
resurrection and my life. Thou, O Lord, love to show mercy, and the
expressions of thy mercy, the nearer they come to infinite, the more
proportionable they are to thy essence, and like thy self. Behold then O Lord,
a fit object for thy pity: my sins are so great and many that to forgive me,
will be an act of glorious mercy, and all the praises which did acrue to thy
name, by the forgiveness of David, and Manasses, and S. Paul, and the
adultresse, and the thief, and the Publican will be multiplied to thy honor,
in the forgiveness of me so vile, so unworthy a wretch, that I have nothing to
say for my self, but that the greatness of my misery, is a fit object for thy
miraculous and infinite mercy. Despise me not, O Lord, for I am thy creature,
despise me not, for thou did dye for me, cast me not away in thine anger, for
thou came to seek me, and to save me. Say unto my soul I am thy salvation;
let thy holy spirit lead me from the errors of my ways, into the paths of
righteousness, to great degrees of repentance, and through all the parts of a
holy life, to a godly and a holy death. Grant this, O blessed Jesus, for thy
mercies, and for thy pity sake. Amen.

II.
O Lord God, Blessed Jesus, Eternal Judge of quick and dead, I tremble with
horror at the apprehension when I call to mind with what terrors and Majesty
thou shall appear in judgment; a fire shall go out from thy presence and a
tempest shall be stirred up round about thee, such a tempest as shall rend the
rocks level the mountains, shake the earth, disorder and dissolve the whole
fabric of the heavens, and where then shall I, vile sinner, appear, when the
heavens are not pure in thy sight. Lord I tremble when I remember that sad
truth, If the righteous scarcely be saved, where then shall the wicked and the
ungodly appear? I know, O Lord, that all my secret impurities shall be laid
open before all the Nations of the world, before all the orders and degrees of
Angels, in the presence of innumerable millions of beatified spirits. There
shall I see many that have taught me innocence and sanctity, many that have
given me pious example, many that have dyed for thee, and suffered tortures
rather then they would offend thee. O just and dear God, where shall I appear,
who shall plead for me that am so laden with impurities, with vanity, with
ingratitude, with malice, and the terrors of an affrighting conscience? Lord
what shall I do, who am straightened by my own covetousness, accused by my own
pride, consumed with envy, set on fire by lust, made dull with gluttony, and
stupid by drunkenness, supplanted by ambition, rent asunder with faction and
discord, made dissolute with lightness and inconstancy, deceived with
hypocrisy, abused with flattery, foold with presumption, disturbed with anger,
and disordered by a whole body of sin and death? But thou shall answer for
me, O Lord my God, thou art my judge and my advocate, and thou art to pass
sentence upon me for those sins, for which thou diedst. O reserve not my
sins to be punished in the life to come, for then I dye eternally, but bring
me in this world to a holy, a sharp and Salutary repentance. Behold I am in
thine hands; grant I may so weep, and be contrite for my sins, that in the
hour of my death I may find mercy, and in the day of judgment I may be freed
from all the terrors of thy wrath, and the sentence of the wicked, and may
behold thy face with joy and security, being set at thy right hand, with all
thy saints and Angels to sing an eternal Alleluiah to the honor of thy
mercies. Amen, sweet Jesus. Amen.

III.
MOST Merciful and indulgent Jesus, hear the complaint of a sad and miserable
sinner, for I have searched into the secret recesses of my soul, and there I
find nothing but horror, and a barren wilderness, a neglected conscience
overgrown with sins and cares, and beset with fears and sore amazements. I
find that I have not observed due reverence toward my superiors, nor modesty
in my discourse, nor discipline in my manners. I have been obstinate in my vain
purposes, cosen'd in my own semblances of humility, pertinacious in hatred,
bitter in my jesting, impatient of Subjection, ambitious of power, slow to good
actions, apt to talk, ready to supplant my neighbors, full of jealousies and
suspicion, scornful and censorious, burdensome to my friends, ungrateful to
my benefactors, imperious to my inferious, boasting to have said what I said
not, to have seen what I saw not, to have done what I did not, and have both
said, and seen, and done what I ought not, provoking thy divine Majesty with a
continual course of sin and vanity. And yet, O Lord, thou have spared me all
this while, and have not taken away my life in the midst of my sins, which is
a mercy so admirable and of so vast a kindness, as no heart or tongue can
think, or speak. If thou had dealt with me according as I had deserved, and
might justly have expected, I had been now, now at this instant sealed up to an
eternity of torments, hopelessely miserable, fearing the revelation of thy day
with an insupportable amazement: and now under the sweet influences of thy
mercies, J am praying to thee, confessing my sins, with shame, indeed at my
baseness and ingratitude, but with a full hope and confidence in thy mercy. O
turn the eyes of thy divine clemency with a gracious aspect upon a wretched
sinner, open the bowels of thy mercy, and receive me into favor. O my dear
God, let thy grace speedily work that in me for which thou so long have spared
me, and to which thou did design me in thy holy purposes and mercies of
eternity, even a true faith, and a holy life, conformable to thy will, and in
order to eternal blessedness. I remember, O Lord, the many fatherly
expressions and examples of thy mercies to repenting sinners, thy delight in
our conversion, thy unwillingnesse to destroy us, thy earnest invitation of us
to grace and life, thy displeasure at our dangers and miseries, the infinite
variety of means thou usest to bring us from the gates of death, and to make
us happy to eternity. These mercies, O Lord, are so essential to thee, that
thou can not but be infinitely pleased in demonstrations of them. Remember
not, O Lord* how we have despised thy mercies, slighted thy judgments,
neglected thy Commandments; but now at length establish in us great contrition
for our sins, lead us on to humble confession and dereliction of them, and
let thy grace make us bring forth fruits meet for repentance, fruits of
justice, of hope, of charity, of religion and devotion, that we may be what
thou delightest in, holy, and just, and merciful, vessels prepared for honor,
temples of the holy Ghost, and instruments of thy praises to all eternity, O
blessed Jesus, who live and reignest, ever one God, world without end. Amen.

O Lord Jesu Christ, Son of the eternal God, interpose thy holy Death, thy
Cross and Passion between thy judgment and my soul, now and in the hour of
my death, granting unto me grace and mercy, to all faithful people pardon and
peace, to the Church unity and amity, and to all sinners repentance and
amendment, to us all life and glory everlasting, who live and reignest ever
one God, world without end. Amen,

A Form of thankesgiving, with a particular enumeration of Gods blessings.
MOst glorious Lord God, infinite in mercy, full of compassion, long suffering,
and of great goodness, I adore, and praise, and glorify thy holy Name,
worshipping thee with the lowliest devotions of my soul and body, and give
thee thanks for all the benefits thou have done unto me; for whatsoever I am,
or have, or know, or desire as I ought, it is all from thee, thou art the
Fountain of being and blessing, of sanctity and pardon, of life and glory.

Praise the Lord, O my soul, and all that is within me praise his holy Name.

Thou, O God, of thine infinite goodness have created me of nothing, and have
given me a degree of essence next to Angels, imprinting thine Image on me,
enduing me with reasonable faculties of will and understanding, to know and
choose good, and to refuse evil, and have put me into a capacity of a blessed
immortality.

O praise the Lord with me, and let us magnify his Name together.

Thou, O God, of thy great mercy have given me a comely body, a good
understanding, straight limbs, a ready and unloosed tongue, whereas with
justice thou might have made me crooked and deformed, sottish and slow of
apprehension, imperfect and impedite in all my faculties.

O give thanks unto the God of Heaven: for his mercy endures for ever.

Thou, O God, of thy glorious mercies, have caused me to be borne of Christian
parents, and did not suffer me to be strangled in the womb, but gave me
opportunity of holy Baptism, and have ever since blessed me with education in
Christian Religion.

Thy way, O God, is holy, who is so great a God as our God?

Thou, O God, out of thine abundant kindness have made admirable variety of
creatures to minister to my use, to serve my necessity, to preserve and restore
my health, to be an ornament to my body, to be representations of thy power and
of thy mercy.

Unto thee, O God, will I pay my vows: unto thee will I give thanks.

Thou, O God, of thine admirable and glorious mercy have made thine Angels
ministering spirits for my protection and defense against all the hostilities of
the Devil; thou have set a hedge about me, and such a guard as all the power
of hell and earth cannot overcome: thou have preserved me by thy holy
providence and the ministry of Angels from drowning, from burning, from
precipice, from deformities, from fracture of bones, and all the snares of
evil, and the great violations of health, which many of my betters suffer.

I will give thanks unto thee, O Lord, with my whole heart: even before the
gods will I sing praise unto thee.

Thou, O most merciful God, have fed me and clothed me, have raised me up
friends and blessed them, have preserved me in dangers, have rescued me from
the fury of the sword, from the rage of pestilence, from perishing in public
distemperatures and diseases epidemicall, from terrors and affrightments of
the night, from illusions of the Devil and sad apparitions; thou have been my
guide in my journies, my refreshment in sadnesses, my hope and my confidence in
all my griefs and desolations.

O give thanks unto the Lord of lords: for his mercy endures for ever.

But above all mercies it was not less than infinite, whereby thou lovedst me
and all mankind when we were lost and dead, and rebels against thy Divine
Majesty; thou gave thine own begotten Son to seek us when we went astray, to
restore us to life when we were dead in trespasses and sins, and to reconcile
us to thy self by the mercies and the atonement of an everlasting covenant.

He is our God, even the God of whom comes salvation: God is the Lord by whom
we escape death.

O most blessed Jesus, I praise and adore thine infinite mercies, humility, and
condescension, that for my sake thou would descend from the bosom of thy
heavenly Father into the pure womb of an humble maid, and take on thee my
nature, and be borne, and cry, and suffer cold, and all the incommodities which
the meannesse of a stable could minister to the tenderness of thy first
infancy.

Lord, what is man that thou art mindful of him: and the Son of man that thou
so regardest him?

I adore thee, blessed Jesus, and praise thee for thine immaculate sanctity, for
all thy holy precepts and counsels, for thy Divine example, for thy miracles
and mysterious revelations of thy Fathers will, for the institution of the holy
Sacraments, and all other blessings of thy Prophetical Office.

O praise the Lord, for the Lord is gracious: sing praises unto his Name, for
it is lovely.

I adore and love thee, most blessed Jesus, for all the parts of thy most bitter
Passion, for thy being betrayed and accused, buffeted and spit upon,
blindfolded and mocked, crowned with thorns and scourged, for thine agony and
bloody sweat, for thy bearing the sad load of the Cross, and sadder load of
our sins, for thy Crucifixion three long hours, when the weight of thy Body
was supported with wounds and nails, for thy Death and Burial, for thy
continual intercession and advocation with thy heavenly Father in behalf of
me and all thy holy Church, and all other acts of mediation and redemption, the
blessings of thy priestly Office.

O praise the Lord for his goodness: and declare the wonders he has done for
the children of men.

I adore and magnify thy holy Name, O most blessed Jesus, for thy triumph over
death, hell, sin, and the grave, for thy opening the Kingdom of Heaven to all
believers, for thy glorious resurrection and ascension, for thy government over
all the creatures, for the advancement of thy holy Kingdom, for thy continual
resisting and defeating the intendments of thine enemies against thy Church, by
the strength of thine arm, by the mightiness of thy power, by the glories of
thy wisdom; for those blessed promises thou have made and performest to thy
Church of sending the holy Ghost, of giving her perpetuity of being in defiance
of all the gates and powers of Hell and darkness, and blessing her with
continual assistances, and all other glories of thy Regal Office and power.

O sing praises, sing praises unto our God; O sing praises, sing praises unto
our King: for God is the King of all the earth, sing ye praises with
understanding.

O most holy Spirit, Love of the Father, Fountain of grace, Spring of all
spiritual blessings, I adore and praise thy divine excellencies which are
essential to thy glorious Self in the unity of the most mysterious Trinity,
and which thou communicatest to all faithful people, and to me thy unworthy
servant in the unity of the Catholic Church.

O magnify the Lord our God, and fall down before his footstool: for he is
holy.

O blessed Spirit, I praise and magnify thy Name for thy miraculous descent
upon the Apostles in Pentecost in mysterious representments, for those great
graces and assistances coming upon their heads, and falling down upon us all
in the descent of all ages of the Church, for confirmation of our Faith, for
propagation of the Gospel, for edification and ornament of thy Family.

Thou O God, shall endure for ever, and thy remembrance throughout all
generations.

O most glorious Spirit, I praise and magnify thy Name for thy inspiration of
the Apostles and Prophets, for thy providence and mercy in causing holy
Scriptures to be written, and preserving them from the corruptions of
Heretics, from the violences of Pagans and enemies of the Cross of Christ.

I will always give thanks unto the Lord: his praise shall ever be in my
mouth.

I bless thy Name for those holy promises and threatenings, those judgments
and mercies, those holy precepts and admonitions which thou have registered in
Scriptures, and in the records and monuments of the Church, for all those
graces, helps, and comforts whereby thou promotest me in piety, and the ways
of true Religion, for baptismall and penitential grace, for the opportunities
and sweet refreshings of the Sacrament of the Eucharist, for all the advantages
thou have given me of good society, tutours, and governors, for the fears
thou have produced in me as deleteries and impediments of sin, for all my hopes
of pardon, and expectation of the promises made by our Lord Jesus Christ to
encourage me in the paths of life and sanctity, for all the holy sermons,
spiritual books, and lessons, for all the good prayers and meditations, for
those blessed waitings and knockings at the door of my heart, patiently
tarrying for, and lovingly inviting me to repentance, without ceasing,
admonishing and reproving me with the checkes of a tender conscience, with
exterior and interior motives, and for whatsoever other means or incentive
of holiness thou have assisted me withal.

I magnify, and praise, and adore thee and thy goodness. All Nations whom
thou have made and sanctified shall come and worship thee, O Lord, and shall
glorify thy Name, for thou art great and do wondrous things, thou art God
alone, and great is thy mercy toward me, thou have delivered my soul from the
nethermost Hell, therefore shall every good man sing of thy praise without
ceasing: O my God, I will give thanks unto thee for ever with Cherubims, and
Seraphims, and all the companies of the heavenly Host, saying, Holy, Holy,
Holy, Lord God of Sabbath, holy is our God, holy is the Immortal, holy is the
Almighty, the Father, the Son, and the holy Ghost, to whom be all honor and
glory and dominion and power ascribed of all spirits, and all men, and all
creatures, now and for evermore. Amen.

I. Prayers preparatory to the receiving of the blessed Sacrament.
O Most immaculate and glorious* Jesus, behold me miserable sinner, drawing
near to thee with the approaches of humility, and earnest desire to be
cleansed from my sins, to be united to thee by the nearest and most
mysterious union of charity and Sacramental participation of thy most holy
Body and Blood: I presume nothing of mine own worthiness, but I am most
confident of thy mercies and infinite loving kindness. I know, O Lord, I am
blind and sick, and dead, and naked, but therefore I come the rather: I am
sick, and thou art my Physician, thou arisest with healing in thy wings, by
thy wounds I come to be cured, and to be healed by thy stripes: I am unclean,
but thou art the Fountain of purity, I am blind, and thou art the great Eye of
the world, the Sun of righteousness, in thy light I shall see light: I am
poor, and thou art rich unto all, the Lord of all the creatures. I therefore
humbly beg of thy mercy that thou would be pleased to take from me all my
sins, to cure my infirmities, to cleanse my filthiness, to lighten my
darkness, to clothe my nakedness with the robe of thy righteousness, that I
may with such reverence, and faith, and holy intention receive thy blessed Body
and Blood in the mysterious Sacrament, that it may be unto me life, and
pleasantness, and holy nourishment, and that I may be firmly and indissolubly
united to thy mystical Body, and may at last see clearly and without a veil
thy face in glory everlasting, who live and reignest, ever one God world
without end. Amen.

II.
I Adore and bless thy glorious Majesty, O blessed Jesus, for this great
dignation and vouchsafing to me, that thou art pleased for all the infinite
multiplication of my sins, and innumerable violations of thy holy Law, still
to give thy self unto me, to convey health, and grace, and life, and hopes of
glory in the most blessed Sacrament. I adore thee, O most righteous Redeemer,
that thou art pleased under the visible signs of Bread and Wine, to convey
unto our souls thy holy Body and Blood, and all the benefits of thy bitter
Passion. O my God, I am not worthy thou should come under my roof, but let
thy holy Spirit with his purities prepare for thee a lodging in my soul. Thou
have knocked often, O blessed Jesus, at the door of my heart, and would
willingly have entered; behold, O Lord, my heart is ready to receive thee, cast
out of it all worldly desires, all lusts and carnal appetites, and then enter
in, and there love to inhabit, that the Devil may never return to a place
that is so swept and garnished, to fill me full of all iniquity. O thou lover
of souls, grant that this holy Sacrament may be a light unto mine eyes, a
guide to my understanding, and a joy to my soul, that by its strength I may
subdue and mortify the whole body of sin in me, and that it may produce in me
constancy in Faith, fullness of wisdom, perfection and accomplishment of all
thy righteous commandments, and such a blessed union with thee, that I may
never more live unto my self, or to the world, but to thee only, and by the
refreshment of an holy hope, I may be lead through the paths of a good life,
and persevering piety to the communion and possession of thy Kingdom, O
blessed Jesus, who live and reignest ever one God, world without end. Amen.

III.
O Lord God, who have made all things of naught, producing great degrees of
es^ence out of nothing: make me a new creature, and of a sinful man, make me
holy, and just, and merciful; that I may receive thy precious Body, devoutly,
reverently, with meekness, contrition, and great affection, with spiritual
comfort and gladness at thy mystical presence. Feed my soul with Bread from
Heaven, fill me with charity, conform me to thy will in all things, save me from
all dangers bodily and ghostly, assist and guide me in all doubts and fears,
prepare and strengthen me against all surreptions and sudden incursion of
temptations, cleanse me from all stains of sin, and suffer nothing to abide in
me but thy self only, who art the Life of souls, the Food of the Elect, and
the joy of Angels. Give me such a gust and holy relish in this Divine
nutriment, that nothing may ever hereafter please me but what savours of thee
and thy miraculous sweetness. Teach me to loath all the pleasures and beauties
of this life, and let my soul be so inebriated with the pleasures of thy
Table, that I may be comprehended and swallowed up with thy love and
sweetness: let me think nothing but thee, covet nothing but thee, enjoy
nothing but thee, nothing in comparison with thee, and neither do nor possess
any thing but what leads to thee, and is in order to the performance of thy
will and the fruition of thy glories. Transfixe my soul, O blessed Jesu, with
so great love to thee, so great devotion in receiving the holy Sacrament, that
I may be transformed to the Fellowship of thy sufferings, and admitted to a
participation of all the benefits of thy Passion, and to a communion of thy
graces and thy glories. I desire to be with thee, dissolve all the chains of
my sin, and then come Lord Jesus, come quickly. Let my soul feed on thee
greedily, for thou art the spring of light and life, the Fountain of wisdom
and health, a torrent of divine pleasure and tranquillity, the Author of peace
and comfort: enter into me, sweet Jesu, take thou possession of my soul, and
be thou Lord over me and all my faculties, and preserve me with great mercy and
tenderness, that no doubting or infidelity, no impenitence or remanent
affection to a sin, no impurity or irreverence may make me unworthy and
incapable of thy glorious approach. Let not my sins crucify the Lord of life
again, let it not be said concerning me, the hand of him that betrayeth me is
with me on the table: that this holy Communion may not be unto me an occasion
of death, but a blessed peace offering for my sins, and a gate of life and
glory. Grant this, O blessed God, for his sake who is both Sacrifice and
Priest, the Master of the Feast, and the Feast it self, even Jesus Christ, to
whom with thee, O Father and the holy Spirit, be all honor and glory, now and
for ever. Amen.

A Prayer after receiving the consecrated Bread.
I Give thanks unto thee Almighty and eternal God, that thou have not
rejected me from thy holy Table, but have refreshed my soul with the salutary
refection of the Body of thy Son Jesus Christ. Lord if I had lived innocently,
and had kept all thy Commandments, I could have had no proportion of merit to
so transcendent a mercy; but since I have lived in all manner of sin, and
multiplied provocations against thy Divine Majesty, thy mercy is so glorious
and infinite, that I am amassed at the consideration of its immensity. Go on, O
my dear God, to finish so blessed a redemption, and now that thou have begun
to celebrate a marriage and holy union between thy self and my soul, let me
never throw off the wedding garment, or stain it with the pollutions of deadly
sin, nor seek after other lovers, but let me for ever, and ever be united unto
thee, being transformed into thy will in this life, and to the likeness of thy
glories in the life to come, who live and reignest, ever one God, world
without end. Amen.

After receiving the Cup.
O Just and dear God, who out of the unmeasurable abysses of wisdom and
mercy have redeemed us, and offered life* and grace, and salvation to us by the
real exhibition of thy Son Jesus Christ in the sacrifice of his Death upon the
altar of the Cross, and by commemoration of his bitter agonies in the holy
Sacrament; Grant that that great and venerable sacrifice which we now
commemorate sacramentally, may procure of thee for thy whole Church mercy and
great assistance in all trials, deliverance from all heresies, schisms,
sacrilege, and persecutions, to all sick people health and salvation,
redemption for captives, competency of living to the indigent and necessitous,
comfort to the afflicted, relief to the oppressed, repentance to all sinners,
softness of spirit and a tender conscience to the obstinate, conversion to the
Jews, Turks, and remedy to all that are in any trouble or adversity. And
grant to us, O Lord, that this blessed Sacrament and sacrifice of commemor^tion
in virtue of that dreadful and proper Sacrifice upon the Cross may obtain for
me, and for us all who have communicated this day, pardon and peace; and that
we may derive from thee by this ministry grace to expel all our sins, to
mortify all our lusts, to exterminate all concupiscence, to crucify all
inordination and irregularity, to produce in us humility, and chastity, and
obedience, and meekness of spirit, and charity, and may become our Defense and
Armor against the violences and invasions of all our ghostly enemies, and
temporal disadvantages; and give us this grace and favor, that we may not die
in the guilt and commission of a sin without repentance, nor without receiving
the blessed Sacrament, but that we may so live and die, that we may at last
rest in thy bosom, and be embraced with the comprehensions of thy eternal
charity, who live and reignest, ever one God, world without end. Amen.

All blessing, and praise, and honor, be unto thee, O blessed Redeemer: to
thee we the banished and miserable sons of Adam, do call for mercy and
defense, to thee we sigh and cry in this valley of tears* O dearest Advocate,
turn those thy merciful eyes toward us, and show us thy glorious face in thy
Kingdom, where no tears, or sighing, or fears, or sadnesses can approach.
Amen, sweetest Jesus, Amen.

Prayers preparatory to death.
I. A Prayer for a blessed ending, to be said in time of health or sickness.
O Blessed Jesus, Fountain of eternal mercy, the Life of the soul, and
glorious Conqueror over Death and sin, I humbly beseech thee to give me grace
so to spend this transitory life in virtuous and holy exercises, that when the
day of my death shall come, in the midst of all my pains, I may feel the sweet
refreshings of thy holy spirit comforting my soul, sustaining my infirmities,
and releeving all my spiritual necessities: and grant, that in the Unity of
the holy Catholic Church, and in the integrity of Christian faith, with
confidence and hope of thy mercy, in great love toward thee, in peace with my
Neighbors, and in charity with all the world, I may through thy grace depart
hence out of this vale of misery, and go unto that glorious country, where thou
have purchased an inheritance for us, with the price of thy most precious
blood, and raignest in it gloriously, in the Unity of thy Father and ours, of
thy holy Spirit, and our Ghostly Comforter, ever one God world without end.
Amen.

II. A Prayer to be said at the beginning of a sickness.
O Lord my God, who chastisest every one whom thou receivest, and with thy
Fatherly correction smitest all those whom thou consignest to the inheritance
of sons; write my soul in the book of life, and number me amongst thy
Children, whom thou have smitten with the rod of sickness, and by thy
chastisements have brought me into the Lot of the righteous. Thou, O Blessed
Jesus, art a helper in the needful time of trouble; lay no more upon me then
thou shall enable me to bear, and let thy gentle correction in this life
prevent the insupportable stripes of thy vengeance in the life to come. Smite
me now that thou may spare me to all eternity: and yet, O blessed High
Priest, who art touched with a sense of our infirmities, smite me friendly, and
reproove me with such a tenderness as thou bear unto thy Children, to whom
thou conveyest suppletory comforts, greater then the pains of chastisement,
and in due time restore me to health, and to thy solemn assemblies again, and
to the joy of thy Countenance. Give me patience and humility, and the grace of
repentance, and an absolute dereliction of my self, and a resignation to thy
pleasures and providence, with a power to do thy will in all things, and then
do what thou please to me; only in health or sickness, in life or death, let
me feel thy comforts refreshing my soul, and let thy grace pardon all my
sins. Grant this, O Blessed Jesus, for my trust is in thee only, thou art my
God, and my merciful Savior and Redeemer. Amen.

III. A Prayer to be said in the progress of a sickness.
O Lord my God, Blessed Jesus, who by thy bitter death and passion have sweetened
the cup of death to us, taking away it is bitterness and sting, and making it
an entrance to life and glory, have pity upon me thy servant, who have so deep
a share in sin, that I cannot shake off the terrors of death* but that my
nature with it is hereditary corruption still would preserve it self in a
disunion from the joys of thy Kingdom. Lord I acknowledge my own infirmities
and beg thy pity. It is better for me to be with thee, but the remembrance
of my sins does so depresse my growing confidence, that I am in a great
straight between my fears and hopes, between the infirmities of my Nature, and
the better desires of conforming to thy holy will and pleasure. O my Dear
Redeemer, wean my soul and all my desires from the flatteries of this world;
pardon all my sins, and consigne so great a favor by the comforts, and
attestation of thy divinest Spirit, that my own fears being masterd, my sins
pardoned, my desires rectified, as the Heart thirsts after the springs of water,
so my soul may long after thee, O God, and to enter into thy Courts. Heavenly
Father, if it may be for thy glory, and my ghostly good, to have the days of
my pilgrimage prolonged, I beg of thee health and life; but if it be not
pleasing to thee, to have this cup pass from me, thy will be done: my Savior
has drunk off all the bitterness. Behold, O Lord, I am in thine hands, do
with me as seems good in thine eyes; though I walk through the valley of the
shadow of death, I will fear no evil, for thou art with me, thy rod, and thy
staff comfort me. I will lay me down in peace, and take my rest, for it is
thou Lord only who shall make me to dwell in everlasting safety, and to partake
of the joys of thy Kingdom, who live and raignest eternal God, world
without end. Amen.

IV. A Prayer for a sick Person, in danger of death.
O Lord Jesus Christ, our health and life, our hope, and our resurrection from
the dead: I resign my self up to thy holy will and pleasure, either to life,
that I may live longer to thy service and my amendment; or to death, to the
perpetual enjoyment of thy presence, and of thy glories. Into thy hands I
commend my spirit, for I know, O Lord, that nothing can perish, which is
committed to thy mercies. J believe, O Lord, that I shall receive my body again
at the resurrection of the just; I relinquish all care of that, only I beg of
thee mercy for my soul; strengthen it with thy grace against all temptations,
let thy loving kindness defend it, as with a shield against all the violences
and hostile assaults of Satan: let the same mercy, be my guard and defense,
which protected thy Martyrs, crowning them with victory in the midst of flames,
horrid torments, and most cruel deaths. There is no help in me, O Lord, I
cannot by my own power, give a minutes rest to my wearied body, but my trust is
in thy sure mercies, and I call to mind, to my unspeakable comfort, that thou
were hungry, and thirsty, and wearied, and whipped, and crowned with Thorns, and
mocked, and crucified for me. O let that mercy which made thee suffer so much,
make thee do that for which thou sufferedst so much, pardon me, and save me.
Let thy merits answer for my impieties, let thy righteousness cover my sins,
thy blood wash away my stains, and thy comforts refresh my soul. As my body
grows weak let thy grace be stronger, let not my faith doubt, nor my hope
tremble, nor my charity grow cold, nor my soul be affrighted with the terrors
of death; but let the light of thy countenance enlighten mine eyes, that I
sleep not in death eternal; and when my tongue fails, let thy spirit teach my
heart to pray, with strong cryings and groans that are unutterable. O Let not
the enemy do me any violence, but let thy holy mercies, and thy Angels repel
and defeat his malice and fraud, that my soul may by thy strength triumph in
the joys of eternity, in the fruition of thee, my life, my joy, my hope, my
exceeding great reward, my Lord and Savior Jesus Christ. Amen.

V. For a dying Person in, or near the agonies of death.
MOst merciful and Blessed Savior, have mercy upon the soul of this thy
servant; remember not his ignorances, nor the sins of his youth, but according
to thy great mercy remember him in the mercies and glories of thy Kingdom.
Thou, O Lord, have opened the Kingdom of Heaven to all beleivers, let the
everlasting gates be opened, and receive his Soul: let the Angels, who rejoice
at the conversion of a sinner, triumph, and be exalted in his deliveranee and
salvation. Make him partaker of the benefits of thy holy incarnation, life and
sanctity, passion and death, resurrection and ascension, and of all the prayers
of the Church, of the joy of the elect, and all the fruits of the blessed
communion of Saints; and daily add to the number of thy beatified servants
such as shall be saved, that thy coming may be hastened, and the expectation of
the Saints may be fulfilled, and the glory of thee, our Lord Jesus, be advanced,
all the whole Church singing praises to the Honor of thy name, who live and
raignest ever one God world without end. Amen.

VI.
O Most merciful Jesus, who did dye to reredeem us from death and damnation,
have mercy upon this thy servant, whom thy hand has visited with sickness: of
thy goodness be pleased to forgive him all his sins, and seal his hopes of
glory, with the refreshments of thy holy Spirit. Lord give him strength and
confidence in thee, assuage his pain, repel the assaults of his Ghostly
enemies by thy mercies, and a guard of holy Angels: preserve him in the unity
of the Church, keep his senses entire, his understanding right, give him great
measure of contrition, true faith, a well grounded hope, and abundant charity:
give him a quiet and a joyful departure, let thy ministering spirits convey his
soul to the mansions of peace and rest, there with certainty to expect a
joyful resurrection to the fullness of joy at thy right hand, where there is
pleasure for evermore, Amen.

VII. A Prayer for the joys of Heaven.
O Most glorious Jesus, who art the portion and exceeding great reward of all
faithful people, thou have beautified humane Nature with glorious immortality,
and have carried the same above all Heavens, above the seat of Angels, beyond
the Cherubims and Seraphims, placing it on the right hand of thy heavenly
Father, grant to us all the issues of thy abundant charity, that we may live in
thy fear, and die in thy favor. Prepare our souls with heavenly virtues for
heavenly joys, making us righteous here, that we may be beautified hereafter.
Amen.

A MORNING PRAYER.
In the Name of the Father, and of the Son, and of the holy Ghost.

Our Father which art in Heaven, etc.

I.
O Eternal son of righteousness, who came from the bosom of thy Father the
Fountain of my glorious light, to enlighten the darknesses of the world; I
praise thy Name that thou have preserved me from the dangers of this night, and
have continued to me still the opportunities of serving thee, and advancing my
hopes of a blessed eternity. Let thy mercies shine brightly upon me, and
dissipate the clouds and darknesses of my spirit and understanding, rectify my
affections, and purify my will and all my actions, that whatsoever I shall do
or suffer this day, or in my whole life, my words and purposes, my thoughts and
my intentions may be sanctified, and be acceptable to thy divine Majesty. Amen.

II.
GRant that my understanding may know thee, my heart may love thee, and all my
faculties and powers may give thee due obedience and serve thee. Preserve me
this day from all sin and danger, from all violences and snares of mine enemies
visible and invisible: let thy holy fear be as a bridle to my distemperatures,
and thy love so enkindle and actuate all mine endeavors, that no pleasure or
allurements of the world may draw me from thy service, nor any difficulty or
temptation may be my hinderance: let the profound humility and innocence of my
blessed Savior keep from me all pride and haughtiness of mind, all
self-love and vainglory, all obstinacy and disobedience, all fraudulency and
hurtful dissimulation, and let the graces of the holy Ghost take so absolute
possession and seizure of my soul, and all it is faculties, that I may tread
down and cast out the spirit of intemperance and uncleanness, of malice and
envy, of idleness and disdain, that I may never despise any of thy creatures,
but my self; that so being little in mine own sight, I may be great in thine.
Amen,

III.
CLoth my soul with the wedding garment, the habits of supernatural Faith and
Charity, that I may believe all thy holy promises and revelations without all
wavering, and love thee my God with so great devotions and affections, that
neither life nor death, prosperity nor adversity, temptations within, nor
without, may ever disunite me from the love of thee; but that I may have the
most intimate adhesion to thy glories and perfections, of which my condition in
this world is capable. Make me to choose virtue with the same freenes of
election, entertain it with as little reluctance, keep it with as much
complacency, actuate it with as many faculties, serve it with as much industry,
as I have in time past my vices and pleasures of the world; and grant that all
inordinate affection to the transitory things of this life may daily decay in
me, and that I may grow in spirit and ghostly strength, till I come to a
perfect man in Christ Jesus. Amen.

IV.
GIve unto thy servant true humility, great contrition, a tender conscience, an
obedient heart, an understanding always busied in honest and pious thoughts, a
will tractable and ever prone to do good, affections eaven and moderate, a
watchful custody over my senses, that by those windows sin may never enter
in, nor death by sin. Make me to watch over my tongue, and keep the door of my
lips, that no corrupt or unseemly communication proceed out my mouth, that I
may never slander, calumniate or detract from the reputation of my neighbor;
that I be not busy in the faults of others, but careful to correct mine own,
being gentle and merciful to others, and severe toward my self, that I may
speak much of thy praises, and what I can for the edification of my brethren.
Amen.

V.
GIve me understanding in thy Law, that I may know thy will; and grace, and
strength faithfully to fulfill the same. Give me a fear of thy Name, and of
thy threatenings, and a love and hope of thy promises, let me daily: feel thy
mercies, and remove thy judgments far from me. Imprint in my heart a filial
reverence and awfulnes toward thy Divine Majesty, that I may study to please
thee with diligence, to worship thee with much devotion, to submit to the
disposition of thy providence with thankfulness; and that in conscience of my
duty toward thee I may honor the King, obey Magistrates under him, love the
Saints, and do all acts of charity according to my opportunity and ability,
directing all my actions and intentions, not according to custom, or in
pursuance of mine own ends and temporal advantages, but in thy fear and in
holy religion to the advancement of thy honor and glory. Amen.

VI.
GIve me a soul watchful in the services of Religion, constant in holy
purposes, ingenuous and free from sordid ends or servile flattery, a modest
gravitie in my deportment, affability and fair courteous demeanor toward all
men, austeritie in condemning mine own sins, sweetness in fraternall
correction and reprehending others, mature judgment, a chaste body and a
clean soul, patience in suffering, deliberation in my words and actions, good
counsels in all my purposes: make me just in performing promises, and in all my
duties, sedulous in my calling, profitable to the Commonwealth, a true Son of
the Church, and of a disposition meek and charitable toward all men. Amen.

VII.
LEt this be my portion, and the comfort of my pilgrimage, so long as I am
detained in the condition of mortality, and exiled from my heavenly Country,
that being free from all fear of mine enemies, and from vexations, cares and
solicitudes of this life, I may be wholly devoted to thy service, that I may
attend thee only, and what tends to thee, that I may rejoice only in thee,
and my soul may rest in thee; that without distractions I may entertain thy
heavenly Doctrine, and the blessed motions of thy holy Spirit, spending my time
in the duties of necessity, in the works of charity, and the frequent office
of Religion, with diligence, and patience, and perseverance, and hope,
expecting the accomplishment of my days in peace; that when I go unto my dust,
I may be reckoned amongst those blessed souls, whose work it is to give thee
praise, and honor, and glory, to all eternity. Amen.

Blessed be the holy and undivided Trinity, now and for evermore. Amen.

An EVENING PRAYER.
In the Name of the Father, and of the Son, and of the holy Ghost.

Our Father which art in Heaven, etc,

I.
O Lord God, who art the light and splendor of souls, in the brightness of
thy countenance is eternal Day that knows no night, in thy arms, and in thy
protection is all quietness, tranquillity, and everlasting repose, while the
darkness covers the face of the earth, receive my body and soul into thy
custody; let not the spirits of darkness come near my dwelling, neither
suffer my fancy to be abused with illusions of the night. Lord, I am thy
servant, and the sheep of thy pasture, let not the Devil, who goes up and
down seeking whom he may devour, abuse my body, or make a prey of my soul,
but defend me from all those calamities which I have deserved, and protect my
soul, that it consent not to any work of darkness, least mine enemy say, he
has prevailed over me, or do mischief to a soul redeemed with thy most
precious Blood. Amen.

II.
PArdon and forgive me all the sins and offenses of my youth, the errors of
mine understanding, the inordination of mine affections, the irregularity of
all mine actions, and particularly whatsoever I have transgressed this day in
thought, word, or deed. Lord, let not thy wrath arise, for although I have
deserved the extremest pressure of thine indignation, yet remember my infirmity
and how thou have sent thy son to reveal thy infinite mercies to us, and
convey pardon and salvation to the penitent. I beseech thee also to accept the
heartiest Devotion and humblest acknowledgement of a thankful heart, for thy
blessing and preservation of this Day, for unless thy Providence and Grace had
been my Defense and Guide, I had committed more and more grievous sins, and
had been swallowed up by thy just wrath, and severest judgments. Mercy sweet
Jesus. Amen.

III.
LOrd, let thy grace be so present with me, that though my body sleep, yet my
soul man for ever be watchful, that I sleep not sin, in or p^termit any
opportunity of doing thee service* let the remembrances of thy goodness and
glories be first and last with me, and so unite my heart unto thee with
habitual charity, that all my actions and sufferings may be directed to thy
glory, and every motion and inclination either of soul or body, may in some
capacity or other, receive a blessing from thee, and do thee service; that
whether I sleep or wake, travel or rest, eat or drink, live or dye, I may
always feel the light of thy countenance shining so upon me, that my labors
may be easy, my rest blessed, my food sanctified, and my whole life spent with
so much sanctity and peace, that escaping from the darknesses of this world, I
may at last come to the land of everlasting rest in thy light, to behold light
and glory through Jesus Christ our Lord. Amen.

Blessed be the holy and undivided Trinity, now and for evermore.

Another Prayer for Evening.
I.
VIsit we beseech thee, O Lord, this habitation with thy mercy, and us thy
servants with thy salvation, and repel far from us all the snares of the
Enemy. Let thy holy Angels dwell here to keep us in peace and safety, and thy
blessing be upon us for ever, through Jesus Christ our Lord. Amen.

II.
O Lord Jesu Christ, the lively Image of thy Fathers mercies and glories, the
Savior of all them that put their trust in thee; we offer and present to thee
all our strengths, and powers of our souls and bodies, and whatsoever we are,
or ^ave to be preserved, governed, and possessed by thee. Preserve us from all
vicious, vain, and proud cogitations, unchaste affections, and from all those
things which thou hate. Grant us thy holy charity, that we may love thee
above all the world, that we may; with sincerity of intention and zealous
affections, seek thee alone, and in thee only take our rest, inseparably
joining our selves unto thee, who art worthy* to be beloved and adored of all
thy creatures with lowest prostrations, and highest affection, now and for
evermore. Amen.

III.
O Father of mercies, and God of all comforts, let this blessing be upon us,
and upon all the members of thy holy Church: all health and safety both of body
and soul, against all our enemies, visible and invisible, now and for ever.
Send us a quiet night, and a holy death in the actual communion of the
Catholic Church, and in thy charity, through Jesus Christ our Lord. Amen.

Our Father which art in heaven, etc.

Now, and in all dangers and afflictions of soul and body, in the hour of
death, and in the day of judgment, save us and deliver us, O sweet Savior and
Redeemer Jesus.

Collects to be added upon Various occasions.
I. For the Church.
ALmighty and everlasting God, who have revealed thy glory to Jews and
Gentiles in our Lord Jesus Christ, extend thy hand of mercy over all the
world, that thy Church may spread like a flourishing vine, and enlarge her
borders to the uttermost parts of the earth, that all Nations partaking of the
sweet refreshings of thy Gospel, thy name may be glorified, the honor of our
Lord Jesus advanced, his prophecies fullfilled; and his coming hastened.
Bless, O Lord, thy holy Church with all blessings of comfort, assistance, and
preservation; extirpate heresies, unite her divisions, give her patience and
perseverance in the faith, and confession of thy name, in despite of all
Enmities, temptations, and disadvantages; destroy all wicked counsels intended
against her, or any of her children, by the Devil or any of his accursed
instruments. Let the hands of thy grace and mercy lead her from this vale of
misery, to the triumphant throne of her Lord and Savior Jesus Christ. Amen.

II. For the King.
O Lord our heavenly Father, High and Mighty, King of Kings, who in thy hands
have the hearts of Kings, and can turn them as the rivers of water, send
the light of thy countenance, and abundance of blessings upon thy servant, our
Sovereign Lord King Charles, make him as holy, valiant, and prosperous as King
David, wise and rich like Solomon, zealous for the honor of thy Law and temple
as Josiah; and give him all sorts of great assistances, to enable him to serve
thee, to glorify thy name, to protect thy Church, to promote true religion, to
overcome all his enemies, to make glad all his liege people, that he serving
thee with all diligence and the utmost of his possibility, his people may
serve him with honor and obedience, in thee, and for thee, according to thy
blessed word and ordinance, through Jesus Christ our Lord. Amen.

III. For the Queen.
O God of heaven, Father of mercies, have mercy upon our most gracious Queen,
unite her unto thee with the bands of faith and love, preserve her to her lives
end in thy favor, and make her an instrument of glory to thy Name, of
refreshment to the Church, of joy to all faithful people of this Kingdom, of
a plenteous and blessed Issue to his Majesty, and Crown her with an eternal
weight of glory, through Jesus Christ our Lord. Amen.

IV. For the Prince of Wales.
O Most blessed Jesus, Son of God, who came from thy Fathers bosom with
myriads of blessings to the sons of men, bless us all by thy especial care
and providence, over the body and soul of the most Illustrious Prince, CHARLES.
Prepare him with plenty of thy grace, and with great abilities to succeed his
Royal Father, in the service of thy Majesty, in defending the Catholic
Faith, in comforting thy holy Church, in governing all the people prudently,
justly, and religiously, that being partaker of all thy mercies here, in
proportion to his necessity and capacity, he may enjoy a fullness of thy glory
hereafter, through Jesus Christ our Lord. Amen.

V. For the Bishops.
O Thou great sheep-heard and Bishop of our souls, most glorious Jesus, bless
all holy and religious Prelates, especially the Bishops of our Church. O God
let abundance of thy grace and benediction descend upon their heads, that by a
holy life, by a true and Catholic belief, by a confident confession of thy
Name, and by a Fatherly care, great sedulity and watchfullnesse over their
flock, they may glorify thee our God, the great lover of Souls, and set
forward the salvation of their people, and of others by their example, and at
last after a plentiful conversion of souls, they may shine like the Stars
in glory, through Jesus Christ our Lord. Amen.

VI. For our Parents.
O Almighty God, and merciful Father, who from the loins of our first
Parents Adam and Eve, have produced mankind, and have commanded us to honor
our Parents; in pursuance of thy holy Commandment and of our duty to thee our
God, and in thee to them, do with all humility beg a blessing of thee for
our Parents, who from thy mercy and plenty have conveyed many to us; pardon
and forgive all their sins and infirmities, increase in them all goodness,
give them blessings of the right hand, and blessings of the left; bless them
in their persons, in their posterity, in the comforts of thy holy Spirit, in a
persevering goodness, and at last in an eternal weight of glory, through
Jesus Christ our Lord. Amen.

VII. For our Children.
O Father of Heaven, God of all the Creatures, by whose Providence mankind is
increased, I bless thy Name for bestowing on me that blessing of the righteous
man, the blessing of Children. Lord bless them with health* with life, with
good understanding, with fair opportunities and advantages of education,
society, tutours, and governors; and above all with the graces of thy holy
Spirit, that they may live and be blessed under thy protection, grow in grace,
and be in favor with God and Man, and at last may make up the number of thine
elect Children, through Jesus Christ our Lord. Amen.

VIII. For our Patron, our Friends, and Benefactours.
O Almighty God, thou Fountain of all good, of all excellency both to Men and
Angels, extend thine abundant favor and loving kindnesses to my Patron, to all
my Friends and Benefactours; reward them and make them plentiful compensation
for all the good which from thy merciful Providence they have conveyed unto
me. Let the light of thy countenance shine upon them, and let them never come
into any desertion, affliction, or sadness, but such as may be an instrument
of thy glory and their eternal comfort, in our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ.
Amen.

IX. A Prayer of a wife for her Husband.
O My God, who have graciously pleased to call me to the holy state of
Matrimony, bless me in it with the grace of chastity, with loyalty,
obedience, and complacencie to my Husband; and bless him with long life, with
a healthful body, with an understanding soul, with abundance of all thy
graces, which may make him to be and continue thy servant, a true son of the
Church, a supporter and a guide to me his wife, a blessing and a comfort to his
children, through Jesus Christ our Lord. Amen.

X. Of a Husband for his Wife.
O Merciful God, who art a Father to us thy Children, a Spouse to thy holy
Church, a Savior and Redeemer to all mankind, have mercy upon thy Handmaid
my wife, endue her with all the ornaments of thy heavenly grace, make her to be
holy and devout as Hester, loving and amiable as Rachel, fruitful as Leah,
wise as Rebeccah, faithful and obedient as Sarah, that being filled with thy
grace and benediction here, she may be partaker of thy glory hereafter*
through Jesus Christ our Lord. Amen.

XI. For a Curate to say in behalf of his Parish.
O Blessed Jesu, thou that art an eternal Priest, an universal Bishop, and
the Fountain of all ghostly good, have mercy upon this Parish which thou have
concredited to my charge. Lord, I am unfit for so great a burden, but by thy
aid and gracious acceptance I hope for mercy, pardon and assistance. O Lord,
send thy holy Spirit to dwell amongst us: let here be peace and charity, and
true Catholic Religion, and holy Discipline. Comfort the comfortless, heal
the sick, relieve the oppressed, instruct the ignorant, correct the
refractory, keep us all from all deadly sin, and make them obedient to their
superiors, friendly to one another, and servants of thy Divine Majesty, that
so from thy favor they may obtain blessings in their bodies, in their souls,
in their estates, and a supply to all their necessities, till at last they be
freed from all dangers and necessities in the full fruition of thy everlasting
glories, O blessed Savior, and Redeemer Jesus. Amen.

XII. For a Parishioner to say in behalf of his Curate.
O God Almighty, who art pleased to send thy blessings upon us by the
Ministration of the Bishops and Priests of thy holy Church, have mercy upon
thy servant, to whom is committed the care of my soul, that he, by whose
means thou art graciously pleased to advance my spiritual good, may by thy
grace and favor be protected, by thy providence assisted, by thy great mercies
comforted and relieved in all his necessities bodily and ghostly, through Jesus
Christ our Lord, Amen.

XIII. For safe Childbirth.
O Blessed Jesus, Son of the eternal God, who according to thy humanity were
borne of a holy Maid, who conceived thee without sin, and brought thee forth
without pain, have mercy upon me thy humble servant, and as by thy blessing I
have conceived, so grant that by thy favorable assistance I may be safely
delivered. Lord, grant me patience, and strength, and confidence in thee, and
send thy holy Angel to be my guardian in the hour of my travail. O shut not
up my soul with sinners, nor my life with them that go down into the pit. I
humbly also beg mercy for my child, grant it may be borne with it is right
shape, give it a comely body, an understanding soul, life, and opportunity
of Baptism, and thy grace from the cradle to the grave, that it may increase
the number of Saints in that holy Fellowship of Saints and Angels, where thou
live and reignest eternal God, world without end. Amen.

XIV. Before a journey.
O God, who did preserve thy servants Abraham and Jacob, thy People Israel,
thy servant Tobias, and the wisemen of the East in their several journies, by
thy Providence, by a ministry of Angels, by a pillar of fire, and by the
guidance of a Star, vouchsafe to preserve us thy servants in the way we are
now to go. Be (O Lord) unto us a Guide in our preparation, a shadow in the Day,
and a covering by Night, a rest to our weariness, and a staff to our
weakness, a patron in adversity, a protection from danger, that by thy
assistance we may perform our journey safely to thy honor, to our own
comfort, and with safety may return, and at last bring us to the everlasting
rest of our heavenly Country, through him who is the way, the truth, and the
life, our blessed Lord and Savior Jesus. Amen.

XV. For afflicted persons.
O Lord God, merciful and gracious, whose compassion extends to all that are
in misery and need, and take delight in the relieving the distresses of the
afflicted, give refreshment to all the comfortless, provide for the poor,
give ease to all them that are tormented with sharp pains, health to the
diseased, liberty and redemption to the captives, cheerfulness of spirit to
all them that are in great desolations. Lord, let thy Spirit confirm all that
are strong, strengthen all that are weak, and speak peace to afflicted
consciences, that the light of thy countenance being restored to them, they may
rejoice in thy salvation, and sing praises unto thy Name, who have delivered
their souls from death, their eyes from tears, and their feet from falling.
Grant this for the honor of thy mercies, and the glory of thy Name, through
Jesus Christ our Lord. Amen.

XVI. For our Enemies.
O Blessed Jesus, who were of so infinite mercies, so transcendent a charity,
that thou did descend from Heaven to the bowels of the earth, that thou
might reconcile us who were enemies, to the mercies of thy heavenly Father;
and in imitation of so glorious example have commanded us to love them that
hate us, and to pray for them that are our enemies; I beseech thee of thine
infinite goodness, that thou would be pleased to keep me with thy grace in
so much meekness, justice, and affable disposition, that I may, so far, as
concerns me live peaceably with all men, giving no man occasion of offense,
and (...) them who hate me without a cause, I beseech thee give thy pardon, and
fill them with cha^i^^e toward thee and all the world, bless them with all
blessings in order to eternity, that when they are reconciled to thee, we also
may be united with the bands of Faith, and Love, and a common hope, and at last
we may be removed to the glories of thy Kingdom, which is full of love and
eternal charity, and where thou live (...) reignest, ever one God, world
without end. Amen.

XVII. A Prayer to be said upon Ember-dayes.
O Merciful Jesus, who have promised perpetuity to the Church, and a
permanencie in defiance of all the powers of darkness, and the gates of hell,
and to this purpose have constituted several orders, leaving a power to the
Apostles, and their Successors, the Bishops, to beget Fathers of our souls,
and to appoint Priests and Deacons for the edification of the Church, the
benefit of all Christian People, and the advancement of thy service; have
mercy upon thy Ministers the Bishops, give them for ever great measure of thy
holy Spirit, and at this time particular assistances, and a power of discerning
and trying the spirits of them who come to be ordained to the Ministry of thy
Word and Sacraments; that they may lay hands suddenly on no man, but maturely,
prudently, and piously, they may appoint such to thy service and the Ministry
of thy Kingdom, who by learning, discretion, and a holy life are apt
instruments for the conversion of souls, to be examples to the People, guides
of their manners, comforters of their sorrows, to sustain their weaknesses,
and able to promote all the interests of true Religion. Grant this, O great
Shepherd (...) Bishop of our souls, ^^essed Jesus, who live and reignest in
the Kingdom of thin^ ^^^rnall Father, one God, world without end (...).

Sanctus Deus. Sanctus Fortis. Sanctus Immortalis.
FINIS.

