A DIALOGUE Between an EXCHANGE, AND EXCHANGE-ALLEY; Or, A Court, and City
APPRENTICE.
Cit. SIR, here is a Bill of Exchange on your Master, will you pay it?


Cou. Yes, I Will answer your Bill, though I have scarce Patience to answer you.


Cit. Why so pray? I don't know my self so unhappy as ever to have been in your
company long enough to merit a diskindness.


Cou. Come Sir, it is reason enough for all Loyal Apprentices to turn Abhorrers
of you and all your Gang, who run counter to them, by promoting that idle Paper
now going up to my Lord Mayor; as I conclude you do, by your living with such a
notorious Fanatic; for though you were against it, he would make you sign it,
or upon refusal, threaten no Employment beyond Sea, and I don't believe your
Loyalty so much, but you would throw it all away rather than be starved.


Cit. But that I find some, though very much mistaken, Ingenuity, in what you
say, I should return an answer in harsher Language, but at present take this;
though my Master be a Dissenter from some imposed Ceremonies (if you call that
a Fanatic, though your Cant has reached further now) of the Church of England,
yet I question not, he, I am sure, I, have otherguess Loyalty for the King,
than empty words, or a little roaring Vive le Roy, over a Pipe of Wine; and for
this Address, if I know any thing of his Mind, he is against my meddling with
it, which I should have agreed to, but that I think it a Duty I owe my self,
upon all occasions to demonstrate that I am really a Protestant, and not behind
any of your presumptuous Addressers for Loyalty; and if it be more than our
place and business, thus in a Public manner to declare it, we may be excused
under that just provocation you have given us; and since many true Sons of the
Church have gone so far in the management of it, I am resolved to be a
Dissenter in nothing but where I see good reason: But this being no place to
talk freely, I could wish you would, after I have told this small Sum, afford
your self half an Hour's time at Garraway's, to be convinced how ridiculous
such Abhorrers render themselves; which if I don't do to an unbiassed reason,
though perhaps not to your prejudiced and inveigled understanding, I Will e'ne
turn one too, for I am resolved, as an ingenuous Person said, to be of Nature's
side.


Cou. Though I am not a little fond of gaining Proselites, yet Dam'e
Coffee-houses, they are not for our turn, being all, if not most Whiggified
hereabouts: if we be taken notice of, we shall be bawled about in a Dialogue;
there is Care, Baldwin, and Smith, have the best Noses (if they don't deal with
the Devil to smell things done in the open Street) that ever I knew; you se^one
of ou^ Party could not have his Posteriors saluted in the Street the other Day,
but it is in a Dialogue presently; and the Rogues had like to have smelt that
Hodg was with us to eat the fruits of his Address, but we Hectored that off,
and retorted it with a brave slur upon Bethel; therefore I am for a Tavern,
where I will command a Pint of good Wine.


Cit. Excuse me Sir, I never drink Wine in a Morning, and for privacy, I Will
ensure you a Room under Lock and Key, where none but our Selves shall be
Auditors, and if the Boy intrudes with a What do you lack, do you call,
Gentlemen? I Will commend you in breaking a Dish upon his Head.


Cou. Well, along lets go, but there is another Objection I have; you have
heard, I suppose the Truth of that Story of the Quakers Son, which our Emissary
Thomson has so handsomely confounded with his unparalled impudence on Tuesday
last; but there goes an odd passage, that he should tell of some Body at the
Amst. Coffee-house, on Tuesday next, which methinks should make them all seem
dangerous.


Cit. Never fear; my Money falls right, only some to change; come let us away.


Cou. I Will follow you, Sir.


Cit. Boy, show a Room, bring us a Bottle of Syder; Sir, will ye please to sit
down, this Place will serve us to chat as well as the best Room in the
Half Moon Tavern.


Cou. No Reflections, I pray.


Cit. There shall not, I Will promise you, nothing but matter of Fact, and
convincing demonstration shall be urged by me, and pray do you promise the
like, for I hate railing and impertinencies wherever I find them.


Cou. Since our time is precious, let us each promise Secrecy and Freedom, and
so proceed to your ridiculing the Abhorrers of your proceedings, who are all
the People of England, who join with us in Loyal Addresses to his Majesty.


Cit. Hold a little; I must beg pardon for interrupting you when you go so high
at first, for if I consented to what you say, I should give up all I have to
say afterward; therefore, let us calmly consider what validity your words are
of; I must confess, had I a Papistical, or, which I think cannot be worse, a
Heathenish absurd Faith, to believe contrary to all my Senses and thinking
Faculties, what those lying Oracles, the Observator, Heraclitus, and Thomson
have said, and the Gazet it self, I doubt not will say, when they have got all
the Addresses they can, and published them in English and Erench, under that
Title; I should then be of your Judgment, or rather ill possessed Opinion; but
let the French believe what they please, and further they will not go; especially
the great Men, they hate impositions, where they think them to be with a
design; I say though their Faith is implicit, and they may by being used to
believe as the Church believes, bring their Senses to that absurdity as to say
Amen to all the foolish Legends and idle Stories every Week published here; yet
I know no reason why we, who can read Letters, and see with our Eyes, and hear
with our Ears from more credible Persons, things of a far different Nature;
should not only be contented to have our Pockets picked now and then of a Penny
for the novelty of the thing, but at last be persuaded and argue for the Truth
of it; but I have often thought that these dumb Dogs would never have prevailed
by their Black and White, were it not for their impudent Abetters who swarm
both in City and Country; and have so industriously abused the latter, that
there is nothing to be had out of Town, but those we call Tory Pamphlets; you
see it is almost Treason to have any other News-book there, or so much as the
City's Petition, though the Act of the Common Council, approved of by
Common Hall, and Printed by their Order and Authority, if they have any; O, the
impudence as well as ingratitude of that Crape-making Town, to abuse one of its
best Benefactors at that rate!


Cou. Pray remember your promise, Norwich is a Town, I have great Veneration
for, as being a Pattern to us in Loyalty, in their good though perhaps too much
Zealous Address to his Majesty; and truly I don't see they had much reason to
respect the Cities Petition, when one of our Ignoramus Grand-Juries presented
their Address as a Libel; But --


Cit. Pray be franck, let us have no But's -- you see I make none, because I am
certain for me, our Discourse shall never go further, and if it does, I Will
speak nothing I am not afraid to stand to before any honest Jury any where, let
me have but fair play, and only those that hear me my Accusers, as Evidence,
for I am joined in my Letany with Hickeringel against the Man-catchers.


Cou. Why, that I was saying is this; you run away with the Petition, as if the
Act of the City, when you know how it is Mayor ridden, and as it were, the
Sheriffs and some of the Factious Aldermens great Horse, which turns which way
they would, because they have the bit in its mouth, and I Am afraid, under the
rose our House of Commons is so too, for in such Assemblies there may be
Leaders, who also drive the rest, and these Drivers may be Enemies to the King,
and the established Government in Church and State, and then where are we? and
you know who were the men in the H. of C. these late Parliaments; look into the
proceedings of that at Westminster and Oxford, and you shall find that of the
513. not above 15. are the great spokesmen, there is, Sir W. J. Sir F. W. Coll.
B. --


Cit. You need not name'em, I find whereabouts you are; and in answer, for the
City shall only say, that you begin with the wrong end of the Horse, and make
it such an Ass as to stand ready Sadled and Bridled, while its Rider Mounts, or
is Mounted by another hand: But such has been the kindness of our Monarchs to
this City whether they have deserved it or no, I Will only think, that they have
given them the pre-eminence before most places of choosing their own Annual
Governors; and certainly a better order among so great a concourse of People
cannot be than by our Common Hall, for every Freeholder to have his Vote,
unless where the Ballot is used, inconveniences in which there are too: Now I
fancy you nor none of your party, would, but are far from it, have the
Government of this City in more hands than it is; nor would you have the K.
leave his more weighty or pleasant affairs to turn Lord Mayor: no, you are more
civil; and then I think you must come to what it is, a plain Lord Mayor and
Sheriffs chosen by the People, the Body, the Majority of them, and confirmed by
the K. Now when these are with so much deliberation mounted, they must ride
till the Year's out, unless some more than ordinary cause; Now if the Citizens
of London are so foolish, and the People of England so mad, as to choose for
their Governors and Representatives (with whom they trust their Lives and all,
and by whom, as has been often said by our betters, they can only be undone,)
those that they know not, or only upon recommendation of a Faction, such as
are Enemies to the King, who if really so, will be Enemies to themselves: The
worst you can say of them, is, that they are factiously mad and fanatical, but
that they are the minor part, you will not now sure have the impudence to say
it to me, or to any but some at Salamanca, or far enough from understanding or
hearing the truth; but that is only in answer to your wrong laid position: And
for Vindication of the City's Government of late, I think it would be an
intrusion for me on those ingenious Gentlemen who sit at Helm, and are better
able to do it, my place as yet, is, as also yours ought to be, rather to submit
and acquiesce in their prudent management of Affairs, and not sawcily to
contradict 'em (as you have, as far as you can) being that to which under the
Auspicious influence of our Great Governor, if my shallow judgment fail me
not, being confirmed by the opinion of a great Courtier, who frankly told me
the other day, not only this City but the whole Kingdom owes its present peace
and quiet.


Cou. We will grant ye, that we ought to submit to our Governors, but no
further than may consist with Loyalty to our Prince, in which case we may
oppose with good Warrant all the factious Fanatics any where; and when we were
told it would be grateful to our Sovereign, would you have us refuse setting
our hands to such a harmless Paper, which is void of all manner of Reflection.


Cit. Very fine! Because you would have Fools, for only such will believe no
Reflections in that Paper, you are resolved to do it now with a Warrant against
the greatest and the best part of the City; but to leave that to be taken
notice of by others, tell me, do you think it no reflection upon the H. of C.
what the King has said of 'em in his Declaration, and he may sure say that that
it is not fit for every one to say: now in thanking the King for his
Declaration, the meaning on it, surely is, thanks for Dissolving and publishing
the faults of the two last Parliaments; and sure, it will signify nothing
without they that chose them, the People of England say so, which that ever
they will, believe it who can for me. No certainly, they that urge this most,
have more understanding than to think to have it believed, but are only so
taken with the notion, that they resolve impudently to assert it, till a
Parliament comes to stop their bawling. But of all the Militia-men and
Grand-juries and other Addressers, I find none less concerned in choosing
Parliaments, and therefore ought to be as backward in criminating as any, than
those in our Station; but when we see you had been put upon it, we thought the
K. had a mind to know how many Lives and Fortunes among the Youths in London he
had at his Service; and hoping none but the Observator would blame us for
observing that method which the nature of Government calls for, application to
a next Superior; we resolved upon an Address to his Majesty's Vicegerent in
this City, and we doubt not his Majesty will see Loyalty through our Modesty as
well as your presumption, and unless you take in those of our size who have
Loyalty for the King, and veneration for Parliaments, all that your Party do in
Addressing, Abhorring, etc. will signify nothing to any that understand the
constitution of our Government, unless you can convince them with plain English
demonstration that the House of Commons is not the Real true Representative of
all the People, or the Majority of 'em, and the same of the Common Hall; till
then I say the Authors of Heraclitus and his gang may keep their Breath for a
better purpose; for all they now do is to fill the Tory's mouths with some
plausible chat, which may sway some, but very few, so simple men. It being
almost Change time, in short, pray let me know your Conviction and your
Resolution.


Cou. Sir, With a great deal of Patience and Attention I have heard you, and
though I must be one of Mris. Celliers followers in her Motto, I never change,
yet I must do you that Justice, as to join issue with what you say between man
and man to be true, but I am so far engaged and encouraged with and by our
noble Patriots who set us on work, that as long as they hold up, I think I
shall get no better Friends, and I Will e'ne hold to them: And for a Parliament,
if it does come, it is but going to Holland a while, and drawing in our
Observator Horns while that dread is over: in the mean time in Jollity we Drink
with a Huzza the D's Health, and in private, all the Salvation we look after,
is, from a Parliament, Good Lord deliver us.


LONDON, Printed for Richard Janeway in Queens-Head-Alley in Paternoster Row.
1681.

An Excellent New Ballad,
To the Tune of, How Unhappy is Phillis in Love.
[1]
LEt Oliver now be forgotten,
His Policy's quite out of Doors;
Let Bradshaw and Hewson lie rotten,
Like Sons of Fanatical Whores:
For Tony's grown a Patrician,
By Voting damned Sedition,
For many years,
Famed Politician,
The Mouth of all Presbyter Peers.
[2]
Old Tony a Turn-coat at Worster,
Yet swore he would maintain the King's Right;
But Tony did Swagger and Bluster,
Yet never drew Sword on his side.
For Tony is like an old Stallion,
He has still the Pox of Rebellion,
And never was sound;
Like the Camelion,
Still changing his Shaps and his Ground.
[3]
Old Rowly's returned (Heave'ns bless him,)
From Exile and Danger set free;
Old Tony made have to Address him,
And swore none more Loyal then He:
The King, (who knew him a Traitor,)
And saw him squint like a Satyr;
Yet through his Grace,
Pardoned the Matter,
And gave him since the Purse and the Mace.
[4]
And now little Chancellor Tony,
With Honor had feathered his Wing,
And carefully picked up the Money,
But never a Groat for the King:
But Tony's Luck was confounded;
The D. who smoakt him a Roundhead;
From Head to Heel
Tony was sounded,
And Y -- soon put a Spoke in his Wheel.
[5]
But now little Tony in Passion,
Like Boy that had nettl'd his Breech,
Maliciously took an occasion,
To make a most delicate Speech;
He told the King like a Croney;
If e're he hoped to have Money,
He must be Ruled:
Oh fine Tony!
Was ever Potent Monarch so schooled?
[6]
The King issues out a Proclamation,
By Learned and Loyal Advice;
But Tony possesses the Nation
The Council will never be wise:
For Tony is madder and madder,
And M -- blows like a Bladder,
And L -- too,
Who grows gladder,
That They Great York are like to subdue.
[7]
But Destiny shortly will cross it,
For Tony's grown Gouty and Sick,
In spite of his Spiggot and Fawcet,
The Statesman must go to Old Nick:
For Tony rails at the Papist,
Yet He himself is an Atheist;
Though so precise,
Foolish and Apish,
Like Holy Quack or Priest in Disguise.
[8]
But now let this Rump of the Law-see,
A Maxim as Learned in part;
Who e're with his Prince is too saucy,
It Is feared he is a Traitor in's Heart:
Then Tony cease to be witty,
By buzzing Treason in the City;
And love the King,
So ends my Dity;
Or else let him die like a Dog in a string.
Printed for Benjamin Harris at the Stationors Arms at the Royal Exchange, and
are to be sold by Langley Curtis in Goatham Court on Ludgate Hill, 1681.


