A DIALOGUE Between a New Catholic Convert AND A PROTESTANT, Showing the
DOCTRINE of TRANSUBSTANTIATION To be as Reasonable to be Believed as the GREAT
MYSTERY OF THE TRINITY By all Good Catholics.

Published with Allowance.

LONDON, Printed by Henry Hills, Printer to the King's Most Excellent Majesty
for His Household and Chapel. 1686.

A DIALOGUE BETWEEN A New Catholic Convert, AND A PROTESTANT, Concerning the
Doctrins of the Trinity and Transubstantiation.
A. YOU cannot imagine how much I am overjoyed to see you. I have been big with
Discourse these three days for want of utterance. You may remember, when we
talked together last, we parted in a Dispute concerning Transubstantiation and
the Holy Trinity, of their equal Reasonableness and Authority. I must confess I
was not at that time so thoroughly armed with Reasons to show you the Parallel:
but since I have given my self a little leisure to consider of it, and I am
persuaded I shall be able to give you satisfaction.


B. Sir, you know I am always glad of any Opportunity to gain your good
Company, but especially upon so good an Occasion. I Will assure you, I am not,
nor ever was, an Enemy to Catholic Communion; and if I had not too just a
Cause, I should never suffer my self in that which without reasonable Grounds
might be called a wilful Schism.


A. I have no reason to doubt your Integrity, and therefore shall not question
that: I shall only desire the liberty to press my old Argument, That you would
rely on the Authority of the Church. I must confess, you have often questioned
the doing of it; but I am sure, when you shall consider there are Mysteries as
well as Doctrins in the Christian Religion, and when you know that Mysteries
are not to be fathomed by Natural Reason, you must needs conclude, that in some
Cases your safest way is to trust Tradition. Now certainly no one can give us
so good an Account of That, us the Church.


B. But, Sir, to be short; What relation has this to the present Parallel of
the Trinity and Transubstantiation? The Authority of the Church is another
Point as disputable as That.


A. Very much: For as these two Doctrins have equal ground from Scripture,
Reason, and Tradition; so is there the same Obligation of your receiving one,
as well as the other. And indeed I have since wondered at my own Profession,
while a Protestant, to think how blind and partial I was: But I must confess,
because we are in a Dispute, it is better laying by such aggravating
Circumstances; and indeed I cannot but be sensible what Prejudices such
Discourses always make, and therefore I shall speak nothing more of that nature.


B. But to return to the main Point; I must tell you, I do not think them
equally grounded on Scripture, Reason, or Tradition; and indeed you may
remember that was the old Point in dispute with us.


A. Well, Sir, to show you your Error, I shall begin with the several
Particulars in their Order; and so, first, as to the Tradition of
Transubstantiation. Now it is evident That has been delivered with less
interruption than that of the Holy Trinity: That Mystery was questioned in the
very Infancy of the Church; nay, not only so, but the Arians prevailed much
against it about the beginning of the Fourth Age. On the other side,
Transubstantiation lay unquestioned and quiet a long time; and when it came to
debate, there was no such opposition as that of Arius, to call in question the
Authority of its Tradition; the Church received it unanimously, and in that
sense continued, till rash Reason attempted to fathom the unlimited Miracles
and Mysteries of God.


B. But the Fathers are not half so express in the Doctrine of
Transubstantiation, as they are in the Mystery of the Holy Trinity.


A. That Is true, and there is very good Reason for it: Transubstantiation has
not been a Doctrine so long in dispute, and it is not customary for Men to argue
unquestionable Truths. And whereas you may think that Transubstantiation has of
late received such shrewd Repulses by your Books, I Will assure you, you forget
how much the true Catholic Zeal destroys the Seeds of Heresies. Do you think
that so many Bishops, not only of the Eastern, but of the Western Church also,
could be Arians, and yet suppose that that Opinion wanted as plausible a
Pretense of Tradition? Certainly if you consider that, you cannot think to
establish the Doctrine of the Trinity by Tradition, more than
Transubstantiation; especially considering the strong Footsteps of that Sect
even in the Fathers now extant. I would cite you some of them, but that they
are not so much to my main Design, and indeed my aim is Brevity.


B. Well, Sir, it is true, we cannot so well plead Tradition to what you have
urged; and especially when I call to mind, that Arianism was confirmed by a
General Council: But we allege an higher ground; we stand upon the Authority
of the Scriptures, and indeed that is the true Touchstone of all Doctrins.


A. It Is true, if you will follow the Catholic Church, and take the Scriptures
literally, you may discover the Mystery of the Holy Trinity in them; but if you
once yield to Figurative Allusions and Interpretations, the Arians will be as
much too hard for you, as you imagine your selves to be for the Catholic Church.
In short, both Doctrins will be at a loss, and both equally require the
Authority of the Church to support them.


B. O no, surely, the Doctrine of the Holy Trinity is more express in Scriptures
than so.


A. To satisfy you that what I say is Truth, because I may represent the
Parallel the clearer, I will personate an Arian, that Sect so often condemned
by the Ancient Church, and you shall see his Plea against the Trinity is as
fair as yours against Transubstantiation. And because this is the main
Parallel, I shall be somewhat the longer, that I may give you the greater
satisfaction.


B. I shall be very glad to hear what you can speak to the matter.


A. First then, I say, It Is highly unreasonable to interpret that Text, 1 John
5.7. That there be Three in Heaven that bear record, and those Three are One;
as likewise John 10.30. I and my Father are One, literally; for if we do, we
not only oppose Sense and Reason, but we make Construction directly against the
very Scripture, John 10.31, 32, 33, 34, 35, 36, 37, 38. and John 17.21, 22, 23.
1 Cor. 3.8 And what can be urged more against us in respect of
Transubstantiation?


B. Very right, Sir, that Interpretation carries a forcible Reasonableness; but
the Doctrine of the Trinity does not wholly depend upon those two Proofs.


A. Right, it does not; but I can give you further Demonstration in this
Parallel. A principal Ground of the Trinity is because the Son is so often
called God in Scripture, as John 1.1, 2. Romans 9.5. etc. Now if we did not
comply with the Catholic Church, and make a Literal Construction in this Case
likewise, how strangely should we be confounded by those Texts where this
Godhead in Christ is declared to be no more than Lordship, and subordinate to
the Father? as Heb. 1.8, 9. 1 Cor. 8.4, 5. 1 Cor. 15.27, 28. Rev. 3.12. and
John 10.35, 36.


B. But, Sir, our Savior forgave Sins too.


A. That Is true, but only by a deputed Authority. You see, when the Sons of
Zebbedee petitioned him, he could not grant the final Accomplishment of our
Spiritual Warfare, that was the Father's Prerogative, Matthew. 20.23. And though he
is to be our Judge, yet he knows not the time, Mark 13.31. 1 Timothy 6.15.


B. I must confess, these things a little surprise me; but however, I cannot
think these neither the only Grounds that support that Mystery of the Trinity.


A. No, you are in the right; there is one strong Proof more: the making of all
things visible and invisible is attributed to the Son, and that expressly, John
1.3. Heb. 1.10. and particularly, Col. 1.16, 17, 18, 19. But yet for all that,
if we do not adhere with the Catholic Church to the Literal Interpretation, we
are at a loss there too: For, first, it is plain by the rest of the Scripture,
that the Son is not our only Maker, as appears by our Creation attributed to
the Father; and then if we compare those Texts to Heb. 1.2, 9, 10. 1 Cor. 8.6.
Ephesians. 3.9. Ephesians. 4.5, 6. 1 Cor. 15.27, 28. we cannot reasonably attribute more to
the Son, than his being God's Instrument in the Creation.


B. But are these the true and only Grounds of the Doctrine of that Holy Mystery?


A. Yes verily; for, that we are Baptized in the Name of the Father, Son, and
Holy Ghost, is no Argument. That were as reasonable, if understood of Christ
and the Holy Ghost, as our Spiritual Governors, as under the supposal of their
being Coequal with the Father, 1 Cor. 10.2. 1 Cor. 12.12, 13.


B. But surely, Sir, the Arians should have other Grounds to establish their
Opinions, besides those; or else your Parallel with Transubstantiation will not
be so demonstrable as you conceive. Pray inform me a little further, I have a
mighty desire to understand a little better their Fundamental Principles.


A. To satisfy you, I shall. First, They allege Christ represented under the
Law altogether as an Angel; for Eminency called the Angel of the Presence, Isa.
63.9. Eccl. 5.6. Genesis 48.16. Number. 20.16. Exodus 23.20, 21, 22. referred to 1
Cor. 10.4, 5, 9. Further, they collect him to be a Created Being, from Col.
1.15. Rev. 3.14. Psalm. 118.23. Isa. 45.8. Ecclus 1.4, 9. Ecclus 24.9. Sap.
6.22, 23. And they interpret that Scripture, Thou art my Son, this day have I
begotten thee, by Acts 13.33. and 2 Pet. 1.17. As to the Holy Ghost, they prove
a vast distance between him and the Son, by John 16.12, 13, 14, 15. and John
15.26. Besides, they say, he is no where called God; and urge for the
probability of their Opinion Rev. 12.9. Rev. 20.8. 2 Cor. 4.4. For as there is
an universal tempting Evil Power, so we may reasonably conclude, there may be a
Good Assisting Power, without any necessity of his being God. And further,
wherever in the Scriptures there is made any mention of the Three Persons,
there is always declared an express Gradation; as, 1 Cor. 12.3, 4, 5. 2 Cor.
13.14. Gift and Communion from the Fellowship of the Holy Ghost, Grace and
Administration from the Lordship and Kingship of Christ, and Love and Operation
from the Father, the Supreme God, the Original Fountain, according to Ephesians. 4.4,
5, 6.


B. I must confess, Sir, these Opinions seem to make it necessary for us in
that Doctrine too, to trust to the Authority of the Catholic Church, and I shall
take time to consider a little upon them: But pray, Sir, what say you to the
Reasons of the two Doctrins.


A. Really, Sir, I must tell you, I think that Parallel much the easiest. It Is
strange new Arithmetic to a Man, to tell him, Three distinct Persons are one
and the same Individual Nature, and then to call such a one the most Pure and
Simple Being; and that especially when they are declared to have various
Intellectual Powers, as appears by John 16.12, 13, 14, 15. and Mark 13.31. 1 Timothy 6.15. Acts 1.7. For my part, I cannot tell well how the Prejudice of
Education could possibly digest a thing so unreasonable, were it not a Divine
Mystery. I am sure, to my Carnal Reason, there may be as well Three hundred
Persons in the Godhead, as Three; and I know not what can be said of
Transubstantiation that is seemingly more absurd than That.


B. I must confess, Sir, I have had strange, consus'd, and surprising Thoughts
of it my self; but I alays apprehended the Christian Church a sufficient Guide.


A. If you did, Sir, pray consider who that Catholic Mother is you so obeyed;
and as you have received the Trinity, so receive a Doctrine equally as
Reasonable, and delivered by Her, Transubstantiation. I know the Ingenuousness
of your Temper, and you promised me at first not to be a wilful Schismatic; and
therefore I have hopes my Reasons, and your Consideration, will be sufficient
to reduce you to Catholic Communion.


B. Sir, I shall consider of it; but as yet you only talked to me at large: I
shall desire one Favor of you before we part; Pray state the Parallel a little
shorter, I shall the better remember it.


A. Well, Sir, I shall. First, The Tradition of one Doctrine cannot be stronger
than another, where both have been at least equally questioned. Secondly, It Is
as reasonable to take This is my Body literally, as it is to take these Texts I
and my Father are one god over all blessed for ever, and By him all things were
made, without reference to other Scriptures, and a Figurative Interpretation.
And, lastly, I think to Human Reason it is as equally unreasonable, and as
seemingly repugnant, to say One is Three, as it is to say a Body is not what it
appears.


B. Very well; I shall desire no more of you now: I Will only take a little Time
to consider, and then you shall know my Mind more freely.


A. Farewell; and God give you his Holy Spirit to instruct you.


FINIS.

