A DIALOGUE BETWEEN HAMPTON-COVRT, AND THE ISLE OF WIGHT: VXBRIDGE being
Moderator.

Impartially discoursing of the effects and defects of the TREATY.

And the likelihoods and unlikelihoods we have of the composure of a well
grounded and lasting Peace.

With the preparations and treachery of the Army for preventing the same.

By Tom Tell troath, Clarke for his Majesty, in the TREATY.

Printed in the Year of expectation, of the peace or ruin of the Nation, 1648.

A Dialogue; etc.
Isle Wight. COme, come, Mrs. Hampton though you are a great Courtier in the
eye, and I but a small spot in the face of the Sea, yet I am verily persuaded
that I am thought worthy before your self to teeme and bring forth the sweet
and long expected Babe of Peace; It Is not the statelynesse of a Court, or the
greatness of a City that the Author and finisher of Peace looks upon, the
meaner place is more acceptable; Bethlem (where the King of peace himself was
born) was thought worthier the^ Jerusalem that City, to bring forth him that
(by his sufferings) made peace for the whole world, and why not the Isle of
Wight before thee, or Mrs. Vxbridge either; yea or London the Parliaments
Midwife.

I have in my Cabinet an ancient Prophecy no less then 500. years old, which
I believe will now be fulfilled, to the joy of all true English hearts, that
love Peace, truth, unity, and concord, the Father and Mother of all other
blessings whatsoever; and this Prophecy runs thus: The time shall come, a King
clothed all in white
Shall Crown England with Peace from the Isle of Wight.



Hampton. O Mrs. Wight be not too confident, this child may yet prove abortive:
Alas, I fear thou must suffer many bitter pangs before thou art yet delivered
of Peace; I know my Royal Master has suffered many base affronts, bitter
griefs, and dire laments in thee; was he not betrayed and decoyd into thee, when
he took his flight from me, by that Apostate Cromwell? was he not in thee kept
close Prisoner, debarred of the society of all his friends and servants,
taunted, and uncivilly used by wicked Hamond his cursed Jailer? and he
according to his bounden duty warranted by the Law of God, the Law of nature,
and the Law of the Land, namely noble Burley making but sign of resistance to
rescue His Majesty from all his misery, was suddenly by these wild Canibals
devoured, hanged, drawn, and quartred for his Alegeance to his King? did not
Rolfe (think you) that waited 4 long hours with a Pistol to take away his
life, deserve a small gratuity of 200. l. for his so doing? did not Dowcet and
Osburne deserve to be imprisoned for revealing the same, and the other revarded
for acting the same? O Hammon remember Mordecai, fear and tremble, for the like
preferment will one day fall to thee as it did to thy Namesake, when it shall
be read in the Chronicles of the Kings of England, that thou setst on that
villain Rolfe to murder his Master, and did solicit thy Masters so often for
him to be so well rewarded for so foul and wicked an intention; and that
wicked villain Serjant Wild, that condemned and murdered Noble Burley (for
doing his duty according to Law) must release Rolfe for doing so abhorred an
act against law, religion reason or conscience; Mrs. Wight you know all this to
be true, do you not?


Wight. I but Mrs. Hampton, truth is not to be spoke at all times; these are
bugs words against the Parliament; have a care they stop not your mouth with a
little Independent mercy, for that will spoil your blabbing for ever after;
you know how they use to deal with Malignants, and being an old Courtier, and
of so ancient a house as you are, you must needs be voted a Malignant and so an
enemy to the Kingdom and Parliament, and then, etc.


Hamp. Were the Parliament as mad as the swine possessed with the Devil, that
they were running headlong to their own confusion; might not a man adventure
to stop them, or persuade them (though to no purpose?) plain Troath fears no
colors, had they as many and as changeable at the Rainbow, and their garments
were dyed with scarlet goar of innocents till they had made this Island a
general Sepulcher; it should not fright me, I Would tell them on it, and that home
too; I say they are Tyrants, and inhumane Rebels, that have wronged the most
virtuous King that ever Reigned in Christendom, have divided him from his own
Wife, driven him from his Princely Children, imprisoned, defamed, reproached,
scandalized, renounced, writ and spoke all manner of evil against him, murdered
his Nobility, killed his Gentry, robbed the Commonalty, and enriched themselves
by the ruins of other men, that now they are fatted in mischief; and tumble
and lie blowing and gloaring in the wealth of the Kingdom; whilst Trading is
decayed, the People are impoverished, beggary increased, many a Member of
Christ stawed, others lie groaning, some in goales others in Hospitals, some
Parents amidst their families keeping time in weeping with their children who
want one morsel of bread to sustain their lives; the Mother sitting to suckle
her tender Infant with an empty breast, and a more sorrowful heart listening for
the dying groans of her starved child, and yet this will not move these
Miscreants to the the least pity or compassion.


Wight. Indeed Mrs. Hampton I believe most of your sad story to be true; but if
the King and Parliament agree, there will no doubt be a way thought on to
increase Trade, that the poor may be set on work and all things may be well.


Hampton. Alas Mrs. Wight, you are deceived; for admit that the King and
Parliament should agree, what will the Army do?


Wight. Agree to, or be hanged; were they agreed, we should do with the Army
well enough.


Hampton. But in the mean time they will deal with him, and us to; to what
end think you took they his Majesty away from Holdenby, without the authority
of Parliament? was it to bring him to his Parliament, or send him to them to be
murdered by Rolfe? to what end did they make so many professions and
engagements for his Majesty's just Rights in general, both at Newmarket, and
Sr. Albanes, as may appear by their voted and revoted Proposalls; was it for
his good? Yes, because the Parliament had protested to make him great and
glorious; therefore they would send him to heaven quickly to be great and
glorious there; for I am persuaded, and so are more beside I, that they would
never have sent him to thee Mrs. Wight, but to have him murdered; what think
you means the 4000. horse that are now upon their march under Ingolsby to
thee, Mrs. Wight, is it to bring him to his Parliament? yes I warrant you, the
clean contrary way; what meant the Independents Petition, but to be seconded
by the Army? What means their placing Committees of Independents in all
Counties, Castles, and places of strength, but to subdue all to themselves? To
tell you true Mrs. Wight, they mean to govern by the power of the sword, and
care not a pin for King or Parliament either; alas they are against both, and
will fight against both before this Treaty go forward, or any peace should be
concluded: Do you think that they mean to give over their trade, viz.
cutting of throats, and murdering their brethren? No, no, blood is the sweetest
liquor they can taste, and stole goods that are plundered and robbed from their
fellow Subjects, is the only staff of their life; if they disband they lose
all: Fairfax and Cromwell intend to share the Kingdom between them; if not
both the Kingdoms; Tom must be King of England, and Noll King of Scotland;
think you we shall not be well governed then? They will be merciful King; Sir
Charles Lucas and Sir George Lifle felt their mercy, and so I fear shall we
ere long; for the seven deadly sins are now the Armies best companions, lust,
luxury, and excess, vanity, pride, and prodigality; envy, contention,
unnatural divisions, oppression, fraud, and violence, are to be of their privy
counsel; oaths, blasphemies, and prophanations, must be their Chaplains;
envy, hatred, and malice, and all uncharitableness shall be their counselors
of estate; English blood shall be their wine, the caske your bodies, which they
will pierce with their swords, your goods shall be their prey, your wives shall
be their lawndresses, and cooks, chambermates, and the like, your sons and
daughters their slaves, your cattle at their command; besides you shall pay for
rods by subsidies to whip and afflict your selves; and in this manner shall you
labor and work for them so long as you live; is not here a through
Reformation indeed? Is not here a Kingdom well governed, when you must be
slaves to the veriest slaves in a Kingdom? Then when it is too late, and the
rod is upon you, you will cry cut with anguish of heart; O that we had known
the day of our visitation, but now it is hid from our eyes; O that we had but
known obedience to so good a King as King Charles, we had not now been slaves
to these Rogues, and scums of mankind? O that we had been wise in time, but
now tyranny, wrath, anguish, and destruction has seized upon us; we murmured
at shipmoney before, but now we are ship wracked of all we have; we thought
our happiness misery then; but now our misery is our happiness indeed, and
who may we thank, but our own obstinancy and disobedience? for which sin we
are now forced to obey those that sometime were our inferiors: What a case are
we now in, when our lives, liberties, and estates lie all under the command of
the sword of a treacherous and revolting Army?


Wight. Mrs. Hampton, I believe thou speak all out of envy, because my
Governor is an Independent, and I my self am commanded by the Army; I
profess I think the Army means well to the King, for all this and will for
their advantage close again with him, and ruin the Parliament.


Hampton. No, no, never think that; they will have no King but Christ
forsooth, and he must reign in their rotten consciences, and their rotten
consciences must reign over you; for the Parliament they intend to break up
that, and choose Representatives by their own power, without the Kings Writ,
that shall be all Independent, which shall be the upholders, preservers,
maintainers, setlers, and establishers of the Kingdom; they mean to have a
Parliament that that they can rule, this is too unruly for them; then for the
liberty of the Subject, when Sir Thomas and his copartner Crumwell shall be the
Kingdoms Stewards, and dispose of all as they shall think fit, the honor and
privilege of Parliament must needs be well backed and maintained then; when
they shall act or do nothing but by the order of the Army.

Uxbridge. But stay a while Mrs. Hampton, what will you say, if London and the
whole Kingdom rise in arms to quell this tyrannical Army, what will you say
then?


Hampton. Then they will prevent all this; but they are so besotted and
bewitched to their own ruin, that they had rather live slaves, then resist
the Army, there is danger in that, and danger they love not, and Religion and
they are upon shaking hands and parting.

Uxbridge. But if the King signs to what he swore to maintain at his
Coronation, how does he preserve his honor, or a good Conscience; or what will
he be the better?


Hamp. If he breaks his Oath in signing to the Presbyterian Religion; farewell
Conscience; for the Militia it is in the hands of the Army, and they willl
scourge him with his own Rod; but if he loses his Honor and a good
Conscience (as God forbid) and grants all things they ask, which to prevent
more effusion of innocent blood he will do, he must remain but the outside,
the picture and sign of a King, to the Parliament themselves, and sign or
sign not be ruined by the Army too: Had ever King two such Masters, if he
pleases the Parliament then he disp^easeth the Army, and if he sides with the
Army then he displeases the Parliament; and between two Thieves he is
crucified, either of them traetyrously enforcing, or craftily persuading His
Majesty; for avoiding the devouring Gulf Charibdis, to dash himself against
the sharp Rock of death-threatning Seylla, according to that old verse, never
more truly verified then now. -- Incidit in Seyllam, cupiens vitare Charibdim.
He Is dashed against Scylla's Rock, and quite destroyed,
Hoping Charibdis Whirle-poole to avoid.



Postscript.
AND certainly this is too evident when we consider the sad condition of His
Majesty since he has been in their hands; being tossed and tumbled up and down
by these most traiterous and rebellious Sectaries and Schismatics, to keep him
in the griping paws and captivity of Cromwell, and his Confederate Hammond,
Rolfe, and others to make up their own mouths and work out their own weal,
though with the inevitable Ruin and destruction of so gracious and good a
King, and the utter confusion of a poor, tottering, torn and miserable
distracted Church and State; But if London still wants eyes to see the misery
that is coming upon her, I would she might be blind for ever; the wealth is
most in her, and where the Carcas is Eagles will gather thither: Me thinks I
hear her last dying knell sound in mine ears, and her very heart strings
crack, an alarm is given to her already.

And if hereafter she will not be shent, let policy teach her to prevent her
certain ruin, that comes posting on with her inevitable destruction.

Tho. Tell treath.

FINIS.

