A DIALOGUE between the D. of C. and the D. of P. at their meeting in PARIS,
With the Ghost of Jane shore.
C. ARt thou returned my sister Concubine,
For all those subtle Cunning Arts of thine.
With which thou did subdue our Monarchs heart
And would not let me with thee share a part.
Tho my great beauty did that heart subdue,
Long ere it could so meanly stoop to you?

P. I am returned to see my native France,
The place where first I saw the world by Chance.
Tho mean by Birth, yet Fortune this can do,
Help by the charms of Wit and Beauty too,
Me thinks my Port and my illustrious Train,
Should rather move your envy than Disdain,

C. My envy! no thy meanness I despise.
Thou art a Beggar still tho in disguise.
The noble Ladys of the Gallick Court,
Will mock at your fine gaudy Train and Port,
Thy Convers and thy Company they will scorn,
Since thou of Genteel Blood was it never born.

P. The King's Example Duchess you will find,
Shall make the Ladys of this Court more kind,
For many services for him I'ave done,
Which he I Am sure with Kindness now will own.
I'ave served him with my person and my Wit,
But how, to tell you Madam, it is not fit.

C. If you have ought for this great Monarch done,
He Will make you then some Abbless or a Nun.
For I do find it is not the guise of France
Their Whores to noble Titles to advance
But Usually the Royal Miss is sent,
To some Religious Cloystor to repent.

P. It is not yet that time of Day with me,
Nor am I fallen to so low degree;
More joyful days I yet do hope to see.
Tho I have here of English Guinies store,
I thither will return, and get me more.
England will me a plenteous Harvest Yield,
Here to buy Lands and Palaces to Build.

C. Methinks you talk at an immodest rate,
Thou French She-Horse-leech of the English state
Rome used to draw its richest Treasures thence
The English Gold was changed to Peter's pence:
But now that Rome can draw from thence no more
It is En^ansed by a Gallick (...)?

P. If I Am immodest me thinks you are Vain,
This Id^y of my riches to Complain:
England did once to you an Harvest Yield,
Alas! I'ave but the gleanings of the field.
Gold fell into your Lap with a spring tide,
But you have spent it on your Lust and Pride;
Your time is past the Lust has made you old,
And to be served you now must give your gold.
Or fumble with some weak old Clergy man
To get a spill your royet to maintain.

C. O Madam you must needs be very chaste
If as they say the prior you embraced
I Laugh to hear of Chastity from you
As if a Whore was E're to one man true.
I own my nature it is brave and high,
With Messalina I my self could Vie.
Let a dull Husband ly with her that is chaste
I by a Prince am fit to be embraced.

P. Brag not, your decayed beauty is grown stale,
And all your Arts no longer can prevail.
I yet retain my glorious Conquering Charms.
Whilst you are banished from a Monarchs Arms
Alas your Beauty now is in the waine
No Art Can e're renew that Face again,
Madam the shining glories are all set
Which makes you thus at the successor fret.

C. Dull tool, my eyes yet sparkle and are good,
I feel a vigorous May yet in my blood,
I Am sound and free from any foul disease,
Can warm a Lover and know how to please.
Whilst thou Corrupted scents the very room
In spite of Essences and strange perfume.
I cannot but wonder by what Magic Art
Thou e're could Conquer a great Monarchs heart,
That babys Face of thine? and those black eyes,
Me thinks should never an Heroes Love surprise.
None that are had eyes e're saw in that French face
Over much of Beauty form or Comely grace.

P. You are my Rival and may me despise
But Lovers see not with your envious eyes.
If you in beauty have the greatest share,
And if that mine cannot with yours Compare
My wit exceeds and yours have proved but ill,
Since you are Cast off and I am Courted still.

C. When I did reign I like a Queen did show,
I sat above and saw Crowned heads below,
Of Jewels and of Gold I had such store,
I knew not how to seek or wish for more.
To me the Idols of the Court all bowed,
I was adored by the numerous Crowd.
Till thou were seen who with some Magic spell,
Some charm or philtre that was made in Hell;
Did my great Heroes heart then steal away,
And took by hell bred Arts my Beauties Prey.
This be my comfort I did first subdue,
They were my Leavings that were shared to you.

P. It shows my Wit and Beauty had most power,
When I subdued your mighty Conqueror,
And that I broke into your Beauties Charms,
And ravished your Hero from your Arms.
I'ave ruled as well as you and my French pate,
Have dived into the great intreagues of State
In Balls and Masks you revel'd out your nights,
But Madam I did relish state delights,
My politiques and Arts were deeper Bred,
Than ever came into your shallow Head,
Vain Pride and pleasure were the things you sought,
Whilst that four Kingdoms did employ my thought.
States men did know that you were but a fool,
But they from me took Measures how to Rule.

C. And yet I see you are turned off at last,
And all your cunning policies Misplaced.

P. You are deceived, and I shall make you mourn,
When you shall see me Madam back return
Mind you your pleasures game your time away,
My business will not let me log er stay.
To our great Monarch I have much to say.

C. If back to England thou should e're return,
May thou become the common Peoples scorn.
May against thee the London Prentise rise,
And may they pull out thy bewitching eyes.
Against that time I will go learn to Curse,
That Pox or Plague I Will wish thee something worse.
What spector's this!

P. O Heavens what have we here!
My Joints do tremble and my soul does fear.
The Ghost of Jane shore to them

Ghost. Perhaps you know me not, yet take a view,
See what I am, I was once such as you
I was a whore a Royal Mistress too.
I was a woman of Egregious fame
And like you two I gloried in my shame
Edward my Lord was, and Jane shore my name.
I lived in splendour and enjoyed delights,
Feasted all day and in Loves luscious rights,
Between a Monarchs Arms wore out the Nights.
But when at last my happy Monarch died,
I lost my Riches Pleasures and my Pride,
And all that ere was sweet or good beside.
Alas, remember what of me became,
My honor stained and black was all my fame,
Scorn of the People to my self a shane.
A wretch I grew wished I were never born,
Poor and Contemned and every Rascals scorn,
Unpitied died most wretched and forlorn.
But happy had I been had this been all,
Or if that I had had no farther fall,
But Hell on my misdeeds aloud did call.
Tormented in the flames of Hell below,
No ease from Torment pain and endless woe
For pleasures past my scorched soul does know.
Short were my pleasures while I lived here,
And those were also mixed with grief and fear
But pain Eternal's in the lower sphere.
You two great Women great in lust and sin
Repent, repent, and to reform begin,
For your reward you Hell at last will win:
Rivals look on me and Contend no more,
What you are now I once was long before,
Yet I am damned although a Royal Whore.

LONDON Printed for J. Smith.


